DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 467 992 



RC 023 681 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Fox, Sandra J. 

Creating a Sacred Place To Support Young American Indian and 
Other Learners in Grades K-3. Volume I. 2nd Edition [and] 
Volume II. 

National Indian School Board Association, Poison, MT . 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED) , 
Washington, DC. 

2002 - 00-00 

403p.; Volume II published in 2000. For other grade levels, 
see RC 023 682-684. 

R215C000058 

NISBA, P.O. Box 790, Poison, MT 59860. credit card orders: 
800-542-4922 (Toll Free) (each volume $25.00 plus $3.95 
shipping) . 

Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC17 Plus Postage. 

Academic Standards; ^American Indian Education; ^American 
Indian Literature; Animals; Art Education; Birds; *Class 
Activities; ^Culturally Relevant Education; Curriculum 
Development; Elementary School Curriculum; ^Elementary School 
Science; Environmental Education; Food; Horses; Integrated 
Curriculum; Music Education; Primary Education; Solar System; 
Stars; *Units of Study 



ABSTRACT 

This two-volume guide presents ingredients for developing a 
culturally relevant curriculum for American Indian students in the primary 
grades. A survey of Indian literature for young children yielded eight topic 
areas included here. The suggested approach to curriculum development is the 
integration of reading, language arts, math, and science based upon the Indian 
literature and other resources. Materials and activities are aligned with 
challenging content standards. Also included are ideas for art activities and 
promotion of tribal values. Indian studies classes and regular classes should 
be coordinated around the topic area so that Native language and cultural 
activities complement classroom instruction. The topic also provides a context 
for language instruction. Activities for parents and tutors are included as 
part of a comprehensive approach. The guide begins with descriptions of the 
roles of administrators, parents and tutors, and teachers and aides in 
creating a sacred place for learning. The eight units in these two volumes 
cover birds; sun, moon, and stars; food; beavers to buffalo; hares to horses; 
art; earth, air, water, and fire; and music and dance. Each 4-week unit 
contains background information on the topic, a suggested outline for 
formulating activities from American Indian literature, information about the 
suggested literature, further resources on the topic, a vocabulary list, 
content standards, example activities developed by teachers of Indian 
children, pages for teacher ideas and lesson plans, and nursery rhymes and 
poetry. A final section of the guide lists additional resources and where to 
get books. (SV) 



O 

ERIC 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



RC 023 681 £,D 467 992 



Creating a Sacred Place To Support Young 
American Indian and Other Learners in Grade K-3. 
Volume I. 2 nd Edition [and] Volume II. 



Sandra J. Fox 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 

Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 





2 



: Oo>s Q <?/ 



reating a Sacred 
Place to Support Young 
American Indian and 
Other Learners in v ^ 
Grades K-3 

Volume 1 



nm S PJ PARTMENT 0F EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

CK This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 

improve reproduction quality. 

• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERl position or policy. 




by 

landbra J. Fox B.Ed 



© National Indian School Board Association, * 

2nd Edition 






by 

Sandra J. Fox D.Ed. 




Materials & Activities for 

Birds 

Sun, Moon & Stars 

Food 

Beavers to Buffalo 

Units 




© National Indian School Board Association, 2nd. Edition, 2002 



Carmen Cornelius Taylor, Executive Director 

PO Box 790 
Poison, MT 59860 
406-883-3603 
fax 406-675-4801 
e-mail: carmen_taylor@skc.edu 

Produced by Michele Allen, Mitom 



O 

ERIC 



4 




This book is dedicated to Dean P. Fox, Good Eagle, 

( 1954 - 1999 ) 

who believed in creating a sacred place. 



This publication is based on work sponsored wholly, or in part, by 
the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, Department 
of Education, under Contract Number R215C000058. The content 
of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views of OER1, 
the Department or any other agency of the Cl.S. Government. 

This document was revised with input and suggestions from 
teachers in the Creating Sacred Places Project. 




Cover design by Dennis R. Fox, Jr. 
Mandan/H idatsa/Arikara/Lakota 



O 

ERLC 



0 



Contents 



Introduction 1 

Creating a Sacred Place - Administrators and School Board Members 1 



Creating a Sacred Place - Parents and Tutors 3 

Creating a Sacred Place - Teachers and Aides 5 

Materials and Activities for Birds Unit 1 1 

Background Information for Teachers and Parents 12 

Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline 14 

About the Literature 16 

Further Resources for Birds Unit 20 

Bird Words 23 

Science, Math and Language Arts Standards 24 

Activities Developed by Teachers of Indian Students 27 

My Ideas for Birds Unit 45 

Lesson Plans/Schedule for Birds Unit 46 

Nursery Rhymes and Poetry 48 

Materials and Activities for Sun, Moon and Stars Unit 49 

Background Information for Teachers and Parents 50 

Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline 52 

About the Literature 54 

Further Resources for Sun, Moon and Stars Unit 59 

Sun, Moon and Star Words 63 

Science, Math and Language Arts Standards 64 

Activities Developed by Teachers of Indian Students 67 

My Ideas for Sun, Moon and Stars Unit 95 

Lesson Plans/Schedule for Sun, Moon and Stars Unit 96 

Nursery Rhymes and Poetry 98 




o 

ERIC 



6 



Nursery Rhymes and Poetry 98 

Materials and Activities for Food Unit 99 

Background Information for Teachers and Parents 1 00 

Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline 1 02 

About the Literature 104 

Further Resources for Food Unit 1 08 

Food Words HO 

Science , Math and Language Arts Standards 111 

Activities Developed by Teachers of Indian Students 115 

My Ideas for Food Unit 143 

Lesson Plans/Schedule for Food Unit 144 

Nursery Rhymes and Poetry 146 

Materials and Activities for Beavers to Buffalo Unit 147 

Background Information for Teachers and Parents 148 

Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline 150 

About the Literature 152 

Further Resources for Beavers to Buffalo Unit 156 

Beavers to Buffalo Words 159 

Science, Math and Language Arts Standards 160 

Activities Developed by Teachers of Indian Students 165 

My Ideas for Beavers to Buffalo Unit 184 

Lesson Plans/Schedule for Beavers to Buffalo Unit 186 

Nursery Rhymes and Poetry 188 

Additional Resources 189 

Indian ABC Books 189 

Where to Get Books 189 

Books Available from the Haskell Foundation 190 

Science Organizations and Projects 191 

Teacher Resources 191 

Social Studies Books for K-3 192 

Outline for Developing Your Own Units 194 



\ 



7 



Introduction 



As we enter the next millennium, it is unfortunate that 
American Indian students, for the most part, are 
still not doing as well in school as they might. 

At the 1999 conference of the National Indian 
Education Association, I gave the banquet 
speech in which I said that we had failed 
because we still did not have the relevant 
curriculum for Indian students that we had 
talked about for at least the 30 years I 
had been involved. After stating that, I 
felt obligated to be a part of the solution. 

My doctorate is in curriculum and 
instruction with an emphasis in the 
teaching of reading. 

In my 30+ years in Indian education, I 
witnessed many classrooms in which 
students were totally disengaged. The 
instruction taking place was either boring or 
the topic was totally unrelated to anything the 
students knew or cared about. The relevant 
curriculum we had envisioned took place in the 
regular classroom, included content related to the lives 
of Indian children, made them proud, expanded to other 
experiences, and enhanced further learning. American Indians had highly developed societies 
before the white man came and have contributed much to this society. I read recently that 
NASA is looking to Indian people to help solve the global warming problem. Indian children 
should know these things. 

Indian literature is a resource that can provide the basis for a culturally relevant curriculum. 
More books are being written by Indian authors who preserving our stories that are similar 
across the country. What I have done is to survey all of the Indian literature available for young 
children, written by both Indians and non-Indians. It has fallen in eight topic areas, four of 
which are included in this book. The approach promoted is the integration of reading, language 
arts, math and science based upon the Indian literature, non-Indian books and topic areas. 
Materials and activities are aligned with the new, more challenging content standards. Also 
included are ideas for art activities and promotion of tribal values from the literature. Creative 
teachers might also include social studies and career education in this integrated approach. 
Indian studies classes and regular classes are to be coordinated around the topic areas so that 
native language and cultural activities complement classroom instruction. The topic will 
provide a context for language instruction and the goal should be conversational language. 
There are activities for parents and tutors as part of a comprehensive approach. This is not a 
canned curriculum; it contains all the ingredients necessary for a school to develop its own 
curriculum for the primary grades with an extension to homes and preschool children. 





i ♦ 



This document pays tribute to many: Indian and other authors who write books for Indian 
children, Indian and other organizations that distribute books especially by and about Indians, 
Indian and other organizations that have made the improvement of math and science 
instruction a priority, individuals who see the connection between Indian culture and science 
instruction, and teachers who have developed and then implemented culture-based curriculum 
in their classrooms. Many good activities have taken place across the country over the years. 
Many good materials have been developed but now sit on shelves or have disappeared. This 
attempt draws from some of them and will help to publicize new efforts. 

Some of the materials and activities included here have been taken from the work of others. 
For example, some of the teachers’ background information included comes from math and 
science materials developed by ORBIS Associates of Washington, D.C. The math and science 
activities included were developed by teachers in Bureau of Indian Affairs-funded schools in 
summer workshops at Haskell Indian Junior College (Haskell Indian Nations University) in 
1992 and 1993. I have drawn on the work of Indian educators such as Richard Nichols, Gwen 
Shunatona and Michelle Chingwa of ORBIS Associates; and Dan Wildcat, Lucretia Herrin, Dr. 
Michael Ward, and Anita Chisholm who led the math and science workshops at Haskell. The 
section, Additional Resources, starting on page 191 lists science organizations and projects, 
teacher resources developed by Indian educators, and Indian book distribution organizations. 

I hope that this document will be useful to parents, tutors, teachers, aides, administrators and 
school board members at schools where there are Indian students. I hope that Indian Education 
and Johnson O’Malley programs can utilize it. I hope that parents who are homeschooling their 
children will find it helpful. I hope that teachers of non-Indian students will use it, especially for 
that week at Thanksgiving, and beyond. 

I have not read every book listed in this document, and if I did, I would not be able to guarantee 
their being free of cultural bias. I did utilize the publication, Books Without Bias: Through 
Indian Eyes by Beverly Slapin and Doris Seale to avoid books that may be offensive. I tried to 
promote books written by Indian authors. If it is found that a book is not acceptable to Indian 
people or to a tribe, in particular, the book should definitely not be used. I recommend that 
books be reviewed by local Indian people to be sure. I have heard varying opinions on this 
matter and on certain books. I just feel that we need to take a risk and help teachers who want 
to incorporate a more meaningful curriculum, but do not have the time or the information to do 
so. Actually, if the use of the approach outlined in this document works, it should promote a 
resurgence of local storytelling and/or the writing of more children’s books by Indian people. 

Anyway, I hope that this document will help little children somewhere. I greatly enjoyed 
developing it. I hope others will enjoy using it to create a sacred place for young American 
Indian and other learners. 





Sandra J. Fox, D. Ed. 
Oglala Lakota 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 





9 



Creating a Sacred Place - Administrators/ 
School Boards 



Consider this quote from Ron Edmonds of the Effective Schools movement: 

We can, whenever and wherever we choose, successfully teach all children whose 
schooling is of interest to us. We already know more than we need to do that. 

Whether or not we do it must finally depend on how we feel about the fact that we 
haven’t so far. 

We are at a time when it is being demanded that schools produce higher achievement. 

Students must learn to read and write at higher levels, be able to solve more difficult math and 
science problems, and they must be adequately prepared to meet the world and function 
successfully in the 21st Century. We must change the way we do things in order to produce 
these results. Schools have been failing students. Part of the problem is that we don’t do what 
we know should be done, as Ron Edmonds states. 

For example, in regard to American Indian students and the teaching of reading, the research 
has said over and over that two major strategies are recommended: 1 ) utilize reading material 
that relates to the lives of the children so they understand that it is experience captured in 
written language and are interested in reading it, and 2) strengthen and expand the language 
ability of children by providing a great deal of opportunity to have new experiences, learn new 
words and practice oral language in English and the native language. 

For the most part, these two recommendations are not followed in schools that have American 
Indian students. Why not? Most reading instruction is done with reading books that seldom 
contain stories that relate to the lives of the children, and experience-based instruction and oral 
language practice require a great deal of work and make a noisy classroom which schools 
don’t usually tolerate. Another part of the problem is that schools and teachers have many, 
many things to do in a day. They have so many things to do that, often, they don’t do them 
well. 




Another piece of 
information that we 
should pay attention to is 
found in a recent report 
from the (J.S. Department 
of Education that 
indicates that children 
from high poverty areas 
are coming to school with 
English vocabularies of 
only about 3,000 words 
as compared to children 
from more affluent 
families that enter school 
with 20,000 word English 
vocabularies. Students 
with 20,000 word 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



10 



1 ♦ 



vocabularies learn to read and write much easier than those with 3,000 word vocabularies. If a 
child does not know the words he/she is to read on standardized tests, there is an automatic 
penalty. Schools that have Indian children must attend to vocabulary expansion by addressing 
language development in English and the native language. 

Still another major consideration is the importance of parental involvement and early childhood 
education and experiences. Recent research tells us that the first three years of life are 
extremely important in preparing children for school. Schools must take advantage of this 
information and plan and implement programs that engage parents in activities with their 
children that will provide the foundations necessary for further learning when the children go to 
school. 



This document is an attempt to help schools follow the recommendations made to improve the 
teaching of Indian children, utilize the information from recent research and reports, and help 
teachers do all the things they are required to do in a more efficient manner. It will primarily 
help teachers teach reading, language arts and science using American Indian and non-Indian 
stories and materials. The materials and activities are aligned with the new, more challenging 
language arts and science content standards required by school reform. At the same time, 
teachers can teach some 
math, art and tribal values. 



Very creative teachers might 
also include social studies 
and career education in this 
integrated approach. This 
approach provides the 
opportunity for the Indian 
studies classes and regular 
classes to work closely 
together to reinforce 
classroom instruction with 
language and cultural 
activities. Parents and tutors 
play an important part. 
Imagine what can happen if 
all are working together 
toward the same goals. 

If you are a parent or 
grandparent, you need to 
also read the section for 
parents and tutors. If you 
want to know more about 
how the approach suggested 
by this document would 
work, read the section for 
teachers and aides. 




0+2 

ERIC 



11 



Creating a Sacred Place - Parents and Tutors 

More than ever before, teachers need the help of parents and tutors who can assist children in a 
one-on-one situation to give them the practice, support and assistance that they need 
individually to do well in school. As part of the national school reform effort, schools are being 
required to expect more from students and teach them more difficult things. For example, now 
all students are to “become good readers by the end of third grade.” This has not happened in 
the past so this is now a national goal. In order to meet this goal, it will take a joint effort of 
teachers, parents, and tutors (if available). 

What must be done to help our children? A recent report by the G.S. Department of Education 
indicated that many children are coming to school with English vocabularies of approximately 
3,000 words as compared to other children that have English vocabularies of 20,000 words. 
Students with 20,000 word vocabularies have a much easier time learning to read and write. 
This tells us that teachers, parents and tutors must provide activities that will help expand 
children’s English vocabularies. Children learn language by hearing and speaking. 
Strengthening children’s native language use helps them learn English easier. Further, it is 
known that reading to children is the single, most important activity that parents can provide to 
help their children succeed in school. Here are more things parents and tutors can do: 

Talk more with children about school and everyday things. Have them recite poetry, 
sing songs, present various things they have learned. Flay with them. 

Tell stories and read to children often. Ask them questions as you read to see if they are 
understanding the stories. Occasionally, have them retell the story or draw a picture 
about it. 

Teach children to be interested in words, how they are spelled, what they mean, and 
teach them new words. Have them write lists and short notes for you. 

As children learn to read, have them read to you - either the whole story, some of the 
pages, or pages after you have read them already. Ask them what they think about what 
happened in the story. 

Be actively involved in the children’s school instructional program. Provide support for 
their learning and make available interesting and meaningful reading and other 
educational materials and activities for them. 

Be a role model and let the children see you reading and writing. Limit television 
watching in favor of time for reading and reading together. 

The activities listed above should be done with children starting at birth, by talking and singing 
to them a lot in both English and the native language, and should be continued all the way 
through their primary school years and beyond. 

This document contains lists of books that you and your children will enjoy. The books include 
stories and information about birds; the sun, moon and stars; food; and animals. The books 
include Indian stories that usually teach lessons and regular non-Indian books for young 
children. This document also contains word lists (pages 23, 63, 110, 159) that parents can use 
for each of the topics and background information for parents on the topics (pages 12, 50, 

100, 148). The lists of books are found in the sections entitled Further Resources and About 
the Literature. The books are categorized as follows: 




12 



3 ♦ 



Phase 1 : Awareness and Exploration 

Children explore their surroundings, building foundations for learning to read and write. 
This starts at birth and continues through preschool. 

The activities listed on the previous page are good ways to help your children build foundations 
for learning to read and write. Books that are most appropriate for Phase 1 children are found 
on the Further Resources lists (starting on pages 20, 59, 108, and 156) and are marked in 
italics. Books listed in the About the Literature sections for Phase 2 (pages 19, 58, 107, and 
155) would also be good to read to preschoolers. The section Additional Resources at the end 
of this book contains a list of Indian ABC books. Your school or community library has picture 
books for preschoolers on the topics included in this book and other topics. Also, check 
bookstores and other stores. Pages 48, 98, 146 and 188 contain nursery rhymes and poetry. 

The other phases are: 

Phase 2: Experimental Reading and Writing 

Children develop the basic concepts of print and begin to experiment with reading and 
writing. This is what they are to learn in kindergarten. 

Phase 3: Early Reading and Writing 

Children read simple stories and write about meaningful topics. This is what they are to 
learn in first grade. 

Phase 4: Transitional Reading and Writing 

Children begin to read more fluently and write using more complex sentences. This is 
what they are to learn in second grade. 

Phase 5: Independent and Productive Reading and Writing 

Children are capable readers and continue to refine reading and writing. This is where 
they should be by the end of third grade. 

Based on these phases, parents and tutors can choose books from the various lists in this 
document in the sections called About the Literature or from the Further Resources lists, 
especially if they are 
interested in materials 
from certain tribes or 
particular aspects of a 
topic. Also included are 
pages for parents or 
tutors to use to schedule 
and log reading time 
with children if there’s 
room. Some parents 
may be homeschooling 
their children, in which 
case, they should also 
read the section for 
teachers and aides. 






Creating a Sacred Place - Teachers and Aides 

Schools are involved in various school reform activities at this time. Teachers of the primary 
grades are being asked to do many things including: 

align curriculum with the new content standards and new assessments, 

do a better job of teaching reading and math, 

utilize an integrated approach to teaching the various content areas, 

teach for understanding and application and focus on depth, 

teach disabled and gifted students in the regular classroom, 

promote positive student behavior through a school-wide approach, and 

provide meaningful parental involvement in the instructional process. 

In addition, teachers of American Indian students are asked to: 

incorporate American Indian content standards, 

provide instruction for Indian children that is based upon research, 

provide culturally relevant instruction within the regular classroom, and 

promote the use of native languages to strengthen children’s language ability. 

This is only a partial list of the many things that teachers of primary students have to do. This 
document will provide assistance to teachers and aides who truly want to create a sacred place 
to support young American Indian or other learners and will help coordinate all that they have 
to do. 

Essentially, the approach presented here combines the teaching of reading, language arts, 
math and science by utilizing American Indian and other literature as the basis for instruction. 
The materials and activities are aligned with the new, more challenging language arts, math 
and science standards and the American Indian content standards. Teachers can also teach art 
and tribal values in relation to the topic and the literature. Some teachers might also include 
social studies and career education in this integrated approach. The approach provides the 
opportunity for Indian studies classes and regular classes to work closely together to directly 
reinforce classroom instruction with language and cultural activities. Parents and tutors also 
have important parts to play. 

A primary purpose of this effort is to help teachers do a better job of teaching Indian children to 
read. In order to meet the national goal of having all students be capable readers by the end of 
third grade, we must utilize all resources and all information available. A recent publication of 
the (J.S. Department of Education, Start Early, Finish Strong: How to Help Eoery Child Become 
A Reader, includes the various phases in learning to read, what should be learned at the various 
grade levels and before. 



O 

ERIC 



14 



5 ♦ 



Phase 1: Preschool - Awareness and Exploration 

Children explore their environment, building foundations for learning to read and write. 

Phase 2: Kindergarten - Experimental Reading and Writing 

Children develop the basic concepts of print and begin to experiment with reading and 

writing. 

Phase 3: First Grade - Early Reading and Writing 

Children read simple stories and write about meaningful topics. 

Phase 4: Second Grade - Transitional Reading and Writing 

Children begin to read more fluently and write using more complex sentences. 

Phase 5: Third Grade - Independent and Productive Reading and Writing 

Children continue to refine reading and writing for different uses and audiences. 

The materials and activities presented in this document are organized generally according to 
these phases, although students at various phases within a classroom can be accommodated 
because the topics for phases are assigned according to student interest level and include 
various reading levels of materials. Ungraded or multi-age classrooms can also be 
accommodated and are encouraged. 

The Start Early, Finish Strong document also indicates that children of low-income families 
come to school with an English vocabulary of approximately 3,000 words, whereas a child 
from a high-income family has an English vocabulary of 20,000 words. The child with a 
20,000 word English vocabulary has a much easier time learning to read and write. If children 
do not know the words they are to read, there is an automatic penalty when they take 
standardized tests. Vocabulary building and language development are key. 

Start Early, Finish Strong states that teachers need to use a comprehensive approach to 
teaching reading and teach young children that language, in a meaningful context, is made up 
of words which contain sounds that are represented by letters and groups of letters. Presently, 
however, too many teachers think that phonics instruction will solve all their problems. Phonics 
rules do not apply to many words. Therefore, meaning and a rich vocabulary are necessary for 
children to recognize words for which phonics rules do not apply. Children need new 
experiences to learn new words; often this new experience comes from reading and words are 
recognized within context while reading. 

Over the years, research regarding improving the 
teaching of reading for American Indian students has 
recommended two major strategies: 1 ) utilizing 
reading material that is culturally relevant, that relates 
to the lives of the children, including language- 
experience stories and American Indian literature, and 
2) strengthening and expanding the language ability 
of the children by providing a great deal of 
opportunity for oral language activities in English and 
the native language including many conversations, 
discussions, retelling of stories, reciting, reporting, etc. 

Further, the approach taken in this document 
promotes viewing Indian children generally as global 
learners rather than analytic learners. Global learners 
often: 







0+6 

ERIC 




concentrate and learn when information is presented as a whole, 

respond to emotional appeals and tend to like fantasy and humor, 

process information subjectively and in patterns, 

easily identify the main idea in a story, 

learn easily through stories, and 

use story context to figure out unknown words. 

And consider the following in regard to teaching elementary science: 

1 . Students should gradually develop a sense of what science is. 

2. An explicit goal of science should be to introduce young children to as many 
different phenomena of the real world as possible. 

3. Science should build an appetite among students for learning how phenomena in the 
world work and how they connect to each other. 

4. Elementary science should convince children that they can become part of the world 
of science and remain members all their lives. 

All of the above information, from the professional literature, is utilized in the development of 
the suggested curriculum units included in this document. The materials and activities can help 
teachers of American Indian students successfully teach them. Four units are presented, 
organized according to topics. The topics are based upon available American Indian literature 
for children and are: Birds; Sun, Moon and Stars; Food; and Beavers to Buffalo. 

For each unit, the following are included: 

1 . Background information on the topic of the unit for the teacher. 

2. A suggested scheme or outline showing how available American Indian literature 
and other children’s literature can be formulated into a unit for kindergarten through 
third grade or for different phases within a multi-age or ungraded classroom. The 
units integrate language arts, math and science activities and suggest art activities 
that evolve from the topics. The units also include an emphasis on values and 
positive behavior, lessons learned primarily from the Indian stories. 

3. Information about the suggested literature, the content it provides and why it is 
organized as it is. The literature is organized mainly by subtopics and assigned to 
phases more according to interest levels than reading levels. Therefore, in the 
literature suggested for a phase, there may be materials of different reading levels, 
but it is the subtopic and what is done with the material that makes the difference. 
Selection of literature to be used is ultimately the choice of the teacher with his/her 
own students in mind. 

4. Further resources that can be used in place of some of the literary pieces selected 
for the unit or for further student reading/activities. A teacher may decide that he/ 
she wants to use only literature from the tribe or area of the students that are being 
taught. Or he/she may want to use only literature written by Indian authors. The 
further resources lists provide a wider choice of materials to draw from. 




16 



7 ♦ 



5. A word list for the topic, to be used to recognize patterns in words and for 
vocabulary expansion. These lists are not exhaustive, and the teacher may decide 
not to use some of the words. The lists include many of the words of the topic and 
particular spelling patterns that they contain, which should be helpful. For 
vocabulary expansion, remember that vocabulary should not be taught by providing 
lists of words and multiple choice tests but by including new words in discussions, 
etc. Students should become fluent in “bird words,” for example. 

6. The new, more challenging language arts, math and science content standards that 
will be covered if the suggested unit is implemented. 

7. Example activities developed by teachers of American Indian children at math and 
science workshops held during the summers of 1992 and 1993 at Haskell Indian 
Junior College (Haskell Indian Nations University). 

8. A page for the teacher to put his or her own ideas for materials or activities. 

9. Pages for lesson plans, schedule. 

10. Nursery rhymes and poetry for language and skills development. 

Other considerations are: 

1. Teachers will have to secure the literature they will use then decide when and how to 
use it. Will it be read to or by students once or will it be used in different ways for 
different instructional purposes? Will it be used for shared reading, guided reading, 
read aloud activities, or independent reading? Will all students read the same 
selection or will different selections be used with different students? Teachers will 
have to determine these things based upon the interests and needs of their students. 
Teachers will also have to determine whether students should then retell a story, 
respond to it, perform it, summarize and report information, etc., and if they should 
do so in writing or orally. The teacher should have literature circles in which students 
discuss, respond and compare and contrast stories. Different students can develop 
questions to be asked for a story, find new words, find the most interesting parts or 
the parts that relate to their lives or provide illustrations. Teachers should regularly 
review the language arts standards to ensure their coverage. 

2. The suggested units are developed so that teachers will teach for understanding and 
application utilizing a spiraling approach. Addressing the same topic and some of 
the same words over and over, from one level to the next, will help provide 
confidence as students move on to higher level materials. The patterns they see and 
learn from one set of words can be applied to other words they encounter. 





17 



3. Teachers who utilize the 
approaches and activities 
included in these units 
will not have quiet 
classrooms. Students 
must be allowed a great 
deal of opportunity for 
oral language activities 
including meaningful 
conversations and 
discussions, oral 
recitations, retelling 
reporting, performing, 
etc. 

4. The school’s Indian 
studies or language 

courses should be organized around the same unit topics and serve to provide local 
tribal cultural and language instruction to complement each unit. The topic will 
provide structure and substance for native language instruction leading to 
conversational language. 

5. The school must reach out to acquire parents’ help. Parents must be trained to do 
the things that are listed on pages 3 and 4. Further, each week they must be 
involved with their child in a meaningful homework assignment for a unit. 

6. Social studies can be incorporated into the units, including the study of cultures and 
cultural diversity; the study of people, places and environments; global connections 
and interdependence; and the study of interactions among individuals, groups and 
institutions. Career education can be included. 

7. Teachers should coordinate the science standards, both regular and Indian 
standards, resources such as Joseph Bruchac’s Keepers books or Greg Cajete’s 
materials, and the regular science program along with the literature and example 
activities to provide a comprehensive approach to science. 

8. Teachers should formulate math problems that relate to the topic areas and are 
based on the math standards and local situations. 

This document will not provide a teacher with a canned curriculum. The teacher or school 
should develop its own curriculum based upon the ideas in this book and available and 
acquired resources. This book contains suggested units covering 16 weeks to be used 
September - December with Birds in September; Sun, Moon and Stars in October; Food in 
November; and Beavers to Buffalo in December. Again, this is only suggested. Many schools 
do not have a written curriculum and prefer to rely on their textbooks as their curriculum. It is 
important for a school to have a written curriculum so all teachers know what they are 
expected to teach. Without one, teachers usually teach whatever they want. The information in 




O 

ERLC 



18 



9 ♦ 




this guide can provide the basis for sound primary 
curricula for American Indian schools. Teachers 
must blend this information with good practices they 
are already undertaking such as providing writers’ 
workshop activities, cooperative learning, the use of 
technology, etc. 

Teachers will have to choose which books to utilize. 
To check for bias, local tribal members can preview 
the books. The section, Additional Resources, at the 
end of this book, provides a listing of vendors for 
purchasing books. Teachers should first check their 
school libraries and various classrooms to 
determine if some books are already available. If 
teachers find that they are lacking materials in 
certain topic areas, they can rely on language- 
experience stories. Teachers may find that some 
books are more appropriate at phases other than 
those to which they are assigned. That’s good. The 
addition of videos and other media will serve to 
enhance instruction. Tribes often have their own 
anthologies of legends. And, of course, real 
storytelling by local elders or others around one of 
the topics would be excellent. This must be done, 
though, with regard to local traditions as some 
storytelling is appropriate only at certain times, and 
there may be other conditions that must be honored. 

Imagine what a strong primary program you could 
have if you provided a program based upon the 
latest research including what is recommended for 
teaching Indian children, you coordinated your 
instruction with that of the Indian studies/language 
staff, and you acquired good parental support and 
assistance by having them provide reading and 
language time with their children. You can supply 
parents with books on the topics you are studying 
and have them also learning and reading about the 
topics. They will be so much more interested in 
helping if they are a true part of the program. See 
the section for parents and tutors. If you have the 
luxury of having tutors for your students, they can 
also be extremely helpful by providing extra reading 
and language time, based on the topic areas, with 
your students. By having a program developed 
around themes or topics, you can do all these things 
easier. 

Good luck as you create a sacred place for your 
students. 



O ♦ 10 

ERIC 



19 




Background Information for Teachers and Parents 

Phases 2 and 3 

It is important to incorporate Indian culture into the curriculum for many reasons: 

1 . It can help make children proud to be Indian as they learn of the many connections 
between scientific and mathematical knowledge and Indian culture. 

2. It can help them learn more as they understand how science and math connect to 
their real worlds. 

3. It can motivate them to read more if they read about their own worlds. 

4. It can help them know how they are to live their lives. 

Indian stories are important links to learning science and math and how to live. Following is a 
story that appeared in Indian Country Today. 

Long time ago, the Wamakas’kan (animal nation, including 
man) came to a shocking awakening because the world they 
were enjoying became dark and ugly, and they realized that 
they were not living the teachings of Tunkasina (Grandfather/ 

God) and the Universal Law of Love for self and one another, 

Respect for self and one another and Honor for self and one 
another. These are only some of the teachings that they were 
supposed to live by, but they did not pay attention and lived a 
life of recklessness and abused the energy they were given by 
Tunkasina which led to a life of corruption, greed and an 
unnatural lifestyle. 

The Wamakas’kan did not know where to turn to for help and 
were silent. Suddenly off in the distance, they heard a noise and 
were silent, and it pleased the heart. As the sound came closer, 
they realized that this sound was Wakan (holy/Sacred), a 
“Sacred Vibration” that brought tears to the eyes. When they 
could see the thing making the noise, it was a bird. 

The bird sang, “Follow me, I will show you a place of peace and 
harmony where there is Respect, Love and Honor.” - Dakota 

This story was printed as a tribute from Marty Indian School in South Dakota to Jackie Bird, 
Native American singer/performer, Featherstone, Brookings, SD. 

Your children will be reading Indian and other stories about birds. These stories will help your 
children learn math and science, reading, writing, speaking and listening skills and how to live. 




O ♦ !2 

ERiC 



21 



Background Information for Teachers and Parents 

Phases 4 and 5 

Why Should Curriculum Incorporate Science and Culture-Related Concepts? 

- ORBIS Associates 

A main reason for incorporating cultural concepts into science instruction for American Indian 
students is because Indian people have always been “scientists.” Native cultures are holistic 
and, hence, view nature as the interactive relationships among living beings. For native 
people(s), maintaining their relationship with nature was critical to survival, both physically 
and spiritually. Their knowledge preceded the advent of scientific inquiry as it is known in the 
modern world. Native peoples pursued knowledge of the physical world and natural 
phenomena before anyone bore the modern day title of “scientist.” Contemporary scientists 
credit Indian people with being exemplary users of “multiple use conservation.” 

Native Americans have often been called the First Environmentalists because of the 
traditional concern for all living things on Mother Earth. That many of their men and 
women have achieved highly developed skills and extensive, intimate knowledge about 
the movements of the heavenly bodies, the chemical qualities of plants, and the 
medicinal applications of animal and botanical matter, has long been known and 
acknowledged by a number of anthropologists. 

Such intimate knowledge leads to another reason for blending science and cultural concepts. 
Many contributions to science have been made by native people as a result of their detailed 
knowledge regarding the habits, habitats, ecological communities, microdistributions, seasonal 
variations, and recent history of the plant and animal species. 

By exploring native cultures through a holistic perspective and through the contributions of 
native people, American Indians can truly be presented as multidimensional human beings - as 
complex, specialized, and knowledgeable individuals and acknowledges Indians as serious 
students of the world in which they live. 

The impressive knowledge of the Native American peoples about a wide variety of 
natural phenomena is not.. .accidental, nor has its acquisition been haphazard. It is 
based on generations of systematic inquiry. It is the accumulation and transmittal of 
repeated observations, experiments, and conclusions. Some of the elements of the 
scientific method were inherent in their processes. Native Americans have understood, 
beyond the obvious, many of the relationships among different types of substances. 

Indians’ view of the world is symbolized by the sacred circle, i.e., the life cycle, the cycle of 
seasons, the roundness of the sun and moon and their orbital movements. All things work as a 
part of the circle and, therefore, are sacred and must be treated with respect. In addition, the 
earth is regarded as a mother which gives life to all things. 

Promoting the scientific aspects of native culture can reinforce the usefulness of science to 
native people and encourage Indian students to learn the skills required for advanced studies in 
science. Indian educators should try to prepare Indian students for science study by stressing 
its importance. Indian role models should be provided as much as possible. The more an 
Indian student hears references to Indians involved with scientific studies, either historically or 
currently, the more likely that he or she will consider science as a viable career option to 
pursue and/or be interested in science. 




22 



13 ♦ 



Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline - Birds 

Reading, Language Arts, 



Science, Math, Art, Values 

P Bird Words 
H Reading Nonfiction 
A Summarizing/Reporting 
S Reading Legends/Fiction 
E Comparing/Contrasting/ 
Retelling/The Oral Tradition 
F Characteristics of Eagles 
I Endangered Status/Numbers 
V Flight of Fantasy/Bruchac 
E Drawing an Eagle 

Eagle Teachings/Bruchac 


Literature - Week 1 

Eagles for Kids by C. Gleek 
Eagles: Facts, Stories, Games by 
Lucy Baker 

Eagles, Hunters of the Sky by 
Ann C. Cooper 

Eagles of America by Dorothy H. 
Patent 

Bald Eagle by Gordon Morrison 


Literature - Week 2 

Adopted by the Eagles by Paul 
Goble 

“Eagle Boy” in Keepers of the 
Animals/Caduto & Bruchac 
“Eagle and the Boy” in And It Is 
Still That Way by Byrd 
Baylor 

Eagle Boy by G. Ha usman 
Eagle Boy by R.L. Vaughn 
Eagle Feather, An Honour by 
Ferguson Plain 


P Bird Words 
H Reading Nonfiction 
A Summarizing/Reporting 
S Reading Fiction/Legends 
E Retelling/Responding 
Raptors/Hawks 
F Cycle of Life/Food Chain 
O Are Hawks Here? 

Cl Hawk Silhouette Art 
R Connections to Nature 


Amazing Birds of Prey by J. 
Parry-Jones 

Raptors (Birds Up Close) by 
Bobbie Kalman 
Summer of the Falcon by Jean 

C. George 

Sky Dancer by Jack Bushnell 
Matthew's Meadow by Corrine 

D. Bliss 


Hawk, I'm Your Brother by Byrd 
Baylor 

Crow and Hawk: A Traditional 
Pueblo Indian Story by 
Michael Rosen 

How Coyote Helped to Light the 
World by Anne B. Fischer 


P Bird Words 
H Reading Nonfiction 
A Summarizing/Reporting 
S Reading Legends 
E Retelling/Performing Legends 
Characteristics of Birds 
T Needs of Birds/Migration 
H Feeding Birds/Costs 
R Observing Birds 
E Drawing/Labeling Bird Parts 
E Respect for Birds/Others 


Birds : Explore the Amazing 
World of Birds by Jen Green 
Birds, Birds, Birds by National 
Wildlife Federation 
Birds by Claude Delafosse 
What Makes a Bird a Bird by 
Mary Garelick 


“Manabozho and the 

Woodpecker” in Keepers of 
the Animals/Caduto & 
Bruchac 

Coyote: Trickster Tale by Gerald 
McDermott 

Iktomi and the Buzzard by Paul 
Goble 

Iktomi and the Ducks by Paul 
Goble 

Hanabosho, Soaring Eagle by 
Joe McClellan 


P Bird Words 
H Reading About Birds 
A Summarizing/Reporting 
S Reading Bird Stories 
E Retelling 
Listening 
How Birds Look 
T Bird Watching/Observing 
W Counting/Coloring Birds 
O Gift of Beauty in Nature 


About Birds: A Guide for 
Children by John Sill 
Bird Watch: A Book of Poetry by 
Jane Yolen 

Crinkleroots Guide to Knowing 
the Birds by Jim Arnocky 
Birds at Your Fingertips by Judy 
Nayer 


The Great Ball Game: A 

Muskogee Tale by Joseph 
Bruchac 

How the Birds Got Their Colours 
by B. Johnston & D. 
Ashkewe 

Coyote and the Winnowing 
Birds/ Eugene 
Sekaquaptewa 

The Ring in the Prairie by John 
Bierhorst 



O ♦ 14 

ERIC 



23 



Reading, Language Arts, 

Literature - Week 3 Literature - Week 4 Science, Math, Art, Values 



Raven: Trickster Tale by Gerald 
McDermott 

How Raven Freed the Moon by 
Anne Cameron 
Raven Returns the Water by 
Anne Cameron 
Raven Brings to the People 

Another Gift by M. Ann Reed 
Raven: A Collection of 

Woodcuts/D. DeArmond 


Raven and River by Nancy 
White Carlstrom 

“Octopus and Raven” in Keepers 
of the Animals/Caduto & 
Bruchac 

Sika and the Raven by Carl 
Hammerschlag 

A Man Called Raven by Richard 
Van Camp 


Bird Words 

Reading Legends/Myths 
Retelling/The Oral Tradition 
Responding 

Comparing/Contrasting 
Reading Fiction 
Traits of Ravens 
Are Ravens Here? 

Raven Habitat 
Doing Woodcuts Art 
Respect for Nature/Others 


Black Crow, Black Crow by 
Ginger F. Guy 
King Crow by Jennifer 
Armstrong 

The Crow Who Stood on His 
Beak by Rafik Schami 
Clever Crow by Cynthia Defelice 
Carmine, the Crow by Heidi 
Holder 


Crow Chief by Paul Goble 
Supper for Crow: A Northwest 
Coast Indian Tale by Pierr 
Morgan 

Rainbow Crow by Nancy Van 
Laan 

Aandeg: The Crow by Shirley 
Pheasant Williams 
A Crow Named Joe by Peter 
Eyvindson 


Bird Words 

Reading Legends/Myths 
Retelling/The Oral Tradition 
Responding 
Local Crow Stories 
Characteristics of Crows 
Crows as Scavengers 
Are Crows Here? 

Drawing Crows 

Being Clever in a Good Way 


Rosie f s Walk by Pat Hutchins 
The Chicken Sisters by Laura J. 
Numeroff 

Ducks Don't Get Wet by Augusta 
Goldin 

Come Along, Daisy by Jane 
Simmons 

A Duck So Small by Elizabeth 
Holstein 

Tom Turkey by Dave Sargent 


The Hen of Wahpeton by Ann 
Nolan Clark 

“The Drake and the Falcon” in 
Lakota and Dakota Animal 
Wisdom Stories by Mark 
McGinnis 

Shingesbiss by Nancy Van Laan 
Turkey and Giant by Nedra 
Emery 


Bird Words 

Reading Fiction 

Retelling/Responding 

Chickens/Ducks/Turkeys 

Ducks Designed for Water 

Birds We Eat 

Care of Chickens 

Weight/Cost of Chicken 

Visiting Chickens/Ducks 

Eggshell Art 

Being in Trouble 


Baby Bird by Joyce Dunbar 
Baby Birds by Martina 
Bonsignori 

Baby Bird's First Nest by Frank 
Asch 

The Best Nest by Philip Eastman 
Birdsong by Audrey Wood 
Bird Talk by Ann Jonas 


Song of the Hermit Thrush by 
Gloria Dominic 
“The Rattlesnake and the 
Meadowlark Family” in 
Lakota and Dakota Animal 
Wisdom Stories by Mark 
McGinnis 

The Magic Hummingbird by 
Ekkehart Malotki 
The Hunter and the Woodpecker 
by C. Crow! 


Bird Words 
Reading About Birds 
Summarizing/Reporting 
Reading Bird Stories 
Retelling/Responding 
Bird Watching/Counting 
Baby Birds/Adult Birds 
Habits of Birds/Habitats 
Milk Carton Bird Houses 
Care for Family/Others 



O 

ERIC 



24 



15 ♦ 



About the Literature for Phase Five 

Indian people have great reverence for birds, especially the eagle and the raven for 
tribes in the northwest. Many Indian stories include these two birds. 

Eagles 

Eagles for Kids by C. Gleek 

Eagles: Fact, Stories, Games by Lucy Baker, Puffin Books, 1990. 

Eagles, Hunters of the Sky by Ann C. Cooper, 1992. 

Eagles of America by Dorothy H. Patent, 1995. 

Bald Eagle by Gordon Morrison, Walter Lorraine, 1998. 

These are all nonfiction about eagles. Information from them should be summarized, reviewed 
and reported. Selected books can be read or heard by all students or assigned to various 
students. 



Adopted by the Eagles by Paul Goble, Aladdin, 1994. Plains. 

Eagle Boy in Keepers of the Animals by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), 
Fulcrum Pub., 1997. Zuni Also on audiotape. 

Eagle and the Boy in And It Is Still That Way by Byrd Baylor, Trails West, 1976. Pima 
Eagle Boy by G. Hausman. Navajo 

Eagle Boy: A Pacific Northwest Native Tale by R.L. Vaughn, Sasquatch Books, 2000. 

Eagle Feather, An Honourby Ferguson Plain (Indian Author), Pemmican Pub., Ojibway 
The first five books are stories of close relationships between boys and eagles. They can be 
retold, in the oral tradition, and compared and contrasted. The last is the story of a young boy 
learning the values of life. This one could be read by gifted and talented students and read or 
retold to other students. Someone familiar with Indian spirituality could talk with the students 
about the significance of eagle feathers. Add local stories that include eagles. 

Ravens 



Raven: Trickster Tale by Gerald McDermott. Northwest 

How Raven Freed the Moon by Anne Cameron, 1997. Northwest 

Raven Returns the Water by Anne Cameron, Harbour Publishing. Northwest 

Raven Brings to the People Another Gift by M. Ann Reed, Tipi 
Press, 1996. Northwest 

Raven: A Collection of Woodcuts by D. DeArmond, 
Alaska Northwest, 1975. 

These are stories including Raven, the trickster and hero. 
The stories should be retold in the oral tradition, and 
compared and contrasted. 

Raven and River by Nancy White Carlstrom, Little, Brown, 1997. 
This is a story about raven and the land. It could be read by gifted 
and talented students and read or retold to other students. 

Octopus and Raven in Keepers of the Animals by Michael Caduto and 
Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1997. Nootka - 
Northwest Also on audiotape. 

Sika and the Raven by Carl Hammerschlag, Turtle Island Press, 1999. 

Northwest 

A Man Called Raven by Richard Van Camp, 1997. Northwest 
These are stories that teach respect for nature. Students should respond to them. 




O ♦ 16 

ERIC 



o tz 

vj 



About the Literature for Phase Four 

Indian people hold a reverence for birds. Birds, such as the hawk and crow, are 
included in many Indian stories. 

Hawks (Raptors) 

Amazing Birds of Prey by J. Parry-Jones, Knopf, 1992. 

Raptors (Birds Clp Close) by Bobbie Kalman, Crabtree 
Pub., 1997. 

These two books are nonfiction about raptors. 

Information from them should be summarized, reviewed 
and reported. Some tribal groups might not wish to have 
owls included. Check with your local communities. 

Summer of the Falcon by Jean C. George, Harper 
Trophy, 1979. 

Sky Dancer by Jack Bushnell, Lothrop, Lee and 
Shepard, 1996. 

Matthew’s Meadow by Corrine D. Bliss, Voyager Picture 
Book, 1997. 

These stories are fictional and include raptors, especially 
hawks. Selected materials can be read or heard by all 
students or they can be assigned to various students. 

Students can respond to these stories by telling how they 
feel about what happens. 

Hawk, I’m Your Brother by Byrd Baylor, Aladdin, 1976. 

Southwest 

Crow and Hawk: A Traditional Pueblo Indian Story by Michael Rosen, 1995. Pueblo 
How Coyote Helped to Light the World by Anne B. Fisher. Pomo 

These are all Indian Stories that include a hawk. They can be retold. Students can ask their 
parents if they have stories that include a hawk. 

Crows 

Black Crow, Black Crow by Ginger F. Guy, Greenwillow, 1991 . 

King Crow by Jennifer Armstrong, Knopf, 1995. 

The Crow Who Stood on His Beak by Rafik Schami, Chronicle, 1996. 

Clever Crow by Cynthia Defelice, Anthenium, 1998. 

Carmine, the Crow by Heidi Holder, Farrar, Straus & Girous, 1996. 

These books are fictional stories including a crow. They can be retold. The most difficult book 
might be read by gifted and talented students and read or retold to other students. 

Crow Chief by Paul Goble, Orchard Books, 1992. Plains 

Supper for Crow: A Northwest Coast Indian Tale by Pierr Morgan, 1995. Northwest 
Rainbow Crow: A Lenape Tale by Nancy Van Laan, Knopf, 1999. Lenape 
Aandeg: The Crow by Shirley Pheasant Williams (Indian Author), Waapoone Pub., Ojibway 
A Crow Named Joe by Peter Eyvindson, Pemmican Pub., Ojibway 

These are Indian stories that include a crow. The can be retold. Students can ask their parents 
if they have stories that include a crow. 




O 

ERIC 



26 



17 ♦ 



About the Literature for Phase Three 

Indian people hold a reverence for birds. Many Indian stories include birds. 
About Birds 



Birds: Explore the Amazing World of Birds by Jen Green, Peachtree, 1991 . 

Birds, Birds, Birds by National Wildlife Federation, McGraw Hill, 1997. 

Birds by Claude Delafosse, Catchwheel Books, 1993. 

What Makes a Bird a Bird by Mary Garelick 

These are nonfiction about birds. Information from them should be summarized, reviewed and 
reported. 



Tricksters and Birds 

Manabozho and the Woodpecker in Keepers of the Animals by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1997. Anishinabe Also on audiotape. 
Nanabosho, Soaring Eagle by Joe McClellan (Indian Author), Pemmican Pub. 

Coyote: Trickster Tale by Gerald McDermott. Southwest 
Iktomi and the Buzzard by Paul Goble, 1994. Lakota 
Iktomi and the Ducks by Paul Goble, 1990. Lakota 

These are trickster stories that involve birds. They can be retold. Selected stories can be read 
or heard by all students or can be assigned to various students or groups. 

Chickens, Ducks and Turkeys 



Rosie’s Walk by Pat Hutchins, 1983. 

The Chicken Sisters by Laura J. Numeroff, Harpercollins, 1999. 

Ducks Don’t Get Wet by Augusta Goldin, Harpercollins, 1999. 

Come Along, Daisy by Jane Simmons, Little, Brown & Co., 1998. 

A Duck So Small by Elizabeth Holstein, Little Tiger Press, 1998. 

Tom Turkey by Dave Sargent. 

These are selections that include chickens, ducks or turkeys. They can be retold. They should 

be read over several times. 

The Hen of Wahpeton by Ann Nolan 
Clark, Haskell Indian Nations 
University, Bureau of Indian Affairs, 
1943. Dakota A hen wants to be in 
the movies. 

The Drake and the Falcon in Lakota 
and Dakota Animal Wisdom Stories by 
Mark McGinnis, Tipi Press, 1994. Lakota 
A boastful drake is caught. 

Shingesbiss by Nancy Van Laan. Ojibwa 
A little duck finds plenty of food until the 
lake freezes. 

Turkey and Giant by Nedra Emery, Salina 
Bookshelf, 1996, Navajo 

These are Indian stories that include chickens, 
ducks or turkeys. They can be retold. They should be 
read over several times. 




Q ♦ 18 

ERIC 



27 



About the Literature for Phase Two 

Indian people hold a reverence for the birds. Birds are often included in Indian stories. 
About Birds 

About Birds: A Guide for Children by John Sill. 

Bird Watch: A Book of Poetry by Jane Yolen, Paper Star, 1999. 

Crinkleroots Guide to Knowing the Birds by Jim Arnocky, Simon & Schuster, 1992. 

Birds at Your Fingertips by Judy Mayer, McClanahan Book Co., 1995. 

These are books mainly about identifying birds. Information from them should be summarized, 
reviewed and reported. 

Bird Stories 

The Great Ball Game: A Muskogee Tale by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Dial Books. 

Muskogee Creek Why the birds fly south in the winter. 

How the Birds Got Their Colours by Basil Johnston and Del Ashkewe (Indian Author), Kids 
Can Press, 1978. 

Coyote and the Winnowing Birds by Eugene Sekaquaptewa (Indian Author), Clear Light 
Publishing, 1994. Hopi How Coyote tricks the birds who find a way to trick him back. 

The Ring in the Prairie by John Bierhorst, Dial, 1976. Shawnee The creation of the birds. 

These are Indian stories about birds. They should be retold. Students can ask their parents if 
they have stories that include birds and retell them at school. 

More About Birds 

Baby Bird by Joyce Dunbar, Candlewick Press, 1998. 

Baby Birds by Martina Bonsignori, Boyds Mill Press, 1992. 

Baby Bird’s First Nest by Frank Asch, Gulliver Books, 1999. 

The Best Nest by Phillip Eastman, Random House, 1998. 

Birdsong by Audrey Wood, Harcourt Brace, 1997. 

Bird Talk by Ann Jonas, Greenwillow, 1999. 

These are books about birds and their habits. Information from them should be summarized, 
reviewed and reported. 

More Bird Stories 

Song of the Hermit Thrush by Gloria Dominic, Troll, 1 996. Iroquois The animals and the birds 
have a contest to see who has the prettiest song. 

The Rattlesnake and the Meadowlark Family in Lakota and Dakota Animal Wisdom Stories by 
Mark McGinnis, Tipi Press, 1994. Lakota A meadowlark tricks rattlesnake. 

The Magic Hummingbird by Ekkehart Malotki, Lickle Pub. Co., 1994. Hopi 
The Hunter and the Woodpecker by C. Crowl, Tipi Press, 1990. Lakota How the flute was 
brought to the people. 

These are Indian stories that include birds. They can be retold. Add local stories that include 
birds. 



er|c 



28 



19 ♦ 



Further Resources for Birds Unit 

These materials can be used to substitute for books in the suggested unit outline or 

for additional reading/other activities for students. 

The Bird Alphabet Book by Jerry Pollotta, Charlesbridge Pub., 1989. 

Roger Tony Peterson’s ABC of Birds: A Book for Little Birdwatchers by Roger Tony Peterson, 
Rizzoli Bookstore, 1995. 

Feathery Facts by Ivan Chermayeff, Gulliver Books, 1995. 

Fly With the Birds: A Word and Rhyme Book by Richard Edwards, 1996. 

How to Draw Birds by John Green, 1999. 

Birds Coloring Book by Lisa Bonforte, Dover Little Activity Books, 1993. 

Counting is for the Birds by Frank Mazzala, Jr. 1997. 

Northern Plains Indian Coloring Book by C. Peterson and Anna Rubia, Varia, 1998. 

Birds by Angela Payston, Aladdin, 1992. 

Are You My Mother? by Philip Eastman, Random House, 1988. 

“Why Birds Go South” in Tales the Elders Told: Ojibway Legends by Basil Johnson, Royal 
Ontario Museum, 1981. 

How Turtle Flew South for the Winter in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1988. Dakota 

Shemay, the Bird in the Sugarbush by David Martinson, Anishinabe Reading Materials, Duluth 
Indian Education Advisory Committee. 

Grandmother’s Pigeon by Louise Erdrich (Indian Author), Hyperion, 1999. Indian 

“How the Redbirds Got Their Color” in Wolf Tales by Mary Powell. Indian 

Sacred Song of the Hermit Thrush, A Native American Legend by Tehanetorens (Indian 
Author), Book Publishing, Summertown, TN. 

Stories involving birds in Hopi Coyote Tales by Ekkehart Malotki (Indian Author), University of 
Nebraska Press, 1984. 

Ka Ha Si and the Loon by Terri Cohlen, Troll. Eskimo 

The Loon’s Necklace by William Toye, Oxford Press, 1977. Tsimshian 

Love Flute by Paul Goble. Lakota Also on audio tape. 

The First Flute in Keepers of the Animals by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian 
Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1997. Lakota 



Q ♦ 20 

ERIC 



29 



How the Robin Got Its Red Breast: A Legend of the Sechelt People by Charlie Craigan, 1997. 

“How the Robin Came To Be” in Ojibway Indian Legends by Cheryl M. King, North Michigan 
University Press, 1972. 

The Legend of the White Dove by W. H. Hooks, Macmillan, 1988. Indian 

Iktomi and the Crane, Little Wound School Bilingual Program. Lakota 

How the Birch Tree Got its Stripes: A Cree Story by F. Ahonokew or Dean Whitestone, Fifth 
House, 1988. 

The Crane in Lakota and Dakota Animal Wisdom Stories by Mark W. McGinnis, Tipi Press, 
1994. 

April Wilson’s Magpie Magic by April Wilson, Dial Books, 1999. 

Huckleberry Robin by Betsy Schabacker, 1998. 

Desert Birds by Alice Flanagan, 1996. 

Cinder Wing and Sky: Birds of the Badlands and Black Hills by M. Melius, Fenske, 1995. 

The Little Red Hen by Paul Galdone, Scholastic. 

The Wolf’s Chicken Stew by Keiko Kasza, Putnam, 1996. Included in some basal readers 
The Chick that Wouldn’t Hatch by Clair Daniel, Harcourt Brace, 1999. 

Daisy and the Egg by Jane Simmons, Little, Brown, 1999. 

The Ugly Duckling by Margaret Wise Brown, 1994. 

The Littlest Duckling by Gail Herman, Viking, 1996. 

Ducks and Introductions in the Trickster and the Troll by Virginia Driving Hawk Sneve, (Indian 
Author), Bison Books, 1999. Lakota 

“Turkey Girl” in Our Father Story Teller by Pablita Velarde (Indian Author), Clear Light Pub., 
1989. Pueblo 

Turkey Girl by Penn Pollock. Zuni 

Turkey’s Gift to the People by Ann Rucki, 1992. Indian 

A Crow’s Journey by David Cunningham, Albert Whitman, 1996. 

“How the Crow Became Black” in Indian Legends of the Paiute, Shoshone and Washoe Tribes, 
State of Nevada Dept, of Ed., 1972. 

Hawk, poem by Simon Ortiz (Indian Author). Pueblo 

Rico’s Hawk by Randy Hook, Green Chimney’s Tale with book, 1999. 




■v> '* 



30 



21 ♦ 



Owl: Animal Lore and Legend by V. Browne (Indian Author), Scholastic, 1995. 

Tonweya and the Eagles by Rosebud Yellow Robe (Indian Author), Dial. Lakota 
Eagle Dreams by Shirley McFarlane, Orca Book Pub., 1998. 

Hidatsa Eagle Trapping, Reprints in Anthropology, Vol. 13 by Gilbert Wilson, Reprinted 1978, 
J. & L. Reprint Co. 

Gluscabi and the Wind Eagle in Keepers of the Earth by Caduto and Bruchac (Indian Author), 
Fulcrum, Inc., 1988. Abenaki Also on audio tape. 

The Old Beaver Woman and the Eagle in Lakota and Dakota Animal Wisdom Stories by Mark 
W. McGinnis, Tipi Press, 1994. 

1 Am the Eagle Free by Simon Paul-Dene (Indian Author), Theytus Books, Iroquois 

Brave Wolf and the Thunderbird by Medicine Crow (Indian Author), Abbeville Press. 

Native American Animal Stories by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author). Stories from Keepers of 
the Animals. 

Mind of the Raven: Investigations and Adventures with Wolf-Birds by Bemd Heinrich. 

How Raven Stole the Sun by Maria Williams, National Museum of the American Indian 

How Raven Made the Tides in Keepers of the Earth by Caduto and Bruchac (Indian Author), 
Fulcrum, Inc., 1988. Tsimshian Also on audio tape. 

Kivok’s Magic Journey: An Eskimo Legend by James Houston, Atheneum, 1973. 

Lesson of the Feather by Cal Thunder Hawk (Indian Author), Tipi Press, 1998. Lakota 

Bird stories in the Indian Reading Series: Stories and Legends of the Northwest: Birds and 
People, Owl Boy, Pet Crow, Owl’s Eyes, Coyote and Raven, Duckhead Necklace by 
Educational Systems, Inc. 

All About Turkeys by Jim Arnosky 

Mousekin’s Thanksgiving by Edna Miller 

The Christmas Bird by Bernadine Watts, Chronicle, 1996. 

Little Robin’s Christmas by Jan Fluenley, 1998. 

CHECK YOCIR LIBRARY OR BOOKSTORES FOR 
OTHER BOOKS RELATING TO YOCIR TOPIC. 

Books in italics are especially suited for Phase One - for 
preschool children. 




O *22 

ERIC 



31 



BIRD WORDS 








BEGINNING SOCINDS 








feather 


sing 


hunt buzzard 


raven 


perch 


formation 


song 


hen bird 


raptor 


peck 


falcon 


soar 


high beak 


roost 


parrot 


fly 


south 


hawk bug 


rooster 


partridge 


flew 


scavenger 


hatch breast 


robin 


pigeon 


flight 


sky 


heron bread 




prey 


flap 


squawk 






prairie chicken 


flock 


swoop 






plume 


float 


sparrow 






predator 


fowl 


screech 








ENDING SOUNDS 


LONG VOWEL SOUNDS 


SHORT VOWEL SOUNDS 


circling 


duck 


glide 


thrush 


hen 


gliding 


flock 


dive 


buzzard 


peck 


flapping 


chick 


dove 


duck 


nest 


screeching 


peck 


crane 


bug 


limb 


squawking 


lark 


drake 


tuft 


chicken 


singing 


squawk 


tail 


hunt 


insect 


diving 


hawk 


eagle 


land 


robin 


cackling 


beak 


meat 


flap 


ostrich 


soaring 


drake 


beak 


branch 


observe 


roosting 




float 


raptor 


flock 


swooping 




tree 


hatch 


song 


wing 




screech 


scavenge 




OTHER WORDS 


R-CONTROLLED VOWELS COMPOUND WORDS 


aerie 


worm 


lark 


bluebird 




dove 


claw 


partridge 


songbird 




crow 


waddle 


cardinal 


hummingbird 


leg 


shell 


formation 


blackbird 




egg 


macaw 


north 


roadrunner 




oriole 


molt 


raptor 


meadowlark 


talon 


grouse 


perch 


scarecrow 




quail 


woodpecker 


observe 


birdcall 




watch 


incubator 


chirp 


birdhouse 




ornithology 


canary 


bird 


birdseed 








turkey 


birdbath 








vulture 


birdcage 





Word walls should be maintained. Instructors should ensure that students know the 
meanings of all of these words in this context and extend vocabulary by noting how they may 
mean other things in other contexts or they may have homophones. Experiences, pictures 
and student illustrations should be used to explain and process word meanings. Words that 
rhyme with these words can be examined to see varying spellings for sounds. Other words 
should be added. Teach the meaning of sayings such as “feather your nest,” “kill two birds 
with one stone,” or “a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.” 



32 



23 ♦ 



Science Standards and Benchmarks for Birds Unit 

Standard - Understands that scientific inquiry works in particular wayss 
Benchmarks 

Understands that learning can come from careful observations 
Understands that tools like binoculars add to information from our senses 

Standard - Understands the processes that shape the surface of the earth and the 

relation of the surface of the earth to the living environment 

Benchmarks 

Knows that change is something that happens to many things around us 
Knows that living things respond to the conditions around them, and they can 
sometimes change their surroundings 

Standard - Knows about the diversity and unity that characterize life 
Benchmarks 

Knows that some animals and plants are similar in appearance and behavior, and 
others are very different from one another 

Knows that stories sometimes give plants and animals attributes they really do not have 

Standard - Understands the genetic basis for the transfer of biological 

characteristics from one generation to the next 

Benchmarks 

Knows that offspring grow up to be similar to their parents 

Standard - Knows the general structure and functions of cells in organisms 
Benchmarks 

Knows that most plants and animals need air, food and water 

Knows that plants and animals are composed of different parts, serving different 

purposes and contributing to the well-being of the whole organism 

Standard - Understands how species depend on one another and on the environment 

for survival 

Benchmarks 

Knows that animals eat plants or other animals for food and may also use plants for 
shelter and nesting 

Mathematics Standards and Benchmarks for Birds Unit 

Standard - Effectively uses a variety of strategies within the problem solving process 
Benchmarks 

Brainstorms possible things to do 

Draws pictures to represent problems 

Represents problem situations using physical objects 

Clarifies problems using discussions with teacher or knowledgeable others 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced properties of numbers 
Benchmarks 

Has a general understanding of the concept of number 
Uses counting to exemplify numbers 



3 +24 

ERIC 



33 



Standard - Uses basic and advanced procedures while performing computation 
Benchmarks 

Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides whole numbers with accuracy 
Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides decimals with accuracy 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced methods of measurement 
Benchmarks 

Understands the basic characteristics of weight and how it is measured 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced concepts of data analysis 

and distributions 

Benchmarks 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of data 

Language Arts Standards and Benchmarks for Birds Unit 

Standard - Gathers information effectively through reading, listening and viewing 
Benchmarks 

Provides an accurate retelling of the basic plot of simple stories the student has read, 
heard or viewed 

Provides an accurate retelling of the main idea of simple expository information the 
student has read, heard or viewed 

Understands that reading, viewing and listening are ways of gaining information about 
the world 

Determines meaning of simple words from context 

Creates mental representations for concrete information read, heard or viewed 

Standard - Reads and responds to literature 
Benchmarks 

Understands that stories have beginning, middle and ending episodes 
Understands the genre of legends and fables 

Standard - Communicates ideas and information in writing 
Benchmarks 

Understands basic connections between spelling patterns and speech sounds 
Understands basic phonological patterns in English 
Expresses ideas in simple expository forms 
Composes simple stories that express cohesive ideas 

Standard - Understands and applies basic principles of language use 
Benchmarks 

Recognizes characteristic sounds and rhythms of language 
Makes valid observations about the use of words 

Standards and Benchmarks from The Systematic Identification and Articulation of 
Content Standards and Benchmarks, Mid-continent Regional Educational 
Laboratory, 1 994. 



O 

ERIC 



34 



25 ♦ 



American Indian Content Standards for Birds Unit 

Science 

Science as Inquiry - 

Indian students should develop an awareness that observations and understandings of 
ecological relationships traditionally formed an essential base of knowledge among American 
Indian cultures. 

Earth and Space Science - 

Indian students should develop an understanding of objects in the sky as exemplified by 
knowledge of weather patterns and the habits of birds. 

Life Science- 

Indian students should develop an understanding of plant and animal life cycles as exemplified 
in traditional American Indian concepts such as the Medicine Wheel. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of characteristics of various animals as 
exemplified in traditional American Indian stories, legends, songs and dances. 

Language and Literacy 

Indian students should be able to: 

Listen for meaning and gain information from spoken English and a Native language. 

Listen to Indian stories told in the oral tradition, comprehend their teachings and be able to 
retell them. 

Speak coherently, conveying ideas in both English and a Native language. 

Read fluently and independently, a variety of materials including those with American Indian 
themes. 

Locate and use a variety of texts to gain information, for example, historical materials about 
their tribe, tribal legends and stories and oral history transcription. 

Be familiar with children’s literature with Indian themes, especially with that pertaining to the 
student’s tribe and literature written by Indian authors. 

Mathematics 

Mathematics as Problem Solving - 

Indian students should formulate problems from everyday and mathematical situations within 
their home and tribal/community worlds. 

Mathematics as Communication - 

Indian students should relate their everyday language to mathematical language and symbols 
including expressing mathematical concepts in their Native languages. 

Estimation - 

Indian students should explore estimation strategies through activities derived from their 
cultural worlds such as estimating the number of sheep/horses that fit in a pen/corral. 

Fractions and Decimals - 

Indian students should apply fractions and decimals by applying them to real world situations 
using Native cultural experiences. 



3 * 26 

ERIC 



35 



Example Activities Developed by Teachers of 
American Indian Students 



Workshop on Culturally-Based Math and Science Curriculum 

Development 

Haskell Indian nations University 
1992 & 1993 




Ideas included should be adapted for appropriateness. 



ERIC 



36 



27 ♦ 



Medicine Wheel 



The relationship of Native Americans to Mother Earth has always been deeply rooted in 
their spiritual belief that everything in nature is one and man is part of this Circle of 
Life. 

Lakota spiritual elder Black Elk explained: 

" You have noticed that everything an 
Indian does is in a circle, and 
because the power of the 
always works in circles. ..The 
sky is round, and I have 
heard that the earth is round 
like a ball, and so are the 
stars. 

The wind, in its greatest 
power, whirls. Birds make 
their nests in circles, for 
their’s is the same religion 
as our’s...The life of a man 
is a circle from childhood to 
childhood.. .Our tipis were 
round like the nests of birds, 
and these were always set in 
circle, the nation’s hoop, a 
many nests, where the Great 
meant for us to hatch our children. ” 

Man is a part of the universe. ..he must keep his universe in balance. 

We undertake this sharing to teach a lesson about our relationship to each people and 
their place. 

We undertake this sharing to demonstrate respect. Foremost, respect for the Creator 
and all of the creatures. 

The challenge is to all of mankind as the guardian of the WORLD and all its 
inhabitants. 





♦ 28 



37 



SCIENCE 

Birds 

Cultural Objective 

Students will learn how birds fit into the cycle of life and to have reverence for birds. 

Science Objectives 

Students will learn the following: 

Many wild birds are good food for people and some animals. 

Domestic birds such as chickens and turkeys are good food for people. 

Some people make money from the sale of eggs and fowl. 

People enjoy hearing birds sing. 

People enjoy the colors of birds’ feathers. 

Watching birds get food, make nests and care for their young ones is interesting 
to people. 

Sometimes people wear the feathers of birds, on hats or for dance or ceremonial 
purposes. 

Medicine men use birds’ feathers for ceremonial purposes. 

Feathers are used on arrows to balance them. 

In some places pictures are made with birds’ feathers. 

Feathers help to keep birds warm and dry. 

Birds eat insects that destroy orchards and gardens. 

Birds eat insects that are harmful to forests and to plants on grazing lands. 

Birds carrying seeds from place to place help keep plants growing over wide 
areas. 

Birds destroy many seeds of plants that are harmful to gardens, forests, grazing 
lands and animals. 

Hawks eat other birds and small animals. 

Crows and blackbirds often dig up planted garden seed. 

Birds need food, water, sleep and shelter. 

Domestic birds need food, water, sleep, shelter and regular care. 

Some birds need shelter that people can provide. 

In winter many birds fly south where it is warm. 




33 



29 ♦ 



Some birds stay in the same place all year. 

It is good to protect birds. 

All birds have English and Native language names. One can speak about their 
body parts and the things they do in English and the Native language. 

Teacher Background Information 

As the children learn about birds, they have excellent opportunities to learn to count, 
compute, measure feed and to understand time. Much storytelling, experience reading 
and writing can take place. Dramatization of some of the stories is an excellent oral 
language activity. The use of rhymes, poetry and songs will enrich the study. Children 
can learn to distinguish different bird calls or songs. Children can make clay birds or 
beautiful pictures of various birds. Children can watch and study birds and, of course, 
learn how birds are viewed in the local Tribal culture. 

Student Learning Activities 

1 . Make bird books. Cut out pictures of birds from magazines or draw different birds 
to put in a book with captions. 

2. Entice the birds to come outside your classroom window with a bird bath, bird 
house or bird food. Watch and study the birds. 

3. Make bird posters to place around in your classroom or in the hallway. 

4. Take a field trip and see how many different birds you see. Be good scientists and 
keep good records. 

5. In the winter, look in the snow for bird tracks. Some birds don’t leave in the 
wintertime. 

6. Visit a farm and watch chickens, turkeys or ducks. 

7. Prepare food from eggs and chickens. Discuss the cycle of life. 

8. Discuss the cost of eggs and chickens. 

Evaluation 

Have each student write a summary of what he or she learned about birds. 




O 4 30 

ERIC 



39 



MATH AND SCIENCE 
Interlocking Circles of Life 

Cultural Objective 

Students will learn that the cycle of life will continue as long as people practice 
reverence for all living things. 

Math Objectives 

Students will: 

/ estimate the solution to a given problem using whole numbers, fractions and 
decimals 

/ construct simple line/bar graphs, tables and charts 

/ interpret pictographs and use information to solve story problems 

/ read and interpret a given set of information contained in a table, graph or 
chart 



bear 




ERjt 



40 



31 ♦ 



Science Objectives 

Students will: 

y recognize that different plants and animals inhabit different biomes and 
have a major impact on the environment 

y recognize that all living things have basic survival needs 

y list ways that organisms take part in natural cycles 

y explain the importance of natural cycles in the ecosystem 

y gather information 

y understand and apply information and concepts 
y analyze, synthesize and evaluate information 
y explain cause and effect 

✓ identify life processes common to all living things 

Teacher Background Information 

The Haida people eat the salmon which they catch with deep gratitude and respect. 
They live in balance with nature’s interlocking Circles of Life. If people live a balanced 
life and treat all living things well, the salmon will swim upstream and offer their bodies 
so people can eat. In return, people must give the bones and other remains back to the 
water so the circle of giving and receiving will never be broken. 

Among the Haida people, there was a boy who did not respect salmon even though the 
fish gave up its body to provide nourishment and life for his people. When he caught a 
salmon, he would throw the bones in the bushes after he had eaten his fill. The spirits of 
the salmon were displeased with his actions and warned him of the consequences but 
he did not listen. 



O *32 

ERIC 




41 



Sure enough, one day a current swept him into the deepest part of the water and he 
drowned. The Salmon People took him along with them to their home in the ocean. 

The Salmon People without their bodies looked just like human beings and their village 
in the ocean was similar to the boy’s own village. Here they taught the boy many 
important lessons. They told him that even though people catch and eat them they 
must do so with great respect and gratitude and return their bones and all they do not 
consume back to the water. They were to do this so that the circle of giving and 
receiving will never be broken and the salmon children would come back. 

We learn that the Salmon People did not harm or react angrily to the boy because of 
his disrespect for the circle of life’s balance; instead, they made him one of them in 
spirit and taught him how to care for and respect them in both body and spirit. 

Salmon Boy later returned to his mother and his village as a 
healer just long enough to teach others the ways of the 
Salmon People and help them when they became sick. 

Adapted from the legend, Salmon Boy in Keepers of the 
Animals , Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac, Golden, 

CO: Fulcrum Publishing, 1991. 








Student Learning Activities 



1. After reading the legend, discuss the significance of the story behind the legend. 
You may wish to use the discussion questions on p. 101 in Keepers of the 
Animals. Here are some additional questions you can use: 

a. When Salmon Boy was being disrespectful to the salmon, what kind of 
circle did he break? 

b. What did Salmon Boy teach his people after he returned home? 

c. If you were Salmon Boy, what lesson would you teach? 

d. Gsing Native American designs and colors, draw a picture of a salmon. 
Gse your imagination. 

2. Show videos dealing with predator and prey, the food chain or food web, such as 
videos from National Geographic, Walt Disney, Nova or the Discovery Channel. 

3. After showing, discuss the importance of the food chain and/or food web with 
the students. Emphasize that the greater the diversity of plant life in an area, the 
greater the diversity of animal life in the same area. 

4. Following the discussion, introduce the vocabulary words you would like the 
students to know. Discuss the meanings of the words and have the students give 
examples of each of the following: 

prey producer herbivore 

predator consumer carnivore 

parasite omnivore 

5. Play a survival game. Divide the class in half. One half of the students will be 
deer while the other half will be plants, water or trees. The students who are the 
deer should turn around so they will not see the other half of the class. The other 
group will decide, individually, which one they will be: the water, plants or trees. 
Instruct the deer that they will need food or water, but only one deer can have 
that item. There is no sharing. 

On the count of three, the deer will turn around and go get their food or water. 
Any deer that does not get one of the necessities of life will die. They become 
part of the food, water and tree group. The students will see the cycles of life 
within the classroom playing this game. Continue for several rounds so that the 
class will understand the concept of competition for food and the survival of the 
fittest. 



O ♦ 34 

ERIC 



43 



6 . 



7. 



8 . 



9. 

10. Play the “Where’s My Dinner?” Game: 

a. Divide the class into 3 groups. Each group will be a specific part of the 
food chain. You can use many different food chains. Here are 2 examples: 

LOWER LEVEL MIDDLE LEVEL HIGHEST LEVEL 

grasshopper frog smallmouth bass 

mouse coyote mountain lion 

The lower-level and middle level animals need to wear flag football belts 
or strips of cloth to signify which group they are in. 

b. Give each student a sandwich bag with a line of tape 2” from the bottom 
to be used as a food pouch. Students in the role of the lowest animal on 
the food chain (herbivores) will be the only ones allowed to pick up the 
popcorn from the floor. They will collect as much of it as they can during 
the round while avoiding the animals above them in the food chain 
(enemies). If they are caught by an animal above them in the food chain, 
they will be eaten. They must give their food pouch to that person 
immediately and sit out for the rest of the round. 



Discuss the food chain and the food web by giving several examples, then have 
the students give some examples of their own. Make sure to stress that a food 
chain always begins with the producers - plant life. When discussing food webs, 
be sure to stress that these are interrelated food chains which overlap each other. 
For example, consider the predator-prey relationship of plants, insects, mice, 
snakes and hawks. 

Have the students construct their own food chain and food web mobiles, using 
the items listed below. 



string or yarn 
construction paper 
metal hangers 
wire cutters 
wire 



magazines 

newspapers 

scissors 

glue 




After the mobiles are completed, have the students explain why they put the 
plants and animals in that order. Ask them to discuss the relationship between 
the plant and the animals in a natural cycle. 

Have the students construct a food chain map to hang on the bulletin board in 
the classroom or in the hall. 



O 

tKJC 



44 



35 ♦ 



Explain that the middle level group of animals need to have at least 2” of 
popcorn in their food pouch to survive. The only way for them to get 
popcorn is by catching the animal below them on the food chain. If they 
do not have enough popcorn in their food pouch when the round is over, 
they will die of starvation. Also, explain that the highest animal on the 
food chain must have popcorn over the tape line to survive. They, too, 
must catch the animal below them in the food chain. If they do not have 
enough popcorn in their food pouch when the round is over, they will also 
die of starvation. 

c. Record how many of each animal are still alive after each round. 

d. Change the number of animals after each round to see how it differs. 

e. Explain to the class that to have a balanced food chain at least 2 mice, 2 
coyotes and 1 mountain lion must survive at the end of the cycle. 

(Adapted from Outdoor Biology Instructional Strategies ) 

1 1 . Have the students explain the meaning of the following statement by Chief 
Seattle: 

“Man did not weave the web of life; he is merely a strand of it. 

Whatever he does to the web, he does to himself.” 




O * 36 

ERIC 



45 



Evaluation 



Have the students write a short essay about the food chain and food web cycles, and 
the balance of nature. 

Resources 

Caduto, Michael and Joseph Bruchac, Keepers of the Animals, Golden, CO: Fulcrum, 
1989. 

American Indian Science and Engineering Society, National Science Foundation, 
Science Activities for Teachers - A Collection of Lesson 
Plans, 1987. 

Outdoor Biology Instructional Strategies, Berkeley, CA: 

Regents Press of the University of California, 1979. 

Developed by: 

Diane Cleveland 
Elaine Hendricks 
Renata Griego 






46 



37 ♦ 



MATH AND SCIENCE 
Stewards of the Earth 

Teacher Background Information 

There is an ongoing controversy on the Mavajo Reservation between the Mavajo Forest 
Industries and residents of the area and Mavajo (Dine) CARE members. The Dine 
CARE organization and residents expressed concerns over logging practices, future 
forests and the overlooking of the cultural values of the Mavajo people. Although 
President Zah declared 12,427 acres for wildlife, watershed protection, herb gathering 
and sacred sites this controversy is far from resolved. There are always going to be 
conflicts of interest between respecting Mother Earth and the need for jobs and revenue 
for the tribe. 

Mative Americans of the Morthwest have petitioned for five salmon species to be 
declared endangered species. The decision on this petition and its economic impact 
will not be considered. In Alaska, the Alaskan Matives have voiced concerns over oil 
drilling in wildlife preserves which will threaten animal and plant habitats. 

Various other tribes throughout the United States and Canada have voiced similar 
concerns over the depletion of wildlife and resources. The opposition of Mative 
Americans to the destruction of animal and plant habitats, agricultural land, fishing 
waters and religious sites has gone unheeded by the federal government, tribal 
governments and industries. 

Student Learning Activities 

1. Brainstorm factors, other than humans, affecting the increase and decrease in 
animal population (i.e. migration, natural predator, dispersal, old age/death, 
accidents, climate, quality of food and water, available shelter and severity of 
weather). 

2. Illustrate and design a large habitat mural with different animals that can be 
found near your school/community. 

3. Divide students into predator and prey. Predator eliminates a prey. The prey then 
becomes a predator. If the predator has no more prey, it dies. The dead 
predators will have a certain place to be (encircled area). 

Make conclusions. What is the relationship between predator and prey? 



O * 38 

ERIC 



47 



Evaluation 



Students will be evaluated on: 

Class participation 
Record in Learning Portfolio 

Students will choose an endangered species of North America and research the animal 
or plant. Students will write a report which includes the name of the selected species, 
characteristics, survival habits, habitat, how it is being protected and illustrations. 

Students will develop a class book on Endangered Species. 

Materials 

Reference books on local and national endangered species, dictionaries, illustrations of 
endangered species, butcher paper, crayons, markers, pencils, addresses of agencies, 
envelopes, writing paper, learning logs, portfolio, construction paper, computer with 
printer, book binder. 




3 

ERIC 



48 



39 ♦ 



International Efforts - Endangered Species 



Teacher Background Information 

The need for wildlife and natural resource preservation is not confined to the borders of 
the CI.S. The balance between human needs and wildlife is threatened from the tropical 
rainforest to the frozen tundra. The world’s tropical forest is being depleted at a rapid 
rate. Efforts are being made to save many species of plants and animals. 

There are many species yet to be identified and analyzed for potential use. In the Arctic 
region polar bears and seals are being slaughtered for their fur and tusk. The 
Convention on International trade in Endangered Species are making efforts to stop 
poachers by banning the sale of ivory, fur and plants. Plans are underway in Kenya to 
balance the survival of the wildlife habitats and human needs. Conservationists assert 
that to ensure the survival of wildlife, people must be able to benefit economically from 
the wildlife preserves and other conservation activities. 

Student Learning Activities 



1 . Read “The Gifts of the Trees.” Do birds live in the trees? Take a walk and list 
types of trees found in your community. List ways on how to care for and save 
trees, i.e. limit fire wood cutting, prevent forest fires and use fake Christmas 
trees. 

2. Illustrate or cut a picture of an endangered species or a threatened species. On 
the back of the illustration write a note of gratitude and list steps you can take to 
save the species. 



List of Endangered Species or Others You May Know of 



wood bison 
bald eagle 
beluga whale 
grizzly bear 
Aurora trout 
right whale 
eastern cougar 
piping plover 
red wolf 
desert wolf 
Kemp’s ridley turtle 



spotted owl 
peregrine falcon 
prairie dog 
brown pelican 
humpback whale 
bowhead whale 
Eskimo curlew 
swift fox 
Everglade kite 
blue whale 



burrowing owl 
ivory billed woodpecker 
black footed ferret 
leatherback sea turtle 
hawksbill sea turtle 
American white pelican 
Arcadian whitefish 
gray timber wolf 
California condor 
woodland caribou 



O ♦ 40 

ERIC 



49 



3 . 



Research a favorite endangered species. Illustrate or cut picture from magazines 
and write a story. Display illustrations and stories separately. Have students read 
stories and match stories with correct illustrations. 

4. Display a world map using illustrations and research information of endangered 
species. Pin the illustration on the border of the map and tie the string, run the 
color string to the appropriate area or region of the map. Secure the string with a 
pin. 

Make a chart to show how many line segments, intersecting lines and parallel lines are 
used. 

Evaluation 

Students will be evaluated on: 

Class participation 
Record in Learning Portfolio 

Students make conservation collage using pictures, captions and articles from 
magazines or newspapers or develop a conservation tips poster and display poster in 
the appropriate area. 

Materials 

A copy of “Gifts of the Trees” for each student, illustrations of endangered species, lists 
of endangered species, reference materials, magazines, newspaper, glue, scissors, 
poster boards, color strings, pins, world map, chart paper, learning log, portfolio 
holders, pencils, colored markers, crayons and construction paper. 




“ '"I k ! rv • ■ l 1 - 1,1 t *'>■' - 

J. ^ , -V , - „ r> , • -ft 




50 



41 ♦ 



“The Gifts of the Trees,” an Indian Fable retold by Ann Hudson Downs (Winter issue 
1993 of Wee Wisdom), MASINAIGAN, p. 22. 

Many, many moons ago when Man first came to live on the earth, he looked at the 
vastness that surrounded him and a great loneliness filled his heart. “How shall 1 live?”, 
he cried. “The world is so big and 1 am alone!” 

The trees were glad the Great Spirit had sent Man to live among them and wanted to 
help him. “You are not alone. We are your brothers and we will help you,” they 
murmured softly. Man felt comforted. 

The maple tree touched him with her tender branches. “1 will give you sweet water to 
drink and to make into sugar,” she said. 

The hickory tree shook a host of nuts from his tall branches. “See? 1 will give you food 
to satisfy your hunger.” “We will help,” spoke up the hickory tree’s cousins, the 
chestnut, the beech and the walnut. 

“Then you will need baskets,” said Goungah, the elm tree. “Make them with my soft 
bark and strengthen them with thongs of my tough muscles.” 

Now there was happiness in the heart of Man as he set out to explore the world for he 
had food and drink and friends. But soon a wide river blocked his trail. “Alas, 1 can go 
no further!”, he cried. 

Wigwass, the birch tree grew near the great river and heard his cry. “1 will help you, my 
brother,” she called. “Take strips of my skin and tie them together with the tough 
thongs given to you by the elm tree. Then you will have a canoe strong enough to 
carry you across the wide rivers.” 

Man did as Widwass suggested and soon the fearful river was behind him. But in the 
meantime the sun had entered his lodge on the west. Man shivered with cold. 

This time it eyed the balsam who saw her brother’s need. “Do not suffer cold,” she said. 
“In my heart there is much sunfire. Rub my branches together and they will give you 
sparks to kindle a flame.” 

Man followed balsam’s instructions and soon a great campfire roared before him. When 
he was warm his eyes grew heavy with sleep. 

“It’s our turn to help,” spoke the great pine and the cedar. And they shook a mound of 
sweet smelling needles beside Man. He spread them into a soft bed and slept. 



O ♦ 42 

EKIC 



51 



All through the long night North Wind blew his icy breath over him. But Man rested 
warm and secure until Wabun, the east wind chased the darkness down the valley and 
brought the morning to Man’s campfire. 

When he awoke there was a great gratitude in his heart. “How can l repay you for your 
kindness?”, he asked the trees. 

“We want no pay,”, they replied. “Giving is the secret of our happiness. We only ask 
that you use the gifts of the forest wisely. Never waste or destroy what the Great Spirit 
has given freely to his children.” 

Indians have never forgotten. They take only what they need and leave the rest for 
others. 



Resources (All Lessons) 

1 . Allman, William F. and Schrof, Joannie M.. “Can They Be Saved?”, C.S. News & World 
Report, October 2, 1989: p. 52. 

2. Bjerklie, David. “Endangered Species Act and its Discontents”. Technology Review, 
May/June 1992: p. 19. 

3. Caduto, Michael J. & Bruchac, Joseph. Keepers of the Animals, Fulcrum Publishing, 
Golden, CO. 1991: pp. 223-243. 

4. Cohn, Jeffery P.. “Decisions at the Zoo”, Bio Science Vol. 42 No. 9, October 1992: pp. 
654-659. 

5. Corn, M. Lynne. “The Endangered Species Act; The Storm’s Eye”. Washington Watch, 
October 1990: p. 627. 

6. Davis, Phillip A.. “Gpstream Battle for Survival Draws Support for Salmon”. 
Environment, March 9, 1991: pp. 602-603. 

7. Down, Ann Hudson, “The Gifts of the Tree”, MASINAIGAN, Winter 1993: p. 22. 

8. Kaplan, Kim J. “Bring ‘Em Back Alive and Growing”, Agricultural Research, July 1991 
pp. 4-12. 

9. McDowell, Jeanne & Seldeman, David. “The Landlord”, TIME, March 8, 1993: p. 38. 

10. Valerie, Taliman, “Logging Issue Hits Compromise State”, Navajo Times Vol. XXXII, 
August 13, 1992: pp. 1-A8. 

11. “Protecting Endangered Species Look Like a Losing Battle”, MASINAIGAN, Winter 
1993: p. 1. 



My Ideas for Birds Unit: 



O 

ERIC 



54 



45 ♦ 



Lesson Plans/Schedule for Birds Unit 




O + 46 

ERJC 

hffliflaffHEaoaa 



55 




o 

EKLC 

iminaffamiaaa 



56 



47 ♦ 



nursery Rhymes and Poems 

Sing a song of sixpence 
A pocket full of rye; 

Four and twenty blackbirds 
Baked in a pie. 

When the pie was opened, 

The birds began to sing; 

Wasn’t that a dainty dish 
To set before the king? 

The king was in his countinghouse, 
Counting out his money; 

The queen was in the parlor, 

Eating bread and honey. 

The maid was in the garden 
Hanging out the clothes, 

When down came a blackbird 
And nicked off her nose. 

Hickety, pickety, my black hen, 

She lays eggs for gentlemen; 
Sometimes nine and sometimes ten, 
Hickety, pickety, my black hen. 

The Chickens 
What a dreadful battle, 

What a dreadful storm! 

Five little chickens 
Fighting for a worm. 

When the worm had vanished 
They all said - Peep - and then 
The five little chickens 
Were all good friends again. 



Ducks’ Ditty 

All along the backwater, 
Through the rushes tall, 
Ducks are a-dabbling 
Uptails all! 

Ducks’ tails, drakes’ tails, 
Yellow feet a-quiver, 

Yellow bills all out of sight 
Busy in the river. 

Everyone for what he liked, 
We like to be 
Heads down, 
tails up, 

Dabbling free! 



At the edge of the cornfield 
a bird will sing with them, 
it will sing with them 
in the oneness of happiness 
and the hearts of the people 
will be filled with thanksgiving. 

So the people and the bird 
will sing together 
in tune with the universal power 
in harmony with the one Creator. 

The birdsong and the people’s song 
and the song of life 
will become one. 

- Southwest 




The teacher should have the students do choral readings of these selections, memorize 
and recite them, and explain what they mean in their own words. These can be used to 
stress phonemic awareness and beginning sounds/ending sounds, rhyming words in 
kindergarten and other word-attack principles such as the ing sound, long and short 
vowel sounds, compound words, r-controlled vowels, at the first grade on up levels. 



<V7 
o t 



♦ 48 







BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




58 



49 ♦ 



Background Information for Teachers and Parents 

Phases 2 and 3 

Indian people a long time ago studied the sun, moon and stars and told stories that 
emphasized certain noted phenomena. One such story follows. 

Legend of the Sun 

A long time ago, the sun used to travel faster than it does now. Indian medicine men 
were considering how they could make it go slower. A fox came along and paid close 
attention to what they were saying. He sat quite still and thought it all over. Then he 
said to himself, “I will go with the sun tomorrow and see if I can make him go slower.” 

The next morning he asked the sun if he might travel with him, but the sun said, “No, I 
know your sly tricks, Mr. Fox; you cannot travel with me.” But the fox followed him, 
and after awhile the sun said he could travel with him. 

When they reached the halfway line, the fox said he was tired and wanted to rest a 
moment. The sun said, “All right.” And the fox lay in the shade with his tail stretched 
out between two trees where the sun could see it. He told the sun to call him when he 
was ready to go on. 

The sun stood quite still for a little while; then he called to the fox to come on. There 
was no answer. He called again. There was still no answer. So he looked to see what 
was the matter. He suspected the fox had played a trick on him. He thought he still saw 
the tail between the trees, but upon looking closer, found it was only a goose’s feather, 
which the fox had placed there to deceive him. The fox was gone - so he went on the 
rest of the way alone. 

The next day, when the medicine men looked at the sun, they noticed that he stopped 
when he got to the middle of the sky, just as the fox had tricked him into doing the day 
before. 

Ever since then, the sun stops at that time of the day and travels slower, looking for the 
fox. The medicine men gave great credit to the fox for making the sun move slower. 

❖ ❖ ❖ ♦> 

Your children are going to read Indian and other stories about the sun, moon and stars. 
From these stories they will learn science and math, reading, writing, speaking and 
listening, and will also learn lessons about life. 



ERIC 



♦ 50 



Background Information for Teachers and Parents 

Phases 4 and 5 

Observatories 2,500 Years Old 

- ORB1S Associates 

At a site in Wyoming known as Bighorn Medicine Wheel, astronomer John A. Eddy 
deciphered the arrangement of what appears from the air to be a giant wheel, with 
spokes made of stones. Dr. Eddy observed and measured how various combinations of 
the outer ends of the Bighorn spokes line up to mark the rise and setting of three bright 
stars which precede it. 

Dr. Eddy, working at the Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics at Harvard University, 
located other similar solar observatories built by “different people at different times.” 

He has tracked down a series of such wheels dotted around southern central Canada 
and along the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains. He has hinted that spokes in 
many of the wheels pinpoint the summer solstice and that often a wheel will point to 
another wheel nearby. 

In the Hoven Weep site, just west of Mesa Verde, Colorado, Dr. Ray Williamson, 
assistant dean at St. Johns College in Annapolis, Maryland, has measured the 
astronomical orientation of ports in the walls of towerlike structures built by the 
ancestors of the Pueblo Indians. The ports, or apertures, he says, are oriented in the 
wall in such a way as to admit the sun only on the winter and summer solstices. Built 
about the year 1 100, Dr. Williams says that the structures show that the Anasazi 
Indians had a “sophisticated” knowledge of the sun and the planets. 

At Cahokia, in East St. Louis, Illinois, Dr. Warren Wittry has explained an extensive 
series of post holes in the once-thriving Indian capital that dates back to the 1 1th 
century. The holes describe four large circles - one is 410 feet in diameter - which, Dr. 
Wittry’s work indicates, may have been used for the same calendar-like purpose that 
Stonehenge is thought to have served. 

“With no everyday need for astronomy in the modern world,” says Dr. E. C. Krupp, 
Director of the Griffith Observatory in Los Angeles, “we may have a hard time realizing 
today how much prehistoric peoples watched, and relied upon, the sky.” “It’s a story,” 
says Dr. Eddy, “which just hasn’t been unraveled. But there is more and more evidence 
that they were all looking at the sky and studying it... We are just scratching the 
surface.” 

These are all things your children should know. 




60 



51 ♦ 



Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline - Sun, Moon & Stars 



Reading, Language Arts, 

Science, Math, Art, Values Literature - Week 1 Literature - Week 2 



P 

H 

A 

S 

E 



F 

I 

V 

E 



P 

H 

A 

S 

E 

F 

O 

a 

R 



p 

H 

A 

S 

E 

T 

H 

R 

E 

E 



P 

H 

A 

S 

E 



T 

W 

O 



Sun, Moon & Star Words 
Reading Legends/Myths 
Retelling/The Oral Tradition 
Comparing/Contrasting 
Research/Verifying 
Memorizing/Reciting 
Constellations 
Stargazing/Planets 
Size of Earth/Sun 
Miles/Kilometers 
Constellation Maps 
Sacrifice to Benefit Others 


Her Seven Brothers by Paul 
Goble 

“How Grizzly Climbed the 

Mountain” in Keepers of the 
Animals by Caduto & 
Bruchac 

Star Song - Passamaquoddy 
“How Fisher Went to the 

Skyland” in Keepers of the 
Animals/ Caduto & Bruchac 
“Seven Pima Stars” in And It Is 
Still That Way by Byrd 
Baylor 


Stars of the First People by 
Dorcas S. Miller 
They Dance in the Sky by J. 

Monroe/R. Williamson 
Star Tales and More Star Tales , 
North American Indian 
Stories by G. Mayo 
American Indian Star Tales by L. 
Moroney 

The Earth Cinder Sky Bear's Feet 
by Bruchac & Locker 


Sun, Moon & Star Words 
Reading Nonfiction/Legends 
Memorizing/Reciting 
Comparing/Contrasting 
Summarizing/Responding 
Number/Distance to Stars 
Sun is Star/Seasons 
Hundred/Thousand/Million 
Draw Stars/Shapes/Calendars 
Respect for Gifts/Differences 


Do You Know About Stars? by 
Mae Blacker Freeman 
The Sun by Seymour Simon 
The Sun, Our Very Own Star by 
Jeanne Bendick 
Songs by Edgar Red Cloud and 
Black Elk in Star Boy by 
Paul Goble 

Eskimo Chant - Rasmussen 


The Legend of Scar face by 
Robert San Souci 
Star Boy by Paul Goble 
Thirteen Moons on Turtle's Back 
by Joseph Bruchac 
Moonstick: Seasons of the Sioux 
by Bunting/Sandford 
Full Moon Stories by Eagle 
Walking Turtle 


Sun, Moon & Star Words 

Reading Nonfiction/Legends 

Retelling/Memorizing 

Comparing/Contrasting 

Summarizing/Reporting 

Gifts from the Sun 

Photosynthesis 

Day & blight/Dark & Light 

24 Hours 

Growing a Plant 

Concern for Self/Others 


Raven: Trickster Tale by Gerald 
McDermott 

The Day Sun Was Stolen by 
Jamie Oliviero 

How the Sun Made a Promise 
and Kept it by Bernstein/ 
Kobrin 

Grandmother Spider Brings the 
Sun by Geri Kearns 

“How Grandmother Spider Stole 
the Sun” in Keepers of the 
Earth by Caduto & Bruchac 


Arrow to the Sun by Gerald 
McDermott 

Arrows - Shel Silverstein 
Dream Feather by Viento Stan 
Padilla 

Shadow Race - Silverstein 
Energy from the Sun by Allan 
Fowler 

Sun Up, Sun Down by Gail 
Gibbons 


Sun, Moon & Star Words 
Reading Legends/Poems 
Retelling/Memorizing 
Comparing/Contrasting 
Listening/Responding 
Day and Might 
Wondering/Observing 
Sun, Moon & Stars 
Color/Cut/Count Stars 
Caring for Others 


Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star 
Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star by 
Iza Trapini 

Somebody Has To - Silverstein 
Coyote Places the Stars by 
Harriet Peck Taylor 
Coyote in Love with a Star by 
Marty Kreipe de Montana 
How the Stars Fell into the Sky 
by Jerri Oughton 


What the Sun Sees, What the 
Moon Sees/ by N. Tafuri 
Following the Sun by Jenny 
Stow 

Sun Song by Jean Marzallo 
Sun, Shine by Carol Greene 
Papa, Please Get the Moon for Me 
by Eric Carle 

Happy Birthday, Moon by Frank 
Asch 



Literature - Week 3 



Literature - Week 4 



Reading, Language Arts, 
Science, Math, Art, Values 



People Who are Stars 
Jim Thorpe by Edward Rivinus 
Tallchlefby Maria Tallchief 
A Boy Called Slow by Joseph 
Bruchac 

Wilma P. MankiUer: Chief of the 
Cherokee Nation by Charnan 
Simon 

Black Elk: A Man With a Vision 
by Carol Greene 


A Picture Book of Martin Luther 
King, Jr. by David A. Adler 
Rosa Parks by Eloise Greenfield 
Girls Can Be Anything by 
Norma Klein 

Helen Keller (or others) by David 
A. Adler 

Roy Campanella (or others) by 
Carol Greene 


Star People Attributes Words 
Reading Biographies 
Comparing/Contrasting 
Retelling/Rewriting 

Writing “1 Want to Be ” 

Research/Writing Biography of 
Local Star Person 
Illustrating Local Biography 
Change, Cycle of Life 
Varying Views 

Respect for Gifts/Differences 
Accomplishments 


Seasons/Weather 
The Earth and the Universe: 
Hold the Sun, Moon & Stars 
Cause Changes on Earth by 
Miguel Perez 

Sky and Weather by Alan Ward 
Weather by Seymour Simon 


Spring Defeats Winter in Keepers 
of the Earth by Caduto and 
Bruchac 

Did You Hear the Wind Sing 
Your Name? Oneida Song of 
Spring/ S. DeCoteau Orie 
The Summer Maker by M. 

Bernstein & J. Kobrin 
Last Leaf First Snowflake to Fall 
by Lee Yerxa 


Sun, Moon & Star Words 
Reading Nonfiction/Legends 
Retelling/Responding 
Summarizing/Reporting 
Change, Cycle of Life 
Seasons/Weather 
Rain/lce/Snow 
Season Suite - Bruchac 
Make Ice Cream/Measuring 
Responding to Change 


The Moon 

Moon and Otter and Frog by 
Simms and Brycela 

The Angry Moon by W. Sleator 

Rabbit and the Moon by Douglas 
Wood 

“Creation of the Moon” in 
Keepers of the Night/ 

Bruchac 

“How Coyote Was the Moon” in 
Keepers of the Earth by 
Caduto Bruchac 


Til Catch the Moon by Nina 
Crews 

Moon CatchinNet- Silverstein 
So That's How the Moon 
Changes Shape by Allan 
Fowler 

Sometimes Moon by Carol 1. 
Schaefer 

The Moon Seems to Change by 
Franklin M. Branley 


Sun, Moon & Star Words 
Reading Legends/Nonfiction 
Retelling/Memorizing 
Summarizing/Reporting 
Transcribing Poems/lllustrations 
Observing Moon Phases 
Surface/Walk on Moon 
Day and Night/24 Hours 
Calendar Days 

Paper Mache Moons/Bruchac 
Consequences/Changing 


Daily Activities 
Giving Thanks, A Native 
American Good Morning 
Message/ Swamp & Printup 
Day and Night by Nedra Emery 
Northwoods Cradle Song by 
Douglas Wood 
Dreamcatcher by Audrey 
Osofsky 


Time to Get Up! by S. Hellard 
Wake Up, Little Children by Jim 
Aylesworth 

My Day by Debbie Mackinora 
Goodnight Moon by M.W. Brown 
Good Night, Gorilla by Peggy 
Rathman 


Daily Activities Words 
Memorizing/Retelling 
Listening/Responding 
Writing Schedules 

Writing “1 Like ” 

Day and Night/Time 
Prisms/Light/Colors 
Drawing Rainbows 
Daily Responsibilities/Daily 
Renewal 




k I 



62 



53 ♦ 



About the Literature for Phase Five 

Indian people have always been very interested in the stars and knew a great deal 
about them even long ago. Tribes have their own star names and star stories. 

Star Stories 

Her Seven Brothers by Paul Goble, Aladdin Paperbacks, Simon and Schuster, 1988. 

Cheyenne, also included in a collection book, Paul Goble Gallery, with The Gift of the Sacred 
Dog and The Girl Who Loved Wild Horses, Aladdin Paperbacks. 

How Grizzly Climbed the Mountain in Keepers of the Night by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum, Inc., 1994. Shoshone 
Star Song in Stars of the First People by Dorcas S. Miller, Pruett Publishing, 1997, Page 43. 

Passamaquoddy Also found in some basal readers. 

How Fisher Went to the Skyland in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum, Inc., 1988. Anishinabe Also on audio tape. 

Seven Pima Stars in And It Is Still That Way by Byrd Baylor, Trails West Publishing, 1976. Pima 
Also found in some basal readers. 

These are four stories from different tribes about the seven stars that form the Big Dipper and 
one about the seven stars that form the Pleiades (dancing brothers). Stories selected can be 
read or listened to by all or assigned to different students. Some are very short. They can be 
compared and contrasted. 

Student Research 

Stars of the First People by Dorcas S. Miller, Pruett Publishing, 1997. 

They Dance in the Sky, Native American Star Myths by Jean G. Monroe and Ray A. 
Williamson, Houghton Mifflin, 1987. 

Star Tales, North American Indian Stories by Gretchen Mayo, Walker & Co., 1987. 

More Star Tales, North American Indian Stories by Gretchen Mayo. 

American Indian Star Tales by L. Moroney, Feathermoon. Also on audio tape. 

These materials are higher reading level, but students can find stories from tribes of their 
choosing or from their own tribes that they can read or listen to and possibly transcribe and 
illustrate to present to their parents or others to verify authenticity. Add other local star stories. 

Star Poetry 

The Earth Cinder Sky Bear’s Feet by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Putnam & Grosset 

Group, Paperstar, 1995. Twelve poems that tell of what Sky Bear (the Big Dipper) sees and 
hears. Mohawk, Anishinabe, Pima, Missisquoi, Winnebago, Cochiti, Pueblo, Lenape, 
Chumash, Inuit, Lakota, Navajo, Pawnee Students should pick or be assigned poems to 
memorize, recite to audiences, transcribe and illustrate. 




O ♦ 54 

ERiC 



63 



People Who Are Stars 

Jim Thorpe by Edward F. Rivinus. Biography of an Indian athlete. Sac & Fox 
Tallchief, America’s Prima Ballerina by Maria Tallchief with Rosemary Wells. Osage 
A Boy Called Slow by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author). About Sitting Bull. Lakota 
Wilma P. Mankiller: Chief of the Cherokee Nation by Charnan Simon. Biography of woman chief 
of today. Available from National Women’s History Project, Windsor, CA. Cherokee 
Black Elk: A Man With a Vision by Carol Greene, Children’s Press, 1990. Biography of a 
medicine man. Lakota 

A Picture Book of Martin Luther King, Jr. by David A. Adler, Holiday House, 1989. Found in 
some basal readers. 

Rosa Parks by Eloise Greenfield. Available from National Women’s History Project, Windsor, 

CA. 

A Picture Book of Helen Keller (or others) by David A. Adler, Holiday House 

Girls Can Be Anything by Norma Klein, E.P. Dutton, 1973. Found in some basal readers 

Roy Campanella (or other Rookie Biographies) by Carol Greene, Children’s Press. 

There are five biographies of Indian people, four of others and a book motivating girls. Each 
child should read or hear at least one Indian biography and one other biography. 




64 



55 ♦ 




About the Literature for Phase Four 

Indian people hold a reverence for the sun, moon and stars which are included often 
in tribal stories and songs that reference nature’s cycles and seasonal changes. 

Sun, Moon and Stars 

Do You Know About Stars? by Mae Blacker Freeman, Random House, 1970. Monfiction about 
number of and distance to stars. Found in some basal readers 
The Sun by Seymour Simon, Mulberry, 1989. Monfiction close-up of the sun. 

The Sun, Our Very Own Star by Jeanne Bencick, Millbrook Press, 1991 . 

All students can read or hear all books selected or the books can be assigned to various 
students. Facts from these books should be summarized, reviewed and reported. 

Songs by Edgar Red Cloud and Black Elk (Indian Authors) in Star Boy by Paul Goble, 
Bradbury Press, 1983. Lakota Songs (poems) of reverence for the sun. 

Eskimo Chant, Knud Rasmussen, translator. Found in some basal readers. 

These songs could be memorized by all students. 

The Legend of Scarface by Robert San Souci, Zephyr Books, 1978. Blackfeet 
Star Boy by Paul Goble, Bradbury Press, 1983. Blackfeet Also on audio tape. 

These two books are versions of the same legend. They can be compared and contrasted. 

Thirteen Moons on Turtle’s Back by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Paperstar, 1992. 
Moonstick: Seasons of the Sioux by Bunting and Sandford, Harpercollins, 1999. Lakota 
Full Moon Stories by Eagle Walking Turtle, Hyperion, 1997. Indian 

These books are poetic expressions of the thirteen cycles of the moon and the changing 
seasons. The class should learn the local Tribal cycles of the moon. 

Seasons/Weather 

The Earth and the Universe: How the Sun, Moon and Stars Cause Changes on Earth by Miguel 
Perez, Barrons, 1998. 

Sky and Weather by Alan Ward, Franklin Watts, 1993. 

Weather by Seymour Simon, Harpercollins, 2000. 

Monfiction books about seasons and weather. Facts from these books should be summarized, 
reviewed and reported. 

Spring Defeats Winter in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian 
Author), Fulcrum, Inc., 1998. Seneca Also on audio tape. 

Did You Hear the Wind Sing Your Name? Oneida Song of Spring by S. Decoteau Orie (Indian 
Author), Walker Books. 

The Summer Maker: An Ojibway Indian Myth by Margery Bernstein and Janet Kobrin, 
Scribner, 1977. 

Last Leaf First Snowflake to Fall by Lee Yerxa, Orchard, 1994. Indian 

Indian stories about seasons and weather. They should be retold. Add local stories about 

seasons and weather. 



O +56 

ERiC 



65 



About the Literature for Phase Three 

Indian people have always been interested in the sun, moon and stars which are 
included in many of their legends. The legends also teach lessons. 

Sun Stories 

Raven: Trickster Tale by Gerald McDermott, Northwest 

The Day Sun Was Stolen by Jamie Oliviero, Hyperion, 1995. Haida 

Houj the Sun Made a Promise and Kept It by Margery Bernstein and Janet Kobrin, Scribner, 
1974. Yana-California 

Grandmother Spider Brings the Sun by Geri Kearns (Indian Author), Northwest Press, 1995. 
Cherokee 

How Grandmother Spider Stole the Sun in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum, Inc., 1998. Creek Also on audio tape. 

These are stories about how various tribes acquired the sun. Selected stories can be read or 
listened to by all or assigned to different students. They can be compared/contrasted. Students 
should ask their families if they have stories about the sun and retell them at school. Add local 
stories about the sun. 

Arrow to the Sun by Gerald McDermott, Viking, 1974. Pueblo Also a film. 

Arrows and Shadow Race in A Light in the Attic by Shel Silverstein, Harper & Row, 1981. 
Dream Feather by Viento Stan Padilla (Indian Author), Book Publishing Co., 1987. 

Two of these are stories about acquiring the spirit of the sun and strength for self and the 
people. The poem Arrows is about shooting an arrow to the sky as in Arrow to the Sun. 

Energy from the Sun by Allan Fowler, Children’s Press, 1998. 

Sun Up, Sun Down by Gail Gibbons, Harcourt Brace, 1983. 

These two pieces are nonfiction about the sun. The main ideas should be summarized. 

Moon Stories 

Moon and Otter and Frog by Simms and Brycela, Hyperion, 1995. Modoc 
The Angry Moon by William Sleator, Little, 1970. Tlingit 
Rabbit and the Moon by Douglas Wood, Simon and Schuster, 1998. Cree 
How Coyote Was the Moon in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac 
(Indian Author), Fulcrum Inc., 1988. Kalispell-Idaho Also on audio tape. 

Creation of the Moon in Keepers of the Night by Bruchac (Indian Author) Navajo 

These are Indian legends that include the moon. Selected stories can be read or listened to by 

all or assigned to various students or groups and retold. Add local stories about the moon. 

So That’s How the Moon Changes Shape by Allan Fowler, Children’s Press, 1991. 

The Moon Seems to Change by Franklin M. Branley, Harper, 1987. 

Sometimes Moon by Carol L. Schaefer, Crown, 1999. 

The first two are nonfiction science-oriented books about the phases of the moon. The last one 
is more poetic about the phases of the moon and could lead to an art project. 

I’ll Catch the Moon by Nina Crews, Greenwillow, 1996. 

Moon Catchin’ Net in A Light in the Attic by Shel Silverstein, Harper & Row, 1981. 



ERIC 



66 



57 ♦ 



About the Literature for Phase Two 

Indian people respect the gifts of the sun, moon, stars, and day and night. Indian 
stories and songs often reference the sun, moon and stars. . 

Sun, Moon and Stars 

Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star - poem (song) 

Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star - by Iza Trapini, Whispering Coyote Press, 1997. 

Somebody Has To in A Light in the Attic by Shel Silverstein, Harper & Row, 1981. 

Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star is included because most children learn it, sometimes even before 
they come to kindergarten. The students can start by being able to recognize some of the 
words. The book takes the poem further. 

Coyote Places the Stars by Harriet Peck Taylor, Aladdin, 1993. Wasco 
Coyote in Love with a Star by Marty Kreipe de Montano (Indian Author), Abbeville Press, 
1998. Navajo 

How the Stars Fell into the Sky by Jerri Oughton, Houghton Mifflin, 1992. Navajo 

These Indian legends all involve the stars. They can be compared and contrasted. Add local 

stories about the stars. 

What the Sun Sees, What the Moon Sees by Nancy Tafuri, Greenwillow, 1997. 

Sun, Shine by Carol Greene, Children’s Press, 1983. 

Sun Song by Jean Marzallo, Harpercollins, 1995. 

Following the Sun by Jenny Stow, Carolrhoda Books, 1997. 

Papa, Please Get the Moon for Me by Eric Carle 

Happy Birthday, Moon by Frank Asch, Simon and Schuster, 1985. 

These are general children’s books regarding a fascination with the sun and moon. 

Daily Activities 

Giving Thanks, A Native American Good Morning Message by Chief Jake Swamp (Indian 
Author), Holiday House. Mohawk 
Day and Night by Nedra Emery, Salina Bookshelf, 1996. Navajo 
Northwoods Cradle Song by Douglas Wood, Aladdin, 1998. Menominee 
Dreamcatcher by Audrey Osofsky, Orchard Books, 1992. Ojibway 
These books have to do with daily rituals and activities and are Indian-oriented. 

Time to Get Up! by Susan Hellard 

Wake Up Little Children by Jim Aylesworth 

My Day by Debbie Mackinora, Little Brown & Co., 1999. 

Goodnight Moon by M.W. Brown, Harpercollings, 1997. 

Good Night, Gorilla by Peggy Rathman 
These books are general about daily routines. 

Selected materials can be read to all students or certain materials can be assigned for some 
students. Some of the materials should be read over until they are memorized to facilitate 
beginning word recognition. 



O ♦ 58 

ERiC 



67 



Further Resources for Sun, Moon and Stars Unit 

These materials can be used to substitute for books in the suggested unit outline or 
for additional reading/other activities for students. 

Finding Out About Sun, Moon and Planets by Lynn Myring, 1983. 

Earth: The Gateway Solar System by Gregory Vogt, 1996. 

Children of the Sun by Arthur J. L’Hommedieu, Child Play Inc., 1994. 

The Moon, the Sun and Coyote by J. Cole, Simon & Schuster, 1991. Indian 

Why the Sun and Moon Live in the Sky by Elphinstone Dayrell, Houghton Mifflin, 1990. 
Included in some basal readers. 

Native American Stories by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author). Includes the same stories as in 
Keepers of the Earth. 

All On Earth, Musical Companion to Keepers Books, performed by Michael Caduto. 

The Daughter of the Sun (Cherokee), The Girl Who Married the Star (Lakota), and The Man 
Who Married the Moon (Pueblo) in Favorite North American Indian Legends by Philip 
Smith, Dover, 1994. 

I Can Read About the Sun and Other Stars by Richard Harris, 1996. 

Clyde and Susanna, The Sun Who Always Loved Her Shine by Kymberli Dyson, Little Light, 
1998. 

How Raven Stole the Sun by Maria Williams, National Museum of the American Indian 
Sunpainters: the Navajo Sun by Baje Whitethorne (Indian Author), Northland Press. 

How Snowshoe Hare Rescued the Sun by E. & D. Bernhard, Holiday House, 1993. Indian 
Monster Slayer by Vee Brown (Indian Author), Northland Press. Navajo 
Monster Birds by Vee Brown (Indian Author), Northland Press. Navajo 
Look at the Moon by May Garelick, Mondo, 1996. 

And if the Moon Could Talk by Kate Banks, Farrar Straus & Giroux, 1998. 

Cabbage Moon by Tim Chadwick, Orchard Books, 1994. 

The Best Book of the Moon by Ian and Aan Graham, 1999. 

Night Comes by Beatrice Schenk de Regriers Included in some basal readers. 

Moongame by Frank Asch Included in some basal readers 

Brave Eagle’s Account of the Fetterman Fight by Paul Goble. Lakota A battle takes place on 
the night the moon is closest to the earth. 



O 




68 



59 ♦ 



How Raven Freed the Moon by Anne Cameron, 1997. Indian 
Full Moons: Indian Legends of the Seasons by Lillian Budd 

Snow Moon, Wild Goose Moon and Wild Rice Moon, Circle Program, Fitzhenry & Whiteside, 
1988. Indian 

Keeping Track of Time in Signs of Tradition: Native American Lessons, Master’s Project, 
University of Kansas, 1994. Mayan and Mandan 

Coyote Concert on a Full Moon Night by Carol Whelchen-Scherer, 1998. 

Full Worm Moon by Margo Lemieux. Algonquin 

The Wish Wind by Peter Eyvindson, Pemmican Pub., 1987. 

Little Herder Books by Ann Nolan Clark, Bureau of Indian Affairs. Little Herder in Summer, in 
Winter, in Spring, in Autumn. Navajo 

Circle of Seasons by Ann Nolan Clark, Bureau of Indian Affairs. Pueblo 

How Thunder and Lightning Came to Be by Beatrice Harrell (Indian Author), Dial. Choctaw 

The Hero Twins and the Swallower of Clouds in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and 
Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum, Inc. 1988. Zuni 

Snow and Ice by Keith Lye, Raintree, 1994. 

Wind and Rain by Claire Llewellyn, Barron’s, 1995. 

The Science Book of Weather by Neil Ardley, Harcourt Brace, 1992. 

Weather Experiments by Vera Webster, Children’s Press, 1989. 

Red Hawk and the Sky Sisters, A Shawnee Legend by Gloria Dominic, Troll, 1996. 

Number the Stars by Lois Lowry, Houghton Mifflin, 1990. 

Lakota Star Knowledge by Ronald Goodman, Sinte Gleska University, 1992. 

The Stars in Old Father Storyteller by Pablita Valarde (Indian Author), Clear Light Pub., 1989. 
Pueblo 

The Dancing Stars: An Iroquois Legend by Anne Rockwell, Crowell, 1972. 

Star Maiden by Barbara Edensen, Little, Brown, 1988. Ojibwa 

Follow the Stars: A Native American Woodlands Tale by Kristina Rodanas, Cavendish, 1998. 
Ojibwa (How Fisher Became the Big Dipper) 

Murdo’s Story: A Legend from Northern Manitoba by Murdo Scribe (Indian Author), Pemmican 
Pub. (How Fisher Became the Big Dipper) 

Oot-Kwah-Tah, The Seven Star Dancers in Keepers of the Night by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1994. Onondaga 



Q ♦ 60 

ERIC 



Pq 



The Lost Children by Paul Goble, Bradbury Press, 1993. (The Pleiades) Blackfeet 

Coyote in Love by Mindy Dwyer, Alaska Northwest Books, 1997. Indian 

Lift the Sky Gp: A Snohomish Indian Legend by Richard Vaughn, 1995. 

How the Milky Way Got Into the Sky (Warm Springs), How the Morning and Evening Stars 
Came to Be (Assiniboine), How Daylight Came to Be (Skokomish), Educational Systems, 
Inc. 

The Story of the Milky Way by Joseph Bruchac and Gayle Ross (Indian Author), Dial Books. 
Cherokee 

Sky woman: Legends of the Iroquois by Joanne Shenandoah (Indian Author), and D. George, 
Clear Light, 1998. 

Star Stories by Linda Skinner (Indian Author). 

Stars in Navajo Tales 

Earth and Sky by R.A. Williamson Indian 

On the Road of Stars by J. Bierhorst, Macmillan, 1994. Indian 

Wilma Mankiller by Gini Holand, 1997. Cherokee 

Wilma Mankiller by Jacki Thompson Rand. Cherokee 

Crazy Horse’s Vision by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author). Lakota 

Maria Tallchief by Heidi Ellen Erdrich. Osage 

Will Rogers, American Humorist by Peter Anderson. Cherokee 

Wilma Rudolph by Victoria Sharrow, Carolrhoda Books, 2000. 

A Picture Book of Sitting Bull by David Adler, Holiday House. Lakota 
“Guardian of Traditions” in Signs of Tradition, University of Kansas, 1994. Lakota 
I See the Moon: Good-Night Poems and Lullabies by Marcus Pfister, 1996. 

Putting the World to Sleep by Shelley Moore Thomas, Houghton Mifflin. 

Good Morning, Good Night by Carmel O’Mara, Red Wagon, 1997. 

The Way to Start a Day by Byrd Baylor. 

A Child’s Good Morning Book by Margaret Wise Brown, Harpercollins, 1996. 

A Child’s Good Night Book by Margaret Wise Brown, Harpercollins, 1992. 

Morning, Noon and Night by Jean Craighead George, Harpercollins, 1999. 

Time for Bed by Mem Fox, Gulliver, 1993. 




70 



61 ♦ 



The Going to Bed Book by Sandra Boynton, Little, 1982. 

Grandmother’s Dreamcatcher by Becky Ray McCain, Albert Whitman & Co., 1998. Ojibwa 
The Boy Who Loved Morning by S. K. Jacobs, Little, Brown, 1993. Indian 
Weave Little Stars Into My Sky by Neil Philip (Indian Children’s Lullabies) 

Mama, Do You Love Me? by Barbara M. Joosse, Chronicle Books, 1991 . Alaskan 
The Christmas of the Reddle Moon by J. Patrick Lewis, Dial Books, 1994. 

Grandmother’s Christmas Story by Richard Red Hawk (Indian Author) 

Circle of Wonder, A Native American Christmas Story by N. Scott Momaday (Indian Author), 
Clear Light Publishing, 1999. 

CHECK YOGR LIBRARY OR BOOKSTORES FOR OTHER BOOKS RELATING TO THE 
TOPIC. 

Books in italics are especially suitable for Phase One - for preschool children. 




O +62 

ERIC 



71 



sun, moon and words 



BEGINNING SOUNDS 



sun 


day 


ball 


fire 


wonder 


high 


summer 


down 


bear 


fall 


wind 


heavens 


silver 


dark 


Big Dipper full 


winter 


half 


side 


diamond 


bright 


far 


warm 


hot 


solar 


dazzling 


breakfast flight world 


hunter 


star 


darkness 


breaking float 


weather 




space 


dream 










sleep 












sky 












ENDING SOUNDS 


LONG VOWEL SOUNDS SHORT VOWEL SOUNDS 


morning 


bright 




fire 


sun 


wind 


evening 


light 




side 


summer 


winter 


breaking 


night 




shine 


up 


travel 


rising 


tonight 




rise 


under 


pattern 


falling 


flight 




time 


hunter 




raining 


dipper 




wake 






snowing 


hotter 




shape 


R-CONTROLLED VOWELS 


dreaming 


colder 




space 


star 




glistening 


winter 




place 


warm 




dazzling 


summer 




dream 


dark 




twinkling 


wonder 




rain 


far 




shining 


silver 




float 


morning 




ANTONYMS 


SYNONYMS 


COMPOUND WORDS OTHER WORDS 


day - night 


shining 




sunlight 


starlight cloud 


moon 


hot - cold 


twinkling 




sunshine 


stardust coyote 


piece 


up - down 


glistening 




sunbeam 


starfish milky way 


constellation 


above - below 


sparkling 




sunrise 


earth 


travel 


over - under 


dazzling 




sunset 


moonlight galaxy 


air 


rise - fall 






sundown 


moonbeam ray 


arrow 


sleep - wake 






sunburn 


pattern 


month 


summer - winter 




sunscreen 


daytime 




dark - light 






sunflower 


nighttime 




morning - evening 




sunroof 


skyland 





Word walls should be maintained. Instructors should ensure that students know the 
meanings of all of these words in this context and extend vocabulary by noting how they may 
mean other things in other contexts or they may have homophones. Experiences, pictures 
and student illustrations should be used to explain and process word meanings. Words that 
rhyme with these words can be examined to see varying spellings for sounds. Other words 
should be added. Teach the meaning of sayings such as “Once in a blue moon,” “Reach for 
the stars,” and “You are my sunshine.” 



ERIC 



72 



63 '♦ 



Science Standards and Benchmarks for Sun , Moon & Stars Unit 

Standard - Understands that scientific inquiry works in particular wayss 
Benchmarks 

Understands that learning can come from careful observations 
Understands that individuals can interpret the same thing in different ways 

Standard - Understands essential ideas about the composition and structure of the 

universe and the motions of objects in it 

Benchmarks 

Knows that the stars are innumerable, unevenly dispersed and of unequal brightness 
Recognizes that while the sun can be seen only in daytime, the moon is out sometimes 
at night and sometimes during the day 

Recognizes that the sun, moon and stars appear to move across the sky every day (or 
night) 

Knows that the face of the moon changes in a regular way, returning to the same shape 
after about a month 

Standard - Knows basic concepts about the earth 
Benchmarks 

Knows that weather changes some from day to day, but things like temperature and 
rain (or snow) tend to be high, low or medium in the same months every year 
Knows that water can be a liquid, like rain, or solid ice, and can be made to go back 
and forth from one form to the other, but the amount of water stays the same 

Standard - Knows the form energy takes, its transformations from one form to 
another, and its relationship to matter 

Benchmarks 

Knows that the sun applies heat and light to earth 

Standard - Knows the main features of the Copernican Revolution 
Benchmarks 

Knows that during the day, the sun seems to move across the sky; it rises and sets at 
slightly different times each day 

Knows that at night, the moon moves across the sky, and the stars appear to form sort 
of a dome over the earth 



Math Standards and Benchmarks for Sun, Moon and Stars 
Unit 

Standard - Effectively uses a variety of strategies within the problem solving process 
Benchmarks 

Brainstorms possible things to do 

Draws pictures to represent problems 

Represents problem situations using physical objects 

Clarifies problems using discussions with teacher or knowledgeable others 



q ♦ 64 

ERIC 



73 



Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced properties of numbers 
Benchmarks 

Has a general understanding of the concept of number 
Uses counting to exemplify numbers 

Standard - Uses basic and advanced procedures while performing computation 
Benchmarks 

Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides whole numbers with accuracy 
Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides decimals with accuracy 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced methods of measurement 
Benchmarks 

Understands the basic characteristics of weight and how it is measured 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced concepts of data analysis 

and distributions 

Benchmarks 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of data 

Language Arts Standards and Benchmarks for Sun, Moon & 
Stars Unit 

Standard - Gathers information effectively through reading, listening and viewing 
Benchmarks 

Provides an accurate retelling of the main idea of simple expository information the 
student has read, heard or viewed 

Understands that reading, viewing and listening are ways of gaining information about 
the world 

Determines meaning of simple words from context 

Creates mental representations for concrete information read, heard or viewed 

Standard - Reads and responds to literature 
Benchmarks 

Understands that stories have beginning, middle and ending episodes 
Understands the genre of legends and fables 

Standard - Communicates ideas and information in writing 
Benchmarks 

Understands basic connections between spelling patterns and speech sounds 
Understands basic phonological patterns in English 
Expresses ideas in simple expository forms 
Composes simple stories that express cohesive ideas 

Standard - Understands and applies basic principles of language use 
Benchmarks 

Recognizes characteristic sounds and rhythms of language 
Makes valid observations about the use of words 



O 

ERIC 



74 



65 ♦ 



American Indian Content Standards for Sun , Moon & Stars Unit 

Science 

Science as Inquiry - 

Indian students should develop an awareness that observations and understandings of 
ecological relationships traditionally formed an essential base of knowledge among 
American Indian cultures. 

Earth and Space Science - 

Indian students should develop an understanding of objects in the sky as exemplified 
by historical American Indian lunar calendars, traditional stories, and knowledge of 
weather patterns and constellations. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of changes in the earth’s surface, 
weather fluctuations and the movements of celestial objects and how they affected 
historical American Indian community locations, annual migrations, and agricultural 
and ceremonial cycles. 

Language and Literacy 

Indian students should be able to- 

Listen for meaning and gain information from spoken English and a Mative language. 

Listen to Indian stories told in the oral tradition, comprehend their teachings and be 
able to retell them. 

Speak coherently, conveying ideas in both English and a Mative language. 

Read fluently and independently, a variety of materials including those with American 
Indian themes. 

Locate and use a variety of texts to gain information, for example, historical materials 
about their tribe, tribal legends and stories and oral history transcription. 

Mathematics 

Mathematics as Problem Solving - 

Indian students should formulate problems from everyday and mathematical situations 
within their home and tribal/community worlds. 

Mathematics as Communication - 

Indian students should relate their everyday language to mathematical language and 
symbols including expressing mathematical concepts in their Mative languages. 

Estimation - 

Indian students should explore estimation strategies through activities derived from 
their cultural worlds such as estimating the number of sheep/horses that fit in a pen/ 
corral. 

Fractions and Decimals - 

Indian students should apply fractions and decimals by applying them to real world 
situations using Mative cultural experiences. 



Example Activities Developed by Teachers of 
American Indian Students 



Workshop on Culturally-Based Math and Science Curriculum 

Development 

Haskell Indian nations University 

1992 




Ideas Included should be adapted for appropriateness. 



SCIENCE 

Day and Night 

Cultural Objective 

Students will understand why it is important for Native Americans to understand their 
relationship with the world and the impact of nature on their lives today. 

Math Objective 

Students will be able to orally identify fractional parts (halves, thirds, fourths) of whole 
objects or sets of objects. 

Science Objective 

Students will understand the cycles of day and night including the sun, moon, and 
stars. 

Teacher Background Information 

Read the story of The Way to Start a Day by Byrd Baylor. This book tells how people 
worldwide greet the sunrise by the use of chants, flute music, songs, bells, and gifts. 




O 

ERIC 



♦ 68 



77 



Student Learning Activities 



Science 



1. Have a class discussion about the sun and moon. Ask the following questions: 

a. What do we know about the moon and sun? 

b. When do we see it? 

c. Is it always the same? 

d. From where does the moon come? 

e. How does the sun warm us? 

2. Demonstrate how the earth rotates to show day and night. Use a flashlight and 
globe, or use students to show how the earth moves to give us day and night. 
Show why it makes days shorter and longer as in winter and summer. 

Math 



1. Match pairs of shapes of the suns and moons at different times (V 4 moon, V 2 
moon, 3 / 4 moon and full moon). 



2. Identify the four basic fractions (’/ 4 , V 2 » 3 / 4 & whole) using the moon. Using a 
picture, show how the moon starts as the month goes along. Show pictures of 
how it changes: V 4 of the moon is lit, then V 2 > 3 / 4 until the whole moon is full. 
The process can also be done in reverse. 




O 

New Crescent 
moon 




First Gibbous 
quarter 





Last Crescent 
quarter 





78 



69 



Evaluation 



1 . Have the class write a brief description of how they or their family greet the sun. 
Illustrate and color. 

2. Using a flannel circle - have the class show the fraction for 1/4, 1/2, 3/4 and 
whole using a contrasting color of pre-cut flannel. 

3. Have the class do a simple crossword puzzle answering the following questions: 
Across: 

1 . Its shape seems to change. 

2. What do we get from both sun and moon? 

Down: 

3. It warms the air and ground. 

4. What does the earth do? 



Resources 

Heil, David, Science: 
Discover the Wonder, 
Grades K-2, Glenview, 
Illinois, 1993. 

Developed By 

Arlene Valenzuela 





♦ 70 



79 



MATH 



Time to the Nearest Hour 

Cultural Objective 

Students will understand the Mative American concept of time. 

Math Objective 

Students will relate to time to the nearest hour. 

Teacher Background Information 

Time is one of the world’s mysteries and is viewed by different cultures in many 
different ways. Early Mative Americans didn’t measure time to the hour because they 
didn’t need to know this information for planting and harvesting or for the breeding of 
animals. 

Our Mative American ancestors used the sun, moon and stars to help them tell time. 
They would tell how much of the day was left from the position of the sun and the 
length of the shadows. 

Student Learning Activities 

1. Make cards with digital times from 1:00-12:00 on them. Have a regular clock 
available. Let students draw a card and set their clock to the same digital time. 

2. Draw a large clock on the floor. Use ribbons to represent the hour and minute 
hands. Have one student hold the minute ribbon and stand on the number 12. 
Explain that when the minute hand is on 12, the time says, “o’clock.” Have 
another student hold the shorter ribbon, and walk to each number as the 
students count. Have the minute hand say, “o’clock.” Relate this to the 
movement of the clock’s hands. 



3. Discuss the time of day. Have students indicate whether they think the following 
activities occur during the day or during the night: sun shining, eating dinner, 
going to school, eating breakfast, seeing the stars, needing artificial lights to see. 
Call on students to act out an activity and let the class guess what the activity is. 
Show the time on a clock. 

4. Divide the students into small groups. Give each group a different time of the 
day. Have each student in the group draw a picture of what might happen at that 
time. Sequence the pictures from each group. 

5. Give each student a clock with no numbers on it. Give the children the number 
cards with 1-12 on them. Have them put their cards on the proper place on the 
clock.. 

Evaluation 

Direct the students to go through magazines and find pictures of daytime and nighttime 
activities. Label one half of a bulletin board “day” and one half “night." Write the digital 
times to the hour on index cards and place them in an envelope attached at the bottom 
of the board. 

Attach a clock under the “day” and “night” headings on the bulletin board. Have the 
students select a card with the digital time on it. Moving the hands on the day or night 
clock face, have students select a picture of an activity. Attach it to the board under the 
“day” or “night” heading, according to what they consider appropriate. Then they can 
move the clock hands to estimate the time to the hour that they think the activity would 
take place. 

Resources 

Fennel, Francis “Skip”, Reyes, Barbara J., Reyes, Robert E., and Webb, Arnold W. 
Mathematics Unlimited. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1987. pp. 89, 97-98, 
107. 

Developed By 

Georgie Riley 
Mary Stonehouse 



O + 72 

ERiC 



81 



MATH AND SCIENCE 
Clocks and Calendars 



Cultural Objective 

Students will learn about some traditional Native American concepts of time and the 
seasons. 



Math Objectives 



The student will: 

tell time to the minute 

make simple picture, bar and line graphs. 

Science Objectives 



The student will: 

use observation skills 
use classification techniques 
make simple predictions 
analyze data. 




ERiC 



82 



73 ♦ 



Student Learning Activities 



1. Discuss the story about spring and winter and describe what Old Man Winter 
looks like. Ask students why they think that the ground turned into stone when 
he stepped on it and why the two men did not sit in front of a real fire? Describe 
what Spring and Winter looked like in their human forms. 



2. Make a chart for students to record the temperature twice daily (preferably early 
morning and afternoon). Record the difference in the temperatures. 



3. Construct a clock on the bulletin board. Ask a variety of time questions on 

separate cards (i.e. show the time on the clock and ask for the numerical time or 
give the numerical time and ask for a picture of the clock face). 



4. Provide sufficient 
Celsius thermometers, 
containers of ice and 
containers of water so 
that students can work 
in small groups. Have 
students place 
thermometers in the 
water and record the 
temperature, then place 
the thermometers in the 
ice and record that 
temperature. Ask 
students to discuss the 
difference in degrees. 

5. Show the students two 
annual calendars, the 
Julian and the Miamian. 
Compare and contrast 
the two calendars, then 
ask students to develop 
a seasonal division for 
each. 



Miami Indian Calendar 




January 



Green Grass Moon 




February 



Planting Moon 




March 



Rose Moon/Flower 
Blooming Moon 





Leaf Falling Moon 



Hunting Moon 




June 



Gathering Moon 




Long Night Moon 




October 



November 



December 



0 



♦ 74 



83 



Evaluation 



Ask students to perform the following activities: 

1 . Discuss and compute the difference in the morning and afternoon temperatures. 

2. State and record the time to the nearest minute. 

3. Identify the temperature at the boiling point and freezing point of water and be 
able to express the experiment. 

4. Differentiate between the Miami Tribal calendar and the Julian calendar even 
though the names of the months and divisions of the seasons are the same. 

Resources 

Caduto, Michael J. and Bruchac, Joseph. Spring Defeats Winter in Keepers of the 
Earth: Native American Stories and Environmental Activities for Children. Golden, 
Colorado: Fulcrum, 1989, pp. 129-130. 

The American Indian Institute. Legacy of the American Indian: Lessons For The 
Classroom. Norman, Oklahoma, Continuing Education and Public Services. 

Developed By 

Marcella Ben Vaughn 




erIc 



84 



75 ♦ 




MATH AND SCIENCE 
The Fun Sun 

Cultural Objective 

Students will understand the importance of the sun’s energy for life on earth and 
recognize the interconnectedness of the natural world with themselves. 

Math Objectives 

Students will: 

recognize simple pattern in sequence 

orally identify fractional parts (halves, thirds, fourths) of whole object or sets of 
objects 

tell time to the hour and half-hour. 

Science Objectives 

Students will: 

use observation techniques 

communicate with basic scientific vocabulary 

understand the cycles of day and night, including the sun, moon and stars. 




0 *76 

ERiC 



85 



Student Learning Activities 

1 . Students will listen to the story “How Grandmother Spider Stole the Sun” and 
discuss why the sun is important. Name gifts we get from the sun. Make a list of 
the gifts and post it up for students to see. 

2. The class will observe the cause of the day and night cycles by using a flashlight 
and globe in a fairly darkened room. Put a dot on the globe to indicate the 
general area the students live. CJse the flashlight for sunlight. Turn the lights off 
and have students take turn shining the flashlight on the globe. What part of the 
globe is light? What part of the globe is dark? What is the lighted part called? 
What is the dark part or shadow called? Next, turn the globe slowly. Students 
can do this one at a time. What is happening to the dot that represents our home 
town? 

3. Discuss the shape of the sun, earth, moon and star from their view. 

Name things that are circles in the classroom. 

Using circle patterns, trace and cut out circles to represent sun, earth, moon and 
star. Order the cut out circles from largest to smallest. Unscramble the ordered 
circles and order circles from smallest to largest. 

Next, fold the circles in halves, then fold.the circles in fourths. 

Using the circle patterns, cut more circles to illustrate a picture of the day and 
night cycle. Glue the shapes on paper provided. Cut out more star circles and 
glue them on. 

Divide the earth in half vertically and color it dark to represent the night. Write 
sun, earth, moon and star next to the right circle. (See illustration.) 

4. Discuss what things they see during the day and what things they see at night. 
List them on the paper and post it up. Draw and write about what things they see 
during the day and night using the list. 

5. Discuss time to the hour and half hour. Make a clock. Using the clock show 
when school starts, what time recess is, what time lunch starts and ends, and 
when school is out. How many hours are in a day? What time do you get up and 
go to bed? Questions can vary. 



6. Demonstrate that different colors absorb different amounts of solar heat. 

Divide students into small groups. Place newspapers, paintbrushes, containers of 
water, and paper towels on desk tops. Give each group five empty aluminum 
cans. Using tempera paints or acrylics (black, white and choose three other 
colors) paint each can. Let the cans dry. After the cans are dry, fill each can with 
tap water. Measure the water temperature. Record the information at each group. 
Place the colored cans filled with water outside in a sunny place. Measure the 
water temperature every 15 minutes for 30 minutes or one hour. Record the 
information at each group. 

Questions and Explanations 
Compare the water temperatures. 

Did the water temperature rise or not? 

The higher the temperature the more heat it absorbs. 

The lower the temperature the less heat it absorbs. 

What color(s) had the hottest temperature? 

What color(s) had the lowest temperature? 

Relate this activity to wearing colored clothes. 

Does a black t-shirt absorb more or less heat? 

Does a white t-shirt absorb more or less heat? 

Does a colored t-shirt absorb more or less than black or white? 





♦ 78 



87 





Evaluation 

1 . Discussion on the importance of the sun and its gifts. 

2. Cut out circles and fold into fractional parts (halves and fourths). 

3. Illustrate day and night cycles. 

4. Make clock and tell time to the hour and half-hour. 

5. Write about things they see during the day and at night. 

6. Demonstration of solar heat. 

Resources 

American Indian Science and Engineering Society. Hands On/Minds On: Science 
Activities for Children. Boulder, Colorado: 1992, p. 5. 

Caduto, Michael J. and Bruchac, Joseph, Keepers of the Earth: Native American Stories 
and Environment Activities for Children. Golden, Colorado: Fulcrum, 1989, pp. 49-50. 

Developed By 

Mae Mallahan 



O 

ERIC 



88 



79 ♦ 




SCIENCE 

Sunrise, Sunset 

Cultural Objective 

Students will understand and relate the importance of the sun as it pertains to their 
culture. 

Science Objective 

Students will: 

identify the importance of the sun 
identify uses and forms of the sun’s energy 
communicate using basic scientific vocabulary. 

Teacher Background Information 

Arrow to the Sun is a good introduction to the important role of the sun to Native 
people. This is a story about a young boy sent to Earth by the Sun. Because of this, he 
was teased and rejected by the other boys. He wanted to find his father. He began his 
journey and in doing so became an arrow, which is how he traveled to the Sun. There, 
he has to prove himself by going through a test. He returned to his people and they 
celebrated his return with the Dance of Life. 



O ♦ 80 

ERiC 



83 





Student Learning Activities 

1. Have the class write and discuss the following questions: 

a. What is the sun? 

b. Of what is it made? 

c. As a safety precaution - Why don’t we look directly at it? 

2. Demonstrate how the sun is stationary and the earth moves in the sky. 
Substitute a flashlight for the sun and a student as the earth. Rotate the child to 
demonstrate day and night. Use the flashlight to show how light travels in a 
straight line from the sun to earth. 

3. Discuss what the sun gives us - heat, light, energy. Use terminology: gases, 
sunlight, energy, sundial and rotate. 

4. Create a sundial using pencil, tape and recording sheet. 






81 ♦ 



Evaluation 



Play the game “Sunny Vocabulary Bingo.” Caller reads questions aloud and students 
cover the answers if given on his bingo card. (See example given.) 

1. Gas storms on the sun’s surface. 

2. Exposing the body to sunlight for an extended period of time. 

3. When the sun goes down. 

4. When the sun comes up. 

5. Large plants with yellow petals. 

6. The oldest device used to measure time. 

7. Florida. 

8. A medical condition when the body becomes overheated because of 
overexposure to sun. 

9. Swims in the freshwater lakes and rivers of North America. 

10. Inflamed skin caused by overexposure to sun. 

Answers 



1 . 


sunspots 


6. 


sundial 


2. 


sun bath 


7. 


Sunshine State 


3. 


sunset 


8. 


sunstroke 


4. 


sunrise 


9. 


sunfish 


5. 


sunflowers 


10. 


sunburn 



Resources 

McDermott, Gerald. Arrow to the Sun: Pueblo Indian Tale. New York, New York: Viking 
Press, 1974. 

Developed By 

Bonnie McGinnis 
Arlene Valenzuela 



0 +82 

ERIC 



91 



SCIENCE 
Solar System 

Cultural Objective 

Students will relate the stories and beliefs of the sun, moon and stars to their tribal life. 

Science Objective 

Students will recognize the size and shape of the sun and moon in relationship to the 
earth and each other. 

Teacher Background Information 

“How the Sun Made a Promise and Kept It,” by Margery Bernstein and Janet Kobrin, 
relates the myth of the creator, Weese-ke-jak, who didn’t like the sun coming and going 
whenever he wanted. One day he made a net to capture the sun. The sun then made 
the earth so hot that the birds and the animals could not live in their natural 
environments. 

Weese-ke-jak then made the sun promise to stay close enough to the earth to keep it 
warm. The problem was that the sun was so hot that none of the animals except the 
Beaver would try to release the sun. He gnawed with his small front teeth until he set 
the sun free. All of the animals thanked Beaver for his bravery. Weese-ke-jak gave 
Beaver two gifts: two large front teeth and a smooth, shiny coat. He kept his tail bare to 
remind everyone how brave Beaver was in setting the sun free. 

The sun was always free from the earth, but not from Weese-ke-jak’s net. From that 
time on, the sun has kept his promise. 




ERIC 



83 ♦ 



Student Learning Activities 



1. Read the story about the sun keeping his promise, discuss it, and draw a picture 
of the sun caught in the net of Weese-ke-jak. Continue with the Mavajo sticks 
example of the sun and the moon. The sun and the moon are never separated. 
The sun stick is called the “abalone which shines out of an abalone basket.” The 
moon is a “perfect white shell bowl which shines out of a white shell basket.” 
Both sticks are deposited on a “high hill towards the East.” 

2. Show a picture of a daytime scene and ask the students why they like the 
daytime. Emphasize that the sun lights up the land and the sky all day. Then 
show a nighttime scene with a moon shining on the ocean or some other 
reflective surface. Ask the students what they see and emphasize that the moon 
lights some things at night, but it is mostly dark because the sun is on the other 
side Of the earth. 

3. Make cutouts of the sun, moon and stars large enough to attach yarn or cord. 
Have the children sing songs appropriate to the shape they wear: “Twinkle, 
Twinkle, Little Star,” “You Are My Sunshine,” and “Hey Diddle, Diddle. ..the Cow 
Jumped Over the Moon.” Students may do this for their own enjoyment, as an 
introduction to the Solar System unit, or as a presentation to another class or 
parents. 

4. Relate the basic facts about the solar system (listed below) to other activities 
listed in this unit: 

There are nine planets. 

The four planets closest to the sun are rocky because they are made of solid 
material. 

The next two are giant planets. They are very large and in many ways are like 
the sun. 

The last three are icy planets: temperatures vary, but they are still cold. 

The size of the earth compared to that of the sun is like a grain of sand against a 
basketball. With these sizes, the distance between them is 3.5 meters. 



5. Illustrate the scale of the solar system with the following materials: 

9 strips of oak tag 2 cm x 4 cm 

Different-sized buttons and juice, soup, and soft drink cans 
Different-colored paper (not black) 

Meter or yard stick 

Black marking pen 

Masking tape 

Ball of heavy string 

Long hallway or auditorium 

Yellow circle (30 cm in diameter) 

Procedure: 

Tape the yellow circle to one end of the ball and label it “Sun.” Gse different- 
sized buttons as patterns to draw circles on colored paper to represent smaller 
planets: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars and Pluto. Gse cans of different sizes as 
patterns for Jupiter, Saturn, Granus and Neptune. (Remember that Jupiter and 
Saturn are much larger than the other planets.) Write the name of the planet on 
each of the nine strips of oak tag. Tape the planet and its name in order, starting 
from the Sun, along the wall of the hall of your school. Gse the meter stick to 
measure the following distances from the Sun: 



a. 


Mercury 


39 cm 


b. 


Venus 


72 cm 


c. 


Earth 


1.00 m 


d. 


Mars 


1.52 m 


e. 


Jupiter 


5.20 m 


f. 


Saturn 


9.52 m 


g- 


Granus 


19.60 m 


h. 


Neptune 


29.99 m 


i. 


Pluto 


36.37 m 



6. Buy a precut model of the Solar System. Punch out and construct a mobile, 
using a dowel rod with the Sun and Planets hung on fish line. 

7. Cut out pictures of the Solar System and place them on a bulletin board against 
a dark blue background. 



Evaluation 

Students will construct a bulletin board or mural representing activities on the sun, 
moon and stars unit. They will describe the solar system which they created. 

Materials needed: stencils, large cutouts, pictures, glue, markers, construction paper 
(yellow, white) and scissors. 

Time: 2 hours 

Resources 

Kennedy, Paul E.. Fun with Sun, Star and Moon Stencils. New York, New York: Dover 
Publications, Inc., 1991. 

Bernstein, Margery and Kobrin, Janet. How the Sun Made a Promise and Kept It New 
York: Charles E. Scribner’s Sons, 1977. 

Discover The Wonder (Level K). Chicago, Illinois: Scott Foresman Science, Scott 
Foresman, IL, 1993. 

Tolman, Marvin N. and Morton, James O.. Earth Science Activities for Grades 2-8, Vol. 
III. West Nyack, New York: Parker Publishing Company, Inc., 1988. 

Wyman, Leland C., The Mountain way of the Navajo. Tucson, Arizona: University of 
Arizona Press, 1975. 

Developed By 

Carol L. Martin 
Vera Freeman 
Becky YoungBear 
Mary Stonehouse 
Georgie Riley 
John Wray 




q ♦ 86 

ERIC 



95 



MATH AND SCIENCE 
Seasons 

Cultural Objective 

Students will understand how Native American people 
view nature and the cycles of a season. 

Math Objectives 

Students will: 

make and interpret pictorial illustrations and 
charts 

record weather changes 
interpret calendars. 

Science Objective 

Students will become familiar with the fundamental concepts of atmosphere, climate 
and weather. 

Teacher Background Information 

From earliest times, people have found ways to mark the passage of time. For 
example, some Native Americans used bundles of sticks to record the passage of 
months. For each day that passed, one stick was removed from a bundle. 

The Chippewa studied the heavens and could tell the time of night and the season of 
the year by observing the constellations. The seasons of the year form a great circle as 
they change, and the circle is continually repeated. There is no beginning and no 
ending. 




O 

ERIC 



96 



87 ♦ 



We live our lives according to the seasons. The following story about the life cycle of a 
plant further illustrates this point. 



Seasons 



Pretend that you are a seed resting in the soil. Winter is moving north and the soil 
around you feels warm and wet. Slowly you begin to unfold. Your root goes down into 
the soil, and your sprout pushes upward. In a few days your leaves begin to unfold and 
they poke up out of the dark soil into the bright, warm sun. You grow taller and taller. 
You can feel your leaves stretch wider and higher toward the sun. 




As spring turns into summer, a bud forms on your head and 
finally opens into a beautiful flower. Feel the long, hot days of 
summer and imagine rain upon your leaves and petals. Some 
mornings you feel cold dew on your leaves. One day a bee 
buzzes over and leaves pollen from another flower to help 
your seeds grow. 

The days grow short during the fall and one morning you feel 
cold and find that frost has frozen your leaves. You are all 
shriveled up, but now you have seeds on you where you had 
none before. One day a cold, hard wind blows and your 
seeds shake loose, falling to the ground. There is not much 
left of you now and the days are very short. You are a dried- 
up brown stalk when the first snow comes, but near your 
roots, resting in the ground, are the seeds which will become 
new plants. 

In the springtime, the sunshine and rains will start the cycle 
all over again. 



Adapted from Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac. Keepers 
of the Earth. Golden, Colorado: Fulcrum, 1989. 



O +88 

ERiC 



97 



Student Activities 



1. Place a picture of clothing for different kinds of weather in a large manila 
envelope on the bulletin board. Have children draw symbols for different kinds of 
weather in a smaller envelope. Each day, children can pick appropriate items of 
clothing from the envelopes and attach them to the bulletin board. 

2. Help the students to make a large paper calendar for the current month and 
place it on the floor. Divide the class into teams, and, using a beanbag or other 
marker, toss the markers onto the calendar. Children should name the numbers 
on which the markers land. Students earn points for each number named 
correctly. 

3. Help the students construct a calendar for the school year and tally daily 
weather. 

4. Celebrate the 40th Day of School. Graph or mark each day of school from the 
beginning of the school year with one of the following, tied in groups of ten: 

a. multicolored straws 

b. large plastic clips 

Celebrate the end of each week with counting activities to 40. Count raisins, 
small candies or popcorn and then eat them. 

5. Count in the students’ native languages, clapping the appropriate number of 
times for each number counted. 

6. Make a large circle and divide it into four equal parts. In each part write the 
name of a season and illustrate as desired, for example, with pictures of children 
dressed in clothing appropriate for the season and participating in seasonal 
activities. Other possibilities include pictures of trees in different seasons or the 
life cycle of corn, berries or pumpkin. 



O 

ERLC 



98 



89 ♦ 



Evaluation 



1. Have the children draw pictures of the life cycle of a plant. 

2. Have the children play the life cycle of a plant, using the characters and creative 
costumes listed below and the following materials: dried beans or peas for seeds, 
white shredded paper for snow, small container with yellow corn meal to be used 
for pollen, and a paintbrush for the bee to use in spreading his pollen. 

Sun with large yellow paper circle and protruding rays 

Bumblebee with yellow paper wings 

Rain with large white cloud 

Wind with long flowing crepe paper streamers 

Flowers 

Storyteller 

Resources 

Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac. Keepers of the Earth. Golden, Colorado: Fulcrum, 

1989. 



Numbers. Cypress, California: Creative Teaching Press, 1990. 

Developed By 

Vera Freeman 
Becky YoungBear 




Q +90 

EKIC 



99 



MATH AND SCIENCE 
The Wonder of Weather 

Cultural Objective 

Students will discover the spiritual and artistic significance of the elements that make 
up weather and their importance to Native Americans. 

Math Objectives 

Students will: 

identify and collect data 

make comparisons and predictions about pictures and bar graphs 

use a calendar to find answers to a simple problem 

fill in missing numbers in addition and subtraction expressions in both 
vertical and horizontal problems 

Science Objectives 

Students will: 

use observation techniques 
use classification techniques 
utilize prediction techniques 
gather information 

describe the elements that make up weather 



100 

o 

ERIC 



91 ♦ 



Teacher Background Information 



The legend of “Spring Defeats Winter,” retold in Keepers of the Earth by Michael J. 
Caduto and Joseph Bruchac, takes place when the world was new. Old man winter sat 
in his lodge with his only friend, the north wind. One morning when they awoke, they 
noticed something different; the weather had begun to change. North wind fled to 
where the snow and ice were deeper, but the old man remained alone in his lodge until 
a young man forced his way into the lodge. The young man began to make the lodge 
very warm, which caused the old man to sweat and become angry. 

The young man told the old man that he had brought the south wind and sunshine with 
him. “You need to leave,” he told the old man, who felt himself becoming smaller and 
smaller. 



Sample A 



Weather Wheel Pattern 





Sample B 
Pinwheel Pattern 



O +92 

ERIC 



101 



^fpno\° 



Student Learning Activities 

1. Discuss the weather with questions such as: 

What did the weather have to do with the clothes you are wearing 

today? 

What is weather? 

What happens to a slide on a sunny day? 

2. Create a bulletin board display which shows how people dress in different types 
of weather' 

3. Create a bulletin board display called TODAY’S WEATHER by having students 
observe and illustrate the day’s weather. 

4. Create. a weather wheel showing different types of weather (see Sample A). 

5. Discuss the question of why air becomes warm: 

Place a piece of black construction paper in a sunny spot and another piece in a 
shady spot. After 15 minutes, have the students place their hands above the 
paper. The paper placed in the sunny spot will have warmed the air above it and 
the sun will have warmed the paper. 

6. Make pinwheels (see Sample B), take them outside and watch them turn in the 
wind. 

7. Discuss the ways in which we predict the weather. 

8. Have the students illustrate the clouds they see. 

9. Ask the students to predict the weather based upon their observations of the 
clouds. 

10. Create a weather calendar (monthly or weekly) using the information from the 
TODAY’S WEATHER bulletin board. 

1 1 . Have the students make a bar graph showing the number of days that are sunny, 
cloudy, foggy, rainy, windy and snowy in their local area. 

12. Have students answer questions from the graph, such as “How many more days 
are sunny than rainy?” 

13. Have the students complete cloud wheels (see Sample C on the following page) 
by adding or subtracting degrees of temperature. 



O 



102 



93 ♦ 



Evaluation 



1 . Ask students to write about their favorite kind of weather. 

2. Have students illustrate their writing. 

3. Ask students to answer these riddles about the thermometer: 

Subtract 8 from me. You will have 8. What am 1? (16) 

Subtract 8 from me. You will have 7. What am 1? (15) 

Subtract 9 from me. You will have 3. What am 1? (12) 

Subtract 6 from me. You will have 5. What am 1? (11) 

Resources 



Science Horizons. Teacher Edition 2. Morristown, New Jersey: Silver Burdett and Ginn, 
1988. 

Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac. Keepers of the Earth: Native American Stories 
and Environmental Activities for Children. Golden, Colorado: Fulcrum, 1989. 



Developed By 

Bonnie McGinnis 

Sample C 
Cloud Wheels 





O +94 

EKIC 



103 



My Ideas for Sun, Moon and Stars Unit: 



O 

tKJC 



104 



95 ♦ 



Lesson Plans/Schedule for Sun, Moon and Stars Unit 



O ♦ 9 6 

EKIC 



105 




ERIC 

hfliflaffHEraaaa 



106 



97 ♦ 



Nursery Rhymes and Poems 

Starlight 

Starlight, 

Starbright, 

First star 
I see tonight. 

I wish I may, 

1 wish I might, 

Have the wish 
I wish tonight. 

Rock-a-bye, baby on the tree top 
When the wind blows the cradle will rock, 
When the bough breaks the cradle will fall, 
And down will come baby, cradle and all. 

Sleep, baby sleep 

The father watches the sheep; 

The mother is shaking the dream-land tree, 
And down falls a little dream on thee: 
Sleep, baby sleep 

Sleep, baby, sleep 

The large stars are the sheep, 

The wee stars are the lambs, I guess, 

The fair moon is the shepherdess: 

Sleep, baby sleep 

Twinkle, twinkle, little star 
How I wonder what you are 
tip above the world so high 
Like a diamond in the sky 
Twinkle, twinkle, little star 
How I wonder what you are 



Hey diddle diddle, 

The cat and the fiddle, 

The cow jumped over the moon. 

The little dog laughed 
To see such sport 

And the dish ran away with the spoon 

A dillar, a dollar 

A ten o’clock scholar 

What makes you come so soon? 

You used to come at ten o’clock, 

But now you come at noon. 

Star Song 

We are the singing stars, 

We sing with our light, 

We are the birds of fire, 

Through the heavens we take our flight. 

Our light is as a star, 

Making a road for spirits. 

Among us are three hunters 
Forever chasing a bear. 

There never was a time 
When they were not hunting. 

We look down upon the mountains. 

- Passamaquoddy Indian song 




The teacher should have the students do choral readings of these selections, memorize 
and recite them, and explain what they mean in their own words. These can be used to 
stress phonemic awareness and beginning sounds/ending sounds, rhyming words in 
kindergarten and other word-attack principles such as the ing and le sounds, long and 
short vowel sounds, sight words, r-controlled vowels, etc. at the other grades. 

10 7 



♦ 98 






108 



Background Information for Teachers and Parents 

Phases 2 and 3 
Indian Food 

In Morth America, native people have cultivated over 2,000 species of plants for food. 
At least 19 of these plants had to be cultivated, such as corn, beans, squash, tomatoes, 
avocados and peppers. Horticultural techniques are credited by scientists to have been 
more advanced in the Americas than they were in Europe. For example, 250 different 
kinds of potatoes were planted by Inca farmers; only one of which, the “super potato,” 
was used in Ireland. 

Indian people learned that by planting beans and corn (and sometimes, squash) 
together, the crops would be larger and healthier. This is due to the fact that the 
nitrogen, needed by corn, was generated by the beans’ roots. Corn, beans and squash 
are sometimes referred to as the “three sisters.” The use of fish as fertilizer by burying 
it in the soil also brought about improvement in crop yield. When Indian people rotated 
crops, they found that they could improve the quality and/or size of plants. 

Some foods required special preparation. Acorns were boiled or roasted and the oil 
extracted for cooking. Acorns and certain roots were made edible by boiling them in 
lye-water made from the ashes of a hardwood tree such as ash or oak. Acorns and 
roots could then be soaked in fresh water to remove the lye and added to stews or 
pounded into meal for bread. 

In addition wild plants such as burdock, dandelion, milkweed, mushrooms, berries, wild 
rice and nuts were also used for food. 

In fact, the same plant could be used for many different purposes. In the corn plant, 
tubes from the stalk were used for medicine; husks for kindling and as tapers for 
carrying fire; husks for weaving mats, baskets and moccasins; corn silk for medicine; 
corn cobs for smoking hides; dried corn kernels for beads and decoration; green corn 
leaves for bandages; and, of course, corn is a very nutritious “high yield” food. 

from Science and Cultural Curricula, Indian Education Act Resource and 
Evaluation Center One, ORB1S Associates, Washington, DC, 1986. 

These are things your children should know. 



♦ 100 



109 



Background Information for Teachers and Parents 

Phases 4 and 5 
Food and Cookery 

- Bureau of Indian Affairs 

Many of the most widely used and important foods known in the United States today 
are of American Indian origin. They are sold in supermarkets, enjoyed every day, and 
often prepared in the original way. Such classic American dishes as barbecue, steamed 
lobster, succotash, spoon bread, cranberry sauce and mincemeat pie are inherited from 
the first Americans. Until the white man came to America, the rest of the world knew 
nothing of such foods as avocados, sweet or Irish potatoes, pineapples, tomatoes, 
peppers, pumpkins or squashes, maple sugar and, of course, corn. Without corn, 
which most Indians regarded as a gift to be treasured and surrounded with ceremony, 
the colonization of America might have faltered. The wild rice of the Great Lakes 
region, which is now considered a gourmet delicacy, is still harvested by the Chippewa 
(Ojibwa). To a considerable extent, religious customs and beliefs determined what 
foods were eaten and how they were prepared. 

Most Indians preferred cooked food to raw, and they had many methods of cooking and 
seasoning their food. Among the methods used were stoneboiling (putting hot stones 
into a basket or pot of water), drying, freezing and smoking. The various cooking 
methods obviously affected pottery and basketry types. Flavoring was accomplished 
by the use of seeds, roots, flowers and grasses. The north Pacific tribes used the tender 
inner bark of hemlock and spruce. In the southwest, mesquite beans, cactus and yucca 
fruits, and the agave were important. 

Five distinct areas provide the Indian foods and recipes we use today. In the southwest, 
the Pueblo tribes, the Tohono O’odham (Bean People), and the Hopis grew peppers 
and beans which were made into savory chili, soups, guacamole and barbecue sauces. 
Along the northwest coast, seafood was the staple, and here women of the Tlingit, 
Kawkiutl, Salish and other tribes steamed and broiled salmon and dozens of other fish 
and seafood from the Pacific and the western rivers. On the vast plains, nomadic tribes 
such as the Sioux and Cheyenne roasted buffalo over campfires. In the South, 
Cherokees and other tribes had long enjoyed an impressive list of fragrant soups and 
rich stews, and they baked the same assortment of corn breads known today. Two 
particular American favorites, the clambake and Boston baked beans, were also staple 
favorites of the Narragansetts, Penobscots and Powhatans, who, like the Iroquois and 
other timber people of the east, steamed their dinners in earthen pits. Their method, 
still in use today, is now called “fireless cooking.” 

From all these regions, American Indians have bequeathed varied, imaginative and 
indispensable dishes. American Indian cuisine may rightly be considered continental 
cooking, indigenous and uniquely North American. 



O 

ERLC 



110 



101 ♦ 



Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline - Food 



Reading, Language Arts, 

Science, Math, Art, Values Literature - Week 1 Literature - Week 2 



P Food Words 
H Summarizing/Reporting 
A Reading Fiction 
S Retelling/Responding 
E Farming/Water 

Indian Farming Practices 
F Seed to Plant/Measure 
1 Indians as Scientists 
V Drawing Food Still Life 
E Work to Help Others 
Wisdom/Generosity 


If It Weren't for Farmers by Allan 
Fowler 

Harvest Year by Cris Peterson 

Hold a Plant Grotvs by Bobbie 
Kalman 

Hungry Mungry by Shel 
Silverstein 

Jam : A True Story by Margaret 
Mahy 


Four Seasons of Corn: A 

Winnebago Tradition We Are 
Still Here Series 

Heetanka's Harvest by Jennifer 
Jones 

The Sacred Harvest: Wild Rice 
Gathering We Are Still Here 
Series 


P Food Words 


Sunflower’s Promise by Gloria 


Good Enough to Eat: A Kid's 


H Retelling/The Oral Tradition 
A Performing Legends 


Dominic 


Guide by Lizzy Rockwell 


S Reading Nonfiction 


First Woman and the Strawberry 


What We Eat by Sara Lynn and 


E Summarizing/Reporting 
Plant Needs-Our Needs 


by Gloria Dominic 


Diane James 


F Nutrition 




Sack Lunch by Bob Reese 


O Foods 1 Like and Why 


How Food Was Given by 


Cl Food Group Charts 


Jeanette Armstrong 


Mary Jo's Grandmother by 


R Make Sunflowers 

Caring for Ourselves/Others 


Me Stew - Shel Silverstein 


Janice CJdry 


P Food Words 


What Food Is This? by 


Waynabozho and the Wild Rice 


H Responding/Retelling 


Rosemarie Hausherr 


in Keepers of Life by Caduto 


A Reading Legends 




and Bruchac 


S Retelling/Responding 


Something Queer in the 




E Performing Legends 


Cafeteria by Elizabeth Levy 


Iktomi and the Berries by Paul 


Reading Poetry 


1 Scream , Vbu Scream: A Feast of 


Goble 


T Memorizing/Reciting 


Food Rhymes by Lillian 




H Nutrition 


Morrison 


Maple Moon by Connie B. Crook 


R List Foods 1 Like 


Recipe for a Hippopotamus 




E Food Rhyme Posters 
E Liking/Disliking 


Sandwich by Shel Silverstein 




P Food Words 


My Whole Food ABC's by David 


The First Strawberries by Joseph 


H Reading Food Stories 
A Retelling/Responding 


Richard 


Bruchac 


S Being Hungry/Needs 


Who Ate It? by Taro Gomi 


Real Wild Rice by David 


E Breakfast/Lunch/Dinner/Supper 
List Foods 1 Like 


Lunch by Denise Fleming 


Martinson 


Wondering/Observing 


With His Mouth Full of Food by 


Shemay, the Bird in the 


T Nutrition 


Shel Silverstein 


Sugarbush by David 


W Making Food Collage 
O Using Manners 




Martinson 



♦ 102 




Hi 



Literature - Week 3 



Literature - Week 4 



Reading, Language Arts, 
Science, Math, Art, Values 



Ininatig’s Gift of Sugar We Are 
Still Here Series 

Manabozho and the Maple Trees 
in Keepers of the Earth by 
Caduto and Bruchac 

Circle of Thanks: Native 
American Poems of 
Thanksgiving by Joseph 
Bruchac 


The Food Pyramid by Joan 
Kalbacken 

Food and Your Health by Jillian 
Powell 

Nutrition: WhaVs in the Food We 
Eat? by Dorothy H. Patent 

Sarah Cynthia Stout Would Mot 
Take the Garbage Out by 
She! Silverstein 


Food Words 

Summarizing/Reporting 
Foods Indians Contributed 
Reading Poetry 
Memorizing/Reciting 
Mutrition/Measure Height 
Science in Cooking/Measures 
Making/Eating Indian Foods 
Tree Parts/Functions/Bruchac 
Making/lllustrating Poem Posters 
Being Thankful for Gifts 


American Indian Food by Jay 


Experiment with Plants by 


Food Words 


Miller 


Monica Byles 


Summarizing/Reporting 
Foods Indians Contributed 


Squanto’s Journey: The Story of 
the First Thanksgiving by 


Corn by Elaine Landau 


Reading Historical Fiction 
Responding/Retelling 


Joseph Bruchac 
The Corn Spirit in Keepers of 


From Seed to Plant by Gail 
Gibbons 


Seed to Plant/Measure 
Gses of Com 

Making/Eating Indian Foods 


Life by Caduto and Bruchac 


Corn - On and Off the Cob by 


Science in Cooking/Measures 


The Garden by Shel Silverstein 


Allan Fowler 


Making Com Husk Dolls 
Being Thankful for Gifts 


Nickommoh: A Thanksgiving 


Racoons and Ripe Corn by Jim 


Food Words 


Celebration by Jackie Koller 


Arnosky 


Summarizing/Reporting 
Foods Indians Contributed 


Corn Is Maize by Alik i 


All About Seeds by Susan 
Kuchalla 


Seed to Plant/Measure 
Making/Eating Indian Foods 
Science in Cooking/Measures 


The Thanks to Trees in Keepers 
of Life by Caduto and 


One Bean by Anne Rockwell 


Tree of Attunemant/Bruchac 
Mothers/Grandmothers Visit 


Bruchac 

1 Must Remember by Shel 
Silverstein 


Starting Science: Food by Kay 
Davis 


Round Dance/Bruchac 
Make Turkeys 
Being Thankful for Gifts 


The Popcorn Book by Tomie De 
Paola 

The Maple Thanksgiving by 


Food Golden Books 
Food by Jan Pienkowski 


Food Words 

Summarizing/Reporting 
Foods Indians Contributed 
Seed to Plant 


Joseph Bruchac 


Edward Plants a Garden by Dale 
Gottlieb 


Making/Eating Indian Foods 
Measuring/Timing 


The Indians Knew by Til lie Pine 


Goodnight Moon by M.W. Brown 
Melinda by Shel Silverstein 


Making Hand Turkeys 
Being Thankful for Gifts 



ERIC 



112 



103 ♦ 



About the Literature for Phase Five 

Indian people contributed many of the foods we eat today. Many Indian tribes were 
excellent farmers long ago before the white man came. 

Farming and Harvesting 

If It Weren’t for Farmers by Allan Fowler, Children’s Press, 1992. 

Hold a Plant Grows by Bobbie Kalman, Crabtree, 1996. 

Harvest Year by Cris Peterson, Boyds Mill Press, 1996. 

Jam: A True Story by Margaret Mahy, Little, Brown, 1985. Included in some basal readers. 
Indian Farming and Harvesting 

Four Seasons of Corn: A Winnebago Tradition We Are Still Here: Native Americans Today 
(Indian Author), First Avenue Editions, 1992. 

Heetanka’s Harvest by Jennifer Jones. 

Indian Maple Sugar and Thanksgiving 

Ininatig’s Gift of Sugar: Traditional Native Sugarmaking, We Are Still Here: Native Americans 
Today (Indian Author), First Avenue Editions, 1993. 

Manabozho and the Maple Trees in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1988. Anishinabe 
Circle of Thanks: Native American Poems of Thanksgiving by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), 
Bridgewater. 

These materials would be good to use during the Thanksgiving season to let children know that 
it’s more than the story of the Pilgrims and Indians. The fact that Indians contributed most of 
the foods we eat at Thanksgiving and their way of giving thanks should be stressed. Include 
local stories about food. 

About Nutrition 

The Food Pyramid by Joan Kalbacken, Children’s Press, 1998. 

Food and Your Health by Jillian Powell, Raintree/Steck Vaughn, 1997. 

Nutrition: What’s in the Food We Eat? by Dorothy H. Patent, Holiday House, 1992. 

This material should be summarized and reported. 

Poetry 

Hungry Mungry and Sarah Cynthia Stout Would Not Take the Garbage Out in Where the 
Sidewalk Ends by Shel Silverstein, Harper and Row, 1974. 

Also see page 146. 



About the Literature for Phase Four 

Indian people contributed many of the foods we eat today. Many Indian tribes were 
excellent farmers long ago before the white man came. 

Indian Legends About Food 

Sunflower’s Promise by Gloria Dominic, Troll, 1996. Zuni 

First Woman and the Strawberry by Gloria Dominic, Troll. Cherokee 

How Food Was Given by Jeanette Armstrong (Indian Author), Theytus Books. 

Food and Nutrition 

Good Enough to Eat: A Kid’s Guide by Lizzy Rockwell, Harpercollins, 1999. 

What We Eat by Sara Lynn and Diane James, World Book Inc., 1994. 

Sack Lunch by Bob Reese, Children’s Press, 1992. 

Mary Jo’s Grandmother by Janice (Jdry, Albert Whitman, 1970. Included in some basal 
readers. 

For Thanksgiving 

American Indian Food by Jay Miller (Indian Author), Children’s Press, New True Books. 
Squanto’s Journey: The Story of the First Thanksgiving by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), 
Harcourt, 2000. 

The Corn Spirit in Keepers of Life by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), 
Fulcrum Pub., 1998. Tuscarora 

These materials should be used in the Thanksgiving season. Students should learn that it’s 
about much more than the story about the Pilgrims and the Indians. The fact that Indians 
contributed most of the foods we eat at Thanksgiving and the way Indians regularly give thanks 
should be stressed. Include local stories about food. 



Plants - Corn 

Experiment with Plants by Monica Byles, Lemer Pub., 1993. 

Corn by Elaine Landau, 2000. 

From Seed to Plant by Gail Gibbons, Holiday House, 1991. 

Corn - On and Off the Cob by Allan Fowler, 1977. 

Information from these books should be summarized and reported. 



Poetry 

Me Stew and The Garden in Where the Sidewalk Ends by Shel Silverstein, Harper and Row, 
1974. 

Also see page 146. 




O 

ERIC 



114 



105 ♦ 



About the Literature for Phase Three 

Indian people contributed many of the foods we eat today. Many Indian tribes were 
excellent farmers long ago before the white man came. 

About Food - Eating 

What Food Is This? by Rosemarie Hausherr, Scholastic, 1994. 

Something Queer in the Cafeteria by Elizabeth Levy. 

Indian Stories Including Food 

Waynabozho and the Wild Rice Keepers in Keepers of Life by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1998. Ojibwa 
Iktomi and the Berries by Paul Goble, Orchard Books, 1992. Lakota 
Maple Moon by Connie B. Crook, Stoddart Kids, 1998. Indian 
These stories can be retold. 

For Thanksgiving 

Nickommoh: A Thanksgiving Celebration by Jackie Koller, Atheneum, 1999. Naragansett 
Corn is Maize: The Gift of the Indians by Aliki, Thomas Crowell, 1976. 

The Thanks to Trees in Keepers of Life by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian 
Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1998. Seneca 

These materials should be used in the Thanksgiving season. The students should know that it 
is more than the story of the Pilgrims and the Indians. The fact that Indians contributed most of 
the foods we eat at Thanksgiving and the way Indian people regularly give thanks should be 
stressed. Include local stories about food. 

Seeds - Gardens - Food 

Raccoons and Ripe Corn by Jim Arnosky, Mulberry Books, 1991. 

All About Seeds by Susan Kuchalla, Troll, 1989. 

One Bean by Anne Rockwell, Walker & Co., 1999. 

Starting Science: Food by Kay Davis, Steck Vaughn, 1991. 

Information from these books should be summarized and reported. 

Poetry 

I Scream, You Scream: A Feast of Food Rhymes by Lillian Morrison, August House, 1998. 
Recipe for a Hippopotamus Sandwich and I Must Remember in Where the Sidewalk Ends by 
Shel Silverstein, Harper and Row, 1974. 

Aslo see page 146. 



About the Literature for Phase Two 

Indian people contributed many of the foods we eat today. Many Indian tribes were 
excellent farmers long ago before the white man came. 

Food and Eating 

My Whole Food ABC’s by David Richard, Vital Health Pub., 1997. 

Lunch by Denise Fleming, Henry Holt, 1992. 

Who Ate It? by Taro Gomi, Milbrook Press, 1991 . 

Indian Stories Including Food 

The First Strawberries by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Dial Books. Cherokee 

The Maple Thanksgiving by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Celebration Press Pub., Iroquois 

The Indians Knew by Tillie Pine, McGraw Hill, 1957. 

These materials should be used in the Thanksgiving season. Students should know that it is 
more than the story of the Pilgrims and the Indians. The fact that Indian people contributed 
most of the foods we eat on Thanksgiving and the way Indian people regularly give thanks 
should be stressed. Include local stories about food. 

Food - Gardens 

Food Golden Books, 1995. 

Food by Jan Pienkowski, 1991. 

Edward Plants a Garden by Dale Gottlieb, Envision Pub., 1998. 

Information from these books should be summarized and reported. 

Poetry 

With His Mouth Full of Food and Melinda Mae in Where the Sidewalk Ends by Shel Silverstein, 
Harper and Row, 1974. 

Also see page 146. 




116 

erJc 



107 ♦ 



Further Resources for Food Unit 

These materials can be used to substitute for books in the suggested unit outline or 
for additional reading/other activities for students. 

Tomatoes, Potatoes, Corn and Beans by Sylvia S. Johnson. Indian 

Food: A Very First Picture Book by Nicola Taxworth. 

The Hungry Little Boy by Joan W. Bios, Simon & Schuster, 1998. 

Itsu Selu: Cherokee Harvest Festival by Daniel Pennington, Charlesbridge Pub., 1994. 

The People of Maize in Keepers of Life by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian 
Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1998. Mayan 

Maple Sugar, Chippewa song in The Sky Clears by A. Grove Day, University of Nebraska Press, 
1951. Also in American Indian Poetry by George W. Cronyn, 1962. 

When the Corn is Red, Tuscarora legend retold by Pekay Shor, Abingdon Press, 1973. 

In My Mother’s House by Ann Nolan Clark, Viking, 1969. Pueblo 

Circle of Seasons by Ann Nolan Clark, Giroux, 1970. Pueblo 

Along Sandy Trails by Ann Nolan Clark, Viking, 1969. Tohono O’odham 

Tohono O’odham, Lives of the Desert People, Tribal Education Department, 1984. 

A Coloring Book of Hidatsa Indian Stories compiled by Roberta Krim and Thomas Thompson, 
Minnesota Historical Society, 1988. 

Buffalo Bird Woman’s Garden as told to Gilbert Wilson. Hidatsa 

Walking His Talk in Signs of Tradition, Master’s Project, University of Kansas, 1994. Mandan 

Mon Daw Min - the Origin of Indian Corn in Ojibway Indian Legends by Cheryl Mills King, 

North Michigan University Press, 1972. 

White Corn Sister by Peter Blue Cloud (Indian Author), Strawberry Press, Bowling Green 
Station, NY. Indian 

Our Mother Corn, Daybreak Star Press, 1981. Hopi, Pawnee, Seneca 
Indian Corn and Other Gifts by Sigmund A. Levine, Dodd, 1974. 

Indian Harvests by William C. Grimm, McGraw, 1973. 

Indian Harvest by Jannette May Lucas, Lippincott, 1945. 

Corn for the Palace by Margaret Crary and Carroll Voss, Prentice-Hall. Lakota 
Food the Indians Gave Us by Wilma and Vernon Hays, David McKay. 




♦ 108 



11 7 



Why Com is Golden by V. Blackmore, Little Brown, 1984. Indian 

People of Corn: A Mayan Story by M.J. Gerson, Little Brown, 1995. Mayan 

The Coming of Corn in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian 
Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1988. Cherokee 

In the Garden by C. M. Mamchur, Pemmican Pub., 1993. Indian 

Full Worm Moon by Margo Lemieux. Algonquin 

American Indian Food and Lore by C. Niethammer, Collier, 1974. 

Native Plant Stories by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 
1995. Same stories as in Keepers of Life. 

Native American Gardening by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author). 

All on Earth, Musical Companion to Keepers Books by Michael Caduto. Indian 

Story Cards of North American Indian Tales by Susan J. Clark. Includes plants and animals in 
Keepers Books. 

Little Boy Eats Too Much by Montana Council for Indian Education 

The Big Tree and the Little Tree ed. by Jean E. Speare, Pemmican Pub., 1986. Canada 

Why Saguaros Grow on the South Side of Hills in And It Is Still That Way by Byrd Baylor, Trails 
West Pub., 1976. Southwest 

Indian Cookin’ by Herb Walker. 

Native American Cookbook by Edna Henry (Indian Author), Messner, 1983. 

Southwest Indian Cookbook: Navajo and Pueblo Images, Quotes and Recipes by Marcia 
Keegan. 

Thanksgiving Day: Greetings to the Natural World by John Stokes. Iroquois 

CHECK YCXIR LIBRARY OR BOOKSTORES FOR OTHER BOOKS RELATING TO THE 
TOPIC. 

Books in italics are especially suitable for Phase One - for preschool children. 





118 

109 ♦ 



FOOD WORDS 



BEGINNING SOUNDS 



salt 


popcorn 


carrot 


sauce 


potatoes 


cantaloupe 


salad 


pot 


cake 


seed 


pop 


candy 


seedling 


peas 


cabbage 


seasoning 


pepper 


com 


soda 


peanuts 


cook 


soil 


pemmican 


combread 


soup 


pancakes 


com balls 


sour 


pinon 


cookies 


sunlight 


pie 


cold 


supper 


pineapple 


coffee 


skillet 


pumpkin 


cranberries 


squash 


plate 


crop 


slice 


plums 




smoke 


plant 




snack 






spoon 


LONG VOWEL SOUNDS 


spice 


slice 


weeds 


spicy 


spice 


seed 


spinach 


ice cream 


beef 


spaghetti 


pie 


beets 


stuffing 


pineapple 


cheese 


stem 


knifecake 


green beans 


stalk 


plate 


tea 


stew 


cake 


seasoning 


stir 


bake 


meal 


sweet 


taste 


meat 


COMPOUND 


grapes 


peanuts 


WORDS 


hoe 


feast 


watermelon 


chokecherry 




blueberry 


OTHER WORDS 


chokecherry 


celery 


onions 


scarecrow 


vegetable 


etiquette 


sunlight 


dry 


je»y 


pancakes 


oranges 


vitamins 


oatmeal 







bananas 


fish 


meat 


bake 


fat 


meal 


beef 


fair 


milk 


beans 


farmer 


minerals 


beets 


feast 


maple sugar 


berries 


fork 


macaroni 


buns 


food 


manners 


bowl 


furrow 


mutton 


boil 


flour 




botanist 


fruit 


tea 


biscuits 


frybread 


taco 


bland 


freeze 


taste 


breakfast 




tomatoes 


bread 




turnips 



SHORT VOWEL SOUNDS 


ANTONYMS 


apples 


lettuce 


hot-cold 


snack 


chef 


sweet-sour 


pancakes 


stem 


spicy-bland 


plant 


dressing 


good-bad 


bland 


pepper 




macaroni 


pemmican 


SYNONYMS 


manners 


edible 


delicious 


jam 


venison 


scrumptious 


radish 


lunch 


good 


candy 


sunlight 


tasty 


cantaloupe 


supper 




dish 


pumpkin 




dinner 


nuts 




nutrition 


gravy 


sugar 


hominy 


water 


chili 


irrigate 


olives 


chocolate 


garden 


apples 


cheese 



Word walls should be maintained. Instructors should ensure that students know the 
meanings of all of these words in this context and extend vocabulary by noting how 
they may mean other things in other contexts or they may have homophones. 
Experiences, pictures and student illustrations should be used to explain and process 
word meanings. Words that rhyme with these words can be examined to see varying 
spellings for sounds. Other words can be added. Teach the meanings of sayings such 
as “being in a jam,” “crying over spilled milk,” “you take the cake,” etc. 



♦ 110 



119 



Science Standards and Benchmarks for Food Unit 

Standard - Understands that scientific inquiry works in particular wayss 
Benchmarks 

Understands that learning can come from careful observations and simple experiments 
Understands the importance of careful description in science and how it allows 
comparison 

Standard - Understands the main individual, social, ethical and institutional aspects 

of science 

Benchmarks 

Understands that learning can come from careful observation of plants and animals, 
but they should not be mistreated 

Standard - Understands the processes that shape the surface of the earth and the 

relation of the surface of the earth to the living environment 

Benchmarks 

Knows that change is something that happens to many things around us 
Knows that living things respond to the conditions around them 

Standard - Knows about the diversity and unity that characterize life 
Benchmarks 

Knows that some animals and plants are similar in appearance and behavior, and 
others are very different from one another 

Knows that stories sometimes give plants and animals attributes they really do not 
have 

Standard - Knows the general structure and functions of cells in organisms 
Benchmarks 

Knows that most plants and animals need air, food and water 
Knows that plants and animals are composed of different parts, serving different 
purposes and contributing to the well-being of the whole organism 
Understands that magnifiers can let us see things that we don’t expect 

Standard - Understands how species depend on one another and on the environment 

for survival 

Benchmarks 

Knows that plant and animal species depend on each other to maintain life, e.g., many 
plants depend on animals for carrying their pollen to other plants or dispersing their 
seeds 

Standard - Understands the cycling of matter and flow of energy through the living 

environment 

Benchmarks 

Knows that plants and animals both need water, animals need food to eat and plants 
need light 




120 



H14- 



Standard - Understands the basic concepts of the evolution of species 
Benchmarks 

Knows that plants and animals have features that help them live in different 
environments 

Knows that cultivated plants result from selective breeding for particular traits 

Standard - Understands the conditions necessary for maintaining good physical 

health and why they are necessary 

Benchmarks 

Knows that eating the “right kinds” of food help people to stay healthy 

Standard - Understands how germ theory differs from earlier notions about what 
causes illness and how germs were discovered and linked to disease 
Benchmarks 

Knows that cleanliness and care in the handling of food help people to keep from 
getting sick 

Standard - Knows about patterns of change and constancy 
Benchmarks 

Knows that some changes can be detected by taking measurements 

Knows that sometimes making up an experiment helps us to learn more about how 

something happens 

Math Standards and Benchmarks for Food Unit 

Standard - Effectively uses a variety of strategies within the problem solving process 
Benchmarks 

Brainstorms possible things to do 

Draws pictures to represent problems 

Represents problem situations using physical objects 

Clarifies problems using discussions with teacher or knowledgeable others 

Standard — Understands and applies basic and advanced properties of numbers 
Benchmarks 

Has a general understanding of the concept of number 
Uses counting to exemplify numbers 

Standard - Uses basic and advanced procedures while performing computation 
Benchmarks 

Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides whole numbers with accuracy 
Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides decimals with accuracy 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced methods of measurement 
Benchmarks 

Understands the basic characteristics of weight and how it is measured 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced concepts of data analysis 

and distributions 

Benchmarks 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of data 



O 4 112 

ERIC 



121 



Language Arts Standards and Benchmarks for Food Unit 

Standard - Gathers information effectively through reading, listening and viewing 
Benchmarks 

Provides an accurate retelling of the basic plot of simple stories the student has read, 
heard or viewed 

Provides an accurate retelling of the main idea of simple expository information the 
student has read, heard or viewed 

Understands that reading, viewing and listening are ways of gaining information about 
the world 

Determines meaning of simple words from context 

Creates mental representations for concrete information read, heard or viewed 

Standard - Reads and responds to literature 
Benchmarks 

Understands that stories have beginning, middle and ending episodes 
Understands the genre of legends and fables 

Standard - Communicates ideas and information in writing 
Benchmarks 

Understands basic connections between spelling patterns and speech sounds 
Understands basic phonological patterns in English 
Expresses ideas in simple expository forms 
Composes simple stories that express cohesive ideas 

Standard - Understands and applies basic principles of language use 
Benchmarks 

Recognizes characteristic sounds and rhythms of language 
Makes valid observations about the use of words 

Standards and Benchmarks from The Systematic Identification and Articulation of 
Content Standards and Benchmarks, Mid-continent Regional Educational 
Laboratory, 1994. 



American Indian Content Standards for Food Unit 

Science 
Life Science - 

Indian students should develop an understanding of plant and animal life cycles as exemplified 
in traditional American Indian concepts such as the Medicine Wheel. 

Earth and Space Science - 

Indian students should develop an understanding of properties of earth, air, water and fire and 
how they served as a basis for traditional American Indian production of food. 

Science in Personal and Social Perspectives - 

Indian students should develop an understanding of elements of nutrition and how they were 
applied in the diets of American Indians prior to the arrival of the Europeans. 

History and Nature of Science - 

Indian students should develop an understanding of elements of botany and ecology which 
have benefited from the contributions of American Indians. 

Language and Literacy 
Indian students should be able to - 

Listen for meaning and gain information from spoken English and a Native language. 

Listen to Indian stories told in the oral tradition, comprehend their teachings and be able to 
retell them. 

Speak coherently, conveying ideas in both English and a Native language. 

Read fluently and independently, a variety of materials including those with American Indian 
themes. 

Mathematics 

Mathematics as Problem Solving - 

Indian students should formulate problems from everyday and mathematical situations within 
their home and tribal/community worlds. 

Mathematics as Communication - 

Indian students should relate their everyday language to mathematical language and symbols 
including expressing mathematical concepts in their Native languages. 

Estimation - 

Indian students should explore estimation strategies through activities derived from their 
cultural worlds such as estimating the number of sheep/horses that fit in a pen/corral. 

Fractions and Decimals - 

Indian students should apply fractions and decimals by applying them to real world situations 
using Native cultural experiences. 

- ORBIS Associates for Office of Indian Education Programs, BIA, 1996 



Q ♦ 114 

EKIC 



123 



Example Activities Developed by Teachers of 
American Indian Students 



Workshop on Culturally-Based Math and Science 
Curriculum Development 

Haskell Indian nations University 
1992 & 1993 




Ideas included should be adapted for appropriateness. 



O 

ERIC 



124 



115 ♦ 



My Roots of Learning 

Like the birth of a tree, I journey my world 
as a young seedling ever so curious. I am at one 
with the tree, growing in my own environment. 

I learn through mistakes, taking risks and questioning 
the wonders of life. As I struggle to overcome 
obstacles and barriers, I develop stronger roots 
to stand firm and branch out to learn about my world — 
beyond me and beneath me.. ..all around me. 

I will hold fast to my beliefs and values 
like the strength of a trunk to 
become a unique individual. 

I can live in my world to face the ever changing 
world successfully wherever I journey. 

This can only happen if I have a special teacher 
to guide me ever so patiently in wisdom 
and knowledge of living harmoniously 
and respectfully with Mother Earth. 

You see, I am special, just like you. 




o 

ERIC 



♦ 116 



1 9K 
x 



SCIENCE 

Environmental Harmony 



Cultural Objective 

Students will understand that historically, 
tribal life styles were dependent upon plants 
for their personal and environmental 
necessities. 

Math Objective 

Students will learn about plant and animal 
growth and identify its relationship to the five 
senses. 




Science Objective 

Students will learn about plant and animal growth and identify its relationship to the 
five senses. 

Teacher Background Information 

Native American people have always tried to live in harmony with nature. This implies 
that they truly understand nature. Plants have helped them relate the environment to 
their daily needs. Many of the observations of nature and plants were based on the use 
of the five senses: hearing, taste, smell, sight and touch. 

Native people depend on nature to survive. They used plants as a daily supply of food, 
medicines, clothing and transportation. Identification of plants and their basic 
functional parts served as a link to harmony in nature. 

Native Americans ate many foods unknown to the first European settlers. Examples of 
these foods are corn, potatoes, pumpkins, squash, string beans, peppers, sunflowers, 
maple syrup, tomatoes, strawberries and wild rice. Perhaps one of the greatest 
contributions of the Native Americans is the introduction of new foods into an otherwise 
bland diet. More than half the food consumed today comes from Native American 
sources. 



O 

tKJC 



126 



117 ♦ 



Student Learning Activities 

1. Take students on a field trip to an area with various types of native plants. 
Discuss these plants and use the five senses to create a “Sense Chart of Plants.” 

2. Give each student a seed to plant in a milk carton. Some interesting seeds 
include grass, beans, peas, corn and other plants that grow above the surface of 
the ground. Make charts or draw pictures of different stages of development. 

3. Ask parents or guardians to prepare a tray of various native foods. Students can 
take turns being blindfolded; then, by feeling and guessing, they can identify the 
various foods. 

4. Take a field trip to a nature area or a grocery store. Have the students select two 
foods and describe them in terms of the five senses. Tape record or video these 
statements. Show them to the class on its return. 

5. Invite other classes to view students’ drawings of foods and plants, and have 
them take part in a tasting contest. 

Evaluation 

Set up a bulletin board or display table of foods that can be described in terms of the 

five senses. Discuss these and categorize them into the four food groups. Invite an 

elder of the tribe to the class to discuss the traditional significance of the foods. 

Resources 

American Indian Engineering Society. Hands On/Minds On. Boulder, Colorado, 1979. 

American Indian Institute. Native American Cultural Lessons Preschool Through High 

School. Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma, 1987. 

Madison County Title V Program. Indian Education Curriculum Guide. Madison County 

Technical Center, Huntsville, Alabama, 1989. 

Westley, Joan. Weeds and Seeds. Sunnydale, California: Creative Publications, 1979. 

Developed By 

John Wray 



Q ♦ 118 

ERIC 



12 7 



MATH AND SCIENCE 
Seeds 

Cultural Objective 

Students will demonstrate a knowledge of how seeds were used in their native culture. 

Math Objective 

Students will: 

relate multiplication to skip counting 

find the area of rectangles by using simple grids 

make simple picture, bar and line graphs 

Science Objective 

Students will: 

use observation skills 
use classification techniques 
communicate by using scientific vocabulary 
analyze data 

analyze ways animals and plants are used by people 



Teacher Background Information 

Seeds are an important part of the Native American culture. They are used as a major 
source of food, whether they ground seeds into flour, ate them whole or used them to 
start new plants. Seeds have been cultivated by humans for thousands of years. 

They are spread through nature in a number of ways. Some are spread by wind, water, 
animals or birds as well as by the plant themselves through plant adaptations. Wind- 
spread seeds include dandelion, milkweed and tree seeds. Animals and birds spread 
seeds in their body coverings as well as through their droppings. Some plants are 
designed to spread their seeds by expelling them from their pods. 

There are two types of seeds, classified by the number of parts that make up the food 
source. One type of seed, called cotyledon, has a two-parts food source. Beans are an 
example of this type of seed. The other type of seed has a one-part food source. An 
example of such a seed is a corn kernel or squash seed. Refer to illustration below. 

Seeds initially grow and sprout roots and a stem by a process called germination. For 
seeds to germinate, they must have moisture and heat. 



Seed Coat 



Embryo 




fl " Leaves 

( /^Embryo 
V (New Plant) 

Root 



(Embryo’s food) 



Cotyledon 




Cotyledon 



Cotyledon 




Bean Seed 



♦ 120 



12 9 



Student Learning Activities 

1. Look at a large dry lima bean. Remove the seed coat and split the seed. 

Describe the different parts of the seed. 

2. Put three dry lima bean seeds between two damp paper towels. Seal these seeds 
in a plastic bag. Place in a warm dark place overnight. Check the seeds the next 
day and discuss the ways in which these seeds look different than before. 
Experiment with other conditions for germinating seeds. Record the findings. 

3. Give students a container of different kinds of seeds. After dividing the students 
into small groups, have them sort and classify the seeds. Ask each student to 
move to another group and decide what characteristics were used to group the 
seeds. 

4. Provide a variety of seeds for the students to use in making a seed collage. Have 
the students arrange the seeds in a pleasing design on a piece of heavy paper 
covered with white glue. Make sure the glue is fairly thick to hold the seeds. 

5. Instruct students to count the number of seeds in a grouping by a multiple 
number (3, 9, 12, 15...). 

6. Show the students how to arrange seeds in row and column configurations and 
express in math terms: 

3 seeds x 4 seeds = 12 seeds or 6 seeds x 6 seeds = 36 seeds. 

7. Have students use a picture or bar graph to record how many different kinds and 
types of seeds they have in a small container of mixed seeds. 

8. Germinate a number of seeds of the same or different kind and graph the results 
of this experiment. Note how many of each kind germinated and which kind 
germinated the best. Let the seeds grow for a few days and measure the growth 
of the root and/or the stem and leaves. 

9. Invite an experienced community member to demonstrate the grinding of grain 
and to explain how and why grain is used in Native American ceremonies. 




130 



121 ♦ 



Evaluation 



1. Give each student a few seeds and ask each to demonstrate the process of 
germinating the seeds. 

2. Have the students label the parts of the seed. 

Resources 

Ditter, Howard J. Modern Plant Biology. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 
1972. 

Developed By 

Nancy L. Roehi 




♦ 122 

ERIC 



131 



SCIENCE 



Plants Used As Food 



Cultural Objective 



Students will use the experience of planting and raising seeds to develop their 
understanding of the importance of nature in their lives. 



Science Objectives 

Students will: 

grow seeds that produce a native food source 
learn the characteristics of seeds and plants. 

Teacher Background Information 

Native Americans use different plants depending upon the 
area in which they live. The Cherokee use ramp, wild greens, 
wild onions, cabbage, and roots for tea. In Iowa, the 
Mesquoki use corn and squash. Northern Indians use rice 
and squash. The Navajo use corn, squash, potatoes, beans, 
berries, wild onions, carrots, garlic, acorns, pinon nuts and 
yucca fruit. Sioux use wild berries and turnips. Plants used by 
the Tohono O’odham are corn, palo verde, pumpkin, fruit of 
the yucca, beans of mesquite, saguaro fruit, cholla buds, 
squash, beans and prickly pear cactus. 






123 ♦ 



Cactus Gathering, by Ruth Underhill, is a story which can be used to set the stage 
for this lesson. 

Cactus Gathering 

As the girls come back from getting water, Flowering Rainbow says, “We saw a ripe 
fruit on the giant cactus.” “It’s too soon,” says mother. “Why, only the other day I saw 
flowers, not fruit.” “Come and see!,” say the girls, laughing and pulling her. “Come and 
see the old cactus right near the house.” 

The giant cactus is a plant that grows nowhere e|se but in the desert country of the 
Southwest, in California and in Mexico. Mexicans, in their language, call it saguaro 
(pronounced sa-war-o) and that is the name people use most often. There is no other 
plant in the world that looks like it. The plant is twice as tall as a man and much 
thicker. “See, my father’s mother!,” says Flowering Rainbow, as Grandmother follows 
the girls to the old saguaro. “See! Only one flower left. But there are fruits, nine, ten, 
one past ten, two past ten, and one is ripe.” She points to the top of the plant. 

This old saguaro has no branches, but it is like a tall green pole. The fruits are all at the 
top like a flock of birds perching close together. There is just one white flower left. It is 
as big as the flower called a lily by the white people. The others have turned into little 
fruits, and one is as large as an egg. A ripe one! There is the prickly pear, with leaves 
like flat, green plates covered with thorns. Its fruits are red and juicy and the girls run 
about looking for ripe ones. When they find them, they brush the thorns off with a 
stone, crack open the fruit, and suck out the dark red inside. There are almost more 
seeds inside than fruit and, with every bite, they get a mouthful of seeds as big as 
beans which they spit out. But they have had nothing sweet since last year and they eat 
all they can. “Don’t make a mistake,” says Grandmother, “and get the kind that gives 
you chills and fever.” The girls laugh. “We know which is good to eat.” Among the 
prickly pear plants is cholla (pronounced choya), which looks like a pretty bush 
covered with little white flowers until you get near enough to see that the flowers are 
really thorns. Then you must not go nearer, because the thorns almost jump out to 
catch hold of anything that goes by. White people call it the jumping cholla. 

There is the kind of cactus that white people call a barrel. It is like a thick little post, 
stuck in the ground, with deep ridges going down its sides and big black thorns 
growing along the ridges. Grandfather picks up a large stone and mashes the top of the 
cactus. Then he takes a stick and lifts off the green outside covering with thorns. 

Inside, the cactus looks white and wet. 

Grandfather takes the gourds he carries for a drinking cup and pushes it down inside. 
Soon it is filled with whitish water. “We don’t have any use of water while this is here,” 
he says. They all drink and, though the water tastes sour, there is plenty of it. 
“Remember,” says Grandfather, “nobody has to die of thirst where the barrel cactus 



♦ 124 



133 



grows.” Each person has a pole, as long as the tallest saguaro, for they have to hook 
the fruit down from the very top. Of course, there is nothing in the desert long enough 
to make such poles, so they use two sticks tied together. The sticks are the thin, 
smooth ribs of the saguaro itself, tied with strips of deerskin. That makes a long, thin 
pole. Near one end, it has a very short stick tied almost crosswise. This acts as a hook 
which catches the stems of the fruit and pulls them loose. Further down, there is 
another hook to use for the lower fruits. The little sticks are tied on at an angle, so that 
you can either push at the fruit from underneath or pull from above. 

Mother takes a huge basket to fill with fruit after it is picked. The basket is shaped like 
a bowl and it is as big as the circle of her arms when she holds them out. The basket is 
made of willow stems, with a black pattern of Devil’s Claw. She cannot set the basket 
on the ground for the ants would get the fruit. She sets it in the branches of a bush. 

Then each woman takes a smaller basket to pick into. Flower Tips is already very good 
at holding the pole, so her stick quickly hooks one of the big, egg-shaped fruits, and 
the fruit comes tumbling down. If it is very ripe, it breaks when it falls and shows its 
inside, like a dark, red jelly full of seeds. The cactus fruit has a hard shell covered with 
thorns. If it does not break, the women have to cut it open. The have no knives and, 
generally, they use fingernails for thorns will scratch their hands. They pull off the stem 
of the fruit itself, which has a hard edge where it joins the shell, and use it for cutting. 

It takes only a few moments for Mother to get all the ripe fruits from one saguaro, 
leaving the green ones to be picked later. Soon she fills her small basket, empties it 
into the big one and goes further away. The fruit ripens so fast that every day, there is 
more on the same plants. White people cook the fruit and close it up in glass jars. 
Sometimes they dry it. But the cactus fruit they always cook, and they make more 
things out if it than anyone could guess. Mother has a special 
cooking pot for the saguaro fruit. After cooking, the dark, 
red juice is strained off with a strainer made by 
Grandmother. It is simply a basket, woven loosely so 
the juice will go through and the seeds remain. 

Juice is only the beginning. Some of the dark fruit 
and the seeds are left and that is cooked again until 
it makes jam. Everybody loves this jam because it is 
sweet. As Mother gets enough, she puts it into clay 
jars and fastens the top with a broken piece of pottery 
stuck on with mud. She will use it as gifts for relatives 
when she goes visiting, and Father will take some far 
over the mountain to trade for other goods. 




O 

ERIC 



134 



125 ♦ 



How do containers make plants more interesting? 

Choose an attractive container. Fill it with potting soil. Plant a seed just below the 
surface of the soil. Keep the soil moist and watch your plant grow. If you choose 
a grapefruit or orange rind for a container, you might want to try a matching 
grapefruit or orange seed. Seeds will sprout in almost any container that will hold 
potting soil. Plants in small containers, such as egg cartons, will need to be 
transplanted without disturbing the root system. This can be an opportunity to 
emphasize creativity and develop an appreciation for the beauty of plants. 

How can we watch seeds grow? 

Soak bean seeds for 24 hours. Put a damp sponge around the inside surface of 
each tumbler. Put eight seeds between the sponge and the side of the tumbler. 
The seeds should be placed 1 inch apart. Check the sponge every day. Be sure it 
is moist. Put one tumbler in a dark location. Place your other tumbler in the light 
of the classroom. Observe your seeds daily. After several days, the beans will 
begin to sprout. The seeds kept in the dark place should sprout at about the 
same time as the ones in the light. Remind the children that many plants begin 
their lives in the dark, below the surface of the soil. As the seeds continue to 
sprout, turn one tumbler on its side. The sprouts will change their direction of 
growth and grow downward. 

Discuss the plants used by the Sioux: corn, red plums, numerous types of 
berries and nuts, and prairie turnips. 

Make Wasna (a special treat for Sioux children) 

1 lb. dried chokecherries (other cherries with do) 

1 cup shortening or tallow 
1 cup sugar 

Grind up the choke cherries, add shortening, then add sugar. Form into balls the 
size of golf balls. 

Make Wojape (a very good dip for fry bread) 

1 small can of berries (unsweetened) 

2 cans water 

V 2 cup of flour or corn starch 
V 4 cup of sugar to sweeten 

Remind students that foods come from plants. Point out that parts of many 
plants can be eaten. Explain that some parts of a plant may be safe to eat while 



other parts of the same plant may be harmful. Tell children not to eat any part of 
a plant without first getting permission from the adult who takes care of them. 
Display a carrot. What part of a plant do you think this carrot is? Help them to 
understand that is a root. Exhibit celery, broccoli, lettuce, peas and tomatoes. 
Help students to understand that celery is the stem of a plant; lettuce is the 
leaves of a plant; broccoli is made up of the flowers of a plant; peas are seeds 
and tomatoes are the fruit of a plant. Afterwards, enlist children to help wash 
foods and prepare a snack. 

7. Bring to class a variety of seeds, such as watermelon, orange, apple, peanut, 
bean, peach, sunflower, corn and pear. Have children identify each seed and 
consider the color, shape and size. Students will learn that the seeds of different 
plants look different from another, but they are alike in that each will grow into a 
plant of its own kind. 

8. Invite an elder to go on a field trip to help identify a variety of plants in the local 
environment. 

Wild Celery 

A small plant that grows almost flat on the ground. For the best taste, it should be picked early 
in the spring before the flowers bloom. It is dried and used in soup and stew. Latin: cymopterus 
glomeratus. Navajo: hazo’oleeh. 




O 

ERIC 



136 



127 ♦ 



Evaluation 



1 . Play a game of matching the plant with the food. 

2. Draw pictures of the plants and name them. 

Resources 

Casteller, Edward F. and Underhill, Ruth. The Ethnobiology of the Papago Indians. 
Albuquerque, New Mexico: University of New Mexico, 1978. 

Underhill, Ruth. People of the Crimson Evening. United States Indian Service, pp. 40- 
49. No place or date given. 

Nurge, Ethel. The Modern Sioux. Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press, 
1970. 

Dennis, Judy, et al. Science. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1985, pp. 64-73. 

Developed By 

Georgie Riley 
Mary Stonehouse 



Carol Martin 







SCIENCE 

How Does Water Help Mother Nature? 

Teacher Background Information 

Each tribe will have their way of using water for cleansing. For example, among the 

Navajo of the Southwest, hair is first washed with water and then corn meal is used to 

dry with. A Native resource person could be brought in to talk to the children about 

how water is used for cleansing among Native people. 

Read to the students the story, “Season Suite” in Keepers of the Earth. 

Student Learning Activities 

1 . Share with the students a dried celery stick and a fresh celery stick and ask 
them what happened to the dried celery stick? Which celery stick will weigh 
more and why? If a scale is not available, have the children hold the dry celery in 
one hand and the fresh celery in the other hand. Does celery contain water and 
where is it kept? 

To show how water moves up from the ground into plants, let the children 
examine celery which has been standing in the red solution. The red lines in the 
stalk show where water travels in plants. These are the plants “pipelines.” Water 
in the plant pipelines carries dissolved food from the soil throughout the plant. 

Let the children examine plant or weed roots. Help them imagine how the “pipe 
system” begins in the tiniest root hairs. These root hairs take in dissolved plant 
foods and carries them throughout the plant where growing cells need feeding. 

To help children understand their own “pipe system”, have them look at the 
veins in their wrists. Ask: can you name the other parts of your body’s pipe 
system? (Veins, arteries, tissue, organs, etc.) How does your pipe system get its 
water? (From the food you eat.) What would happen if you stopped eating and 
drinking? (You would die.) You are telling them that we need water to live. 

2. Take 2 plants from your area and plant in paper cups. Water one plant and not 
the other. Make a chart showing the growth of the plant watered and the lack of 
growth in the plant not watered. 



er|c 



133 



129 ♦ 



Evaluation 



Have the children dictate or write individual stories entitled “A Day Without Water.” 
Read the stories to the class and consider assembling the stories into a journal for the 
class library. 

Materials 

Celery sticks - both dried and fresh 
Red solution (water and red food coloring) 

Small food scale 
Writing paper 
2 plants 
Soil 

2 paper cups 

Resources 

Caduto, Michael J. and Bruchac, Joseph. Keepers of the Earth. Fulcrum Inc., Golden, 
Colorado, 1989. 

Project Wet Montana. Water is Our Best Friend. Bozeman, Montana: Montana State 
University, 1993, pp. 5-6. 




♦ 130 

EKIC 



139 



SCIENCE 



Mushroom in the Rain 

Teacher Background Information 

Tell the students you will read a story of how water affects animal and plant life. It is 
vividly illustrated in the story. Read the story “Mushroom in the Rain” by Mirra 
Ginsburg. Discuss how water affects animal and plant life. What happens to the 
animals and plants when it rains? 

Student Learning Activities 

1. To illustrate what happens to mushrooms when it rains, use a dry sponge. Pour 
water on it slowly. The sponge will swell up with water. 

2. Retell the story to someone using a felt piece. 

3. Marne the animals in the story and find out what happens to them when it rains. 

4. Choose an animal or a plant. Draw the animal or plant. Then write what will 
happen to you when it rains. 

5. Rewrite the story using different animals and plants. 

Another reading suggestion is All Wet! All Wet! by James Skofield. 



140 



131 ♦ 



Evaluation for Unit (Performance Based Assessments) 

Each student will create, design and write a book based on the information learned in 
the preceding lesson for our water unit. 

Each student will have a portfolio maintained and updated throughout the water unit 
including samples of their writing, illustrations, pictures of models and/or experiments 
and teacher narratives. 

Resources for Unit 

Berger, Melvin. The New Water Book. Thomas Y. Crowell Corp.: Mew York. 1973 

Boyle, Marie E. Water: Its Form and Motion. Beacon Press: Boston, Massachusetts. 
1961. 

Caduto, Michael and Bruchac, Joseph. Keepers of the Earth. Fulcrum, Inc.: Golden, 
Colorado. 1988. 

Clobe, Rene. A Child’s First Book of Poems. Golden Press: Mew York. 1981. 




♦ 132 

ERIC 



141 




SCIENCE AND MATH 



Water and Farming 

Teacher Background Information 

Water, plants and animals are interdependent because they are part of a circle of life. 
Respect for Mother Earth and above all respect for the great spiritual force that stands 
behind all and makes life possible and worthwhile is an important value for many 
Native American people. Pueblo Indian religion strongly focused on fertility, moisture 
and the harmony of all life forms in Nature. 

Water is our most precious resource. Successful management of land is related to good 
water management. Water is especially important to farmers and ranchers. The 
irrigation of crops, for livestock to graze in green pastures is a very important part of 
our food chain. 

Farming is also one of the most important occupations in the world. People cannot live 
without food, and nearly all the food they eat comes from crops and livestock raised on 
farms. Crops raised to supply food for the world’s population are called food crops. 
Many of these are shipped to markets as soon as possible after harvesting. Crops 
raised for livestock are called feed crops. 

There are also special crop growing methods. One method is the organic method in 
which crops are grown without the use of chemicals. This method of farming protects 
the soil and water. Another method used is hydroponic farming. This method is the 
science of growing crops in water. Chemicals are added to provide nutrients that 
normally come from soil and could harm water. 

When rainfall is scarce, farmers must irrigate their crops. Farmers living in dry regions 
must build canals, pipelines and tunnels to carry water from rivers and reservoirs. 
Irrigation systems contribute to raise food production and thus improve health quality 
of life and social conditions. 

The Pueblo Indians of the Southwest are skilled desert farmers. At one time they raised 
crops with the aid of an elaborate system of water control and storage of water in mesa 
top reservoirs from which it was diverted by conduits into their fields. 

Native Americans believe the earth is the mother of all creatures, and that the land 
belongs equally to all those who live upon it. America’s future depends on how well we 
take care of it. Whatever affects the water affects all living creatures on Earth. 




142 



133 ♦ 



Student Learning Activities 

1 . Look at a map of your state and the map of the United States. 

a. Find the areas used for farming. 

b. Are the farming areas near a water system? 

c. Are the farming areas near large urban areas? 

d. Where and how do the farmers get their water supply? 

2. Visit a library to find out about early irrigation systems used in your area. 

a. Report on findings from the research. 

b. Illustrate the systems used. 

3. Invite an elder community member to talk on early farming practices in your 
area. 

a. Students should be ready with questions. 

b. Students will write out a short report on the information from the 
presentation. 

4. Plant some seeds and keep a record on growth, color and texture. 

a. Students will create a chart and will graph the growth of the plants. 

b. Students may conduct other experiments with different types of soil and 
the amount of water given the plants. Place plants in a well lit area of the 
room and one in a dark area to record growth. 

c. What conclusions can be drawn about water and plants? 

Evaluation 

1. From the classroom presentation by the elder, students will be expected to do a 
writing project. In this project students should note the farming methods used 
today and methods used in the past. 

Resources 

World Book Encyclopedia, Vol. F/7, Pub. World Book, Inc. a Scott Fetzer Company, 
Chicago, copyright 1989. 

Harrison, C. William. Conservationists and What They Do. Franklin Watts, Inc., 1963. 

Water Use Handbook, Water Wise, G.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of 
Reclamation. 



O ♦ 134 

ERIC 



143 



SCIENCE 

Eating Healthy 

Teacher Background Information 

The life cycle is a basic part of all life. Eating properly and making use of Mother 

Nature’s bounty is a duty of mankind. A sound mind and body contributes to the good 

of the group which is a basic concept throughout all of the Native American traditions. 

Student Learning Activities 

1 . Read the story “The Coming of the Corn” from the book Keepers of the Earth. 

2. Display empty food containers or pictures and invite students to identify the 
foods and food groups represented. Explain the Food Pyramid grouping to 
students which recommends which foods are needed for a good diet. 

3. Choose various students to place the foods in proper food groups and discuss 
the ways in which the various food items might be consumed. 

4. Develop a wall chart and have the students select an item and name ways that it 
may be prepared or in a natural form. 

5. Have the students describe one meal they have eaten from the previous day and 
place the items in the proper food group. 

6. Students will divide into small groups and they will cut out pictures from a 
chosen food group and construct a poster of a picture chosen. 

Students will put their pictures drawn on the bulletin board that depict various 
ways that food is grown. The food could be grown underground, in the trees, 
vines and in stalks. 

7. Students will develop math readiness skills by explanation of basic fractional 
units. Cut various fruits into halves and fourths. Encourage the students to count 
how many pieces they have when a food item is cut into halves and fourths. 




144 



135 ♦ 



Evaluation 



Set up a tasting table representing each of the food groups. Display foods of the 
various food groups cut into sections representing fractions. Ask students to identify 
how many fractions the food has been prepared in. Invite each child to take a food and 
taste it. 

Materials 

Paper 

Pencils or markers 

Food items from the food groups 

Table knife 

Paper plates 

Resources 

Blackwood, Bueschen, Gidderage and Caren. HBJ Science. Harcourt and Brace 
Publishers, Chicago, Illinois, 1989, p. 137. 

Caduto, Michael and Bruchac, Joseph. Keepers of the Earth. Fulcrum Inc., Golden, 
Colorado, 1989, p. 137. 



MATH AND SCIENCE 
Native American Frybread 

Cultural Objective 

Students will learn more about frybread, an important traditional food in the lifestyles 
of many Native Americans. 

Math Objectives 

Students will: 

illustrate fractional parts of whole objects or sets of objects 

measure lengths using nonstandard units, centimeters and inches 

order fractions on the basis of concrete materials 

describe three-dimensional objects from different perspectives 

identify and name common two- and three-dimensional figures (cube, cylinder, 
pyramid, ball). 

Science Objectives 

Students will: 

interpret data from graphs and charts 
make inferences from data and observation 
observe that all things take up space and have weight 
communicate by using basic scientific vocabulary. 




O 

ERIC 



146 



137 ♦ 



Teacher Background Information 

Among all tribes, each meal and its preparation is preceded by prayer. Although the 
words of the prayer may differ from tribe to tribe, the universal spirit of reverence and 
giving of thanks are reflected throughout preparation and eating. 

This lesson will demonstrate the cooking of frybread which is a basic food for many 
tribes. Methods of preparation may vary between tribes. Different tribes may use 
different grain sources for the flour, depending upon the availability of different grains 
in that geographic area. 

The most common grain used to make frybread is wheat flour, however, acorn flour is 
also used. The dough mixture is generally prepared by measuring the ingredients by 
hand because originally there were no measuring utensils available. Native women 
were quite adept at mixing the precise amount by using a “handful” or “pinch” of each 
ingredient. They would knead the dough to the right consistency. Usually, the dough 
was pinched off in chunks or balls and hand rolled or patted into the desired shape. It 
was then fried in a container of hot fat. It was fried to a golden brown and either served 
with a main dish or eaten alone. 



Student Learning Activities 

1. Ask the students to recall how their grandmother makes frybread. Discuss how 
people used to make frybread by nonstandard measurements - handful and 
pinch. Then ask the students to decide if their grandmother’s handfuls would be 
the same as their’s. 

2. Have students measure handfuls of sand, rice and small beans, and place the 
quantity on paper plates. Next, have students compare their handfuls with each 
other. Ask if their handfuls were bigger or smaller than those of other students. 
Let students experiment to see if they could find a way to increase their handfuls. 
What did they conclude? Point out to the students that the handfuls are not equal 
for every person. If they are going to make something by using handfuls, they 
will not get the same amount every time and that is why this process is called 
nonstandard measurements. 

3. Give each group a standard cup measure. Group members will choose one of 
the items (sand, rice or beans) and see how many handfuls it takes to fill the 
cup, but not overflowing. Chart this information on a graph. Discuss the graph. 

4. Have students guess which measure (>/ 2 cup, V 3 cup, or '/ 4 cup) their handful 
can fill without overflowing and how many of these cups are needed to fill the 
one cup measure. Discuss the difference between nonstandard units of measure 
and standard units and the need for standard units. 

5. Before students begin to make frybread, discuss and identify the three states of 
matter: liquid, solid and gas. Use the recipe to identify examples of each state. 
Reminder: baking powder (sodium bicarbonate) will be considered both a solid 
and a gas (carbon dioxide). 

6. Have class make frybread. Observe the physical changes in the dough which 
results from the addition of baking powder which is composed mostly of sodium 
bicarbonate. The baking powder when mixed with flour and water will chemically 
generate the gas, carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide gas makes the dough rise. 
An experiment to show why the dough raises can be performed by pouring 
vinegar on the baking powder, producing carbon dioxide bubbles. 

7. Divide the dough into equal portions about 3” in diameter. Give one portion to 
each student to work into a ball. Discuss the geometric shape of a sphere and 
what shape you make when you flatten a sphere. Discuss the difference in 
circumference of the sphere and circle by measuring with a piece of string. 

8. The teacher should place a cast iron skillet on a heat source. Place the lard into 
the pan. Discuss what is happening to the lard and why. (Heat changes a solid to 
a liquid.) Remind the students of the safety techniques they need to use when 
cooking with a pan that contains hot shortening. 

143 



Observe the physical change of dough to firm bread. Place the formed dough 
carefully into the hot shortening. Instruct students to watch what is happening. 
Ask why the dough changes while in the pan. Cook until golden brown on both 
sides. Cut the bread in half and have the students observe the air pockets in the 
bread produced by the carbon dioxide. 

Have students cut their bread into equal parts. Designate groups to cut their 
bread into halves, quarters, thirds, sixths and eighths. Compare the sizes of their 
pieces with other groups. Ask which is bigger, e.g. V 2 or V 4 » V 4 or V 8 , V 3 or V 4 , 
and V 2 or V 8 - 

Describe the characteristics of dough, cooked and uncooked. Take your dough 
and add different grains, e.g. blue cornmeal, oatmeal, whole wheat, rice flour, 
powder milk and yellow cornmeal. This activity will show students how different 
grains affect the structure of the bread. 

Talk about flour, where it comes from, how it is ground and how it was ground in 
early days. Discuss early technology with crude tools and implements and the 
technological difference between grinding methods. 

Identify good health habits such as eating nutritional foods. 




140 



149 



Third Grade Evaluation Activities 



1 . Illustrate fractional parts of their frybread. Give students a circle and have them 
divide it into fractional parts i.e. V 2 » V 4 » V 3 , V 6 and V 8 - 

2. Using fractional parts, compare relationships between fractional sizes. Which is 
greater i.e. V 4 or r / 6 , V 2 or V 3 , V 2 or V 6 , V 8 or V 4 ? 

3. Chart dough ball estimation and actual size of fry bread. 

4. List the physical change you observe in making fry bread. 

5. Describe the chemical change in making frybread. 

6. Write a journal entry about the scientific information learned from this activity. 

Second Grade Evaluation Activities 

1. Discuss where flour comes from. Show examples of corn ground into flour (or 
use other locally available grains). Use a traditional grinding stone and discuss 
other milling processes. Then let the students grind enough corn to make a cup 
of flour. Weigh grain and flour. 

2. Have students estimate the weight of a dough ball after mixing dry ingredients. 
Chart the estimates. Weigh the raw dough and record on the chart. Compare the 
two. Have students weigh the cooked dough. Measure the frybread using inches 
or centimeters. 

3. Have students write a brief paragraph about or draw a picture of the frybread 
process. 

First Grade Evaluation Activities 

1. Shape dough into a circle. Talk about the circle. Then have students make 
different shapes (circle, rectangle, triangle, square). Talk about the shapes. Cut 
shapes into V 2 , V 3 and ’/ 4 - 

2. Estimate how many pieces of frybread the dough will make. Count to see how 
many actual pieces of frybread were made. 

3. Count how many circles, rectangles, triangles or squares were made. Graph the 
number of shapes. 

Classify frybread by size and graph. 



4 . 



Recipe for native Frybread 

4 cups white flour 
1 tablespoon baking soda 
1 teaspoon salt 
warm water 
lard or shortening 



Procedure 

1 . Mix the flour, baking powder and salt together. Add 1 V 2 cups of warm water to 
dry ingredients. Knead until dough is soft and elastic and does not stick to bowl. 
(If necessary, add a little more warm water.) 

2. Shape dough into balls the size of a small peach. Pat back and forth by hand 
until dough is about V 2 or l/ 4 thick and round. Make a small hole in center of 
round. 

3. Melt 1 cup lard or shortening in heavy frying pan. Carefully put the rounds into 
hot fat, one at a time. Brown on both sides. Drain on paper towel and serve hot. 

Resources 

Karasch, Barrie. Native Harvests. New York: Random House, 1979. 

Tribal American Children’s Center and Tribal American Consulting Corporation. 

American Indian Life Environment: An Early Education Curriculum. 1975, p. 
214. 

Callaway, Sydney and Gary Witherspoon. Grandfather Stories of the Navajos. Illustrated 
by Hoke Denetsosie and Clifford Beck, Jr. Phoenix: Navajo Curriculum Center 
Press, 1974. 

Developed By 

Cynthia Henley Deborah Kent 

Mae Mallahan Bonnie McGinnis 

Nancy Roehl Jeri Stevens 

Arlene Valenzuela Marcella B. Vaughn 



q ♦ 142 

ERIC 



151 



My Ideas for Food Unit: 




152 

o 

ERIC 



143 ♦ 



Lesson Plans/Schedule for Food Unit 



O 

ERIC 



♦ 144 



153 




ERjt 



154 



145 ♦ 



Nursery Rhymes and Poems 

Little Tommy Tucker 
Sang for his supper: 

What shall he eat? 

White bread and butter. 

How shall he cut it? 

Without even a knife? 

How shall he marry 
Without even a wife? 

Little Jack Horner 
Sat in the corner, 

Eating a Christmas pie; 

He put in his thumb, 

And pulled out a plum, 

And said, What a good boy am I! 

Little Miss Muffet 
Sat on a tuffet, 

Eating her curds and whey 
There came a big spider 
And sat down beside her 
And frightened Miss Muffet away. 

Mistress Mary, quite contrary 
How does your garden grow? 

With silver bells and cockle shells, 

And pretty maids all in a row. 

Jack Sprat could eat no fat 
His wife could eat no lean, 

And so between them both, you see, 
They licked the platter clean. 

Polly, put the kettle on 
Polly, put the kettle on 
Polly, put the kettle on 
We’ll all have tea. 



The Queen of Hearts 
She made some tarts, 

All on a summer’s day; 

The Knave of Hearts 
He stole the tarts, 

And took them clean away. 

Pease porridge hot, 

Pease porridge cold, 

Pease porridge in the pot 
Nine days old. 

Some like it hot, 

Some like it cold, 

Some like it in the pot 
Nine days old. 

Yellow butterflies 

Over the blossoming corn 

With pollen-painted faces 

Chase one another in brilliant throng. 

Blue butterflies, 

Over the blossoming beans, 

Will pollen-painted faces 
Chase one another in brilliant 
streams. 

Over the blossoming corn, 

Wild bees hum; 

Over the blossoming beans, 

Wild bees hum. 

- Southwest 

Other food poems and songs 



The teacher should have the students do choral readings of these selections, memorize 
and recite them, and explain what they mean in their own words. These can be used to 
stress phonemic awareness and beginning sounds/ending sounds, rhyming words in 
kindergarten and other word-attack principles such as sight words, long and short 
vowels, le, ing, er and r-controlled vowels in first grade and up. 



O ♦ 146 

ERiC 



155 



o 

ERIC 



Background Information for Teachers and Parents 

Phases 2 and 3 

The Study of Animals in Science Lessons 

- ORBIS Associates 

In the study of animals in science lessons, teachers should emphasize animals from 
their local areas. The fact that Indian people respect animals and think of them as 
equals, or relatives, should be stressed. Indian people recognize the importance of 
animals and acknowledge their individual behavior characteristics. These are depicted 
in the many legends about animals in all tribal cultures. These legends should be 
included as part of the science curriculum. 

Animals are important to Indians for food and clothing purposes and sometimes for 
shelter. Animal parts can be used for tools and utensils. Animal behavior is watched for 
such things as predicting weather. 

Predicting Winter 

If beavers build their dens more than four feet above the water level, the winter will be 
unusually cold. 

If muskrats build their homes in the middle of the lake, there will be a long winter. A 
muskrat will build in deep water so there will be open water to make certain that he can 
get out if there is a long, hard freeze. 

Clothing 

Deer, moose, caribou, beaver and otter skins or pelts are used for clothing. Sometimes 
dyed moose or deer hair, as well as dyed porcupine quills, are used to embroider 
clothing. 

Sinew and gut can be used as thread for binding; brain matter is used in the hide 
tanning process. 

Tool/Gtensils 

A bear tooth set into a bone or wooden handle is used as a cutting or engraving tool. 
Glues are made from the residue left from boiling deer antlers. 

Hide scrapers are sometimes made from deer or moose jaws. 

from Science and Cultural Curricula, Indian Education Act Resource and 
Evaluation Center One, ORBIS Associates, Washington, DC, 1986. 



O ♦ 148 

ERIC 




Background Information for Teachers and Parents 

Phases 4 and 5 The Buffalo 

In the early 1500’s, there were millions of buffalo in this country. In fact, even two 
hundred years ago, there were still over 50 million. But then, the European-Americans 
started to move further west. Unlike the Plains Indians, these settlers were not really 
interested in respecting or honoring the buffalo. They killed them just for the hides 
without even eating the meat. Sometimes they just hunted them for the fun of hunting 
and didn’t take any of the buffalo. 

These European-Americans also started to disturb the buffalo’s environment. Towns 
were built up everywhere; land was planted in crops instead of leaving it as prairies for 
the buffalo to graze on. The settlers also built railroads right through the prairies. 

All of these activities resulted in the almost complete extinction of the once huge 
buffalo herds. By 1870, only about 13 million of the 50 million buffalo remained. But 
the most shocking time was between 1870 and 1900. In only 30 short years, the 
American buffalo herd dropped from 13 million to 1,000 animals! Fortunately, by 
1900, people said “enough is enough. We’ve got to save the buffalo.” Thanks to that 
effort, today there are an estimated 35,000 buffalo in this country. 

For Indian tribes in the Plains area of the United States, the buffalo was truly a “Giver of 
Life.” In other words, the Indians in that area depended on the buffalo for most of the 
important things they needed to live. In return for all that the buffalo gave the Indians, 
the Indians respected and honored them greatly through special ceremonies, dances 
and songs. Above all, the Plains tribes never hunted more buffalo than they needed and 
tried not to disturb the land that the buffalo depended on for its food. 

When the Indian people killed a buffalo, they used every part of him. They did not 
waste any part. This respect for the buffalo and for the land he grazed on was very 
important. Without that respect the buffalo would not have been able to thrive, and 
then the whole way of life would be changed for the Plains Indians. 

Before the Indians got horses, the Plains tribes followed the buffalo by foot. They used 
dogs to carry their goods. The horse changed the way that Plains tribes hunted buffalo. 
They could follow the migrating buffalo more easily. Until the middle of the last century, 
the lives of the Plains Indians were totally interwoven with the life of the migrating 
buffalo herds which provided a wonderful assortment of gifts for people to use 
including food, clothing, shelter, musical instruments, games, tools and weapons, 
cooking pots and carrying bags. You can certainly see now why the Plains Indians so 
greatly respected the buffalo. 

- from The World of Animals, ORB1S Associates, Washington, DC. 

158 



o 




149 ♦ 



Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline - Beavers to Buffalo 



Reading, Language Arts, 

Science, i^lath, ^Vrt, Values Literature Week 1 Literature 2 



P Beavers to Buffalo Words 
H Reading Legends 
A Retelling/The Oral Tradition 
S Reading Nonfiction 
E Summarizing/Reporting 
Visiting Buffalo/Cost to Keep 
F Local Presenter on Buffalo 
I Protection of Habitat 
V Endangered Species/Numbers 
E Save the Earth/Animal Posters 
Being Good Stewards 


Passing of the Buffalo in Keepers 
of the Animals by Caduto 
and Bruchac 

The Return of the Buffaloes by 
Paul Goble 

There Still Are Buffalo by Ann 
Nolan Clark 


Buffalo - American Bison Today 
by Patent 

Buffalo Days by Diane Hoyt- 
Goldsmith 

Brother Eagle, Sister Sky by 
Susan Jeffers 


P Beavers to Buffalo Words 
H Reading Nonfiction 
A Summarizing/Reporting 


Buffalo by Emilie V. Lapthien 


The Buffalo Jump by Peter Roop 


S Reading Fiction 
E Responding/Retelling 

Visiting Buffalo/Cost of Meat 


The Buffalo by Sabrina Crewe 


Buffalo Hunt by R. Freedman 


F Buffalo Habits 
O Needs/Habitat 
U Drawing Buffalo 
R Having Courage 


Bison for Kids by T. Wilkinson 


Where the Buffaloes Begin by 
Olaf Baker 


P Beavers to Buffalo Words 
H Reading Fiction 


Wolues for Kids by T. Wolpert 


Dream Wolfby Paul Goble 


A Responding 


Purple Coyote/Cornette 


Maii and Cousin Horned Toad by 


S Reading Legends 


Coyote at Plnon Place by 


Shonto Begay 


E Retelling 

Mammals/Survey of Locale 


Deborah Dennard 
Little Coyote Runs Away by 


Coyote and Little Turtle by 
Hershal Talashoema 


T Wolves, Coyotes, Foxes 


Craig Kee Strett 


Coyote Goes Walking by T. Pohrt 


H Alike but Different 


Way Out West Lives a Coyote 


Coyote and the Laughing 


R Needs/Habitat 
E Clay Animals 
E Don't Be Foolish 


Named Frank by Jillian Lund 


Butterflies by H. Taylor 


P Beavers to Buffalo Words 
H Reading Nonfiction 
A Summarizing/Reporting 


About Mammals: A Guide For 
Children by Cathryn Sill 


The Great Race by Paul Goble 
I Sing for the Animals by Paul 


S Reading Legends 


1 Can Read About Baby Animals 


Goble 


E Retelling/Responding 
Mammals 

Baby/ Adult Animals 


by Elizabeth Warren 
Little Friends by Mike Logan 


Holu Turtle Set the Animals Free 
by Jeanette Armstrong 


T Animal Tracks 


How to Be a Nature Detective by 


Gluscabi and the Game Animals 


W Making Animal Masks 
O Respect for Animals/Life 


Millicent E. Selsam 


in Keepers of the Earth by 
Caduto and Bruchac 



0 * 150 

ERiC 



159 



Reading, Language Arts, 

Literature - Week 3 Literature - Week 4 Science, Math, Art, Values 



Buffalo by F. Haines 

Buffalo Land by W. D. Berry 

Bison - Symbol of the American 
West by M. S. Sample 


White Buffalo Woman by 
Christine Crowl 

The Legend of the White Buffalo 
Woman by Paul Goble 

Buffalo Dreams by Kim Doner 

The White Buffalo Calf Woman 
and the Sacred Pipe in 
Keepers of the Earth by 
Caduto and Bruchac 


Beavers to Buffalo Words 
Reading Nonfiction 
Summarizing/Reporting 
Reading Legends 
Responding 

Comparing/Contrasting 
Listening to Elder’s Present 
Where is a White Buffalo? 
Circle of Life Activity/Bruchac 
Respect Sacred Knowledge 
Wisdom, Generosity, Caring 


People of the Buffalo by Maria 
Campbell 

Gifts of the Buffalo Nation by 
Intertribal Bison Cooperative 

Time of the Bison by A. Turner 


Buffalo Woman by Paul Goble 

Buffalo by Tiffany Midge 

The Great Buffalo Race: How the 
Buffalo Got Its Hump by 
Barbara Ebensen 


Beavers to Buffalo Words 
Reading Nonfiction 
Summarizing/Reporting 
Reading Legends 
Retelling/The Oral Tradition 
Indians’ Use of Buffalo 
Based on Material Properties 
Presentation by Beadworker 
Student Beadwork 
Respect for Buffalo/Gifts 


Antelope: Animals in the Wild 
by Mary Hoffman 
The Deer by Serge Simon 
All About Deer by Jim Arnosky 

Forest by Laura Godwin 
Bambi by Walt Disney 
Once Upon a Springtime by 
Jean Marzollo 


Antelope Woman by Michael 
Lacapa 

Echogee, the Little Blue Deer by 
Acee Blue Eagle 
Awi Gsdi, The Little Deer in 
Keepers of the Earth and 
How the Fawn Got Its Spots 
in Keepers of the Animals by 
Caduto and Bruchac 
How the Baby Deer Got Its Spots 
by Steven Roy 


Beavers to Buffalo Words 
Reading Nonfiction 
Summarizing/Reporting 
Reading Fiction/Legends 
Responding/Retelling 
Animal Families 
Deer, Antelope, Elk 
Alike But Different 
Needs/Habitat/Camouflage 
Journey with Abenaki/Bruchac 
Care for Family 


Peggy Porcupine, Roy Raccoon, 
and Billy Beauer all by Dave 
Sargent 

Welcome to the World of 
Raccoons, Porcupines, 
Beavers all by D. Swanson 

Possum and the Peeper by Anne 
Hunter 

The Prairie Dog by Sabrina 
Crewe 


Who Wants to Be a Prairie Dog? 
and Slim Butte Raccoon by 
Ann Nolan Clark 
Turtle Races with Beaver and 
Why the Possum Has a 
Naked Tail in Keepers of the 
Animals by Caduto and 
Bruchac 

/ Can ’t Have Bannock But the 
Beauer Has a Dam by * 
Bernelda Wheeler 


Beavers to Buffalo Words 
Reading Fiction/Legends 
Res'ponding/Retelling 
Reading Nonfiction 
Summarizing/Reporting 
Two-Leggeds, Four Leggeds 
Local Small Mammals 
Alike But Different 
Make Sack Animal Puppets 
Animals Are Relatives 



O 

ERIC 



160 



151 ♦ 



About the Literature for Phase Five 

Indian people view animals as relatives and respect and care for them. Animals are 
the topic of many Indian stories. The buffalo is a very sacred animal. 

Passing and Return of the Buffalo 



Passing of the Buffalo in Keepers of the Animals by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac 
(Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1997 Kiowa 
The Return of the Buffaloes by Paul Goble, [National Geographic Society, 1996. Plains 
There Still Are Buffalo by Ann Nolan Clark, Ancient City Press, 1992. Plains 
Buffalo - American Bison Today by Patent and Munoz. 

Buffalo Days by Diane Hoyt-Goldsmith, Holiday House, 1997. Crow 

Brother Eagle, Sister Sky by Susan Jeffers, Dial Books, 1991. Northwest 

These books recount the care of buffalo today and the necessity of caring for Mother Earth to 

avoid the loss of things in nature. 



The Importance of Buffalo 

Buffalo by F. Haines. 

Buffalo Land by W. D. Berry. 

Bison - Symbol of the American West by 
M. S. Sample. 

These books contain general 
information about buffalo. The 
information should be summarized and 
reported. 

White Buffalo Woman by Christine 
Crowl, Tipi Press. Lakota 
The Legend of the White Buffalo Woman 
by Paul Goble, National Geographic 
Society, 1998. Lakota 
The White Buffalo Calf Woman and the 
Sacred Pipe in Keepers of the Earth by 
Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac 
(Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1988. 

Lakota 

Buffalo Dreams by Kim Doner 
These selections tell the story of the gift of the 
sacred pipe to the Lakota people from the White 
Buffalo Calf Woman. The significance of the sacred 
pipe and the importance of the buffalo, and 
especially the white buffalo, should be covered with 
the children by someone recognized as knowledgeable 
of Indian spirituality if available. These versions of the 
story can be compared and contrasted. Include local 
stories of the buffalo. 




♦ 152 



161 



About the Literature for Phase Four 

Indian people view animals as relatives and respect and care for them. Animals are 
the topic of many Indian stories. The buffalo is a very sacred animal. 

About Buffalo 

Buffalo by Emilie V. Lapthien, Children’s Press, 1989. 

The Buffalo by Sabrina Crewe, 1997. 

Bison for Kids by T. Wilkinson. 

These selections contain information about buffalo, the history and present. The information 
can be summarized and reported. 

Seeking and Hunting the Buffalo 

The Buffalo Jump by Peter Roop, Rising Moon, 1996. Plains 

Buffalo Hunt by R. Freedman, Holiday House, 1998. Plains 

Where the Buffaloes Begin by Olaf Baker, Puffin Books, 1981. Blackfeet 

These selections are stories about seeking and hunting buffalo. They can be retold and 

responded to. 

Gifts of the Buffalo 

People of the Buffalo by Maria Campbell (Indian Author), Firefly Press, 1983. Plains 
Gifts of the Buffalo Nation by the Intertribal Bison Cooperative, South Dakota. Plains 
Time of the Bison by A. Turner, Macmillan, 1987. 

These selections include various uses of parts of the buffalo and stresses the buffalo’s 
importance to people. The information can be summarized and reported. 

Buffalo Stories 

Buffalo Woman by Paul Goble, Aladdin, 1984. Plains 

Buffalo by Tiffany Midge (Indian Author), Scholastic Books. Seneca, Omaha, Ojibwa, Wichita, 
Apache, Kiowa 

The Great Buffalo Race: How the Buffalo Got Its Hump by Barbara Ebensen, Little, Brown, 

1994. Seneca 
These materials are Indian 
legends about buffalo. They can 
be retold in the oral tradition. 

Include local stories of the buffalo. 



0 





153 ♦ 



About the Literature for Phase Three 

Indian people view animals as relatives and respect and care for them. Animals are 
the topic of many Indian stories. Coyote is a trickster for many tribes. 

Wolves 

Wolves for Kids by T. Wolpert. 

Dream Wolf by Paul Goble. Plains 

These selections include nonfiction about wolves and an Indian legend including a wolf. 
Coyote Stories 

Purple Coyote by Cornette, Doubleday, 1999. 

Coyote at Pinon Place by Deborah Dennard, Soundprints, 1999. 

Little Coyote Runs Away by Craig Kee Strett, Putnam, 1997. 

Way Out West Lives a Coyote Named Frank by Jillian Lund, Dutton, 1993. 

These are fictional stories about coyotes. They can be retold and responded to. 

Indian Coyote Stories 

Mail and Cousin Horned Toad by Shonto Begay (Indian Author), Scholastic, 1992. Navajo 
Coyote Goes Walking by T. Pohrt, Farrar Straus, 1995. Plains 

Coyote and the Laughing Butterflies by Harriet Taylor, Simon & Schuster, 1995. Pueblo 
These are Indian legends about the trickster, Coyote. They can be retold or performed. 

Antelope 

Antelope: Animals in the Wild by Mary Hoffman, 1987. 

Antelope Woman by Michael Lacapa (Indian Author), Northland Pub., 1992. Apache 
These selections include a nonfiction selection about antelope and an Apache legend. 

Deer 



The Deer by Serge Simon, Charlesbridge Pub., 1993. 

All About Deer by Jim Arnosky, Scholastic, 1997. 

Forest by Laura Godwin, 1998. 

Bambi by Walt Disney, Mouse Works, 1996. 

Once Upon a Springtime by Jean Marzollo, 1998. 

These selections are about deer and fiction including deer. 

Indian Deer Stories 

Echogee, the Little Blue Deer by Acee Blue Eagle (Indian Author), Palmco, 1971. 

Awdi Gsdi, the Little Deer in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac 
(Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1988. Cherokee 
How the Fawn Got Its Spots in Keepers of the Animals by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac 
(Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1997. Dakota 
How the Baby Deer Got Its Spots by Steven Roy, Tipi Press. Dakota 
Include local stories about these animals. 




0 ♦ 154 





About the Literature for Phase Two 

Indian people view animals as relatives and respect and care for them. Animals are 
the topic of many Indian stories. 

Mammal Animals 

About Mammals: A Guide for Children by Cathryn Sill, Peachtree, 2000. 

I Can Read About Baby Animals by Elizabeth Warren, 1996. 

Little Friends by Mike Logan, Falcon Pub., 1992. 

How to be a Nature Detective by Millicent E. Selsam, Harper Trophy, 1995. 

These are general books about animals. The teacher should stress the mammals, especially 
ones that are from the area. 

Indian Animal Stories 

The Great Race by Paul Goble, Bradbury Press, 1985. Plains 
I Sing for the Animals by Paul Goble. Plains 

How Turtle Set the Animals Free by Jeanette Armstrong, (Indian Author), Theytus Books, 
Okanagan 

Gluscabi and the Game Animals in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1988. Abenaki 
These legends can be retold. 

Some Mammals 

Peggy Porcupine by Dave Sargent, 1996. 

Roy Raccoon by Dave Sargent, 1996. 

Billy Beaver by Dave Sargent, 1996. 

Possum and the Peeper by Anne Hunter, Houghton Mifflin, 1998. 

Welcome to the World of Porcupines by Diane Swanson, Whitecap Books, 1999. 

Welcome to the World of Raccoons by Diane Swanson, Whitecap Books, 1998. 

Welcome to the World of Beavers by Diane Swanson, Whitecap Books, 1999. 

The Prairie Dog by Sabrina Crewe, 1996. 

These selections include information about the animals and fiction stories. 

Indian Stories About Mammals 

Who Wants to Be A Prairie Dog? by Ann Nolan Clark, Haskell Indian Nations Foundation. 
Navajo 

The Slim Butte Raccoon by Ann Nolan Clark, Haskell Indian Nations Foundation, Lakota 
Why the Possum Has a Naked Tail, Cherokee, and Turtle Races with Beaver, Seneca, in 

Keepers of the Animals by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum 
Pub., 1997. 

I Can’t Have Bannock But the Beaver Has a Dam by Bernelda Wheeler (Indian Author), 
Pemmican Pub. 

These stories can be retold and responded to. Include local stories about little wild mammals. 




164 



155 ♦ 



Further Resources for Beavers to Buffalo Unit 

These materials can be used to substitute for books in the suggested unit outline or 
for additional reading/other activities for students. 

Raccoon’s Adventures in Alphabet Town by Janet McDonnell, Children’s Press, 1992. 

The Furry Animal Alphabet Book by Jerry Pallotta, Charisma Press, 1990. 

Plains Indians Coloring Book and Plains Indians Diorama available from Four Winds Books. 

Northern Plains Indian Coloring Book by Charlene Peterson and Anna Rubia, Varia Pub., 1988. 

A Coloring Book of Hidatsa Indian Stories compiled by Roberta Krim and Thomas Thompson, 
Minnesota Historical Society, 1988. 

I Am a Little Deer by Francois Crozat, 1994. 

Animals (Words for Everyday) by Zoe Davenport, 1995. 

Desert Mammals, Grassland Mammals, Temperate Forest Mammals, Mountain Mammals, all 
by Elaine Landau, True Books, 1997. 

Mammals by Joy Richardson, Franklin Watts, 1993. 

The Animals Ballgame by L. Ameach, Children’s Press, 1992. Indian 

The Meeting of the Wild Animals in Favorite North American Indian Legends by Philip Smith, 
Dover. 

The Two-Legged Creature by Anna Lee Walters (Indian Author), Northland Pub. Otoe 

Coyote Becomes a Buffalo in Lakota and Dakota Animal Wisdom Stories by Mark W. 

McGinnis, Tipi Press, 1994. 

The Secret of the White Buffalo by C. J. Taylor (Indian Author), Lakota 

Buffalo Legend by Nancy Van Laan, Little, Brown, 1993. Indian 

Spirit of the White Bison by B. Culleton (Indian Author), Peguis Pub., 1985. Indian 

Ella Deloria’s (Indian Author) The Buffalo People by Julian Rice, University of New Mexico 
Press, 1994. 

Legend of the Crazy Horse Clan by Moses Nelson Big Crow (Indian Author). Lakota 
White Tails Don’t Live in the City by D. Bouchard, Whole Language Cons., 1989. Indian 
The Legend of the Bluebonnet by Tomie DePaola, Putnam, 1983. Comanche 
Ceremony in the Circle of Life by Whitedeer of Autumn (Indian Author). 

The Indian Way by Gary McLain (Indian Author). 



♦ 156 

ERIC 




Between Sacred Mountains: Navajo Stories and Lessons from the Land, University of Arizona 
Press. 

Champion of the Classroom in Earth’s Caretakers, University of Kansas, 1994. Ankara 
A Walk to the Great Mystery by Virginia Stroud (Indian Author), Dial Books for Young Readers. 
Bear by E. K. Caldwell (Indian Author), Scholastic Books. Indian 
Alaska Bear Tales by Larry Fanin. 

The Year of the Three Legged Deer by E. Clifford, Dell, 1972. Indian 

Sad Eyes in Our Father Story Teller by Pablita Velarde (Indian Author), Clear Light Pub., 1989. 
Pueblo 

The Deer in the Wood, Adapted from Little House Book by Laura Ingalls Wilder, Harpercollins, 
1995. 

Wolf Run by J. Houston, Harcourt Brace, 1971. Northwest 

Wolf Child by D. Nolan, Macmillan, 1989. Indian 

Wolf Tales by Mary Powell. Indian 

Brother Wolf by Harriet Peck Taylor. Seneca 

Watchful Wolves by Ruth Berman, 1997. 

Wolves in Just Listen, Houghton Mifflin Reading Series. 

How Turtle’s Back was Cracked by Gayle Ross (Indian Author), Cherokee 
The Friendly Wolf by Paul Goble, Bradbury, 1974. Plains 
Fox Song by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Philomel. 

Silver Fox and Coyote Create Earth, Miwok, How the People Hunted the Moose, Cree, and Why 
Coyote Has Yellow Eyes, Hopi, in Keepers of the Animals by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1997. 

How Fox Brought the Forests from the Sky, Snoqualmie, and the Buffalo Bull and the Cedar 
Tree, Osage, in Keepers of Life by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), 
Fulcrum Pub., 1998. 

Coyote, A Trickster Tale by Gerald McDermott, Southwest 
Coyote and Bobcat by S. Harold Collins, Garlic Press, 1999. Indian 
Coyote and the Grasshoppers by Gloria Dominic, Troll. Pomo 

Coyote Stories and Why Bears Have Short Tails in And It Still Is That Way by Byrd Baylor, 

Trails West, 1976. Included in some basal readers 




168 



157 ♦ 



Navajo Coyote Tales by William Morgan, Ancient City Press, 1988 
Navajo Coyote Tales by Berard Haile, University of Nebraska Press, 1984. 

Emma and the Coyote by Margaret Ruurs, Stoddart Kids, 1999. 

We Walk in Sandy Places by Byrd Baylor, Scribner, 1976. Southwest 
Raccoon at Clear Creek Road by Carolyn B. Otto, Smithsonian, 1995. 

Opossum at Sycamore Road by Sally Walker, Soundprints, 1997. 

The Crayfish and the Raccoon and The Old Beaver Woman and the Eagle in Lakota and 
Dakota Animal Wisdom Stories by Mark W. McGinnis, Tipi Press, 1994. 

Coyote and Porcupine in Hopi Coyote Tales by Ekkehart Malotki (Indian Author), University of 
Nebraska Press, 1984. 

How the Toad and Porcupine Lost Their Noses in Favorite North American Indian Legends by 
Philip Smith, Dover. 

Ben and the Porcupine by Carol Carrick, Houghton Mifflin, 1985. 

Pine Ridge Porcupine by Ann Nolan Clark, Haskell Indian Nations University, Lakota 
Beaver by Glen Rounds, Holiday House, 1999. 

Amikoonse/Little Beaver by Ferguson Plain (Indian Author), Pemmican. Ojibwa 
Otter Boy by Thomas E. Simms, Sinte Gleska University, 1989. Lakota 
Prairie Dogs by Emery Bernhard, Harcourt Brace, 1997. 

How Chipmunk Got His Stripes by Joseph and James Bruchac (Indian Authors), Seneca 
Enuk, My Son by Claire Fejes, Pantheon, 1969. Inuit 

Full Moon Stories by Eagle Walking Turtle (Indian Author), Hyperion, 1997. 

Rudolph the Red Nosed Reindeer by Rick Bunsen, Golden Books, 1998. 

The Christmas Deer by April Wilson, 1995. 

Circle of Wonder, A Native American Christmas Story by N. Scott Momaday (Indian Author). 

CHECK YOUR LIBRARY OR BOOKSTORES FOR OTHER BOOKS RELATING TO THE TOPIC. 
Books in italics are especially suitable for Phase One - for preschool children. 



O 4 158 

ERiC 



167 



BEAVERS TO BUFFALO WORDS 



BEGINNING SOUNDS 



beaver 


hump 


pup 


camp 


sinew 


tail 


beads 


hunt 


pipe 


coat 


stampede 


tan 


beast 


hide 


pouch 


cow 


spotted 


teeth 


baby 


hoof 


paw 


calf 


snort 


tepee 


bison 


hooves 


pelt 


cook 


skin 


tipi 


bones 


horn 


possum 


caribou 


skunk 


trap 


bow 


herd 


porcupine 


coyote 


skull 


tracks 


bobcat 


hair 


parfleche 


claw 


squirrel 


trickster 


buffalo 


hunter 


plains 


clothing 


scraper 


two-leggeds 


buck 

bear 

berries 

bull 

badger 


horseback 

hibernate 

habitat 


prairie dog 


creek stream 

cougar 

LONG VOWEL SOUNDS-i,o,e Double O 


fox 


run 


meat 


hide 


weasel 


moose 


fast 


robe 


moose 


pipe 


beaver 


food 


feet 


raccoon 


milk 


white 


meat 


raccoon 


food 


respect 


mother 


porcupine 


beast 




fur 


relatives 


moccasins 


bone 


feast 


hoof 


fawn 


rawhide 


mountain lion 


nose 


beads 


cook 


family 


reindeer 


muskrat 


robe 


eat 


woodchuck 


four-leggeds 

ferret 


rack 


mink antelope 

mountain goat coyote 


stream 




SHORT VOWEL SOUNDS 


u,a,i 


OTHER WORDS 




pup 


tan 


gift 


quill 


elk 


deer 


run 


camp 


sinew 


kill 


ears 


dye 


hunt 


family 


skin 


leg 


endangered 


opossum 


hump 


raccoon 


trickster 


shelter 


eyes 


otter 


jump 


animal 




zoologist 


water 


arrow 


cunning 

hunter 

skunk 

possum 

woodchuck 

chipmunk 

buffalo 


antelope 

antler 

habitat 

tracks 

dam 

grass 

trap 




goat 

game 


wolf 

groundhog 


bull boat 



Word walls should be maintained. Instructors should ensure that students know the 
meanings of all of these words in this context and extend vocabulary by noting how 
they may mean other things in other contexts or they may have homophones. 
Experiences, pictures and student illustrations should be used to explain and process 
word meanings. Words that rhyme with these words can be examined to see varying 
spellings for sounds. Other words can be added. Teach the meaning of sayings such 
as “outfoxing someone,” to “weasel out,” and to “buffalo someone.” 

163 



159 ♦ 



Science Standards and Benchmarks for Beavers to Buffalo Unit 

Standard - Understands that scientific inquiry works in particular ways 
Benchmarks 

Understands that learning can come from careful observations 

Standard - Understands the main individual, social, ethical and institutional aspects 

of science 

Benchmarks 

Understands that learning can come from close observation of plants and animals, but 
they should not be mistreated 

Standard - Understands the processes that shape the surface of the earth and the 

relation of the surface of the earth to the living environment 

Benchmarks 

Knows that change is something that happens to many things around us 
Knows that living things respond to the conditions around them 

Standard - Knows about the diversity and unity that characterize life 
Benchmarks 

Knows that some animals and plants are similar in appearance and behavior, and 
others are very different from one another 

Knows that stories sometimes give plants and animals attributes they really do not 
have 

Standard — Understands the genetic basis for the transfer of biological 

characteristics from one generation to another 

Benchmarks 

Knows that offspring grow up to be similar to their parents 

Standard — Knows the general structure and functions of cells in organisms 
Benchmarks 

Knows that most plants and animals need air, food and water 

Knows that plants and animals are composed of different parts, serving different 

purposes and contributing to the well-being of the whole organism 

Standard — Understands how species depend on one another and on the environment 

for survival 

Benchmarks 

Knows that animals eat plants or other animals for food and may also use plants for 
shelter 

Standard - Understands the cycling of matter and flow of energy through the living 

environment 

Benchmarks 

Knows that plants and animals both need water, animals need food to eat and plants 
need light 



O 4 160 

ERIC 



169 



Standard - Understands the basic concepts of the evolution of species 
Benchmarks 

Knows that plants and animals have features that help them live in different 
environments 

Standard - Understands the main steps in the transformation of a single fertilized 
cell into a fully-formed animal, and the process of the development and aging that 
follows birth 
Benchmarks 

Knows that animals have offspring, usually with two parents involved 

Standard - Understands that the way things work often changes with scale 
Benchmarks 

Knows that many things in nature come in sizes and speeds that are very different - 
from very small to very large, very fast to very slow, etc. 

Math Standards and Benchmarks for Beavers to Buffalo Unit 

Standard - Effectively uses a variety of strategies within the problem solving process 
Benchmarks 

Brainstorms possible things to do 

Draws pictures to represent problems 

Represents problem situations using physical objects 

Clarifies problems using discussions with teacher or knowledgeable others 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced properties of numbers 
Benchmarks 

Has a general understanding of the concept of number 
Uses counting to exemplify numbers 

Standard - Uses basic and advanced procedures while performing computation 
Benchmarks 

Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides whole numbers with accuracy 
Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides decimals with accuracy 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced methods of measurement 
Benchmarks 

Understands the basic characteristics of weight and how it is measured 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced concepts of data analysis 

and distributions 

Benchmarks 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of data 



170 

9 * 

ERIC 



161 ♦ 



Language Arts Standards and Benchmarks for Beavers to 
Buffalo Unit 

Standard - Gathers information effectively through reading, listening and viewing 
Benchmarks 

Provides an accurate retelling of the basic plot of simple stories the student has read, 
heard or viewed 

Provides an accurate retelling of the main idea of simple expository information the 
student has read, heard or viewed 

Understands that reading, viewing and listening are ways of gaining information about 
the world 

Determines meaning of simple words from context 

Creates mental representations for concrete information read, heard or viewed 

Standard - Reads and responds to literature 
Benchmarks 

Understands that stories have beginning, middle and ending episodes 
Understands the genre of legends and fables 

Standard - Communicates ideas and information in writing 
Benchmarks 

Understands basic connections between spelling patterns and speech sounds 
Understands basic phonological patterns in English 
Expresses ideas in simple expository forms 
Composes simple stories that express cohesive ideas 

Standard - Understands and applies basic principles of language use 
Benchmarks 

Recognizes characteristic sounds and rhythms of language 
Makes valid observations about the use of words 




O 

ERIC 



♦ 162 



i n i 
JL & X 



American Indian Content Standards for Beavers to Buffalo Unit 

Science 

Science as Inquiry - 

Indian students should develop an awareness that observations and understandings of 
nature and ecological relationships traditionally formed an essential base of knowledge 
among American Indian cultures. 

Physical Science - 

Indian students should develop an understanding of the innate properties of objects and 
materials that were (and are) recognized by traditional American Indian cultures in the 
manufacture and use of specific tools and material objects that capitalize upon those 
properties. 

Life Science - 

Indian students should develop an understanding of plant and animal life cycles as 
exemplified in traditional American Indian concepts such as the Medicine Wheel. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of characteristics of various animals 
as exemplified in traditional American Indian stories, legends, songs and dances. 

Science in Personal and Social Perspectives - 

Indian students should develop an understanding of elements of pre-contact North 
American environment and how changes to them were brought on by the arrival of 
Europeans in North America, such as the effects of the fur trade on animal populations 
and its subsequent effect on Indian life. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of local challenges in environmental 
protection and how traditional Indian knowledge, practices and philosophies have been 
and continue to be called upon for solutions. 

Mathematics 

Mathematics as Problem Solving - 

Indian students should formulate problems from everyday and mathematical situations 
within their home and tribal/community worlds. 

Mathematics as Communication - 

Indian students should relate their everyday language to mathematical language and 
symbols including expressing mathematical concepts in their Native languages. 

Estimation - 

Indian students should explore estimation strategies through activities derived from 
their cultural worlds such as estimating the number of sheep/horses that fit in a pen/ 
corral. 

Fractions and Decimals - 

Indian students should apply fractions and decimals by applying them to real world 
situations using Native cultural experiences. 



O 

ERIC 



172 



163 ♦ 



Language and Literacy 

Indian students should be able to - 

Listen for meaning and gain information from spoken English and a Mative language. 

Listen to Indian stories told in the oral tradition, comprehend their teachings and be 
able to retell them. 

Speak coherently, conveying ideas in both English and a Mative language. 

Read fluently and independently, a variety of materials including those with American 
Indian themes. 

Locate and use a variety of texts to gain information, for example, historical materials 
about their tribe, tribal legends and stories and oral history transcription. 

Be familiar with children’s literature with Indian themes, especially with that pertaining 
to the student’s tribe and literature written by Indian authors. 

American Indian Content Standards, ORBIS Associates for Office of Indian 
Education Programs, Bureau of Indian Affairs, United States Department of the 
Interior, 1996. 




♦ 164 

ERIC 




Example Activities Developed by Teachers of 
American Indian Students 



Workshop on Culturally-Based Math and Science 
Curriculum Development 

Haskell Indian nations University 
1992 & 1993 




Ideas included should be adapted for appropriateness. 



O 

tKJC 



174 



165 ♦ 



SCIENCE 



Animals on the Reservation 

Cultural Objective 

Students will understand that nature and animals play important roles in the lives of 
Native Americans. 

Science Objective 

Students will be able to tell about growth in plants and animals. 

Teacher Background Information 

Animals have great spiritual significance to Native Americans, as well as serving as 
sources of clothing and food. In the winter, the elders of the family sit around and tell 
stories about animals and their roles in creation, seasons, ceremonies, and other 
celebrations. 

A Cherokee Indian legend, “Awi (Jsdi, the Little Deer,” reminds us that, “Many years 
ago the humans and animals could talk to each other. They lived in peace and 
harmony, and the humans respected the animals. The humans killed the animals only 
when they were needed for food or clothing.” But Little Deer crippled all the humans 
who did not “show respect and give thanks to the animals they hunted.” 

The Sioux (Lakota, Dakota) respect the buffalo for its food and clothing. It is 
considered to be a special gift from the Great Spirit sent to serve and help people. 
Native people use many types of animals for food and clothing, such as wool from 
goats and sheep, feathers from birds, and the hides of animals. Nature’s bounty is not 
wasted. The Papago (Tohono O’odham) capture the coyote for its pelt and rabbits for 
their meat. Horses and cattle are raised by many tribes for food and clothing. These 
include the Papago, Navajo and Plains tribes. Sheep and goats serve the same purpose 
to the Navajos. Fish is also an important form of wildlife to the tribes near water areas, 
but fish is taboo for the Apache, Navajo and Zuni tribes. 








q ♦ 166 

ERiC 



175 



Student Learning Activities 

1. Discuss sheep while showing pictures, paying careful attention to the care 
necessary to raise sheep and their use. Put styrofoam, pipe cleaners, and cotton 
or cotton balls on the art table and have the children connect the styrofoam balls 
with pipe cleaners, and then use pipe cleaners for legs and facial features. Glue 
cotton on the sheep. Read a story about sheep or have the children make a 
group story or song from their own experience. 

2. Show pictures of animals: horse, cow, rabbit, goat, cat, elephant, mouse, dog, 
deer, chicken, duck, lion, turtle and pig. Talk about how each animal moves and 
have the students take turns imitating animals for their classmates, asking them 
to guess what they are. Have the students draw or paint pictures of animals they 
see on the reservation. 

3. Encourage students to tell their own animal stories. 

4. Read to the children, Buffalo Woman, written and illustrated by Paul Goble. Talk 
about the uses of the buffalo. Show a picture of the buffalo and go over the 
simpler uses of the horns, bones, skin, hide and hair. Use popsicle sticks to 
represent buffalo ribs to make a toboggan. Use yarn to represent rawhide to tie it 
together. Use a brown paper bag for a vest: cut it to make a vest for little boys or 
a dress for little girls. The students will decorate it with crayons, paper, markers 
or paint. 

5. Discuss the winter count. This is a calendar the Sioux used to count the years by 
winters. Pictures represent events of the year. Using brown wrapping paper, let 
the students make their own “winter count” of their lives. Use symbols to 
represent their interests, family or home. 

6. Take the students to a farm, ranch or zoo to see buffalo. 

7. Take students on a field trip to a zoo on the reservation. The teacher will discuss 
the information supplied by the zoo, so that the students will know what to look 
for as they go from display to caged areas. 

8. Invite an elder to come into the classroom during the winter to tell winter stories 
about the coyote, dog and other animals. 











176 



167 ♦ 



Evaluation 



The students will compile a book about the sheep, goats, buffalo or other reservation 
animals. They will write the words, draw and color pictures and design a cover. 

Resources 



Castletter, Edward F. and Ruth M. Underhill. The Ethnobiology of the Papago Indians. 
Albuquerque, New Mexico: University of New Mexico Press, 1978. 

Science. Chicago: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1985. 

Qridley, Marion E., The Story of the Sioux. New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1972. 

Goble, Paul, Buffalo Woman. New York: Broadway Press, 1984. 

Hall, Teresa, David Churchman, Sandy Gibbs, Kathleen Gebauer, John Quinlan, 
American Indian Life Environments. Tribal American Children’s Center, 1975. 

Minor, Marz and Nono, The American Indian Craft Book. Lincoln, Nebraska: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1972. 



Developed By 

Carol L. Martin . 
Georgie Riley 
Vera Freeman 
Becky YoungBear 
John Wray 
Mary Stonehouse 




q ♦ 168 

ERIC 




MATH AND SCIENCE 
Wild Animal Math 

Cultural Objectives 

Students will: 

understand Native American beliefs in regard to care of animals and nature 
be able to identify the importance and many uses of animals in tribal life. 

Math Objectives 

Students will: 

make generalizations and predictions by determining the rules on a given pattern 
measure lengths using nonstandard units, centimeters and inches 
make comparisons and predictions about pictures and bar graphs. 

Teacher Background Information 

To the Native American, animals of the wild were never hunted down as a sport. 

Instead, the animals were hunted to provide food, dress and shelter but usually only 
after an offering and prayer were given to ask for permission to hunt the animals. 

The Native American considered the animals to be their relatives. Many clan names are 
derived from various animals. Some believed that divine beings were in animal forms. 
And today there are still ceremonial dances in which the dancers dress to resemble 
different animals. 



ERiC 



178 



169 ♦ 



This lesson uses a Cheyenne and Sioux Myth, The Great Race of the Birds and 
Animals, to illustrate the way in which mankind won power and guardianship over all 
animals. Man is reminded to use his power wisely, to take care of the animals, and to 
give thanks for them. 

Student Learning Activities 

1 . Read The Great Race of the Birds and Animals. After the story, ask the following 
questions, then write student responses on butcher paper to post in the room: 

a. Why were Buffalo and People racing? 

b. Why did the birds take People’s side and the animals Buffalo’s side? 

c. How and why was Magpie important to the race? 

d. What was the prize? 

e. How is the advice, “Use your power wisely. Look after all things that I have 
made, even the smallest of them. They are all your relatives,” still true 
today? How should we treat animals? 

f. How do we use animals today? 

2. List and count the number of animals mentioned in the story. 

3. Use the above list to put the animals in order according to their size. 

4. Use a flannel board and flannel animals shapes from the story to develop math 
patterns in which the students will discover what comes next. Do several 
together. 

5. Have students work in pairs to develop math patterns using animal shapes. Each 
pair will need various animals and several copies of each animal. Students will 
take turns in developing and solving the patterns. 

6. Make an animal pictograph to solve problems. 



Deer Pictograph 

There are more than 60 different types of deer. The Whitetail deer is the most common 
deer and is also one of the smallest deer. It may stand 3 1/2 feet tall. Moose are the 
largest deer. They may be as tall as 7 1/2 feet tall. 

Read the pictograph below and answer the questions about deer height. 



Height 


Sir =10 deer 


3 feet 




4 feet 




5 feet 




6 feet 


IS* Hr 

00000 


7 feet 


^rr^nr ^rr 



1. How many deer are 5 feet tall? 

2. How many deer are 3 feet tall? 

3. How many deer are taller than 5 feet altogether? 

4. How many deer are shorter than 5 feet altogether? 

5. How many deer are there all together? 



O 




180 



171 ♦ 



6. Divide students into several groups. Have each group draw a life size animal on 
butcher paper that has been folded in half. Have students draw young animals 
(e.g. buffalo calf, lamb, fawn or coyote pup). Cut out two shapes of each animal 
Staple together, leaving several openings to stuff the animals later. Paint and let 
dry. Stuff the animals with scraps of paper and then staple the openings closed. 
This activity will take several class periods. 

7. Have each group estimate how tall or long they believe their animal is. Record 
the estimates on a chart. Have students measure the height and length of their 
animals using paper clips, and then with a ruler. Record each of these 
measurements on the chart. Discuss and compare the measurements on the 
chart. Story problems could also be developed from the charts. 

Evaluation 

1 . Discussion questions after the story. 

2. Have students write a paper on why animals are important to us and how they 
can help take care of the animals. 

3. Small group work on patterns. 

4. Measurement charts. 

Resources 

Goble, Paul. The Great Race of the Birds and Animals. Mew York: Aladdin Books, 

Macmillan Publishing Co., 1991. 

Hoven, Leigh. Thematic Unit - Native Americans. Huntington Beach, California: 

Teacher Created Materials, 1990. 

Wesche, Alice. Wild Brothers of the Indians. Tucson, Arizona: Treasure Chest 

Publications, 1977. 

World Book Encyclopedia. Book “D”, vol. 5, page 88. Chicago: World Book, 1989. 

Developed By 

Cynthia Henley 



18 . 



O 



♦ 172 



MATH AND SCIENCE 
Endangered Species - The Buffalo 

Time Frame: 2 Weeks 
Cultural Objective 

Students will: 

appreciate and respect all living things in nature and recognize that man, 
animals and plants are one in the circle of life. 

Science Objective 

Students will: 

recognize the relationship between earth, animal and plants, and how they 
interact to generate life. 

Mathematics Objective 

Students will: 

select and use the correct operations with whole numbers 
use charts and graphs to present and solve a problem 
identify points, lines and line segments. 

Teacher Background Material 

Native Americans’ relationship to Mother Earth has always been deeply rooted in their 
spiritual beliefs that everything in nature is one and man is part of this circle of life. 

In many Native beliefs, the extinction of many forms of wildlife is an indication of the 
disharmony between man and nature. 

The near annihilation of the American bison/buffalo by the European hunters and the 
GS Army was a means to control the Plains Indians. The Plains Indians depended on 
the buffalo for their survival. The army predicted if all of the buffalo are killed, the 
Plains Indians will also be eliminated as the obstacle to the westward expansion. Some 
fair minded Texans requested the depletion of the bison be halted, but General 
Sheridan ordered continued extermination. By 1900 the American bison was near 
extinction from a population of 50 to 60 million only a century before. The protection 
of the American bison finally began in 1893. Through protective management, the 
buffalo has multiplied and is no longer on the endangered species list. 



Student Learning Activities 



1 . Read Buffalo Woman by Paul Goble. Discuss with the students the relationship 
the Native Americans had with the buffalo. Record student responses on chart 
paper. 

2. Display illustrations of animals most students are familiar with, i.e. horse, sheep, 
cattle, salmon, seals, etc. Have each student list why the animal she/he selected 
is important to her/him, family and tribe. 

3. In 1 993 the following numbers of buffalo existed. 

Yellowstone Canada Reservations Ranches 

3,000 15,000 5,000 120,000 

Students will develop a bar graph of the present numbers of buffalo. 

What conclusions can the students make? 

List the findings and conclusions on the chalkboard. 

Evaluations 

Students will draw pictures depicting how the buffalo was useful to the Native 
Americans. Share illustration with class. 

Students will list ways how the family or community will be affected if the animal of 
their choice became extinct. 

Assess students’ understanding by observing their bar graphs and from the conclusions 
drawn. 

Students will complete any of one or more of the activities listed below. 

✓ Class participation in learning activities 

✓ Record statements, comments, ideas and questions appropriate to lesson 
in the learning log 

%/ Maintain a portfolio of notes, drawings and completed assignments 

Materials 

Story Buffalo Woman, drawing paper, pencils, markers, crayons, chart paper, learning 
log, portfolio, animal illustrations, dictionaries. 



0 >174 

ERiC 



183 



SCIENCE/MATH 
Destruction of Habitat 

Teacher Background Information 

The extinction rate is higher now than when dinosaurs roamed the earth. The number 
and complexity of factors affecting the disappearance of species has continually 
increased. Human overpopulation, deforestation and pollution all contribute to the 
destruction of global wildlife habitats. 

The destruction of global wildlife habitats threatens humans as well. The current threats 
to our environment can be controlled, or even reversed, if everyone becomes educated 
and in turn educates someone else about the threat to our Mother Earth. 

Student Learning Activities 

1. Discuss with students the effects of overpopulation, deforestation and pollution. 
Record responses on the butcher paper. 

2. Students will discuss how they can help stop the destruction of the wildlife 
habitat and record their responses. 

3. Students will discuss the relationship of man, animal and plants and how they 
interact to make new life. Record responses. 

Evaluation 

Students will illustrate, as groups or individually, how man, animals and plants can help 
each other to stay alive and make more of its kind. They can use the responses from 
discussions. Share illustrations and thoughts. 

In discussion, have the students respond to the following: 

What have you learned about Endangered Species? 

What do we mean when we say, “Man, animals and plants are one in the 
circle of life?” 





184 



175 ♦ 



SCIENCE/MATH 
The Role of Zoos 

Teacher Background Information 

A role of the zoo in protecting endangered species extends beyond entertaining 
customers to conservation and education efforts. They balance conservation programs 
with popular exhibits. 

One controversial issue is “should zoos breed two of the same species with different 
characteristics and traits to create a hybrid?” Many argue this type of breeding creates 
an inferior species. 

Student Learning Activities 

1 . Students will write the local zoo and inquire about their captive breeding 
program. 

2. Students will write local/state/federal agencies and inquire about their recovery 
plan and breeding program to increase populations, particularly among 
endangered species. 

3. Students will prepare playing cards using 3” x 5” tag board. On cards identified 
as Set A, students will list natural factors that decrease or increase animal 
population. 

The cards with natural factors which increase population will have plus values 
and cards with natural factors that decrease population will have negative 
values. 

Prepare cards identified as Set B. List human factors that impact directly or 
indirectly on the decrease of a population. These cards will have negative values. 

Fill a small container with 150 beans. This represents the animal population. Fill 
a separate dish with 100 beans to draw from to increase the population. 

Students will take turns drawing cards, reading and adding or subtracting from 
the pot. 

When all the cards are read, count the beans left in the population. 

How many beans are left in the population? 

Has the population increased or decreased? 

Has the population stayed the same? 

Why? 

q ♦ 176 




185 



Evaluation 

Students will complete 2 or more of the activities listed: 

Class participation 
Record in learning log 
Maintaining a current portfolio 

Cross-age teaching: Students will prepare a mini lesson on what they have 
learned and present it to a younger age student. 



Materials 

Envelopes, writing paper, addresses of the local zoo, federal or state wild life offices, 
tag boards, markers, beans, containers, calculators, learning log, portfolio, 
construction paper, completed activities for mini lesson. 




ERIC 



186 



177 ♦ 



MATH AND SCIENCE 
Protecting Mother Earth 

Cultural Objectives 

Students will learn: 

that Native Americans respect Mother Earth and treat her with reverence and 
sacredness. 

that some people have become selfish and take from the earth but give nothing 
back in return. This behavior is an example of life out of balance. 

Chief Seattle’s statement, “Whatever befalls the earth befalls the sons of the 
earth. Man did not weave the web of life; he is merely a strand of it. Whatever he 
does to the web, he does to himself.” 

Math Objectives 

Students will: 

construct simple line or bar graphs, tables and charts 

read and interpret a given set of information contained in a table, graph or chart. 

Science Objective 

Students will: 

describe the role of plants in the prevention of erosion 
know the importance of conserving natural resources 

list the types of natural and man-made pollution, their causes and their impact 
on the environment 

demonstrate knowledge of ethical and moral dilemmas associated with pollution 
by listing human causes of pollution and alternative choices 

identify examples of destruction of habitats due to population growth and misuse 
of resources 

understand cause and effect relationships. 



0 



♦ 178 



IS 7 



Teacher Background Material 

The Legend of the Bluebonnet by Tomie de Paola, is a very good introduction to the 
topic of ecology. In this Comanche legend, a little orphan girl unselfishly offers her 
most prized possession, her doll, to the Great Spirit. Because of her unselfishness, blue 
flowers could be seen in all directions and the rain began to fall. As a result, her tribe 
was saved. 

Discuss the types of pollution, their causes, and the ways in which they can effect 
changes in their lives, families and communities. Explore creative ways of transforming 
“trash” into “treasure.” As Buckminster Fuller often said, “There is no such thing as 
trash. There are only precious resources we haven’t found a use for yet.” 




ERLC 



188 



179 ♦ 





Student Learning Activities 

1. Discuss doll-making techniques and materials. 

a. Invite a guest from the community to demonstrate and discuss doll- 
making techniques. Videotape the demonstration for later reference and to 
house in the library. 

b. Group students and give each group a doll made from different materials. 
On chart paper, have pupils list the materials they think their doll is made. 
Each group discusses the materials they had listed. 

c. Conduct an experiment on the juices from native berries that will show up 
on cloth and can be used for painting faces on the dolls. 

2. Give students a doll-making assignment. 

a. Have pupils bring an item from home from members of their family e.g. 
buttons, trim, lace, etc. 

b. Gather wild grapes, cedar berries, cherries, etc. from your local area. 

c. In the classroom, wash and sort the berries and squeeze the juice into 
cups. Have students predict which juice will be best. Tally their 
predictions. 

d. Give small groups of students scraps of muslim, the different juices and 
paint brushes. 

e. Instruct student to write their names on the material with a pencil. Draw 
and label a mouth and two eyes using different juices for each part. Let 
dry overnight. Observe and record which juices showed up best. Display 
and compare the results. 

f. Have the class construct their dolls following the steps the resource 
person demonstrated. The items brought from home are used to design 
their dolls. The best juice, according to their test, is used to draw the dolls’ 
faces. 

g. When the dolls have been completed, place them in a designated area and 
have pupils measure the heights of their dolls. Record and chart the 
heights to compare them with others. 

h. Invite the parents/guardians and the resource person to a fashion show of 
the finished dolls. If possible, videotape the show for later viewing by the 
pupils. 






♦ 180 



189 



Doll Making Materials 

pencils wild grapes 

cedar berries small cans (1 per pupil) 

cups (1 per pupil) paintbrushes 

paper rulers 

family members 

3. Construct a Litter Man. 

a. Take a nature walk and note the litter found in the area. Discuss why 
littering is bad, the reasons why people throw trash out and what may 
happen if they continue to litter. 

b. Brainstorm for vocabulary words, write them on a chart and use in later 
creative writings. 

c. Contact the U.S. Forest Service and ask Woodsy Owl to visit the 
classroom to talk about pollution. 

d. Organize students in groups and assign a specific area of the playground 
for each group to collect trash from for a week. 

e. Provide each group of students with a rectangular dishpan, marked in 
fourths, with objects buried beneath sand or dirt. Each grid is labeled A, B, 
C or D. Students then carefully dig through the grid and record on a sheet 
of paper (divided into grids) any objects they may find. Each location 
should be labeled and the object drawn on the paper. Continue in this 
manner with the remaining grids. 

f. Students will chart trash collected daily from a specific area. They will 
map the area where they collect their trash. They will sort their trash and 
explain to the class how they classified their trash. 

g. Students will work in groups to set up a graph to show the amount of trash 
collected daily. 

h. Using a large piece of chicken wire, the students will shape a litter man, 
filling the holes in the wire with the litter which they have collected. 

4. Using a map of the United States showing the territories of the Native American 

tribes prior to 1600, have students choose a representative tribe from the 

southeast, northeast, central plains, northwest and southwest e.g. the Seminole, 

Mohawk, Cheyenne, Kwakiutl and the Pueblo. 

a. Separate students into five groups and assign a tribe to each group. 

b. Groups will then research to discover how their tribe obtained food and 
clothing, what types of shelters they constructed and specific ways they 
adapted to their environment. 



markers 

cherries 

water 

muslin scraps 
contributions from 



c. Each group will then guess reasons for the types of lifestyles which they 
discovered. 

d. Each group will draw pictures illustrating the results of their research, 
mount them on a chart and make an oral presentation to the whole class. 

e. When all presentations have been made, the whole group will compare 
and contrast the differences and similarities of each tribal lifestyle. 

f. Each group will construct a diorama to authentically portray its tribe’s 
lifestyle and environment. The group will construct a model of an item or 
illustrate a process specifically developed by the particular tribe to adapt 
to the respective environment. 

g. Each group will investigate the folklore of the tribe which members 
studied to find a legend or poem that pertains to an element of nature e.g. 
the sun, winds, rains, etc. Members will illustrate the legend or poem and 
will present their legend or poem to the whole class. The whole class will 
chart the similarities and differences in these ancestral views of nature. 

Investigate renewable and non-renewable resources. 

a. Ask students to identify objects that come from plants, animals and things 
of the earth. Record on paper. Cut pictures from magazines that show 
products made from plants, animals and natural resources. Work in small 
groups to make collages. 

b. Invite a resource person from a lumber yard. Ask the visitor to bring in 
different types of wood and discuss the amount of wood cut per year, as 
well as types of products that come from wood. 

c. Discuss what is renewable and non-renewable. Work on a definition for 
renewable and non-renewable resources. 

d. Repeat the search for products composed of renewable and non- 
renewable resources. 

e. Bring in a section of a tree trunk. Let children examine it and draw 
conclusions about it. 

f. Discuss how long it takes for a tree to grow. Research how many trees it 
would take to make the students’ desks, paper, chairs, etc. 

g. Bring in clothing made from animal skins. Ask students to speculate 
about the number of animals it took to make the clothing. 

h. Invite a resource person from a local zoo to discuss why some animals are 
endangered or extinct. 

i. Bring a variety of clothing and food products made from plants. Have 
students infer that these items are renewable farm products. 

j. Invite a local farmer to discuss how farming has changed over the years. 



k. 



Take the class to a local recycling facility. 



6. Conduct a community recycling drive. 

a. Have students read books about the Earth and recycling with their 
parents/guardians. Discuss the need for community involvement in 
recycling in order to establish parental support for the drive. 

b. Consult local tribal leaders about the possibility of a contest between 
villages to see which one could collect the most materials for recycling. 

c. Design and construct posters to be posted in each village announcing the 
date of the village clean-up and recycling drive. 

d. Provide locations for trash to be brought for sorting and recycling pickup. 

e. Have students work with representatives from the Tribal Council and the 
recycling plants to establish a schedule for collections at the villages. 

f. Ways and types of measurement for the trash will have to be determined 
by the village officers and the pick-up crew. 

g. Have the students send information about the recycling drive to Renew 
America, an organization that collects stories about people who help 
create Earth-positive changes in their community. 

Evaluation 

Each activity contains its own built-in evaluations, such as discussions, construction of 

the doll, litter man, dioramas, charts and setting up the tribal recycling drive. 

Resources 

Beakes, Morris. Our Wonderful World. Fresno, California: Aims Education Foundation, 

1987. 

Brandon, William. The Magic World. New York: Morrow, 1971. 

de Paola, Tomie. The Legend of the Bluebonnet. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1983. 

Detwyler, Thomas. Man’s Impact on Environment. New York: McGraw Hill, 1971. 

Laury, Jean Ray. Doll Making - A Creative Approach. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold 

Co., 1970. 

Pringle, Laurence. The Only Earth We Have. New York: Macmillan, 1969. 

Developed By 

Renata Griego 

Diane Cleveland 

Elaine Hendricks 



ERIC 



192 



183 ♦ 



My Ideas for Beavers to Buffalo Gnit: 



♦ 184 

ERIC 



194 




185 



Lesson Plans/Schedule for Beavers to Buffalo CInit 



O 

ERIC 



♦ 186 



95 




o 

EKLC 

iminaffamiaaa 



196 



187 * 



Nursery Rhymes and Poems 



A Little Squirrel 
I saw a little squirrel 
Sitting in a tree; 

He was eating a nut 
And wouldn’t look at me. 



The Porcupine 

The porcupine is puzzled 

that his friends should act so queer, 

for though they come to visit him 

they never come too near. 



The Beaver 
The beaver is fat, 
and his tail is so flat 
that it resembles an oar. 

He’s known for his teeth, 
those on top and beneath, 
and he lives just a trifle offshore. 

He nibbles on trees 

as a mouse nibbles cheese 

with incisors as sharp as a knife. 

And with dexterous tricks 
builds a house out of sticks 
along with his children and wife. 

Far, far away from Buffalo Country 
Hither now they come with their little ones 
Rapidly now they walk, rapidly they walk, 
Even now they reach the Red Bird Cap. 

O Buffalo Old Man, O Buffalo Old Woman! 
Come hither rapidly with your little ones. 
- Pueblo 

A Poem About a Wolf, Maybe Two Wolves 
He comes running 
Across the field where 
He comes running 

Yoweeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 
Other wild animal poems, songs. 



They often stop to say hello 
and pass the time of day, 
but still the closest of them all 
stays many feet away. 

He sits and ponders endlessly, 
but never finds a clue 
to why his close companions 
act the distant way they do. 

The porcupine has never had 
the notion in his brain 
that what he finds enjoyable 
to others is a pain. 

Buffalo Story 

In this way came the buffalo tracks 
the buffalo track that we see 
that everywhere we see 



the tracks of those feet made by life 
in this way 

O ^ 

life that came in this way 0 



Now the little calf is born 
filled with life and motion 
born the newborn yellow calf 
standing on its feet and walks 
leaving tracks, leaving tracks 
- Omaha 



The teacher should have the students do choral readings of these selections, memorize 
and recite them, and explain what they mean in their own words. These can be used to 
stress phonemic awareness and beginning/ending sounds, rhyming words in 
kindergarten and other word-attack principles such as long and short vowels, ly, le, er 
and ing, singular - plural, and other skills at the first grade level and up. 



♦ 188 

ERiC 



197 



Additional Resources 

Indian ABC Books 

Many Nations: An Alphabet Book of Native America by Joseph Bruchac (Indian 
Author), Troll, 1998. 

Cherokee ABC Coloring Book by Daniel Pennington, Book Publishing Co., PO Box 99, 
Summertown, TN 38483 

ABC’s of Our Spiritual Connection by Kim Soo Goodtrack (Indian Author), Theytus 
Books. 

ABC’s, the American Indian Way by Richard Red Hawk (Indian Author), SCB 
Distributors, 1992. 

The Path of the Quiet Elk, A Native American Alphabet Book by Virginia Stroud (Indian 
Author), Dial, 1996. 

Navajo ABC, A Dine Alphabet Book by Luci Tapahonso (Indian Author), Aladdin, 

1999. 

Powwow ABC by Sandy Hummingbird, 2000. 

Where to Get Books 

North American Native Authors Catalog, Greenfield Review Press, PO Box 308, 
Greenfield Center, NY 12833 * 518/583-1440 

Medicine Root Inc., Native Earth Products of North America, PO Box 353, Louisville, 
CO 80027 * 303/66 1-9819 

Indian Books Catalog, Four Winds Indian Books, PO Box 544, York, NE 68467-0544 * 
402/362-5654 * www.fourwindsindianbooks.com 

Oyate Catalog, 2702 Mathews St., Berkely, CA 94712 * 510/848-6700 * 
www.oyate.org 

Prairie Edge Book and Music List, Prairie Edge, 6 th & Main, Rapid City, SD 57701 * 
800/541-2388 * prairie@rapidnet.com * www.prairieedge.com 

Native American Catalog, Book Publishing Company, PO Box 99, Summertown, TN 
38483 * 931/964-3571 * bookpubl@usit.net 

Pemmican Pub., Unit #2, 1635 Burrows Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba R2X0T1 Canada 
204/589-6346 * pemmican@fox.nstn.ca 



O 

ERIC 



198 



189 ♦ 



Books Available from the Haskell Foundation 

Hen of Wahpeton by Ann Nolan Clark $8.00 

Little Herder in Spring, Little Herder in Summer, Little Herder in Autumn, Little Herder 
in Winter by Ann Nolan Clark 4 books for $25.00 or 1 for $8.00 

There Still Are Buffalo by Ann Nolan Clark $7.00 

Coyote Tales by William Morgan $8.00 

Who Wants To Be A Prairie Dog? by Ann Nolan Clark $7.00 

Slim Butte Raccoon by Ann Nolan Clark $7.00 

Young Hunter of Picuris by Ann Nolan Clark $6.00 

Little Turtle by Hildegard Thompson $4.00 

Little Hopi by Edward A. Kennard $8.00 

Little Boy With Three Names by Ann Nolan Clark $8.00 

Bringer of the Mystery Dog by Ann Nolan Clark $8.00 

Billy Black Lamb by Caroline H. Breedlove $4.00 

Field Mouse Goes To War by Edward A. Kennard $8.00 

Grass Mountain Mouse by Ann Nolan Clark $8.00 

Little Man’s Family, Books One and Two $5.00 and $7.00 

Navajo Life Series by Hildegard Thompson $4.00 

Sun Journey by Ann Nolan Clark $7.00 

This Little Books series of children’s books was commissioned by the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs in the 30’s, 40’s and 50’s. They have influenced and entertained several 
generations of Indian children. 

To place an order for the Little Books, call 785/749-8417 or 8425. Shipping and 
handling extra. The Haskell Foundation, 155 Indian Avenue, Lawrence, KS 66046. 



O 



♦ 190 



199 



Science Organizations and Projects 

American Indian Science and Engineering Society, PO Box 9828, Albuquerque, NM 
87119-9828 Publishes Winds of Change Magazine 505/765-1052 * www.aises.org 

Four Directions Project involves science, math and technology for Bureau of Indian 
Affairs funded schools. Pueblo of Laguna, Laguna, MM * www.4directions.org 

Bureau of Indian Affairs Council Fire Website, Lightspan Partnership by Subscription 
www.lightspan.net 

American Indian/ Alaska Mative Initiative, Mational Science Foundation Rural Systemic 
Initiative, Tribal Colleges, Alaska, Citah-Colorado-Arizona-Mew Mexico (CICAN), Navajo 
Nation projects, NSF, Arlington, VA * www.nsf.gov 

Teacher Resources 

Earth’s Caretakers and Signs of Tradition: Native American Lessons, Math and Science 
Teachers for Reservation Schools (MASTERS) Project, University of Kansas, 1993 & 
1994. 785/864-4435 * jnewland@ukans.edu 

Keepers of the Earth, Keepers of the Animals, Keepers of Life, Keepers of the Night by 
Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac, Fulcrum Pub., Golden, CO 1988-1998. 

Native Science, Natural Laws of Interdependence by Gregory Cajete, Clear Light Pub., 

2000. 

Ignite the Sparkle: A Native American Science Education Curriculum Model by 
Gregory Cajete, Kavaki Press, Skyland, NC 1999. 

American Indian Science, A New Look at Old Cultures by Fern Brown, Twenty First 
Century Books, 1997. 

Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Children by Doris Seale and 
Beverly Slapin, New Society Publishers, 1987. Oyate, 2702 Mathews St., Berkeley, CA 
94702 

Start Early, Finish Strong: How to Help Every Child Become a Reader, Ci.S. Department 
of Education, 1999. 877/4ED-PCIBS * www.gov/pubs/edpubs.html * www.gov/ 
americareads 

Put Reading First, Research Building Blocks for Teaching Children to Read, K-3 
www.nifl.gov 



o 

c. 




o 

ERIC 



191 ♦ 



Social Studies Books for K-3 

Families 

On Mother’s Lap by Ann Herbert Scott. 

MaMa, Do You Love Me? by Barbara M. Joosse, Chronicle Books, 1991. 

In My Mother’s House by Ann Molan Clark. 

Grandmother’s Dreamcatcher by Becky Ray McCain, Albert Whitman & Co., 1998. 
Grandmother’s Christmas Story by Richard Red Hawk (Indian Author). 

Grandma Knows by Lois Dalby and Jeanette McCrie, Peguis Pub., 1972. 

Songs from the Loom, A Mavajo Girl Learns to Weave, We Are Still Here Series. 

The Worry Stone by Marrianne Denger, Rising Moon, 1996. 

Askii and His Grandfather by Margaret Garaway, Treasure Chest, 1989. 

Alice Yazzie’s Year by Ramona Maher, Coward, 1977. 

Shemay, The Bird in the Sugar Bush by David Martinson (Indian Author), Duluth Indian 
Ed. Advisory Committee, 1975. 

Morning Arrow by Nanabah Chee Dodge (Indian Author), Lothrop, 1975. 

Shota and the Star Quilt by Margaret Bates-Hill, Gloria Runs Close to Lodge and 
Philomene Lakota (Indian Authors), Zero to Ten, Ltd., 1998. 

Jingle Dancer by Cynthia Leitich Smith (Indian Author). 

Where Did You Get Your Moccasins? by Bernelda Wheeler, Peguis Pub., 1992. 

Kevin Cloud, Chippewa Boy in the City, Reilly & Lee, 1972. 

American Indian Families by Jay Miller. 

“The Family” in the Learning Circle, Classroom Activities on First Nations in Canada, 
Department of Indian Affairs and Native Development, www.inac.gc.ca 

Little Man’s Family, Haskell Foundation. 

Children of Clay, A Family of Pueblo Potters, We Are Still Here Series. 



0 ♦ 192 

ERiC 



20 1 



Communities 

Drumbeat, Heartbeat, A Celebration of the Powwow, We Are Still Here Series. 

A Trip to a Powwow by Richard Red Hawk (Indian Author). 

American Indian Festivals by Jay Miller. 

Lakota Sioux Children and Elders Talk Together by E. Barrie Kavasch, Power Kid Press, 
1999. 

Powwow Activity Book by Sandy and Jesse Hummingbird. 

Clambake, A Wampanoag Tradition, We Are Still Here Series. 

The Spring Celebration by Tina CJmpherville (Indian Author), Pemmican, 1997. 

A Haida Potlatch by Ulli Steltzer, University of Washington, 1984. 

Indian Nations 

Native Peoples Series for Primary Grades available from Four Winds Indian Books. 
Includes Apache, Cherokee, Chinook, Chumash, Commanche, Iroquois, Miwok, 

Ojibwa, Porno, Powhatan, Pueblo, Seminole, Sioux, Wampanoag, Inuit, Navajo, 

Pawnee, Nez Perce, Cheyenne, Shawnee, Shoshone, Choctaw. 

New True Books About Native Americans Series, Children’s Press. Includes Apache, 
Cherokee, Cheyenne, Chippewa, Choctaw, Chumash, Crow, Delaware, Eskimo, Hopi, 
Mandan, Menominee, Mohawk, Navajo, Nez Perce, Oneida, Onondaga, Pawnee, 
Penobscot, Porno, Seminole, Seneca, Shoshoni, Sioux, Tlingit, Tuscarora. 

History 

Map of American Indian Tribes available from Four Winds Indian Books. 

The People Shall Continue by Simon Ortiz (Indian Author), Children’s Book Press, 

1977. 

The Trail of Tears by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author). 

The Unbreakable Code by Sara Hoagland Hunter. 

The Story of Wounded Knee available from Four Winds Indian Books. 

Before Columbus available from Four Winds Indian Books. 




202 



193 ♦ 



Unit Title 

Introduction 



Paragraph describing what the students will be learning and how it fits into the overall 
school curriculum. 



Activities and Materials 

List the major activities students will be engaged in. Be sure to list word study, reading, 
writing, speaking and listening activities as well as hands-on activities and viewing of 
visuals or demonstrations. Include the materials, especially books, stories and poems 
that will be used for the unit. 



Standards and Benchmarks/Skills Addressed 

List the state standards and benchmarks addressed by the activities in the unit. You can 
use the code numbers of the standards and benchmarks. 



Evaluation 

How you will know that students have learned what you want them to learn. 



Approximate Length of Unit 
Days or hours needed for the unit. 

0 ♦ 194 




203 






iii Grades K-3 

Volume 11 




by 

Sandra J. Fox D.Ed. 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

Gj This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



204- 




Creating a Sacred Place to Support Young 
American Indian and Other Learners 

in Grade*) K-3 

Volume II 




by 

Sandra J. Fox D. Ed. 



Mater laid eJ Actio it led for 
Hared to Horded, 

Art, 

Earth, Air, Water e3 Fire, 
Mudic eJ Dance 
Umtd 





© National Indian School Board Association 2000 

Carmen Co met Liu Toy Lor, Executive Director 
PO Box 790 
Poison, MT 59860 
406/883-3603 
fax 406/675-4801 

e-mail carmen_taylor@skc.edu 



O 

ER i.C 



205 



Tins book is dedicated to Rick Athens, Waabdi Kan Hoksida 
(Oh) Eagle Boy), 

( 1950 - 2000 ) 

who believed in cm mg a sacne d place . 



This publication is based on work sponsored wholly, or in 
part, by the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
Department of Education, under Contract Number 
R215C000058. The content of this publication does not 
necessarily reflect the views of OERI, the Department or 
any other agency of the U.S. Government. 




Covek design hv Dennis R. For, Jr. 
Mandan/Hidaisa/AKikaKa/Lakora 



206 



Contents 



Introduction 



Creating a Sacred Place - Administrators and School Board Members 1 

Creating a Sacred Place - Parents and Tutors 3 

Creating a Sacred Place - Teachers and Aides 5 

Materials and Activities for Hares to Horses Unit II 

Teacher’s/Parent’s Background Information 12 

Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline 14 

About the Literature 16 

Further Resources for Hares to Horses Unit 20 

Hares to Horses Words 23 

Science, Math and Language Arts Content Standards Addressed 24 

Activities Developed by Teachers of Indian Students 29 

My Ideas for Hares to Horses Unit 47 

Lesson Plaris/Schedule for Hares to Horses Unit 48 

Materials and Activities for Art Unit 51 

Teacher’s/Parent’s Background Information 52 

Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline 54 

About the Literature 56 

Further Resources for Art Unit 60 

Art Words 63 

Science and Language Arts Content Standards Addressed 64 

Activities Developed by Teachers of Indian Students 69 

My Ideas for Art Unit 95 

Lesson Plans/Schedule for Art Unit 96 

Materials and Activities for Earth, Air, Water and Fire Unit 99 

Teacher’s/Parent’s Background Information 100 

Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline 102 

About the Literature 104 

Further Resources for Earth, Air, Water and Fire Unit 108 

Earth, Air, Water and Fire Words 1 10 

Science and Language Arts Content Standards Addressed 1 1 1 

Activities Developed by Teachers of Indian Students 117 

Lesson Plans/Schedule for Earth, Air, Water and Fire Unit 142 

My Ideas for Earth, Air, Water and Fire Unit 144 



O 




207 



Materials and Activities for Music and Dance Unit 
Teacher’s/Parent’s Background Information 
Suggested Primary Level Unit Outline 
About the Literature 

Further Resources for Music and Dance Unit 
Music and Dance Words 

Science and Language Arts Content Standards Addressed 
Activities Developed by Teachers of Indian Students 
Lesson Plans/Schedule for Music and Dance Unit 
My Ideas for Music and Dance Unit 



145 

146 
148 
150 
154 

157 

158 
163 
188 
190 



Additional Resources 



191 



ERIC 



208 



INTRODUCTION 



As we enter the next millenniuni, it is unfortunate that American Indian students, for the 
most part, are still not doing as well in school as they might. At the 1999 conference of 
the National Indian Education Association, I gave the banquet speech in which I said that 
we had failed because we still did not have the relevant curriculum for all Indian students 
that we had talked about for at least the 30 years I had been involved. After stating that, I 
felt obligated to be a part of the solution. My doctorate is in curriculum and instruction 
with an emphasis in the teaching of reading. 

In my 30+ years in Indian education, I witnessed many classrooms in which students 
were totally disengaged. The instruction taking place was either totally boring or the 
topic was totally unrelated to anything the students knew or cared about. The relevant 
curriculum we had envisioned took place in the regular classroom, included content 
related to the lives of Indian children, made them proud, expanded to other experiences, 
and enhanced further learning. American Indians had highly developed societies before 
the white man came and have contributed much to this society. Indian children should 
know about these things. I read recently that NASA is looking to Indian people to help 
solve the global warming problem. Imagine the science and other knowledge needed to 
solve global warming. 

Indian literature is a resource that can provide the basis for a culturally relevant 
curriculum. There are many more Indian authors writing books for children and 
more good Indian literature is being published. Many of the books include Indian 
stories that teach lessons for life and they are similar across tribes. 

What I have done, essentially, is to survey all of the Indian literature available for young 
children, written by both Indians and non-Indians. It has fallen in eight topic areas, four 
of which are included in this book. The approach promoted is the integration of reading, 
language arts and science based upon the Indian literature and non-Indian books for 
young children. Materials and activities are aligned with the new, more challenging 
language arts, math and science standards. Also included are ideas for art activities and 
promotion of tribal values from the literature. Creative teachers might also include social 
studies and career education in this integrated approach. Indian studies classes and 
regular classes are to be coordinated around the topic areas so that language and cultural 
activities complement classroom instruction. The topic will provide a context for native 
language instruction and the goal should be conversational language. There are activities 
for parents and tutors as part of a comprehensive approach. This is not a canned 
curriculum; it contains all the ingredients necessary for a school to develop its own 
curriculum for the primary grades with an extension to homes and preschool children. 

This document pays tribute to many: Indian and other authors who write books for 
Indian children, Indian and other organizations that distribute books especially by and 
about Indians, Indian and other organizations that have made the improvement of math 



and science instruction a priority, individuals who see the connection between 
Indian culture and science instruction, and teachers who have developed and then 
implemented culture-based curriculum in their classrooms. Many good activities have 
taken place across the country over the years. Many good materials have been developed 
but now sit on shelves or have disappeared. This attempt draws from some of them and 
will help to publicize new efforts. 

Some of the materials and activities included here have been taken from the work of 
others. For example, some of the teacher’s background information included comes from 
math and science materials developed by ORBIS Associates of Washington, DC, an 
Indian-owned company that focuses on education research and training. The math and 
science activities included were developed by teachers in Bureau of Indian Affairs- 
funded schools in summer workshops at Haskell Indian Junior College (Haskell Indian 
Nations University) in 1992 and 1993. I have drawn on the work of educators such as 
Richard Nichols, Gwen Shunatona and Anne Litchfield of ORBIS Associates; Dan 
Wildcat, Lucretia Herrin, Dr. Michael Ward, and Anita Chisholm who led the math and 
science workshops at Haskell. The section. Additional Resources, starting on page 191 
lists science organizations and projects, teacher resources developed by Indian educators, 
and Indian book distribution organizations. 

I hope that this document will be useful to parents, tutors, teachers, aides, administrators 
and school board members at schools where there are Indian students. I hope that Title 
IX and Johnson O’Malley programs can utilize it. I hope that parents who are 
homeschooling their children will find it helpful. I hope that teachers of non-Indian 
students will use it, especially for that week at Thanksgiving and, hopefully, beyond. 

I have not read every book listed in this document, and if I did, I would not be able to 
guarantee their being free of cultural bias. I did utilize the publication. Through Indian 
Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Childrenby Beverly Slapin and Doris Seale to 
avoid books that may be offensive. I tried to promote books written by Indian authors. If 
it is found that a book is not acceptable to Indian people or to a tribe, in particular, the 
book should definitely not be used. I recommend that books be reviewed by local Indian 
people to be sure. There is guidance for reviewing books in Through Indian Eyes and in 
a document developed by the Indian Community School of Milwaukee listed in the 
Additional Resources section. I would like to know if there is a book that should be 
eliminated from this document. I have heard varying opinions on this matter and on 
certain books. I just feel that we need to take a risk and help teachers who want to 
incorporate a more meaningful curriculum, but who do not have the time or the 
information to do so. Actually, if the use of the approach outlined in this document 
works, it should promote a resurgence of local storytelling and/or the writing of more 
children’s books by Indian people. 

Anyway, I hope that this document will help little children somewhere. I greatly enjoyed 
developing it. I hope others will enjoy using it to create a sacred place for young 
American Indian and other learners. - SJF, Oglala Lakota, Albuquerque, NM 



CREATING A SACRED PLACE - ADMINISTRATORS/SCHOOL BOARDS 

Consider this quote from Ron Edmonds of the Effective Schools movement: 

We can, whenever and wherever we choose, successfully teach all 
children whose schooling is of interest to us. We already know more 
than we need to do that. Whether or not we do it must finally depend 
on how we feel about the fact that we haven’t so far. 

We are at a time when it is being demanded that schools produce higher achievement. 
Students must learn to read and write at higher levels, they must be able to solve more 
difficult math and science problems, they must be adequately prepared to meet the world 
and function successfully in the 21 s * Century. We must change the way we do things in 
order to produce these results. Schools have been failing students. Part of the problem is 
that we don’t do what we know should be done, as Ron Edmonds states. 

For example, in regard to American Indian students and the teaching of reading, the 
research has said over and over that two major strategies are recommended: 1) utilize 
reading material that relates to the lives of the children so they understand that it is 
experience captured in written language and are interested in reading it and 2) strengthen 
and expand the language ability of children by providing a great deal of opportunity to 
have new experiences, leam new words and practice oral language in English and the 
native language. 

For the most part, these two recommendations are not followed in schools that have 
American Indian students. Why not? Most reading instruction is done with reading 
books that seldom contain stories that relate to the lives of the children, and experience- 
based instruction and oral language practice require a great deal of work and make a 
noisy classroom which schools don’t usually tolerate. Another part of the problem is that 
schools and teachers have many, many things to do in a day. They have so many things 
to do that, often, they don’t do them welL 

Another piece of information that we should pay attention to is found in a recent report 
from the U.S. Department of Education that indicates that children from high poverty 
areas are coming to school with English vocabularies of only about 3,000 words as 
compared to children from more affluent families that enter school with 20,000 word 
English vocabularies. Students with 20,000 word vocabularies leam to read and write 
much easier than those with 3,000 word vocabularies. If a child does not know the words 
he/she is to read on standardized tests, there is an automatic penalty. Schools that have 
Indian children must attend to vocabulary expansion by addressing language 
development in English and the native language. 



Still another major consideration is the importance of parental involvement and early 
childhood education and experiences. Recent research tells us that the first three years of 
life are extremely important in preparing children for school. Schools must take 
advantage of this information and plan and implement programs that engage parents in 
activities with their children that will provide the foundations necessary for further 
learning when the children come to school. 

This document is an attempt to help schools follow the recommendations made to 
improve the teaching of Indian children, utilize the information from recent research and 
reports, and help teachers do all the things they are required to do in a more efficient 
manner. It will primarily help teachers teach reading, language arts and science usin g 
American Indian and non-Indian stories and materials. The materials and activities are 
aligned with the new, more challenging language arts, math and science content standards 
required by school reform. At the same time, teachers can teach art and tribal values. 
Very creative teachers might also include social studies and career education in this 
integrated approach. This approach provides the opportunity for the Indian studies 
classes and regular classes to work closely together to reinforce classroom instruction 
with language and cultural activities. Parents and tutors play an important part. Imagine 
what can happen if all are working together toward the same goals. 



If you are a parent or grandparent, you need to also read the section for parents and 
tutors. If you want to know more about how the approach suggested by this document 
would work, read the section for teachers and aides. 



CREATING A SACRED PLACE - PARENTS AND TUTORS 



More than ever before, teachers need the help of parents and tutors who can assist 
children in a one-on-one situation to give them the practice, support and assistance that 
they need individually to do well in school. As part of the national school reform effort, 
schools are being required to expect more from students and teach them more difficult 
things. For example, now all students are to “become good readers by the end of third 
grade.” T his has not happened in the past so this is now a national goal. In order to meet 
this goal, it will take a joint effort of teachers, parents, and tutors (if available). 

What must be done to help our children? A recent report by the U. S. Department of 
Education indicated that many children are coming to school with English vocabularies 
of approximately 3,000 words as compared to other children that have English 
vocabularies of 20,000 words. The students with 20,000 word vocabularies have a much 
easier time learning to read and write. This tells us that teachers, parents and tutors must 
provide activities that will help expand children’s English vocabularies. Children learn 
language by hearing and speaking. Strengthening children’s native language use helps 
them learn English easier. Further, it is known that reading to children is the single, most 
important activity that parents can provide to help their children succeed in school. Here 
are some things parents and tutors can do: 

Talk more with children about school and everyday things. Have them recite 
poetry, sing songs, present various things they have learned. Play with them. 

Tell stories and read to children often. Ask them questions as you read to see if 
they are understanding the stories. Occasionally, have them retell the story or 
draw a picture about it. 

Teach children to be interested in words, how they are spelled, what they mean, 
and teach them new words. Have them write lists and short notes for you. 

As children learn to read, have them read to you-either the whole story, some of 
the pages, or pages after you have read them already. Ask them what they think 
about what happened in the story. 

Be actively involved in the children’s school instructional program. Provide 
support for their learning and make available interesting and meaningful reading 
and other educational materials and activities for them. 

Be a role model and let the children see you reading and writing. Limit television 
watching in favor of time for reading and reading together. 

The activities listed above should be done with children starting at birth, by talking and 
singing to them a lot in both English and the native language, and should be continued all 
the way through their primary school years. 

3 



O 

ER i.C 



213 



This document contains lists of books that you and the children will enjoy. The books 
include stories and information about animals, art, the earth, and music and dance. The 
books include Indian stories that usually teach lessons and regular non-Indian books for 
young children. This document also contains word lists (pages 23, 63,1 10, 157) that 
parents can use for each of the topics and background information for parents on the 
topics (pages 12, 52, 100, 146). The lists of books are found in the sections entitled 
Further Resources and About the Literature . The books are categorized as follows: 

Phase 1 : Awareness and Exploration 

Children explore their surroundings, building foundations for learning 
to read and write. This starts at birth and continues through preschool. 

The activities listed on the previous page are good ways to help your children build 
foundations for learning to read and write. Books that are most appropriate for Phase 1 
children are found on the Further Resources lists (starting on pages 20, 60, 108, and 154) 
and are marked with an asterisk (*). Books listed in the About the Literature sections for 
Phase 2 (pages 16, 56, 104, and 150) would also be good to read to preschoolers. The 
section Additional Resources at the end of this book contains a list of Indian ABC books. 
Your school or community library has picture books for preschoolers on the topics 
included in this book and other topics. Also, check bookstores and other stores. 

The other phases are: 

Phase 2: Experimental Reading and Writing 

Children develop the basic concepts of print and begin to experiment 
with reading and writing. This is what they are to learn in kindergarten . 

Phase 3: Early Reading and Writing 

Children read simple stories and write about meaningful topics. This is 
what they are to learn in first grade. 

Phase 4: Transitional Reading and Writing 

Children begin to read more fluently and write using more complex 
sentences. This is what they are to leam in second grade. 

Phase 5: Independent and Productive Reading and Writing 
Children are capable readers and continue to refine reading and writ ing 
This is where they should be by the end of third grade. 

Based on these phases, parents and tutors can choose books from the various lists in this 
document in the sections called About the Literature or can choose from the Further 
Resources lists, especially if they are interested in materials from certain tribes or 
particular aspects of a topic. Also included are pages for parents or tutors to use to 
schedule and log reading time with children. Some parents may be homeschooling their 
children, in which case, they should also read the section for teachers and aides. 

4 



CREATING A SACRED PLACE - TEACHERS AND AIDES 



Schools are involved in various school reform activities at this time. Teachers of the 
p rimar y grades are being asked to do many things including: 

align curriculum with the new content standards and new assessments, 

do a better job of teaching reading and math, 

utilize an integrated approach to teaching the various content areas, 

teach for understanding and application and focus on depth, 

teach disabled and gifted students in the regular classroom, 

promote positive student behavior through a school- wide approach, and 

provide meaningful parental involvement in the instructional process. 

In addition, teachers of American Indian students are asked to: 

incorporate American Indian content standards, 

provide instruction for Indian children that is based upon research, 

provide culturally relevant instruction within the regular classroom, and 

promote the use of native languages to strengthen children’s language ability. 

This is only a partial list of the many things that teachers of primary students have to do. 
This document will provide assistance to teachers and aides who truly want to create a 
sacred place to support young American Indian or other learners and will help coordinate 
all that they have to do. 

Essentially, the approach presented here combines the teaching of reading, language arts 
and science by ut ilizin g American Indian and other literature as the basis for instruction. 
The materials and activities are aligned with the new, more challenging language arts, 
math and science standards and the American Indian standards. Teachers can also teach 
art and tribal values in relation to the topic and the literature. Some teachers might also 
include social studies and career education in this integrated approach. The approach 
provides the opportunity for Indian studies classes and regular classes to work closely 
together to directly reinforce classroom instruction with language and cultural activities. 
Parents and tutors have important parts to play, also. 



5 



A primary purpose of this effort is to help teachers do a better job of teaching Indian 
children to read. In order to meet the national goal of having all students be capable 
readers by the end of third grade, we must utilize all resources and all information 
available. A recent publication of the U.S. Department of Education, Start Early, Finish 
Strong: How to Help Every Child Become A Reader, includes the various phases in 
learning to read, what should be learned at the various grade levels and before. 

Phase 1 : Preschool - Awareness and Exploration 

Children explore their environment, building foundations for learning to read and 
write. 

Phase 2: Kindergarten - Experimental Reading and Writing 

Children develop the basic concepts of print and begin to experiment with reading 

and writing. 

Phase 3 : First Grade - Early Reading and Writing 

Children read simple stories and write about a meaningful topic. 

Phase 4: Second Grade - Transitional Reading and Writing 

Children begin to read more fluently and write using more complex sentences. 

Phase 5: Third Grade — Independent and Productive Reading and Writing 
Children continue to refine reading and writing for different uses and audiences. 

The materials and activities presented in this document are organized generally according 
to these phases, although students at various phases within a classroom can be 
accommodated because the phases are assigned according to student interest level rather 
than strictly by reading levels of materials. Ungraded or multiage classrooms can also be 
accommodated and are encouraged. 

The Start Early, Finish Strong document also indicates that children of low-income 
families come to school with an English vocabulary of approximately 3,000 words, 
whereas a child from a high-income family has an English vocabulary of 20,000 words. 
The child with a 20,000 word English vocabulary has a much easier time learning to read 
and write. If a child does not know the words he/she is to read, there is an automatic 
penalty on standardized tests. Vocabulary building, language development, is a key. 

Start Early, Finish Strong states that teachers need to use a comprehensive approach to 
teaching reading and teach young children that language, in a meaningful context, is 
made up on words which contain sounds that are represented by letters and groups of 
letters. Presently, however, too many teachers think that phonics instruction will solve all 
their problems. Phonics rules do not apply to many words. Therefore, meaning and a 
rich vocabulary are necessary for children to recognize words for which phonics rules do 
not apply. Children need new experiences to learn new words; often this new experience 
comes from reading or words are recognized within context while reading. 

6 



O 



216 



Over the years, research regarding improving the teaching of reading for American 
Indian students has recommended two major strategies: 1) utilizing reading material that 
is culturally relevant, that relates to the lives of the children, including language- 
experience stories and American Indian literature, and 2) strengthening and expanding 
the lang uage ability of the children by providing a great deal of opportunity for oral 
language activities in English and the native language, including many conversations, 
discussions, retelling stories, reciting, reporting, etc. 

Further, the approach taken in this document promotes viewing Indian children generally 
as global learners rather than analytic learners. Global learners often: 

concentrate and learn when information is presented as a whole, 

respond to emotional appeals, 

tend to like fantasy and humor, 

process information subjectively and in patterns, 

easily identify the main idea in a story, 

learn easily through stories, and 

use story context to figure out unknown words. 

And consider the following in regard to teaching elementary science: 

Students should gradually develop a sense of what science is. 

An explicit goal of science should be to introduce young children to as 
many different phenomena of the real world as possible. 

Science should build an appetite among students for learning how 
phenomena in the world work and how they connect to each other. 

Elementary science should convince children that they can become part 
of the world of science and re main members all their lives. 

All of the above information, from the professional literature, is utilized in the 
development of the suggested curriculum units included in this document. The materials 
and activities can help teachers of American Indian students successfully teach them. 
Four units are presented, organized according to topics. The topics are based upon 
available American Indian literature for children and are: Hares to Horses; Art; Earth, 
Air, Water and Fire; and Music and Dance. 

7 

n v C 
'Q ) 




1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 



217 



For each unit, the following are included: 



1 . Background information on the topic of the unit for the teacher. 

2. A suggested scheme or outline showing how available American Indian 
literature and other children’s literature can be formulated into a unit for 
kindergarten through third grade or for different phases within a multi-age or 
ungraded classroom. The units integrate language arts and science activities 
and suggest mathematics application and art activities that evolve from the 
topics. The units also include an emphasis on values and positive behavior, 
lessons learned primarily from the Indian stories. 

3. Information about the suggested literature, the content it provides and why it 
is organized as it is. The literature is organized mainly by subtopics and 
assigned to phases more according to interest levels than reading levels. 
Therefore, in the literature suggested for a phase, there may be materials of 
different reading levels, but it is the subtopic and what is done with the 
material that makes the difference. Selection of literature to be used is 
ultimately the choice of the teacher with his/her own students in min d. 

4. Further resources that can be used in place of some of the literary pieces 
selected for the unit or for further student reading/activities. A teacher may 
decide that he/she wants to use only literature from the tribe or area of the 
students that are being taught. Or he/she may want to use only literature 
written by Indian authors. The further resources lists provide a wider 
choice of materials to draw from. 

5. A word list for the topic, to be used to recognize patterns in words and for 
vocabulary expansion. These lists are not exhaustive, and the teacher may 
decide not to use some of the words. The lists include many of the words of 
the topic and particular spelling patterns that they contain, which should be 
helpful. For vocabulary expansion, remember that vocabulary should not be 
taught by providing lists of words and multiple choice tests but by including 
new words in discussions, etc. Students should become fluent in “art words.” 



6. Example activities developed by teachers of American Indian children at math 
and science workshops held during the summers of 1992-1994 at Haskell 
Indian Nations University and the University of Kansas. 

7. The new, more challenging language arts, math and science content standards 
that will be covered if the suggested unit is implemented. 

8. A page for the teacher to put his or her own ideas for materials or activities. 



9. Pages for lesson plans. 




8 



Other considerations are: 



1 Teachers will have to secure the literature they will use then decide when and 
how to use it. Will it be told or read to students? Will students read it 
themselves or with assistance? Will the selection be read or heard over and 
over again? Will all students read the same selection or will different 
selections be used with different students? Teachers will have to determine 
these things based upon the interests and abilities of their students. Teachers 
will also have to determine whether students should then retell a story, 
respond to it, perform it, summarize and report information, etc., and if they 
should do so in writing or orally. The teacher should have literature circles in 
which students discuss, respond and compare and contrast stories. Teachers 
should regularly review the language arts standards to ensure their coverage. 

2. The suggested units are developed so that teachers will teach for 
understanding and application utilizing a spiraling approach. For example, 
books should be read over and over, even from one grade to the next. 
Addressing the same topic and the same words over and over, from one level 
to the next, will provide mastery and then confidence as students move on to 
higher level materials. The patterns they see from one set of words can be 
applied to other words. 

3. Teachers who u tilize the approaches and activities included in these units will 
not have quiet classrooms. Students must be allowed a great deal of 
opportunity for oral language activities including meaningful conversations 
and discussions, oral recitations, retelling, reporting, performing, etc. 

4. The school’s Indian culture/language courses should be organized around 
the same unit topics and serve to provide the local tribal cultural and language 
instruction to complement each unit. The topic will provide structure and 
substance for native language instruction leading to conversational language. 

5. The school must reach out to acquire parents’ help. They must be trained to 
do the things that are listed on pages 3 and 4. Further, each week parents must 
be involved with their child in a meaningful homework assignment for a unit, 

6. Social studies can be incorporated into the units, including the study of 
cultures and cultural diversity; the study of people, places and environments; 
global connections and interdependence; and the study of interactions among 
individuals, groups and institutions. Career education can be included. 

7. Teachers should coordinate the science standards, both regular and Indian 
standards, resources such as Joseph Bruchac’s Keepers books or Greg 
Cajete’s materials, and the regular science program along with the literature 
and example activities to provide a comprehensive approach to science. 





219 



8. Teachers should formulate math situations and problems that relate to the 
topic areas and local situations and include the names of local stores, etc. 

This document will not provide a teacher with a canned curriculum. The teacher or 
school should develop its own curriculum based upon the ideas in this book and 
available and acquired resources. This book contains suggested units covering 16 weeks 
to be used in the spring semester with Earth, Air, Water and Fire around Earth Day and 
the Music and Dance unit at the end of school before the powwow season. Again, this is 
only suggested. Many schools do not have a written curriculum and prefer to rely on 
their textbooks as their curriculum. It is important for a school to have a written 
curriculum so all teachers know what they are expected to teach. Without one, teachers 
usually teach whatever they want. The information in this guide can provide the basis for 
sound primary curricula for American Indian schools. Teachers must blend this 
information with good practices they are already undertaking such as regular sustained 
silent reading, language-experience activities, cooperative learning, the use of 
technology, etc. 

Teachers will have to choose which books to utilize. To check for bias, local tribal 
members can preview the books. The section. Additional Resources, at the end of this 
book provides a listing of vendors for purchasing books. Teachers should first check 
their school libraries and various classrooms to determine if some books are already 
available. If teachers find that they are lacking materials in certain topic areas, they can 
rely on language-experience stories. Teachers may find that some books are more 
appropriate at phases other than those to which they are assigned. That’s good. The 
addition of videos and other media will serve to enhance instruction. Tribes often have 
their own anthologies of legends. And, of course, real storytelling by local elders or 
others around one of the topics would be excellent. This must be done, though, with 
regard to local traditions as some storytelling is appropriate only at certain times, and 
there may be other conditions that must be honored. 

Imagine what a strong primary program you could have if you provided a program based 
upon the latest research and what is recommended for teaching Indian children, you 
coordinated your instruction with that of the Indian studies/language staff, and you 
acquired good parental support and assistance by having them provide reading and 
language time with their children You can supply them with books on the topics you are 
studying. You can have parents also learning and reading about the topics. They will be 
so much more interested in helping if they are a true part of the program. See the section 
for parents and tutors. If you have the luxury of having tutors for your students, they can 
also be extremely helpful by providing extra reading and language time, based on the 
topic areas, with your students. By having a program developed around themes or topics, 
you can do all these things easier. 

Good luck as you create a sacred place for your students. 




10 



220 




Hazes to Houses 




TEACHER’S/PARENT’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION - 



The Study of Animals in Science Lessons 

This unit is a continuation of the study of mammals in the Beavers to Buffalo unit in 
Volume 1 of Creating a Sacred Place to Support Young American Indian and Other 
Learners. The mammals included in this unit are: mice, rabbits, dogs, sheep, goats and 
horses. All of these animals might be pets. The Beavers to Buffalo unit concentrated on 
wild animals. 



Indians and Horses 

Indian people respect cattle, sheep and horses and many Indian people earn their livings 
by raising these animals. The horse is especially admired by Indian people and is kept 
for pleasure as well as for its usefulness on ranches. 

When Spanish explorers came to America in the 1500s, they brought horses with them. 

At that time there were no horses in America. Some of the horses the Spanish brought 
got loose and roamed wild over parts of Mexico. The Spanish let other horses loose on 
purpose, because it would have been too much trouble to take the horses back to Spain. 
Some horses stayed in Mexico, living in the countryside there. Some of the horses 
traveled north, into what is now the western United States. These wild, ownerless horses 
were called mustangs. The name mustang comes from a Spanish word that means a n i m a l 
without an owner. 

Years and years passed, and the herds of mustangs became larger. The horses became 
tough and hardy because only the ones that were strong enough to live in the wild could 
survive. These mustangs were small horses. Each adult mustang weighed from 600 to 
800 pounds. Each adult mustang was about 56 inches high. These mustangs were not 
much larger than ponies, but they could run fast. They were beautiful animals, with long 
flowing manes and tails. Mustangs were all different colors - brown, tan, black, white, 
chestnut-colored, or spotted. 

American Plains Indians caught mustangs. Their lives changed greatly with the coming 
of the horse. They rode these sturdy horses on buffalo hunts and during battle. Indians 
loved their horses and took good care of them They were skillful riders, too. They rode 
bareback and rode without using their hands to hold on so they could use weapons and 
carry things. They painted their horses for battle. The mustangs were so important to 
Indians that they thought of them as part of the family. It was as an Indian horse that the 
mustang gained the greatest fame. 




12 



222 



Today many Indian people axe ranchers and use the horse to help them in the raising of 
cattle or sheep. They have learned how to best take care of these animals and to care for 
the land necessary to raise them. 



Song of the Horse - Navajo 

How joyous his neigh! 

Lo, the Turquoise Horse of Johano-Ai 
How joyous his neigh! 

There on precious hides outspread standeth he; 

How joyous his neigh! 

There on tips of fresh flowers feedeth he; 

How joyous his neigh! 

There of mingled waters holy drinketh he; 

How joyous his neigh! 

There he spumeth dust of glittering grains; 

How joyous his neigh! 

There in the mist of sacred pollen hidden, all hidden; 
How joyous his neigh! 

There his offspring may grow and thrive forevermore; 
How joyous his neigh! 



i3. ; 



22 3 



SUGGESTED PRIMARY LEVEL UNIT OUTLINE - HARES TO HORSES 
Reading, Language Arts, . 

Science, Math, Art, Values 
P Hares to Horses Words 
H Reading Fiction 
A Comparing/Contrasting 
S Retelling/Responding 
E Mammals 

Height/Weight of Horses 
F Horse Habits 
I Uses of Horses 
V Write/Illus. Horse Stories 
E Respect for Horses/Nature 



Literature - Week 1 

Charlotte and the White 
Horse by Ruth Krauss 

Billy and Blaze by 
C. W. Anderson 
Black Beauty by Robin 
McKinley/ Anna Sewell 

Belle ’s Journey by 
Marilynn Reynolds 



Literature - Week 2 

Doesn Y Fall Off His 
Horse by Virginia Stroud 

Gift Horse - A Lakota 
Story by S. D. Nelson 

Death of the Iron Horse 
by Paul Goble 
Lone Bull ’s Horse Raid 
by Paul Goble 



P Hares to Horses Words 
H Reading Nonfiction 
A Summarizing/Reporting 
S Reading Legends 

E Retelling/The Oral Tradition Once Upon a Horse: A 
Mammals History of Horses by 

F Cost of Buying a Horse Susan Jurmain 

O Survey #, Kind of Horses Near 
U Make Clothespin Horses Pinto Horses by Janet 
R Respect for Horses/Historv Gammie 



After Columbus: The The Gift of the Sacred Dog 
Horse ’s Return to America by Paul Goble 
by Herman Viola 

Bringer of the Mystery Dog 
by Ann Nolan Clark 

Turquoise Boy - A Navajo 
Legend by Terri Cohlene 



P Dog/Sheep/GoatWords 
H Reading Fiction/Legends 
A Retelling/Responding 
S Reading Nonfiction 
E Summarizing/Reporting 
Cost of Feeding Dog 
T Mammals 
H Dog Habits 
R List Kinds of Dogs 
E Write/Illus. Dog Story 
E Respect for Dogs 



Boomer Goes to School A Friend Called 'Chum ’ by 
by Constance McGeorge Bemelda Wheeler 



Why Dogs Don’t Talk 
Anymore in And It Is Still 
That Way by Byrd Baylor 



Ben and the Porcupine 
by Carol Carrick 

Dogs by Gail Gibbons 

Dog People: Native Dog 
Big Red by Jim Kjelgaard Stories by Joseph Bruchac 

Dog Story by Oren Lyons 



P Mouse/Rabbit Words 
H Reading Fiction/Legend 
A Retelling/Responding 
S Comparing/Contrasting 
E Mammals 

Cost of Mouse Cage/Food 
T Count Mice Placed in Room 
W Make Egg Carton Mice 
O Respect for All Animals 



It’s a Mouse by D. M. 
Souza 

The Field Mouse and the 
Dinosaur Named Sue by 
Jan Wahl 

City Mouse — Country 
Mouse by John Wallner 
Mickey and Friends 



Grass Mountain Mouse by 
Ann Nolan Clark 

Field Mouse Goes to War 
by Edward A. Kennard 

The Story of Jumping Mouse 
by John Steptoe 
The Mouse Raid by M. Ward 



14 



O 

ERIC 



224 



Literature - Week 3 

Cowboys by Marie Gorsline 

Horses, Horses, Horses by 
Allan Fowler 

Seneca by Karen L. Baker 
Once We Had a Horse by 
Glen Rounds 
Buckin’ Bronco — Shel 

Silverstein 

Wild Horses by Glen 
Rounds 

Baby Horses by Dorothy 
H. Patent 

Horse Heroes by Kate Petty 
Horses by Elsa Pasell 



Charlie and Tess by Martin 
Hall 

Woolly Sheep and Hungry 
Goats by Allan Fowler 

The Little Lamb by Judy 
Dunn 

Sheep by Ann L. Hansen 

Mary Had a Little Lamb 

Adventures of Peter Rabbit 
by Beatrix Potter 

The Velveteen Rabbit by 
by Margery W. Bianco 

Jackrabbit by Jonathan 
London 

Rabbits, Rabbits and More 

Rabbits by Gail Gibbons 



Literature - Week 4 

Out of the Saddle:Native 
American Horsemanship 
by G. Pony Boy 
What 's the Most Beautiful 
Thing You Know About 
Horses by Van Camp 
Sioux Cowboy by Ann Nolan 
Clark 

Alice Yazzie ’s Year by 

Ramona Maher 

The Girl Who Loved Wild 
Horses by Paul Goble 

The Mud Pony by Caron 
L. Cohen 

How Wild Horses Were 
Captured/Moatara Council 
for Indian Education 



Little Herder in Summer, 
Little Herder in Autumn, 
Little Herder in Winter, 
Little Herder in Spring 
all by Ann Nolan Clark 

The Goat in the Rug by 
C. Blood & M. Link 

Ashkii and His Grandfather 

by Margaret Garawav 

Rabbit and the Moon 
by Douglas Wood 

How Snowshoe Hare 
Rescued the Sun by 
E. & D. Bernhard 
Rabbit by Don Birchfield 
Muwin and the Magic Hare 
by Susan H. Shetterly 

15 



Reading, Language Arts, 
Science, Math, Art, Values 
Hares to Horses Words 
Reading Nonfiction 
Summarizing/Reporting 
Reading Fiction/Poetry 
Retelling/Responding 
Raising Horses/Cost 
Rancher/Cowboy Visit Class 
Caring for the Land 
Respect for Land 
Respect Ranchers/Cowboys 
Hares to Horses Words 
Reading Nonfiction 
Summarizing/Reporting 
Reading Legends 
Retelling/Responding 
Care of a Horse/Cost 
Horseman Visit Class 
Color Horse Pictures 
Class Poster/Kinds of Horses 
Respect for Horses/Nature _ 
Dogs/Sheep/Goat Words 
Reading Fiction 
Retelling/Responding 
Reading Nonfiction 
Summarizing/Responding 
Estimate Sheep/Classsroom 
Eyes Closed/Count Sheep 
Care of Sheep/Goats 
Sheep Rancher Visit Class 
Make Sheep w/Cottonballs 
Respect for Sheep/Land 
Mouse/Rabbit Words 
Read Fiction/Legends 
Retelling/Responding 
Reading Nonfiction 
S ummarizing/ Reporting 
Care of Rabbit/Cost 
Draw/Color Rabbit Pictures 
Respect for All Animals 




>» < '• 
* ■ V 



225 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE FIVE - 

American Indian people have great respect and admiration for horses. Many 
Indian people ranch and participate in rodeos. 



Horse Stories - 

*Charlotte and the White Horse by Ruth Krauss, Harper Trophy, 1999. 

* Billy and Blaze and others by C. W. Anderson, Aladdin, 1992. 

*Black Beauty by Robin McKinley and Anna Sewell, Random House, 1980. 
*Belle ’s Journey by Marilynn Reynolds, Orca Books, 1 994. 

These stories can be compared and contrasted. 



Indian Horse Stories - 

*Doesn ’t Fall Off His Horse by Virginia Stroud (Indian Author), Dial. Kiowa 
*Gift Horse -A Lakota Story by S. D. Nelson (Indian Author), H. N. Abrams Pub., 
1999. 

*Lone Bull ’s Horse Raid by Paul Goble. Plains 
*Death of the Iron Horse by Paul Goble. Plains 



Cowboys, Horses and Care of Them - 

* Cowboys by Marie Gorsline, Random House, 1980. 

*Horses, Horses, Horses by Allan Fowler, Children’s Press, 1992. 

*Seneca by Karen Lee Baker, Greenwillow, 1997. 

*Once We Had a Horse by Glen Rounds, Holiday House, 1996. 

*Buckin’ Bronco in A Light in the Attic by Shel Silverstein, Harper & Row, 1981. 



Indian Cowboys — 

*Out of the Saddle: Native American Horsemanship by G. Pony Boy (Indian Author). 
*What’s the Most Beautiful Thing You Know About Horses by Van Camp. 

* Sioux Cowboy by Ann Nolan Clark, Lakota Books. 

* Alice Yazzie ’s Year by Ramona Maher, Coward, 1977. Navajo 

Gifted and talented students can read the most difficult selections and report to the class 
or they can help the teacher read them to the class. 





2£G 



16 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE FOUR - 

American Indian people have great respect and admiration for horses. Many 
Indian people ranch and participate in rodeos. 

History of Horses in America - 

* After Columbus: The Horse ’s Return to America by Herman Viola, 1994. 

*Once Upon a Horse: A History of Horses and How They Shaped Our History by Susan 
Jurmain, Lothrop, Lee and Shepard, 1989. 

*Pinto Horses by Janet Gammie, Aldo & Daughters, 1996. 

Indian people especially used pinto horses. 

Indian Stories of How Horses Came — 

*The Gift of the Sacred Dog by Paul Goble, Aladdin, 1980. Lakota 
*Bringer of the Mystery Dog by Ann Nolan Clark, Lakota Books. 

*Turquoise Boy - A Navajo Legend by Terri Cohlene, Troll. 

These are legends that can be retold in the oral tradition. 

Horses, Baby Horses, Wild Horses and Hero Horses — 

*Wild Horses by Glen Rounds, Holiday House, 1993. 

*Baby Horses by Dorothy H. Patent, Carolrhoda, 1991 . 

*Horse Heroes by Kate Peggy, DK Pub., 1999. 

*Horses by Elsa Pasell, A New True Book, Children’s Press, 1985. 



Indian Stories of Horses - 

*The Girl Who Loved Wild Horses by Paul Goble, Aladdin, 1978. Plains 

*How Wild Horses Were Captured by Montana Council for Indian Education, B illin gs. 

*The Mud Pony by Caron Lee Cohen, Scholastic, 1988. Pawnee 

Gifted and talented students can read the most difficult selections and report to the class 
or they can help the teacher read them to the class. 



ERIC 




17 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE THREE - 

Indian people in the southwest raise sheep and goats and they use dogs to help them 
with the herds. Indian people everywhere have pet dogs. 

Dog Stories - 

*Boomer Goes to School by Constance McGeorge, Chronicle, 1 996. 

*Ben and the Porcupine by Carol Carrick, Houghton Mifflin, 1985. 

*Dogs by Gail Gibbons, Holiday House, 1996. 

*Big Red by Jim Kjelgaard, Holiday House, 1988. 



Indian Dog Stories — 

*A Friend Called Chum by Bemelda Wheeler (Indian Author), Pemmican Books, 1985. 

*Why Dogs Don’t Talk Anymore in And It Is Still That Way by Byrd Baylor, Trails 

West, 1976. Southwest Included in some basal readers 

*Dog People: Native Dog Stories by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum. 

Abenaki 

*Dog Story by Oren Lyons (Indian Author), Holiday House, 1973. Onondaga 



About Sheep and Goats - 

*Charlie and Tess by Martin Hall, Little Tiger Press, 1996. 

*Woolly Sheep and Hungry Goats by Allan Fowler, Children’s Press, 1993. 
*The Little Lamb by Judy Dunn, Random House, 1 977. 

*Sheep by Ann Larkin Hansen, Checkerboard. 

*Mary Had a Little Lamb nursery rhyme 



Indian Stories Including Sheep and Goats - 

* Lit tie Herder in Summer, Little Herder in Autumn, Little Herder in Winter, Little Herder 
in Spring all by Ann Nolan Clark, The Haskell Foundation, Haskell Indian Nations 
University. Navajo 

*The Goat in the Rug by Charles Blood and Martin T .ink Navajo 

*Ashkii and His Grandfather by Margaret Garaway, Treasure Chest, 1989. Navajo 

Gifted and talented students can read the most difficult selections and report to the class 
or they can help the teacher read them to the class. 





18 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE TWO - 

Indian people have a reverence for all animals. Many Indian stories contain rabbits 
and mice. 



About Mice and Mouse Stories - 

*lt 's a Mouse by D. M. Souza, Carolrhoda, 1 998. 

*The Field Mouse and the Dinosaur Named Sue by Jan Wahl, Cartwheel Books, 2000. 
*City Mouse - Country Mouse and Two More Mouse Tales from Aesop by John Wallner, 
Scholastic, 1987. 

*Mickey and Friends, 1 999, or any other Mickey Mouse book. 



Indian Mouse Stories — 

*Grass Mountain Mouse by Ann Nolan Clark, The Haskell Foundation, Haskell Indian 
Nations University. Lakota 

*Field Mouse Goes to War by Edward A. Kennard, The Haskell Foundation, Haskell 
Indian Nations University. Hopi 

*The Story of Jumping Mouse by John Steptoe, Lothrop, 1 984. Plains 

*The Mouse Raid by Marlene Ward, Joyce Burr and Janet Ahler (Indian Authors), 

Theodore Roosevelt Nature and History Association, Medora, ND, 1989. Hidatsa 

These stories can be compared and contrasted. 



About Rabbits and Rabbit Stories - 

* Adventures of Peter Rabbit by Beatrix Potter, Ideals Children’s Books, 1997. 
*The Velveteen Rabbit by Margery Williams Bianco, Doubleday, 1958. 
*Jackrabbit by Jonathan London, 1996. 

* Rabbits, Rabbits and More Rabbits by Gail Gibbons, Holiday House, 2000. 



Indian Rabbit Stories — 

* Rabbit and the Moon by Douglas Wood, Simon & Schuster, 1998. Cree 
*How Snowshoe Hare Rescued the Sun by E. & D. Bernhard, Holiday House, 1 993. 
*Rabbit by Don Birchfield (Indian Author), Scholastic. Southeast 
*Muwin and the Magic Hare by Susan H. Shetterly, Atheneum. 

These stories can be compared and contrasted. 



229 



19 



FURTHER RESOURCES FOR HARES TO HORSES UNIT - 

These materials can be used to substitute for books in the suggested unit outline or 

for additional reading/other activities for students. 

The Mouse Couple by Ekkehart Malotki, (Indian Author), Northland Press. Hopi 
How the Mouse Got Brown Teeth by Ray Smith, (Indian Author), Fifth House. Cree 
Iktomi and the Buffalo Skull by Paul Goble, Orchard, 1996. Lakota 

The Brave Mouse in And It Is Still That Way by Byrd Baylor, Scribner’s, 1976. 

Southwest 

The Gathering Mice, The Little Warrior Mouse and the Meadow Mice and the Moon in 
Lakota and Dakota Animal Wisdom Stories by Mark McGinnis, Tipi Press, 1994. 

Do You See a Mouse? by Bernard Waber, Walter Lemoine Books, 1995. 

Mouse Mess by Linnea A. Riley, Scholastic, 1997. Included in some basal readers 

Deer Mouse at the Old Farm Road by Laura G. Galvin, Soundprints, 1998. 

*Farm Mouse, House Mouse, Country Mouse, Town Mouse by Geraldine Dobbie, 
Patchwork Mice Series, Todtri Prod., 1999 

* Mo use Count by Ellen Stoll Walsh, Red Wagon, 1995. 

Do You Want To Turn Into a Rabbit? in And It Is Still That Way by Byrd Baylor, 
Scribner’s, 1976. Southwest 

How Jackrabbit Got Very Long Ears by Heather Irbinskas, Rising Moon, 1994. 

Homer Little Bird’s Rabbit by Limana Kachel, Montana Council for Indian Education, 
Billings, 1983. 

Rabbit Tales in Temiskaming by Muriel N. White, Highway Book shop, 1972. Indian 

How Rabbit Tricked Otter and other Cherokee Animal Stories told by Gayle Ross, 
(Cherokee), audiotape. 

Rabbit and Coyote and others in Navajo Coyote Tales by Berard Haile, Univ. of 
Nebraska Press, 1 984. 

Rabbit’s Wish for Snow: A Native American Legend by Tchin, Scholastic, 1998. 




o 



30 



20 



One More Bunny, Adding from One to Ten by Rick Walton, Harpercollins, 2000. 

♦Read to Your Bunny by Rosemary Wells, Scholastic, 1999. 

* Rabbits by Fiona Patchett, Usbome Pub., 1 999. 

♦Black and White Rabbit’s ABC and Brown Rabbit’s Shape Book by Alan Baker, 
Larousse Kingfisher Chambers, 1999. 

How the Dogs Saved the Cheyennes by Hap Gilliland, Montana Council for Indian 
Education, Billings. 

The Horse and the Dog in Hidatsa Culture by Gilbert Wilson, J & L Reprint Co. Vol. 10 
All About Dogs and Puppies by Laura Driscoll, Grosset & Dunlap, 1998. 

♦Blue Goes to School by Angela C. Santomero, Simon Spotlight, 2000. 

The Boy and the Dog by Siv Widerberg, R & S, 1991. 

Bark, Spike, Bark, Simon Spotlight Rugrats Ready to Read, 1998. 

♦Clifford, the Big Red Dog by Norman Bridwell, Scholastic, 1985. 

♦Big Dog - Little Dog by Philip Eastman, Random House, 1 973. 

♦I Am a Little Dog by Francois Crozat, Barrons Juveniles, 1990. 

Cleo and the Coyote by Elizabeth Levy, Harpercollins, 1996. 

Nanabah’s Friend by Mary Perrine, Houghton Mifflin, 1970. Navajo 

Nezbah’s Lamb by Edith Agner, Friendship Press, 1954. Navajo 

Little Man’s Family, Little Books Series, Haskell Indian Nations University. Navajo 

Navajo Life Series by Hildegard Thompson, Haskell Indian Nations University. 

When the Navajo Had Too Many Sheep by George Boyce, Indian Historian Press, 1974. 
Stephannie and the Coyote by Jack Crowder, 1970. Navajo 

Billy Whiskers: The Autobiography of a Goat by Frances T. Montgomery, Dover, 1985. 

Goats: Farm Animals by Ann L. Hansen, Checkerboard Lib., 1998. 

21 








Sheep by Tessa Potter, Steck- Vaughn. 

* Sheep Out to Eat and Sheep in a Shop by Nancy Shaw, Houghton Mifflin, 1992. 

S in g in g Sioux Cowboy by Ann Nolan Clark, Lakota Books. 

My Navajo Sister by Eleanor Schick, Simon & Schuster, 1996. 

The Spotted Horse by Henry Tall Bull (Indian Author), Montana Council for Indian 
Education, Billings. 

Blue Canyon Horse by Ann Nolan Clark, Viking, 1954. Southwest 

Coyote and the Cowboy and others in Hopi Coyote Tales by Ekkehart Malotki (Indian 
Author), Univ. of Nebraska Press, 1984. 

Paul Goble Gallery includes The Girl Who Loved Wild Horses and Gift of the Sacred 
Dog, Simon and Schuster, 1999. Plains 

My Horse Coloring Book by John Green, Dover, 1994. 

Bronco Busters by Alison C. Herzig, Putnam, 1998. 

Birth of a Foal by Hans-Neinrich Isenbart, Carolrhoda, 1 986. 

*The Horse by Emanuela Bussolati, Boyds Mill, 1993. 

Horse by Emily Bolan, Barrons Juveniles,. 2000. 

Yaqui Myths and Legends by Ruth W. Giddings, University of Arizona Press, 1993. 

And Still the Turtle Watched by Sheila MacGill-Callahan. Indian 

The Indian Way: Learning to Communicate with Mother Earth by Gary McLain, John 
Muir Pub., 1990. 

Red Ribbons for Emma, New Mexico Energy Collective, New Seed Press, 1981. Navajo 

Between Sacred Mountains: Navajo Stories and Lessons from the Land, Rock Point 
Community School (Indian Author), University of Arizona Press. 

CHECK YOUR LIBRARY OR BOOKSTORES FOR OTHER BOOKS 
RELATING TO THE TOPIC. 

*These books are especially suitable for Phase One — for preschool children. 




O 




22 



HARES TO HORSES WORDS 



Beginning Sounds — 



bark 


cage 


dog 


hay 


Iamb 


rabbit 


barn 


carrots 


dog food 


halter 


legs 


ram 


bareback 


cottontail 


drink 


. hare 


lettuce 


rawhide 


big 


collie 


fast 


herd 


little 


rein 


bone 


colt 


fur 


hop 


leather 


rearing 


buck 


coat 


feed 


hole 


mice 


roundup 


bunny 


corral 


food 


hoof 


mouse 


rodeo 


buckskin 


cowboy 


foal 


howl 


mane 


rope 


bronc 


cowgirl 


gate 


horn 


mare 


run 


bridle 


cinch 


gallop 


horse 


paw 


ride 


break 


cheese 


goat 


horseshoe 


pet 


riding 


brand 




graze 


horseman 


pinto 


rigging 


braid 




grass 


horsemanship 


pony 








groom 




puppy 




saddle 


tail 






playful 




sorrel 


tame 










spotted 


trot 


Singular- 


Plural- 


Compound Words- 


spurs 


trap 


mouse 


mice 


cowboy 




snort 


veterinarian 


rabbit 


rabbits 


cowgirl 




sniff 


vaccination 


bunny 


bunnies 


horseman 




squeak 


water 


hare 


hares 


buckskin 




stud 


wild 


dog 


dogs 


jackrabbit 




stallion 


wool 


puppy 


puppies 


bareback 




stirrup 


woolly 


sheep 


sheep 


roundup 




Shetland 




Iamb 


Iambs 






sheep 


whine 


horse 


horses 


Ch and Sh 


Words- 


sheep dog 


whiskers 


pony 


ponies 


cheese 


Shetland 


shear 




goat 


goats 


cinch 


shear 


shelter 




hoof 


hooves 




sheep 












sheep dog 


Other Words- 










shelter 



Appaloosa 
Quarter Horse 

neigh Word walls should be maintained. Instructors should ensure 

ewe that students know the meanings of these words in this context 

ears and extend vocabulary by noting how they may mean other 

eat things in other contexts or they may have homophones. 

Experiences, pictures and illustrations should be used to explain 
and process word meanings. Words that rhyme with these words 
can be examined to extend vocabulary and to see varying spellings 
for sounds. Other words should be added. 



233 



23 



SCIENCE STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN ANIMALS - HARES TO HORSES UNIT- 

Standard - Understands that scientific inquiry works in particular ways 
Benchmarks - 

Understands that learning can come from careful observations 

Standard — Understands the main individual, social, ethical and institutional aspects 
of science 
Benchmarks - 

Understands that learning can come from close observation of plants and animals, but 
they should not be mistreated 

Standard - Understands the processes that shape the surface of the earth and the 

relation of the surface of the earth to the living environment 

Benchmarks- 

Knows that change is something that happens to many things around us 
Knows that living things respond to the conditions around them 

Standard - Knows about the diversity and unity that characterize life 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that some animals and plants are similar in appearance and behavior, and others 
are very different from one another 

Knows that stories sometimes give plants and animals attributes they really do not have 

Standard - Understands the genetic basis for the transfer of biological 

characteristics from one generation to another 

Benchmarks- 

Knows that offspring grow up to be similar to their parents. 

Standard - Knows the general structure and functions of cells in organisms 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that most plants and animals need air, food and water 

Knows that plants and animals are composed of different parts, serving different purposes 
and contributing to the well-being of the whole organism. 

Standard - Understands how species depend on one another and on the 

environment for survival 

Benchmarks- 

Knows that animals eat plants or other animals for food and may also use plants for 
shelter 

Standard-Understands cycling of matter and energy flow through the environment 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that plants and animals need water, animals need food to eat and plants need light 

24 



Standard - Understands the basic concepts of the evolution of species 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that plants and anim als have features that help them live in different environments 

Standard - Understands the main steps in the transformation of a single fertilized 
cell into a fully-formed animal, and the process of the development and aging that 
follows birth 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that animals have offspring, usually with two parents involved 

Standard - Understands that the way things work often changes with scale 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that many things in nature come in sizes and speeds that are very different — from 
very s mall to very large, very fast to very slow, and so on 

MATHEMATICS STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN HARES TO HORSES UNIT- 

Standard -Effectively uses a variety of strategies within the problem solving process 
Benchmarks- 

Brainstorms possible things to do 

Draws pictures to represent problems 

Represents problem situations using physical objects 

Clarifies problems using discussions with teacher or knowledgeable others 

Uses guess and check to solve problems 

Clearly states problems in his or her own words 

Checks the reasonableness of results through estimation 

Standard -Understands and applies basic and advanced properties of numbers 
Benchmarks- 

Has a general understanding of the concept of number 
Uses counting to exemplify numbers 

Understands the relationship of fractions and decimals to whole numbers 

Standard - Uses basic and advanced procedures while performing computation 
Benchmarks- 

Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides whole numbers with accuracy 
Adds, subtracts, multiples, divides decimals with accuracy 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced methods of measurement 
Bench marks- 

Understands the relationships between length, width and height 
Understands the basic characteristics of weight and how it is measured 



"235 



25 



Understands the basic characteristics of area and how it is measured 
Understands the basic features of mass 

Makes effective use of ruler and scale for making measurements 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced concepts of data analysis 

and distributions 

Benchmarks- 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of data 
Collects and organizes simple data sets to answer questions 



LANGUAGE ARTS STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY 
GRADES ADDRESSED IN HARES TO HORSES UNIT - 

Standard — Gathers information effectively through reading, listening and viewing 
Benchmarks- 

Provides an accurate retelling of the basic plot of simple stories the student has read, 
heard or viewed 

Provides an accurate retelling of the main idea of simple expository information the 
student has read, heard or viewed 

Understands that reading, viewing and listening are ways of gaining information about 
the world 

Determines meaning of simple words from context 

Creates mental representations for concrete information read, heard or viewed 

Standard — Reads and responds to literature 
Benchmarks- 

Understands that stories have beginning, middle and ending episodes 
Understands the genre of legends and fables 

Standard - Communicates ideas and information in writing 
Benchmarks- 

Understands basic connections between spelling patterns and speech sounds 

Understands basic phonological patterns in English 

Expresses ideas in simple expository forms 

Composes simple stories that express cohesive ideas 

Experiments with different genre as modes for expressing ideas 

Standard - Understands and applies basic principles of language use 

Recognizes characteristic sounds and rhythms of language 
Makes valid observations about the use of words 

Makes valid observations about the use of language at home as opposed to the use of 
language in school 





26 



AMERICAN INDIAN CONTENT STANDARDS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN HARES TO HORSES UNIT - 

SCIENCE 

Science As Inquiry- 

Indian students should develop an awareness that observations and understandings of 
nature traditionally formed an essential base of knowledge among Indian cultures. 

Physical Science- 

Indian students should develop an understanding of the innate properties of objects and 
materials that were (and are) recognized by traditional American Indian cultures in the 
manufacture and use of specific material objects that capitalize upon those properties. 

Life Science- 

Indian students should develop an understanding of plant and animal life cycles as 
exemplified in traditional American Indian concepts such as the Medicine Wheel. 

Science in Personal and Social Perspectives- 

Indian students should develop an understanding of local challenges in environmental 
protection and how traditional Indian knowledge, practices and philosophies have been 
and continue to be called upon for solutions. 



LANGUAGE AND LITERACY 
Indian students should be able to — 

Listen for meaning and gain information from spoken English and a Native language. 

Listen to Indian stories told in the oral tradition, comprehend their teachings and be able 
to retell them. 

Speak coherently, conveying ideas in both English and a Native language. 

Read fluently and independently, a variety of materials including those with American 
Indian themes. 

Locate and use a variety of texts to gain information, for example, historical materials 
about their tribe, tribal legends and stories and oral history transcription. 

J 

Be familiar with children’s literature with Indian themes, especially with that pertaining 
to the student’s tribe and literature written by Indian authors. 



MATHEMATICS 



Mathematics as Problem Solving- 

Indian students should formulate problems from everyday and mathematical situations 
within their home and tribal/community worlds. 

Mathematics as Communication- 

Indian students should relate their everyday language to mathematical language and 
symbols including expressing mathematical concepts in their Native languages. 

Mathematics as Reasoning- 

Indian students should believe that mathematics makes sense within their home and tribal 
communities and articulate examples of how it makes sense. 

Estimation- 

Indian students should explore estimation strategies through activities derived from their 
cultural worlds such as estimating the number of sheep/horses that fit in a pen/corral. 

Number Sense and Numeration- 

Indian students should construct number meanings through real-world experiences and 
use of physical materials. 

Concepts of Whole Number Operations- 

Indian students should develop meaning for the operations by modeling and discussing a 
rich variety of problem situations including some from the Indian world. 

Whole Number Computation- 

Indian students should use a variety of mental computation and estimation techniques in 
solving problems related to Indian cultural themes. 

Measurement- 

Indian students should understand the attributes of length, capacity, mass, and volume 
and relate these measures to use in their own cultural, home, tribal or community worlds. 

Statistics and Probability- . 

Indian students should collect, organize and describe data related to local 
tribal/community demographics. 

Fractions and Decimals- 

Indian students should apply fractions and decimals by applying them to real world 
situations using Native cultural experiences. 

American Indian Content Standards, ORBIS Associates for Office of Indian Education 
Programs, Bureau of Indian Affairs, United States Department of the Interior, 1996. 





28 



Example Activities Developed by T eacbens op 
Awemm Indian Smdems 

Workshop on Culturally-Based Mail) and Science CwmcuLuw Development 

Haskell Man Junior College 
1992 



MASTERS Project 

Math and Science Teachers por Reservation Schools 
University op Kansas and 
Haskell Indian Nations University 
Earth's Caretakers, 1 993 
Si(jMS Of Tradition, 1994 




Ideas should be adapted par appropriateness. See appendix for how to order Earth's Caretakers and Signs op Tradition. 




29 

239 



MATH AND SCIENCE - 



"RANGE ECOLOGY" 

CULTURAL OUTCOMES: II, IX 

SCIENCE OUTCOMES: I, II, III 

MATH OUTCOMES: II, VIII 

CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

Students will understand the Native American reverence for the relationship 
between plants and animals and their environment. 

MATH OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

read a problem, think about it, choose an appropriate method of 
calculation, write the problem down, solve and analyze their answer 

draw appropriate conclusions. 

SCIENCE OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

understand the relationship between humans, plants, animals and the 
environment 

know and use scientific recording and reporting skills 



understand ecological relationships, including the human impact on 
nature and nature’s impact on humans. 





30 



TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 




The Anishinabeg told the following story to illustrate man's dependence 
on the plant world: 

Roses were once the most numerous and brilliantly colored of all the 
flowers. Such were their numbers and such were the variety and 
richness of their shades that they were common. No one paid much 
attention to them; their beauty went unnoticed, their glory unsung. 

Even when their numbers declined and their colors faded, no one 
appeared to care. Cycles of scarcity and plenty had occurred. There 
was no cause for alarm. There is degeneration and regeneration. 
Plenty always follows scarcity. 

But year after year, roses became fewer in number. As the numbers 
and richness of the flowers diminished, the fatness of the rabbits 
increased. Only the bear, bee, and hummingbird were aware that 
something was wrong. 

The tribe felt that something was not quite right, but they couldn't 
explain it. They only knew that the bear was thinner and its flesh less 
sweet. The bears found smaller quantities of honey and what they 
found was less delectable, The bears and the hummingbirds found 
fewer roses. The tribe was bewildered; the bears blamed the bees; the 
bees were alarmed. No one could do anything. 

Eventually one summer, there were no roses at all. Bees hungered; 
hummingbirds grew thin; the bears raged. In later years, that summer 
was known as "The Summer of the Disappearance of the Rose." At 
last, everyone was alarmed. In desperation, a great meeting was 
called. Everyone was invited. 

There were many days of discussion before the meeting decided to 
dispatch all the swift to search the world for a single rose and if they 
found one, to bring it back. Months went by before. a hummingbird 
chanced to discover a solitary rose growing and clinging to a 
mountainside in a far off land. 

The hummingbird lifted the faint and pallid rose from its bed and 
brought it back. On arrival, medicine men and women immediately 
tended the rose and in a few days restored the rose to life. When he 
was well enough, the rose was able to give an account of the 
destruction of the roses. 

rest COPY AVAILABLE 

241 

31 



In a voice quavering with weakness, the rose said, "The rabbits ate all 
the roses." 

The assembly raised an angry uproar. At the word, the bears, wolves 
and lynxes seized the rabbits by the ears and cuffed them around. 
During the assault the rabbits' ears were stretched and their mouths 
were split open. The outraged animals might have killed all the rabbits 
that day had not the rose interceded on their behalf saying, "Had you 
cared and watched us, we might have survived. But you were 
unconcerned. Our destruction was partly your fault. Leave the rabbits 
be." 

Reluctantly, the angry animals released the rabbits. While the rabbits’ 
wounds eventually healed, they did not lose their scars which remained 
as marks of their intemperance. Nor did the roses ever attain their 
former brilliance or abundance. Instead, the roses received thorns 
from Nanabozho to protect them from the avarice of the hungry and the 
intemperate. 

Nanabozho, in endowing the roses with thorns, warned the assembly, 

" You can take the life of plants, but you cannot give them life." 



The rose in this story can be compared to the endangered species of 
plants and animals which for so long were not noticed or cared for by 
the majority of the world’s population. However, most of the Native 
Americans can be compared to the bear, the bee, and the hummingbird 
who did care, but were too small in number to achieve successful 
conservation by themselves. Only when it appeared that the rose had 
disappeared did the entire population become alarmed. 

Let us consider other population groups and the ways in which they 
adjust their population to availability of food. The place where an 
organism lives is called a habitat. A group of one kind of organisms 
that live within the same area is called a population and the way the 
organisms are spaced or spread out in a given area is called the 
distribution. The home range is the area where a population of 
animals usually forages for food. There are 3 types of distribution: 

a. uniform-evenly spaced. 

b. random-irregularly scattered. 

c. clumped-bunched together in different areas. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

' 242 



32 



Since plants can exist alone, they are called autotrophs and serve as 
the primary food producer in the food chain. Animals and humans are 
called heterotrophs since they can’t exist without eating other living 
creatures, namely, plants, and are termed consumers. Thus, disruption 
or extinction of plant species has catastrophic effects upon the food 
chain and life cycles of all organisms. Careful treatment of Mother 
Earth and sensible methods of conservation are crucial for successful 
land and resource management. 

After the Long Walk and the signing of a treaty, the Navajo returned 
to an economy based on sheep and other livestock. It is believed that 
by 1 880 the Navajos’ flocks surpassed the optimum livestock ratio for 
their land. A survey conducted in 1930 counted 1,111,589 mature 
sheep. In 1933 there were approximately 1.3 million sheep on the 
reservation. That is about 1 sheep for every 9 acres, while the carrying 
capacity of the range was 1 sheep for every 20 to 30 acres. 

This type of imbalance occurred all across the western United States, 
causing the government to impose stock reduction on ranchers and 
also the Navajo people. The Dine' were unhappy about the stock 
reduction program because this was the base of their economy. 
Grazing regulations were approved for the reservation in 1956. 
However, severe damage had already been done to the range by 
overgrazing. 

The following example shows what happens when grasses have been 
overgrazed. Note that snakeweed is poisonous to livestock. 

1 . The natural home of snakeweed is probably a rocky slope. . 
Grasses grow better on the soils of the plain. 

2. Animals can kill off grasses by biting them off again and again 
before they have a chance to grow. This leaves an open spot 
on the plain. 

3. If livestockdoes not permit the grasses to grow, the snakeweed 
takes over the open area. 

4. When snakeweed takes over, the animals go hungry. 



best copy available 



243 



33 



Plants needs are specialized for their own environmental niche, 
although they all need soil, nutrients, water and light. Plants have 
varied sensitivities to amounts of nutrients, water and light that they 
need. Therefore, plants grow where their special adaptations make 
their survival possible. It is important to emphasize the importance of 
the interdependence of plants and animals, for they are all part of the 
Circle of Life. 



Here are some examples of plants that are found on the reservation. 
These are some of the plants that the Department of Range 
Conservation plan to try to restore without a reduction in livestock: 



1 . Needle and thread grass-usually eaten before the seed has 
grown. Navajo-troh ts’ozi troh adishishi. 

2. Alkali sacaton grass— a tall grass and the seeds can be used as 
food for humans. Navajo— troh dehakalii. 

3. Indian rice grass— grows about 2 feet high and seeds may be 
eaten by people. Navajo-nidididii. 

4. Galleto grass-very hardy in dry weather and the leaves are 
very tough. Navajo-troh tsahii. 

5. Winter Fat— gray colored and is used for winter fodder for 
sheep. Navajo-gohtsohdii. 

6. Sumac— a tall bush with red berries that can be eaten with sugar 
and commeal. Navajo-chitchin 

7. Goosefoot— the largest species of this plant needs a lot of water 
and is named "lambs quarter. " Leaves and stems can be eaten 
when they are young. Navajo-troh deii tsoh. 

8. Wild celery-small plant that should be picked before the 
flowers on the plant bloom. It is used in soups and stews. 



244 



34 



Some individuals think that the Navajo can manage their grazing land 
with skillful herding. Some people believe it will be possible to have 
bigger and better herds by changing the old assigned permit areas 
and making the herds and flocks a group affair by pooling grazing 
permits. 

The grazing committee for each chapter would be required to monitor 
and keep track of all the herds in their area. This idea is expressed 
in the video tape/’Distant Thunder.” 





24-5 

- 35 



7 





STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 



O 

ERIC 



1 . This first activity is a demonstration of how animals may compensate 
when there are excessive numbers of animals and a reduced food 
source. 

Each student will need 10 poker chips of one color, 6 poker chips of 
a different color and four sandwich bags. The teacher will need a 
clothesline (100 ft.), a stopwatch or just a watch with a second hand. 
The teacher should have the data sheet made before beginning the 
activity. Using the clothesline, the teacher marks off a circle outside 
that has a diameter of 1 0 meters. The 1 0 poker chips of like color for 
each student are to be scattered in that circle. Mark off 2 more areas 
that are at least 10 meters away from the first circle and place 1/2 of 
the remaining poker chips in each circle. 

2. Have the students play a game involving deer population. Have the 
deer represented by the sandwich bags and the poker chips represent 
food for the deer. For the deer to survive 1 year (1 minute), it must 
obtain at least 5 chips but can obtain no more that 1 0. Remember that 
deer do not share food. 

Yearl: Have students predict how many deer will survive. All the deer 
should survive this year. Set the timer and have the students collect 
the food chips and place them in a plastic bag. Record the number of 
surviving deer on the data sheet. 

Year 2: Redistribute the chips. Give each of the students who had 
surviving deer an additional plastic bag. Set the timer and have the 
students again gather food for their deer. Anyone who does not have 
at least 5 chips for each bag is out of the game. Record the number 
of survivors. 

Year 3: Repeat year 2. 



Year 4: Hand out 1 more bag for each surviving deer. Tell the students 
that because of the large number of deer in the population last year, 
the plants that deer eat were damaged and food production has been 
decreased. Remove 1 1 A of the food chips and redistribute the remainder 
in the home range. Then gather food chips and record the number of 
surviving deer. 

Year 5: Discuss with the group what the deer might do when the home 
range can no longer support them. Permit the group to search for new 
range, since the home range is depleted. At the end of the minute, call 
the group together and discuss how dispersal affected the number 



that survived. 




46 



36 



Ask the following questions: 



When was it easiest for the deer to survive and when was it the 
hardest? 

What factors determined the carrying capacity of the home 
range? 

If a person put out com for the deer and then stopped suddenly, 
what would be the effect on the deer population? 



Select the plants that are native to the home area and research 
information about the plants. The students will prepare illustrations 
which will include the scientific name, Indian name, uses of the plant, 
habitat and do an illustration of the plant. This should be done on 
display board or poster board. 

Take a field trip to observe how plants and animals have adapted to 
a specific environment. They^ill then state a hypothesis, record data 
from their field trip and draw a conclusion which they need to verify with 
books on Botany and Zoology. 



Draw a mural that shows how adaptations occur in nature. The 
students will describe the adaptations and state why these were 
necessary. 

Interview individuals in their home areas. Students will explain that 
this is not a government survey but rather a class assignment. Inquire 
about the number of sheep, goats, cattle and horses they have. 
Students will graph this information using common area divisions. 

Have a tribal ranger come to the school or have the class visit the 
ranger at the office. Ask the ranger to explain his jurisdiction and what 
his specific duties are. 



Invite a Bureau of Land Management employee who has the 
responsibility of overseeing the reclamation of land to explain what the 
agency is doing to assist in reclaiming the land that has been 
overgrazed or otherwise destroyed. 



best copy available 



RESOURCES: 



Anderson, Don. Native American Science and Mathematics . Fond Du Lac, 
Minnesota: Department of Education, 1987. pp. 29-30. 

Reno, Philip. Navajo Resources and Economic Development. Albuquerque. 
New Mexico: University of New Mexico Press, 1981. 

Jones, Thomas Jesse. The Navajo Indian Problem, An Inquiry. New York: 
1939. 

Evers, Larry. Between Sacred Mountains. Tucson Arizona: Sun Track and 
the University of Arizona Press, 1984. 

DEVELOPED BY: 

Ivadene E. Dhority 
Grover Parsons 



Champion of the Classroom 

Rose Star 



Looking at the World Through the Eyes of Don YellowBird 



Don YellowBird is a man of Arikara and Sioux descent. His home town, White Shield 
(population about 600 people), is on the eastern edge of Fort Berthold Reservation in North 
Dakota. Fort Berthold is often referred to as “The Home of the Three Affiliated Tribes.” The 
Arikara, Mandan, and Hidatsa peoples have lived here cooperatively since 1862. At one time 
Fort Berthold was one large piece of land, but the United States Corps of Engineers built a dam 
in the middle of the reservation. The land is mostly farmland and badlands. 

When Don was younger, he attended elementary and high school in Minot, North Dakota. 
After high school he went to college, Wahpeton State School of Science. Later he transferred to 
Grand Forks, North Dakota, where he earned his Bachelors and Masters Degrees in Education. 
He moved to White Shield where he has lived and worked as an elementary teacher for over 

fifteen years. 

Don grew up as the middle child of 13 children. His mother, Dorothy, has always been very 
loving and supportive. His father, Grover, died years ago, but Don still feels his influence. His 
father was a firm disciplinarian, and had high expectations for Don which were sometimes hard 
to live up to. His parent’s expectations gave him a sense of self responsibility and determination 
. . . values which helped him to attain many goals. 

Don’s many accomplishments include awards in track, football, cross-country, and 
basketball. He was honored in the Wahpeton ’s Hall of Fame for excellence in football. In 1986, 
the North Dakota Indian Education Association selected him as Indian Educator of the Year. 

He helped organize the first North Dakota Native American Science Fair. Don felt that 
Native American children needed to be recognized for their talents and abilities. In the state 
science fair competition, only a small percentage of the participants were Native American 
students. He believed that Native American children would feel more comfortable participating 
in science fair competitions that were judged on science projects with special meaning to their 



culture. 

He also worked with Ln-Med (American Indians in Medicine), where he helped coordinate 
programs to help Indian students who wanted to work in health fields. Don would like to see 
more Native American children become teachers, lawyers, doctors, and administrators to 
provide leadership. Don’s love for working with the children brought him back to White Shield 
where he has continued to teach and coach. 

For recreation, Don hunts, fishes, and plays golf. He goes hunting with his friends during 
hunting season every year, but he says he goes for the pleasure of walking in the "breaks," 



249 



39 



ST COPY AVAILABLE 



observing wildlife, and enjoying the land. The “breaks” is a name for land that has been worn 
away by erosion of the soil, from rivers or the weather. 

During hunting season, hunting for deer is called “harvesting.” Each hunter is allowed to 
shoot one deer if the deer population is high. If the deer population is low, only a limited 
amount of deer hunting licenses may be sold restricting the number of hunters. Harvesting, he 
says, helps. keep the deer population stable, because if the deer become too crowded there may 
not be enough food to feed the deer and they may starve to death. However, if the deer 
population become too low, then there is the chance they may become extinct. 

When Don goes on these hunting and fishing trips he said that if you really look you can see 
many interesting things. You may even begin to imagine what life was like many years ago. 

Don tells his own story: 

One day, on a walk in the breaks, my students and I saw some petrified sequoia tree trunks 
and I wondered, “Sequoias in North Dakota?” I thought, “Now how could they be here?”. One 
petrified sequoia was sitting there and had eroded all the soil around its trunk and was setting up 
in the air. . . like a trophy sits on its base! These great big sequoias are at least ten feet around. 
Perhaps the area down below in White Shield had been a big sequoia forest at one time. This 
would explain the rich coal deposit in White Shield. Coal comes from dead vegetation and dead 
animals and trees. There may have been a lot of dinosaurs here many years ago. Maybe when 
the dinosaurs died and their bodies decomposed under the weight of the soil, coal formed. 

If you look at the soil, you see the clay in a lot of layers and you see the vegetation. When 
you look at the river, you can see how the water has eroded the shorelines and formed the river. 
As we looked around, we found a lot of edible plants, like wild turnips and berries (including 
bull berries, bear berries, and wild cactus berries). All these plants are growing on the land, 
feeding the inhabitants. 

If you walk and don’t run, you can see all these things. It’s not just badlands; its a place of 
wonderment! It’s a place that makes you wonder, “Why is this like this?” Lots of questions 
buzz through my mind as I walk on the land. Sometimes when my brothers and I are out 
walking along these paths, we might find some bones of cows and I wonder how did- the bones 
get there. What happened? How did the animal die? By not hurrying, but stopping, looking, 
touching, and observing, each person gets a different picture of nature that exists right here in 
White Shield. 

Once I saw some little ants and I observed them and I thought, “These little ants are amazing 
little insects! They’re lifting hundreds of times their own weight.” It would be like us, carrying 
a house on our back. Then we find there are different kinds and colors of ants. Some ants fight 
•.and some don’t. There are millions of different insects and in order to see what each one does 
you have to sit and look and watch. If you don’t stop to observe, you miss a lot of this stuff. 

The time I like to be outdoors is in the morning. So many things happen in the morning. I 
have camped out overnight, and early in the moming I’ve seen deer come down to the water, and 
drink. I’ve seen loons, too. You see ducks, geese, and swans fairly often, but to see a loon is a 
rare occasion! 



40 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Take some time, get some binoculars, and observe all the different types of birds. One thing 
I have observed was the ducks. You see the males, they’re so pretty, so beautiful! Then 
compare them to the females. They’re so drab and plain. Why are male ducks colorful and 
female ducks plain? The answer is right there. Who has to protect the nest? Who has to 
camouflage right into the surroundings? The female duck! The male is the one who flies off 
and gets the attention and the female has to protect their nest, and her blending in is her cover, 
her protection. The female matches the reeds and grasses, while the male has bright colors on 
his head and chest that make him stand out. I’ve seen this in over 50 different species of ducks. 

I think the bottom line is this: Do we want someone to destroy this? Where will the ducks 
live? Where will the ants live? Ants help to break down plants so that they may be recycled. 
People may kill off the insects by spraying insecticides and the wilderness will disappear, and 
our children will not see what we can see now. 

Many farmers use chemicals to fertilize their fields and to kill insects. These chemicals filter 
down through the ground into underground rivers, called the groundwaters. Through natural 
springs this same water enters our rivers and is then taken into water treatment plants where 
some impurities are filtered and the water is recycled for us to use. Many impurities are still in 
the water. We drink this water. Animals (including cows, pigs, and chickens) drink the water. 
The chemicals are absorbed by plants. We in turn are swallowing those same chemicals into our 
bodies when we drink the water, eat the animals that drink the water and eat the plants, and when 
we eat the plants. 

There are other more natural ways to make the soil rich and reduce the number of crop 
eating insects. We can use manure, the natural waste of livestock, as a fertilizer. It puts nitrogen 
back into the soil and won’t hurt us. There are insects that can be put into these same fields, that 
will eat the insects that feed off the crops. Chemicals may or may not be quicker and easier, but 
they may be harmful to the earth and animals (including people). We need to think of what is 
the best way, to protect our environment and our lives. In the future, clean water will be more 
valuable than money. We have to learn to use water wisely. 

Water also helps clean our air. After a rain, I like to go outside, take a deep breath and look 
around. I breathe in pure air, because the rain has cleaned the air of all impurities (like dust, 
smoke, and chemicals) by driving them into the ground. In that short period of time, we breathe 
in pure air. After a while, we start smelling pollution. But the smell of fresh air is great! 

After the rain, I often see a rainbow. It is beautiful! A rainbow is made from water droplets 
suspended in the air like prisms. Sunlight is bent, or refracted, as it passes through the water 
droplets. Normally, we can’t see the color of light. The colors: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, 
blue-violet, and violet are streaming down on us all the time. These seven colors are the colors 
:of light, but when they shine together they turn to white light. After a rain, when the sun is to 
our back, the light rays hit a raindrop and are refracted and we see the colors of the spectrum: 
the rainbow. 

The rain also nourishes the trees. Trees are pretty to look at and they give us shade. The 
grass is green, and nice to lie on. We often think of plants as the lowest form of life, but we 



ERIC 





really don’t realize how important plants are. Where would we be without them? We use them 
for food. So do the animals that we eat, such as cows and pigs. This is called the food chain. 
One food chain begins with grass. The cows eat the grass and we eat the cows. 

We also need plants for oxygen. People breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide. 
Plants take in carbon dioxide from the air and give off oxygen. Oxygen is produced during the 
food making process of the plant called photosynthesis. Without this oxygen cycle, we would 
die. When we kill plants, we cut off our own oxygen supply. The Native Americans have 
known for many years the importance of the balance of nature and have used storytelling to help 
others understand and have respect for our environment. 



Discussion Questions: 

1. Why does Don YellowBird say that it is important to walk slowly and observe? 

2. What role does deer harvesting have in the balance of nature? 

3. Why are the colors of the male and female duck important? 

4. Why should we care about groundwaters? 

5. Why is it important to understand the way the land used to be and the way it is now? 

6. Where do you see colors of the spectrum? What makes those colors? 

7. If a food web is the complex interaction of many food chains, why is every plant 
and animal important? 



Social Studies 

Legends of the Horse 



Objective: 

To discuss the beliefs surrounding the arrival of the horse in North America. 

Materials: 

• Turquoise Boy: A Navajo Legend by Terri Cohlene. ISBN 0-86593-003-1. 

• drawing paper 

• crayons 

Exploration: 

A long time ago, before even your Grandmother was a baby, the Navajo People wandered the 
area we call New Mexico. There were no White people and no cars. There weren't even any 
horses! Now there are horses everywhere, but then there were none. How do you think the 
horses got there? Allow time for students to think about different ways the horse could have 
arrived. 

Seminar: 

Have students give their ideas. Remember to discuss each idea with an open mind. Encourage 
creativity. 

Invention: 

Different people have different answers to the same questions. Most people believe that the 
people who came to this area from Europe and Mexico brought the horses with them. Some of 
those horses escaped and ran free to build up herds of wild horses. Then the Navajo people 
found some of these horses by accident. The Navajo believe their Gods helped bring horses to 
them. I'm going to read you a story that tells you what the Navajo believe. This story is called a 
legend. A legend is an old story that help us understand what those people believe. Read the 
story, Turquoise Boy. Refer to the vocabulary section in the back of the story to help with 
unknown words. 

Application: 

Discuss the many different ways the Navajo lives could have been changed once they found the 
horses. Have students complete a bulletin board with different before and after pictures they 
have drawn showing the many different uses of the horse. Examples might include walking to 
one’s home versus riding there; or people dragging something heavy versus having the horse 
carry it. 

Extensions: 

Students can create their own legends in answer to questions of how things came to be. Students 
could also translate some of their grandparents' or elders' stories of their youth into legends. 




alST COPY AVAILABLE 

43^53 




Language Arts 

Learning the Language of the Lakota 



Objective : 

Students will tell a story using words from the Lakota language. 

Invention: 

Benjamin’s family spoke the Lakota language fluently. Students will have an opportunity to leat 
words-from the Lakota language. Vocabulary and pronunciation will be introduced. The teacher 
should print the following words on cards and then show a matching picture card. 

Pronunciations: 



Students can then write and share an animal story using the Lakota words they have learned. 



English 



Lakota (phonetic pronunciation) 



Animals 



dog 

cat 

horse 

cow 

bear 

deer 

fox 

P'g 



sunka (shoon' kah) 
igmu (ig moo') 

sunkawakan (shun kah wah kdnh) 

pte (ptay) 

mato (mah toe') 

tahca (tak cha') 

sungila (shoon gee' lah) 

kukuse (koo koo' shay) 

pahin (pah heen') 

pispiza (pee spee zah) 

wica (wee cha') 

sungmanitu (shung mah' nee too) 
tatanka (tah tahn' kah) 

sungmanitu tanka (shung mah' nee too tahn' kah) 



porcupine 

prairie dog 

racoon 

coyote 

buffalo 

wolf 



Application: 



Science 



Animal Habits and Habitats 



Objectives: 

Students will identify animals near their homes. They will study their habitats and habits. 

Note: Lakota pronunciations for animals appear in the previous lesson. 

Materials: 

• a variety of animal books 

• color sheets 

• crayons 

Background Information: 

Be familiar with animals in your area and their habitats, eating habits, and other information 
concerning them. Hang up pictures around the room a week or so before the lesson is taught. 
Encourage children to observe them. 

Exploration: 

Discuss various animals that students see around the reservation, city, or town. Discuss the 
animals' habitats and eating habits. Discuss how the animals and people in your area interact. 

Seminar: 

What is your house made oi7 Animal habitats are all similar and yet different in some ways. 
How is your habitat like the animals'? How are the two habitats different? 

Invention: 

An elder may be asked to come to class and share stories of animals on the reservation and their 
meinings and purposes to the Lakota or your own people long ago and today. 




45 



Application: 



Students will use their imagination and draw a picture of themselves and an animal of their 
choice. Children will be encouraged to use ideas from one of the elder's stories. 







(“Coyote is very wise and knows how to keep his mouth closed and his ears up.”) 



“coyote” 



My Ideas for Hares to Horses Unit: 



O 

ERIC 



47 



257 



LESSON PLANS/SCHEDULE FOR HARES TO HORSES UNIT 




O 

ERIC 



2,53 



48 




49 



erIc 




50 





261 



TEACHER’S/P AJRENT’S BACKGROUND INEORMATION- 



Indian Art 

There are artists in every Indian tribe. This has always been the way. Probably every 
tribe had something only they made - a special way of showing their artistic talent. But 
most tribes shared much of the art styles with neighbors. Because of this, the art of 
Indian people can be grouped into culture areas. Indian people used things in their 
natural environments to make art objects. That’s one reason art is not the same in one 
place as it is in another. 

Indian people in each culture area have found many ways to express their love of beauty 
and their creative talents. Artists from many tribes still do traditional things. Here are 
just a few examples of tribal art from each culture area. See if you can tell why these 
tribal groups used certain things for their artwork because of where they live. 

ARCTIC people carve on stone, bone, horn and ivory. Most art is used to decorate 
everyday tools, such as a knife handle or a harpoon head. 

NORTHWEST COAST people are known for their carvings on totem poles, house fronts, 
canoes, and wooden boxes. These carvings are figures of animals, monsters, and human 
beings. Some of these carvings are painted, mostly in the colors red and black. 

PLAINS tribal people painted their artwork on buffalo hides because, as hunters, hides 
were available to them. These hides were painted and decorated with porcupine quills. 

In some tribes symbols were painted on the outside of tipis. Colors most often used in 
painting were brown, red, yellow, black, blue and green. These are the colors of nature. 

PLATEAU tribes painted and decorated their tipis, parfleche cases and shields. Clothing 
was decorated with porcupine quills, shells, elk teeth, feathers, and bear claws. They also 
wove comhusk bags and other types of baskets. 

SOUTHWEST people create their artwork on pottery, baskets, woven cloth, jewelry and 
in sand paintings. Designs often use shapes, but pictures of birds, animals, and human 
beings are used, too. 

SOUTHEAST people used their own bodies on which they painted beautiful and detailed 
designs. The most common colors were red, black, yellow, white and blue. People’s 
clothing was also richly decorated with shells and feathers. 




52 



NORTHEAST people were artists who painted on bark, something that was easily found 
in the forests where they lived. They also made beautiful wood carvings. Clothing and 
bark baskets were decorated with porcupine quills. Some artists carved pipes from stone. 
Over the years, these culture groups borrowed from each other and developed new forms 
of art. Indian artists are still at work making things that tell us about their traditions. 

Some Indian artists are borrowing from the art of the past or other tribal groups to create 
something brand new. These new art styles help us understand what Indian cultures are 
like today. 

The oldest kind of Indian art was made thousands of years ago. It is known as “rock art.” 
There are different kinds of rock art. The most common are PETROGLYPHS which are 
carvings made on the surface of rocks. Another kind is called PICTOGRAPHS. These 
are rock paintings. Some Indian people also carved whole figures out of rock, 
SCULPTURES. Some of these sculptures were tools that were for everyday use, like 
grinding stones, bowls, and hammers. Some were art objects of religious importance. 
Other stone art was carried by special people to show they were leaders of the tribe. 

The figures carved or painted on rocks shows' animals, people, monsters, or shapes, like 
circles and squares. Some of these were put there to tell a story. Others were for 
religious purposes. Some were probably meant to entertain or be funny, like a comic 
strip in a newspaper. Because rock does not rot away like wood does, much of the Indian 
rock art has lasted many thousands of years. People can see them even today. This rock 
art gives us a chance to enjoy the work of Indian artists who lived long ago. 

from Indian Culture Units on American Indians: Visual Arts, 
ORBIS Associates, Washington, DC, 1987. 



Reference: Introduction — Indian Art , Airport School District, Michigan. 



53 





SUGGESTED PRIMARY LEVEL 
Reading, Language Arts, 

Science, Math, Art, Values 
P Art Words 

HUsing Reference Books 
A Reading Biographies 
S Retelling/Responding 
E Science of Color 
Cost of Art Items 
F Writing Description of Art Item 
I Create Art Item 
V Math for Art Item 
E Respect for Art/ Artists 



UNIT OUTLINE - ART 

Literature - Week 1 

A Tour of Western Art 
by Carole Armstrong 
The Boy Who Loved to 
Draw: Benjamin West 
by Barbara Brenner 
Shadow Catcher: Life and 
Work of Edward Curtis 
by Laurie Lawlor 
Georgia O ’ Keefe by 
Linda Lowery 



P Art Words 

H Using Reference Books 
A Reading Biog./Nonfiction 
S Reading Legends 
E Retelling/Responding 
Weaving Baskets 
F Geometry in Designs 
O Writing Directions/Basket Making Art) by Sue Lacey 
U Science of Baskets Landscapes by Peggy 

R Respect for Art/ Artists King 



Redoute: The Man Who 
Painted Flowers by 
Carolyn Croll 
Fun with Flower Stencils 
by Paul Kennedy 

Landscapes (Start with 



P Art Words 

H Using Reference Books 
A Reading Nonfiction 
S Reading Fiction 
E Retelling/Responding 
What Is Art? 

T Learning from Rock Art 
H Time and Art 
R Drawing Pictograph Story 
E Writing What Story Says 
E Respect for Art/ Artists 



Child's Book of Art by 
Lucy Micklethwait 

Emma 's Rug by Allen Say 

The Painter by Peter 
Catalanotto 
Squeaking of Art: The 
Mice Go to the Museum 
by Monica Wellington 



P Art Words 

H Reading Nonfiction/Biography 
A Reading Fiction 
S Retelling 
E About Illustrators 
Cost of Art Supplies 
T Mixing Colors 
WWrite and Illustrate Book 
O Respect for Art/Artists 



The Art Lesson by Tomie 
dePaola 

What Do Illustrators Do? 
by Eileen Chriselow 

Country Artist: A Story 
About Beatrix Potter by 
David R. Collins 



Literature - Week 2 

Where There Is No 
Name for Art by Bruce 
Hucko 

Forbidden Talent by 
Redwing Nez 
The Ledgerbook of 
Thomas Blue Eagle 
by Gary Matthaei 
Contemporary American 
Indian Artists/ D. Reno 
Weaving: a California 
Tradition by Linda 
Yamane 

Waw Giwulk: Center of 
the Basket & The First 
Basket in Keepers of 
Life/ Caduto & Bruchac 
Little Indian Basket 
Maker by Ann Nolan 

Clark 

Before You Came This 
Way by Byrd Baylor 

Stories on Stone: Rock 
Art, Images from the 
Ancient Ones by 
Jennifer Dewey 

Picture Writing of the 
American Indians by 
Garrick Mallery 
Legend of the Indian 
Paintbrush by Tomie 
dePaola 

The Goat in the Rug 
by Blood and Link 
The Quilt Story by 
Tony Johnston & 
Tomie dePaola 





54 



Literature - Week 3 

Shota and the Star Quilt 
by Bateson-Hill and Runs 
Close to Lodge 
Morning Star Quilts by 
Florence Pulford 

The Patchwork Quilt by 
Valerie Flournoy 
The Josejina Story Quilt 
By Eleanor Coerr 



Literature — Week 4 

Songs from the Loom by 
Monty Roessel 
Navajo Rugs and Blankets 



Reading, Language Arts, 
Science, Math, Art, Values 
Art Words 
Reading Fiction 
Using Reference Books 



by Chuck & Andre Mobley Make Quilt/Rugs/Shawls 
Morning Arrow by Nanabah Science of Dyeing Wool 



Chee Dodge 



The Button Blan/cetANW 
Coast Activity Books 



Geometry in Star Quilts 
Math in Making Quilts/Rugs 
Artist/Quilter/Weaver Visit 
The Giveaway/Gratitude 
Appreciation/Art/Generosity 



When Clay Sings by Byrd 
Baylor 

Children of Clay by Rina 
Swentzell 

Little Indian Pottery Maker 
by Ann Nolan Clark 
Helen Cordero and the 
Storytellers of Cochiti 
By Nancy S. Howard 



Kids ‘N Clay Ceramics 
Book by Kevin Nierman 

Clay Modeling with Pooh 
by Laura Torres 

Create Anything with Clay 
by Sherri Hoab 



Art Words 

Using Reference Books 
Reading Nonfiction 
Making Pots/Figures 
Science of Pottery 
Writing How Your Pot Sings 
Have Potter Visit Class 
Measuring 

Patterns/Designs on Pots 
Appreciation of Pottery 



Quillworker: A Cheyenne 
Legend by Terri Cohlene 



The Pine Ridge Porcupine 
by Ann Nolan Clark 

Where Did You Get Your 
Moccasins? by Bemelda 

Wheeler 



Small Animals of North 
America Coloring Book 
by Elizabeth McClelland 

Hand Print Animal Art by 
by Carolyn Carreiro 
Superdoodle Mammals by 
by Bev Armstrong 

I Can Draw Animals by 
Tony Tallarico 



Art Words 

Reading Fiction/Legends 
Retelling 

Using Reference Books 
Creating Designs 
Do Simple Beadwork 
Draw Animal Pictures 
Local Bead/Quillworker Visit 
Local Artist Visit 
Write About Local Artisan 
Appreciation of Art 



Grandmother Spider Brings 
the Sun by Geri Keams 

Dreamcatcher by Audrey 
Osofsky 



Harold’s Trip to the Sky 
by Crockett Johnson 

The First Starry Night 
by Joan S. Isom 



Grandmother ’s Dreamcatcher The Starry Night by Neil 
by Becky McCain Waldman 



Art Words 

Reading Fiction/Legends 
Reading Biography 
What is Art? 

Make Dreamcatchers 
Fingerpaint “Starry Night” 
“Starry Night with #_Stars’' 
Have Artist Visit Class 
Appreciation of Art 





u S 



55 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE FIVE - 

Indian people have always been artists. Indian art has become very popular in the 
nonlndian world and has influenced nonlndian art. 

About Art and Artists - 

*A Tour of Western Art by Carole Armstrong, 1999. 

*The Boy Who Loved to Draw: Benjamin West by Barbara Brenner, Houghton Mifflin, 
1999. 

*Shadow Catcher: Life and Work of Edward Curtis by Laurie Lawlor, 1994. 

* Georgia O 'Keefe by Linda Lowery, On My Own Biographies, 1996. 



Indian Art and Artists — 

*Where There Is No Name for Art by Bruce Hucko. Pueblo 
*Forbidden Talent by Redwing Nez, Northland Pub., 1995. Navajo 
*The Ledgerbook of Thomas Blue Eagle by Gary Matthaei Lakota 
* Contemporary American Indian Artists by Dawn Reno. 



Indian and Other Quilts - 

*Shota and the Star Quilt by Margaret Bateson-Hill, Consultant Gloria Runs Close to 
Lodge, Lakota text by Philomine Lakota (Indian Author), Zero to Ten, Ltd., 1998. 

Lakota 

* Morning Star Quilts by Florence Pulford. Fifty full-color photos of Indian star quilts. 
*The Patchwork Quilt by Valerie Flournoy, Dial Books, 1985. Also found in some 
basal readers 

*The Josefina Story Quilt by Eleanor Coerr, Harpercollins, 1986. 

These stories should be compared and contrasted. 



Indian Blankets, Shawls, Rugs - 

*Songs from the Loom - A Navajo Girl Learns to Weave by Monty Roessel (Indian 
Author), Lemer We Are Still Here Series. 

*Navajo Rugs and Blankets, A Learning Coloring Book by Chuck and Andrea Mobley. 

* Morning Arrow by Nanabah Chee Dodge (Indian Author), Lothrop, 1975. Navajo 
*The Button Blanket, a Northwest Coast Activity Book. 

The more difficult materials could be read by gifted and talented students and reported on 
to the class or they can help the teacher read them to the class. Be sure Indian culture 
staff or knowledgeable people from the community are involved in art projects. 

56 




266 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE FOUR - 

Indian people have always been artists. Indian art is very popular in the nonlndian 
world and it has influenced nonlndian art. 

Painting Plants, Flowers, Landscapes - 

*Redoute: The Man Who Painted Flowers by Carolyn Croll, Philomel, 1996. 

*Fun with Flower Stencils by Paul Kennedy, 1990. 
landscapes (Start with Art) by Sue Lacey, Millbrook Press, 2000. 

* Landscapes by Peggy King, Crabtree, 1996. 

Weaving with Plants: Indian Basket Making - 

*Weaving: a California Tradition by Linda Yamane (Indian Author), Lemer We Are 
Still Here Series. 

* Waw Giwulk: Center of the Basket in Keepers of Life by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum, 1998. O’odham 

*The First Basket in Keepers of Life by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian 
Author), Fulcrum, 1998. Mandan 

*Little Indian Basket Maker by Ann Nolan Clark, Melmont, 1957. O’odham 
If it exists, include the basket making of local tribe(s). 

Indian Pottery - 

*When Clay Sings by Byrd Baylor, Scribner’s, 1972. Pueblo 

*Children of Clay - A Family of Pueblo Potters by Rina Swentzell (Indian Author), 
Lemer, We Are Still Here Series. 

*Little Indian Pottery Maker by Ann Nolan Clark, Melmont, 1955. 

*Helen Cordero and the Storytellers of Cochiti Pueblo by Nancy Shroyer Howard, Davis 
Pub., 1995. 

If it exists, include pottery making of local tribe(s). 

The more difficult materials can be read by gifted and talented students and reported on 
to the class or they can help the teacher read them to the class. 

Working with Clay — 

*Kids ‘N Clay Ceramics Book by Kevin Nierman, Tricycle Press, 2000. 

*Clay Modeling with Pooh by Laura Torres, Mouse Works, 1999. 

* Create Anything with Clay by Sherri Hoab, Klutz, 1 999. 

Be sure Indian studies culture staff or knowledgeable people from the community are 
involved in art projects. 



57 



267 




ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE THREE - 

Indian people have always been artists. Indian art is very popular in the nonlndian 
world and it has influenced nonlndian art. 



About Art and Artists - 

* Child’s Book of Art by Lucy Micklethwait, D K Pub., 1999. 

*Emma 's Rug by Allen Say, Houghton Mifflin, 1996. 

*The Painter by Peter Catalanotto, Orchard Books, 1995. 

* Squeaking of Art: The Mice Go to the Museum by Monica Wellington, Dutton, 2000. 



Indian Petroglyphs and Pictographs - 

* Before You Came This Way by Byrd Baylor, Dutton, 1969. 

* Stories on Stone: Rock Art, Images from the Ancient Ones by Jennifer Dewey, 1996. 

* Picture Writing of the American Indian by Garrick Mallery. 

The teacher should stress that Indian people have always been artists and these are some 
examples of their first art. 



Indian Beadwork and Quillwork - 

*Quillworker: A Cheyenne Legend by Terri Cohlene, Troll, 1990. 

*The Pine Ridge Porcupine by Ann Nolan Clark, Lakota Books. 

*Where Did You Get Your Moccasins? by Bemelda Wheeler, Pemmican Pub. Canada 

Drawing/Coloring Animals - 

*Small Animals of North America Coloring Book by Elizabeth McClelland, 

*Hand Print Animal Art by Carolyn Carreiro, Williamson Pub., 1997. 

*Superdoodle Mammals by Bey Armstrong, 1 993. 

*1 Can Draw Animals by Tony Tallarico, Little Simon, 1996. 

The teacher should stress that beadwork and quillwork were done on animal skins and 
animals are often the subjects of Indian art. 

Gifted and talented students should read the more difficult selections and report to the 
class or help the teacher read them to the class. Be sure to have the Indian culture staff or 
other knowledgeable people from the community involved in art projects. 



ERIC 



58 



f . 

■ fr 




ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE TWO - 

Indian people have always been artists. Indian art is very popular in the nonlndian 
world and it has influenced nonlndian art. 

About Illustrators — 

*The Art Lesson by Tomi dePaola, G. P. Putnam, 1989. Included in some basal readers 
*What Do Illustrators Do? By Eileen Chriselow, Houghton Mifflin, 1999. 

*Country Artist: A Story About Beatrix Potter by David R. Collins, Carolrhoda, 1990. 

About Art — 

*Legend of the Indian Paintbrush by Tomie dePaola, Paperstar, 1989. 

*The Goat in the Rug by Charles Blood and Martin Link, Parents, 1976. Navajo Also 
found in some basal readers 

*The Quilt Story by Tony Johnston and Tomi dePaola, Paperstar, 1996 

These stories are included to emphasize the illustrators and to introduce other examples 

of art made by Indians and nonlndians. 

Other Stories Including Indian Art — 

*Grandmother Spider Brings the Sun by Geri Keams (Indian Author), Northland Press, 
1995. Cherokee Includes beautiful Indian pottery. 

*Dreamcatcher by Audry Osofsky, Orchard Books, 1992. Ojibway 

* Grandmother’s Dreamcatcher by Becky McCain, Albert Whitman & Co., 1998. 

Ojibway 

These stories are included to include other items of Indian art and to emphasize what the 
students learned in the Sun, Moon and Stars unit. 

Art Including the Sky — 

* Harold’s Trip to the Sky by Crockett Johnson, Harpercollins,1981. 

*The First Starry Night by Joan Shaddox Isom, Charlesbridge, 1998. 

*The Starry Night by Neil Waldman, Boyds Mill, 1999. 

Be sure to have Indian culture staff or other knowledgeable people from the community 
involved in art projects. 




59 



FURTHER RESOURCES FOR ART UNIT - 

These materials can be used to substitute for books in the suggested unit outline or 
for additional reading/other activities for students. 

I Spy: An Alphabet in Art by Lucy Micklethwait, Mulberry Press, 1996. 

A is for Artist by John Harris, J. Paul Getty Museum, 1 997. 

The Graphic Alphabet by David Pelletier, 1997. 

Color by Ruth Heller, Grosset & Dunlap, 1995. 

The Berenstain Bears Draw It by Stan and Jan Berenstain, Random House, 1996. 

Drawing Lessons from a Bear by David McPhail, Little, Brown, 2000. 

The Art Box by Gail Gibbons, Hobday House, 2000. 

Let’s Start Painting, Silver Dolphin, 1998. 

Cbck: A Book About Cameras and Taking Pictures by Gail Gibbons, Little, Brown, 

1997. 

*Color Zoo by Lois Ehlert, Lippincott, 1989. 

*Red Blue Yellow Shoe by Tana Hoban, Wm. Morrow, 1986. 

* Picture of Harold’s Room by Crockett Johnson, Harpercollins, 1960. 

*Molly Draws by Levert, Annick Press, 1998. 

*Farm A nimals in Art, Lowell House, 1997- 
*Wild Animals in Art, Lowell House, 1997. 

Georgia O’Keefe by Mike Venezia, Children’s Press, 1993. 

Leonardo Da Vinci by Tony Hart, Barrons Juveniles, 1994. 

Van Gogh by Mike Venezia, Getting to Know the World’s Greatest Artists, 1994. 
Michaelangelo by Tony Hart, Barrons Juveniles, 1994. 

Norman Rockwell by Mike Venezia, Getting to Know the World’s Greatest Artists, 2000. 



Diego Rivera by Mike Venezia, Getting to Know the World’s Greatest Artists, 1995. 
Diego by Jeanette Winter, Knopf, 1994. 

Quilt Making, Quilt Making Activity Kit by Mary Ruthsdotter, available from National 
Women’s History Project, Windsor, CA. 

The Quilt by Ann Jonas, Greenwillow, 1987. 

The Boy and the Quilt by Shirley Kurtz, Good Books, 1991. 

An Amish Quilt Coloring Book by Cheryl Benner, Good Books, 1 994. 

Magpie Magic: A Tale of Colorful Mischief by April Wilson, Dial, 1999. 

How to Draw Birds by John Green, Dover, 1999. 

Bird Fantasy Designs by William Rowe, Dover, 1980. 

I Can Draw Animals by Ray Gibson, ETC Pub., 1998. 

Animals in Art by Gladys Blizzard, Lickle Pub., 1 992. 

Kids Can Draw Animals by Philippe Legendre, 1999. 

Drawing Horses by Jeff Crosby, Grosset and Dunlap, 2000. 

Spot a Dog by Lucy Micklethwait, Mulberry Books, 1995. 

I Can Draw Horses by Gill Speirs, 1983. 

Bunnies in my Head by Tricia Tusa, University of Texas, 1998. 

How to Draw Pets by Christine Smith, Garreth Stevens, 1996. 

Legend of the Red Wolf by Valerie Ozeta, Red Wolf Pub., 1999. Indian 

Sea and Cedar by Lois McConkey, Firefly, 1973. Northwest 

Native Artists of North America by Reavis Moore. 

Navajo Visions and Voices Across the Mesa by Shonto Begay (Indian Author), Schol. 
Rainbow at Night by Bruce Hucko. Navajo 



271 



61 



Colors of the Navajo by Emily Abbink, Carolrhoda, 1998. 

Language of the Robe: American Indian Trade Blankets by Robert Kapown, Gibbs- 
Smith, 1992. 

How to Make a Native American Dance Shawl. Video 

The Porcupine’s Quills in Skunny Wundy by Arthur Parker, Albert Whitman, 1970. 

Indian 

An Indian Artist, Read Aloud Story by Lorraine Webster, University of South Dakota, 
1972. 

North American Indians Coloring Album by Frank Fox. 

Indian Designs by David Villasenor. 

Lucy Learns to Weave by Virginia Hoffinan, Woodside & Co., Navajo Curriculum 
Center Press. 

Weaving a Navajo Rug by Begay Students, Chinle, AZ. 

A First Clay Gathering by N. Naranjo-Morse, 1994. Pueblo 
Star Quilt Sticker Book, Little Dover Books. Plains 

The Star Quilt, a Symbol of Lakota Identity by Marla N. Powers, Lakota Books, 1990. 
Simply Seminole: Techniques and Designs in Quiltmaking by Dorothy Hanisko. 

Guide to Indian Rock Carvings of the Pacific Northwest Coast/Beth Hill, Hancock, 1980 
The Same Sun Was in the Sky by Denise Webb, Northland, 1994. Indian 
Indian Basketry by George Wharton James. 

American Indian Beadwork by W. Ben Hunt. 

There are many Indian art books for adults that contain pictures of art items. 

CHECK YOUR LIBRARY OR BOOKSTORES FOR OTHER BOOKS 
RELATING TO THE TOPIC. 

*These books are especially suitable for Phase One - for preschool children. 



ART WORDS 



Beginning Sounds- 



basket 


cut 


design 


gallery 


leather 


pot 


buy 


color 


decorate 


glue 


loom 


potter 


between 


cotton 


dye 


green 


landscape 


pottery 


buckskin 


camera 


dreamcatcher 


grass 


line 


paint 


bead construction paper draw 






painting 


beadwork 


crayon 




hide 


moccasins 


paintbrush 


beautiful 


clay 


fold 


hard 


mold 


palette 


blue 


canvas 


frame 


harden 


masterpiece 


picture 


blanket 


curve 


fringe 


hang 


museum 


pencil 


black 


complete 






material 


paper 


brush 


create 


sew 


tape 


markers 


paste 


brown 


creative 


skin 


talent 


measure 


portrait 




circle 


stroke 


tan 




purchase 


quilt 




star quilt 


trace 


water 


Pendleton 


quilter 


rug 


stitch 


triangle 


watercolor 


petroglyph 


quill 


rock art 


square 


thread 


weave 


pictograph 


quilhvork 


red 


scissors 


tools 


wool 


plan 


quality 


rainbow 


shape 




white 


prism 


quantity 


ruler 


shawl 


view 




photograph 




roll 


sharp 


visualize 




photographer 


Long Vowel Sounds- 


Short Vowel Sounds- Compound Words- 


Other Words- 


weave 


frame 


black 




watercolor 


art 


bead 


paste 


basket 




quilhvork 


artist 


easel 


landscape 


masterpiece 




beadwork 


illustrate 


dreamcatcherline 


grass 




paintbrush 


illustrator 


paint 


hide 


landscape 




landscape 


yellow 


portrait 


inside 


tan 




dreamcatcher 


orange 


between 


white 






masterpiece 


nice 


green 




brush 




inside 


needle 






cut 




outside 


imagine 


Exceptions- 




rug 









measure 

leather Word walls should be maintained. Instructors should ensure 

thread that students know the meanings of these words in this context 

masterpiece and extend vocabulary by noting how they may mean other 

things in other contexts or they may have homophones. 
Experiences, pictures and illustrations should be used to 
explain and process word meanings. Words that rhyme with 
these words can be examined to extend vocabulary and to see 
varying spellings for sounds. Other words should be added. 

63 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



273 



SCIENCE STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN ART UNIT - 

Standard — Understands the convictions scientists share about the nature of the 

world and what can be learned about it 

Benchmarks- 

Understands that science experiments normally have reproducible results: science 
experiments generally work the same way in different places 

Standard — Understands that scientific inquiry works in particular ways 
Benchmarks- 

Understands that learning can come from careful observations and simple experiments 
Understands that individuals can interpret the same thing in different ways 

Standard — Understands basic concepts about the structure of matter 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that some properties of material may be changed by external actions like heating 
and cooling, but different materials respond differently to the same actions 
Knows that when a new material is made by combining two or more materials, as in a 
chemical transformation, the material can have properties that are different from the 
original materials 

Standard — Knows the forms energy takes, its transformations from one form to 

another, and its relationship to matter 

Benchmarks- 

Knows that an object in a beam of light can cast a shadow, while other objects might 
bend or transmit the light 

Standard — Understands motion and the principles that explain it 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that light from the sun is made up of a mixture of many different colors of light, 
even though to the eye the light looks almost white 

Standard - Understands cycling of matter and energy flow through the environment 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that some source of “energy” is needed for any work to be done 

Standard — Understands the nature of physical, conceptual, and mathematical 

models and the uses made of them 

Benchmarks- 

Knows that a model of a thing is different from the real thing, but can be used to learn 
something about what the real thing is like 

Knows that geometric figures, number sequences, graphs, diagrams, sketches, number 
lines, maps, and even stories can be used to represent objects, events, and processes in the 
real world, although these representations can never be exact in every detail 

64 



Standard - Knows about patterns of change and constancy 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that things change in some ways and stay the same in some ways 
Knows that sometimes making up an experiment helps us to learn more about how 
something changes 



MATH STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN ART UN IT- 

Standard - Effectively uses a variety of strategies within the problem solving 

process 

Benchmarks- 

Brainstorms possible things to do 

Clarifies problems using discussions with teacher or knowledgeable others 
Clearly states problems in his or her own words 
Checks the reasonableness of results through estimation 

Standard — Understands and applies basic and advanced properties of numbers 
Benchmarks- 

Has a general understanding of the concept of number 

Uses counting to exemplify numbers 

Understands the relationship of decimals to whole numbers 

Understands the relationship of fractions to decimals and whole numbers 

Standard - Uses basic and advanced procedures while performing computation 
Benchmarks- 

Adds, subtracts, multiplies and divides whole numbers with accuracy 
Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides decimals with accuracy 

Mentally adds and subtracts basic combinations of whole numbers with reasonable 
accuracy 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced methods of measurement 
Benchmarks- 

Understands the relationship between length, width and height 
Understands the basic characteristics of area and how it is measured 
Makes effective use of ruler for making measurements 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced concepts of geometry 
Benchmarks- 

Understands the similarities and differences between circles, squares and triangles 
Understands the meaning of the concepts of inside/outside/between 
Understands the basic characteristics of the concept of three dimensions 
Understands the basic features of angles 

Analyzes the effects of combining, subdividing and changing shapes 

65 



275 



Standard — Understands and applies basic and advanced concepts of data analysis 

and distributions 

Benchmarks- 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of data 
Collects and organizes simple data sets to answer questions 



LANGUAGE ARTS STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY 
GRADES ADDRESSED IN ART UNTT- 

Standard - Gathers information effectively through reading, listening and viewing 
Benchmarks- 

Provides an accurate retelling of the basic plot of simple stories that student has read, 
heard or viewed 

Provides an accurate retelling of the main idea of simple expository information the 
student has read, heard or viewed 

Understands that reading, viewing and listening are ways of gaining information about 
the world 

Determines me anin g of simple words from text 

Creates mental representations for concrete information read, heard or viewed 

Standard - Reads and responds to literature 
Benchmarks- 

Understands that stories have beginning, middle and ending episodes 
Understands the genre of legends and fables 

Standard - Communicates ideas and information in writing 
Benchmarks- 

Understands basic connections between spelling patterns and speech sounds 

Understands basic phonological patterns in English 

Expresses ideas in simple expository forms 

Composes simple stories that express cohesive ideas 

Experiments with different genre as modes for expressing ideas 

Standard - Understands and applies basic principles of language use 
Benchmarks- 

Recognizes characteristic sounds and rhythms of language 
Makes valid observations about the use of words 

Makes valid observations about the use of language at home as opposed to the use of 
language in school 

Standards and Benchmarks from The Systematic Identification and Articulation of 
Content Standards and Benchmarks, Midcontinent Regional Educational Laboratory, 
1994. 



AMERICAN INDIAN CONTENT STANDARDS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN ART UNIT - 



SCIENCE 
Science As Inquiry- 

Indian students should develop an awareness that observations and understandings of 
nature traditionally formed an essential base of knowledge among American Indian 
cultures. 

Physical Science- 

Indian students should develop an understanding of the innate properties of objects and 
materials that were (and are) recognized by traditional American Indian cultures in the 
manufacture and use of specific material objects that capitalize upon those properties. 

Earth Science- 

Indian students should develop an understanding of properties of earth, air, water and fire 
and how they served as a basis for traditional American Indian production of clothing, 
housing, tools, and art objects. 

Science and Techno logy- 

Indian students should develop an awareness of the problem solving skills demonstrated 
by historical American Indians in the development of tools and technologies such as in 
pottery technology - e.g. types of clay, tempering, firing techniques, decorative 
techniques. 



Indian students should be able to - 

Listen for meaning and gain information from spoken English and a Native language. 

Listen to Indian stories told in the oral tradition, comprehend their teachings and be able 
to retell them. 

Speak coherently, conveying ideas in both English and a Native language. 

Read fluently and independently, a variety of materials including those with American 
Indian themes. 

Locate and use a variety of texts to gain information, for example, historical materials 
about their tribe, tribal legends and stories and oral history transcription. 

Be familiar with children’s literature with Indian themes, especially with that pertaining 
to the student’s tribe and literature written by Indian authors. 



LANGUAGE AND LITERACY 



67 




MATHEMATICS 



Mathematics as Problem Solving- 

Indian students should formulate problems from everyday and mathematical situations 
within their home and tribal/community worlds. 

Mathematics as Communication- 

Indian students should relate physical materials, pictures, and diagrams to mathematical 
ideas utilizing beadwork, pottery, baskets, rugs, star quilts, and other items from 
American Indian cultures. 

Mathematics as Reasoning- 

Indian students should use models, known facts, properties and relationships to explain 
their t hink ing, taking objects or ideas from their own or other American Indian cultures to 
do so. 

Estimation- 

Indian students should apply estimation when working with quantities, measurement, 
computation and problem solving with hands-on experience in creating Indian arts/crafts 
items. 

Number Sense and Numeration- 

Indian students should construct number meanings through real-world experiences and 
use of physical materials drawing upon both designs from Indian artwork for examination 
and numerical analysis as well as manipulatives derived from Indian crafts (beads). 

Geometry and Spatial Sense- 

Indian students should describe, model, draw and classify shapes including tribal design, 
symbols and traditional structures (such as the conical shape of the tipi). 

Indian students should investigate and predict the results of combining, subdividing and 
changing shapes such as those found in star quilt designs. 

Indian students should relate number and measurement ideas by counting, measuring and 
performing other ftmctions related to geometric designs found in American Indian art. 
Indian students should recognize and appreciate geometry in their world especially that 
found in Indian arts and crafts and the significance of certain shapes, such as the circle, to 
Indians. 

Measurement- 

Indian students should make and use measurements in problem and everyday situations 
such as creating Indian arts and crafts. 

Patterns and Relationships- 

Indian students should represent and describe mathematical relationships ut ilizing 
patterns found in Indian art and design. 



68 




Example Amvirns Developed hy leadens op 
Amman Indian Siudems 



Wonkshop on Ciinmlly-Sased Mari and Science Cmnicdm Developwem 

Haskell Indian JunioK College 
1992 



WASTERS Projcct 

Mari anb Science Teachers fOK Resemnon Schools 
Umvensny op Kansas anb 
Haskell Indian MaTions Univensny 
Eamb's Camakens, 1 993 




Ideas should he adapted pm appnopmmess. See appendix pn how to onden Eatah's Camakens. 



MATH - 



“NATIVE AMERICAN BASIC DESIGNS” 



CULTURAL OUTCOME: IX 

MATH OUTCOME: I 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

Students will learn to recognize geometric shapes that have spiritual and 
artistic importance to their tribe. 

MATH OBJECTIVE: 

Students will match, sort, and classify shapes and objects. 



TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

Native Americans use geometric shapes inbeadwork, paintings, headdresses, 
shields, and clothing. Each tribe has special designs which have particular 
significance to them. 

The first beads were painted. The Indians used colored earth, clays, rocks, 
plants, and bark for their dyes, which were dried, pounded and ground into 
a fine powder. This powder was mixed with water or animal fat to make paint. 

Beads brought by European travellers became popular with many tribes, 
these beads gradually replaced the porcupine quill in popularity of use. The 
Woodland People used floral designs in their embroidery, while the Plains 
Indians worked with geometric designs. The Crow and Blackfeet Indians 
combined both types of design in their work. 

Many Indian tribes used similar combinations of geometric shapes to signify 
some meaning. Some of these include the trees, lightning, animals, stars, 
people, rivers, mountains, birds, clouds, etc. They are carved, beaded, 
painted, constructed, or quilled onto many clothing items, headdresses, 
rugs, tepees, blankets, quilts, riding gear, baskets, totem poles, pottery, 
baskets, and moccasins. 

2S0 




70 




The Papagos (Tohono O'odham) make baskets with a number of different 
designs. Papago baskets are made from yucca leaves, devils's claw, willow 
branches, and bear grass. The designs are usually colored black, red, green, 
and white. The green leaves of the yucca can be bleached white in the sun. 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 

1 . Students will go on a field trip to find yucca leaves, devil’s claw, willow, 
and bear grass. Put these in bags to preserve them until the class 
returns to school. Discuss size and color and relate them to the 
construction of baskets. Let them dry and later construct a basket. 

2. The teacher will show the class some samples of baskets with 
interesting designs. The students will draw six circles on their paper 
and then draw some designs that they see in the baskets. Discuss the 
colors, how many colors, and shapes in the design. The teacher will 
display the circles after they are cut out and pasted on a contrasting 
background. 

3. The students will match cut out shapes of the circle, square, triangle, 
rectangle and diamond. 

4. The students will trace around templates of shapes on paper and then 
combine different shapes to make recognizable objects. Have them 
tell about their picture. The students will then cut out shapes to color 
and make designs. 

5. The teacher will make a large circle with masking tape on the floor. 
The students will then work on motor development skills - walk, crawl, 
hop, skip, or hop in and out, etc. Check these skills off to show 
improvement in development. 

6. The students will trace a design in sand with finger or stick, using basic 
shapes. Tell about how it feels, what shapes are drawn, and how.to 
make a design using two shapes, increasing it to more as child's ability 
progresses. This may also be done on the chalkboard. 




281 
- 71 



BEST 



WEEK-LONG UNIT ACTIVITIES: 

1. The teacherwill place a large circle on chalkboard or story paper. The 
class will discuss what a circle means to each child and his/her tribe. 
Review the letters and words E (East), S (South), W (West), and 

N (North). The students will show and turn their bodies to face that 
direction. They will place the capitol letters on the correct spot on the 
board or paper and in the classroom. The teacher will place this in the 
room or on the bulletin board which has pictures of circle designs in 
Indian crafts. 

2. The teacher will pass out geoboards and one rubber band to each 
student. Students will experiment and explore various placements of 
the rubber band, with the teacher noting whether any of them make the 
basic shape patterns. Handout the shapes you have discussed in 
earlier activities for the whole group to duplicate. Experiment with one 
child describing to another child where to place his/her rubber band. 
The teacher will encourage them to use the four directions. If this is 
too difficult, the teacher may give the directions to the whole group or 
small groups. Add more basic designs of art work to the bulletin board. 

3. The students will use geoboards to create designs with two rubber 
bands. Draw a picture of one or two designs on the board. Let the 
children continue to explore with designs. Have them count the pegs 
between the rubber bands and then color that many squares on the 
large scale graph paper using different colors for each rubber band. 

4. The teacherwill give the children a 9" square of beige cotton material, 
have them draw one of their favorite designs made earlier, and color 
with tri-chem paints. The teacher would combine all of these into a 
wall-hanging for the classroom. 

5. The teacher will display the finished work and save for an art show 
or a gift for a parent or guardian. 




282 

: : BEST copy available 



72 



6 . 



Making a Pattern: 



a. Read The Quillmaker aloud to the students. 

b. Discuss "quilling”-using naturally dyed porcupine quills for 
ornamentation instead of beads. They can be used for earrings, 
medallions, or belts. 

c. Using colored tooth picks to represent quills, the students can 
make patterns on strips of paper. 

d. The teacher can discuss the star quilt used for "memorial 
ceremonies” and other ceremonies. They also serve as a way 
of making a living for many people. 

e. Have an elder or person of the community show in a simple way 
how they make a star quilt. 

f. In a group, plan how to make a simple quilt using construction 
paper. Follow through and make one. 

7. The students will make a bulletin board with the same design with 
different colors. They will place cards of the four directions on the 
proper location on the bulletin board. The students will make a colorful 
border with various geometric shapes. 




73 





EVALUATION: 



The students will color from basic design sheets two or more designs on large 
scale graph paper. Using two or three colors and designs, the students will 
make a book mark or cover to a design book. 



RESOURCES: 



Terri Cohlene, The Quillmaker . Vero. California: The Raurle Corp., 1990. 

Dobyns, Henry F..The Pap ago People. Phoenix Arizona: Indian Tribal 
Series, 1972. 



19 5 8 n ^ 6 ^°k er ^’ Ih^ian Beadwork. NewYork: William Morrow and Company, 

Lyford, Carrie A., Quill and Beadwork of the Western Sioux . Boulder, 
Colorado: Johnson Publishing, 1979. 



DEVELOPED BY: 

/ 

Carol L. Martin 
Mary Stonehouse 
Georgie Riley 




SCIENCE - 



“SKINWORK” 



CULTURAL OUTCOME: II 

SCIENCE OUTCOME: III 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

Students will learn how Native Americans prepared animal hides for clothing 
and shelter. 



SCIENCE OBJECTIVE: 

Students will learn how plants and animals are used to enhance our lives. 
TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

Indians used their environment in an ecologically sound manner. Every bit of 
skin was used. Everything not used in the larger garments was utilized for 
moccasins, pouches, and other small items. The smallest pieces were used 
for fringe. 

Manifesting their respect for life, Native Americans found ways to use every 
part of the animals they killed. The skins were used to make clothing, tipi 
covers, shields, masks, and boats. Skins were often used as containers to 
hold paints, foods, medicines, and infant blankets. 

The preparation of animal skins was not an easy task. The skins had to be 
treated or else they would become hard and stiff. They were prepared by first 
removing the animal flesh with rock scrapers, then rubbing an oily paste of 
brains and liver on the hide and soaking it in water for several days. 

Shields were made from tough pieces of hide stretched over frames. Many 
of the shields were decorated with religious symbols to protect the user. 
Moccasins, worn by many tribes, were made of various types of skins. The 
styles were many and varied as a result of climate and local terrain. During 
the winter, moccasins were often stuffed with fur and grass for warmth. 



285 , 



75 



Other types of clothing made from hides included leggings, shirts, dresses, 
robes, and tipis in the hunting tribes. Skins were essential to the daily lives 
of the Native Americans. 

STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 

1 . Invite an elder to demonstrate the uses of hides. If time permits, ask 
the visitor to demonstrate tanning leather. (Due to time factor this 
might be illustrated in picture form.) 



EVALUATION: 



1 . Post an art display of items created by the students. 

2. Ask students to describe their creations. 

3. If possible, videotape the visit from the elder and evaluate the student 
reactions to the material being presented. 



RESOURCES: 

Whiteford, Andrew. North American Indian Arts 

American Indian Tribes of the Southwest . Huntsville Alabama: Madison 
County Title IV Project, 1987. 



DEVELOPED BY: 

John Wray 




77 




MATH AND SCIENCE 



"WEAVING MAGIC" 



CULTURAL OUTCOMES: 
MATH OUTCOMES: 
SCIENCE OUTCOMES: 



V, VII 

I. II. VI 

II, III, V 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

Students will appreciate and recognize the craft of weaving and the ways in 
which it relates to tribal traditions and income. 

MATH OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

when given patterns, make generalizations and predictions by 
determining the rules. 

translate real life situations involving addition and/or subtraction into 
conventional symbols of mathematics 

identify coin values and count coins 

measure lengths using non-standard units, centimeters and inches. 

SCIENCE OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

use observation and classification skills 
communicate by using basic scientific vocabulary 
utilize prediction techniques 
classify things as living or nonliving. 



288 



78 



TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 



The picture book, The Goat in the Rug , by Charles C. Blood and Martin Link, 
uses the character of a goat to tell about the process of carding, dyeing and 
weaving a rug through the use of her wool. The story is written at a level that 
a second-grade student can easily understand. 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 

MATH 

1. Provide a ball of yam and a container of dye. Give each item a set 
price. Have the students add or subtract the cost of the materials to 
make a rug. 

2. Have the students practice weaving by using contrasting color 
construction paper using an over-under pattern. 

3. Once the students understand the pattern, have them create their own 
"rugs” in patterns of their choice by using cardboard or plastic meat 
trays, balls of colored yam, and tape: 

a. Wind the yam at one inch intervals on the tray 

b. Tape the ends down 

c. Begin weaving over and under until making a strand about an 
inch wide 

d. Estimate the number of strands in an inch 

e. Count the number of strands in an inch-wide "rug" 



f. After completing the rug, compute the total amount of yam that 




STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 



Science 



1 . Compare living and nonliving beings in the story and chart the 
students’ answers. 

2. Locate the plants used in the story and predict what colors each plant 
will produce. 

3. Identify the parts of the plant (stem, leaves, roots, flower and root 
hairs). 

4. Make dyes from the following plants: juniper, rabbit brush, yucca, 
dock, wild onion, cliff rose and sumac. Note that each plant uses a 
different part to produce its color 



5. Use the following method to make the dyes: 

Boil water and add the plant or plant part into the boiling water. Let it 
boil until the water has turned a shade darker than the desired color. 
The time will vary depending upon the color and type of plant used. 
Each plant should be boiled in a separate container. 

For plant dye preparation refer to Navaio Native Dves . by Nonabah G. Bryan. 
Palmer Lake, Colorado - Filter Pmss 



Juniper 
Rabbit Brush 
Yucca 
Dock 

Wild onion 
Cliff rose 
Sumac 



leaves 
flowers 
root stems 
roots 
bulbs 

leaves and stems 

roots, twigs, leaves and berries. 



ERIC 




80 





EVALUATION: 



ERIC 



1 . Calculate the profit margin involved in making a medium-sized wool 
rug, by answering the following questions: 

How much do the materials cost? 

How much time does it take to produce a rug? 

How much does a rug sell for in local markets? 

2. Label the plant parts, with the use of actual plants, photographic 
illustrations, or plastic models. 



RESOURCES: 

Blood, Charles L. and Link, Martin. The Goat in the Rua . New York: Aladdin 
Books, 1990. 



DEVELOPED BY: 

Arlene Valenzuela 
Bonnie McGinnis 




81 



291 




MATH AND SCIENCE - 



"BEAUTY FROM THE EARTH: 
NAVAJO NATIVE DYES" 



CULTURAL OUTCOMES: 
MATH OUTCOMES: 
SCIENCE OUTCOME: 



VI, VII 
IV, VI 
II 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVES: 

Students will understand that: 

weaving is an important art within the Navajo tribe 

Native Americans make use of local plants and minerals in producing 
the dyes for the wool. 

MATH OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

measure the length and weight of objects by using metric and standard 
units of measure 

identify shapes and figures by name 

recognize elements of similarity, congruence, and symmetry of simple 
concrete objects or models 

identify line segments, intersecting lines, and parallel lines. 

SCIENCE OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

gather information 

understand and apply information and concepts 
understand the cause and effect relationships. 



292 



82 



TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 



In the Navajo legend about Spider Woman from Our Friends the Navaios 
(p. 1 0), Spider Woman teaches the First Woman how to weave on a loom that 
SpiderMan had explained howto build. After reading this legend to the class, 
discuss its importance and meaning. Refer to the legend "The First Spinner” 
adapted from Waterless Mountain, (p.33-35): 

Spider Woman teaches the First Woman the art of dyeing. The old women 
who weave in this story believe that Spider Woman must be remembered, 
and tribute paid to her, for teaching The People how to weave. It is said that 
if one does not give her credit for her knowledge, Spider Woman will spin 
webs in the head of the weaver, who will lose much of her knowledge, 
intelligence, and wisdom. One of the ways to pay tribute to Spider Woman 
is to leave a small hole or "Spider Hole" in the weaving. 

Many people believe that the Navajo learned the art of weaving from the 
Pueblos. If this is true, then they have excelled much further in the art than 
their masters have to date. The Navajos have been the least influenced by 
the Europeans and have created an art unmatched by any other tribe. 

Most Navajos use wool from their domestic sheep. The wool is washed after 
it is sheared. They "card” the wool (combing it with hand cards). To spin the 
wool, they use a tool called a spindle which is a slender stick inserted through 
the center of a round wooden disc. 

Navajos use native plant dyes to color wool. These native plant dyes are 
made by using plants and minerals easily found in their native land. The 
colors that can be produced by these plants and minerals range over many 
shades of yellow, black, brown, rose, tan, gray, pink, and orange. A good 
shade of green was not attainable through natural materials. 

In preparing plant dyes there are no exact measurements used, just 
approximate ones. Cactus fruit, plants, and bark are measured in pans, 
Sumac and Navajo Tea are made in rolls, and rugs are measured in hand- 
lengths. 

The colors and shades produced by plants vary depending upon local soil 
conditions, weather and the seasons. Alum is added in some preparations 
when dyeing the wool to help intensify the color. This mineral ( an aluminum 
salt) is found in the form of soft white chunks and is collected from under rocks 
in flat areas where there has been recent water evaporation. Alum forms 
crystals like table salt and is also used in industry for making cosmetics, dyes, 
in baking powders, crunchy pickles and leather tanning agents. 



293 



83 



ERiC 




STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 

1 . Invite a grandmother with weaving experience to come to the class 
and talk to the students about the dyeing and weaving processes. 
Invite an elder or special visitor to show several plants that can be 
found in the area. This information will be important for a field trip. 
Have the person explain when the plants are available for collecting. 

2 . Take the class on a field trip near the school and divide them into 
groups. This is necessary since you will need to collect plants and 
minerals for the Dyeing Activity. Explain to the students how much of 
each item is required and have them approximate that amount when 
the item is in a paper sack. Remembr to use smaller quantities of 
fresh plants than dried plants to produce a given color. 

I. Spin wool with a spindle and roll into large loops so it can be put into 
the dyes. This wool will be used later when the students create their 
own weaving on the loom. 

Prepare dyes from the plants listed on the chart at the end of this 
lesson and throw the chunks of alum on hot coals or a pan until they 
start to foam; then drop into the dye bath. 

Have the students design a simple pattern, either with the bead frame 
or on paper. Copy the design so that the students can try different 
color patterns to see which one they like the best. 





84 



6 . 



O 

ERIC 




Make a simple loom and use the yams dyed in class to create a 
weaving. Allow at least one hour to do the weaving. If the students 
are unable to finish during the project time, allow the students to work 
on it during free time, recess, and before and after school. 

The following materials are needed for each student: 

needle kitchen fork 

scissors stiff cardboard (9" x 12") 

ru l® r warp string (wool spun or cotton string) 

pencil yam (wool spun or store bought) 

2 sticks or twigs 



a. Cut the piece of cardboard at each end with small slits about 
1/4" apart and about 1/2" long. These slits will hold the warp 
in place. 

b. Attach the yam through to the cardboard with a knot around the 
first slit. 

c. Pull the yam across the loom to the opposite notch on the other 
side of the cardboard. Loop the yam around the small tab and 
go through the next notch. Continue doing so until the loom has 
been threaded and tie off the yam with a knot. 

d. Begin weaving the pattern that the students designed during 
the previous lesson. Remind the students not to pull the yam 
too tightly at the edges when they go back and forth. If they do, 
their weaving will pull in towards the center. Be sure that the 
students understand that each row of yam must fit tightly with 
the one above it. 

e. When it is necessary to change yam, leave about 2" hanging 
on the edges so that students can weave them in later. This will 
be done after the weaving has been taken off the loom. 

f. When the weaving has been completed, remove it from the 
loom. Bend down the tabs, carefully, one side at a time. Slide 
a stick or twig through the loops of the yam at each end. 

g. Display the weavings in the classroom. Have the students 
compare their design with the finished product. 



295 

85 



Let the students use a bead frame for counting by I’s, 2’s, 5's, etc. 
Have the students use them to figure out certain problems that you 
have distributed to the class or have put on the chalkboard. 



(Adapted from Learning Mathematics - A Program for Classroom 
Teacher. 




RESOURCES: 



Our Friends - The Navajos. Papers on Navaio Culture and Life. Tsaile, 
Arizona: Navajo Community College Press, 1976. 

Armer, Laura (Adams). Waterless Mountain . New York: David McKay and 
Company, 1963. 

Mathews, Washington. Navaio Weavers . Palmer Lake, Colorado: Filter 
Press, 1968. 

Navaio Native Dyes: Their Preparation and Use Palmer Lake, Colorado: 
Filter Press, 1978. 

McKeown, Ross. Learning Mathematics A Program for the Classroom 
Teacher. . Portsmouth, New Hampshire: Helnemann, 1990. 



DEVELOPED BY: 



O 

ERIC 



Diane Cleveland 
Renata Griego 
Elaine Hendricks 




Tbe vertical loom, rigged (or plain rare, 

(1) Detail thawing the rigging of string loops 
to the beddle rod. (2) A diagram c rf the loom 
and iti working parti. (3 tad 4) Diagrams 
Illustrating the (unctions erf ahed rod and hed- 
dla in ch a n ging sheds. Only two warps, c and 
o, are drawn in. These represent, respec- 
tively, the even-numbered and odd-numbered 
warps. The ahed rod paisea behind c— or be- 
hind ail the even -numbered warps (2, 4, 8, 8, 
etc.) Beddle loops clasp o, or all odd-nu ni- 
bs red warps. In diagram 3 the beddle Is 
shown pulled forward, ami the batten, b, in- 
serted behind o and turned sideways to open 
the shed (or the first weft, Wl. In 4 the shed 
rod is shown forced down against the beddle 
loops, sad tbe batten bolding open tbe abed 
thus formed. The second weft, W7, is in 
position. 

Loom drawings by 

Frances R. JUynolds and Malcolm Withers 





87 



n \ "• 



8EST COPY AVAILABLE 




One Artist's Journey 

Beverly Nelson 



Following the Footsteps of Virgil James 

As a boy, Virgil James lived with his mother and his grandfather, a Methodist minister, in the 
church parsonage. His grandfather would take him into the woods and study the Bible while 
Virgil played. When Virgil was five-years-old, a visitor in his home took the time to show him 
how to draw a semi-trailer truck. He was enthralled with his newly found talent. As a 
preschooler, his enthusiasm and delight could not be bound. He drew on everything - even the 
church walls. When his mother made him stop, he would lie on the floor underneath the church 
pews and draw on the underside of the wooden seats. 

Virgil James, a full-blood Choctaw, was bom and raised in southeastern Oklahoma. He 
spent much of his time outdoors fishing and hunting, but two incidents made him rethink his 
desire and reasons for hunting. The first happened while hunting behind his house one day. His 
rifle didn’t seem to be working correctly. Usually a good shot, he aimed, but wasn’t able to hit 
anything. He kept shooting toward a squirrel and kept missing. He sat down to check his rifle 
and the sight. While sitting under the tree, he saw the squirrel that he had been trying to shoot 
go to its nest. He then saw thqt it was bringing food to a nest full of baby squirrels. To his 
amazement nothing was wrong with his gun. 

The second incident happened after he had grown to be a man. Virgil had taught his son 
never to shoot at a nest. One day he ignored his own rule. He saw a bushy tail over the side of a 
nest and thought it was a squirrel. He shot at the tail and wounded the animal - a raccoon. 
Unfortunately, he wounded, but didn’t kill, the animal. He had to shoot the animal again to end 
its misery. Virgil continues to take his gun on hikes to explore the woods, but he doesn’t kill 
anything. He just enjoys the pleasure of being outdoors. 

As a teenager Virgil attended vocational school in Tahlequah, Oklahoma. He considered 
himself to have a rebellious spirit because of the many times he would run away from school to 
return home, approximately 170 miles away. After hitchhiking all that way, his mother would 
send him back each time. She didn’t punish him, but she would tell him the value of getting an 
education. After the second year of doing this, returning to school became embarrassing to him 
and he realized that he was responsible for his own actions. If he were going to get an 
education, he would have to do it himself. 

• His high temper and rebellious spirit lengthened his stay in school. It took him five years to 
graduate simply because he would not complete his school work. He eventually began to study 
and finish his assignments. He graduated near the top of his class. It was during this time that 
his interest in drawing was revived. While taking a painting course, he entered a painting in a 
contest and was awarded “honorable mention.” 



REST COPY AVAILABLE 



298 



After graduation, Virgil attended Haskell Indian Institute in Lawrence, Kansas, for five 
months to learn the trade of printing. He still had a desire to attend art school but wasn’t able to 
afford it. The GI Bill offered financial assistance to attend school for people who joined the 
military service. Virgil enlisted in the Navy for four years. During those four years he gained 
valuable experience drawing illustrations and printing. After the service, he worked as a printer 
and lithographer while attending more art classes. He also worked as an airbrush and product 
illustrator for an advertising agency. Virgil’s strong desire to become a free lance artist and run 
his own business kept him returning to school to further his education. 

Virgil now has over 25 years experience as a commercial artist, with 18 of those years as a 
free lance artist. During his years as a free lance artist, he had the opportunity to work on 
advertisements that appeared in Look, Life, Ebony, National Geographic, and the Wall Street 
Journal. 

Virgil feels commercial art is involved in everything. People are needed to design 
everything from food containers to lettering on boxes. Virgil uses a variety of methods to draw, 
design or illustrate objects or lettering used in advertising. Virgil likes to work in most art 
mediums. He enjoys water color, charcoal, pencil, and painting. 

Only a few years ago after an eye examination, Virgil discovered that he is partially color 
blind. His blindness is especially pronounced when he works with grays and graduated shadings 
of some colors. He doesn’t feel color blindness is a handicap. He doesn’t let it bother him in 
any way and continues to draw and paint based on his perspective of reality. 

When working on a project, many times Virgil worked with clay, making a mockup of an 
object, or simply reducing or enlarging a design. Virgil kept a time sheet to record the time he 
spent on his work projects. He got so experienced he could look at a job and determine almost 
exactly how much time it would take and how much it would cost to make. 

Once again, he returned to school for more training in the fine arts. He went to the Institute 
of American Indian Arts in Santa Fe, New Mexico. There he learned about painting, pottery 
making, and sculpting. In addition to art studio classes, he also took a variety of courses 
including history, English, and art appreciation. 

While in Santa Fe attending the Art Institute, he was introduced to the art of traditional 
pottery making. Although he says that it’s more painstaking and difficult, he respects the 
methods our ancestors used to make pottery and the beliefs and values of our oneness with 
nature. Pottery comes from the earth. It is made with clay, painted with minerals and plants, 
shaped with stones and gourds. As the Pueblo artists in Arizona and New Mexico take pieces of 
the land and make pottery, they feel this creates a bond. Traditional potters speak of including 
the whole universe — the earth, the sky, and human beings — into the design of the pottery. 

.Pottery making is so ancient that archaeologists spend much time analyzing pottery fragments, 
or potsherds. The pottery remains offer a glimpse of the culture. 

Virgil’s voice is reverent when he speaks of pottery making. Clay is “picked” and is 
considered a gift from Mother Earth. Offerings of corn meal are given by some tribes, asking 
permission from Mother Earth to use her body for pottery to support themselves and their 




299 



^ 'V 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



89 



children. Much time is given to processing materials for potting. It may take twenty-four to 
thirty hours of work to mix one cubic foot of clay. Clay must be dried before it is soaked, 
sometimes ground and sieved clean. Water is changed several times to purify and dissolve stray 
minerals. Once saturated, the clay must be sieved to sift out the impurities of stones, branches, 
and roots. 

Adding a temper of sand, finely ground rock, or potsherds helps the clay to dry more slowly 
and more evenly. There is an art to deciding the proportion of temper and clay. Next is shaping 
and scraping the clay to rough out the form of the object. There are many methods and 
techniques to pottery making. But potters, including Virgil, believe the forms and designs are a 
part of you. Your story or feelings or how you view your world will be evident in your pottery. 

Virgil enjoys life and feels everyone should enjoy whatever they do, that one shouldn’t hold 
back emotions, talents or feelings but be aware of one’s self and one’s feelings. He feels one 
should always be honest with one’s self and others. He also believes in respecting others with 
the same respect he would like. He believes his feelings, emotions and attitudes cannot be 
hidden from painting or molding clay. As far as his work is concerned, he doesn ’t settle for less 
than his best. 



Discussion Questions: 

1. What kind of person do you think Virgil James is? Justify your comments based on the 
profile information. 

2. How can you tell Virgil enjoyed drawing as a young child? 

3. What thoughts do you feel Virgil had after the two hunting incidents that made him change 
his mind about hunting to kill animals? 

4. What caused Virgil to remain in vocational school an extra year? 

5. Virgil’s mother did not punish him when he ran away from school, she just talked to him and 
sent him back. What were other ways she could have handled this? Name at least two, and 
tell what you think the outcome would have been regarding Virgil’s life and attitude. 

6. Why did Virgil finally decide to stay in school and work hard? 

7. What was Virgil’s reason to enlist in the military service? 



Illustration on page 53: Petroglyphs (carvings on rock) from locations in the Southwest. These marks were made 
by ancient peoples. 



Language Arts 

How Can Clay Sing? 

Objective: 

Students will gain insight into the world of pottery long ago by reading Byrd Baylor’s 
When Clay Sings. 

Material: 

•book: When Clay Sings by Byrd Baylor. New York: MacMillan, 1987 
ISBN 0-689-71106-9. 

Exploration: 

Prior to reading the book aloud to students, discuss the title of the book. 

Suggested Questions: 

What does the author mean? 

What do think the author is going to tell us about clay? 

Can clay really sing? 

Seminar and Invention: 

Discussion questions after reading the book: 

1. Where does the story take place? What is the climate? 

2. How long ago is the author talking about? 

3. Did the things in the story really happen? How do you know? 

4. Why did the parents tell their children to “treat the pottery piece with respect, because 
it is old?” 

5. How can clay (or any object) be “a piece of one’s life?” 

6. How do you Ihink the colors were chosen by the illustrator for the book? 




3 0.4 




7. Why do you think the people who made the pottery left so much of it remaining 

for us to find? Do you think they thought about leaving the pottery for us or is it simply 
accidental that we have found the pottery? 

8. What did people paint on their pottery? Have designs on pottery changed from that time? 

9. What kind of bugs does the author say there were then? 

10. What is the author suggesting when she says the women spoke to the Earth as they took the 
clay? Why would the women do this? 

1 1. What three words did the author use to describe the process of making pottery? 

12. What can you tell from the book about the people who made pottery long ago? What was 
their world like? 

13. How can you tell the children of that time were like the children of today? 

14. What do you think the author means when she says “songs had to be powerful. . . ?” 
When/where do we have those type songs today? 

Application Extensions: 

1. Ask students if they have an item in their home (that belonged to another person) that their 
parents consider very precious? Discuss why it is considered valuable to the family? What 
meaning or significance does it have? Is the item valuable because of how much it cost or 
because it is important to one or more members of the family? 

2. Tell students there are people who study other people through the things they used in the 
past. Discuss the term “anthropologist.” Why is this career important and what can we learn 
from the past? 

3. Discuss family life and the things they do together that “holds life together” as mentioned 
near the end of the story. 

4. Make water color paintings of the Southwest area. 

5. Invite a potter to class for a demonstration. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



6. Research clay designs and their meanings, past and present. 





Science 



Dirt or Clay? 



Objective: 

Students will learn to distinguish between dirt and clay. 

Students will list at least one physical characteristic of clay. 

Students will learn to recognize several Native American tribes that create pottery. 

Materials: 

•dirt 

•clay 

•empty coffee cans 
•newspapers 
•water 1 
•notebook 
•plastic bags 

Exploration: 

In order for clay to be “picked” as in the profile, one must be able to recognize clay and 
distinguish its characteristics from other substances in the earth. 

After dividing students into groups of no more than four students each, hand out plastic bags 
labeled Bag 1 and Bag 2. (Bag 1 has dirt and Bag 2 has powdered clay.) Have each team 
appoint a student recorder to record team responses as they answer questions about each bag. 

Suggested Questions: 

What are the physical characteristics of Bag 1? 

What are the physical characteristics of Bag 2? 

How are the two bags different? . . . alike? 

Each team is to record the responses for that group. After those responses have been recorded, 
teams will add water to each bag. Coffee cans may be used for this step if desired. Be sure to 
label coffee cans correcdy, Bag 1 or Bag 2. Again members of each team will discuss and 
record the characteristics of each Bag/Can. 



303 



Seminar: 



Teams will report their findings to the class. Questions groups might ask include: 

What was the color before and after the water was added? What was the texture before 
and after the water was added? What was the weight of each when dry versus wet? 
What was the texture before and after? Which bag had dirt? Which bag had clay? 

What were the reasons for their decision? 

Invention: 

Students have determined the difference between clay and dirt by observing physical 
characteristics. Another word for the texture of clay is plasticity. They have collected and 
recorded data after making a hypothesis or proposing an explanation based on a set of facts. 
They have also realized that when a body of clay does not have plasticity, it is called short. 
Native American potters in the past used this procedure in order to decide the material with 
which to make their pots. Many potters today continue to select clay in this way to make 
pottery. 

Suggested Questions: 

Discuss the importance of pottery in certain Native American tribes. 

Discuss the traditional uses and the use of pottery today. 

Ask the Native American students in your class if their tribe makes pottery - did they 
historically? 

What process was used? Who were the potters? Who are the potters today? 

Students might also discuss how farmers could tell when dirt was good for growing their 
crops? 

How can differences in soil content determine where we live, grow our food, or build our 
homes? 

Application. 

Give the students two new bags of earth. Let them determine which bag contains earth that 
would be better suited to making pottery. 




My Ideas for Art Unit: 



O 

ERIC 



305 

95 * 



LESSON PLANS/SCHEDULE FOR ART UNIT: 




ERIC 



96 





307 

97 



V, 




308 



98 



Bomb, Am, 
Waren & Fme 






309 



TEACHER’S/PARENT’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION - 



Mankind Affects Mother Earth 

This unit is about earth, air, water, and fire, the four elements or sometimes referred to as 
the Four Ancestors by Indian people. These four elements are gifts and must be used and 
treated with respect. Consider the following attributed to Chief Seattle: 

Every shining pine needle, every sandy shore, every mist in the dark woods, 
every clearing and humming insect is holy in the memory and experience of 
my people. Teach your children what we have taught our children, that the 
Earth is our mother. The rivers are our brothers, they quench our thirst and 
feed our children. The air is precious to the red man, for all things share the 
same breath - the beast, the tree, the man, they all share the same breath. And 
what is man without the beasts? If all the beasts were gone, men would die 
from a loneliness of spirit. 

This we know. The Earth does not belong to man; man belongs to the Earth. 

Man did not weave the web of life, he is merely a strand in it. Whatever he does 
to the web, he does to himself. All things are connected like the blood which 
unites one family. All things are connected. 

The four elements, all natural resources, react with one another and in this way are 
interrelated and interconnected. Ail natural resources are connected. 

We cannot keep dumping waste in the oceans, rivers, and on our land. Disposal of 
garbage is a critical environmental issue in our society today. Every day each one of us 
generates nearly four pounds of trash. Much of this waste ends up in our landfills 
Nearly 50% of the waste system is composed of recyclable materials. By reusing objects 
before throwing them away, composting, and recycling, everyone can si gnifi cantly 
decrease the amount of waste sent to landfills. 

Each day more and more waste is sent to landfills. Landfills are quickly fillin g up, and it 
is becoming very difficult to find new landfills because nobody wants a landfill in their 
“backyard.” It costs a lot of money to get rid of garbage and the environmental cost is 
very expensive, too. Once the land has been used for a landfill, it can’t be used as a site 
for public housing, for example. 



100 



310 



Because of human intelligence and our ability to alter the earth, we are unique among 
living things in being powerful determiners of the global environment. In our hands rests 
the responsibility to preserve the life-sustaining power of the earth - our home that gives 
us everything from drinking water to the ephemeral beauty of a dew-covered flower petal 
glistening quicksilver in the morning rays of sunlight. 

North American Indian stories can help us learn how to care for the earth. Through 
their combined knowledge we can help children discover their own roles in maintaining 
this fragile balance for themselves and all living things in the generations to come 
(Bruchac and Caduto, 1989). Mother Earth is our home and we, her children, must 
endeavor to preserve her resources for our future generations. 

The respect for Mother Earth is rapidly fading in today’s society. We ignore the crucial 
importance of recycling and the importance of preserving our resources. About 20 
countries are currently water-scarce or water-short. The number is to double by 2020 
(United Nations). The need to recycle and care for Mother Earth has to be taught to all 
ages and to all ma nkind. 

-1994 Math/Science Workshop, Haskell Indian Nations University 



T his unit might be conducted around the time of Earth Day. 



SUGGESTED PRIMARY UNIT OUTLINE-EARTH, AIR, WATER, FIRE 
Reading, Language Arts, 

Science, Math, Art, Values 
P Air Words 



II Reading Nonfiction 



Literature -Week 1 

If We Could See the Air by 
David Suzuki 



A Summarizing/Reporting 

S Reading Legends/Fables Air Is All Around You by . 
E Retelling/The Oral Tradition Franklin M. Branley 
Reading Fiction and Poetry 
F Science of Air A ir by Andy Charman 

I Charting Temperature 
V Making Kites Air by Cathy Poth 

E Appreciating/Respecting Air 



Literature - Week 2 
Gluscabi & the Wind 
Eagle and Spring 
Defeats Winter in 
Keepers of the Earth 
by Caduto/Bruchac 

The Wish Wind by 
Peter Eyvindson 
Strange Wind - Shel 
Silverstein 



P Water Words 
H Reading Legends/Fables 
A Retelling/Responding 
S Reading Nonfiction 
E Summarizing/Reporting 
Science of Water 
F Gathering Data on Water 
O Water Safety/Parents 
U Making Boats That Float 



Snail Girl Brings Water by 
Geri Kearns 



Water by Frank 
Asche 



How Thunder and Earthquake Water -What It Is and 
Made Ocean, The Hero Twins What It Does by 
and the Swallower of Clouds Judith Seixas 

& Koluscap and the Water I Am Water by Jean 

Monster in Keepers of the Marzollo 
Earth by Caduto & Bruchac The Water Cycle by 



R Appreciating/Respecting Water 



Helen Frost 



P Fire Words Loo-Wit, the Fire Keeper in 

H Reading Legends/Fables Keepers of the Earth by 
A Retelling/The Oral Tradition Caduto and Bruchac 



Nanabosho Steals Fire by 
Joe McLellan * 



S Reading Nonfiction 
E Surnmarizing/Reporting 
Good/Bad of Fire 
T Fire Safety 

H Practice Stop, Drop, Roll 
R Home Fire Drills/Time 

E Making Fire Safety Posters Fire Race: A Karuk Coyote 
EAppreciating/Respecting Fire7b/e by J. London 



Rainbow Crow: A Lenape 
Tale by Nancy Van Laan 



Arthur's Fire Drill by 
Marc T. Brown 

Stop, Drop and Roll 
by Lyn L. Hester 

I Am Fire by Jean 
Marzollo 

Home Fire Drills by 
Lucia Raatma 



P Rock Words 
H Reading Nonfiction 
A Surnmarizing/Reporting 
S Reading Fiction 
E Retelling/Responding 
Science of Rocks 

T Collecting/Counting Rocks I Am A Rock by Jean 
W Make Rock Garden Marzollo 

O Appreciating/Respecting Rocks 



Everybody Needs a Rock by 
Byrd Baylor 

The Worry Stone by 
Marianne Denger 



Let 's Go Rock 
Collecting by R. Gans 

If You Find a Rock by 
Peggy Christian, 

Arrowheads & Stone 
Artifacts by C. Yeager 




102 




3 12 



Literature - Week 3 

Air Pollution by Darlene 
R. Stille 

Experiment with Air by 
Bryan Murphy 

Air and Flight by Sally 
Hewitt 

Air and Flight by Jon 
Richards 



Reading, Language Arts, 
Literature-Week 4 Science, Math, Art, Values 

Four Ancestors by Four Ancestors (Elements) Words 
Joseph Bruchac Reading Nonfiction 
The Taos Indians and Sumrnarizing/Reporting 
Their Sacred Blue Reading Poetry/Songs/Legends 

ZaAe/Marcia Keegan The Four Elements 

Cost of Trash Pickup Services 
Recycling/Cleaning 
Writing Earth Poems 
Making Earth Day Posters 



Cheyenne Fire 
Fighters by Tall Bull 
and Weist 

Legend of the White 



Buffalo Woman/Goble Respecting the Earth 



Raven Returns the Water We Need Water by Water Words 
by Anne Cameron Helen Frost Reading Legends/Fables 

Coyote and the Grasshopper Retelling/Responding 

by Gloria Dominic Keeping Water Clean Reading Nonfiction 

Coyote Takes Water from the by Helen Frost Summarizing/Reporting 
Frog People by Barry Lopez Water Science 

in American Indian Myths & Water Pollution by Recycling/Cleaning 
Legends by Erdoes and Ortiz Darlene Stille Cost of Bottled Water 

A Promise is a Promise by Experiment with WaterMakmg Earth Day Posters 

Munsch and Kusueak by Bryan Murphy Respecting the Earth 

Moth, the Fire Dancer in Firefighters to the Fire Words 

Rescue by E. Rodger Reading Legends 



Keepers of the Night by 
Caduto and Bruchac 

How Fire Got Into the 
Rocks and Trees by 
Steven Roy 

Coyote and the Firestick 
by Barbara Goldin 



Retelling/The Oral Tradition 
Reading Nonfiction 
Forest Fire! by Mary Responding 
Ann Fraser Recycling/Cleaning Clutter 

Preventing Fires 
Fire Engines/Maicva. Weighing Trash 

Freeman Writing Fire Safety Rules 

Fire Night! By Monica Making Earth Day Posters 
Driscoll Beatty Respecting the Earth 



Iktomi and the Boulder by Rocks and Minerals at Rock Words 



Paul Goble Your Fingertips /. Judy 

Nayer 

Old Man Coyote and the Best Book of Fossils, 

Rock in Keepers of the Earth Rocks and Minerals/ 
by Caduto and Bruchac Chris Pellant 



Coyote Steals the Blanket 
by J. Stevens 



Rocks by Terry 
Jennings 



Reading Legends 
Retelling 

Reading Nonfiction 
Recycling/Cleaning 
Classifying/Value of Some Rocks 
Don’t Be Foolish 
Making Earth Day Posters 
Respecting the Earth 



103 



313 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE FIVE - 

Indian people have always recognized the four elements: earth, air, water and fire. 
They treat them with respect and sometimes refer to them as the Four Ancestors. 
Indian people have been asked to assist in solving the hole in the ozone layer 
problem. 

About Air — 

*IfWe Could See the Air by David Suzuki, Nature All Around, 1996. 

*AirisAll Around You by Franklyn Mansfield Branley, Let’s Read and Find Out Series, 
1986. 

*Air by Andy Charman, First Starts, 1994. 

* Air by Cathy Poth, Look and Learn Series, 1989. 



Stories and Poems including Wind - 

*Gluscabi and the Wind Eagle, Abenaki, and Spring Defeats Winter, Seneca, in Keepers, 
of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac ( Indian Author), Fulcrum, 1988. 
*The Wish Wind by Peter Eyvindson, Pemmican, 1987. 

*Strange Wind in A Light in the Attic by Shel Silverstein, Harper and Row, 1981. 



More About Air - 

*Air Pollution by Darlene R. Stille, New True Books, 1990. 

* Experiment with Air by Bryan Murphy, Experiment With Series, 1992. 
*Air and Flight by Sally Hewitt, It’s Science, 2000. 

*Air and Flight by Jon Richards, Science Factory, 1999. 



Indian Stories About Earth, Air, Water and Fire — 

*Four Ancestors, Stories, Songs and Poems from Native North America by Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author). 

*The Taos Indians and Their Sacred Blue Lake by Marcia Keegan, 1975. 

*Cheyenne Fire Fighters by Henry Tall Bull and Tom Weist, Montana Council for 
Indian Education, 1971. 

* Legend of the White Buffalo Woman by Paul Goble, National Geographic Society, 1998. 
Lakota The sacred pipe is made of a special stone. 

Gifted and talented students should read the more difficult selections and report to the 
class or help the teacher read them to the other students. 

104 



O 

ERIC 



314 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE FOUR - 

Indian people have always recognized the four elements: earth, air, water and fire. 
They treat them with respect and sometimes refer to them as the Four Ancestors. 
Indian tribes are very concerned about water pollution. 

Indian Stories about Water - 

* Snail Girl Brings Water: A Navajo Story by Geri Kearns (Indian Author), Rising 
Moon, 1998. 

*How Thunder and Earthquake Made Ocean, Yurok, The Hero Twins and the Swallower 
of Clouds, Zuni, and Koluscap and the Water Monster, Micmac, in Keepers of the Earth 
by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac ( Indian Author), Fulcrum, 1988. 



About Water - 

*Water by Frank Asche, 2000. 

* Water- What It Is and What It Does by Judith Seixas, 1 990. 
*1 Am Water by Jean Marzollo, Cartwheel Books, 1996. 
*The Water Cycle by Helen Frost, Pebble Books, 1999. 



More Indian Stories Including Water - 

*Raven Returns the Water by Anne Cameron, Harbour Pub. Northwest 

*Coyote and the Grasshopper by Gloria Dominic, Troll, 1996. Porno 

*Coyote Takes Water from the Frog People in American Indian Myths and Legends by 

Richard Erdoes and Alfonso Ortiz, Pantheon, 1984. See Activities Section of this uni t 

*A Promise is a Promise by R. Munsch and M. Kusugak, Annick Pr., 1988. Alaskan 



More about Water - 

*We Need Water by Helen Frost, Pebble Books, 1999. 

*Keeping Water Clean by Helen Frost, Pebble Books, 1999. 

*Water Pollution by Darlene Stille, A New True Book, 1991. 

* Experiment with Water by Bryan Murphy, Lemer, 1992. 

Be sure to stress water safety. 

Gifted and talented students should read the more difficult selections and report to the 
class or help the teacher read them to the other students. 



105 



315 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE THREE - 

Indian people have always recognized the four elements: earth, air, water and fire. 
They treat them with respect and sometimes refer to them as the Four Ancestors. 
During the summer of 2000, 5,000 Indian fire fighters helped to fight fires all over 
the United States. 



Indian Stories about Fire - 

*Loo-Wit, the Fire Keeper in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac ( Indian Author), Fulcrum, 1988. Nisqually 

*Nanabosho Steals Fire by Joe McClellan (Indian Author), Pemmican. Ojibway 
* Rainbow Crow: A Lenape Tale by Nancy Van Laan, Knopf, 1991. 

*Fire Race: A Karuk Coyote Tale About How Fire Came to the People by Jonathan 
London, Chronicle, 1993. 

About Fire and Fire Safety - 

* Arthur’s Fire Drill by Marc T. Brown, Random, 2000. 

*Stop, Drop and Roll by Lyn L. Hester, Hester & Hester Pub., 1982. 

*1 Am Fire by Jean Marzollo, Hello Science Reader, 1996. 

*Home Fire Drills by Lucia Raatma, Capstone Press, 1999. 

The emphasis of this unit is on the good and bad of fire and on fire safety. It does not 
include experimenting with fire. 

More Indian Stories about Fire — 

*Moth, the Fire Dancer in Keepers of the Night by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac 
(Indian Author), Fulcrum, 1994. 

*How Fire Got into the Rocks and Trees by Steven Roy, Tipi Press, 1996. Lakota 
*Coyote and the Firestick: A Northwest Coast Legend by Barbara Goldin, Harcourt 
Brace, 1996. 

More about Fire and Rescue - 

*Firefighers to the Rescue by Elizabeth Rodger, Troll, 1997. 

* Forest Fire! by Mary Ann Fraser, Troll, 1999. 

*Fire Engines by Marcia Freeman, Pebble Books, 1 999. 

*Fire Night! by Monica Driscoll Beatty, Health Pub., 1999. 

Gifted and talented students should read the more difficult selections and report to the 
class or help the teacher read them to the other students. 



106 




316 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE TWO - 

Indian people have always recognized the four elements: earth, air, water and fire. 
They treat them with respect and sometimes refer to them as the Four Ancestors. 
Indian people recognize the rock as representing nature and being formed by a 
power holding molecules together. 

About Rocks (Representing Earth) and Needing Them - 

*Everybody Needs a Rock by Byrd Baylor, Aladdin. 

*The Worry Stone by Marianne Dengler, Rising Moon, 1996. Indian 
*1 Am a Rock by Jean Marzollo, Cartwheel, 1998, 

Rock Hunting - 

*Let’s Go Rock Collecting by Roma Gans, Harpercollins, 1997. 

*If You Find a Rock by Peggy Christian, Harcourt Brace, 2000. 

* Arrowheads and Stone Artifacts by C. G. Yeager. 

Indian Stories about Rocks — 

*Iktomi and the Boulder by Paul Goble. Lakota 

*01d Man Coyote and the Rock in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum, 1988. Pawnee 

*Coyote Steals the Blanket by J. Stevens, Holiday House, 1996. 

More about Rocks - 

*Rocks and Minerals at Your Fingertips by Judy Nayer, McLanahan Book Co., 1995. 

*The Best Book of Fossils, Rocks and Minerals by Chris Pellant, Larousse Kingfisher 
Chambers, 2000. 

*Rocks or Find Out About Rocks by Terry Je nnin gs, Bbc. Pubns., 1999. 




317 



107 



FURTHER RESOURCES FOR EARTH, AIR, WATER AND FIRE UNIT- 
These materials can be used to substitute for books in the suggested unit outline or 
for additional reading/other activities for students. 

Mother Earth’s Counting Book by A. Clements, Picture Book Studio, 1992. 

Good Earth Art: Environmental Art for Kids by Mary Ann Kohl, 1991. 

Flying and Floating by David Glover, Kingfisher Books, 1993. 

*Air (The Four Elements) by Maria Rius, 1985. 

Air: Simple Experiments for Young Scientists by Larry White, 1996. 

Feel the Wind by Arthur Dorros, 1990. 

Up in the Air by Wendy Madgwick, Raintree/Steck Vaughn, 1998. 

My First Plane Ride by Elizabeth Benjamin, Golden Books, 1999. Also by Erin Gathrid 
Around the Pond by Ann Cooper, Court Wayne Press, 1998. 

Along the Seashore by Ann Cooper, Court Wayne Press, 1997. 

All Along the River by Allan Fowler, Children’s Press, 1994. 

Oceans and Rivers by Michael W. Carroll, Chariot Victor Pub., 1999. 

Science with Water by Helen Edom, EDC Pub., 1992. 

Blue Dawn in Keepers of Life by M. Caduto and J.Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum, 
1998. Pueblo 

How Raven Made the Tides, Tsimshian, and Sedna, the Woman Under the Sea, Inuit, in 
Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac ( Indian Author), Fulcrum, 
1988. 

Muskrat Will Be Swimming by Cheryl Savageau (Indian Author), Northland Press. 

* Water (The Four Elements) by Carme Sole Vendrell, 1985. 

Safety Around Fire by Lucia Raatma, Capstone Pr., 1999. 

Little Badger and the Fire Spirit by Maria Campbell (Indian Author), McClelland, 1977. 

108 

313 



Firefighters A to Z by Chris L. Demarest, Margaret Elderberry, 2000. 

Coyote Goes Hunting for Fire by M. Bernstein and J. Kobrin, Scribner, 1974. California 
The Fire Bringer: A Paiute Indian Legend by Margaret Hodges, Little, 1972. 

It’s Fire Drill Day by Steve Metzger, Cartwheel Books, 1998. 

*Fire (The Four Elements) by Maria Rius, 1985. 

*The Fire Station by Michael Martchenko, 1991 . Also by Robert Munsch 
*Fire Engines by Anne Rockwell, Picture Puffins, 1993. 

Coyote and Rock and other Lushootseed Stories by Vi Hilbert (Indian Author). Skagit 
Audio Tape 

If You Are a Hunter of Fossils by Byrd Baylor. 

Ultimate Sticker Books: Rocks and Minerals by Helena Spiteri, DK Pub., 1998. 

The Smiling Stone by Marcia Trimble, Images Press, 1998. 

The Rock by Daniel Birchmore, 1997. 

Eyewitness: Rocks and Minerals by Steve Parker, DK Pub., 1997. 

It Could Still Be a Rock by Allan Fowler, Children’s Press, 1993. 

Tunka-Shila, Grandfather Rock in Keepers of the Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum, 1988. Lakota 

What’s the Earth Made of? by Susan Mayes, 1995. 

Earth: the Elements by Ken Robbins, 1995. 

Brother Eagle, Sister Sky: A Message from Chief Seattle by Susan Jeffers, Dial, 1991. 

Northwest 

And Still the Turtle Watched by Sheila MacGill-Callahan. Indian 

CHECK YOUR LIBRARY OR BOOKSTORES FOR OTHER BOOKS 
RELATING TO THE TOPIC. 

*These books are especially suitable for Phase One — for preschool children. 

109 



319 



EARTH, AIR, WATER AND FIRE WORDS 



Beginning Sounds- 










brown 


creek 


danger 


flame 


ground 


lake 


big 


cycle 


drop 


fire 


gravel 


liquid 


boulder 


clean 


drill 


fumes 


garbage 


light 


bag 


can 


disaster 


freshwater 


gas 


lava 


burn 


cloud 


detector 


faucet 






blaze 


cook 


drink 


flood 


hard 


measure 


blow 


cold 


damp 


float 


hunt 


melt 


breeze 


cool 


dirty 


flight 


hot 


mass 


breathe 


compare 


dirt 


fossil 


heat 


mud 


blue 


collect 




flint 


hose 


mineral 


bath 




warm 




hail 




bathe 


small 


wind 








bottle 


soil 


west 


Long Vowel Sounds- 


Exceptions- 




stone 


water 


ice 


hail 


ocean 


pour 


sand 


wet 


smoke 


breathe 


break 


puddle 


search 


wash 


stone 


clean 


search 


pollution 


space 




fire 


float 


breath 


pebble 


solid OU Sounds- 


flame 


heat 




pretty 


safety 


south 


blaze 


rain Compound Words- 




smooth 


ground 


bathe 


steam 


firefighter 


rock 


stop 


cloud 


hose 


stream 


fireman 


round 


start 


round 




east 


saltwater 


roll 


smoke 


Exceptions- 




creek 


freshwater 


rain 


swim 


boulder 




breeze 


raindrop 


raindrop 


saltwater 


pour 






arrowhead 


river 


steam 










run 


stream 


Ending sounds n, k and 1- 






recycle 


south 


brown, burn. 


clean, can, rain, run, stone. 


pollution 


red 


snow 


break, creek, cook, drink, rock, smoke, truck, lake 




scientist 


hail, cool, drill, fossil, soil, small, roll 




Other Words- 












trash 


element 


Word walls should be maintained. Instructors should 


earth 


air 


ensure that students know the meanings of these 


oxygen 


vapor 


words in this context and extend vocabulary by noting 


jagged 


north 


how they may 


mean other things in other contexts or 



evaporate ashes they may have homophones. Experiences, pictures and 

orange alarm student illustrations should be used to explain and 

process word meanings. Words that rhyme with these 
words can be examined to extend vocabulary and to see 
varying spellings for sounds. Other words should be 
added. 

110 



ERIC 



3^0 



SCIENCE STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN EARTH, AIR, WATER AND FIRE UNIT- 



Standard - Understands the convictions scientists share about the nature of the 

world and what can be learned about it 

Benchmarks- 

Understands that science experiments normally have reproducible results: science 
experiments generally work the same way in different places 

Standard - Understands that scientific inquiry works in particular ways 
Benchmarks- 

Understands that learning can come from careful observations and simple experiments 
Understands that tools like thermometers, magnifiers, rulers, or balances add to 
information from our senses 

Understands the importance of careful description in science and how it allows 
comparison 

Understands that individuals can interpret the same thing in different ways 

Standard - Knows basic concepts about the earth 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that water can be a liquid, like rain, or solid ice, and can be made to go back and 
forth from one form to the other, but the amount of water stays the same. 

Knows that water in a closed container stays the same, but water left in an open container 
disappears (evaporates) 

Knows that when liquid water disappears, it turns into gas (vapor) in the air and can re- 
appear as a liquid when cooled 

Knows that air is a substance that surrounds us, takes up space, and whose movement we 
feel as wind 

Knows that clouds, like fog and steam from a kettle, are made up of tiny droplets of water 
Knows common rocks and minerals, what they are made of, and how they form 
Knows the major differences between fresh and ocean waters 

Standard - Understands the processes that shape the surface of the earth and the 

relation of the surface of the earth to the living environment 

Benchmarks- 

Knows that rocks come in all sizes, from boulders to grains of sand 
Knows that change is something that happens to many things around us 

Standard — Knows the forms energy takes, its transformations from one form to 

another, and its relationship to matter 

Benchmarks- 

Knows that things that give off light often give off heat 



111 



321 



Standard - Understands basic concepts about the structure of matter 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that all objects occupy space and have mass 

Knows that objects can be described and classified by their composition and their 
physical properties 

Knows that materials can exist in different states (solic, liquid, gaseous, each having 
characteristic properties 

Knows that some properties of a materials may be changed by external actions like 
heating and cooling, but different materials respond differently to the same actions 

Standard - Knows about the diversity and unity that characterize life 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that stories sometimes give plants and animals attributes they really do not have 

Standard - Understands the cycling of matter and flow of energy through the living 

environment 

Benchmarks- 

Knows that many materials can be recycled; recycled materials continue to exist, but in 
another form 

Standard — Understands the basic concepts of the evolution of species 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that some kinds of things that live today still resemble once living things that 
have completely disappeared 

Knows that fossils provide evidence that some organisms living long ago are now extinct 
and can be compared to one another and to living organisms according to their 
similarities and differences 

Standard - Understands the nature of the Chemical Revolution 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that things have properties that can be used to tell them apart and find out which 
of them are alike (conductivity, density, solubility) 

Knows that objects that are alike in some ways may be different in others 
Knows that is it possible to learn about all kinds of objects by counting or measuring 
them in different ways and comparing the results 

Knows that fire - along with air, earth and water - was long believed to be the substance 
out of which everything else was made; this seems sensible, though no longer believed, 
because it looks like fire is given off when something bums 

Standard - Understands the nature of physical, conceptual, and mathematical 
models and the uses of them 

Knows that one way to describe something is to say what other things it is like 
Knows that geometric figures, number sequences, graphs, diagrams, sketches, number 
lines, maps, and even stories can be used to represent objects, events, and processes in the 
real world, although these representations can never be exact in every detail 

112 



MATH STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN EARTH, AIR, WATER AND FIRE UNIT- 



Standard- Effectively uses a variety of strategies within the problem solving process 
Benchmarks- 

Brainstorms possible things to do 
Draws pictures to represent problems 

Clarifies problems using discussions with teacher or knowledgeable others 
Uses guess and check to solve problems 
Clearly states problems in his or her own words 
Checks the reasonableness of results through estimation 

Standard- Understands and applies basic and advanced properties of numbers 
Benchmarks- 

Has a general understanding of the concept of number 
Uses counting to exemplify numbers 
Orders small sets of numbers 

Understands the relationship of fractions to decimals and whole numbers 

Standard- Uses basic and advanced procedures while performing the process of 

computation 

Benchmarks- 

Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides whole numbers with accuracy 
Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides decimals with accuracy 

Standard- Understands and applies basic and advanced methods of measurement 
Benchmarks- 

Understands the relationships between length, width and height 
Understands the basic characteristics of weight and how it is measured 
Has a basic understanding of the concept of temperature and how it is measured 
Understands the basic features of mass 

Makes effective use of ruler, thermometer and scale for making measurements 

Standard- Understands and applies basic and advanced concepts of data analysis 

and distributions 

Benchmarks- 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of data 
Collects and organizes simple data sets to answer questions 

Standard- Understands and applies basic and advanced properties of functions and 

algebra 

Bench marks- 

Identifies basic number patterns 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of variable 

113 




323 



LANGUAGE ARTS STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY 
GRADES ADDRESSED IN EARTH, AIR, WATER AND FIRE UNIT - 



Standard - Gathers information effectively through reading, listening and viewing 
Benchmarks — 

Provides an accurate retelling of the basic plot of simple stories the student has read, 
heard or viewed 

Provides an accurate retelling of the main idea of simple expository information the 
student has read, heard or viewed 

Understands that reading, viewing and listening are ways of gaining information about 
the world 

Determines meaning of simple words from context 

Creates mental representations for concrete information read, heard or viewed 

Standard — Reads and responds to literature 
Benchmarks — 

Understands that stories have beginning, middle and ending episodes 
Understands the genre of legends and fables 

Standard — Communicates ideas and information in writing 
Benchmarks — 

Understands basic connections between spelling patterns and speech sounds 

Understands basic phonological patterns in English 

Expresses ideas in simple expository forms 

Composes simple stories that express cohesive ideas 

Experiments with different genre as modes for expressing ideas 

Standard - Understands and applies basic principles of language use 
Benchmarks - 

Recognizes characteristic sounds and rhythms of language 
Makes valid observations about the use of words 

Makes valid observations about the use of language at home as opposed to the use of 
language in school 



Standards and Benchmarks from The Systematic Identification and Articulation of 
Content Standards and Benchmarks, Mid-continent Regional Educational Laboratory, 



1994. 






114 



AMERICAN INDIAN CONTENT STANDARDS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN EARTH, AIR, WATER AND FIRE UNIT - 



SCIENCE 
Science As Inquiry- 

Indian students should develop an awareness that observations and understandings of 
ecological relationships traditionally formed an essential base of knowledge among 
American Indian cultures. ' 

Physical Science- 

Indian students should develop an understanding of the innate properties of objects and 
materials that were (and are) recognized by traditional American Indian cultures in the 
manufacture and use of specific material objects that capitalize upon those properties. 

Earth Science- 

Indian students should develop an understanding of properties of earth, air, water and fire 
and how they served as a basis for traditional American Indian production of clothing, 
housing, tools, and other objects. 

Science and Technology- 

Indian students should develop an awareness of the problem solving skills demonstrated 
by historical American Indians in the development of tools and technologies. 



LANGUAGE AND LITERACY 
Indian students should be able to - 

Listen for meaning and gain information from spoken English and a Native language. 

Listen to Indian stories told in the oral tradition, comprehend their teachings and be able 
to retell them. 

Speak coherently, conveying ideas in both English and a Native language. 

Read fluently and independently, a variety of materials including those with American 
Indian themes. 

Locate and use a variety of texts to gain information, for example, historical materials 
about their tribe, tribal legends and stories and oral history transcription. 

Be familiar with children’s literature with Indian themes, especially with that pertaining 
to the student’s tribe and literature written by Indian authors. 

115 





325 



MATHEMATICS 



Mathematics as Problem Solving- 

Indian students should formulate problems from everyday and mathematical situations 
within their home and tribal/community worlds. 

Mathematics as Communication- 

Indian students should realize that representing, discussing, reading, writing, and 
listening to mathematics are vital parts of learning and using mathematics because it 
creates holistic instruction akin to a traditional Indian approach to learning. 

Mathematics as Reasoning- 

Indian students should use models, known facts, properties and relationships to explain 
their thinking, using objects or ideas from their own or other American Indian cultures. 

Estimation- 

Indian students should explore estimation strategies through activities derived from their 
cultural worlds. 

Number Sense and Numeration- 

Indian students should construct number meanings through real-world experiences and 
use of physical materials. 

Concepts of Whole Number Operations- 

Indian students should develop meaning for the operations by modeling and discussing a 
rich variety of problem situations including some from the Indian world. 

Whole Number Computation- 

Indian students should use a variety of mental computation and estimation techniques in 
solving problems related to Indian cultural themes. 

Measurement- 

Indian students should understand the attributes of length, capacity, mass, and volume 
and relate these measures to use in their own cultural, home, tribal or community worlds. 

Statistics and Probability- 

Indian students should collect, organize and describe data related to local 
tribal/community demographics. 

Fractions and Decimals- 

Indian students should apply fractions and decimals by applying them to real world 
situations using Native cultural experiences. 

American Indian Content Standards, ORJBIS Associates for Office of Indian Education 
Programs, Bureau of Indian Affairs, United States Department of the Interior, 1996. 

116 



Example Activities Developed by Teachens op 
Aamcan Indian Srudems 

Woxkshop on CuLmaRj-Sased Mali and Science Ciwuculnw Devebpoxnx 

Haskell Indian JrnoK College 
1992 & 1993 




Ideas should be adapted poR appRopmmess. 



117 

327 




SCIENCE 



“FINDING YOUR SPECIAL ROCK” 



CULTURAL OUTCOME: 
SCIENCE OUTCOME: 



II 

IV 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

Students will understand their relationship to Mother Earth based upon their 
knowledge of the earth's surface. 



SCIENCE OBJECTIVE: 

Students will discover the composition of the earth’s surface. 



TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

" Everybody Needs A Rock. ” by Byrd Baylor, tells the story of a child who is 
searching for his special rock. This book provides beautiful illustrations of 
rock formations that children can identify. The child finds the rock that is 
special to him for the beauty that only he can see. 

Additional Reading: " The Desert Is Theirs ” by Byrd Baylor. 



Seve 





323 



BEST COPY AVAM ABLF 



118 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 




1. Read the story, " Everybody Needs a Rock." 

2. Take a walk around the school yard to collect rocks. 

3. Have the students sort and chart the rocks by size, color, and shape. 

4. Ask the students to identify their favorite rocks. 

5. Give the students colored pencils or water colors so that they can 
illustrate their rocks. 

OPTIONAL ACTIVITIES: 

1 . Discuss and show pictures of geological formations from mountains, 
hills, valleys, lakes, rivers, and oceans. 

2. Identify special rock formations in the local area. 

3. Provide examples of different types of rocks such as varieties quartz, 
agates, and geodes. 

EVALUATION ACTIVITY: 

Create a classroom book by having the students illustrate and write about 
their special rocks. 

RESOURCES: 

Baylor, Byrd. Everybody Needs A Rock . New York: Macmillan, 1974. 
Baylor, Byrd. The Desert is Theirs . New York: Macmillan, 1975. 

DEVELOPED BY: 

Bonnie McGinnis 



329 




119 



SCIENCE -- 



“ROCKS 



II 



CULTURAL OUTCOME: II 

SCIENCE OUTCOME: IV 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

Students will appreciate the Native American beliefs in and respect for the 
kinship of all living things. 



SCIENCE OBJECTIVE: 

Students will identify kinds of rocks, water, and land around us. 



TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 



Rocks (which have life cycles of millions of years) have wonderful stories to 
tell. A wide variety of myths and legends tell of the Indian’s relationship to 
rocks. Many Native American people believe that every part of the earth is 
sacred - even the stones and rocks of the earth. They believe that there is 
a special kinship between people and every part of nature, including rocks. 

In "Our Forgotten Relatives," Robert LaBatte, Cheyenne River Sioux, tells of 
a rock that was sacred to his people in South Dakota. Named Medicine Rock, 
It was about 1 0 ten feet wide and 20 feet long, and was said to have been put 
there by the Great Spirit, who also left his handprint on the center of the rock. 

This rock was a place where Indians came to pray. Mothers put the clothing 
of their children on the rock, along with prayers for their healing. Warriors 
stopped there to pray for victory before battles. Yet, in 1950, government 
officials declared that the rock stood "in the way of progress" because they 
wanted to build a dam on the site. Construction of the dam would cause the 
rock to be inundated by water. Therefore, a small non-Indian town got 
permission from a non-Indian on whose land the stone rested, to move it to 
their town as a tourist attraction. It was much abused there, and the meaning 
of the rock was lost to the Sioux people for a generation. 



3 

ERIC 



330 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



120 



LaBatte has asked to bring the rock back to the reservation where it belongs. 
He says that there are many sacred rocks in this country which are like our 
relatives. They are nations which are here to help us. 



See also "Tunka-shila, Grandfather Rock," and "Old Man Coyote and the 
Rock", pp. 57-58 in Keepers of the Earth. 



A rock is a piece of the earth’s crust. Rocks come in all sizes, shapes, and 
colors. Geologists classify rock into three basicgroups: igneous, sedimentary, 
and metamorphic. The rock cycle is the name given to the process that 
recycles rock material of the earth. 



The Rock Cycle 



r 



Igneous rdcks 



Sedimentary rocks 

r v 

heat 

i. 

Metamorphic rocks 



weather 




cool 



J 

heat 




331 

121 — 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 



1 . Take the class on a walk around the school to collect different types 
of rocks. Ask students to save their special rocks to use for the 
activities listed below. 

2. Make dioramas with the rocks which the students have collected, 
using shoe boxes, and pictures of various environments such as the 
seashore, woodlands, or a stream bed. 

a. Prepare the shoe boxes by tunning them on their sides and 
using materials, pictures, or both to stimulate the settings for 
the rocks. 

b. Explain that one way geologists identify rocks is by the location 
in which they are found. 

c. Talk about the rocks the students have collected. Where were 
they found? What do the rocks look like? Place the rocks in 
the appropriate scenes. 

d. Place the rocks and boxes in the science area so that the 
students can continue to use them. 



3. T ake the class on a field trip to a geology display, rock shop, or stream 
bed. 

4. Play "Rock to Rock" with the class: 

a. Look at samples of three types of rock: sedimentary, 
metamorphic and igneous. 

b. Show and discuss the diagram of the rock cycle. 



c. Read the rock story while students sit with their eyes closed, 
then ask students to draw pictures of their fantasy journey. 




122 



"A ROCK” 




Imagine that you are a rock. You live on a sunny hillside. It is very hot. Can 
you feel the sunlight warming you? 

During the winter, you are worried about the ice that freezes in the crack on 
top of you. This crack grows bigger each year because the ice pushes hard 
on the sides of the crack. 

One spring, it is very wet as rain pours into streams rushing down the hillside. 
Feel the wetness of the water flowing over you as it streams into the dirt below 
you. 

Suddenly, the Earth begins to shake. You begin to roll down the valley. Ow! 
You hit another rock which splits into two halves. 

Splash! You land in the river. You are pushed by the water and you are 
getting all broken up into gravel and sand. Finally you settle down on an area 
along with millions of pieces of sand and gravel. ' 

Some pieces settle on top of you. You yell, "Stop pushing!" but more weight 
presses down. Your pieces get pushed and stuck together with other pieces. 
You are now hardening and becoming a sedimentary rock. The pressure 
grows and you begin to get warmer. You change color and hard. Now you’re 
a metamorphic rock. You keep getting pushed further down. It is hot. It is 
boiling hot I Everything begins to melt and you are part of a hot mess of melted 
rock. 

Wait, you’re being pushed up and the Earth is shaking and rumbling again. 
You burst up out of the top of a volcano. Red-hot lava is all around you. You 
land on a high point of the volcano away from the hot flow. Slowly, the volcano 
begins to quiet down and the lava cool£ and hardens. You are now a cold, 
grey igneous rock on top of a volcano — your new home. 



Adapted from Caduto, Michael and Burchac, Joseph. Keepers of the Earth . 
Golden, Colorado: Fulcrum, 1989. 




’ best copy available 



3233 



EVALUATION: 



1 . Have students tell about the cycle of the rocks, then name other 
cycles, such as the cycle of seasons. 

2. Ask the class to find pairs of rocks in a sandbox, then make a collection 
display. 

a. Go to the sand box and hide the rock pairs before the students 
arrive. 

b. Prepare the students by saying that the rocks that they have 
studied during the past week were buried by a tremendous land 
slide in the sand box, leaving two of each kind of rock. 

c. Have them look for matching pairs of rocks. 

d. Students can display their rocks on a special table. 



RESOURCES: 

Caduto, Michael J. and Burchac, Joseph. Keepers of the Earth: Native 
American Stories and Environmental Activities for Children. Golden, Colorado: 
Fulcrum, 1989. 

Williams R. Mudpies to Magnets . Mt. Rainer, Maryland Gryphon House 
1987. ’ 



DEVELOPED BY: 

Vera Freeman 
Becky YoungBear 




334 



124 



SCIENCE - 



“LIVING WATER” 



CULTURAL OUTCOMES: II, XI X 

SCIENCE OUTCOMES: I , III, IV 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

Students will understand Native American respect and reverence for water. 



SCIENCE OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

describe their impact on the environment 
sort living things into related groups 

compare characteristics of different plant and animal environments 
explain the importance of earth's air and water. 

TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

To the Native American, water is a strong living spirit. In some of the 
Southwest tribes, dances and ceremonies are performed to ask for rain. 
Stories are also passed down in many tribes from one generation to another 
to instill in the children the sacredness of water.^ 

This unit includes a Crow story written by Henry Real Bird. The story has 
been paraphrased, but it will still give the students the idea that water is alive, 
important for the existence of all living things, and often changes in form. ' 



best copy available 



335 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 




1 . Read to the students the story "Water Story" found at the end of the 
lesson. After the story, discuss the importance of water in our lives. 
Have students explain what they think the author meant when he said 
"Water is the greatest thing in the world. Wherever water goes, there 
is life.” An ongoing class poster could be developed to list and 
illustrate the many uses of water and how it affects our lives. 



2. Have a class discussion on where water is found. List the responses 
on the board or butcher paper. After list is completed, do the following 
activity to demonstrate that water is all around us including the air. 

Instruct students to breathe on the windows or mirrors to demonstrate 
condensation of water vapor. 

Ask students to explain what occured. Explain to the students that the 
fog or tiny water drops they saw on the mirror was water from the air. 
The water in the air is a gas called water vapor and it condenses to a 
liquid as the vapor cools on the surface of the mirror. 

Have students write in a science journal what they observed and a 
definition of water vapor. 

3. In this next activity, students will observe how water vapor turns into 
rain. Explain to students that as the sun hits the water on the earth, 
the water is heated and some of the water will evaporate into the air 
forming water vapor. As the Warm air and water rises to meet the 
cooler air, something will occur. Have students predict what they think 
will happen. Write predictions in their journals and then watch the 
activity to check their predictions. 

a. Pour a cup of hot water in a quart size jar. 

b. Place a pie tin with ice in it on iop of the jar. 

c. Water condensation should occur. Have students explain 
what they observed. Discuss with students the activity, and 

v how it demonstrates why it rains 

d. Students can write down their observations and what they 
learned in their journals. 

4. Show the students a picture of the water cycle and discuss. Have the 
students explain how the previous activity ties in with the water cycle. 



336 



126 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



5. Introduce students to the two types of water on Earth, saltwater and 
freshwater. Categorize the different bodies of water as either salt or 
freshwater. See how many different bodies of water the students can 
come up with. Discuss the types of bodies found in their geographic 
area. For students who have never been to the ocean, have pictures 
of the ocean to show them. Have the class make a freshwater and a 
saltwater collage using magazine pictures. 

6. Make and taste saltwater, observe how the salt is left behind when 
saltwater evaporates, and compare saltwater's freezing properties to 
freshwater. 

Each student will need a 4 ounce cup of warm water. In each cup, 
place a teaspoon of salt. Students should stir until dissolved. Let 
students take a taste of the saltwater. Have them record in their 
journals wtiat they did and how the water tasted. Explain to the 
students how this water is like the ocean's water. 

Next, fill an ice cube tray with saltwater and another tray with 
freshwater. The water in each tray should be the same temperature. 
Put in the freezer and watch to see which freezes first. Explain to 
students the saltwater freezes at a lower temperature. Discuss which 
bodies of water would freeze in the winter. 

With the remaining saltwater, pour into a glass plate and place in a 
window. Over a period of days, students should record what is 
happening to the water. Eventually, the wafer should evaportate 
leaving only the salt behind. 

7. Have the students draw and color a picture of what they think life would 
be like if they lived underwater in a pond or lake. When pictures are 
completed, let each student share his/her picture with the class. 

Ask students what they think water pollution is. Lead a discussion on 
the types of water pollution, the effects of Water pollution on plants, 
animals, and humans. Ask students how their pictures might be 
different if the water was polluted in their picture. Discuss ways they 
can help keep the water clean and the importance of clean water to 
them. 



8EST COPY AVAILABLE 
337 

127 



% 

8. Visit a body of freshwater. Before leaving on the field trip, discuss the 
different types of life and environment in and around freshwater and 
saltwater. This information could be added to the previous webbing. 
When your arrive, take a few minutes to sit and have students quietly 
observe the environment around them. Have them listen for different 
sounds of life and remind them how all living things are dependent 
upon water. Students could write in their journals what they observed. 

Instruct the students to walk around the body of water or shoreline and 
search for different types of life (insects, plants, animals, ect..). 
Remind them to look under rocks. If strainers are available, let them 
sieve the mud. Hand lenses could also aid in the students findings. 
Remind students to treat all living thing with respect and place them 
back into their habitat. 



Students should answer worksheet questions. Let students draw 
pictures of what they saw. 




128 



EVALUATION: 



1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 



Teacher observations 




Discussions 
Journals 

Worksheet from field trip 
Make a mural of the local water cycle. 



r 







Definitions: water vapor, saltwater, freshwater, evaporates, water 
pollution, and environment. 



RESOURCES: 

Caduto, Michael J. and Joseph Burchac, Keepers of the Earth: Native 
American Stories and Environmental Activities for Children. Golden, Colorado: 
Fulcrum, 1989, pp. 87-90, 100. 

American Indian Institute. Native American Cultural Lessons. University of 
Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma: 1987. 

Science Horizons . Teacher Edition 2. New York: Silver, Burdett & Ginn, 
1 987. 



DEVELOPED BY: 

Cynthia Henley 



339 



129 



“WATER STORY” 



By Henry Real Bird 
(paraphrased) 

The Crow people respect the mystery of water. They say that when you feed 
the water, the water people will watch over you while you swim. So, children 
would take fat, bones, and meat to feed the water people, and would then 
have much fun swimming. The water was fresh, clean, and tasted good. 

The grandfather would tell the children, that water had great mystery. It 
comes out of the ground, turns into a cloud and then flows down and becomes 
a stream, creek, brook, or river . Sometimes it is unable to flow, so it becomes 

a puddle, pond, lake, or ocean. Water is where fish, frogs, turtles, and 
beavers live. 

Everything that lives has water in it. Wherever water goes, there will be life. 
If a flower or an antelope do not have water, they will die. 

The grandfather would tell how the grandmother would heat water to cook the 
meat and how the water would start to dance on top, jump out of the pot and 
turn into steam. 

' Rernember he would say, "water has great mystery. As the temperature 
changes, so does water. In the winter, the clouds drop soft snow. Theground 
turns white and many animals change their clothes." 

As the weather becomes warmer, the snow melts and flows to a lower level. 
The muddy water runs into the river which becomes very strong. It moves 
everything that is in the way including large trees." 

"The water will soak into the ground and tell the flowers, grass, and leaves 
to come out and color the earth. The birds will also return to thier homes. And, 
in the summer, the rains will fall and tell the berries, watermelon, and pototoes 
to come out." 

"Remember, water has great mystery. The more water you have the stronger 
you are. Water is the greatest thing in the world. Wherever water goes, there 
is life. So take care of it." 



O * 

o ‘i 



0 



130 



SCIENCE - 



“LIFE-CHANGING WATER” 



CULTURAL OUTCOME: II 

SCIENCE OUTCOME: I 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

Students will understand their relationship with Mother Earth and the spiritual 
and natural worlds. 



SCIENCE OBJECTIVE: 

Students will understand the relationship between water and their environment 



TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

Water is sacred to Indian people, who believe that it has a strong spirit and 
can be found in all areas of life. It helps tie together their relationship to 
Mother Earth and their spiritual nature. The Crow story written by Henry Real 
Bird, and the Kalapuya myth, "Coyote Takes Water From the Frog People," 
told by Barry Lopez, demonstrates the significance of water. 




341 

131 — 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 

1 . Have the students sit in a circle as the water story is being told. Ask 
questions about water and its importance to people and animals. 
Discuss local bodies of water and what lives there. 

2. During the circle time provide the students with opportunities to see 
and feel water change. Pass an ice cube around the circle. Ask what 
is happening as it melts. Point out terms such as ,, melting ,, and 
"liquid." 

3. Use the globe to show that the blue represents bodies of water. Name 
the oceans, pointing out the one closest to the child's home. 

A. Introduce songs about rain or water to the students. One of them could 

be the "Rain Song” sung to the tune, "Are You Sleeping?" 

It is raining, It is raining, 

On my head, On my head 
Fitter, Fitter, pat, pat 
Fitter, Fitter, pat, pat 
Now I’m wet, now I'm wet. 

It is raining, It is raining 

On the plants, On the plants 

Fitter, Fitter, pat, pat 

Fitter, Fitter, pat, pat 

Now they’ll grow, now they’ll grow. 

It is raining, It is raining 

On the dirt, On the dirt 

Fitter, Fitter, pat, pat 

Fitter, Fitter, pat, pat 

Now there's mud, now there's mud. 

5. Read the Kalapuya myth retold by Barry Lopez, "Coyote T akes Water 
from the Frog People." 



342 



132 



6. Illustrate the effects of water pollution: 

a. Get the attention of the students by setting out a dishpan of 
water in a learning center filled with toy tires, toy cars, plastic 
lids from milk cartons, and glass pop bottles. Attach a paper clip 
to some of them. Let the students explore, pick up objects, ask 
questions, and inquire of other students. 

b. Discuss how we take care of Mother Earth and do not abuse 
her. Show the worksheet of the polluted beach. Askwhatdoes 
not belong there. Color the items that are bad for the beach. 

c. Play "Clean Up Our Water". Let some students use a fishing 
pole (a stick with a magnet attached to a string or some fishing 
line) to clean up the ocean or dish pan. Name the items as they 
are pulled out of the water. 

d. Make a water cycle: Clouds to Rain, Rain to Lakes and 
Streams, Streams to Evaporation, Evaporation to Clouds. 
Then do various activities of group stories, books, posters, etc. 
to illustrate the water cycle and pollution. Emphasize the 
constant interaction between the sun and the earth that provides 
the needs for all living things. 

e. Have the students make a raindrop bulletin board, placing 
raindrops in strategic positions. 



7. Illustrate the effects of oil spills: 

a. Materials: aluminum pie pan, sand and rocks, water, dropper, 
motor oil, small plants, spoon, paper towels, Q-tips. 

b. Procedure: 

Divide class into groups of 4 or 5 students 
Pass out pie tin with sand and rocks 

Press small plants into sand, then fill the pan about 1/2 full of 
water 

Put about 5 drops of oil into the pan. Have students use 
different methods to clean up the "oil spill," (spoon, wind, other 
water, paper towels, cotton balls, string). 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

343 

133 



EVALUATION: 



Have the students discuss what water means to them and describe their 
favorite water activities. After showing pictures of children bathing, washing 
their hands and face, drinking, swimming, etc., ask the students to draw a 
picture of what they like to do in the water. 

RESOURCES: 



Henry Real Bird, "Water Story.” Native American Cultural Lessons Preschool 
Through High School . American Indian Institute, Norman, Oklahoma: 
University of Oklahoma, 1 987, pp. 9-1 0. 

Barry Lopez, "Coyote Takes Water from the Frog People” in Richard Erdoes 
and Alfonso Ortiz, American 1 Indian Myths and Legends New York: Pantheon 
Books, 1984, pp. 355-356. 



Madison County Title V, Environmental Curriculum Guide: Culture Based 
Environmental Curriculum . Alabama, 1 990. 

Tolman, Marvin N. and James O. Morton, Earth Science Activities for Grades 
2-8, Book III . West Nyack, New York: Parker Publishing, 1988. 



DEVELOPED BY: 
Carol L. Martin 




o • 



344 



134 




"COYOTE TAKES WATER FROM THE FROG PEOPLE" 



by Barry Lopez 

Coyote was out hunting and he found a dead deer. One of the deer's rib 
bones looked like a big dentalia shell, and Coyote picked it up and took it with 
him. He went up to see the frog people. The frog people had all the water. 
When anyone wanted any water to drink or cook with or to wash, they had to 
go and get it from the frog people. Coyote came up. "Hey, frog people, I have 
a big dentalia shell. I want a big drink of water - 1 want to drink for a long time." 

"Give us that shell," said the frog people, "and you can drink all you want." 

Coyote gave them the shell and began drinking. The water was behind a 
large dam where Coyote drank. 

"I’m going to keep my head down for a long time," said Coyote, "because I’m 
really thirsty. Don’t worry about me." 

"Okay, we won’t worry,” said the frog people. 

Coyote began drinking. He drank for a long time. Finally one of the frog 
people said, "Hey, Coyote, you are drinking a lot of water there. What are 
you doing that for?" 

Coyote brought his head up out of the water. "I’m thirsty." 

"Oh." 

After a while one of the frog people said, "Coyote, you sure are drinking a lot. 
Maybe you better give us another shell." 

"Just let me finish this drink," said Coyote, putting his head back underwater. 

The frog people wondered how a person could drink so much water. They 
didn’t like this. They thought Coyote might be doing something. 

Coyote was digging out under the dam all the time he had his head under 
water. When he finished he stood up and said, "That was a good drink. That 
was just what I needed.” 

Then the dam collapsed, and the water went out into the valley and made the 
creeks and rivers and waterfalls. 



345 

135 - 



The frog people were very angry. "You have taken all the water, Coyote!” 

"It's not right that one people have all the water. Now it is where everyone can 
have it." 

Coyote did that. Now anyone can go down to the river and get a drink of water 
or some water to cook with, or just swim around. 





346 




136 




SCIENCE/MATH - 



Protection of Natural Resources” 
(Air, Water, Soil) 



CULTURAL OUTCOME: II, XIII 

MATH OUTCOME: I, II, VII, VIII 

SCIENCE OUTCOME: I, IV, VI 



CURRICULUM AREAS : Math 

Science 



TI ME FRAME: 10 Days 



CULTURAL LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
Students will: 

« nd appreciate Native American customs and 
preserve and protect Mother Earth's natural 

ebuurces § 



MATH LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
Students will: 



use problem-solving strategies to investigate and understand 
tjieir relationship to the community 

use varied forms of measurement, estimation, mental 
computations, and select the most appropriate methods of 
computation to communicate relationships and to relate to 
their environment. 



SCIENCE LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
Students will: 

develop a working knowledge of science and the social, 
technological and environmental impact of science on their 
lives 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



© , 

ERJC 



13 



t3 42 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 



AIR POLLUTION 



Activity I: "Dirty Air That We Breathe" 



a, 



Materials : 

Magnifying glass 
Clean, large mouth jars 
Petroleum jelly 

Procedure : 



1 

2 



5. 



Coat the inside of a jar with petroleum jelly. 
Place the jar, uncovered, outside in an 
undisturbed area for a day. 

After bringing in the jar, look at the 
petroleum jelly through a magnifying glass. 
Ask the students about their observations 
(water, dirt, insects, pollen). 

Have the students draw a picture showing how 
the air may have carried the particles to the 
jar. 



Activity II: "Pollutants" 



a . 



b. 



c. 



Ask students to list ways in which human activities 
P°Hute the air. Write suggestions on a chart. 
Some possibilities include: car exhaust, smoking, 
fireplace usage, factory pollution, power plant 
emissions, etc..' 

Tell s tuden ts that people used to think that human 
pollution would not affect air quality because of 
the large volume of air in the atmosphere. What do 
they think now? (Get sources from newspapers, 
magazines, environmentalists). 

Activity: Have the students make an eight foot 
mark on the wall, measuring from the floor. The 8' 
mark represents the limits of the atmosphere, about 
300 miles above sea level. Have the students 
measure two inches from the floor. This distance 
is the part of the atmosphere where living things 
breathe and weather takes place. 



Activity Is 



SOLID WASTE 
"Trash Can Sorting" 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



a. Materials: 

Two or more full classroom trash cans, containing 



ERIC 1 



348 



138 > 



2 . 



O 

ERIC, 



b. 



food or liquid. 

Plastic sheet for trash 

Plastic, disposable gloves for students 



Discuss why solid waste 
problem . 



can become an environmental 



c . 



Place the full trash can on the table in front of 
the class. Explain that each day these cans will 
be collected from each classroom at the school. Ask 
the class to make a prediction of how many cans per 
week will be collected. Discuss the process used 
to arrive at a good estimation. 



d. 



After the sorting process, ask the students how 
much of the contents can be recycled or reused. 
Use total numbers of cans for measurement. 



e. 



f . 



Students will help develop a 
questionnaire for collection of cans, 
class discussion v what they should know, 
and/or what they should observe. 



survey or 
List through 
who to ask. 



Example questions: 



How many trash cans are filled in each 
classroom each day? 

How much trash is collected from the office 
each day? 

Where does the trash go after it leaves the 
school? 

Does the school have a recycling program? 

Does the school buy recycled paper or 
products? 

How can there be a cut-back in making trash? 



9* Stress to the students the importance of accurate 
reporting on their findings. Record the 

information collected on .sheets of butcher paper. 

h. Have the students draw posters to place around the 
school to promote trash reduction and recycling. 



Set up recycling cans in your school for an on- 
going recycling program in your school. Contact 
other community recycling groups. 



Activity II: "Model Landfill" 

a. Use heavy duty scissors to cut liter bottles into 
two halves. Tape the edges if they are sharp or 
rough. 



i&39 



•BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

Av : * ■' 




b. The student will then write his/her name on a piece 
of tape on the upper half of the container with a 
permanent ink pen. This is the end with the pour 

SDOUt • 



c . 



The student will plug the pour spout with cotton 
paper towel, or coffee filter. 



t 



a 



d. 



e. 




The student will create a 
garbage with soil. 



landfill by alternating 



Line the bottom of the container with soil, 
the top portion into the bottom. 



and set 



Use a large spoon to add one of the pollutants, 
such as plastic spoon pieces, food bits, vegetable 
oil, or foil, and then cover it with soil. 



g- 



Continue layering soil and garbage until all types 
of items have been included. 



h. Have each student observe the landfill for 10 days 
recording observations on the student sheet. If 
oil is observed, that is harmful chemicals or oil 
which could seep into underground water supplies. 

i. During the observation period, sprinkle each 

landfill with water every other day to keep them 
damp. 

After 10 days the students will dump out the 
contests of their landfills onto newspapers. 
Suggestion: Do this activity outside! 

A 

k. Using a stick to prod around the dirt, the students 
will observe any changes. The foil, plastic, and 
will not have changed (decomposed), but 
the fruits and vegetables will probably have begun 
to decompose. Did a syrupy liquid form during 
decomposition? 



Ask, "Why did some items change and some not?" 
(Some are biodegradable; some are not.) 



Ask, "What kinds of harmful things are in garbage?" 

Ask, "Is it safe to touch rotting garbage?", "Why 
not?", "Is it safe to drink water with a couple of 
drops of the syrupy liquid in it?", "Why not?" 



350 



140 



3. Activity III: "The Three R's" 

a. Materials: 

The Three R's Chart 

Samples of common disposable products (camera, 
razor, nonref illable pens , paper diapers, 
lighters). 

b. Vocabulary: 

Reduce: to lessen consumption of materials in 

extent or amount. 

Reuse: to use again. 

Recycle: to recover useful materials from garbage 
or waste to reprocess into a new product. 

c. Explain that one way to help conserve the 
environment is by reducing the amount of things 
people buy. Tell how a disposable ballpoint pen or 
razor can be replaced by a refillable pen or a 
reusable razor. 

d. Reducing can also, mean using less, such as using 
part of a piece of paper for a short note, rather 
than a whole piece. 

e. Items that can be used over again are good choices: 

cloth rags instead of paper towels, cloth napkins 
rather than paper ones. Reusing products in other 
ways is recycling: using old sheets as cleaning 

rags, old cloth for quilts 

f • Reusing also means to pass no longer needed items 
to other people. 

g. Recycled aluminum cans, steel cans, plastic, 
newspapers, cardboard, plastic bottles, cartons, 
glass bottles, and glass jars can be reprocessed 
and made into new items. 

Recycling also means buying recycled products. 

h. Give each student a work sheet of "The Three R's" 
and keep a record of their behaviors. 



Resources : 

Minor, Marz and Nono, The American Indian Craft Book . 

University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, 1972, pp. 95, 15. 

Recycle. Conserve. Protect: an environmental education 

teacher's guide, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Community 
Relations, 77 Beale Street, San Francisco, Ca 94106. 



ERIC 



. 





141 



LESSON PLAINS/SCHEDULE FOR EARTH, AIR, WATER AND FIRE UNIT 



352 

O 

ERIC 



142 



353 




143 



My Ideas for Earth, Air, Water and Fire Unit: 




O 

ERJC 



- 354 



144 






355 



TEACHER’S/PARENT’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION- 



Music: Tool to Pride in Indian Heritage 

Dr. Louis Ballard, American Indian composer, said, “It is possible for everyone to 
participate in music either as a performer or as one of the technicians who make it 
possible. The teacher is a most important person in this situation.” 

“I want teachers to innovate... to use their imaginations... to explore the possibilities of 
using Indian music in the classroom. . . whether it’s music, history, English, 
woodworking, whatever it may be. Bring Indian music in the classroom at one time or 
another, either as a listening, singing, rhythmic, phonetic movement in dance or simply 
an appreciation experience. But there should be music available at all times,” he said. 

If you are an Indian, you should know at least five songs. . . It is important because it is 
part of your tools, your resources; it’s part of your pride in yourself and part of the 
education of America, . .” 

Dr. Ballard said that the best resources for acquiring a knowledge of music are the older 
generation in the community and tribal singers. “And you must not go to them and say, 
‘Sing me this song.’ You have to evolve certain ways of ingratiating yourself with 
people...” 

“I’m not saying that Indian music is better than any music in the world, but I’ll be darned 
if it is not just as good, you see. And teachers, especially, should feel this way too, 
because if they don’t, then they are imparting prejudice to their youngsters... that says 
that Indian music is nothing. . . then there is no pride in that youngster. . . They have a 
sensitivity, a beauty that should be utilized in a direction of pride in their heritage, and 
music is an excellent tool to use for achieving this.” 

“The tribal music that we have remaining is really at the core of our Indian people who 
are the crossroads of the educational economic potential. And the Indian youth will 
inherit a legacy of pride and relevance or a legacy of ignorance and exploitation - 
depending upon you, the educator, the so-called cultured person. Misconceptions about 
Indian music and other aspects of our culture are abundant both in our schools and in the 
minds of the general public. These half-truths are defaming and detrimental to the true 
image of the Indian. . .” 

“. . . There is a great deal of material within our tribal fives to work from. The Indian 
singers, especially the head singers, are vital encyclopedias on archives of material. The 
death of a head singer is like a museum burning down because here are people who have 
carried on the vocal, oral traditions, non-written epic poetry in music and drama that our 
forefathers had. . . ” 



146 



er|c 



356 



“Creative potential in Indian music and the related arts of music composition and 
traditional dances can offer unlimited avenues for self-expression as well as an expansion 
of our present educational approach... All schools in this country should be doing Indian 
folk dances.” 

“Suppose 200 years from now... a stranger comes to these shores and approaches the 
average man on the street and asks him to sing his favorite folk song. It is my hope that 
that man in this country will respond with an American Indian folk song,” Ballard said. 

-Dr. Ballard’s presentation at the 8 th Annual NIEA Convention included in 
American Indians: Performing Arts, ORBIS Associates, Washington, DC, 1 986. 



Music continues to be one of the most identifiable expressions of American Indian 
culture. It is a vital means of self-identity and cultural perpetuation among Indian people. 
Additionally, it is a common feature by which non-Indians recognize and acknowledge 
Indian culture. 

Indian students can benefit from a basic orientation to this rich aspect of their cultural 
heritage. Because nearly every aspect of life in Indian communities was and, in many 
cases, still is touched by music, there are many cultural and historical “lessons” available 
in the study of even a single song. The study of music can: 

serve as a stimulus for improved self concept and ethnic pride, 

be an effective way to involve broad cross-sections of the community in 
educational programs, 

contribute to the perpetuation of culture, and 

provide excellent educational opportunities for improving analytical, comparative, 
and critical thinkin g s kills among students. 

The twentieth century has brought an even wider variety of musical practices into Indian 
life. Today, virtually every genre of music includes Indian performers. Country, 
bluegrass, folk, “chicken scratch,” classical, swing, rock, and gospel are some of the 
traditionally non-Indian areas into which Indian performers have ventured. And yet, 
there is usually some aspect of these performers’ art which re mains uniquely Indian — the 
politically minded lyrics of country and folk singers, Floyd Westerman and Buffy Sainte- 
Marie, the urban concerns of Indian rock group XIT, and the traditionally- influenced 
modem classicism of Louis Ballard. Culture is not static, it changes and evolves. While 
the traditions of the past are important, it is just as important to be able to grow and to 
explore new creative expressions as Indian people, -from Using American Indian Music 
in Cultural Instruction, ORBIS Associates, Washington, DC. 

147 




.'•j ' 



357 



Literature - Week 1 

Powwow Summer by 
Marcie Rendon 



SUGGESTED PRIMARY LEVEL UNIT - MUSIC AND DANCE 
Reading, Language Arts, 

Science, Math, Art, Values 
P Music and Dance Words 
H Reading Nonfiction 
A Critiquing Powwow Lit. 

S Reading Biographies Drumbeat Heartbeat: 

E Write About Favorite Singers Celebration of the 
Singing Powwow Songs Powwow by Susan 
F Science of Sound Braine 

I Cost of Traveling to Powwows 
V Make Article for Outfit Powwow Photographs 



E Respect and Generosity 



by Mike Marra 



Literature - Week 2 

Britney Spears by Ann 
Gaines 

Gloria Estevan by Fernando 
Gonzales 

Duke Ellington: the Piano 
Prince by Andrea D. Pinkney 

Leonard Bernstein by Mike 
Venezia 



P Music and Dance Words 
H Reading Nonfiction 
A Critiquing Powwow Lit. 

S Reading Fiction/Responding 
E Try Different Dances 
Singing Bottles Activity 
F Sing Powwow Songs 
O Approx. Cost of Outfit 
U Make Article for Outfit 
R Integrity and Respect 



Eagle Drum: on the 
Powwow Trail with a 
Young Grassdancer 
by Robert Crum 

Lakota Hoop Dancer 
by Lefthand Bull & 
Haldane 

Shannon: An Ojibway 
JDancer by Sandra King 



Tap Dance Recital by 
Barbara Steadman 
Song and Dance: Poems by 
Lee Bennett Hopkins 
Dancing Pants - Silverstein 
Arthur Rocks with Binky by 
Mark T. Brown 

Madison Finds a Live 
Jitterbug by Sunny Warner 



P Music and Dance Words 
H Reading Nonfiction 
A Critiquing Powwow Lit. 

S Reading Fiction 
E Retelling and Responding 
Powwow and Other Music 
T What Makes Sound 
H Singing Powwow Songs 
R Cost to Make Shawl/Hoops 
E Make Article for Outfit 
E Integrity and Respect 



Powwow by George 
Ancona 

The Fancy Shawl Dancer 
by Gerald Mirra 

The Hoop of Peace by 
Jan Havnen-Finley 



Frank was a Monster Who 
Wanted to Dance by Keith 
Graves 

The Little Band by James 
Sage 

Rock‘n Roll Band - Shel 
Silverstein 

Song and Dance Man by 
Karen Ackerman 
Moses Goes to A Concert 
by Isaac Millman 



P Music and Dance Words 

H Reading Powwow Stories A Trip to a Powwow by 
A Reading Other Music Stories Richard Red Hawk 
S Sharing Powwow Experiences 
E Hearing Different Sounds Powwow ABC by Sandy 

Co st of Powwow/Other T apes Hummingbird 
T Singing Powwow Song 

W Making Article for Outfit Jingle Dancer by 
O Dignity and Respect Cynthia L. Smith 



Thump, Thump, Rat a Tat Tat 
by Gene Baer 
Big Bird’s Band Plays 
Together 

The Old Man Who Loved 
to Sing by John Winch 
Grandpa ’s Song by Tony 
Johnston 



148 



353 



Literature - Week 3 

Maria Tallchief by 
Heidi E. Erdich 

Maria Tallchief, Prima 
Ballerina by Vee Browne 

Maria Tallchief: 

America 's Prima 
Ballerina by Rosemary 
Wells 

The Rabbit Dance in 
Keepers of the Animals 
by Caduto/Bruchac 
The Deer Dance in 
Keepers of the Animals 
by M. Caduto and J. 
Bruchac 

Butterfly Boy in Old 
Father Story Teller by 

Pablita Velarde 

Dancing Drum: A 
Cherokee Legend by 
Terri Cohlene 

Nanabosho Dances 
by Joe McLellan 

Grandfather Drum 
by Ferguson Plain 



Love Flute by Paul 
Goble 

The Hunter and the 
Woodpecker by C. 
Crowl 

The First Flute in 
Keepers of the Animals 
by Caduto/Bruchac 
The Flute Player by 
Michael Lacapa 



Literature - Week 4 

The Nutcracker by 
Carin Dewhirst 

Ballet by Annabel 
Thomas 

Angelina Ballerina 
by Helen Craig 
Lili at Ballet by 
Rachel Isadora 
Coyote Concert on a 
Full Moon Night by 
C.Whelihan-Scherer 
Animal Music by 
Harriet Ziefert 
The Song of Six Birds 
by Rene Deelefs 
The Animals ’ Song by 
David Harrison 



Nathaniel ’s Violin by 
Allison Lohang 

Nana Hannah ’s Piano 
by Barbara Bottner 

The Old Musician by 
Rita Tomqvist 

The Fiddler of the Northern 
Lights by Natalie Kinsey 

Ourchestra-Silverstein 

The Flute Concert by Wolf 
Harranth 

The Flute Player by Robyn 
Eversole 

J.B. ’s Harmonica by John 
Sebastian 

Little Boy with a Big Horn 
by Jack Bechdolt 

149 



Reading, Language Arts, 
Science, Math, Art, Values 
Music and Dance Words 
Reading Biography 
Comparing and Contrasting 
Reading Nonfiction 
Reading Fiction/Responding 
Cost of Dance Lessons 
Indian Dancer(s) Visit Class 
Write Story of Local Dancers 
Write Story of Your Courage 
Courage and Integrity 

Music and Dance Words 
Reading Legends/Fables 
Retelling/Oral Tradition 
Draw Anima l Dancers 
Figure Purchase of Tapes 
Tape/Listen to Bird Songs 
Other Sounds in Nature 
How Sound Travels 
Describing Nature Sounds 
Respect for Nature/Dance 
Music and Dance Words 
Reading Legends 
Retelling/Oral Tradition 
Reading Fiction 
Retelling/Responding 
Discuss Powwow Prize $ 
Sound from a Drum 
Classroom Band 
Musician Visits Class 
Make Miniature Drum 
We Have Gifts/Talents 

Music and Dance Words 
Reading Legends 
Reading Fiction 
Retelling/Responding 
Playing Recorders/ 
Harmonicas/Cost 
What Makes Sound 
Have Flute/Harmonica 
Player Visit Class 
Love/for Each Other 



359 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE FIVE - 

Music and dance are important parts of Indian culture. Powwows are held on 
weekends in the summer and other times throughout the year. Indian people 
participate in other forms of American music and dance. 

Powwows- 

* Powwow Summer by Marcie Rendon ( Indian Author), Carolrhoda Books, 1996. 

* Drumbeat Heartbeat: Celebration of the Powwow by Susan Braine (Indian Author), 
LemerPub., 1995. 

* Powwow Photographs by Ben Marra, Henry N. Adams, 1 996. 

These books describe powwows and contain beautiful pictures of powwow dancers. 
Students should compare their own experiences at powwows with what is described in 
these books and critique the books. 

Other Music Makers- 

* Britney Spears by Ann Gaines, Mitchell Lane Pub., 1999. 

* Gloria Estevan by Fernando Gonzales, Millbrook Pr., 1994. 

*Duke Ellington: the Piano Prince by Andrea D. Pinkney, Disney Press, 1998. 

* Leonard Bernstein by Mike Venezia, 1997. 

These stories are about famous American music makers. The idea is to explore other 
music of America. 

Maria Tallchief- 

*Maria Tallchief by Heidi E. Erdich, Native American Stories. 

* Maria Tallchief, Prima Ballerina by Vee Browne, (Indian Author), 1995. 

* Maria Tallchief: America ’s Prima Ballerina by Rosemary Wells, Viking, 1999. 

These books are about Maria Tallchief, the Osage prima ballerina. At least two of them 
should be used and they should be compared and contrasted. 

Ballet - 

*The Nutcracker by Carin Dewhirst, 1997. 

* Ballet by Annabel Thomas, 1987. 

* Angelina Ballerina by Helen Craig, 1983. 

*Lili at Ballet by Rachel Isadora, Paper Star, 1993. 

These books are about ballet and ballerinas. 

Gifted and talented students should read the more difficult selections and report on them 
to the class or help the teacher read them to the other students. Be sure to have Indian 
culture staff or other knowledgeable people from the community involved in 
art/craft/singing projects. 

150 




360 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE FOUR- 

Music and dance are important parts of Indian culture. Powwows are held on 
weekends over the summer and at other times during the year. Indian stories are 
sometimes about dancing and dancers. 

Powwows- 

*Eagle Drum: on the Powwow Trail with a Young Grassdancer by Robert Crum, Four 
Winds Press, 1994. 

*Lakota Hoop Dancer by Lefthand Bull (Indian Author) and Haldane, Dutton. 

* Shannon: An Ojibway Dancer by Sandra King (Indian Author), Lemer, 1995. 

These are stories of Indian dancers and powwows. Students should compare their own 
powwow experiences with those in the books and critique the books. 

Other Music and Dances- 

*Tap Dance Recital by Barbara Steadman, Dover, 2000. 

*Song and Dance: Poems by Lee Bennett Hopkins, 1997. 

*Dancing Pants in Where the Sidewalk Ends by Shel Silverstein, Harper and Row, 1994. 

* Arthur Rocks with Binky by Mark T. Brown, Little Brown and Co., 1998. 

*Madison Finds a Live Jitterbug by Sunny Warner, Houghton-Mifflin, 1999. 

These stories refer to other forms of American music and dance. 

Animal Dance Legends- 

*The Rabbit Dance in Keepers of the Animals by M. Caduto and J. Bruchac (Indian 
Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1997. Mohawk 

*The Deer Dance in Keepers of the Animals by M. Caduto and J. Bruchac (Indian 
Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1997. Yaqui 

*Butterfly Boy in Old Father Story Teller by Pablita Velarde (Indian Author), 

Clear Light Pub., 1989. Pueblo 

These are Indian legends about animals and their influence on dance. Also, All On Earth, 
Musical Companion to Keeper Books, performed by Michael Caduto. 

Animal Music and Song - 

*Coyote Concert on a Full Moon Night by Carol Whelchen-Scherer, Norothwood Pr., 
1998. 

* Animal Music by Harriet Ziefert, Houghton Miff l in , 1999. 

*The Song of Six Birds by Rene Deelefs, Dutton, 2000. 

* The Animals’ Song by David Hamson, Boyds Mill Pr., 1997. 

These are stories about how animals also have music and song. Gifted and talented 
students should read the more difficult selections and report on them to the class or help 
the teacher read them to the other students. Be sure to have Indian culture staff or other 
knowledgeable people from the community involved in art/craft/ singing projects. 

151 




361 



ABOUT THE LITERATURE FOR PHASE THREE- 

Music and dance are important parts of Indian culture. Powwows are held on 
weekends in the summer and at other times during the year. Indian stories are 
sometimes about music and dance. 



Powwows- 

*Powwow by George Ancona, Harcourt, Brace Javonovich, 1993. 

* The Fancy Shawl Dancer by Gerald Mirra. 

*The Hoop of Peace by Jan Havnen-Finley, Naturegraph, 1994. 

These contain pictures and information about powwows. Students should compare their 
own powwow experiences with the ones in these books. The last part of The Hoop of 
Peace may be too advanced for this level. 

Other Music and Dance- 

*Frank Was a Monster Who Wanted to Dance by Keith Graves, Chronicle Books, 1999. 
*The Little Band by James Sage, 1991 

*Rock’n Roll Band in Light in the Attic by Shel Silverstein, Harper and Row, 1981. 
*Song and Dance Man by Karen Ackerman, Dragonfly, 1 999. 

* Moses Goes to a Concert by Isaac Millman, Farrar Straus & Girroux, 1998. 

These are general children’s stories about music and dance. 

Legends about Music and Dance- 

* Dancing Drum: A Cherokee Legend by Terri Cohlene, Troll, 1990. 

*Nanabosho Dances by Joe McClellan (Indian Author), Pemmican, 1991. Ojibwa 
* Grandfather Drum by Ferguson Plain (Indian Author), Pemmican. Ojibwa 
These are Indian legends including the drum and tell how the hoop dance started. 

Other Stories of Music- 

*Nathaniel’s Violin by Allison Lohang, Orca Book Pub., 1996. 

*Nana Hannah ’s Piano by Barbara Bottner, 1 996. 

*The Old Musician by Rita Tomqvist, 1993. 

*The Fiddler of the Northern Lights by Natalie Kinsey- Warnock, 1996. 

*Ourchestra in Where the Sidewalk Ends by Shel Silverstein, Harper and Row, 1974. 
These are general children’s books about music makers. 

Gifted and talented students should read the more difficult selections and report on them 
to the class or help the teacher read them to the other students. Be sure to have Indian 
culture staff or other knowledgeable people from the community involved in 
art/craft/singing projects. 



152 




362 



ABOUT T HE LITERATURE FOR PHASE TWO- 

Music and dance are important parts of Indian culture. Powwows are held on 
weekends in the summer and other times during the year. Besides the drum, the 
flute is another important Indian musical instrument. 

Powwows- 

*A Trip to a Powwow by Richard Red Hawk (Indian Author). 

* Powwow ABC by Sandy Hummingbird. 

* Jingle Dancer by Cynthia Leitich Smith, Morrow Jr., 2000. 

These are books about powwows. Students should compare their own powwow 
experiences to those described in these books. 

Other Music and Song- 

*Thump, Thump, Rat a Tat Tat by Gene Baer, 1991. 

*Big Bird’s Band Plays Together, 1999. 

*The Old Man Who Loved to Sing by John Winch, 1998. 

* Grandpa ’s Song by Tony Johnston, 1 99 1 . 

These are general children’s books about music and song. 

Indian Flutes- 

*Love Flute by Paul Goble. Lakota Also on audio tape. 

*The Hunter and the Woodpecker by C. Crowl, Tipi Press. Lakota 

*The First Flute in Keepers of the Animals by M. Caduto and J. Bruchac (Indian 

Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1997. Lakota 

*The Flute Player by Michael Lacapa (Indian Author), Northland Press. Apache 

The first three books tell the Lakota legend of how the flute came to be. The last is an 
Apache legend. 

Other Flutes and Air Instuments- 

*The Flute Concert by Wolf Harranth, Blackbirch Mktg., 1998. 

*The Flute Player by Robyn Eversole, Orchard, 1995. 

*J.B. 's Harmonica by John Sebastian, 1993. 

* Little Boy with a Big Horn by Jack Bechdolt, Golden Books, 1999. 

These are general children’s books about air instruments. 

Be sure to have Indian culture staff or other knowledgeable people from the community 
involved in art/craft/singing projects. 



153 



ERIC 



363 



FURTHER RESOURCES FOR MUSIC AND DANCE UNIT- 

These materials can be used to substitute for books in the suggested unit outline or 

for additional reading/other activities for students. 

The Cat in the Hat Songbook by Dr. Seuss, Random House, 1993. 

*The Musical ABC Book by Judith Stuchly, Straight Edge Inc., 1997. 

* Scott Gustafson’s Animal Orchestra: A Counting Book by Scott Gustafson, 1996. 

Frog Went a Courtin’: A Musical Play in Six Acts by Do min ic Catalano, 1998. 

*1 Make Music by Eloise Greenfield, Writers and Readers, 1991. 

1, 2, 3 Music by Sylvie Auzary-Luton, Orchard Books, 1999. 

I Like the Music by Leah Komaiko, Harper Trophy, 1989. 

The Fabulous Song by Don Gilmore, Kane/Miller Book Pub., 1998. 

Gonna Sing My Head Off by Kathleen Krull, Knopf, 1995. 

*Bear’s Big Band by Kiki Thorpe, Readers Digest, 2000. 

*Out and About Books: Dancing Class by Helen Oxenburg, Puffin, 1993. 

* Shall We Dance by Carol Niclaus, 2000. 

Dance Away by George Shannon, 1998. 

Dancers and the Dance: Stories by Summer Brenner, 1990. 

Harriet’s Recital by Nancy Carlson, First Ave Editions, 1997. 

Pamela’s First Musical by Wendy Wasserstein, 1996. 

Gabriella’s Song by Candace Fleming, 1997. 

Loudmouth Joe and the Comet by Nancy Carlson, Carolrhoda, 1983. 

The Cello or Mr. O by Jane Cutler, Dutton, 1999. 

Fiddlin’ Sam by Mairiana Dengler, Rising Moon, 1999. 

154 




364 



Rosie’s Fiddle by Phyllis Root, 1997. 

The G um on the Drum by Barbara Gregorich, School Zone Pub., 1993. 

The Bat Boy and His Violin by Gavin Curtis, Simon and Schuster, 1988. 

*01d MacDonald’s Musical Farm by Judith Stuchly, 1998. 

Forest Singer by Sylvia Sikundar, Barefoot Books, 1999. 

The Anima l Orchestra by Nick Sharratt, 1997. 

Mockingbird by Allan Ahlberg, 1998. 

Satchnio’s Blues by Alan Schroeder, Yearling Books. 

The Blues of Flats Brown by Walter D. Myers, Holiday House, 2000, 

The Dance by Richard Evans, Simon & Schuster, 1999. 

Isadora Dances by Rachel Isadora, Puffin, 2000. 

Nina, Nina Star Ballerina by Jane O’Connor, Grosset & Dunlap, 1997. 

The Best Book of Ballet by Angela Wilkes, Larousse Kingfisher Chambers, 2000. 
The Nutcracker Ballet by Deborah Hautzig, Random House, 1992. 

A Young Person’s Guide to Ballet with music on CD by Anita Ganeri. 

*Ballerina Bear by Shana Corey, Random House, 2000. 

*One Ballerina Two by Vivian French, Lothrop Lee and Shepard, 1991. 

10 Ballet Fun Books: Stickers, Paper Dolls, Stencils and More, Dover, 1999. 

Ballet Stickers and Ballet Sticker Activity Book by Barbara Steadman, Dover, 1999. 
Let’s Dance by George Ancona, Morrow Jr., 1998. 

The Buffalo Dance by Nancy Van Laan. Blackfeet 
Native Artists of North America by Reavis Moore. 

155 



365 



The Praying Flute by Tony Shearer, Sun Publishing Co., 1975. Indian 
Pow-Wow by Adolph Huntry Wolf, Indian Author. Indian 

Powwow Country by Chris Roberts, American & World Geography Pub., 1992. Indian 
People of the Circle by Chris Roberts. Indian 

We Dance Because We Can by Ben Conteras and Diane Bernstein. Indian 
Within the Circle, video for learning about powwows, narrated by Ford Ashley. Indian 
Into the Circle, An Introduction to Native American Powwows by Full Circle. Video 
On the Powwow Trail by Chad Killscrow and Chris Roberts. Indian Video 
Children’s Atlas of Native Americans, Rand McNally. 

Powwow Trading Cards by Chris Roberts available from Four Winds Indian Books. 
Wacipi, Presenting the Sioux Powwow. 

Native American Men’s and Women’s Dance Styles by Scott Swearington and Sandy 
Rhoades. Video 

Powwow tapes and CDs available by many different singing groups. Indian 
Flute music tapes and CDs available for different Indian flute players. Indian 
Indian Dancers Coloring Book by O.T. Branson, Treasure Chest, 1999. 

Powwow by June Behrens. Indian 

American Indian Festivals, a True Book by Jay Miller, 1 997. 

A Haida Potlatch by Ulli Steltzer, University of Washington Press, 1984. 

Special Powwow Edition by Indian Country Today Newspaper, Indian Country.com 

Native American Dance: Ceremonies and Social Traditions by C. Heth, S miths onian 

CHECK YOUR LIBRARY OR BOOKSTORES FOR OTHER BOOKS 
RELATING TO THE TOPIC. 

*These books are especially suitable for Phase One — for preschool children. 



366 ' 



156 



MUSIC AND DANCE WORDS 



Beginning Sounds- 



band 


contest 


fancy dance 


bustle 


cornet 


fan 


bells 


composer 


feathers 


ballet 


camp 


flute 


beat 


corn soup 


flag song 


buckskin 


category 


fringes 


beadwork 


celebration 


fry bread 


belt 


circuit 




braids 




headband 


blanket 


guitar 


hoop dance 


roach 


giveaway 


honor song 


rap 


gourd dance 


honor guard 


recorder 


golden age 


harmonica 


regalia 


grounds 


headdress 


rock and roll 


grand entry 




round dance 


grass dance 





sing 


partner 


tap 


singer 


powwow 


tape 


song 


piano 


tent 


sneak up 


Pendleton 


tuba 


special 


play 


tiny tots 


step 


prize 


traditional 


star quilt 


princess 


trick song 


straight dance plume 


teen 

junior 


drumstick 


music 


jingle dress 


dance 


musician 


judge 


dance stick 


moccasins 


jingle dance 


donation 




jingles 


drum 




visitor 


drum group 




vendors 

veterans 



Vowel Sounds- Short Vowel Sounds-Ending Sounds- 


OU Sounds- 


braids 


band 


feather 


announcer 


roach 


fan 


arbor 


outfit 


bead 


camp 




round dance 


beat 


rap 


announcer 


grounds 


sneak up 


tap 


visitor 


loud 


straight dance 


drum 


recorder 


soup 


itions- 


bustle 


composer 


group 


headdress 


buckskin 


singer 


gourd 


fry bread 


judge 


dancer 




feathers 









Compound Words- 

beadwork 

quilhvork 

headband 

headdress 

buckskin 

warbonnet 

Other Words- 
adult 

Indian tacos exhibition 
leggings arena 

orchestra emcee 



Other Ending Sounds n, 1 and k- 

cora, celebration, fan, donation, Pendleton, musician 

rock and roll, special, intertribal, shawl 

sneak, beadwork, trick, stick 

Word walls should be maintained. Instructors should 
ensure that students know the meanings of all of these 
words in this context and extend vocabulary by noting 
how they may mean other things in other contexts or 
they may have homophones. Experiences, pictures and 
student illustrations should be used to explain and 
process word meanings. Words that rhyme with these 
words can be examined to extend vocabulary and to see 
varying spellings for sounds. Other words should be 
added. 

157 



367 



SCIENCE STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN MUSIC AND DANCE UNIT - 

Standard — Understands the convictions scientists share about the nature of the 

world and what can be learned about it 

Benchmarks- 

Understands that science experiments normally have reproducible results: science 
experiments generally work the same way in different places 

Standard- Understands that scientific inquiry works in particular ways 
Benchmarks- 

Understands that learning can come from careful observations and simple experiments 
Understands the importance of careful description in science and how it allows 
comparison 

Standard-Understands basic concepts about the structure of matter 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that all objects occupy space and have mass 

Knows that objects can be described and classified by their composition and their 
physical properties 

Standard-Understands motion and the principles that explain it 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that the varieties of motion include vibrational 

Knows that an object’s motion can be changed by a push or pull by people or by other 
objects 

Knows that thing s that m ake sound vibrate 

Knows that the properties of sound such as pitch and loudness can be altered by changing 
the properties of its source (a vibrating object) 

Standard- Understands the nature of the Chemical Revolution 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that objects that are alike in some ways may be different in others 

Standard- Understands the nature of physical, conceptual, and mathematical 

models and the uses made of them 

Benchmarks- 

Knows that many of the toys he/she plays with are like real things only in some ways 
Knows that many of the toys he/she plays with are different from real things because they 
are not the same size, are missing many details, or are not able to do all of the same , 
things 

Knows that a model of a thing is different from the real thing, but can be used to learn 
something about what the real thing is like 

Knows that one way to describe something is to say what other thing it is like 



158 





Knows that geometric figures, number sequences, graphs, diagrams, sketches, number 
lines, maps, and even stories can be used to represent objects, events, and processes in the 
real world, although these representations can never be exact in every detail 

Standard- Knows about patterns of change and constancy 
Benchmarks- 

Knows that sometimes making up an experiment helps us to learn more about how 
something changes 

Knows that things change in steady, repetitive, or irregular ways, or sometimes in more 
than one way at a time, and that a table or graph of observations or measurements often is 
the best way to tell what kinds of change are happening 



MATHEMATICS STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN MUSIC AND DANCE UNIT- 

Standard-Effectively uses a variety of strategies within the problem solving process 
Benchmarks- 

Brainstorms possible things to do 

Draws pictures to represent problems 

Represents problem situations using physical objects 

Clarifies problems using discussions with teacher or knowledgeable others 

Uses guess and check to solve problems 

Clearly states problems in his or her own words 

Checks the reasonableness of results through estimation 

Standard-Understands and applies basic and advanced properties of numbers 
Benchmarks- 

Has a general understanding of the concept of number 

Uses counting to exemplify numbers 

Understands the relationship of decimals to whole numbers 

Standard-Uses basic and advanced procedures while performing the process of 

computation 

Benchmarks- 

Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides whole numbers with accuracy 
Adds, subtracts, multiplies, divides decimals with accuracy 

Standard-Understands and applies basic and advanced methods of measurement 
Benchmarks- 

Understands the relationships between length, width and height 
Understands the basic features of mass 

Makes effective use of ruler and scale for making measurements 

159 



369 



LANGUAGE ARTS STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS FOR PRIMARY 
GRADES ADDRESSED IN MUSIC AND DANCE UNIT - 

Standard - Gathers information effectively through reading, listening and viewing 
Benchmarks - 

Provides an accurate retelling of the basic plot of simple stories the student has read, 
heard or viewed 

Provides an accurate retelling of the main idea of simple expository information the 
student has read, heard or viewed 

Understands that reading, viewing and listening are ways of gaining information about 
the world 

Determines meaning of simple words from context 

Creates mental representations for concrete information read, heard or viewed 

Standard - Reads and responds to literature 
Benchmarks — 

Understands that stories have beginning, middle and ending episodes 
Understands the genre of legends and fables 

Standard - Communicates ideas and information in writing 
Benchmarks - 

Understands basic connections between spelling patterns and speech sounds 

Understands basic phonological patterns in English 

Expresses ideas in simple expository forms 

Composes simple stories that express cohesive ideas 

Experiments with different genre as modes for expressing ideas 

Standard - Understands and applies basic principles of language use 
Benchmarks — 

Recognizes characteristic sounds and rhythms of language 
Makes valid observations about the use of words 

Makes valid observations about the use of language at home as opposed to the use of 
language in school 



Standards and Benchmarks from The Systematic Identification and Articulation of 
Content Standards and Benchmarks, Mid-continent Regional Educational Laboratory, 



1994 . 



160 



370 



AMERICAN INDIAN CONTENT STANDARDS FOR PRIMARY GRADES 
ADDRESSED IN MUSIC AND DANCE UNIT - 



SCIENCE 
Physical Science- 

Lndian students should develop an understanding of the innate properties of objects and 
materials that were (and are) recognized by traditional American Indian cultures in the 
manufacture and use of specific material objects that capitalize upon those properties. 

Earth Science- 

Indian students should develop an understanding of properties of earth, air, water and fire 
and how they served as a basis for traditional American Indian production of clothing, 
housing, tools, and other objects. 

Science and Technology- 

Indian students should develop an awareness of the problem solving skills demonstrated 
by historical American Indians in the development of tools and technologies, such as in 
the development of musical instruments. 



LANGUAGE AND LITERACY 
Indian students should be able to - 

Listen for meaning and gain information from spoken English and a Native language. 

Listen to Indian stories told in the oral tradition, comprehend their teachings and be able 
to retell them. 

Speak coherently, conveying ideas in both English and a Native language. 

Read fluently and independently, a variety of materials including those with American 
Indian themes. 

Locate and use a variety of texts to gain information, for example, historical materials 
about their tribe, tribal legends and stories and oral history transcription. 

Be familiar with children’s literature with Indian themes, especially with that pertaining 
to the student’s tribe and literature written by Indian authors. 



161 



371 



MATHEMATICS 



Mathematics as Problem Solving- 

Indian students should formulate problems from everyday and mathematical situations 
within their home and tribal/community worlds. 

Mathematics as Communication- 

Indian students should realize that representing, discussing, reading, writing, and 
listening to mathematics are vital parts of learning and using mathematics because it 
creates holistic instruction akin to a traditional Indian approach to learning. 

Mathematics as Reasoning- 

Indian students should use models, known facts, properties and relationships to explain 
their thinking, using objects or ideas from their own or other American Indian cultures. 

Mathematical Connections- 

Indian students should use mathematics in other curriculum areas by developing their 
own story problems derived from American Indian themes. 

Estimation- 

Indian students should explore estimation strategies through activities derived from their 
cultural worlds. 

Number Sense and Numeration- 

Indian students should construct number meanings through real-world experiences and 
use of physical materials. 

Concepts of Whole Number Operations- 

Indian students should develop meaning for the operations by modeling and discussing a 
rich variety of problem situations including some from the Indian world. 

Whole Number Computation- 

Indian students should use a variety of mental computation and estimation techniques in 
solving problems related to Indian cultural themes. 

Measurement - 

Indian students should understand the attributes of length, capacity, mass, and volume 
and relate these measures to use in their own cultural, home, tribal or co mmunit y worlds. 

Fractions and Decimals- 

Indian students should apply fractions and decimals by applying them to real world 
situations using Native cultural experiences. 

American Indian Content Standards, ORBIS Associates for Office of Indian Education 
Programs, Bureau of Indian Affairs, United States Department of the Interior, 1996. 

162 



Example Activities Developed hy Teackns op 
Amman Indian Smdenrs 



Workshop on CidnmlLy-Based Math and Science Ciwucdum Developoienr 

Haskell Indian Junior College 
1992 



MASTERS hojecr 

Mark and Science leadens pon R esemwn Schools 
UnmnsiTf op Kansas and 
Haskell Indian Namns Umvensny 
Eamh's Camakens, 1 993 




Ideas should he adapred pon appnopmmess. See appendvc pon how to onden Each's Camakens. 



163 



373 




SCIENCE 

“THE BEAT GOES ON” 

CULTURAL OUTCOME: VII 

SCIENCE OUTCOMES: II, V 

CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

Students will understand why drums were used for many different reasons in 
Native American cultures. 



SCIENCE OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

understand how sounds are produced and travel through matter 
use observation skills 

communicate by using scientific vocabulary 
make simple predictions 
make inferences from data and observations 
analyze data. 

TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

The drum is an intricate part of life for many Native Americans. Singing with 
the use of a drum is a serious matter for Native Americans; for them, the drum 
plays from birth until death. 

The drum adds to the happiness and welfare of the Indian in many ways. 
Drum sounds are for all of the important events in Native Americans' lives - 
ceremonies, war, hunting, and pleasure. Drum sounds can be used to make 
the people feel happy or sad, as well as to warn them of danger. Of course, 
the drum is also used for accompaniment to singing. The singer provides the 
melody and the drum provides the rhythm. 



0 



3 74 



A drum can make a number of different sounds. When an object vibrates, 
waves of the surrounding air are picked up by the ear and are known as 
sound. The pitch, high or low sound, is determined by how fast the waves 
vibrate. Rapidly moving waves make a high pitch. Variations in volume are 
caused by the height of a sound wave. Sound travels slowest through a gas, 
faster in a liquid, and fastest through a solid because of the distance between 
the molecules of the substance. A sound conductor, such as air, lets the 
sound waves move freely. An echo is caused by a sound which bounces back 
from an object or objects. 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 

1. Singing Bottles: 

Provide four small identical glass bottles. Put different amounts of 

liquid into each bottle. Using a small wooden dowel, tap each bottle 

gently in succession. Record your observations. What did you notice 

about the different sounds? Tap an empty bottle. How does it sound? 

What makes the sounds different? Record your answers. 

2. What Causes Sound? 

a. Measure a piece of monofilament fish line 20 inches long. Tie 
a 4 inch piece of dowel to each end. 

b. Put a shoe box on the edge of a table or desk. 

c. Remove the lid, make a hole in one end of the box with your 
pencil, thread the fish line through the hole, and secure it with 
a toothpick. 

d. Put the lid on the box and stretch the fish line, lengthwise 
across the top of the box Put one dowel under the fish line near 
one end of the lid. 

e. Slowly pull down on the dowel and pluck the fish line. What do 
you hear? What do you see? 

f. As you pluck the line, pull down on the dowel to stretch it tighter. 
Watch and listen. What do you hear? What do you see? Try 
to play a simple tune. What might happen if you cut a hole in 
the lid of the shoe box? Try it. 



375 



3. 



Traveling Sound 



a. Cut two pieces of string 20 inches long. 

b. Tie the string to the wide ends of a wire coat hanger. 

c. Hold the ends of the strings and hit the hanger against a solid 
object. Listen to the sound it makes. 

d. Wrap the ends of the string twice around each of your index 
fingers. Put your fingers in your ears and tap the hanger on the 
solid object again. 

e. What happened? What can you say about this? 

When struck without the fingers in the ears, the hanger will 
sound flat and metallic. When the fingers are placed in the 
ears, the sound will be a loud gong because sound travels 
better through the relatively solid string than through the air. 

4. Making a drum: 

Use a three-pound metal coffee can, an oatmeal box or a number ten 
food can as the base of the drum. Cut a large balloon in half and 
stretch it tightly over the cut out end of the container. Fasten with a 
rubber band or string. Tap on the drum head with a small dowel stick. 
How can you change the pitch of your drum? How can you change the 
volume of your drum? Predict what happens if you change the type 
of material on the head of your drum? Record your findings. How can 
you change the base of your drum? What do you predict will happen 
to the sound? Record this information. Experiment to find your best 
combination to make the loudest drum. Demonstrate your findings. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



166 



376 



EVALUATION: 



1 . Have the students join three or four of their classmates in making a 
drum ‘'band." Each student's drum must make a different sound. 

2. Have each group explain to the class how their sounds were made. 



RESOURCES: 

Coleman, Satis N.. The Drum Book . New York: The John Day Company, 
1931. 

Densmore, Frances, A M. The American Indians and Their Music . New York: 
The Woman’s Press, 1 926. 

Discoverthe Wonder . Glenview, Illinois: Scott Foresman Science Division of 
Harper Collins Publishers, 1989. 

Hofsinde (Gray-Wolf), Robert. Indian Music Makers . New York: William 
Morrow and Company, 1967. 

Tolman, Marvin N. and James O. Morton . Physical Science Activities for 
Grades 2-8 . West Nyack, New York: Science Curriculum Activities Library, 
Parker Publishing Company, Inc., 1986. 



DEVELOPED BY: 
Nancy L. Roehl 




377 

- 167 



MATH - 



"POW WOW TRAILS" 



CULTURAL OUTCOME: IX 

MATH OUTCOME: VII 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

gain a knowledge of various tribes and reservations within the United 
States 

generally understand the meaning of Pow Wow. 

MATH OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

know how to use whole numbers, fractions, and decimals in making 
estimates 

develop mapping skills and apply computation skills in determining 
mileage and cost of travel. 

TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

Pow Wow is defined as a ceremony especially for the constraining of spirits 
by invocation of a sacred name or by a spell. Often practiced with feasting, 
dancing, etc. by Indians for the cure of diseases, for success in hunting or war 
and other purposes. It is also a conference or social gathering. 

Students will be taught howto use a map scale to measure distance on a map. 
They will learn how to figure out gas mileage and traveling costs attending 
a Pow Wow on the various Indian Reservations throughout the United States. 
Provide a map of the United States with Indian Reservations on it. 




168 



Distance = Rate x Time (D = R x T) This formula will be used to 
estimate time of arrival. 

Example of figuring mileage: 

250 miles Mileage reading on odometer after trip 
-140 miles Mileage reading on odometer before trip 
110 miles Number of miles traveled 

Divide the total miles traveled by the number of gallons of fuel used to 
calculate the miles per gallon. 

STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 

1. Follow a Pow Wow trail by using one of the three following calenders 
of events. Decide which Pow Wow will be attended for that weekend. 

2. Choose a car, van, or truck, economical or gas guzzling, compact or 
roomy. 

Student will use the gas mileage for chosen vehicles to figure out 
traveling costs. Choose a route that is the shortest for a map or atlas. 
Use the given formula on the cost sheet. Mileage will be logged on the 
data sheet provided. 

3. Venture out to the various Pow Wows from the calender chosen. Go 
from Pow Wow to Pow Wow. Leave one Pow Wow and just continue 
on to the next destination. 

4. Choose between a life of luxury by staying in a motel or roughing it by 
camping at the Pow Wow grounds. Use the list of motel costs and meal 
cost from the cost sheet provided. Expenses will be logged oh the data 
sheet. 

5. Include an automatic $5.00 weekend button fee for each Pow Wow 
attended. 

6. Calculate the total cost of his/her Pow Wow trail. Totals should be 
under the $1,000.00 limit. 



HAPPY TRAILS TO YOUIIII 



379 

- 169 



POWWOW EXPENSES 



o 

ERLC 



Gas costs $1 .20 

Economy Car 30 miles/gallon 

Luxury Car 20 miles/gallon 

MILEAGE: 

total miles traveled = total gallons used 
car’s miles/gallon 

For example, if you used the economy car and traveled 00 miles, you use 2 gallons. 
The cost of traveling to the POW WOW Is = total gallons used X gas cost. 

2 gallons X $1.20 = $2.40 

LODGING: 



Econotipi $28.00 

Double bed 
Hot water 
Showers 

Hilton Hogan $54.50 



KJngsize bed 
Swimming pool 
Sauna 
Phone 
T.V. 

Cliff Dwellers Inn $108.50 

Waterbed T.V.-HBO & MTV 

Swimming pool Phone 

SaunaNJacuzzi Room service 



Camping $-0- 

MEALS: 

CAMPER'S SPECIAL 



Breakfast.. 


...$2.00 


Lunch 


..$3.50 


Supper 


...$5.00 


Snacks. 


...$1.00 


CHEAP 


Breakfast.. 


...$4.00 


Lunch 


..$7.00 


Supper 


..$10.00 


Snacks 


..$2.00 



LUXURY 

Breakfast $8.00 

Lunch $12.50 

Supper $25.00 

Snacks $4.50 

380 



170 



JUNE, £660 

• Intertribal Pow Wow: June 1-2, West of 
Rio West Mali, Gallup, N.M. Contact 1- 
800233-4528. 

• 6th Anniversary Mill Bay Casino Pow 
Wow: June 1-4, 455 E. Wapato Lake Rod 
Manson, Wash Contact 1-800-643-2946 
ext. 4214. 

• Cowboy Days & Indian Nights Pow 
Wow: June 2-3, Page Sports Complex, 
Page, Ariz. Contact (520) 645-5018. 

• 32nd Annual Alabama Coushatta 
Pow Wow: June 2-3, Indian Village Ball 
Park, Livingston, Texas. Contact 1-800- 
444-3507 or (409) 563-439 1 . 

• 21st Annual Otiningo Pow Wow: June 
2-4, Broome County's Otsiningo Park, 
Binghamton, N.Y. Contact (607) 729- 
0016. 

• 7th Annual Warroad Traditional Pow 
Wow: June 2-4, Warroad City Park, 
Warroad, Minn. Contact (218) 386-2834. 
15th Annual Honoring of the Elders Pow 
Wow: June 2-4, Santa Clara County Park, 
Gilroy, Calif. Contact (408) 258-1326. 

• 3rd Annual Mininising Honoring our 
Children Pow Wow: June 2-4, Detour 
State Park, Detour, Mich. Contact (906) 
484-2921 or (906) 484-3147. 

• Sah Gii Bah Gah Pow Wow: June 2 -4, 
Pow Wow Grounds, Nett Lake, Minn. 
Contact (218) 757-3261. 

• 9th Annual Veterans Pow Wow: June 
2-4, Tulalip Community Center, 
Marysville, Wash. Contact (360) 65 1 - 
4470. 

• Return to Beaver Creek Pow Wow: 
June 2-4, Matarazzo Farms, Belvidere, 
N.J. Contact (908) 475-3671. 

• Big Wind Pow Wow: June 2-4, Pow 
Wow Grounds, Crow Heart, Wyo. 
Contact (307) 332-9106: 




Kul-Wicasa Oyate Fair & Waclpl - 1999 



• 5th Annual Navajo Song & Dance: 
June 3, Ellis Tanners, Gallup, N.M. 
Contact 1-800-233-4528. 

• Kickapoo Pow Wow: June 3-4, Grand 
Village of the Kickapoo Park, LeRoy, HI. 
Contact (309) 962-2700. 

• Honor our Elders & Warriors Pow 
Wow: June 3-4, Vermillion River , 
Matthiessen State Park, 111. Contact (708) 
493-0321. 

• 19th Annual Yuba-Sutter Pow Wow: 
June 3-4, Yuba College, Marysville, Calif 
Contact (530) 749-6196. 

• 6th Annual NAABC: June 3-4, Naval 
Air Station Joint, Horsham, Pa. Contact 
(215) 369-0581. 

• Occaneechi Saponi Spring Pow Wow: 

June 9-10, 



Downtown Hillsborough, N.C. Contact 
(919) 732-6512 or (919) 304-3723. . ... 

.• Red Earth Festival; June' 9-11, Myriad 
Convention Center, Oklahoma City, 

. Okla. Contact (405) 427-5228. . . 

• 145th Treaty Day Pdw Wow: June 9-11, 
Ceremonial Grounds, White Swan, 
Wash. Contact (509) 865-5121. ... . 

• 132nd Arihuil White Earth Pow Wow: 
June 9-11, Tribal Grounds, White Earth, 
Minn. Contact (218) 983-3285 or (218) 

.'935-2392 

• 34th Annual Will Rogers Indian Club 
Pow Wow: June 9-11, Ellis O. Jackson 
City Park, Marshfield, Mo. Contact (417) 
759-2782 or (41 7) 2564698. .. 

• Dance for the Spirit; June 9-11, 

Waupaca, . County Fairgrounds, 
Weyauwega, Wis. Contact (920) 867-2647 
or (920) 884-1080. ■ 

• Homecoming of the Three Fires Pow 
Wow: June 10-11, Riverside Park, Grand 
Rapids, Mich. Contact (616) 458-8759. 

• Connecting our Spirits: June 10-11, 
Middlesex Fairgrounds, Westford, Mass. 
Contact (617) 884-4227. 

• 9th Annual Honoring our Veterans ■ 
Pow Wow: June 10-11, Bay Mills Softball 
Field, Brimley, Mich. Contact (906) 248- 
3715 or (906) 248-3241. 

• Return to Pimiteoui Pow Wow: June 
10-11, W.H. Sommer Park Peoria, IU. 
Contact (309) 691-9369. 

• 5th Annual Bison Days Pow Wow: 
June 10-11, the Zebrovka Buffalo Ranch, 
Huntingdon, Pa. Contact (814) 643-6915. 

• 9th Annual Eskasoni First Nation 
Pow Wow: June 15-21, Pow Wow 
Grounds, Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, 
Canada. Contact (902) 379-2508 or (902) 
379-2591. 

• Kaskaskia River Dance Pow Wow: 
June 16-18, Peterson Park, 6th and 
Broadway, Mattoon, HI. Contact Patrick 
Gaines (21 7) 234-7555. 

• Gateway to the Nations: June 1618, 
Fort Hamilton Military, Brooklyn, N.Y 
Contact (713) 6869297. 

• 15th Annual Strawberry Moon Pow 
Wow: June 1618, Campgrounds, Mole 
Lake, Wis. Contact (715) 478-5106. 

• 8th Annual Naes College Pow Wow: 







★ Star Quilts, All Sizes 

★ Machine Quilted 

★ Satin/Broadcloth & Velvet 

★ Dance Shawls and Outfits 




Will ship 
anywhere - 
write or call 
for prices 
Box 297, Arlee, 
MT 59821 
(406) 726-3116 



171 




V V y V 

1*TH 



v y 



V r f ¥ V 



TRfpy November 3, 4, & 5, 2000 

* W ▼ Central Florida Fairgrounds • West Hwy 50 • Orlando, Florida 



Native American 
Entertainment 
Competition 
Dancing 



CwrWit rvaca'vaf acXcJdon 
revn Aisocsoon & FW. 



Arts <fc Crafts. 
Food and more!! 

Head Staff and Drums 
to be announced 



For pow wow and 
vendor information 
call Anic McRae 
407-862-9676 
or Jan Kiser 



407-331-8399 

and cfvonta £*> yevarm her Nstfv* Americans and nesd po* Tb* 
brai norvtxcrt enjardatien and a not a ffiferad -**th any otfw erjaraaoen 



© . .POW WOW 2000 INDIAN COUNTRY TODAY 

best copy available 381 





Gathering of Nations Pow Wow - 1999 



June 16-18, Mather Park, Chicago, 111. 
{773) 761-5000. 

• Sullivan County Pow Wow: June 16- 
18, Sullivan County Fairgrounds, 
Forksville, Pa. Contact (570) 924-9082. 

• 7th Annual Kaskaskia River Pow 

Wow: June 16-18, Peterson Park, 

Mattoon, 111. Contact (217) 234-7555. 

• 97th Red Bottom Celebration: June 16- 
18, Pow Wow Grounds, Frazer, Mont. 
Contact (406) 768-5557. 

• Iowa Tribal Pow Wow: June 16-18, 
Pow Wow Grounds, Perkins, Okla. 
Contact (405) 547-1091 or (405) 466-3101. 
Mohawk Trail Pow Wow: June 17-18, 
Indian Plaza, Chariemont, Mass. Contact 
(413) 339-4096. 

• 11th Annual Keeping the Traditional: 
June 17-18, Massasoit Community 
College, Brockton, Mass. Contact (617) 
884-4227. 

• 7th. Two Worlds Intertribal Lodge 
Rendezvous: June 17-18, Benson Farm, 
Stanwood, Mich. Contact (616) 344-7111 
or (231) 856-4451. 

• 19th Plains Indian Museum Pow 
Wow: June 17-18, Joe Robby Pow Wow 
Grounds, Codv, Wvo. Contact (307) 578- 
4049. 



• 9th Annual Grand Celebration: June 
21-25, Grand Casino Hinckley, Hinckley, 
Minn. Contact 1-800 GRAND-21 ext. 
3085. 

• 41st Annual Eastern Shoshone Pow 

Wow: June 22-25, Pow Wow Grounds, 
Fort Washakie, Wyo. Contact (307) 332- 
9106. - ' 

• 7th Fort Randall Casino: June 23-25, 
. Fort Randall Casino & Hotel, Wagner, 

S.D. Contact (605) 487-7871 or (800) 362- 
6333. 

• Twin Buttes Celebration: June 23-25, 
Pow Wow Grounds, Twin Buttes, N.D. 
Contact (701)938-4398. 

• 10th Annual First Peoples Pow Wow: 
June 23-25, Gibralter Trade Center, Mt. 
Clemens, Mich. Contact (810) 756-1350. 

• 24th Annual Great Lakes Pow Wow: 
June 23-25, Hannahville Indian 
Community, Wilson, Mich. Contact (906) 
466-9230. 

• 19th Annual AIITCO: June 24-25, 
County Fairgrounds, Frederick, Md. 
Contact (301) 869-9381. 

• 12th Coquille Indian Tribe Salmon 
Bake: June 24-25, the Mill Resort & 
Casino, North Bend, Ore. Contact (541) 
756-0904. 

• 16th Indian Hill: June 24-25, Indian 
Hill Ranch, Tehachapi, Calif. Contact 
(661) 822-1118. 

• 39th Annual First Nation Chippewas 
of Sarnia Pow Wow: June 24-25, 
Community Center, Sarnia, Ontario, 
Canada. Contact (519) 336-8410. 

• 28th Annual Oneida Pow Wow: June 
30-July 2, Norbert Hill' Center, Oneida, 
Wis. Contact (920) 490-2452 or 1-800-236- 
2214. 

• 27th Poundmakers Lodge: June 30- 
July 2, Poundmakers Lodge, St. Albert, 
Alberta, Canada. Contact (780) 458-1884. 

• 23rd Annual Three Rivers Lodge: June 
30-July2, 13505 Union Road, Manteca, 
Calif. Contact (209) 858-2421. 

• 22nd Red Cliff Pow Wow: June 30-July 
2, Pow Wow Grounds, Red Cliff, Wis. 
Contact (715) 779-3152. 

• 6th Wildhorse Pow Wow: June 30-July 

2, Wildhorse Gaming Resort, Pendleton, 
Ore. Contact (541) 278-2274. 

• AABITA-NIIB- 
ING: June 30-July 2, 

Veterans Memorial 
Grounds, Cass 
Lake, Minn. 

Contact (218) 335- 
8289. 

• Sisseton- 
Wahpeton Pow 
Wow: June 30-July 

3, Wacipi Agency 
Village, Sisseton, 

S.D. Contact (605) 

698-3911. 



JULY, J.0O 0 

• Rainbow Dancer Pow Wow: July 1-2, 
Rodeo Grounds, New Windsor, III, 
Contact (309) 968-6848 or (309) 382-2779. 

• Munsee- Del aware Nation Pow Wow: 
July 1-2, Munsee- Delaware Nation Park, 
Munsee, Ontario, Canada. Contact (5119) 
289-5475 or 1-800-257-7279. 

• 28th Calico Dancers Pow Wow: July 1- 
2, Moreau Recreation Park, South Glens 
Falls, N.Y. Contact (518) 793-1693. 

• Mohawk Trail: July 1-3, Indian Plaza, 
Chariemont, Mass. Contact (413) 339-4096. 

• 128th Annual Quapaw Tribal Pow 
Wow: July 2-4, Pow Wow Grounds, 
Quapaw, Okla. Contact (918) 542-1853. 

• Navajo Fourth of July Pow Wow: July 
4, Fair Grounds, Window Rock, Ariz. 
Contact (520) 871-6478. 

• 37th Annual Sac & Fox Pow Wow: July 

6- 9, Tribal Pow Wow Grounds, Stroua, 
Okla. Contact (918) 968-3526. 

• Southern Wyoming Veterans Day 
Pow Wow: July 7-9, Laramie County 
Community College Arena, Cheyenne, 
Wyo. Contact (307) 634-7526 or (30 7 ) 632- 
1020 . 

• The Great Mohican Indian Pow Wow: 
July 7-9, Pow Wow Grounds, 
Loudonville, Ohio. Contact 1-800-766- 
2267. 

• Ktaqmkuk Mi'Kmaq Gathering: July 

7- 9, Pow Wow Grounds, Conne River, 
Newfoundland. Contact (709) 882-2470. 

• 18th Bear River Anniversary Pow 
Wow: July 7-9, Pow Wow Grounds, Lac 
du Flambeau, Wis. Contact (715) 588-9203 

• 26th Tonka wa Pow Wow: July 7-9, Fort 
Oakland Pow Wow Grounds, Tonkawa, 
Okla. Contact (580) 628-2561. 

• Grand Ronde Veteran's Pow Wow: 
July 7-9, Pow Wow Grounds, Grand 
Ronde, Ore. Contact (503) 879-5878 

• Antelope Pow Wow: July 7-9, Pow 
Wow Grounds, Mission, S.D. Contact 
(605) 747-2381. 

• Prairie Island Pow Wow: July 7-9, 15 
miles north of Red Wing, Prairie Island, 
Minn. Contact 1-800-554-5473. 

• Narragansett Pow Wow: July 8-9, ‘ 
Crandell Homestead, Westerly, R.l. 




INDIAN COUNTRY TODAY POW WOW 2000 

o 

tKIC 



.382 

172 " 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Contact (401)364-1100. 

• Island In the Sun Pow Wow: July 8-9, 
Beausoleii First Nation, Christian Island, 
Ontario, Canada. Contact (705) 247-2035. 

• 37th Annual Sac & Fox Pow Wow: July 
8-9, Pow Wow Grounds, Stroud, OkJa. 
Contact (918) 968-3526. 

• Sussex County Pow Wow: July 8-9, 
Sussex County Fairgrounds, Sussex 
County, N.Y. Contact (718) 686-9297. 

• 6th Annual All-Nations Pow Wow: 
July 14-16, Los Vaaueros Rodeo Arena, 
Big Bear City, CalLt. Contact (909) 584- 
7115 or (909) 790-1390 or (510) 465-3267 
or (408) 295-9509. 

• 7th Fond Du Lac Veteran's Pow Wow: 
July 14-16, Mash-Ka-Wisen Grounds, 
Cloquet, Minn. Contact (218) 879-4593. 

• Honor the Earth Pow Wow: July 14-16, 
LCO Reservation, Hayward, Wis. 
Contact (715) 492-5981. 

• 8th Annual North American Iroquois 

Pow, Wow: July 14-16, Veterans 

Memorial Park, Salamanca, N.Y. Contact 
(716) 283-0084. 

• Mandaree Celebration: July 14-16, Pow 
Wow Grounds, Mandaree, N.D. Contact 
(701) 759-3241 or (701) 759-3311. 

• 3rd Annual Ishpeming's Pow Wow: 
July 14-16, Recreational Area, Ishpeming, 
Mich. Contact (906) 475-7162. 

• 11th Annual Shoalwater Bay Sobriety 
Pow Wow: July 15, Shoalwater Bay 
Casino, Tokeland, Wash. Contact (360) 
267-6766. 



• Mee-G witch-Mahnomen Pow 
Wow: July 15-16, Pow Wow Grounds, 
Ball Club, Mian. Contact (218) 246- 
8971. 

• Honor Our Elders Pow Wow: July 15- 
16, TBA, Somerset, Mass. Contact (508) 
880-6887. 

• 34th Annual Stampede & Pioneer 
Days: July 15-16, Churchill County 
Regional Park, Fallon, Nev. Contact (775) 
423-3873 or (775) 423-7803. 

• Cow Creek Pow Wow: July 15-16, 
South Umpqua Falls, Canyonville, Ore. 
Contact (541) 672-9405. 

• 2nd Annual White Buffalo Society 
Pow Wow: July 15-16, Gaston Lions Club 
Fair Grounds, Gaston, Ind. Contact (765) 
396-3609. 

0 2nd Circle of Nations Pow Wow: July 
15-16, Meadow Park, Flushing, N.Y. 
Contact (212) 666-9478. 

• Honoring Our Heritage: July 15-16, 
Cross Roads Village, Mt. Morris, Mich. 
Contact (810) 239-6621. 

Lake Helen Pow Wow: July 15-16, 
across from Lake Helen, Nipigon, 
Ontario, Canada. Contact (807) 887-2510. 

0 30th Annual Lone Feather Council 
Pow Wow: July 15-16, Post Field House, 
Fort Carson, Colo. Contact (719) 495-0798 
or (719) 749-2633. 

0 Buffalo Pow Wow: July 17-18, 
Fruitridge Road, Grand Rapids, Mich. 
Contact (616) 364-4697. 




Gathering of Nations Pow Wow - 1999 
* Keweenaw Bay Indian 



COMMUNITY PARK 
JACKSONVILLE, IL 
JCT RT 67 & 36 & 72 

P0TAWAT0MI TRAIL 
POW WOW 

Dance Contest MAY 19-21, 2000 
Princess Contest 




Headman Dancsr Emc8e 

Fred WarBonnett Bob Blue 

Lakota Choctaw 

Headwoman Dancer Host Drum 

Jeannie Herbert Eagle Ridge 

Cherokee , . 

lead Singer: 
Arena Director Chip Roberts 

Ben Norberto Cherokee 

Commanche/Navajo 

EOR MORE INFORMATION CALL: 
Kent Eyre 217-2*15-0409 
Dan Hoffman 217-528-9172 
Tim Edwards 217-245-0444 

PUBLIC WELCOME 
ALL DRUMS WELCOME 

NO DRUGS OR AC CO HOC ALLOWED 
FREE ACMISSIONI 
8 RING YOUR LAWN CHAIRS 



ERIC 







22nd Annual 

Big Wind 
Celebration 
Pow Wow 

“Camping Day, 
June 1, 2000” 

June 2, 3 & 4, 2000 
Crowheart, Wyoming - 
USA 

$1 5,000 in Prize 
Everyone Welcome! 

• Indian Games 

• Handgame Tournament 

• Parade 

• Pow wow Arbor Feast 

• S.E.P.C Drum Contest 

• Big Wind Princess Contest 



> 



i 



V 



For Mora Information Contact: 
S.E.P.C. at (301) 332-9106 

wvwvw 




American 
Indian tomahawks 





tom pipe i \ C3 :o 
issoun Wir 

tcScts The 

bbcksmtth Shoppe forges 
them ill! Wie reproduce your 
fivoriic American Induo 
lonuhjvk whether il be i 
spoorooo. tester a. Missouri 
War Hatchet tod ill io 
between. All i.xes i rz (orge-i 
is they were 100 :o 200- 
ycirs ago, with a ecu I (ire 
ind then jhipcd with 
hammer and joviL Our 
bandies ire liken (tom our 
wood lor being of Maple. Elm or 
Hickory, depending which it u bong 
reproduced. Ail our ixa ire 
extremely faithful reproductions 

ind ue 

100% satisfaction guaranteed! 

/n r foajOT.' _ _ 

The BJjcksmirh Shoppe 

J9 Gcu*er Raid • Kidin<M»iIlc. P.\ UNjO 
pit owe: 6IO-it7-57 00 



t-fclpAL 

TUJJTIOSL 







Contemporary 
Hand Painted Clothing, 
Traditional and 
Contemporary Beadwork 



ALL Cry 

V 

o 

NATIVE OWNER . . tfl 
STEVE & MAC2LE REEVES 

P.O. Box 141 ‘ 

Desert Hot Springs, CA 92240 
Tdeprione: 760-363-6558 
Fax: 760-363-6658 



/ 

<r 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



173 



383 



POW WOW 2000 INDIAN COUNTRY TODAY 





Screaming Eagle Singers travel from South Dakota 
Orlando, Fla., for annual pow wow. 



Community Pow Wow: July 21-23, 
Ojibwa Pow Wow & Campground, US 
41, Baraga, Mich. Contact (51 7) 353-6623. 

• 38th Flandreau Santee Pow Wow: July 
21-23, Pow Wow Grounds, Flandreau, 
S.D. Contact (605) 997-3891. 

• Bitterroot Valley Good Nations Pow 
Wow: July 21-23, Historic Daly Mansion 
Grounds, Hamilton, Mont. (406) 363-5383. 

• Standing Arrow Pow Wow: July 21-23, 
Pow Wow Grounds, Elmo, Mont. 
Contact (406) 849-579S or (406) 849-5893. 

• 13th Annual Buffalo Days Pow Wow: 
July 21-23, Unesko World Heritage Site, 
Fort Mcleod, Alberta, Canada (Contact 
(403) 553-2731. 

• Julyamsh Pow Wow: July 21-23, 
Greyhound Park, Post Falls, Idaho! 
Contact 1-800-523-2464 ext. 272. 

Champion of Champions Pow Wow: 
July 22-23, Chiefswood Park, Grand 
RJ\ er Reserve, Ontario, Canada. Contact 
(519) 758-5444 or (519) 445-4391. 

• 13th Annual White Mountain Native 
American Art Festival: Julv 22-23, 
Tinetop-Lakeside, Lakeside, Ariz. 
Contact (520) 367-4290 or 1-S00-573-4031. 

• Ml Rears age Indian Museum Pow 
V\ow: July 22-23, Mt. Kearsage Indian 
Museum, Warner, N.H. Contact (603) 
456-2600 or (603) 456-3244. 

• 17th Annual Cherokee of Hoke City 
Pow Wow: July 23-24. Rockfish, Davis 
Bridge, N.C. Contact (910) 875-0222. 

• 22nd Annual Thunderbird Pow Wow: 
July 28-30, Queens County Farm 
Museum, Floral Park, N.Y. Contact (718) 
347-3 2 76. 



235-4625. 



• Crown City Pow 
Wow: July 28-30, 
Dunkirk City Park, 
Dunkirk, Ind. 
Contact (765) 768- 
6462. 

• Honor the Fire 
Keepers Pow 
Wow: Julv 28-30, 
Dunn Field, Lake 
Geneva, Wis. 
Contact (414) 473- 
7748 or (414) 248- 
2784. ■ 

• Eirruneskin Pow 
Wow: July 28-30, 
ErmLneskin Pow 
Wow Grounds, 
Hobbema, Alberta, 
Canada. Contact 
(780) 585-3741 or 
(780) 585-3435. 

• 2nd Gagaguwon 

Pow Wow: July 29- 
30, Ausable 

Children's Park, 
comer of OTool & 
Harbor, Oscoda, 
Mich. Contact (517) 
739-1994 or 1-800- 



AUGUSTj £Q60 



• 34th Annual Rocky Boy Pow Wow: 
August 3-5, Rocky 



Nation Pow Wow: August 4-6, Pow 
Wow Grounds, Long Plain, Manitoba, 
Canada. Contact (204) 252-2731 or (204). 
252-2369. 

• Oklahoma Indian Nation Pow Wow: 
August 4-6, Football Field, Concho, Okla 
Contact (405) 262-5708. 

• 16th Annual Little Elks Retreat Pow 
Wow: August 4-6, Tribal Campgrounds, 
Mount Pleasant, Mich. Contact (517) 772- 
5888. 

• Rogue River Gathering: August 5-6, 
Riverside Park, Grants Pass, Ore. 
Contact (541) 474-6394 or (541) 839-6704. 

• Whiteface' Mountain Pow Wow: 
August 5-6, Whiteface Mountain Ski 
Area, Wilmington, N.Y. Contact (518) 
946-2223. 

• NASAU College Pow Wow: August 5- 
6, NASAU College, East Meadow, N.Y. 
Contact (516) 226-5306 or (718) 978-7200. 

• 69th Annual American Indian Expo: 

August 7-12, Caddo County 
Fairgrounds, Anadarko, Okla. Contact 
(405) 247-6651. \ 

• 79th Annual Gallup Inter-Tribal Pow ! 
Wow: August 9-13, Red Rock State Park, 
Gallup, N.M. Contact 1-800-233-4528. 

• OMAK Stampede Indian 
Encampment Pow Wow: August 10-13, 
Stampede Arena, Omak, Wash. Contact 
(509) 826-4218 or 1-800-933-6625. 

• Little Shell Celebration: August 10-13, 
Pow Wow Grounds, Newtown, N.D. 
Contact (701) 627-3634 or (701) 627-3483. 



1C 



Boy Reservation, 
Havre, Mont. 
Contact (406) 395- 
4478. 

• Menominee 

Nation Pow Wow: 
August 3-6, 

Woodland Bowl, 
Keshena, Wis. 
Contact (715) 799- 
5114. 

• Bell Pow Wow: 
August 4-5, Pow 
Wow Grounds, 
Stillwell, Okla. 
(918) 696-4480. 

• 7th Dakota 

Wacipi: August 4- 
6, Upper Sioux 
State Park, Granite 
Falls, MLnn. 

Contact (320) 564- 
2360. 

• 22nd Annual 
Honoring Sobriety 
Pow Wow: August 
4-6, Mash ka Wisen 
Treatment Center, 
Sawyer, Minn. 
Contact (218) 879- 
6731. 

• Long Plain First 



'7'lortl) to Soldi \ - ^a6i io r Vde*Si 

- 7 / it’d .American Jndian, 
we Ixwe it! 



Your complete source for authentic 
American Indian recordings for over 25 years. 
We carry all the titles from all the labels. 



Choose from our catalog of over 1700 titles 

• Cassettes • CDs • Videos • 



Traditional 

Contemporary 

Reggae 



Pow Wow 

Rock 

Gospel 



Flute 

Rap 

Legends & more 



Conned with itye power o/ 'tlainx Ameriam mudic 



Send S2.00 for music or craft catalog - S3. 00 for both 

Drumbeat Indian Arts, Inc. 

4 743 North 1 6th Street, Suite 1, Phoenix, AZ 85016 
(602)226-4823 • (800) 895-4859 • FAX (602) 265-2402 
e-mail: AZDRUMBEATQAOL.com 



INOUN COUNTRY TOO AY POW WOW 2000 



174 



334 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




• Serpent River Pow Wow: August 11- 
13, Pow Wow Grounds, Serpent River, 
Ontario, Canada. Contact (705) 844-2418. 

• Kul-Wicasa Oyate Fair & Wacipi: 
August 11-13, Fairgrounds, Lower Brule, 
S.D. Contact (605) 473-5561. 

• Big Grassy River Pow Wow: August 

11- 13, Pow Wow Grounds, Big Grassy, 
Ontario, Canada. Contact (807) 488-5614. 

• 24th Annual Mohican Veteran's Pow 
Wow: August 11-13, Many Trails Park, 
Bowler, Wis. Contact (715) 793-4394. 

• Nesika lllakee Pow Wow: August 11- 
13, Government Hill, Siletz, Ore. Contact 
1-800-922-1399 ext. 230. 

• 23rd IICOT Champions Pow Wow: 
August 11-13, Tulsa State Fairgrounds, 
Tulsa, Okla. Contact (918) 836-152 3. 

• Grand Portage Rendezvous Pow 
Wow: August 11-13, Pow Wow Grounds, 
Grand Portage, Minn. Contact (218) 475- 
2277 or (218) 475-2653. 

• 5th Annual Mihsihkinaahkwa 
Traditional Pow Wow: August 12-13, 
Morsches Park, Columbia City, Ind. 
Contact (219) 625-4370. 

• Cowasuck Band Gathering: August 

12- 13, Parlin Field, Newport, N.H. 
Contact (508) 528-7629. 

• Spirit of the North Pow Wow: August 
12-13, Shooting Star Casino, Mahnomen, 
Minn. Contact (218) 846-9749. 

• 20th Annual Paumanauke Pow Wow: 
August 12-13, Tanner Park, Copiague, 
Long Island, N.Y. Contact (516) 661-7558. 

• 6th Blue Water Celebration: August 
12-13, Pine Grove Park, Port Huron, 
Mich. Contact (810) 982-0891. 

8th Annual Golden Pow Wow: August 
12-13, Parfet Park Golden, Colo. Contact 
(303) 277-6651. 

• 13th Annual Tyendinaga Pow Wow: 
August 12-13, Morches Park, Colombia 
City, Ind. Contact (613) 969-1205. 

• 82nd Crow Fair & Pow Wow: August 
17-20, Crow Reservation, Crow Agency, 
Mont. Contact (406) 638-2601. 

• 25th Annual Wichita Pow Wow: August 
17-20, Wichita Tribal Complex, Anadarko, 
Okla. Contact (405) 247-2425 ext. 109. 

• 24th Annual Chief Lookingglass 
"Dance under the Stars" Pow Wow & 
Celebration: August 18-20, Nez Perce 
Reservation, Kamiah, Idaho. Contact 
(208) 935-2890 or (208) 935-0289 or (208) 
935-0716. 

• Shakopee Mdewalcanton Pow Wow: 
August 13-20, Pow Wow Grounds, Prior 
Lake, Minn. Contact (612) 445-8900. 

• 34th Annual Mille Lacs Pow Wow: 
August 18-20, Iskigamizigan Pow Wow 
Grounds, Mille Lacs, Minn. Contact (320) 
532-7518. 

• 7th Annual Ponca Pow Wow: August 
18-20, Pow Wow Grounds, Niobrara, 
Neb. Contact (402) 857-3519. 

• Mohegan Wigwam: August 18-20, St. 



Bernard's High School, Uncasville, 
Conn. Contact (860) 848-6100. 

• 17th Annual Long Lake Cree Pow 
Wow: August 18-20, Long Lake Rodeo 
Grounds, Long Lake, Alberta, Canada. 
Contact (780) 826-3333. 

• 8th Annual Strengthening our 
Community Pow Wow: August 18-20, 3 
Mile Road, Hessel, Mich. Contact (906) 
484-5026 or (906) 647-5321. 

• 8th Annual Highground Warrior Pow 

Wow: August 18-20, Highground, 

Neillsviile, Wis. Contact (715) 743-4224 
or (414) 384-2050. 

• 18th Annual AIC Traditional Pow 
Wow: August 19-20, Boone County 4-H 
Grounds, Lebanon, Ind. Contact (765) 
482-3315. 

• 44th O-Sa-Wan Pow Wow: August 19- 
20, Boon City Fairgrounds, Belvidere, 111. 
Contact (847) 882-1644 or (708) 877-8563. 

• 8th Santa Rosa Pow Wow: August 19- 
20, Sonoma County Fairgrounds, Santa 
Rosa, Calif. Contact (707) 869-8233. 

• Rocky River Rendezvous and Two 

Worlds Pow Wow: August 19-20, 

Memory Isle Park, Three Rivers, Mich. 
Contact (616) 344-7111 or (616) 279-9069. 

• Dawnland Center Intertribal Pow 
Wow: August 19-20, Parkers Farm, 
Montpelier, Vt. Contact (802) 229-0601. 

• Ojibwa Keeshigun Pow Wow: August 
19-20, Old Fort William, Thunder Bay, 
Ontario, Canada. Contact (807) 473-2344. 

• 7th Annual 
Whitefish River 
Pow Wow: August 
19-20, Sunshine 
Alley, Birch Island, 

Ontario, Canada. 

Contact (705) 285- 
4321. 

• 8th Spirit of 
Wovoka Days: 

August 25-27, Joe 
Parr Sports 

Complex, 

Yerington, Nev. 

Contact (775) 463- 
2320 or (775) 463- 
2350. 

• 32nd Southern 
California Pow 
Wow: August 25- 
27, Orange County 
Fairgrounds, Costa 




Kul-Wicasa Oyate Fair & Wacipi - 1999 

Children Spring Pow Wow: August 26- 
27, TLmberlake Campground, S. 40th St., 
Climax, Mich. Contact (616) 565-0525 or 
(616) 979-5621. 

• Fresh Meadows Pow Wow: August 26- 
27, Alley Pond Park, Fresh Meadows, 
N.Y. Contact. (212) 666-9478 or (516) 292- 
9447. 






Mesn, Calif. 

Contact (714) 663- 
1102 . 

• 3rd Rapid River 

Anishnabeg Pow 
Wow: August 25- 
27, Hiawatha 

Forest, Rapid River, 
Mich. Contact (906) 
474-9910. 

• Free the 




Minneapolis Community 
and Technical College i 
United Nations of Indian Tribes 
for Education (U.N.l.T.E.) 

Student organization invites 
ycu to our: 



Second Annual 
Pour non 

Friday, April 28th, 2000 

Minneapolis Community and Technical College 

1501 Hennepin Ave. S. • Minneapolis. MN 55^03 



<■> 



Time: 1:00 and 7:00 p.m. 
Admission: $2.00 

Si.CO discount for a donation of scr.ocl supplies. 

Contest Specials: TBA 



For info, call Renee Beaulieu-Banka at (612) 341-7064 

Sponsors to date 3re: Minneapolis Community 
Technc3J College. ShaMcoee/Kldewokartcn Community. 

Leech lake Tribal Council. St. Cron Tr.bsj Council 

and V V7-i re Eirf\ fnbai Council. !-* ; 







BEST COPY AVAILABLE 385 



o 



POW WOW 2000 INOIAN COUNTRY TOOAY 




Muiiu ’ 



WIUUll 

mOumuim | 

INN* f-VOtf \ 

[miimcxo V^IO*l«*< 



KOTA ! . ’ 



IKliKMt . 




■•-i 

i 



l O B 2 A 

• IAHOMA CITY j 



|navajo reservation 
|navajo-hopi disputed area 

HHfEDERAL INDIAN RESERVATIONS. 

OTHER FEDERAL INDIAN RESERVATIONS 



=jt e “» r~— 



— it r r 

inoMiri ■ 

1 C All 



ERiC 



330 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



176 



EVALUATION: 



0 

ERIC 



1 . Check student’s work for accuracy on both estimation and exact 
calculation. 

2. Ask to find the shortest route home. 

RESOURCES: 



Webster's New International Dictionary 2nd Edition Unabridged. G. & C. 
Merriam Company. Springfield, Massachusetts: 

Hammond's Ambassador World Atlas . C.S. Hammond and Company. 
Maplewood, New Jersey: p. 124-Political. 

James M. Goodman. The Navajo Atlas . University of Oklahoma Press. 
Norman, Oklahoma: "Indian Map/Indian Reservations of the Continental 
United States." 



DEVELOPED BY: 



Frances Wabaunsee 
David White 
Grover Parsons 




177 



387 



ItS I UOPY AVAILABLE 



SCIENCE - 



o 

ERLC 




“MARIA TALLCHIEF: DANCER WITH A DREAM” 

CULTURAL OUTCOME.* IX 

SCIENCE OUTCOME- III 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

Students will determine that good health habits and a positive mental attitude 
are vital to create happy, healthy Indian lifestyles. 

SCIENCE OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

identify and practice good health habits 
understand the effects of eating nutritional foods. 



TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

"MARIA TALL CHIEF" 

Betty Marie Tall Chief wanted to be a ballerina, but not just an ordinary 
ballerina. She wanted to be a prima ballerina-a star. She knew it wouldn’t 
be easy to achieve her dream. It would take determination, hard work, and 
sacrifice. But when she was a little girl dreaming of future greatness, she 
could not have imagined how hard it would be to achieve. 

Betty Marie Tall Chief was bom in Fairfax, Oklahoma, in 1925 to an Osage 
father and a Scots-lrish-Dutch mother. When she was eight years old, her 
father moved the family to Los Angeles. There, Betty Marie and her younger 
sister, Marjorie, were enrolled in music and ballet lessons. Ballet is not easy. 
It means many hours of practice, of painful bending and twisting and 
stretching. It means repeating the same turn, the same step, over and over 
and over until your body aches and you want to cry with exhaustion. It means 
missing movies and parties, and hearing the sounds of your friends' laughter 
through the open window while you practice and practice and practice. It 
means going without something that you want so you can buy new ballet 
shoes. Only the most determined succeed. 



38 # 8 



In 1941, when Betty Marie was seventeen, she was asked to join the great 
dance company Ballet Russede Monte Carlo on its 1941 Canadian tour. She 
was no longer a student, but a professional. Of course, she would not start 
out as a prima ballerina; that would take many months, even years, of work. 
At first she would only be a member of the corps de ballet. Her name would 
appear in small print in the program, if indeed it was printed at all. Yet this 
was the first step, the first chance she would have to learn what the life of a 
professional dancer was like. Dizzy with excitement, and at the same time 
a little frightened and lonely, she said goodbye to her parents and sister and 
left with the Ballet Russe for Canada. 

Betty worked harder than she had ever worked in her life. She practiced the 
simplest steps over and over and over. Her every day was filled with work. 
There were rehearsals, and fittings for costumes, and more rehearsals, 
meals eaten on the run, only very short moments of rest, and then more 
rehearsals. She worked longer, practiced harder, and put more effort into 
learning each part than any other dancer. She learned quickly. 

One night just before the curtain was to rise on a performance, Betty Marie 
was told that she would dance a small part in the ballet Gaite Parisienne. This 
part called for her to do a series of fouettes, which involved whipping kickouts 
performed with one raised leg while at the same time balancing and spinning 
on one toe. She was wonderful, so wonderful that when she was finished, the 
audience clapped and cheered, and the principal dancers— including Danilova, 
the star of the ballet praised her. After that she was given other good parts. 
She never knew until the last minute what role she would dance. Sometimes 
she’d be dressed and ready for one role and would have to change into a very 
different costume. It didn’t matter because she was always prepared. 

One night a soloist did not show up, and once again, Betty Marie had to 
change costumes and get ready for a different role. She was hardly changed 
and the new costume barely fastened when she was back on stage, dancing 
alone in front of the audience. 

There was a party after the ballet. Mia Slavenska, one of the dancers, 
approached Betty Marie. "You’re ready for greater roles," she told Betty. 
"You’ve earned them. But there's a problem. You’ll have to change your 
name. Mr. Denhen wants you to have a new name— a Russian name, to go 
with the image of the Ballet Russe." 

For the first time in her life, Betty Marie found something that was more 
important to her than dancing. "Never!" she said. "I will not change my last 
name! It is a good Indian name and I am proud of it. I'm not Russian. I’ll 
change my first name. I'll be Maria if you want me to, but I won’t let you change 
the way it is pronounced ’’ 



So it was decided. Betty Marie Tall Chief put aside her childhood as a dancer 
and became a woman. It was the beginning of the great career of Maria 
Tallchief, the Osage Indian dancer who would go a long, long way. 

She didn’t become a star right away, and because of this she was not happy. 
She was depressed, she couldn t eat; she grewthinner and thinner. Herbody 
grew weak and she came down with a cold. She became very ill and had to 
be put in the hospital. With proper care, she eventually became well enough 
to return to the ballet. 

She continued to perfect and polish her dancing. She practiced by herself 
for hours on end. She used her own money to pay for extra lessons. She grew 
very thin and wan, but her drive to succeed grew even stronger. 

In the fall of 1 942, the ballet went on tour to Los Angeles. That winter was 
a hard one. One after another the dancers became ill. Maria caught a cold 
and was unable to shake it. She danced a solo, but her spirits remained low, 
and her health was poor. Her mother begged her to come home and stay. But 
Maria said no. In April, even though she was very ill, she went on tour with 
the company. 

One night Maria fainted at a party. She begged her friends to say nothing to 
her mother . She again had to be put into the hospital. The doctors again told 
her how important it was to take good care of her body. "You must get enough 
rest. You must eat the right foods to keep your body in good physical 
condition,’ the doctor told her. Then Maria knew that she must always eat 
the right kinds of food to make her strong and healthy. She realized just how 
important it was to get proper rest. 

As time passed, Maria danced the lead roles and became the star of the 
ballet. Her sunken cheeks filled out and color returned to her pale face. Her 
New York debut was outstanding, and no one could question her role as a 
dancer. As she stood with the other dancers to accept the cheers of the 
audience, her eyes filled with tears. She saw the audience rise. She heard 
their shouts and applause. She saw bouquets of flowers being brought to the 
stage. Her aims were filled with flowers. 

For Maria Tallchief, life would never be the same again. 




390 
— 180 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 



1 . Have students discuss what might have happened if Maria had not 
had the courage to continue her dancing. How did dancing keep her 
body "physically fit?” 

2. Discuss how eating the right foods keeps one healthy. 

3. Have the class name ways that the body can break down. Name some 
diseases or illnesses that we can get by poor nutrition. Discuss 
problems that are common to certain lifestyles. (Smoking, drinking, fat 
consumption). What medicines can you take? How did the early 
Native Americans treat illnesses? 

4. Have local athletes speak to the class about how good health habits 
helped them achieve their goals and how they overcame any health 
problems that they might have had. 



EVALUATION ACTIVITIES: 

1 . Have each student choose a 3 x 5 card on which has been printed a 
body part - leg, arm, heart, etc. Lay a large sheet of newsprint on the 
floor and give students 10 minutes to complete a picture and label 
body parts. 

2. Have a short quiz over the effects of good and poor nutrition. 

3. Have students predict what mighthappen if there had been no doctors 
to care for Maria. 

4. Have students predict what might have happened if Maria had let the 
boss change her name. 



RESOURCES: 

Information about Maria T all Chief was supplied by conference on “A Gender 
Equity Curriculum for Grades 6 - 12," Tahlequah, Oklahoma, 1991. 



DEVELOPED BY: 



391 

- 181 



Jeri Stevens 



Caretakers of the Earth 

Martha Gould-Lehe 



Eskimos of Yesterday and Today 

The word Eskimo means “eaters of raw meat.” It is an Algongquin word and was a name 
given by outsiders. People of this north polar region do not traditionally call themselves 
Eskimos. Depending upon their geographical location along the Alaskan coastline, they refer to 
themselves as Yupik, Iglulik, or Inuit. 

In the past, these Alaskan natives lived almost completely off the sea and its resources. The 
Yupik, Iglulik, and Inuit caught fish and hunted seal, walrus, sea lion, and whale. In the 
summers they traveled to fish campgrounds where they put up salmon, dried meats, and picked 
berries. They often ate their food uncooked because Alaska’s northern coastline has no trees, so 
firewood was rare. 

Animals provided many of their needs. Animals were eaten as food. Animal fat was used as 
oil for lamps or as lotions. Animal furs were made into clothing, blankets, or shelter. Women 
tanned the animal hides and spent hours making mukluks, parkas, and snow pants. The sinew 
was used for thread. In the winter the Natives wore two sets of clothing. First, they put on a set 
with the fur side in (close to their body), then a set with the fur side out (away from their body). 
This double set of clothing kept them warm even in the coldest temperatures. 

The natives usually lived in igloos of animal skins, wood, mud, or sod. Ice igloos were used 
only when they hunted or Fished near the sea. Ice igloos were temporary shelters. They could 
be constructed in less than an hour and were invaluable when hunters were caught far from 
home. Entertainrnent in and around their homes consisted of string games, ball games, and 
many games of strength and endurance. Stories, songs, dances, and laughter also filled their 
nights. Eskimos today still enjoy traditional foods. The Eskimo people petitioned the 
International Whaling Commission to obtain and retain the right to keep one of their traditional 
lifestyle customs alive. As a result, they were granted the right to harvest a limited number of 
bowhead whales, a species placed on the endangered species list. 

Eskimos still use dog Sleds, but many more use snowmobiles for winter travel. Some 
Eskimos today still live off of the land. Others hold jobs in the villages or cities. Whether they 
choose to live life in traditional and/or modem ways, Eskimos strive to keep their proud heritage 
"alive in song, dance, and story-telling. William Tyson represents one such storyteller who shares 
memories of life in the days when he was a boy. 




best copy available 

393 ‘ 



183 



Reflections of William Tyson 



In 1916 William Tyson was bom in an Alaskan Yupik Eskimo village called Kanillik 
(Gung e lik). Thirty to forty people lived in the village located near the Bering Sea coast near 
Sheldon’s Point. When William was a young man, most of Alaska’s rural Indians and Eskimos 
lived off the land. Villagers found the land good and plentiful, and they were careful to take 
only what they needed. 

Spring, summer, and fall were busy times for William. He and his family gathered 
vegetables and berries from the tundra. As a small child, William was shown wild rice, celery, 
herbs, and roots, which he learned to recognize and gather before the cold north wind brought 
snow and sub-zero temperatures. His family stored these treasures in fish or grass baskets. 

Other items were stored in seal or whale stomach bags. 

In the spring and summer William’s family watched for the beluga whales and seals that 
came to the Bering Sea on their northerly migration routes. The men would venture out in, 
kayaks, always searching the sea to catch sight of these animals. When the whales were sighted, 
the men paddled toward them quickly. Hunting of several whales was needed to feed a village, 
because of the small size of the beluga. The whale fat, called blubber, and meat were part of 
William’s diet. His family used the oil in lamps so the long, dark Arctic nights could be 
brightened. No part of the whale was wasted. 

The seal was another mammal William’s family needed. Seal fur was tanned and made into 
clothes. Seal fat was rendered out and the precious oil was painstakingly saved in seal bladder 
containers. A time without seal oil was to have a time without flavor, because the oil was used 
to dip dried fish in and was poured over other foods as gravy is poured over foods today. Fish 
gathering was a part of every season. Fish was William’s main diet and still is today. 

As winter came and claimed the land, William was still very busy. He had his dogs to care 
for, his traps to run, and furs to skin. He caught many animals like squirrels, fox„land otters, 
and, once in a while, a wolverine or wolf. From these animal skins, his mother made beautiful 
parkas and other articles of clothing. His family took some of the furs across the frozen bay to 
the white man’s store where they traded furs for items such as knives, utensils, guns, 
ammunition, and blankets. They traded for very little food because they did not like the white 
man’s food very much; however, they found many of his tools quite useful. 

William was content as a young child. Season followed season. . . harvest followed harvest. 
Each season had offerings. The cycle of life was balanced and predictable. William and his 
family never took from the Earth without giving back, and they had great respect for all things. 
They knew they were not greater or lesser than any — just a part of it all. 

In 1927, William’s life changed drastically. He was sent away from home to school. It was 
a time of great changes. Laws were passed in far away places and many more white people 
moved into the area. William’s people could no longer hunt whenever and for whatever they 
wished. Now there was something called “open season” and “closed season.” It was very hard 
for them to understand why the caribou could no longer be killed for their potlatches 



ERJC 



394 ' ^ ' 



REST COPY AVAILABLE - 



184 



(ceremonial feasts). The cycle of life he lived now had restrictions decided by people he didn’t 
know. 

Paper money and coins were also foreign to William. What did this paper mean? It had no 
place in his memory. He had no idea of how much it would buy or even how hard he should 
work for it. It took a long time for him to gain some understanding of money. A new people 
had come with new ways. The time of predictability was gone. 

William stayed in his village learning the new ways until 1972, when the Alaska Native 
Land Claims Act was passed. In that year he went to Anchorage to work as an interpreter. He is 
now retired and, whenever he can, spends his time performing Eskimo dances and speaking to 
young people. 

Today as William presents to a group of young people he tells them, “Dancing is good. It is 
a good way to be happy and to keep the old ways alive.” He tells them how he used to make his 
own drum by carefully selecting a willow that had the right grain. The grain is very important 
because the wood has to be pliable when it is steamed and shaped into a hoop. Now drum 
makers use airplane fabric to stretch over the willow and twine to secure it. In the old ways a 
drum was made by moistening walrus or seal stomachs and stretching these over the hoop. The 
stomachs were then secured with sinew from the seal. As the sinew and stomach dried, they 
became very taut. Then when the drum was struck with various size rods, a variety of pitches 
would vibrate outward. William smiles as he demonstrates. “A drummer and dancer can make 
his own rhythm,” he says, “for to the Eskimo the dance is a story of deeds or the re-enactment 
of a legend. The drum adds cadence to the re-telling." 

After this statement, William gets quiet. His mind sees days long past. . . days that can only 
be demonstrated now. A lifestyle has passed and he is leaving us a legacy. No one speaks as 
William’s downcast eyes rise to survey the young audience. “It was hard for me,” he tells, “but 
' it will not be like that for you.” 

He tells of a time when his parents showed him everything. They were his teachers. 

William smiles at the children as he tells them that his parents did not spank or hit him. “The 
old ones believe you always show love, because love will keep a people together. If you hit a 
child, the child will grow up to be angry. So that is why we don’t hit children.” 

He pauses here, his grey head bowed, gathering time and direction before he proceeds. 
“Now-a-days parents don’t teach their children like my parents did. They leave it to the school 
or the babysitters. Things are very different, and it seems to me that many young people are 
forgetting to respect the older people who give them knowledge. . .” His fingers tighten around 
the drum handle and the children wait. They seem to sense the respect that he commands. 

Sometimes memories are difficult to remember. We visit places, people, and things of the 
past, and we know we are just visiting because time moves forward. The new becomes the old 
' all too quickly. William looks up and with a smile strikes his drum. “When I was young, I 
could dance all night,” he says, “but now I am old and I get tired. So, tell me what you learned 
today.” 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 
395*.v 



185 



He holds the drum and striker loosely in his hands as he calls on a little girl id the front, - 
“I learned it is important to show respect,” she says. 

“And to show love so. people won’t become angry,” adds her friend. 

William points to a boy in the back row, “Let’s see what you heard today.” 

“I learned that we need to have people like you to teach us, so that the old ways won’t be 
gone forever,” the boy answers seriously. 

“Good! You have all been excellent listeners. Now remember what you heard today, and 
teach it to others.” 

William holds up his drum in a kind of salute as the students stand and file pass, thanking 
him for his dme and information. The presentation is over. William has instilled a sense of the 
Eskimo way of life in a much younger generation, a generation that can only see his memories in 
museums, film documentaries. . . and through his words and deeds. 




BEST COPY AVAILAB^ 



Illustration: 

String game known as: Two Diamonds by Osage 

Twin Stars by Navajo 
Lightning by Zuni 

Diamonds and Turtles in Caroline Islands 
One form of Navajo Storm Clouds 
Sixth move of Alaskan string game, The Mouth 
The same pattern is also found in Hawaii and New Guinea with a similar pattern 
of Cat's Cradle made by the Australian aborigines. 



er|c 




186 



Discussion Questions: 

1. Why do you think William Tyson is invited to speak and perform in schools now, but he 
was not allowed to practice his culture as a child? 

2. If you could go back and meet William as a child, what sort of things would you like him to 
show you? What questions would you ask him? 

3. How does William feel children should be treated? Does he imply that children are treated 
differently today than when he was a child? 

4. What did William and his family use as valued items for trade? 

5. Why do you think the Eskimo people were always careful not to take too much from their 
environment? 

6. Could people today learn from William’s family? If so, what? 




■ 397 



187 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





398 



188 




189 



My Ideas for Music and Dance Unit: 



er|c 



400 



190 



ADDITIONAL RESOURCES 



Indian ABC Books 

Many Nations: An Alphabet Book of Native America by Joseph Bruchac (Indian 
Author), Troll, 1998. 

Cherokee ABC Coloring Book by Daniel Pennington, Book Publishing Co., P.O. Box 99, 
Summertown, TN 38483 

ABC’s of Our Spiritual Connection by Kim Soo Goodtrack (Indian Author), Theytus 
Books. 

ABC’s, the American Indian Way by Richard Red Hawk (Indian Author), Scb 
Distributors, 1992. 

The Path of the Quiet Elk, A Native American Alphabet Book by Virginia Stroud (Indian 
Author), Dial, 1996. 

Navajo ABC, A Dine Alphabet Book by Luci Tapahonso (Indian Author), Aladdin, 1999. 
Powwow ABC by Sandy Hummingbird, 2000. 

Where to Get Books 

North American Native Authors Catalog, Greenfield Review Press, P.O. Box 308, 
Greenfield Center, NY 12833 (518) 583-1440 http://nativeauthors.com 

AISES Books Catalog, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (505) 765- 
1052 www.aises.org 

Indian Books Catalog, Four Winds Indian Books, P.O. Box 544, York, NE 68467-0544 
(402) 362-5654 http://www.fourwindsbooks.com 

Amazon.com Bookstore and bookcenter@nativeweb.org All selections are linked 
directly to Amazon.com bookstore so that you may purchase them online at a discount. 

Prairie Edge Book and Music List, Prairie Edge, 6 th & Main, Rapid City, SD 57701 
(800) 541-2388 prairie@rapidnet. com www.prairieedge.com 

Medicine Root Inc., Native Earth Products of North America, P.O. Box 353, Louisville, 
Colorado 80027 (303)661-9819 Fax (303) 664-5139 

The Native Book Centre, 150 York Hill Blvd., Thornhill, Ontario, Canada L4J 2P6 
(905) 881-7804 Fax (905) 881-7808 http ://www. 9to5.com/9to5/NBC/ 

191 



40 1 



BOOKS AVAILABLE FROM THE HASKELL FOUNDATION 

Hen of Wahpeton by Ann Nolan Clark $8.00 

Little Herder in Spring, Little Herder in Summer, Little Herder in Autum, 

Little Herder in Winter by Ann Nolan Clark 4 books for $25.00, 1 $8.00 

There Still Are Buffalo by Ann Nolan Clark $7.00 

Coyote Tales by William Morgan $8.00 

Who Wants To Be A Prairie Dog? by Ann Nolan Clark $7.00 

Slim Butte Raccoon by Ann Nolan Clark $7.00 

Young Hunter of Picuris by Ann Nolan Clark $6.00 

Little Turtle by Hildegard Thompson $4.00 

Little Hopi by Edward A. Kennard $8.00 

Little Boy With Three Names by Ann Nolan Clark $8.00 

Bringer of the Mystery Dog by Ann Nolan Clark $8.00 

Billy Black Lamb by Caroline H. Breedlove $4.00 

Field Mouse Goes To War by Edward A. Kennard $8.00 

Grass Mountain Mouse by Ann Nolan Clark $8.00 

Little Man’s Family, Books One and Two $5.00 and $7.00 

Navajo Life Series by Hildegard Thompson $4.00 

Sun Journey by Ann Nolan Clark $7.00 

This Little Books series of children’s books was commissioned by the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs in the 30 ’s, 40 ’s and 50 ’s. They have influenced and entertained several 
generations of Indian children. 

To place an order for the Little Books, call 785/749-8417 or 8425. Shipping and 
handling extra. The Haskell Foundation, 155 Indian Avenue, Lawrence, KS 66046. 

192 

402 : 



Science Organizations and Projects 

American Indian Science and Engineering Society, P.O. Box 9828, Albuquerque, NM 
87119-9828 Publishes Winds of Change Magazine. (505) 765-1052 www.aises.org 

Four Directions Project involves science, math and technology for Bureau of Indian 
Affairs funded schools, Pueblo of Laguna, Laguna, NM. www.4directions.org 

Science Through Native American Eyes, Cradleboard Teaching Project, Nihewan 
Foundation for American Indian Education, founded by Bufly Sainte-Marie. 

Interactive Multimedia CD Rom for grades 5-adult, www.cradleboard.org 

American Indian/ Alaska Native Initiative, National Science Foundation Rural Systemic 
Initiative, Tribal Colleges, Alaska, Utah-Colorado-Arizona-New Mexico (UCAN), 
Navajo Nation projects, NSF, Arlington, VA http://www.nsf.gov 

Teacher Resources 

Earth’s Caretakers and Signs of Tradition: Native American Lessons, Math and Science 
Teachers for Reservation Schools (MASTERS) Project/University of Kansas, 1993 & 
1994. (785) 864-4435 inewland@ukans.edu 

Keepers of the Earth, Keepers of the Animals, Keepers of Life, Keepers of the Night by 
Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac, Fulcrum Pub., Golden, CO, 1988-1998. 

Native Science, Natural Laws of Interdependence by Gregory Cajete, Clear Light Pub., 
2000 . 

Ignite the Sparkle. A Native American Science Education Curriculum Model by Gregory 
Cajete, Kavaki Press, Skyland, NC, 1999. 

ENC Focus for Mathematics and Science Education, print catalog that highlights specific 
topics and resources in math and science, Eisenhower National Clearinghouse. 
(800)621-5785 http ://www. enc.org/ 

Won in the Classroom, Guidelines for the Selection of Culturally Appropriate Materials, 
Indian Community School of Milwaukee, Inc. (414) 345-3040 www.ics-milw.org 

r 

Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Children by Doris Seale and 
Beverly Slapin, University of California, 1998. Oyate, 2702 Mathews St., Berkeley, CA 
94702 

Start Early, Finish Strong: How to Help Every Child Become a Reader, U. S. Department 
of Education, 1999. 877/4ED-PUBS www.gov/pubs/edpubs.html 
www.gov/americareads 



193 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

Reproduction Basis 



This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release (Blanket)" 
form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all or classes of 
documents from its source organization and, therefore, does not require a 
"Specific Document" Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may be 
reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form (either 
"Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 




-089(1/2003) 




