DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 421 304 



RC 021 155 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Thi ebaux , Raananna L . 

Inside Perspectives: An Analysis of a Public School Program 
in a Rural Alaskan Community. 

1997-03-09 
47p . 

Information Analyses (070) -- Reports - Research (143) 
MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

♦Alaska Natives; *American Indian Education; *Culturally 
Relevant Education; Diversity (Student) ; *Educational 
Attitudes; Elementary Secondary Education; Interviews; 
Parent Attitudes; Parent Participation; Public Schools; 
Rural Education; *School Attitudes; *School Community 
Relationship; Student Attitudes; Teacher Attitudes ; Teacher 
Student Relationship 
Alaska 



MSTRACT 



This paper examines the perceptions of educators, parents, 
and students in a rural Alaska town concerning educational quality and issues 
in their schools. A literature review provides background on the history of 
education in the region, the value of culturally congruent education for 
Native students, the importance of teacher background in relation to the 
rural setting and cultural sensitivity, and the shortage of certified 
teachers in rural Alaska. Interviews were conducted in a remote rural Alaska 
town in which the population was about 50 percent Native Alaskan (from a 
variety of cultural groups) . Most interviewees were Native Alaskans and 
included a teacher educator, principals, teachers, parents, and students. 
Qualitative analysis of the interviews revealed the following major themes: 

(1) culture (culturally relevant practices in the schools, extreme cultural 
diversity in the community, inappropriateness of mainstream materials, 
skepticism about the sincerity of cultural programs, mistrust of educators 
from "outside, " culture shock when students leave the community) ; (2) school 

role and functioning (poor quality of some aspects of education, general 
relevance of school to students' lives, use of the community college for 
advanced courses, high performance at the elementary level, alternative 
school for potential dropouts); (3) relations among school, family, and 
community (parent and community participation, teacher- student relationships , 
ethnic relations) ; and (4) social issues (drinking, substance abuse, early 
pregnancy, family problems) . Contains 6 figures and an accompanying key and 
40 references . ) (SV) 



******************************************************************************** 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



******************************************************************************** 



ED 421 304 



Inside Perspectives: An 
Analysis of a Public School Program in a Rural 
Alaskan Community 

May 3, 1996 

(Revised March 9, 1997) 



By Raananna L. Thiebaux 



to 

to 



US. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

0>rWs document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 









Points of view or opinions stated in this i 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 









O 

ERIC 



2 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



ABSTRACT 



Whether uaehing in the northern reaches oj Alaska or on the Atlantic stretch oj the country^ students and their families will 
likely come from diverse cultural backgrounds. How culture is addressed in the classroom — through relationships between teachers and 
students, methods oJ instruction, the school atmosphere, or the course curriculum — can make the difference in the overall education 
experience. By studying an area that has had to contend with significant cultural issues, in this case rural Alaska, and that has done so 
partly by addressing them through the education system, perhaps something can be learned by the rest of the nation as it tries to answer its 
own (juestions about culture and education. 

INTRODUCTION 
History of the Topic 

Tlie majorin^ population in rural Alaska is Native; Athapaskan, Inupiat, and Yup'ik arc a few of tlic tribes. 
Isolated or semi-Lsolated villages may have Native Ala.skan populatioas of ninety-five percent or more; a modcratclv 
large town, serving as crossroads for goods and transportation, may have a population of at least fifn percent 
Native Alaskan (Bamhardt, 1995). 

Despite these demographics, fonnal education has been dominated by non-Nativc Alaskaas. Prior to the 
purchase of Alaska by the United States, what schools existed were Rassian government or missionan’. These 
schools were not, however, accessible to people in villages. In the earlv 1900.S, the Biaeau of Indian Affairs 
established day schools and then later boarding schools in larger towas (Parrett, 1982). Eventually elemenrair 
.schools were established in villages, but high school education could still only be pursued through boarding 
schools (Booker, 1987). Since Native Alaskan Lfestyle was, and in many cases still is, predominantlv sastenance 
(hunting and fishing) and therefore village based, again few Native Alaskan children were able to attend high 
school without leaving their communities for long periods of time. Following the Tobeluk v. Lind Ltigation in 
1976, where one family sued for the right to accessible education, village based high schools began to be provided 




O 



even if the family of only one student was requesting it (Cotton, 1984). 

As elsewhere in the comitiy, for a long time and up until recently, the main mtention of formal schooling 
for Native Alaskans was assimilation, the dissolution of commiuiities, and ultimately the release of land (Cotton, 
1984). In the 1960s to 1970s, however, there was an increased appreciation of cultural differences, and 
recognition of the value of considering culture m education. The National Advisory Council on Indian Education, 
having Native Alaskan and Native American members, was established as parr of the Education Amendments Act 
in 1972. The result was Native peoples having an increased role in their formal education. Wliile they did not have 
final say in decisions, they were in a better position to see that their interests and needs were addressed (Prucha, 
1986). 

With the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act in 1971 returning land and resources to the Native 
Alaskan people, it became evident that there was a need for advanced education in order to manage developing 
modem industiy. Evenmally university based programs were created to prepare people to work specifically m the 
development of rural Alaska (Booker, 1987). In order to get Native Alaskan students to the universiti' level, 
however, lower education needed to be more effective (Wauters et al., 1989). Curriculum and teaching methods in 
village based public schools were thought to be key to thus; hence, programs for more adequately prepanng 
professional Native Alaskan teachers for pubLc schools were developed. 

Wliether mainstream or culturally oriented education is more effective is of some immediacy in the rural 
Alaskan environment. While the population may be predominantly Native Alaskan, there ls still a disproportionate 
number of non-Native Ala.skan teacher.s; similar conditioas exist for admincstrative personnel (Bamhardt. 1995). 
Furthermore, these teachers often receive their training from programs designed for more typical environmental, 
social, economic, and cultural situations tlian those found in rural Alaska. Because of these faaors, who defines the 
education for which particular population, and how culture and education interact are significant issues. 




4 



Background Theory 

It is generally accepted tliat learning built on prior knowledge will be the sturdiest kind of knowledge 
(Pressley & McCormick, 1995). TTie contemporar)- notion Ls that culture itself is a knowledge base upon which 
learning can be built; it is a framework into which perceptions of the world can be organized (Segall et al., 1990). 
Even the language of a culture is designed to capture s>mbohcally an understanding of the world that is culturally 
based (Hoijer, 1994). Well before students enter formal schooling, their perceptions and cognitive ways of dealing 
with the world have begun to form as a result of being part of a specific culture (McCarty et al., 1991; Kawagley, 
1993). It is this prior knowledge tliat learning in a fonnal school environment builds upon. And because tiie 
specifics of a culture are not globally .shared, one particular method of instruction or one enviromnental .structure 
may hterally nor make sense to a student. Their culture may funaion or be stnictured differently than wiiar is 
being presented. 

Despite the long .standing multicultural and multietimic make-up of the United States, education in tiie 
United States has been predominantly Eurocentric. History, hterature, language, and ways of thinking have been 
taught from the European point of view and in the context of European values. Even while non-Europeans may 
have physical access to schools, the\- have not necessarih- had equal access to the benefits of education. Tlieir own 
history', values, and ways of thinking have been ignored, mocked, or even punished. TTie .solid base of their ailtural 

J 

experience as a source of prior knowledge has been historically neglected; education being received becomes shaky 
at best. Fiuthermore, the people themselves as a resource for knowing what might be an effective approach to their 
own education has been consLstently ignored. Pewewardy states that ‘Indian people are not allowed to be experts 
on themselves, it s asually someone else definitig the Indian’* (1994). Such a statement could easily be extended to 
other North Americans of non-European decent. 

It has slowly been recognized that different peoples' backgrounds are invaluable to the fabric of and 
participation in our society. There have subsequently been attempts to nurture and incorporate that w^hich 
individuals and groups bring with them. Multicultural education is one such attempt, being more inclasive in its 




5 



perspeaives, more encompassing in the historv' it teaches. The goal is to make instruaion pertain to all cultures 
and etlmicities, tlierefore meeting the needs of all students and their familial backgrounds (Banks, 1993; Hardman 
et al., 1993). It recognizes the value of every one's ailtural background on a personal level, what makes an 
mdividual unique, as well as being part of the nation's and ultimately the world s cultural, ethnic, social, economic, 
and historic whole. 

An argument against multicultural education has been that we should not spend so much tune and energy 
focusing on ethnicity and race. There is concern that it not only w'aters down the qualit\’ of education but chat it 
perpetuates divisions between people (Banks, 1993). However, for a population that is significantly diverse, 
education has already failed and divisions already exist to a discouraging degree. To neglect the philosophy of 
multicultural education is to ignore the ethical question of w'ho controls knowledge and w^ho has the power to 
maintain inequalities. 

Ethnocentnc (other than European) education has also generated fear, being disputed as perpetuating 
narrow, often false and unscholarly knowledge (Singer, 1994). The issue of creating deeper nfts beween people of 
different cultural and racial backgrounds exists to perhaps even a greater degree than for multicultural education. 
Again, however, these rifts already exist, and if the high drop out rate of students from minority groups Is any 
indication, trying to educate diverse students from a purely Eurocentric point of view fails (Gilliland & Reyhner, 
1988). 

The intent of miilciailtural and aikure specific education has been to accommodate the faa that people of 
different backgrounds wiU have different experiences in the world and therefore perceive things differently. In 
practice they may be falling short. Both have received criticism for foaising on artifacts of culture, such as food and 
histone events. Wliat in praaice may be missing is that people of different cultural backgrounds may also learn, 
think, and understand differently (McCarty et al., 1991; Wauters et al., 1989). Different physical environments 
may result in differential development of cognitive skills and learning styles; different social and value systems mav 
influence expectations held for human and environmental interaaions. 



For example, it is believed that a traditional hunting and fishing lifestyle develops an independent, self- 
reliant personalit)-. Likewise, tliought and perception will be field-independent, logical and linear. On the other 
hand, agnadtural societies are more group-onented and field-dependent, takmg mto consideration background 
information mcludmg that of the group (Albert & Triandts, 1994; Lieberman, 1994). Intelligence will also take 
on different meanings depending on what is requu-ed and valued b>- an envu-onment (Gardner, 1993). Wliether 
these specific beliefs are true or not, and there may be confliamg opmions (see Lipka, 1991), there is neverthele.ss 
a strong argument that culture should be considered when designing an effective education program for any 
particular group. 

Under traditional European-style iastruaion, the unage of the Native Aniencan [and Native AlaskanJ 
student has long been one of silence (Lipka, 1991). At best, this has been interpreted to mean that tliey liave a 
non-verbal inteUigence, or that by their culairal naaire they do not express themselves verballv (McCart\ et al., 
1991: Powell & Anderson, 1994). The flaw of this assessment is tliat it is based on observations of Native 
Amencan and Native Alaskan students functioning m a mamstream st\de classroonx While these observations 
might be used positively to redesign curriculum and techniques, they could also result in a negative mterpretation. 
They may be identified as mcompetent because they do not respond verbally m the classroom, whereas other non- 
Native Amencans and Native Alaskans may be succeeding because of the fundamental design of the classroom 
system. 

Language poses another obstacle. Smdents are often expeaed to respond in a language they are not 
verbally and mentally fluent in. They may be uncomfortable speaking, thus appearing to be non-verbal, while in 
their first language this is not an issue (Kuhns, 1994). 

With increased understandmg that student performance is often a fiinaion of the environment rather than 
an inadequacv' of the student, the blame has shifted. There is evidence that the ^mismatch between the culture of 
the school and the culture of the home'’ is the cause of poor performance and experiences in school ( Au & 
Kawakami, 1994). It has been found that by changing the nature of the instruction so that it parallels what 




7 



students experience in their communities, students are not non-verbaJ at all, and are certamlv not incompetent 

(McCart)- et al., 1991; Au & Kawakami, 1994). Furthermore, 

Imposing on children ways of thinking and acting that are foreign to their group ma>- make these 
children less well adapted to living in their own culture. If the school uses methods appropriate to 
the children’s backgroimd there is no reason that children of any minorit)- group should make less 
progress educationally than those of the dominant socien-. (G illilan d, 1988) 

Tlic hann to tliese students may be doubled when the issue of culture is not addressed. Not only are they isobted 
wiiile being taught, they also become isolated from their communities. 

These phenomena generate the principle behind developing culturally congruent education. Adapting 
cumculum, as multicultural education in practice primarily docs, is not enough because the instructional methods 
have nor been changed (McCarn- et aL, 1991). Rather, it has been proposed that adapting ebssroom enviromnent 
and teaching .stt le to emphasize “traditional styles of learning,” such as “the tran.sfer of skiUs b)' observing and 
imitating the actions of elders (Wauters et aL, 1989) would result in increased success of Native American 
students. This is somewhat of a generalization because, by definition, learning style is largely individual. The idea, 
however, is to capitalize on the degree to which learning style is shaped by culture, and make it work for rather 
than against student success. 

There have been several studies of what culturally congruent education could be like. A study done on the 
Wann Springs Indian Reservation in Oregon (Au & Kawakami, 1994) produced evidence that students w'lU 
participate readily when social structures in the school are similar to those in the commimity. For example, 
community life in thus population is a group endeavor. Power is not held by any one particular person. If aaivities 
in the classroom are run by the whole student body rather than under the sole direction of the teacher, suidents are 
found to be willing participants. However, if a classroom is run in the traditional European way, with the teacher 
the designated leader and the students individually called upon to respond, participation is vastly reduced. 

TTie American Indian Magnet School in Minnesota incorporates traditional Native American practices and 
values in the classroom. The philosophy is that of ‘‘placing education into culture rather than.. .placing culture into 



education** (Pewewardy, 1994), making the entire process of education culmrallv based. 

In an assessment study by McCart)^ et al., on the bilingual and bicultural Navajo Rough Rock 
Demonstration School in Arizona, it was indicated that the underlying philosopliy of the education and school 
functioning is perhaps the most significant faaor in student success (1991). Regardless of what is being taught, 
the most important component seems to be the use of traditional philosophy, that of ‘*K*e,’* or relatedness of all 
things — ^social, physical, and cognitive. When instniction is based in this philosophy, regardless of the explicit 
curriculum or language spoken, student participation increases drastically. At the same time, it is acknowledged 
that these students are participants in the larger mainstream community and they need the knowledge to deal with 
it. 

St. Maiy*s Catliolic boarding school for Native Alaskans, while not traditional in structure or even 
curriculum focus, was also found to be successful becaase of its fundamental philosophy. It attempts a holistic 
approach — drawing from dunensions of the individual, spirit, nature, and community (mcluding teachers) — ^inore 
closely matching their traditional world view of harmony and interconnectedness (Kleinfeld, 1982). Tlic result of 
this approach is that students feel more certain of thenxselves and less caught between cultural worlds — that of 
their village homes and that which mainstream education fits into. 

A study done in a Yup*ik classroom with a Native Alaskan teacher also provided evidence that 
participation is enhanced when traditional methods are used. Students are comfortable, trusting, and active in the 
lessons as long as die classroom and teaching structures and values are ailturaUy familiar (Lipka, 199 1). 

A population in any particular environment, however, is neither homogenous nor generic. Students are 
diverse, parents may not hold the same views as their children nor as teachers. So, while the above examples and 
their goals may be appealing, the outcomes — efiectiveness and functionality — ^may be interpreted differently 
depending on which segment of the group is asked. 

For example, a study done at a school in an Alaskan bush village (Ovanda, 1984) yielded quite different 
perceptions about the education in that community’. Students and parents tliought that having more Native 




9 



Alaskan teachers would improve schools, and that there should be more Native Alaskan cultural activities, as well 
as learning more about the world beyond the village. Teachers, on the other hand, felt that increased training in 
cross-cultural comnnmication for themselves would sufifice, and that adture in education was less importanr. Note 
that approximately 85% of the teachers in this study were non-Native Alaskan, whde closer to 100% of students 
and parents were Native Alaskan. TTiere is clearly a discrepancy between what the people bom and raised in that 
area feel is important, and what the mainstream popidation would like to see emphasized. 

Whde m the Ovanda study it was mdicated that Native Alaskan teachers and adtural aimaduni content 
are desirable, the most important elements in the experience and success of the student may not be the ethnicirv of 
the teacher, nor perhaps even the curriadum content. Instead it seems the fundamental phdosophies and attitudes 
in the classroom, and the relationships ben\xen the students and teachers, are key in having a positive school 
experience. Therefore, die stance diat the teacher takes Ls paramount, as thev liave access to facditating most 
aspects of the classroom. If teachers understand adtural values and mechanisms of learning as based ui adture, 
either through training or b\’ having been a part of that adture, and have positive attitudes about these, then 
positive and effective instmaion is an attainable goal (Gilliland, 1988; McCarn- et al, 1991). 

Teachers own backgrounds are a valuable resource in defining and creating a classroom environment 
(Carr, 1994). This is especially the case where their backgroiuids are similar to that of students. Sharing a similar 
background, teachers and students wiU have an easier time reaching a consensits about expectations in the 
classroom, and imderstand each other better on a funaional level (Albert & TriandLs, 1994). Sundarlv, Native 
Alaskan teachers who have grown up in rural Alaska will more likely enter the classroom with the neces.saiy 
understanding and sensitivity for creating a culturally congnient environment. However, jast as teachers from other 
nondominant cultures and etlmicities are not adequately represented in this country , the lack of certified Native 
Alaskan teachers is a problem even in rural areas where the population is almost 100% Native Alaskan (Bamhardt, 
1995). Mainstream teacher education falls short of attraaing and keeping Native Alaskan students, and otherw^ise 
may not adequately prepare teachers to serve in the rural enviromnent. There is also a high rate of non-Native 




10 



Alaskan teacher turnover in rural Alaska, partly due to extreme conditions, adding to the problem of inconsistency 
in the classroom (Booker, 1987), 

Recognizing the value of having teachers whom students can identify and establish stable relationships 
with and who can create a culturally familiar environment, programs for preparing teachers for rural Alaska have 
been developed. The Alaska Rural Teacher Training Corps (ARTTC) was establislied in 1970 for the purpose of 
prepanng teachers for niral and predominantly Native Alaskan environments (Booker, 1987). Later it became the 
Cross-Cultural Education Development Program (X-CED) and eventually joined the University of Alaska 
Fairbanks Center for Cross-Cultural Studies. 

Training in this program is field-based; suident teachers live and leani in rural coinnuinities. Students are 
mostly Native Aaskan or at least have held long-term residence ui niral Alaska (Bamhardt, 1995). The philosoph\’ 
of the program is that these student teachers will bring with them skills and understanding that enliancc their 
abilities as teachers in rural Alaska, just as their young students will bring to the classroom their own cultural 
backgrounds. The program is designed to be “constructivist”; training is built on experience that student teachers 
have gained from being members of rural communities. Furthermore, since their training takes place in the actual 
environment where they will be teaching, it can be customized to fit the particular needs of that envu-oninent. And 
serving the needs of the student teachers, they can undergo training without having to sever tics with their homes 
and families (Bamliardt, 1995). 

Being able to motivate students requires knowledge of what is important to youth m that socien , and 
being able “to motivate according to cultural values” (“Tom.” qtd. in Kuhns, 1994). Personal gains that are valued 
by mainstream society, such as getting into the best higher education institutions or making a lot of money, niav 
not necessarily motivate a Native Alaskan student to achieve. However, a student being responsible for gains felt 
by the entire family or commimitv, such as bringing a sense of pride, may be a source of personal encouragement. 
Because these are culturally specific motivators, it is important that a teacher be familiar with this concept, whether 
they themselves are Native Alaskan or not. Mainstream motivators have been applied throughout histor\-; in fact. 




11 



Native peoples who have themselves been through assimilation schools may still believe that they will work 
(“Danielle,” 1995). However, because of the reality of conflicting cultural values, this kind of motivation has been 
ineffective. 

Even if cross-cultural teaching techniques, multicultural sensitivity, and specific cultural knowledge are 
taught to prospeaive teachers, it may not be enough. It is not the add-on cultural programs that feed student 
success, but rather the fundamental philosophies as expressed in educational prcKesses (Sleeter, 1990). In other 
words, what counts on a deeper level is actual expressed behavior and attitudes. Likewise, acceptance and ability on 
some level to employ fundamental cultural principles and practices (Kawagley, 1993) can result in success of all 
involved in the educating process and enviromnent. 

It is not a perfect situation. It may be difficult to address the variety of backgrounds of student teachers 
who are preparing to serve their students* varioas needs while satisfy ing State requirements and communin’ desires. 
Lipka conunented in his study of Native Alaskan teaching styles that, despite evidence of cuIturaUy compatible 
teaching methods being most eft eaive for Native Alaskan students, these methods are still not being taught in the 
X-CED program (1991). Even with special programs meant to improve education in the niral Alaskan 
environment, outcomes may still not be satisfying communin’ needs. 



STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 



How State mandated requirements are met in Alaskan public education is under regional or local control. 
This means that technically education can take on the appearance and to a degree the function that reflect local 
needs. Local communities, however, are made up of many groups of people holding different positions and having 
different needs. Individuals within these groups may come from different backgrounds and may have cxpectatioas 
not shared by the rest of the group. For example, teachers from a mainstream population and trained in an urban 
setting may not be prepared for what they will encoimter in a rural setting. Their expectations of what students 
need from an education may run counter to w hat students actually need as members of the local community, as was 




12 



found in the Ch’anda study (1984). 

Parents in any society may want something very different for their children than children want for 
themselves. In Cotton’s report on the establishment of high schools in rural Alaska (1984), parents had expressed 
that they woidd like their children to learn “traditional skills and values,” and have the abilit)' to thrive in village 
life. No comment was made regarding whether or not these students wanted to remain in the villages, or about 
what they hoped to achieve after high school 

TTiis mixture of factors makes it difficult to know if education programs, particularly those that originate 
from outside the communitt’, are adequately serving the people of that community. Some means of assessment is 
necessary to determine if program goals, and especiaUy program outcomes, match recipient needs. 

One way of approaching an assessment would be tlirough a records analysis (King, 1987), such as 
comparing program goal statements and student test scores. Tliis approach, however, does not indicate the kinds of 
experiences tliat people have as participants of the program, nor what their own expectations of the program are 
aside from stated program goals. 

A more desirable approach uses self-reporting. TTiis involves going direaly to the people, que.stioning 
across the spectrum of groups involved and making an analysis from this sampling to yield a more complete picture 
of the program’s actual impact (King, 1987). 

It seems logical to assess a program from the viewpoint of the people who use it, as it is the>' who are to 
benefit from the existence of communin’ based services. Their needs are meant to be at the core of program design; 
they participate in the programs, take lessons learned from those programs, and must find some way to apply them 
to their daily fives. 

Furthemiore, die if the Native world view is of things being interconnected (Kawaglev, 1993), and since 
the rural Alaskan population is largely Native, it also seems appropriate that a study taking pbce in this 
community would incorporate multiple perspeaives to the greatest degree possible. Taken together, these 
perspeaives would hopefully “provide die most comprehensive understanding of the subjea” (Pollard & Kaufinan, 




13 



1994). 



That said, the purpose oj this research was to assess education currently provided in rural Alaska^ using the perspectives given 
hy those involved in education as the basis Jor assessment. 

It was hoped that through this study an initial understanding of the perception of the education’s 
eflfeaiveness, in the context of this communin’ and its people, could be achieved, in addition to uncovering 
perceived lunitations of the current education program. By comparing across the spectrum of people and places 
they hold in the education system — from teacher education program administrators to yoimg students — as well as 
across some of the cultures represented in tliis communin’, it was hoped to reveal where perspectives mesh, and 
perhaps where they are mismatched. 

On a persona] level, by studying education in a cultural environment that Ls different from mv own, I also 
hoped to begin to understand how in general needs of education might differ and how this might be addressed as a 
provider of education services. 

METHODS 

The nature of this research lent itself to a qualitative research approach (Pollard & Kaufman, 1994). 
Bogdan and Bidden have said of qualitative research that it attempts to get at meanings that its purpose is to 
understand ‘Tow different people make sense out of their lives,” and to illuminate “the inner dynamics of 
situations (1992). Because the purpose of this research was to understand how a particular group of people 
perceive education and how it fimaions in their lives, this approach seemed most suitable. 

The qualitative approach was also appropriate because this is a cross-cultural study, where it Ls nor possible 
to simply ask a question and expect to be able to take answers entirely at face value. There are messages hidden 
within words spoken, both the researcher s and respondents’, that can either skew or add to understanding. Much 
of this understanding may be discovered only if the process and context of the research is included in the research 
outcomes (Bogdan & Bidden, 1992). An entirely quantitative end produa would have necessitated losuig this 




14 



depth in the study. 

This was also an exploratory study. Rather than testing a proposed h)'pothesis, the goal was instead to 
understand the issues well enough to make fiiture hypotheses possible, as new hypotheses spring from that which 
is begun to be understand (True, 1983). For example, the original intent of the research was to stud) a specific 
mteraction between education and the rural Alaskan community. However, because so little mformation about the 
nature of rural Alaskan education w'as available, it was nor possible to generate a viable question, A study siicli as 
this one would provide a foundation for generating future hYporheses. 

Generally, unstructured mrerviews are used for exploratoty studies (True, 1983). Claesson and Bncc 
(1989) recommend usmg semi-structured mterview questions to facilitate consistency, particularly for explorator\- 
interviews. Considering the limited amount of rime that was available for interviewing, as well as the small sample 
size, this semi-structured approach was die best choice. Had more time been available, it would have been possible 
to engage ui exploration via extended observation, participation, and unstructured questionuig. With only a sliort 
time available to gather data, however, most of the weight fell on interview results. Fully structured interview 
questions were avoided as much as possible to give the interviewees latitude to express thenxselves more completely 
(True, 1983). 

A key premise of this thesis was that culture has a role in the educating process. Past research m other 
populations has indicated that ailnire is in fact important, primarily from the philosophical and instnictional 
standpoint. However, developing interview' questions that addressed ailture specifically was avoided. To the people 
of this community, culture may or may nor be a vital component in education: Cbesson and Brice (1989) 
emphasized that what respondents consider important issues in education cannot be presupposed. Instead, 
assessing education based on its “intenial** impact, rather rlian on goals defined by individuals outside of the 
community', was the intent of this research and was reflected in the interview questions. 

It was anticipated that some responses would touch on culture without having to ask directly. By intenuew 
design, such responses would have been relatively unprovoked and therefore hopefully more revealing of what the 




15 



interviewee really thought. However, if the interviewee had not made any reference to culture, some additional 
probing would have ensued; the issue of culture m education is significant on some level at least, and should not be 
missed. 

While the primary data source used in the analysis came from formal, prearranged mterviews, the actual 
on-site exploration began before that. The research visit was timed for attending the Iniiit Circumpolar Conference 
General Assembly and Inuit Elder s Conference hosted in the town where most ol the research as conducted. 

The advantage of attending this conference prior to conducting interviews was several fold. It was an 
opportunity to get a general overview of what issues are important to northern cultures, and tliere were 
opportunities during informal discussions for participant observation. This was a time for immersion, to learn as 
much as possible in a httle time, to begin to notice key issues, to become more familiar with interaction behaviors, 
and to some degree to sort through the language. As stated by Erlandson et al., “[It is] difficult to coiranimicate 
with persons whose experience has been shaped in drastically different ways...it is important for researchers to 
attempt to share the constructions of those whose himian settmg they are mvestigatmg” (1993). By the time 
formal interviews were conducted, hopefully some of the inevitable confusion that goes along with any new 
situation would have dissipated, and the ta.sk of the interviews themselves more readily focused upon. In addition, 
and perhaps most importantly, this was a time for establishing a rapport with the people who would be 
participating m the research (Bogdan & Bidden, 1992). 

Interviews 

Interview schedules, or lists of ordered questions, were used to facditate staying on task and to give a basis 
for comparing results. Questions may have varied depending on tlie individual situations and as interviewing 
experience dictated (Bogdan & Bidden, 1992). Once an appropriate set of questions was finalized, that framework 
was followed as closely as possible in order to make comparisons across the populations being intenfewed. While 
different categories of people bemg mterviewed needed to have shghtly different sets of questions (due to their 




16 



specific roles in the education system), the target of each interview was the same — that of tlicir personal 
perspective of the education system. 

The interview schedule design included warm-up questions. These were intended to put the inter\uewee at 
ease while simultaneously leading to the heart of the question, a question which might by itself be diffiailt to 
answer; they were not used in the data analysis (True, 1983). For example, if the information sought after was 
what a parent would like to see being done for their child, the following line of questioning may have been used to 
get to the indkator question that provided data to be coded: 

How long have you lived here? 

Did you go to the same schools that your children do? 

Have many changes have taken place in how schools do things? How are thev different/similar? 

What would you like schools to do for your children in these current times? 

Additional probe questions may have been needed to get an answer to the indicator question (True, 1983). 

What was avoided were questions so specific that they were leading. How exact the questions became, 
however, depended on the interviewee response and how quickly they were on theu own able to answer within the 
limits of the research goal. The same approach w'as used regarding references to culture in education. 

Interviews were preceded by a briefing on what kind of questions the respondent could expect, and what 
their rights were, including confidentialit\\ Interviews were tape recorded with permission; otherwise, hand-wntten 
notes were taken. Recordings were transcribed for coding and for later reference for particularly illustrative quotes. 
To preserve confidentiality, records were given a letter and number code, rather than name identification. 

Participant Observation 

Ehiring the conference and subsequent conversations, notes were kept regarding commcntaiy on education 
and its role in the local community. TTierc were also opportunities to engage in informal duscussion regarding 
people's perceptions of and experiences with the school system. For example, during a visit to a nearby village, a 
few minutes were spent talking to a high school student while browsing in a convenience store. Permission to use 
information garnered from conversations was acquired prior to any participation, and notes were made following 




i f 



the discussions. 



A key use for this informally acquired information was to ref'me the proposed interview questions so tJiat 
the final questions targeted more quickly the prevalent issues in education. It was also used to identifv trends 
during the initial data analysis, but not for establLshing quantitative results. 

Field Notes 

Recommended as an ongoing record of information, experiences and thoughts that occur in the process of 
collecting data (Bogdan & Bidden, 1992), and as a means for adding depth to the study by picking up “alternative 
or additional perspeaives, [and] phenomenon of interest” not otherwrse a part of interview data (Maton, 1993), a 
field notebook was also kept. It contained descriptions of physical surroimdings, obsers'ed and experienced 
interactions, thoughts about research progress being made (or not made), and questions as they arose. By providing 
descriptive infonnation, these notes rounded out the context and expenence of the stud\ . 

THE RESEARCH SITE 

The site seleaed for .study is a town lying on the edge of the Benng Sea. It is only acce.ssible bv air. There 
are a few gravel roads leading out of it, none of which are more than 70 miles or so long, and only one ending in 
another village. (One road does end in another built-up area, but it is not really considered to be a village; it rs more 
a “resort” area.) There us one paved road and no traffic hghts. Many of the hoiuses are witliout pliunbing. However, 
compared to many other rural villages, it is .still a very developed town with manv amenities. It ho.sts a ho.spital, a 
recreational center, a large new grocen- store, many craft shops, and a small hbran. There are separate facilities for 
the elementary, middle, and high schooL There are any number of liquor establishments. Employment here Ls 
largely through the Native Alaskan Corporations, die hospital, and the auport. Tounsm ls also part of the 
industry', and there is a substantial market for crafb. Smaller villages are often charaaenzed by sustenance Lving, 
supplemented with welfare. The population is 50% or more Native Alaskan, depending on how etlmicitv Ls 




18 



detennined, such as those who are mixed Native/ non-Native Alaskan. There are a few African Americans, and a 
significant number of Asian and Russian descent. Populations in the smaller villages are closer to 100% Native 
Alaskan. 

This site was selected for several reasons. My Alaskan research contact had been a long term resident there. 
Because of this, she was able to serve as an initiating liaLson with members of the education communin' for 
interviews. The conference being held there was convenient for attending as part of the research, and it drew people 
from other villages, some of whom were contaaed for uiterviews. Tlie population of the town is big enough in 
itself that a fair sampling of representative groups were obtained for interviewing. Using the limited external road 
system, an excursion to a nearby village was possible, gettuig a more complete picture of the rural context and 
pursuing a few more interviews. 

THE SUBJECTS 

Formal Interviews 

Subjects for participant observation and interviews were for the most part Native Alaskan, although not 
limited to this population. The population that senses and attends the schools in the region where the stud\* was 
conducted is ethnically mixed. Within realistic research limitations, this was represented in the interview pool. 
School employees and students who are not originally from diLs area often leave during the summer, and were 
subsequently not available for interviews. As these people are more likelv to be non-Native Alaskan, there was an 
under representation of that population in the interview data. 

The main subject pool was referred by my Alaskan research advisor who hves and works in the region of 
study. Prior to going to Alaska, each prospective subject was called for an initial introduction and to ask for verbal 
consent to a later interview. All conceded, with brief or no hesitation. Follow-up letters with more information 
about myself and the study were sent. Upon arrival, all were contacted except for one who decided not to come to 




19 



the conference. Interview appointments were set up with the others. 

It was hoped that from these initial contaas and from attending the conference, additional potential 
subjects could be contaaed. TTiis approach proved to be sticcessflil, and several interview appomtments were set 
up. 

A total of twelve formal interviews were conduaed. These were comprised of one teacher education 
program administrator (non-Native Alaskan); two principals (both non-Native Alaskan, but one who is otherwuse 
a minorit}- person); four teachers (all Native Alaskan); four students (all Native Ala.skan); and one parent (Native 
Alaskan). One teacher was an elder, and one was interviewed as both a teacher and parent. The data for the 
program administrator and two of the students were not used in the quantitative data analysis. While they were 
fonnal interviews, the mterview formats were significant!)- different, and could not be used for comparison. 

Participant Observation 

At the conference there were approximately 100 delegates; 150 observers; 45 VIPs and .speakers; and 
several hundred others who held roles such as translation, media, and entertainment. Seven countries were 
repre.sented. From Alaska, there were approximately 27 delegates, 79 observers, and 22 \^Ps and speakers. The 
conference was a limited source of participant obsen'ation subjects as most participants were busy with conference 
activities. Notes taken from listening to one student who s-poke at the conference were used in the qualitative 
analysis. 

Other contaas were made with people while attending the entertamment portioas of the conference, 
during social interaaions with acquaintances of our hostess, and as a result of conversatioas with people in such 
settings as local craft shops. 

Six interaaions resulted in aseftil participant observation data. Tliese were comprised of one pnncipal 
(non-Native Alaskan); one teacher (non-Native Alaskan but a long-term resident of the communiry ); and four 
students (two who were Native Alaskan and one who was otherwise a minorit)' person). 



DATA ANALYSIS 



To code the data, an initial content analysts was done of the overall results. Data from mterviews, 
participant observation, and field notes were used. Sixteen specific themes were identified, then grouped accordmg 
to four broad categories; these were culture, school role and fiinCTionmg, relations, and social tssiies. An other/not 
sure category was also created. 

Each mterview transcript was reduced to statements that could be readily categorized. A transcript code 
was written on each segment and given a sequential number, for easier handling. Workmg with each transcript, 
segments were reviewed for content, and their sequential number written into the appropriate theme as fotmd on 
the coding sheet. In addition to my.self, this step in codmg was performed by tw’o other individuals who were nor 
lamiliar with the research and who only knew wliat tlieincs were being looked for in the interview results. The 
purpose of having backup coders was to rule out bias in how the .statements were coded, and to detemiine the 
reliabilit)' of the coding system. 

Due to the unexpeCTed unavailabiliti- of two additional coders, not all transcripts were reviewed by backup 
coders. Thus was considered in reviewing for potential bias in the results. Only those transcripts that had backup 
coding as well as self-coding were used in the reliability te.st. 

A correlation test of coder results was run on the data compiled. Due to the small sample size and 
resultmg small data tallies, correlation tests were run withm the major rather than mdividual re.sponse categories. 
The degree of correlation shown was used to mfer the validity of iLsmg data patterns to anal\z,e perspectives. 

Percentages of responses in each category were made for each group, using data from comparable 
transcripts. Response percentages were also calculated for combined group responses using all comparable 
transcripts. Percentages were graphed, showmg response patterns for each group and the combined population 
interviewed. (See Figures 1 through 6 for graphed results.) Clustering within the broad groups was the basis of 
analysis. As the interview pool was relatively small, peaks occurring in specific theme categories mav or mav not 
have occurred for a larger population. However, if there was a particularly strong peak in one theme it was noted in 




21 



the analysis. Vahdin’ of cluster and peak patterns may be inferred from the reliabilin’ test using backup data. 

Participant observation transcripts and interviews not following the regular interview schedule could not 
be used in the percentage analysis. In most cases they did not provide the same breadth or depth of infonnation as 
the formal interviews; therefore, they are not legitimately comparable. However, they do provide a lot of valuable 
information and were used in the initial theme analysis, as well as for the qualitative analysis. 

The qualitative analysis was supported by looking at specific quotes, and reviewing focal pomts in 
comments and interview responses. Quotes were used to create a deeper understanding of what is important to the 
people in this community in the context of their education system. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Data Validity and Reliability 

The correlation test showed that for combmed group data within the four broad categories, tliere was a 
high degree of correlation. There were neither distinaly opposing nor random results. The most ‘^unreliable*' 
results were found in the other/ not sure categoty, indicating that certainu* of codmg varied with tlic coder, 

A comment made by one of the coders should be noted in assessmg for validiu'. It was stated that when 
making an unsure but “best guess" for which categoty to put a statement into, they would try to distribute them 
evenly. This ma)* have lead to a skewing or flattening out of results. 

Conference and Field Notes 

Major topics of discussion during the conference were faaors affecting sustenance livmg, social issues such 
as drinking, and relations between youth and elders. Most apparent was tlie frustration of Native Alaskan people 
who choose to have a “traditional" lifestyle, and the interference they experience by the mainstream social system, 
including government. 




22 



At least for the individuals who spoke, traditional lifesnles, languages, and connections between people are 
important in their lives. At the same time, there is acknowledgment that mainstream lifestyles and associated skills 
are also important; however, it Ls evident that tradition Ls the preferred framework. 

Education as a .specific topic was not addressed, bur reference was made to it as a vehicle for resolving 
problems m the community. Followmg traditional practices is seen as a way of appeasmg social problems affectmg 
youth. Elders want culture and language to be taught in school so that they niay coiiuiuiiiicate better with their 
youth. Communication is somethmg that all generations are mterested m workmg on but, because of mcreasmg 
mfluence of outside or changmg cultures, tliey have found it difficult to do so. 

Interviews and Participant Observation 

Formal interviews provided the data that was used to show trends within groups and to make coinparisoas. 
Both uiterv'iews and participant obsen^ation provided data to be used for qualitative analysts, wliich was the 
uitended focus of this research. Therefore, they are considered together. 

Culture Culture as a broad theme was a priinaiy area of focus. PrmcipaLs, teachers, students, and parents all showed 
clustering in this area. The specific topic of coping with culture was cmphasb.ed for all groups interv'iew'cd. 

Students also showed a focus on attitude regardmg culture, and parents showed a foats on ailtiiral tssue.s. Students 
are directly subjected to attitudes regarding ailtiire, be that by what teachers project or by the messages liidden in a 
selective curriculum. Parents grew’ up with having to make major cultural adjustments between how their own 
parents grew up and what their children now experience. 

Culture shows a high concentration of commentary’ and interview response amongst Native and non- 
Native Alaskans alike. Residents are smiilarly affected by the remoteness and climate of the region, as well as bv 
the industiy. Schools can have and m many cases do have a role in preparing students for, or otherwise 
accommodatmg to, life in this region. For example, outdoor sur\uval clubs and courses in small engine repair inav 




23 



be available as part of the school program. 

Approximately hall ol the student population Ls Native Alaskan, some practicing .sustenance Lving with 
their families, some whose parents grew up .speaking their Native Ala.skan language. Diffenng values and 
communication characteristics pose challenges betw'een the school s\'stein and communitv. For example, the is.suc 
of “wait-tune,” the time recommended to wait for a response after asking a question, as well as other diff erences m 
conununication stt les were mentioned by several interviewees. The wait-time for Native Ala.skan .students mav be 
much longer than lor non-Native Alaskan students, and non-Native Alaskan teachers often have dilficnilti' 
accommodating this. There is also the possibilit>' ol imsinterprcting Native Alaskan .student intelligence, for 
traditionally they may leam by observ'ation ol their experienced elders, rather than the constant verbal interaction 
that marks mainstream learning envu-onments. SciiooLs ma\- provide inservices for teaciiers on topics of 
communication and learning .styles, led bv Native Ala.skan people of the conmiunitw 

Native Alaskan parents ma\- liave the traditional belief tliat the teaciier is tiie authorirv and siiould not be 
questioned. There may also be lear associated with these views. One teacher stated that, “Sometimes Native 
parents don’t want to meet the teacher at all; the\- never know who their kid’s teacher is. Thev are afraid.” A teacher 
who understands this, or one who ls able to speak a Native Alaskan language, is better able to put a parent at ca.se. 
This Ls e.spcciall\- the case when the .student’s guardian ls a grandparent, where culmral values ma\- be even more 
deeply ingrained. Teachers are encouraged to be sensitive to these and other cultural difference.s, and be gentiv 
persistent in tlicir interactions witli families. 

Also posing a problem is that there is realli' not one ethnic culture represented in this region. This 
particular community Ls extremely diverse in both its Native and non-Native Ala.skan population. Thrs presents 
difficulties in tty ing to design appropriate cultural prograiiLs. For example, a school ma\- decide to tcacii a Native 
Ala.skan language; because there arc numerous dialects represented, however, whicii language to teach becomes tiie 
question. 

Curriculum materials that are developed for a mainstream context are sometimes inappropriate, often 




24 



catering to a difterent cultural life experience. One parent commented: 

For the Native people, the curriculum should come from their point of view\...They don't 

understand traffic lights, we don't have any here. Don't understand frogs, we've never seen them. 

It shoidd come from their own environment. 

TTiere is increasing interest in die community to become involved in designing materials that are appropriate to the 
region and the people. Sometimes materials can be supplemented, maximizing students' learning by drawing on 
what is familiar to them, their experiences and environment. For example, the elementary* school may bring in 
materials such as fish and musk ox heads, organisms that most students have seen before, to study as they leani 
about life science. Enterprising teachers are able to use the immediate environment as a valuable resource. 

The most evident cultural mclusion in the schools arc bicultural/bilingual classes, available from 
elementary* through high school. Teachers are usually but not always Native Alaskan. Students Icam Native 
Alaskan languages; whicli one may depend on wliat theu teacher Ls fluent ui. Tliey also learn crafts and skills, such 
as ivory carv^ing or dancing. There are aLso courses in self sufficiency, and outdoor skills classes are currentlv 
expanding. 

When there Ls an interest expressed ui an additional aspea of culuiral praaices, such as kayak building, 
supplemental instruction may be provided. However, such accommodations have sometimes been offered, onlv to 
have students choose not to participate. Perhaps because of what has happened in the past, culturally based 
programs often have a stigma attached. Parents, including Native Alaskan parents, may not want their children to 
participate, suggesting that those programs arc not for the serious students. Often students will not participate 
because it's *hiot cool." Cidture in education seems to be pulled at from all sides, and in parr at least remains an 
unsettled issue. 

Despite the apparent efforts to accommodate a mainstream school system to a population having a 
predominantly different cultural background and experience, diere is still some question as to the sincerity of these 
actions. Several interviewees expressed that they suspea that importance of culture in education Ls just bemg given 
lipservice. As in the past, the bare mmimum may be bemg done, or programs may be under used or misused. For 




25 



example, the high school had a migrant student program that was to provide academic support for students whose 
families left for part of the year for sustenance living. A student, examining this more closely, found the actual 
facility' to be minimal, probably lending more to these students’ failure than their success. Whether this Ls a result 
of funding or organizational problems, or silent prejudices, Ls at this point left to speculation. 

Most teachers and administrators come from outside of rural Alaska, from entirely different ailtural 
backgrounds and expenences than into which they are placed. They are often met with skepticism by the 
community as to their reasons for being there, such as only to make money or increase retirement benefits. This Ls 
fueled by the fact that often imported staff do not get involved in the communin- or otherwise show httle intere.st 
in the culture and hfe,style. Furthennore, these staff often only last for a short time, perhaps one school year, before 
they move on to a new location. Whetlicr it is the case or not, this is perceived as having a negative attitude 
towards the people, region, and culture. 

A recommendation made by several inten'iewees was that prospeaive teacliers be required to learn about 
the region before coming, perhaps have a trial period, and to zsscss clo.sely their own ailtural beliefs and prejudices. 
Ideally this would result in attracting teachers and other staff who are genuinely interested and committed to the 
area, and who would stay for an extended period of time. 

Other areas where cultural issues show up ts when .snidents leave their commimities. These .students 
usually land in a physical environment very different from where they grew up, and coupled with expo.sure to a new 
and imfamiliar set of values, will experience aJture shock. The end result ts veiy often that they drop out and 
return to their vilbges. One principal remarked that Native Alaskan parents, if their children are having difficulty, 
will encourage them to come home rather than complete their endeavors outside. As more .students have 
opportunities to have experiences outside tlieir communities, .such as for senior trips and work/study programs, 
the incidence of these difficulties may diminish. 

Even for tliose who successfully complete post-secondary education programs, most seem to return to 
their commumties to live. Following their experiences outside, they often return witli a broader view of the world 




and a desire to make changes in their communities, mainly regarding social problems. Notably, interest in their 
culture as a valuable aspea of their lives and the lif e of the region is often renewed. 

School role /functioning School role and functioning also showed some degree of response clustering. Howe\'cr, the 
specific topic that stood out across all groups was that of proclauned school role and actual outcomes. This should 
not be a disappointing dLscoverv’, as it would be hoped that schools would concern themselves heavily with this 
issue. What may have been surprising was the amount of emphasis that students put on thus topic. 

Several groups shared the sentiment that the quality of education falls short of what they need in order to 
survive beyond the public school system, be that in post-secondan* education or emplovnient situations. One 
student reflected on her freshman year at college and her struggles with English writing classes, stating: 

I didn't know what a thesis was, or what elements of writing meant. 1 had to figure all of that out. 

And looking back now 1 just can't believe what [public school] teachers got awav with....l thought 

I was really set, but I was really naive. When 1 came back I thought about wanting to the school 

board, because 1 was so unprepared. 

Weaknesses in preparation are recognized by school administrators as well, mostly pertaining to work- 
related skills rather than post-secondarv* education. One principal stated that the schools are trying to improve 
student preparation for the workforce, especially since most will go on to work rather than pursue higher 
education. This has entailed finding out the needs of future employers by asking them directly, and bv observing 
problems that current employers and employees in the comnninitv’ have. For example, schools are ttying to instill a 
work “ethic" in their students, de\^eloping in them a sense of responsibility and pride, evidently scarce in the 
current workforce. 

The general relevance of school to students' lives was mentioned in several other contexts as well. Students 
on the academic track desire better preparation for surviving away from their communities, so that they may 
successfully complete post-secondary education paths. High performmg students who wish to enter the technical 
workforce have indicated that thev* are not acquiring the skills needed by that level of job. They also express 
interest in learning more about the region's cultural and political histoty, current events, and how their commimin' 




27 



fits into the broad spearum of the nation and on a global level. To be sure, advances in these realms are being 
made, but real progress is subject to limited resources associated witli rural circumstances. 

Several groups felt there should be more choices available, such as upper level math and science courses, as 
well as more diverse language courses. Satellite courses to some degree supplement choices; howxver, thus is 
challenged by distances from teaching centers and time differences which affect the ability for students to 
communicate with those instructors. More and more, the conirmmity college in the subject town is being drawn on 
to provide upper level and other more varied instruction. 

At the elementaty school level, the sentiment expressed w'as somewhat different. An administrator stated 
that the schools are as good as if not better tlian the national average at preparing their students, especiall\* in math 
and science. Currently tliey are looking at improving connections between staff at the different levels of schooling, 
in order to prepare students at the elementaty level to do well at the middle and high school levels. The hope ls 
that tliey will be able to earn- the Itigh perfonnance trend foiuid at the elementan level through to the upper levels. 

Drop out Is not seen as an unusually big problem, but this is not bv chance. The region carries a burden of 
social problems, which under ordinaty circumstances would result in many students dropping out of the school 
system. In addition, there may be a cultural discrepancy between what is available in the regular school svstem and 
conditions under which Native Alaskan students in particular may be able to perform better. Described by one 
teacher, for example, under traditional circumstances Native Alaskan students would be taught one-to-one, whereas 
in schools the ratio is of course much higher. Accommodating these problems is the “alternative school” where 
high school students who might otherwise drop out can complete tlieir education and at the same time get 
employment training skills. 

The alternative school uses a modified daily schedule and tutors or aides, most often Native Alaskan, to 
increase available one-to-one attention. Aides arc responsible for helping with course work and job training; they 
also give students personal support. For example, if a student fails to show up for school, the aide will go to that 
student s house and be a force behind getting them to attend. These aides were described as being “like parents. 




28 



counselor, and teacher all in one/* The success of the alternative school system in this district Ls evident, as there 
has been only an estimated .5% dropout rate, all witliin the last four years* 

Relations TTie categor)' encompassing relations in the education communit\* also had a significant incidence of 
response. Relations between school, family and community, and attitudes affeaing relations were consistently high 
scoring points of focus. Students are the only ones deviating from this peak; their focus lay in staff and student 
relations* 

According to one principal, parents are likely to be involved in their children’s education, so long as not 
restricted by cultural values. The community as a whole seems to work well with the school system, mostlv in 
providing feedback regarding indusm* emplo>Tnent requuements, which helps to unprove education goals. 

Participation of the community in the education system has proved both fruitful on one hand and 
ncgleaed on the other. Members of the community outside of the education svstem who have skills tliat are 
valuable to students, such as coaching, were at one time invited to participate in school activities* Evidently this is 
no longer encouraged, for reasons that were not verifiable but possibly related to avoiding having funds cut. On the 
other hand, the elementary school at least has encouraged the involvement of the communin* in school cultural 
activities, in an effort to bring the two closer together. Parents may also serve as volunteers in the classroom, 
strengthening the bonds between famdies and schools, and working to achieve common goals. 

Students commented frequently on relations between students and school staff. Students pick up on when 
teachers not only care about what tliey are teaching or how well tlieir students are doing, but also when they show 
genuine interest in their students and in their backgrounds. It is an appreciated feature of a teacher or other school 
personnel when they take the time to get involved in the communin' where students live. The sincenU' comes 
tlirough, and students feel better about being part of that teacher s classroom, not surprisingly resulting in better 
academic outcomes. (Parents are also more likely to become involved if the interest is found to be two-way.) 
According to several students interviewed, the key is not in what a teacher s background is, but rather that they aa 
out of caring and respect. 




29 



One principal described the students in tliis community as being quite difterenr than those that might be 
encountered elsewhere. Tliey were described as being tough on the outside and at the same time are veiy caring 
about the welfare of their peers. On the otlier hand, they have also been described as being uniisiully mean, 
particularly towards each other. The school personnel have to deal frequently with prejudices amongst the students, 
especially between the Native Alaskan students originating from different geographic regions, and feel that the 
battle is against values that are prevalent in the general community*. According to this principal, for teachers and 
other school personnel to develop good relationships with their students, they need to respea cultural and social 
differences, and give students space to resolve problems independently. 

Social issues The final broad theme where many responses fell was that of social issues. Primarily this refers to .social 
issues that affect students in a way directly relevant to school, such as drinking and early pregnancy. Social i.ssues 
affecting students beyond the school experience scored low for most groups except for saidents themselves. Tliev 
seem aware of the social reality* tliat they must face after they get out of the school system. 

Alcohol is in particular a problem. One interviewee suggested that this problem is fueled b\* an 
overabundance of drinking establishments in this town. The results of alcoholi.sm go beyond adult related 
behaviors, and are evident at the elementaiy school level as fetal alcohol s\*ndrome and fetal alcohol effect. The 
local police department operates a D.A.R.E. program in the schools in an effort to interrupt the cycle of substance 
abuse. Schools may have extraairricular aaivities that provide suidents with healthy social outlets, but in villages 
where resources are more limited, youth are more likely to adopt harmfid social habits. Some villages have opted to 
be ''dty*,'' tlie outcomes of which were not verifiable in the scope of this study. 

Perhaps less easy to address is the problem that many students may encounter at home. For example, they 
themselves may be drinking, or tlieir parents may be dnnkmg and they are left with die responsibility of siblings. In 
reference to difficidt home situations, several young interviewees expressed hope that teachers would learn to not 
criticize the community% particularly when teachers have come from outside. TTiey also hope that teachers 
themselves find a healthy oudet for their frustrations, keeping it out of the classroom because students experience 




30 



enough conflict in their own lives. This understanding for the conditions that exist in the comniunirv' factors into 
classroom funaioning and student/teacher relations; one teacher stated, ‘‘Tliere s a lot of students that need to be 
listened to. They have a lot of major problems at home. ' 

Students may also be used to living without a lot of family guidance, posing problems for teachers who are 
most comfortable with being ‘'in charge" of the classroom. One principal s experience has been that students are 
not afraid to defy their teachers, and that a relaxed approach may be more effeaive in dealing with students on a 
daily basis. For a classroom situation to work, teachers need to be in tune w'ith their students' lives, because of the 
close connection between the two arenas, and because teachers cannot extricate themselves from die workings of 
the communitv% 

Social issues also appear in the context of culture. Students whose families live traditionally mav come into 

conflict writh school goals. One teacher stated diat: 

Teachers have academic expectations, and some of the traditional parents don't have that; reading 
is not important to the family. Wliat is important Ls getting the food ready for the winter, putting 
away the seal meat, and makmg mukluk bottoms, buying gas for huntmg. TTiat's what's miportant 
to the family. 

A principal observed in the communiu* other patterns associated wnth traditional living, such as: 

‘My mother got married at 13 or 14, so I'm expected to.' I think it's kind of a cvcie. But they have 
to break the idea that just because it happened to their mother or father doesn't mean that it has 
to happen to them. 

Traditions may create a c\’cle, compounding social problems that may lead to not completing school, posing 
additional challenges for students. Another principal observed that often when students don't finish school, thev 
stay in their villages and rely on sustenance living supplemented by welfare, and are otherw^ise unable to do 
an)’thing for their livelihoods. 

Social problems are not restriaed to the Native Alaskan population but are neverdieless predominant ui 
this sector. A solution might be found in ailtural development. One interviewee obsen^ed that w^hen students can 
explore and learn to appreciate their heritage, they feel better about theinselves and achieve greater .success. Another 




31 



comment made was cliat Native Alaskan youth do veiy well in their lives when thev are closely tied to traditional 
lifestyles. When they are put back into the mainstream system, including the public school system, the\' revert back 
to unliealthy behavior. 

The impaa of social problems is evident even for those who complete high school and go on to po.st- 
secondary education. A situation was described where a student went on to college with the benefit of scholarship.s, 
but due to homesickness and culture shock m general, began to dnnk heavily and eventualli dropped out. Another 
observation was that students often feel they have very little to go to once out of school, especially since the 
educational focus may not be really relevant to their lives and circumstances. Students are constantly challenged bv 
the patterns found in their communities and by a school system that may not be ftiUv prepanng them for success in 
their given environment. 

Teacher Education Program Administrator The mtcn’icw schedule for tlic teacher education program adminLstraror was 
irregular, catenng veiy specifically to a imiquc position in the education svstern; however, libcrn- was taken to .see 
how it compared to the other results. Agam there was an emphasis on culture, copmg and Issues, as well as hlsron , 
politics, and ethnicity. The most noteworthy peak was in the specific categon- of community as a resource. Tliis 
goes along with the stated mtent of the teacher education program, that teachers’ skills are to be developed 
accord mg to the needs of the communities that they come from and will be teaching m. 

The fact that there are a few parallels to the other data, despite the interview having a different foais, 
warrants a remark. The concerns of the people responsible for training teachers for these conummitics mav nor be 
too far off from the concerns of the conununity. Nevertheless, the different interview fonnats limits how much 
comparison can be made between tliese groups. 

CONCLUSIONS 

The goal of education in this rural Alaskan community is several-fold. One is cultural enriclunent, through 
study and experience of the Native Alaskan and regional culture, as well as the many different ethnicities and 




32 



cultures that comprise this area. It is also to prepare students to funaion m tlieir immediate environment, and to 
be competitive on a national level. Fmally, it is to teach students in a manner most conducive to their learning, 
given their backgrounds. What might be deduced from interview respoases and other comments is that, while the 
effort is apparent, these goals are not yet being achieved. Many aspects of education in this communin' are 
culturally congruent or closely so; education is drawmg on the ailtures of the people, Native and non-Native 
Alaskan, and of the region. And where success m thts goal has not yet been achieved, there is mterest for 
continually improving. 

For the most part, concerns regardmg education in tliis rural ^\laskan communin' are shared among 
mdividuals and groups mtenMewed. Students, teachers, prmcipaLs, and parents all addressed witfi sunilar decrees of 
emphasis those Issues of ailture, school role and fiincrioning, relationships found witlim the education communin', 
and social issues that have an impact on education. This was evidenced by response data having simdar peaks in 
those broad tliemes, withm categories of people mten^ewed and across categories, Becaxtse no non-Nativc Alaskan 
teachers were officially interview ed, it ls not possible to ren'iark on whether non-Native perceptions of tlie 
education system differ significantly from those of Native Alaskans. 

In research realin*, it Is difficult to know’ how’ much of the response restilts were artificiallv produced bv 
the mterv’iew questions or by the coding scheme. How’ever, it can be safel\' concluded that the described Issties are 
probabl)' significant; the mterview questions were by design intended to prompt interviewees to speak as much or 
as little as they desired, and the depth of collected comments could not be artificially produced. 

LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 

One of the hazards of any study tliat crosses cniltures is the presumption that those on ''opposite sides*’ of 
the ailtures will understand each other, respond m an mterpretable manner, or share enough similarities that 
communication w’lU not be overly hindered (Bama, 1994). Interview'mg across cultures for the purpose of getting 
at the heart of die matter, hearmg “the word*' from the people themselves, poses interpretive cliallenges. In 




33 



addition, the “interviewer effect,” where subjects modiff their responses (consciously or not) bccaase they know 
they are being observed, is also well documented (True, 1983); respondents may give answers that thev think the 
interviewer wishes to hear, rather than what thev reallv think. 

Speech mannertsms and non-verbal behaviors may hold subtle, ailnirallv based meaning. Bv playing dose 
attention to this metacommunication,*’ it mav be possible to ‘‘find clues to the interpretation the speaker w'ishes 
to attach...to the words” (Briggs. 1986), in other words, find the meaning hidden in the words. With a limited 
experience of cultural innuendos, it may be diffiailt to “hear” or “see” the message. 

Because of the issue being examined, there are social and political overtones that can affect how people 
respond (Briggs, 1986). For example, if there Ls concern about job seairin- or about services being taken a wav, 
teachers and parents may not express complaints about programs. Sunilarly, children mav respond with what the\- 
think their parents w^ant to hear, and parents may respond with what thev think the interviewer wants to hear. This 
is not a factor that can easily be controlled for, other than being aware, nying to “listen between the Imes,” and 
resisting the confines of cultural filters. 

Field notes are also a place where interpretive errors can occur. Wliat stands out as significant enough for a 
researcher to write down may not be at all significant as far as the subjects of the suidy are concerned. Likewise, 
lacking the experience to recognize subtleties that are nevertheless significant in that culture, lifestvde, or 
environment, it is possible to inadvertently create gaps in understanding the topic. On the other Iiand, if diligently 
used, field notes can also be a means for capturing tliese subtletie.s. 

In this study, the sample size and duration of “liands-on” research are also limitations. With relativelv few 
representatives of the chosen categories, it is nskv to make generalizations of perspectives and how thev compare 
across categories, it is only possible to begin to put ti^ether a picture of how people in this particular area of niral 
Alaska perceive their education, and speculate on how the goals of the education providers (pnTgram planners, 
administrators, and teachers) are on target with what the recipients (parents and students, and in some wavs tlic 
teachers again) expect or get. A short on-site time is limiting because it pennits httle time to “wann up,” to get bv 




34 



cultural coinniunication differences, and to build up the tmst of the coinniunit\* in the researcher and research 
activities. 

The soundest advice given in die course of tliLs project, facing the challenge of the cross-cultural research 
situation, was to at all tunes go in with eyes open, not filter what was seen or heard, never imitate how the people 
expressed themselves, bur learn from them and from niv own mLstakes. Any research situation has limitations that 
have to be accepted and, to the best of the researcher's abdit\’, be considered when interpreting results. 

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY 

This was an initial exploration of the current education system in one location of rural Alaska. Tlie 
intention was to look, ask, and hsten carefiiUy to what was said and not said as die education and its recipients' 
perceptioas were explored. A safe conclusion at this stage is that there are tssues worth giving coasistcnt and 
carehil consideration to, and that the people arc the carriers of these wortiiy messages from which educators all over 
can learn. This was a chance to listen and leam from people who have contended with and contmiie to contend 
with an education that largely has onginated from outside their own culaire. People sucii as these are in tiie 
position to instigate change (Wetsmantel & Fradd, 1989): they may be the voice as well as the active force of a 
communiti*. 

It is a goal that studies like this, m conjimction with similar smdies of different dimensions of the topic, 
would be used to evaluate the effectiveness and desirabdity of public programs (Shore & Keepers, 1982). As stated 
by Tomlmson and Callahan, “evaluation... is ongoing, and each well-designed and wcU-conducted exammation of a 
program will aid in strengthenmg future assessments” (1994). Errors arc an inevitable component of all research, 
but it is these errors tliat will help strengthen fuuire work. 

SUGGESTIONS FOR ACTION 

Currently, the value of the Cross-Cultural Education Development Program that prepares teachers for 




35 



teaching in rural Alaska Ls being assessed. Partly related to funding Issues, and partly for questioning its utility , 
cutting of the program is being considered. The results of this study will hopefully, however, lend credence to the 
value of preparing teachers in a ailtural context, such as this program laigrely ha.s. TTiere us undeniable evidence that 
the formal development of an understanding of the dominant, hustoncally and aaively significant culture ls vital to 
the success of the learning environment and process, at least in thus particubr community-. Likewtse, teaching .sty les 
and curriculum are domains where such an understanding needs to exist, as these are hopefiilly developed to best 
suit the community where they are implemented. On an ongoing basis, and in the context of the communit}-, 
existing inservice professional development programs might be enlianced or neyv ones developed. 

There are also implications from this study that suggest that becoming an active iiieiiiber of the 
community , perhaps just as much a frame of mind as an aaion, is as vital to the succe.ss of the educator as it is to 
the educated. For education relation.ships to be effcaive, members of the education community need to e.stablish 
comfortable working connections with the community — the people as well as their culture. New educators can be 
helped to establish themselves into a context often diftcrent from their own uninediatc backgrounds by developing 
an appreciation for, and participation in, the culture of the communin . 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE STUDY 

As no teachers originating from outside the rural Alaskan region were inten^iewed, it was not possible to 
get a comparative perspective, revealmg their expectations and findings of education m this environment. Several 
representatives from each group who were interviewed alluded to problems related to teachers origuiating from 
outside the region; comments were significant enough that further investigation is warranted. The goal of such a 
study would be to seek solutions that benefit both tlie teachers and the recipients of educational services. For 
example, it was recommended multiple times that prospeaive teachers visit an area before committing to it; thev 
should also be encouraged to examine closely their behefs about culture and different social clunates. 

Understanding tlie experiences of teachers who have not done tliis prior to accepting a position in an unfamiliar 




36 



region might help facilitate better results. 

( 

Tile provision for and related success of the alternate school program to reducing incidence of drop out Ls 
another aspect arising out of this initial investigation that should be explored further. The traditional school 
situation is not one that works for all students, and students are often lost unnecessarily because more suitable 
provisions are not made. The alternative school system appears to work well in this communiry, helping more 
students complete high school and gain valuable work experience, and might elsewhere as well. 

Relations between school and communin' were a subject of frequent and thought provoking commentarv'. 
Because most students seem to remain in the communities where rhe\* attend school, it would be valuable to 
explore further how school and communities might better serve each other. For example, programs that involve 
smdents helping in the coimininity might provide learning opportunities and improve confidence. It may also give 
students the sense of having a place to go after completing high school as they become more involved in the region 
they live and see different possibilities tliat extst for them there. It also benefits tlie community, munediatclv in the 
form of service and down the road as it facilitates preparing students for the needs of the area, A stud\’ in this area 
could reveal what similar programs may already exLst, and what interest there mav be for it in otlier schools and 
communities. 

Finall)', a comparative study should be done betM'een the perspectives of those dircctlv involved in tlic 
education communirv' and those in the corporate community, especially where the flow of money is concerned. 
There may be differences betv^^een diese two communities regarding what Ls seen as important in the general role of 
education, as well as in developing specific curriculum and defining the educational context. If differences do exist, 
an exploration in this domain may reveal potential “hidden agendas” that lead to weaknesses in the abilitv for 
either to provide qualit>- services for the communit)* as a whole, and mav ultimately be a springboard for seeking 
solutioas. 




37 



Percent Response 




6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 

Response Category 




38 



Percent Response 



20 



15 



10 



I I 



n 



6 



_L 



I 



7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 l6 17 

Response Category 




39 



25 



20 



0) 

Sl5 

a 

w 

PS 

+j10 

c 

0) 

.Si 

5 



in 



I 



i 



r* 

n i 

! ' i 



5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 l7 

Response Category 




40 



Percent Response 



16 - 

14 - 

12 - 

10 - 

8 - 



2 

0 






i ! 



n 



n 

! I 



6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 

Response Category 




Percent Response 



20 



t 

! 



15 



10 



5 



0 




i 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 l4 is 16 



Response Category 




42 



Percent Response 



30 



} 

25-f-— 

I 

1 

I 





9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 



Response Category 




43 



Figure 1: Percent Response in Response Categories for Principals . 

Figure 2: Percent Response in Response Categories for Teachers , 

Figure 3: Percent Response in Response Categories for Students . 

Figure 4: Percent Response in Response Categories for Parents , 

Figure 5: Percent Response in Re5ponse Categories for Combined Groups — Principals. Teachers, Suidents.& 
Barents . 

Figure 6: Percent Response in Response Categories for Teacher Education Program Administrator . 



Key to response categories: 

CULTURE 

1 = Hision\ politics, & ethnicny 

2 = Arritudc re: culnirc/environmem/pcupic/culuirc based programs 

3 Coping w/ ciiliure/cuimral differences; culture based programs 

4 = Cultural & environmental differences fstyle, language. ctc,\ issues 

SCHOOL ROLE/FUNCTIONING 

5 = Start preparation (general', 

6 = Facility & program (general ’ 

7 “ Relevance of school (general ; 

8 = School role (proclaimed': / Outcomes 

9 = Resources, community/environment 

RELATIONS 

10 = School & family/community relations 
11= Start & student relations 

12 = Student & student relations 

13 = Attitude/background, affecting relatioa'i/results 

SOCIAL ISSUES 

14 = Social issues & culture/ region/ familv life (& school' 

15 = Social issues & student life ■ & school ) 

16 = Social issues & beyond school 

17 = Other / not sure 




44 



REFERENCES 



Albert, R., & TriandLs, H. (1994). Interculrural education for multiculuiral societies: Critical issues. In L. Samovar 
& R. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (7th ed., pp. 425-434). Bebnont: Wadsworth, Inc. 

Au, K., & Kawakaim, A. (1994). Cultural congruence in instruction. In E. Holluis, J. King, & W. Hannan (Eds.), 
Teaching diverse populations: Formulating a knowledge base. State U of New York: State U of New York Press. 

Banks, J. (1993). Multiailtural education: Development, dimensions, and challenges. Phi Delta Kappan, September, 
22-28. 



Bama, L. (1994). Stumbling blocks in intercultural communication. In L. Sainorar & R. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural 
communication: A reader (7th ed., pp. 337-346). Belmont: Wadsworth, Inc. 

Bamhardt, R. (1995). Personal inter\'iew. 

Bogdan, R., & Bidden, S. (1992). Qualitative research for education: An introduction to theory and methods. Needham 
Heights: AUmi and Bacon, Inc. 

Booker, J. (1987) Program rn^iew: Alaska rural teacher training corps (AR 1 1 C) and cross-cultural education development prooram 
(X-CiD 1970-I98d). U of Alaska Fairbanks: Center for Cross-Cultural Studies. 

(1^^^^)- Learning how to ask: A sociolinguistic appraual of the role of the interview in social science research. New York: 
Cambndge Universit}' Press. 

Carr, C. (1994). Teaching critical thinking techni/jues across cultural differences: A case study of United States teacher trainers and 
Cuatemala teachers (Diss.). U of Maryland. 

Claesson, M.. & Bnce, R. (1989). Teacher/mothers: Effcas of a dtial role. American educational research journai 26f I ), 
1-23. 

Cotton, S. (1984). Alaska's “Molly Hootch case": High schools and the village voice. Educational research ijuarterly 
8(4), 30-43. 



”Damelle.' (1995). Personal interview. 

Erlandson, D., Hams, E., Skipper, B., & Allen, S. (1993). Doing naturalistic inquiry: A guide to methods. Newbun* Park: 
Sage Publications, Inc. 

Gardner, H. (1993). Multiple intelligences: The theory in practice. New York: Basic Books. 

Gilliland, H., & Reyliner, J. (1988). Teaching the ISative American. Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company. 

Hardman, M., Drew, C., Egan, M., & Wolf, B. (1993). Human exceptionality: Societ)*, school, and family. 
Needham Heights: AJIvti and Bacon, Inc. 

Hoijer, H. (1994). The Sapir-Whorf h\pothesis. In L. Samovar & R. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A 
reader (7th ed., pp. 194-201). Bebnont: Wadsworth, Inc. 




45 



Kawagle)’, A. (1993). A lupiaq world view: Implications Jor cultural, educational, and technological adaptation in a contemporary 
world (Dis.s.). U of Alaska Fairbanks. 

King, J., Morris, L, & Fitz-Gibbon, C. (1987). How to assess program implementation. Ncwbun' Park: Sage 
Publications, Inc. 

Kleinfeld, J. (1982). Getting it together at adolescence: Case studies of positive socializing environments for . 
Eskimo youth. In S. Manson (Ed.)^ .\av directions tn prevention among American Indian and Alaska Native 
communities. Portland: Oregon Health Sciences Universit>\ 

Kuhns, M, (1994). Implications oj culturally based educational policies on Native American students' performance and self- 
perception (Thesis). U of Marj^land. 

Liebemian, D. Ethnocognitivisin, problem solvmg, and hemispherity. In L Samovar & R. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural 
communkation: A reader (7th ed.). Belmont: Wadsworth. Inc. 

Lipka, J. (1991). Toward a culturally based pedagogy: A case study of one Yup’ik Eskimo teacher. Anthropology £r 
tducation Quarterly, 22, 20v^-223. 

Maton, K. (1993). A bridge betv\^ecn ailturcs: Linked ethnographic-empirical metliodolog\* for culture ancliored 
research. American journal of community psychology, 21(6), 747-773. 

McCarty, T., Lvncli, R., Wallace, S., & Bcnally, A. (1991). Classroom inqiur\* and Navajo learning sales: A call 
for reassessment. Anthropology & education quarterly, 22, 42-59. 

Ovanda. C. (1984). Scliool and communia* attitudes ui an Athapaskan bush village. Educational research quarterly, 

8(4), 12-29. 

Parrett, W. (1982). Schools for rural Alaska. Phi delta kappan, Mav, 626-627. 

Pewewardy, C. (1994). Culturally responsible pedagogy in action: An American Indian magnet school. In E. 

Hollins, J. King, & W. Ha\Tnan (Eds.). Teaching diverse populations: Formulating a knowledge base. State U of New' 
York: State U of New^ York Press. 

Pollard, R., & Kaufinan, J. (1994). Successftil special population program characteristics: A qualitative uiquin'. 
journal of instructional psychology, 21(2), 148-154. 

Powell, R., & Anderson, J. (1994). Culture and classroom communication. In L. Samovar & R. Porter (Eds.), 
Intercultural communkation: A reader (7th ed., pp. 322-330). Belmont: Wadsworth, Inc. 

Pressley, M., & McCormick, C. (1995). Cognition, teaching and assessment. New' York: HarperColluis College 
Publishers. 

Prucha, F. (1986). Ihe Great (abridged ed.). (J. of Nebraska Press. 

Segall, M., Dasen, P., Berrv*, J., & Poortinga, Y. (1990). Human behavior in global perspective: An introduction to cross- 
cultural psychology. Needham Heights: AU\m and Bacon, Inc. 




48 



Shore, J., & Keepers, G. (1982). Examples of evaluation research tn delivering preventive mental health services to 
Indian youth. In S. Manson (Ed.), i\Vw Jirectiotis in previmtion among American Indian and Alaska \ative 
communities. Portland: Oregon Health Sciences U. 

Singer, A. (1994). Reflections on multiailniralism. Pki delta kappan, 76(4), 284-288. 

Sleeter, C. (1990). Staff development for desegregated schooling. Pki delta kappan, 72(1), 33-40. 

Tomlinson, C., & Callahan, C. (1994). Planning effective evaluations for programs for the gifted. Roeper- Review, 
17(1), 46-51. 

True, J. (1983). finding out: Conducting and evaluating social research. Belmont: Wadsworth, Inc. 

Wauters, J., Bruce, J., Black, D., & Hocker, P. (1989). Learning sales: A snidy of Alaska Native and non-native 
students. Journal oj American Indian educatiofu August, 53-62. 

Wetsinantel, J., & Fradd, S. (1989). Evaluating accomplishments and planning for the future. In S. Fradd & J. 
Weismantcl (Eds.), Meeting the needs oJ culturally and linguistkally different students: A handbook for educators. 

Boston: College Hill Press. 




47 



fiiMm 


m 


U.S. Department of Education 


I 1 


I ^ I 


P 

I I 




m 


Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 




I J I 



REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 

I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: 



Inside Perspectives: An Analysis of a Public School Program in a Rural Alaskan Community 



Author(s): ‘ 






Corporate Source: 



Publication Date: 



/u4- 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 






In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and. if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affix^ to all Level 1 documents 


The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2A documents 


The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 28 documents 


PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


A"’ 








A® 






c!^ 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




^ 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 



Level 1 



Level 2A 



Level 2B 






□ 



□ 



Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche or other ERiC archivai 
media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. 



Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media 
for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 



Check here for Level 28 release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents wilt be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here,-^ 

i^ease 

ERIC 



/ hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors reQuires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 


Signature: 


Printed Name/Position/Title: 


OrganizatiorVAddress; / 

■7S U. 


Telephone: , 

(MS-id-L-snoo 


'% 03 - 9 fJi-Qc(S 


E-Mail Address; 








III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 



If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 



If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 

ERIC/CRESS AT AEL 
1031 QUARRIER STREET - 8TH FLOOR 
P O BOX 1348 
CHARLESTON WV 25325 

phone: 800/624-9120 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 

ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
1 1 00 West Street, 2"“ Floor 
Laurel, Maryland 20707-3598 



Telephone: 301-497-4080 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 



ERIC 



FAX: 301-953-0263 
e-mail: ericfac@inet.ed.gov 
WWW: http://ericfac.piccard.csc.com 



-088 (Rev. 9/97) 

PREViOUS VERSIONS OF THIS FORM ARE OBSOLETE. 



