DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 435 099 



CS 216 921 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



Angelides, Mary 

American Literature before 1865: The Spanish Exploration and 
Discovery Documents . 

1999-00-00 



IDENTIFIERS 



13p • 

Reports - Descriptive (141) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

* American Indian Literature; Community Colleges; *Course 
Descriptions; *Culture Conflict; Curriculum Development; 
Curriculum Guides; Foreign Countries; Student Educational 
Objectives; ^Thematic Approach; Two Year Colleges; *United 
States Literature 

Eighteenth Century; *Exploration; Nineteenth Century; Saint 
Louis Community College at Meramec MO; *Spain 



ABSTRACT 



This curriculum guide outlines a proposed four or five hour 



course, English 204, at the Meramec Campus of St. Louis Community College. 

The guide delineates the course, giving information on: (1) Goals, 

Objectives, and Background Notes; (2) Activities, Teaching Strategies, 
Assignments; (3) Readings and Notes; (4). Additional Sources; (5) Audio-Visual 
Materials; and (6) Evaluations. The curriculum guide follows one that begins 
with the study of American literature with Native American literature and the 
oral tradition, which explores, in part, the encounter with Europeans from 
the Native point of view. The purpose of the guide is to use the 
" encounter" - -between the Spanish (primarily in the Southwest and Florida) and 
the Native Americans- -to introduce major themes in American literature. These 
include: the Spanish "American Dream" manifested in the spread of Catholicism 
and the search for gold; the transformation and conquest of Native cultures 
by Europeans; and the fact that the United States was a diverse culture from 
the beginning and that its literature was multi-vocal from the start. (NKA) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 435 099 



St. Louis Community College - Meramec Campus 
Global Studies Curriculum Development 



Curriculum Module Title: 

American Literature Before 186s: the Spanish 
Exploration and Discovery Documents 



Course: American Literature Before 1865 (ENG 204) 
Time: Four-five horns 

Professor Mary Angelides, English Department 
Contents: 

1. Goals, Objectives and Background Notes 

2. Activities, Teaching Strategies, Assignment 

3. Readings and Notes 

4. Additional Sources 

5. Audio-visual Materials 

6. Evaluations 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



□ This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 



CENTER (ERIC) 



<N 

G\ 



□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



2 



-j&U 




° Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



1 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



Module - Spanish Explorers 2 



1. Goals, Objectives, and Background: 

This curriculum module follows one that begins the study of American literature 
with Native American literature and the oral tradition which explores, in part, the 
encounter with Europeans from the native point of view. A major focus will have 
been the creation stories and the religious connection many Native Americans had 
with the land. 

Also, during the previous two weeks I have led the discussion and given students 
tips on critical reading and textual analysis. During this module they will have the 
opportunity to practice those techniques in small groups and present conclusions to 
the class, thus assuming responsibility and ownership of the course. 

Following this module on the Spanish exploration and discovery literature, we will 
explore the Puritans. 

My purpose in this module is to use the “encounter”--between the Spanish (primarily 
in the Southwest and Florida) and the Natives Americans--to introduce major 
themes in American literature: 

• the Spanish “American Dream” manifested spiritually in the spread of 
Catholicism and materially in the search for gold and the possession of new 
lands 

• the transformation and conquest of native cultures by Europeans, often 
including extermination, enslavement, and dispossession 

• that the United States was a diverse culture from the beginning and that the 
literature was multi vocal from the start: Spanish, French, Dutch, and later 
English, as well as the Native American oral tradition explained in the 
previous module 

More specifically student objectives include: 

• to read and examine early records of exploration to determine the dreams, 
aspirations, and purpose of the Spanish explorers of the 16th and 17th 
centuries 

• to understand and explain the role of the Catholic church via the early 
missions and the encomienda system 




3 



Module - Spanish Explorers S 



• to develop critical reading and thinking skills by writing summaries and 
discussing narrative passages and poems 

• to contrast the Spanish explorers’ view of events with those of Native 
Americans 

• to work collaboratively in groups to deepen understanding of the exploration 
and travel literature, a major prose form of the 16th and 17th centuries 

• to place events in accurate historical and chronological context by using time 
lines and maps 



Throughout this curriculum module I will rely heavily on maps, slides, time lines to 
give students a sense of time, place, and context. Also I will stress how language is 
used to accommodate and ass imil ate cultures. For example, because the Spanish 
language lacked words for various aspects of the new world, the explorers and 
writers had to describe phenomena. by adopting native names and , conversely, 
renaming things in Spanish, such as the land. 

Much of Spanish -American literature was at first a “record” (describing the land, 
flora, fauna, etc.) and then “justification”-not merely a record of this “new” world 
but often an exaggeration of the splendors therein to acquire additional funds from 
the Spanish crown and others to support further exploration and church expansion. 

Significant historical events and notes: 

1492 - Columbus; Haiti and Caribbean 

1493 - Papal Bull: aim to Christianize Native Americans rather than enslave them, 
which prevented open aggression against native populations 

1494 - Pact between Portugal and Spain: agree to give Spain complete dominion in 
the Americas except for Brazil (as well as Africa) which was reserved for Portugal 

1513 - Ponce de Leon; Florida 
Balboa; Pacific 



1520s - Cortez; Mexico, Aztecs 



Module - Spanish Explorers 4 



Cabrillo; California coast 
Coronado; Southwest 

1539 - De Soto; Mississippi River 

1542 - Spanish law forbidding enslavement of Native Americans (worked against 
blacks who became the target of the slave trade); establishment of encomienda 
system: 

• encomienda system: no slaves, but natives were required to pay tribute to 
local conquistadors, thus to the mid-16th century, this system enabled native 
labor to substitute for-slave-labor to Europeans (widely practiced throughout 
Latin America) 

1680 - Pueblo revolt; forced labor and forced religious practices led to revolt; 

Hopi, Zuni, Tewa and others kill 21 missionaries & 400 colonists; 
surrounded Sante Fe and governor’s palace. . . 

• missionaries and missions: missionary activity competed with colonizers; 
Franciscan, Dominican, Augustinian, and later Jesuit missionaries tried to 
eradicate native religious practices--thus conversion and complete education 
and hispanization of native society was their goal. Not totally successful in 
eradicating practices and settled on sacramental instruction. Establishment 
of missions (or congregation ) apart from native settlements was the system 
from the 1500s to 1800s; from St. Augustine, FL to the Southwest and 
California 

• Additional information is located in a packet on missions provided by 
Professor Theodore Finkelston, History Dept., St. Louis CC-Meramec. It 
includes maps, slides, notes, etc. 




5 



Module - Spanish Explorers 5 



2. Activities, Teaching Strategies, Assignments: 

a) Introduce the current relevance of some of the conflicts between the Spanish and 
Native Americans of the 16th and 17th centuries with articles from The New York 

Times: 

• Brooke, James. “Conquistador Statue Stirs Hispanic Pride and Indian 
Rage,” 9 Feb. 1998: A10 

• Brooke, James. “Hot Issue in Northern New Mexico: Fine Print of an 1848 
Treaty,” 19 Feb. 1998: A10 

These articles not only illustrate the lasting affects of the encounter but also help 
connect the previous module to the new one. 

b) Have all students read the Yuchi “Creation of the Whites” (see Readings section) 

c) The collaborative assignment is the primary strategy during this module (see 
attached assignment sheet and Readings section) 

d) Time line activity (on going throughout the semester): Each class period a time 
line is drawn on the board or on an overhead transparency of the century we are 
working on. For review of the last class I usually have a student (historian) place 
the events of the last few classes on the time line; then students add events and 
literature from the current day’s presentations and discussions. 

e) Each collaborative group starts by not only placing their reading on the time line 
but also must bring a map (or overhead sketch) of the area covered by the expedition 
or other events. 

f) Slide, map, and video presentations: 

-Southwest slides, New Mexico/Arizona areas discussed in the readings 
(in my private collection from my recent sabbatical) 



-St. Augustine, Florida maps and slides (in my collection from visit to St. 
Augustine) 

-Video on The National Monuments of New Mexico (SLCC) 

g) Missions: (see Prof. Finkelston’s packet,) pamphlet on California Missions, St. 
Augustine. 




6 



Module - Spanish Explorers 6 



COLLABORATIVE ASSIGNMENT 

Spanish Exploration and Discovery Literature 

During the next three class periods you will have an opportunity to read and explore 
the records left by the Spanish during the 16th and 17th centuries. As literary 
historians you will be given a different set of documents to summarize, analyze and 
discuss, and then present your findings to the class. 

Each group must carefully read the documents before class with a one-page, typed 
summary of the events and be ready to discuss the following questions: 

• what area is described and when 

• what was the purpose of the trip and/or document 

• describe the encounter with the natives 

• give ex amp les of phrases that glorify or embellish the environment and/or 

difficulties the new land caused 

• summarize any references to religion; how do these attitudes compare to 
those of the Yuchi in “Creation of the Whites” on pages 115-6 



Take notes during your discussion; then organize your presentation to the class 
(about 10 minutes) with everyone in the group making some part of the 
presentation. Perhaps each person could take one of the discussion questions and/or 
summary; whoever takes question one must bring some type of map or drawing of 
the area covered and place the events on a tune line. Your presentation must 
include a brief summary and conclusions about the five questions above as well as 
any additional information you feel necessary for a full understanding. 

Evaluation: 

Your typed s ummar ies are due on the first day of discussion. The summary and your 
oral presentation will be evaluated by me and given 10-15 points (to be included 
with your quiz points) depending on the quality of your work. 




7 



Module - Spanish Explorers 7 



3. Readings and Notes: 

Course text: The Heath Anthology of American Literature, Vol. 1. 

Eds. John Alberti and Randall Bass. Houghton Mifflin, 1998 
(third edition). Readings and page numbers refer to this edition. 

a) Begin with “Creation of the Whites” (Yuchi) pp. 115-6 

All students read this short selection to show connections between the previous 
module and the current one. 

The Yuchi called themselves “offspring of the Sim” because of their emergence story; 
their origins being from the sun. All others emerged “from a descending order of 
nature”-sun, sky, moon, sea, ashes, eggs, plants. Whites came from across the sea 
and thus came from sea foam. Whites came several tunes by boat and were given 
land by the Yuchi who were native to the Southeast US. Major points: 

• cultural inferiority of the Whites 

• importance of the “gift”, the land 

• trust on the part of the natives 

This selection makes an interesting contrast to the views of the Spanish expressed 
in the following readings which will be assigned to different groups for the 
collaborative project (see assignment sheet). 



Additional selection (option): “How America Was Discovered” (pp. 182-84) by 
Handsome Lake, a Seneca chief in the League of the Iroquois. Although this 1799 
vision comes later chronologically, it is short enough to add an ironic selection to 
compare with the Spanish view of the discovery. 



b) Group assignment: Journal of the First Voyage to America (1492-1493) pp. 
116-25 by Christopher Columbus abstracted from journal by Bartolome de Las 
Casas. 

The first voyage (Oct. 12, 1492 landed) on the island of San Salvador, then to 
Bahamas, Cuba, Haiti (Hispaniola). Second voyage (Sept. 1493) brought him to 
Puerto Rico, Jamaica, Cuba, Virgin Islands, and Lesser Antilles. Third and fourth 
voyages, Trinidad and South America but never reached Florida-thought he had 




8 



Module - Spanish Explorers 8 



found the Garden of Eden; but never the gold he sought. Thought he found the 
Indies. His account reveals the uncertainty of the lands discovered. 



c) Group assignment: Relation of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, pp. 128-40 
by Cabeza de Vaca. 

Notes: New world man, the new American, no longer Spanish, not a native but a 
hybrid (“mestiso voice”). He narrates the process of becoming something new. His 
chronicle is one of self-justification; failed journey and captured by natives. He was 
part of the Narvaez ill-fated expedition to explore the Gulf 1528-29; de Vaca was 
similar to an auditor and legal consultant to make sure the expedition met with 
Spanish law. He was separated from the main group when they left Florida for 
Texas (lost near the mouth of the Mississippi River) and shipwrecked; only four 
survived; enslaved by the Indians for years; escaped and took off for the Southwest 
and Mexico, then finally to Spain. He learned to adjust and adapt to a culture he 
had once deplored; when found again he is neither welcome among the Native 
Americans nor the Spanish. His chronicle reads like a conversion tale, stripped of 
all but his faith; takes the form of hagiography (life of a saint). 

He combined religious practices from Native Am. customs and Catholic prayers, 
healed the sick, prayed; thus his failure turns into a spiritual success. Because of 
his knowledge of Native Am. customs he was given the governorship of Paraguay. 

His experience can also be looked at as a immigrant’s tale where he had to learn new 
language and customs, thus forging a new identity and mak i ng a successful 
assimilation between his Spanish past and American experience. 



d) Group assignment: “Letter to Philip II” (October 15, 1565) and 

“To a Jesuit Friend” (October 15, 1566) pp. 147-155 
by Pedro Menendez de Aviles, 1519-1574 

Notes: Purpose to colonize Florida (they thought it extended from Newfoundland to 
New Mexico) and expel the Huguenots who threatened the Spanish trade route. In 
1565 he arrived at the St. Johns River (northern Florida) surprising the French 
garrison at Ft. Caroline (renamed Ft. Mateo). Aviles founded St. Augustine, the 
oldest European city, and established a fort there to protect the Spanish trade route 
south to the Caribbean. Philip II ordered Aviles to eliminate the French from 
Florida. Large land grant made to his family in perpetuity, thus the system of 




9 



Module - Spanish Explorers 9 



displacement of other cultures begins. His influence reached up to the Carolinas 
and as far as the Chesapeake and west to Tallahassee with the establishment of 
mis sionaries, but he did not have enough resources and people to hold this large 
area, except for St. Augustine. His letter to Philip describes the battle with the 
French, and the other letter to a Jesuit friend appeals for additional Jesuits to help 
accomplish the expansion of the church; he already has one major financial investor. 



Additional mini-lecture option: Give students a short lecture on the French in the 
Southeast and their role in exploration- -Samuel de Champlain, 1570-1635, along 
the St. Lawrence; Rene de Laudonniere, 1562-1582, voyages into Florida. French 
Protestants were engaged in a religious war with the Catholic crown 1562-98. The 
Huguenots Aviles mentions in his letters were Calvinists (presbyterians) and not 
Lutherans. 



e) Group assignment: (two related readings) 

A Relation of the Reverend Father Fray Marcos de Niza, Touching His 
Discovery of the Kingdom of Cueola or Cibola EZuni pueblo] . . .pp. 156-9 
by Fray Marcos de Niza, (1495?- 1542) 

and 

The Narrative of the Expedition of Coronado, pp. 159-162 
by Pedro de Casteneda, (1510?-1570?) 

Notes: On the early exploration of Cabeza de Vaca’s journey to the New Mexico 
area, the viceroy of New Spain in Mexico City sent Fray Marcos to explore the area 
around the Zuni pueblos (Cibola). Fray Marcos tries to justify his expedition, which 
had found no gold, by making assurances that the mythical Seven Cities of Cibola do 
exist-excellent example of the rhetoric of the dream of wealth. His narrative was so 
successful that the viceroy later sends Coronado to find the cities of gold, who finds 
t h e extraordinary pueblos but no gold; Fray Marcos loses face with Coronado, etc. 

Castenada’s narrative details the huge Coronado expedition. They take Fray 
Marcos with them and when they reach Cibola and find no gold, he is sent back to 
Mexico City, but Coronado continues the search north and east to Kansas led by an 
Indian called the Turk who said the city of Quivira was the city of their dreams. 
Areas covered include the coast of California, the Southwest, Texas, Oklahoma, 
Kansas. 




10 



Module - Spanish Explorers 10 



f) Group assignment: The History of New Mexico (1610) pp. 162-72) 

by Gaspar Perez de Villagra, (1555-1620) 

Notes: Epic poem in 34 cantos (Cantos I and XXX only in our selection) heralding 
the heroic and triumphant march, attack and defeat of the Acoma by the Spanish 
crown and the Catholic church (compared to Virgil’s Aenead). It describes the 
expedition of Juan de Onate 1598-1608 from San Juan Pueblo north of Santa Fe 
west to Acoma pueblo and west to Zuni and Hopi lands, establishing settlements 
along the way. 

Canto I - Highlights the Onate’s purpose and the area covered 

Canto XXX - Highlights the battle with the Acoma, who originally were friendly 
when Coronado came 60 years earlier. Ironically, 60 years later we have the Pueblo 
Revolt 

Suggestions: Opportunity for oral interpretation of literature for group if so inclined; 
dramatic reading? 




11 



Module - Spanish Explorers 1 1 



4. Additional Sources: 

Text: The Heath Anthology of American Literature, Vol. 1. Eds. John Alberti 
and Randall Bass. Houghton Mifflin, 1998 (third edition). Additional 
information can be found in the introductory sections to the exploration and 
discovery sections written by Carla Mulford (Penn. State Univ.) and Juan Bruce- 
Novoa (Univ. of California, Irvine). 

Bruce-Novoa, Juan. “Shipwrecked in a Sea of Significance,” Reconstruction 
Our Past. Ed. Maria Sobek. Univ. of California, Irvine, 1993. Excellent current 
analysis of Cabeza de Vaca and other explorers. 

Turner, Frederick W. Beyond Geography: The Western Spirit Against the 
Wilderness, 1980. Helpful in understanding the concept of Manifest Destiny, the 
American dream, etc.— a classic. Information also on Cabeza de Vaca and others. 

Winn, Peter. Americas. Univ. of California Press, 1992. The first two chapters, 
“A View from the South,” and “Legacies of Empire” are excellent background on the 
history of the Americas and the encounter of Europeans with the indigenous 
cultures. 

The New York Times articles (see page 5) 



5. Audio-visual Materials: Most of these materials can be found in my office, CN 
211. I will be happy to share them with colleagues if contacted a week in advance. 

• Map of early St. Augustine, Florida 

• Slides, posters, and pictures of the Southwest and St. Augustine 

• Missions: packet from history Prof. Theodore Finkelston (SLCC) includes 
maps, notes, and slides of San Antonio area missions (available from TF) 

Video: The National Monuments of New Mexico. RCM Pictures, Cortez, CO. 
Distrib. INTERpark, cl990. Available in Learning Lab, SLCC-Meramec: 
978.9, N2771 




12 



Module - Spanish Explorers 12 



6. Evaluation: 

Essay exam questions: 

• a) Explain the purpose of the Spanish in America as revealed in three pieces 
of exploration and discovery literature. 

• b) Contrast the views of the the Native Americans and the Spanish of the 
encounter as revealed in three pieces of literature we have read. 



Quiz points for collaborative assignment (see assignment sheet). 



® 

U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 

National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

i-o 11 6 921 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title. "American Literature Before 1865: 


The Spanish Exploration and 




Discovery Documents " 


Author(s): Mary Angel ides 






Corporate Source. 




Publication Date: 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced In the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EORS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and. If 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 





The sample stJcAer shown below will be The sumplo stidkor shown below will be The sample sficker ahown below will be 

affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Lovci 2A document* affixed to all Level 2B documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
OlSSEMJNATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE. AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY. 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 






0 \® 




\e» 


s* 




. . cp 




cf 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




s 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 



Level 1 Level 2A Level 2B 






Check, here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction Check here for Level 2A rotoie. permitting reproduction Check here for Level 2Q release. penriitUng 

end dissemination In microfiche or other ERIC archival and dissemination In microfiche and In electronic media reproduction and dissemination In microfiche only 

media (e g., eiearenle) and paper copy. for ERIC archival collection subscribe* only 

Documents will bo processed as Indicated provided reproduction quality permit*, 
tf permlaalon to reproduce Is granted, but no bo* la checked, documents will be processed at Level 1, 



Sigh/ 



here?*] 

ERIC 36 



I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce end disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERiC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception Is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy Information needs of educators In response to discrete inquiries. 



Sigrunui 












Community College 
11333 Big Bend Blvd. 

St L oui s , MO 63122 5 9 90 



- Meramec 



Printed Nam«/Po»K*on/Thko: 



Marv An gplides 

Telephone: 

C31/n QA ^I-7c;S7 



E-Mail Address: 



Professor 
F j^nglia -h 

HUl QB4-7117 



°T/ 28/99 




