DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 452 004 



RC 022 941 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



SPONS AGENCY 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



CONTRACT 
PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Trimble, Joseph E.; Beauvais, Fred 

Prevention of Alcoholism, Drug Abuse, and Health Problems 
among American Indians and Alaska Natives: An Introduction 
and Overview. 

National Inst, on Drug Abuse (DHHS/PHS) , Rockville, MD. 
2001 - 00-00 

34p . ; In: Health Promotion and Substance Abuse Prevention 
among American Indian and Alaska Native Communities : Issues 
in Cultural Competence; see RC 022 940. 

DAO 3 3 71; DA07074 
Information Analyses (070) 

MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

* Alaska Natives; *Al coholism; American Indian Culture; 

* American Indians; At Risk Persons; Cultural Awareness; 
*Cultural Relevance; Demography; *Drug Abuse; Family 
Influence; Health Promotion; Mental Health; Peer. Influence; 
*Prevention; Research Needs; Rural Urban Differences 



ABSTRACT 



This chapter reviews the literature on substance abuse and 
prevention efforts in Native communities. The first section describes 
demographic characteristics of America’s indigenous people, including tribal 
and government definitions, interaction and validation styles, and 
rural-urban differences. It concludes by warning that use of broad ethnic 
glosses to describe any ethnic group in a research venture is poor science, 
and that research involving American Indians must consider the cultural 
variations and numerous subgroups that have distinct lifeways. The second 
section presents an overview of the substance use and misuse field, noting 
that the research on prevention is very limited. Topics covered include 
setting, rates and patterns of substance use, etiology and correlates of use, 
prevention, social skills, peers, family, school-based programs, policy, 
community- wide efforts, community readiness, and cultural sensitivity. 
Conclusions drawn include: the family is central in American Indian culture 
and must be involved in prevention approaches; peer influence is significant, 
but to a lesser degree than among non-Natives; cultural identification is not 
directly related to substance abuse prevention, although it may be critical 
in treatment; many factors affecting youth in general also impact drug use 
among American Indian youth; much more is known about risk than about 
resiliency factors for American Indian youth; and evidence of the 
effectiveness of school -based programs is very limited. Seven recommendations 
are given for the advancement of prevention strategies, themes, and research 
among American Indians and Alaska Natives. (Contains 72 references.) (TD) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



PC vv/ 



t 



1 

Prevention of Alcoholism, 
Drug Abuse, and Health 
Problems Among American 
Indians and Alaska Natives: An 
Introduction and Overview* 



[ I c: department of education 

Office of Educational Research 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

yfi This document has been reproduced as 
10 received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Joseph E. Trimble 
Fred Beauvais 



^ / grew up with it. Everyone drank where I grew up. Everyone 

§ did. You know, kids, and the adults, and, I guess growing up 

jn that was just the way to go. There wasn 't any other way It was 
q like you can't wait to be 21 so I can go into bars legally even 

1x5 though I was already in them. That was just a way of life. 

When we sobered up, it's still like you kind of don't fit in. It's 
really difficult, humiliating almost. It's almost easier to go 
along with the flow than to sober up. 

—Anonymous American Indian informant (1995) 



This chapter was supported in part by funds provided by the 
National Institute on Drug Abuse (Grant Numbers DA03371 and 
DA07074). 



O 



ERLC 



\ 



2 



1 




These compelling and profoundly moving words reflect the 
Noughts and sentiments of countless American Indians and 
Alaska Natives. Indeed, alcohol misuse is considered by most of 
America's indigenous population to be their most serious and 
significant health problem, a problem that affects almost every 
facet of life. Discussions about mental and physical he , 
deviance, familial problems, and community structure and 
function among American Indians must include, in some form 
or another, the influences of alcohol use and misuse. Yet it is 
extremely bold to assume that if the widespread use and misuse 
of alcohol was significantly reduced in American Indian com- 
munities that the prevalence of health and psycho^cial prob- 
lems would be eliminated; historical events have led to many 
structural problems that create numerous stressors in these com- 
munities. It is reasonable to conclude, though, that cultura y 
resonant alcohol and drug use prevention strategies, if effective, 
would contribute to the reduction of illness, disease, devianae ' 
and community disruption. Further, any discussion o alcohol 
problems in American Indian communities, grave as they are, 
must recognize that there are many Amencan Indian people for 
whom alcohol poses little or no personal problems. Stereotyping 
of all American Indian people should clearly be avoided 

This monograph presents an inquiry into the Prevention of 
alcohol and drug use in American Indian and Alaska Native 
communities. Our inquiry into the broad-based topic of Preven- 
tion as a tool for health promotion and mamtenance is restricted 
to substance use and misuse in large part because it is the area 
in which most of the research and development has occurred, 
due to its high incidence and prevalence among American 
Indians and Alaska Natives. To place our inquiry m perspective, 
this introductory section wiU provide an overview of substance 
use and misuse among American Indians and Alaska Natives 
and as a consequence serve as background for the other chap- 
ters contained in this monograph. To set the inquiry in mo ion, 
the first section provides important information on the demo- 
graphic characteristics of America's indigenous people. The sec- 
ond moves to an overview of the substance use and misuse 

field. 




Demographic Characteristics of 
American Indians and Alaska Natives 



The terms American Indian and Alaska Native are “ethnic glosses" 
(Trimble, 1991, 1995). They refer to the aboriginal populations of 
North America and are terms imbued with political and socio- 
cultural considerations. In this chapter, American Indian and 
Indian are typically used for the sake of brevity and are not 
meant to demean the distinct heterogeneity that exists among 
the many native tribes and villages and those who prefer to 
identify with these entities rather than with the broad glosses. 
The terms race and racial should be avoided where possible 
because they do not have relevance for American Indians and 
Alaska Natives. These concepts are "academic anachronisms" 
and have little scientific and practical value, in part because of 
their elusive, unbounded nature (see Yee, Fairchild, Weizmann, 
& Wyatt, 1993). 

The term American Indian is an imposed, invented ethnic cat- 
egory originally foisted on the Arawak, a now-extinct 
Caribbean-basin tribe. The category continues to be used to the 
extent that almost all indigenous native peoples of the Western 
Hemisphere are referred to as Indians. Many pejorative, histori- 
cal, and stereotypical images are incorporated in the meaning 
when it is used by outgroup members, but contemporary 
American Indians have also found some value in self- 
identification with this broad gloss. Speaking to this point, 
Trosper (1981) cogently argues that "American Indians have 
transformed themselves from a diverse people with little com- 
mon identity into an ethnic group" and that they "have done so 
by mobilizing, with respect to a charter, the shared history of 
broken treaties" (p. 257). By forging a common ethnic category, 
America's indigenous population has created a social and polit- 
ical force that has far greater strength and influence than do 
individual tribal governments; the emergence of the pan-Indian 
category has created a conventional label with which one can 
identify (see Hartzberg, 1971). 



ERIC 



4 




Tribal-Specific Definitions 

Tribal groups had names for themselves and, indeed, linguistic- 
specific names for other tribal groups. Within their own lan- 
guages, the names of tribes such as Lakota, Cheyenne, Navajo 
(Dine), and Hopi mean "human beings" or "the people." Within 
tribes, bands such as "those with burned thighs" or "those who 
plant near the water" and moieties such as "Eagle" or "Raven" 
were given specific names that refer to some idiosyncratic or 
spiritual characteristic. In addition, tribes such as the Lakota 
referred to other tribes according to stereotyped physical fea- 
tures and characteristics: the Cheyenne were referred to as 
Sihiyena (people with a shrill voice), the Winnebago as Hotanke 
(loud-voice people), and the Navajo as Sna-hde-hde-ha (those 
with striped blankets). Such distinctions were typically ignored 
by American colonialists, historians, and novelists, leaving the 
world with the erroneous impression that American Indians 
were a distinctive but singular lot. 

Government Attempts at a Definition 

The Federal Government, through the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(BIA), found it necessary to provide a legal definition of an 
American Indian, the only ethnic group in the United States 
afforded this distinction. The definition has undergone numer- 
ous revisions in the past 100 years or so, but currently the BIA 
defines an American Indian as a person whose American 
Indian blood quantum is at least one-fourth, and/ or who is a 
registered or enrolled member of one of the 557 federally rec- 
ognized tribes. The hard-and-fast criteria of BIA eliminated 
many people of American Indian background who affiliated in 
one form or another with one of some 60 federally nonrecog- 
nized tribes, ones that in many cases never signed formal 
treaties with the Government or that were part of scattered, 
small groups in the Northwest and the Southwest (see Snipp, 
1989, 1996). 

Some recognized, or "treaty," tribes do not agree with the 
BIA criteria and have developed their own specifications. Some 
have lowered the blood quantum criterion to one-eighth and 



4 



5 




even one-twenty-eighth and a few have increased it to one-half. 
One tribe in Oklahoma in the late 1960s opened its rolls to any- 
one who could prove ancestral ties; the specific blood quantum 
was not viewed as an important criterion. About 7 percent of the 
tribes require that one have more than one-fourth blood quan- 
tum and about 32 percent have no set blood quantum criteria. 
Whatever the criteria, individuals must be able to establish their 
claim by providing documentation showing that one or more of 
their relatives or ancestors are on some version of a tribe's roll 
or census (Thornton, 1996). 

The United States Census Bureau and the Department of 
Education (DOE) each developed their own criteria. The Census 
Bureau allows each citizen to declare his or her ethnic origin on 
the basis of the group with which he or she most identifies — in 
a word, the criterion is self-enumerative. After conducting an 
extensive survey among American Indian people throughout 
the United States, DOE staff generated some 70 distinct defini- 
tions of "American Indian." After a careful review of the results, 
DOE decided on a definition that closely resembles BIA criteria 
but provides more latitude for tribal-specific criteria, regardless 
of Federal status (U.S. Department of Education, 1982). 

Government definitions are developed largely to determine 
who is eligible for services provided by treaty arrangements and 
congressionally mandated programs. The definitions do not 
include the extent to which an individual follows tribal custom 
and tradition or the degree to which he or she professes an eth- 
nic identification. 

Interaction and Validation Styles 

Among most American Indians, merely being federally recog- 
nized and fitting the definitional criteria of the BIA and DOE 
are not sufficient. For many, it is vitally important to glean a 
sense of the way someone lives and subscribes to traditional 
and readily identifiable lifestyle patterns. As a consequence, 
when two strangers meet and it is apparent that both possess 
distinctive physical characteristics— dark, straight hair; dark 
brown eyes; brown skin; high cheekbones; broad nasal struc- 




ture; and other distinguishing features— they seek to elicit 
information from each other to substantiate degree of ethnic 
affiliation. Using a nesting procedure, one will ask questions 
"Where are you from?" "What tribe do you belong to. Who 
are vou related to?"— in an effort to generate some commonly 
shared background. If one or the other doesn't quite fit the 
physical stereotype, the conversation may well turn to identi y- 
ing which parent or grandparent was not American Indian and 
what the person's blood quantum might be. This is usually a 
delicate subject, so it is often handled rather carefully. If all of 
the information appears authentic and genuine, the conversa 
tion may lapse into one in which each shares stories about pre- 
sumed common life experiences. Often the conversation takes 
on a form of "homeland centrism/' in which the daily, contem- 
porary lifestyle of the individual's origins is emphasized over 
tribal customs and traditions. Hence, American Indians from 
reservations are likely to discuss socializing influences more 
indicative of contemporary lifeways back home than to give 
attention to classic tribal customs. In a very subtle way the con- 
versation is designed to provide evidence not only that the par- 
ticipants are American Indians by definition, but also that they 
have the experiences to back that up-experiences that demon- 
strate the authenticity and strength of the identification with 
one's ethnic origins. 



Demographic Patterns 

The Census Bureau currently uses a self-identification proce- 
dure to establish American Indian identity. Their definition is a 
departure from those developed by tribes. States, and the , 
as no one is necessarily required to document their claim. The 
Census Bureau data therefore are at odds with the data main- 
tained by the BIA and data monitored by State agencies. In 1990, 
the Census Bureau declared that 1,959,000 citizens were 
American Indians or Alaska Natives. In 1960, the Census Bureau 
noted that 552,000 reported they were American Indian. Thus, 
between 1960 and 1990 the American Indian population had 
grown by about 255 percent. The rapid 30-year population 





increase is somewhat incredible — such population increases are 
almost unheard of in the field of demography. This suggests that 
many more citizens chose to identify with their American 
Indian heritage in 1990 than in 1960. 

The Census Bureau's use of a self-identification criterion 
indeed had some effect on growth as individuals likely declared 
an ancestral identification without having legal ties to a tribe. 

Some of these individuals are those who claim multiple tribal 
backgrounds, yet their blood quantum for any one of them is 
insufficient for them to become officially registered or enrolled. 

For example, such individuals may have a combined American 
Indian blood quantum of one-half but no one tribal quantum is 
acceptable by each of the tribes represented in their ancestral 
background; they may have all of the facial features demonstra- 
tive of American Indians (that is, they look "Indian") but are not 
qualified to be recognized by either State- or federally recog- 
nized tribes. 

Many Americans of American Indian mixed ethnic ancestry 
choose to identify as American Indian or Alaska Native, because 
it creates a new identity for them that brings with it pride along 
with the desire to learn tribal customs, traditions, and lan- 
guage. Additionally, there are some people who, regardless of 
their degree of blood quantum, are obligated by family tradi- 
tions to continue their identities as American Indian or Alaska 
Native. Typically, they are descended through matrilineal or 
patrilineal lines that are part of a highly complex clan or moi- 
ety system. To sever the ties by refusing to identify or ignoring 
their ancestry often brings about banishment from the clan and 
hence the tribe, often casting a shadow of foreboding on the 
entire extended family. 

In 1990, slightly over half of the American Indian population 
resided in urban areas. The demographer Matthew Snipp main- 
tains that "roughly half of the all urban American Indians can be 
found in as few as 16 cities, including Tulsa, Oklahoma City, Los 
Angeles-Long Beach, Phoenix, Seattle-Tacoma, Riverside-San 
Bernardino, New York City, and Minneapolis-St. Paul" (1996, p. 

38). According to the sociologist Russell Thornton, urban 
American Indians are less likely to speak or understand their 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE j 



8 




tribal language, participate in tribal cultural activities, repor 
tribal affiliation, or marry American Indians than those who 
reside in rural communities, villages, or reservation communi- 
ties. "If these trends continue," Thornton argues, both the 
genetic and tribal distinctiveness of the total Native American 
population will be greatly, lessened" (Thornton, 1996, p. 110). He 
adds that "urbanization is likely not only to result in increased 
intermarriage as more and more Native Americans come in con- 
tact with non-Native peoples, but also to diminish further the 
identity of Native Americans as distinctive tribal peoples tied to 

specific geographical areas" (p. Ill)- 

In identifying American Indian and Alaska Native samples 
for behavioral and social science research, researchers often rely 
on the generic labels to describe and differentiate their respon- 
dent groups. In so doing they assume that their respondents 
share a common, modal understanding of their tribal lifeways 
and thoughtways; it is as though the researcher believes that all 
American Indians and Alaska Natives share commonly held, 
culturally unique mannerisms, styles, and states. In fact, 
researchers who solely rely on an ethnic gloss to describe 
American Indians and Alaska Natives actually ignore the rich- 
ness of cultural variations within these groups and the numer- 
ous subgroups that are characterized by distinct lifeways and 
thoughtways (Trimble, 1991). 

Use of broad ethnic glosses to describe any ethnic group in 
a research venture is poor science. Apart from the fact that 
glosses are gross misrepresentations, their use violates certain 
tenets concerning external validity and indeed fosters stereo- 
types. Heath (1978) argues that "categories of people such as 
those compared under the rubric of 'ethnic groups' are often 
not really meaningful units in any sociocultural sense (p. 60). 
He goes on to add, "it is... little wonder that epidemiological 
and other data collected under such rubrics (i.e., ethnic minori- 
ties and other nationalistic groups) are virtually meaningless" 

(p. 60). ., 

At an individual level one may rely on labels to describe 

their ethnic affiliation and subsequently their identity. Use 
of the label, though, is a small part of the identity process, as 





one is likely to expand the labeling to include other subjective 
identifiers such as natal background, acculturative status, 
ego-involvement, and attitudes toward own and other groups; 
behavioral preferences such as language usage, friendship 
affiliations, music and food preferences, and participation 
in cultural and religious activities may also be included 
(Trimble, 1991). Hence, any research involving American 
Indians and Alaska Natives must take into consideration 
these factors and those discussed earlier to account for the 
depth of one's identity. 

Overview of Substance Abuse 
Prevention Among American Indians 
and Alaska Natives 

In 1982, the American Indian anthropologist Spero Manson 
edited the first known book devoted exclusively to the subject of 
prevention among American Indians and Alaska Natives. The 
book's contents covered five sections that included research, 
training, services, evaluation, and recommendations. This semi- 
nal work set an important and significant tone for a field that at 
that time had received little or no attention. Manson (1982) 
pointed out in his opening chapter that "relatively little preven- 
tion research has been conducted in the area of American Indian 
mental health. Much of that which exists represents a very nar- 
row focus" (p. 11). Considerable prevention research has 
occurred since his work was published. Yet the published works 
have largely focused on the substance abuse field and in many 
instances deal with commentary and recommendations rather 
than with the research on prevention. Indeed, many important 
and relevant etiological and epidemiological studies exist docu- 
menting over time the prevalence and use rates of alcohol and 
drugs. The findings are compelling and continue to point to the 
need for more prevention-specific research, a point echoed more 
than 18 years ago by Manson and his colleagues. What follows 
is a detailed summary of these findings. 



10 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



9 




Setting 

The characterization of the physical, sociopolitical, and economic 
conditions affecting American Indian youth varies from one 
locality to the next, but some commonalities exist that impinge 
directly on the problems of drug and alcohol abuse. The lands 
allotted to American Indian people were typically those of least 
economic consequence and were usually in remote areas. In 
some places, this is rapidly changing with the discovery of natu- 
ral resources and other forms of economic development, yet it 
still remains true that American Indian reservations are typically 
found within the poorest sectors of the country. Despite some 
changes for the better, poverty and its attendant ills of poor nutri- 
tion and health care; stress on all social structures (particularly 
the family); and inadequate housing, transportation, and other 
basic support systems are still a way of life in most reservation 
areas. Young (1994) succinctly summarized the health conditions 
of American Indians as follows: "The recent epidemiological his- 
tory of Native American populations appears to be characterized 
by several key features: decline but persistence of infectious dis- 
eases, stabilizing at a level still higher than non-Native popula- 
tions; rise in chronic diseases, but not quite rampant; and the 
overwhelming importance of social pathologies" (pp. 52-53). 

Education is a further area where inadequacy and a deficit of 
resources are common on reservations. Historical approaches to 
the education of American Indian youth were extremely harsh 
and the use of boarding schools has had an extremely deleterious 
effect on the family and on other social institutions. It is only 
recently that American Indian families have taken the opportu- 
nity to regain control of the educational systems and to have a 
central influence in the lives and development of their children. 

Despite the negative picture that is generally drawn when 
describing American Indian youth, there have been recent, dra- 
matic changes in the social fabric of American Indian communi- 
ties that point to a much brighter future (Beauvais, 2000). Tribes 
have enthusiastically taken more and more responsibility for 
their affairs and there is a sense that the coming generations will 
enjoy a much better quality of life. With respect to drug and 





alcohol abuse issues, American Indian communities have been 
in the forefront of the development of prevention interventions, 
although, as will be seen, the evaluation of these efforts has been 
sorely lacking. 

Rates and Patterns of Substance Use 

It has been recognized for more than 25 years that substance use 
and abuse has been a significant problem for large numbers of 
American Indian youth residing on reservations. Pinto (1973) 
was among the first to bring this to light and to argue for 
increased resources to address the problem. Subsequently, a 
variety of studies have demonstrated very high rates of use, 
although most of these have been on geographically limited 
populations (e.g., Cockerham, 1975; Dick, Manson, & Beals, 
1993; Longclaws, Barnes, Grieve, & Dumoff, 1980). The studies 
of the Tri-Ethnic Center for Prevention Research at Colorado 
State University, however, have corroborated these local investi- 
gations and have shown higher rates of use for most drugs since 
1974 for representative samples of American Indian youth 
across the United States (Beauvais, 1992, 1996; Beauvais, 
Chavez, Oetting, Deffenbacher, & Cornell , 1996; Beauvais & 
LaBoueff, 1985; Beauvais & Oetting, 1988; Beauvais, Oetting, 
Wolf, & Edwards, 1989; Beauvais & Segal, 1992; Oetting & 
Beauvais, 1989; Oetting, Edwards, & Beauvais, 1989; Oetting, 
Edwards, Goldstein, & Garcia-Mason, 1980). These higher rates 
have been exhibited for lifetime, annual, and 30-day prevalence 
as well as for an overall index of drug involvement (Beauvais, 
1996; Oetting & Beauvais, 1983). In 1992, the Tri-Ethnic Center 
had access to a large sample of adolescents from around the 
United States, which included a substantial number of 
American Indian youth who were not living on reservations. 
The data showed that non-reservation American Indian youth 
had levels of drug use lower than American Indian youth living 
on reservations but higher than their non-Indian counterparts 
(Beauvais, 1992). The finding leads to the speculation that 
although reservation life has many positive aspects, there may 
be environmental variables (e.g., pervasive poverty and unem- 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



12 



11 





ployment) that promote higher levels of substance use; 
American Indian youth not living on reservations are not as sub- 
ject to these harsh conditions. Tri-Ethnic Center studies 
(Beauvais, 1992; Beauvais & LaBoueff, 1985) and a study by 
Mitchell and Beals (1997) have shown only minor variation in 
drug use from one reservation to another, suggesting that the 
causative factors are common across groups and are not a resu t 
of cultural or geographic differences. Boarding school studen s 
(Dick et al„ 1993; May, 1982) and high school dropouts 
(Beauvais et al., 1996), however, have a higher incidence of drug 

use than American Indian youth in general. 

Despite having higher rates of use, drug and alcohol use pa - 
terns of American Indian youth have paralleled those found or 
other youth, although they vary over time. Across the United 
States, there was a substantial increase in drug a use t r °^g ^ 
the early 1980s and then a steady annual decline through 199 . 
At that point, use began to rise again (Beauvais, 1996). The lat- 
ter finding of recent increases has not been substantiated 
through epidemiological evidence for American Indian youth, 
but numerous anecdotal reports from local prevention and 
treatment people on reservations and some preliminary da a 
indicate that a rise in substance abuse is now occurring, ata 
collection now taking place will help establish the recent tren s 
for American Indian youth. The one exception to the variable 
pattern over the past 20 years is for those American Indian 
youth abusing drugs at the most extreme levels Tri-Ethmc 
Center researchers have identified a "high-risk pattern 
(approximately 20 percent of American Indian 7th-12th graders) 
that has not changed substantially since 1980. 

The pattern of the findings suggests that there is a group o 
American Indian youth who use drugs for much the same rea- 
son as other youth (i.e., are subjected to the same secular influ- 
ences that vary over time), but that there is another group (i.e., 
those at high risk) whose drug use is rooted in extreme dys- 
function of social and personal resources. For the former, it is 
reasonable to conclude that prevention programs that work 
among youth in general and that promote prosocial and norma- 
tive messages will probably be effective for American Indian 



12 



13 





youth. The high-risk youth, on the other hand, are likely to have 
a host of other social dysfunctions and will require more intense 
approaches. In one sense, they represent a treatment population. 



Etiology and Correlates of Use 

While not as extensive as that for other youth, there is a body of 
literature that examines the etiologic and correlative factors in 
American Indian adolescent drug use. Some of these studies 
employ a more broadly based theoretical perspective while oth- 
ers look at single or small groups of variables in a more descrip- 
tive approach. At the macrolevel are the study of problem-prone 
behavior theory (Mitchell & Beals, 1997), social learning theory 
(Winfree, Griffiths, & Sellers, 1989), and peer cluster theory 
(Oetting & Beauvais, 1987). The more limited studies have 
examined discrete sets of variables such as emotional distress, 
self-esteem, anger and aggression, socialization, knowledge, 
attitudes, and demographic factors (Austin, Oetting, & 
Beauvais, 1993). The majority of these investigations have found 
that there is a great deal of correspondence between the etio- 
logic factors in substance use for both American Indian and non- 
Indian youth. One of the more general findings across all stud- 
ies where it is included as a variable is that peer influence 
appears to mediate nearly all other psychosocial variables in the 
prediction of substance use (Oetting & Beauvais, 1987). While 
this conclusion regarding general similarity across ethnic 
groups is important, a number of studies have demonstrated 
that there may be relative differences among cultural groups in 
the influence of peers. For example, in a Tri-Ethnic Center study, 
Swaim, Oetting, Jumper-Thurman, Beauvais, and Edwards 
(1993) found that although peers were significant in predicting 
drug use among American Indian youth, they were consider- 
ably less so than for other youth and that family influence 
regarding drug use was stronger. This same analysis indicated 
that school had a smaller influence on decisions to use drugs for 
American Indian youth than for other youth. 

There are important implications here for designing preven- 
tion programs for American Indian youth in that the family. 





13 




rather than the school, should be the main target for interven- 
tions. Another difference often found between American Indian 
and non-Indian youth is the influence of religion on levels of 
drug use (Austin et al., 1993); religious involvement appears to 
be a protective factor for non- American Indian youth but has lit- 
tle effect for American Indian youth. This may well be more of a 
measurement problem; the meaning of religiosity differs greatly 
between the two groups and scales used to measure this dimen- 
sion in the general population may not be effective with 
American Indian groups. 

One variable that has attracted considerable attention in the 
search for etiologic factors is that of cultural or ethnic identifica- 
tion. The prevailing belief is that American Indian youth who 
have higher levels of identification with their culture will 
demonstrate lower drug and alcohol use. Despite this strong 
belief, the research data on this linkage have been extremely 
meager, not only for American Indian youth but also for all other 
minority populations (Bates, Beauvais, & Trimble, 1997; 
Beauvais, 1998; Oetting & Beauvais, 1990-91; Trimble, 1991, 1995, 
in press). Research to date on this issue has been aimed at find- 
ing a direct effect for cultural or ethnic identification, whereas the 
actual path may be indirect, operating through a number of other 
psychological and social variables. Given the strong investment 
among prevention and treatment professionals, examination of 
the relationship between cultural identification and substance 
abuse remains a fruitful and necessary area of inquiry. 

Regardless of the causative implications of culture on drug 
use, there is a clear consensus among drug abuse researchers 
and practitioners that prevention programs must be designed to 
be culturally appropriate (Beauvais & LaBoueff, 1985; Fleming, 
1992; May, 1995; Petrovsky, Van Stelle, & De Jong, 1998; Trimble, 
1992, 1995; Trimble, Padilla, & Bell-Bolek, 1987). Programs must 
include content and activities that are congruent with and pro- 
mote the values, beliefs, and practices of the aboriginal people 
of the Americas. The primary reasons for this are respect for the 
culture of American Indian and Alaska Native communities and 
to ensure that any program will be acceptable within the com- 
munities. Even though a particular approach may have been 



14 



15 





shown to be effective in reducing drug use among adolescents 
in other locations, if it is not accepted as being culturally rele- 
vant it will have no chance of success. 

In examining the full range of research conducted on 
American Indian youth, it can be concluded that the majority of 
it has been focused on problem behaviors with very little 
addressing healthy or resilient behaviors. At least two authors 
have noted that unless there is further attention paid to the fac- 
tors involved in positive adolescent development among 
American Indian youth, our knowledge of prevention of nega- 
tive behaviors will be seriously limited (Beauvais, 2000; Mitchell 
& Beals, 1997). 

Prevention 

Over the past decade there have been numerous efforts to cata- 
logue and summarize the nature of drug prevention activities 
among American Indian youth (Hayne, 1993, 1994; Office of 
Substance Abuse Prevention, 1990; Owan, Palmer & Quintana, 
1987). May and Moran (1995) and May (1995) have provided a 
comprehensive review of drug and alcohol prevention pro- 
grams among American Indian populations using the public 
health model of primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention. 
While it is clear that there is a tremendous amount of activity 
directed toward preventing drug abuse in American Indian 
communities, there are only a handful of studies that have 
applied any rigorous scientific attention to determining effec- 
tiveness. May and Moran (1995) concluded, "Few systematic 
outcome evaluations of either approach (primary and secondary 
prevention) have been completed in Indian communities. Thus, 
based on the work in the field to date, we believe that although 
these approaches have much promise, indications of success 
should be characterized as preliminary" (p. 297). 

Social Skills 

Among those few programs that have received some scientific 
scrutiny are those described by Schinke and Gilchrist and their 
colleagues (Gilchrist, Schinke, Trimble, & Cvetkovich, 1987; 



ERIC 



16 






15 





Schinke, Botvin, et ah, 1988 ; 

Walker, ^.. 9A ^ ll ^^ 1Ua iile. 1992). In the first 
Schinke, Schmm&& G lchns , , # ^ enhancement pro- 

of these stu f es / Gl '°, h " ^ commoda te local tribal lifeways and 
gram was develop American Indians in the 

administered to a group y h vout h (mean age 

Pacific Northwest. One hundred and two yoc ^ 

11.34; 49% female) were education 

domly assigned to a a series of exerci ses designed to 

information about drugs skills regarding 

identify values and to 

future use of drugs and alco • P f ako hol, 

group, the experimental youth exhibit*! lowe^ra ^ ^ ^ 

marijuana, and inha 1 ? A1 note d at both testing peri- 

posttest and 6-month followup. Also no ^ user , a n 

ods were reductions in se pe improved ability to 

increase mtaowledge^ ou^ "8^ ^ which enhanced 

refuse offers to use a g modeling of social compe- 

problem solvingt^the leeching reductions in abuse of 

tence skills, a 6-montn to p and barbiturates 

alcohol, marijuana, m a an ^ random assignment 

(Schinke, Botvin, et al., 1988 . Once aga , ^ ^ ^ 

to experimental and contro con component was 

study is significant in that a so. cia compeh ince co p ^ 

derived from the theoretical no on 

trained in bicultural compe en American Indian society) 

in both American Indian substance 

should display better overall adjustmenl t an, LaFromboise and 
use. This idea is discussed extenswely ^“(1993) and 

Rowe (1983) and LaFrom oise, framework and empirical 

is also consistent with the theore and Qetting (1993). 

find ^he S idea ' ^“^TbLltaial competence training 

should receive a great deal “°^®^ a “ s ub^iM abuse 

given that this is one area m cross cuirnr 

research that is solidly based m Theo^and *at , f 

minotily populations. 



16 



17 




Unfortunately, not much has been done to follow up on the 
promising work of Schinke or Gilchrist in more than a decade. 

Peers 

In a pilot study of alcohol abuse with a group of American 
Indian youth. Carpenter, Lyons, and Miller (1985) found that the 
incorporation of peer counselors into a prevention program led 
to significant decreases in alcohol consumption at the end of the 
intervention and at 4-, 9-, and 12-month followups. This was a 
very small (n = 30), uncontrolled study and the results should be 
viewed with caution. In another small pilot study, Duryea and 
Matzek (1990) found some promising results using peer pres- 
sure resistance among American Indian elementary school stu- 
dents. While encouraging, the existing studies on peers and 
drug use among American Indian youth are extremely limited. 
Given the centrality of peers in the etiology and maintenance of 
drug-using behavior in general and specifically within 
American Indian populations, prevention programs incorporat- 
ing peer dynamics need considerably more investigation. 

Family 

There is nearly universal agreement that the family is of para- 
mount importance among and within all American Indian 
groups (Fleming, 1992). While the centrality of the family in the 
development of children and adolescents is recognized by most 
cultures, the traditional kinship and extended family structure 
of American Indian communities add importance to this social- 
ization source. With respect to influence on drug and alcohol 
abuse specifically, Swaim et al. (1993) have demonstrated that 
American Indian families may take precedence over peers as the 
most proximal determinant of abuse or non-abuse. This is con- 
trary to the usual finding of the predominance of peer influence 
among non-American Indian adolescents (Oetting & Beauvais, 
1986). 

Given the importance of the family, it is surprising that there 
is scant literature addressing prevention interventions that fea- 
ture the family. Hayne (1993, 1994) presented a review of more 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



18 



17 







o 

ERIC 






than 60 prevention programs on American Indian reservations 
and in urban American Indian centers. A review of the goals and 
content of these programs reveals that less than 10 percent focus 
on the family as one of the more important intervention targe s. 
Most of the programs list activities such as parent training skills, 
recreational activities to increase contact with the family, rug 
education for family members, and similar elements, but only a 
few include the family as a central focus of the interventions An 
exception to this is a recently described project by Van Stelle 
Allen, and Moberg (1998). The project is built on a 24-week 
intervention that includes a family weekend retreat, a fami y 
drug abuse curriculum, home visits, family support groups, an 
elders resource council, and cultural activities that bring youth, 
parents, and elders together. The project enjoyed wide accep- 
tance in the community and many of the existing service agen- 
cies participated. Unfortunately, no data were provided on 
behavioral outcomes. 



School-Based Programs 



By far the majority of drug prevention programs across the 
United States are implemented in the school setting, and the si - 
uation in American Indian communities is not much differen 
(Owan et al., 1987). A further similarity is the lack of consistent 
assessment of effectiveness. A few programs have demonstrated 
specific, short-term gains (Bernstein & Woodall, 1987, Murphy 
& DeBlassie, 1984), but most lack any evidence that they can e 
generalized or that the gains are sustained over time. 
Particularly overlooked is the need for continued booster ses- 
sions that seems to be the sine qua non of effective ^ hool '^;d 
programs (Botvin, Baker, Dusenbury, Botvin, & Tracy, 1995). 
Given the popularity of school-based interventions, it is imper- 
ative that more effort be placed in assessing their impact and in 
determining the dimensions that are required for effectiveness. 

Policy 

Policy is an area that has received virtually no attention in su - 
stance abuse prevention among American Indian youth, n a 



18 



19 




exhaustive overview of policy concerning alcohol reduction 
among American Indian populations. May (1992) found few 
empirical studies, outside of those examining the effects of alco- 
hol prohibition, which addressed policy topics. Yet, May was 
able to list no less than 107 potential avenues for alcohol control, 
based on findings in the general literature and an analysis of 
policy options available in American Indian communities. It is 
notable that even as comprehensive as this list is, it did not 
include issues of school policies regarding drug and alcohol 
abuse among adolescents. This is a ripe and important topic for 
research development and program opportunities. Policy 
options clearly overlap with legal approaches, but again, out- 
side of the studies showing that prohibition has little effect on 
alcohol consumption in American Indian communities, there 
are no studies showing how the police and courts can effectively 
address adolescent drug use prevention in American Indian 
communities. 

Community-Wide Efforts 

The past decade has witnessed a growing interest in commu- 
nity-wide prevention efforts and that interest has also been evi- 
dent in American Indian communities. The impetus for this 
movement in part comes from disenchantment with the effec- 
tiveness of highly targeted and limited prevention interven- 
tions. Gorman (1996), for example, reviewed the outcomes of 
the majority of the school-based prevention programs and con- 
cluded that most of them have only a minimal and transitory 
effect on substance abuse. Given the complexity of and the 
many interacting social, psychological, and biological elements 
leading to substance abuse patterns, it is not surprising that a 6- 
week school curriculum intervention, for instance, will not sub- 
stantially change drug use patterns among adolescents. 

Recognizing the manifold nature of adolescent substance 
abuse, many in the substance abuse prevention field are recom- 
mending approaching the problem on multiple fronts. Certainly 
the emphasis on community partnerships within the Center for 
Substance Abuse Prevention, for example, is a reflection of this 








stance. The same momentum has been building over the past 
several years within American Indian communities. May and 
“ ® L 95) and May (1995) conclude from their reviews of 

Indian communities that there 

fs a need for a more general, multifaceted public health 

Native Mental 

HeaUh Research Center has undertaken a major community 

CSton “un W b o y f “doH^lth Sciences 
Center 3 Called the Healthy Nations Project, the initiative led to the 
^cation of 13 American Indian urban and rural communi 
ties in which 5-year prevention projects are now being dev 
need The projects are designed to be locally initiated and 
locaUy OTntrolled efforts that are highly responsive to the cul- 
tural beliefs and needs of each location. Each project is expec e 
to develop a variety of networking and intervention activities 
that address the problem of substance abuse across the con 
uum tom needs P assessment through treatment aftercare and 
relapse prevention. Current descriptions of the progress in these 
communities reveal an impressive diversity of culturally 

^ r ° Th^ problems Inv olved in any scientific analysis of drug 
prevention efforts are only magnified when the arenaofmtere 
fs expanded to encompass multiple community and mdividua 

aedies and their interactions. Of P" J”fv n- 
nniaue nature of each community coalition and the lnte 
tions they define as being appropriate for their locale. e iver- 
sitv precludes multiple applications of a standard approach that 
can be compared in an experimental design. A second major 
problem is the identification of a reasonable contro * 
American Indian and Alaska Native communities are heteroge 
“not only in their cultural makeup but also in structural 

characteristics such as size, governance pattern^ | 11 ' 

wavs and thoughtways, and economic bases. The presence or 
thefheterogenehy creates major doubts as to wfiether or no 
external validity can be assured by any design. A th 'M is *“ e 
determining the actual level of exposure to any or all of the 



o 

ERIC 



20 



21 



coalition efforts. While there may be a plethora of activities tak- 
ing place in a particular community, it is often difficult to tell 
which ones, and to what degree, youth may have participated 
in. In short, assessment of the effectiveness of community coali- 
tions, or partnerships, usually entails fairly loose experimental 
designs and often, equivocal results. 

All of the above problems were inherent in an effort to eval- 
uate a community-based alcohol prevention program on a west- 
ern reservation by Cheadle et al. (1995). The initial plans for ran- 
domization and identification of comparable control 
communities were stymied by funding considerations. 
Consequently the control communities were non-Indian loca- 
tions in another State. Pre-, post-, and followup surveys of youth 
in the community did show reductions in alcohol and marijuana 
abuse over a 4-year period. However, similar, albeit smaller, 
reductions were also seen in the "control" communities and the 
research team was reluctant to attribute the reductions to the 
prevention program. Furthermore, the team was unable to doc- 
ument to what extent the youth had been exposed to prevention 
activities throughout the course of the program. 

Community Readiness 

It is a common observation among those working with 
American Indian communities that there is a seemingly endless 
succession of new drug prevention programs that are brought 
into communities, thrive while external funding is available, 
and then rapidly disappear with the cessation of funding. A 
major element of this circumstance is likely that the communi- 
ties never had an initial investment in the program (Beauvais & 
Trimble, 1992). The need for these programs is often not widely 
recognized or accepted; the programs are usually designed by 
someone outside of the community and most likely they are not 
congruent with the culture of the community. Furthermore, 
many of the implemented programs are so ambitious that they 
overwhelm the existing resources within the community. For 
example, a school-based program that requires a considerable 
financial investment in teacher training and materials will not 




work in a reservation school where both dollars and human cap- 

“ aI As a respOTise^tcTdtis^rnismatch between community need, 
perc" «o r ns P and attitudes 

interventions, an appro^h^abeled^comm^ ^ X ^ ^ 

thTaccemaTe of these interventions (see Jumper-Thurman 
the acceptan Getting, this monograph). The 

^deriving principle of this model is that communities are at 

Ss£=^33=Ss 

conform to what the community is ready do handle U 

futile and perhaps unity was exhibiting tolerance 

drug survey data if the community * nature of 

rtJK S £££££<£%• ?»•» « 

X,"„d dank. — “ » * “ k “ “ “ SS 

..to to.-™ *» — ■“ “ ^ “ 

mM <. bto qto»« “f 

quantitative. Substantial amounts of interview data 



22 



23 




lected in the process of specifying where a community is on the 
continuum. The end result, however, is a numerical rating that 
can be used in statistical analyses to determine whether or not a 
community has changed in their level of readiness as a result of 
a community development intervention. 

Once again, community readiness does not speak to the 
issue of the effectiveness of any drug prevention strategy. It 
does, however, provide an accurate gauge for determining at 
what point certain interventions can be introduced. Without 
attention to this critical timing, no program, regardless of its 
demonstrated potency in similar communities, can be effective. 
It would appear essential that more attention be paid to the 
community readiness paradigm. At the same time, efforts must 
continue to examine the specific types of interventions that will 
be effective in American Indian communities. 

\ 

Cultural Sensitivity 

There are a number of requirements that must be recognized 
and attended to when the research enterprise crosses cultural 
boundaries. Failure to do so has led to the failure of many 
research efforts, which for obvious reasons do not show up in 
the literature. (See Manson, 1989 for an exception.) Trimble 
(1977), Rolf (1995), and Beauvais and Trimble (1992) discuss 
many of these requirements, including access to research popu- 
lations, trust, collaboration in the design of researchable ideas 
and in the research process, measurements that capture con- 
cepts crossculturally, and the interpretation and dissemination 
of results from a cultural perspective. Petrovsky et al. (1998) 
recently described a community-wide drug prevention pro- 
gram in an American Indian community that not only demon- 
strated positive outcomes (substance use rates were lower than 
those of a comparison community) but also conformed to cross- 
cultural research requirements. Each of the four components of 
the intervention was designed through extensive discussions 
with community members; this took an extended period of 
time but was necessary to establish the legitimacy and rele- 
vance of the research project. In addition, community members 




24 



23 



^ 







inrluded as staff. Problems and interim project outcomes 
the intervention. 



Monograph Contents 



The contents of this monograph represent the lo^dmgand 
Seated commitment of the authors to reducing and eliminat 
mg he harsh consequences of aicohol ^ , 

American Indian and Alaska Native communities, ^chapters 
fm thin slices of the realities of daily life in American Indian and 
Alaska Native communities and thus represent a very small 
“n of what can be said about the m 

LtrVi rhanter represents at a minimum what one must Kn 
work effectively in American Indian and Alaska Native com- 

mU Wecore^heme'S each chapter reflects on the importance of 

he cunenttorriers to program development. He then reviews 
he primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention work ov« the 
pasffew years and from that review draws a number of princ 
nles that should be adhered to in future programming efforts^ 

typically seen in drug intervention program . America n 

for a svnthesis of the holistic approaches from the Arne 
Indian worldview with "traditional" drug prevention actm hes. 
r „ ald and lustin Mohatt and Kelly Hazel provide yet a differ 
ent context The vast expanses of Alaska present numerous chal- 
lenges to prevention within Alaska Native villages; however, 



24 



25 




they describe numerous initiatives at the State, regional, and 
local levels that are responsive to the demographic and cultural 
needs of Alaska Natives. Pamela Jumper-Thurman and her col- 
leagues expand on the community readiness theme and 
describe its application to a variety of prevention programs for 
American Indians. The process of assessing community readi- 
ness is fully described. Jeannette Johnson and her team address 
community perceptions of and effectiveness of the National 
Association of Native American Children of Alcoholics. Rich 
ethnographic data are included to illustrate their conclusions. 
Finally, Fred Beauvais addresses the issue of the effectiveness of 
school-based prevention programs in American Indian commu- 
nities. His article ends with a strong recommendation that 
American Indian families, rather than schools, should be the pri- 
mary focus of prevention in American Indian communities. 

It is our sincere hope that the material in this monograph 
will serve to strengthen everyone's resolve to reduce the inci- 
dence and prevalence of alcohol and drug abuse and of life- 
threatening illnesses occurring among many of the indigenous 
peoples of the Americas. We sincerely hope that American 
Indians and non- American Indians will benefit constructively 
from the information and seek ways to follow through on the 
recommendations. 

Summary and Future Directions 

Much can be written about the present and future status of pre- 
vention programs designed for use in American Indian and 
Alaska Native communities. Certainly, there are few published 
articles about research findings on American Indian prevention 
programs and thus there is a desperate need for more research 
on the topic; the etiologic findings support such a recommenda- 
tion. The material summarized and presented in this introduc- 
tory chapter sets a tone that demands attention. From the pre- 
vention and etiologic literature that does exist, the following 
conclusions can be drawn with respect to effectiveness of pre- 
vention and intervention activities among American Indian 
youth: 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



26 



25 





1 The centrality of the family in American Indian culture 
makes it imperative that it is involved in prevention 

2 Peers exert a significant effect on decisions about drug use, 

' although to a lesser degree than among non-American 

3. Ascurrently defined and measured, cultural identification is 
not directly related to substance abuse prevention althoug 

it may be critical in treatment. . 

4. Many of the factors affecting youth in general also impact 

drug use among American Indian youth. 

5. Much more is known about risk than resiliency ac ors or 

American Indian youth. 

6. The evidence for the effectiveness of school-based programs 
is very limited. 

As a consequence of Manson's 1982 seminal work, in 1984 
Trimble outlined a series of recommendations directed towards 
the advancement of prevention strategies, themes and research 
among American Indians and Alaska Natives. According to 
these recommendations, researchers should consider these 

questions: 

1. What forms of drug and alcohol use are thought to be pre- 
ventable? By what indigenous and tnbally specific means. 

2 What are the models of human and transcultural compe- 
' tence "in terms of individuals, families, and communities 
that account for the immense heterogeneity among 
American Indians and Alaska Natives? How can these mod- 
els drive prevention and intervention strategies? 

3. What are the characteristics of natural support systems. 
What are the traditional ways of changing and strengthen- 
ing those systems to advance the prevention of substance 
use and abuse, of illness, and of individual and social 

deviance? 

4. What culturally appropriate information about the causes 
and consequences of substance use and abuse, illness, an 
deviance is available for circulation and use in meric 
Indian and Alaska Native communities? What procedu 



26 



27 




are available to assist American Indians and Alaska Natives 
in turning cognitively based information into behavioral 
skills to assist them in coping with situations involving 
alcohol and drugs? 

5. What are the psychosocial characteristics associated with the 
lifespan predictors of substance use and misuse? What are 
the age-specific gender differences and characteristics? 

6. What treatment modalities (indigenous and traditional) are 
available to effectively deal with substance use and misuse? 
What expectancy variables define treatment, the therapeutic 
relationship, and aftercare? From the American Indian's 
point of view? From the intervenor's point of view? 

7. Under what conditions and for what reasons are practices 
and techniques of traditional healers and shamans appro- 
priate for dealing with American Indian and Alaska Native 
substance use and misuse? What are the ethical issues asso- 
ciated with changing the shamanic traditions to accommo- 
date conventional forms of health and wellness interven- 
tions, including psychiatric and conventional psychological 
approaches? 

Although these recommendations are 16 years old, they still 
hold relevance and promise for setting an agenda for future 
work. 

References 



Austin, G., & Gilbert, M. (1989). Substance abuse among Latino youth. 
Prevention Research Update, 3. 

Austin, G., Oetting, E., & Beauvais, F. (1993). Recent research on substance 
abuse among American Indian youth. Prevention Research Update, 11. 

Bates, S. C., Beauvais F., & Trimble, J. E. (1997). American Indian adolescent 
alcohol involvement and ethnic identification. Substance Use and Misuse, 
32 (14), 2013-2031. 

Beauvais, F. (Ed.). (1992). Indian adolescent drug and alcohol use: Recent 
patterns and consequences [Special Issue], American Indian and Alaska 
Native Mental Health Research, 5 (1). 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 








u ■ p C\ QQfV) Trends in drug use among American Indian students and 
“1“ America! Journal of Public Health, 86 (11), 1594-1598. 

Beauvais, F. (1998). Cultural identification and substance use: An annotated 
bibliography. Substance Use and Misuse, 33 , 1315 155b. 

Beauvais F (2000). Indian adolescence: Opportunity and challenge. In R. 
Ztemayor, G. Adams, & T. Gullotta (EdsO, Adolescent dmersd y m etkutc, 
economic and cultural contexts. Thousand Oaks, CA. Sage. 

Beauvais, E, Chavez, E, Oetting, E. R, Deffenbacher, J & Cornell « 

Cl 996) Drue use violence, and victimization among 

Meccan American, and American Indian dropouts, students w„h aca- 
"demic problems, and students in good academic standing. Journo f 
Counseling Psychology, 43 (3), 292-299. 

„ • p o t aRoueff S (1985). Drug and alcohol abuse intervention in 

“tantndt —nities. The International Journal of the Addictions, 

20 (1), 139-171. 

r> . • t; s OpUinp E R. (1988). Indian youth inhalants: An update. In 
^Crider & B. A. Rouse (Eds.), Epidemiology of Inhalant Abuse An ^ ate 
(NIDA Research Monograph No. 85). Rockville, MD: National Inshtute on 

Drug Abuse. 

Beauvais F Oetting, E. R., Wolf, W., & Edwards, R. W. (1989). American 
Indian youth and drugs, 1976-1987: A continuing problem. American 
Journal of Public Health, 79 (5), 634-636. 

Beauvais, F„ & Segal, B. (1992). Drug use patterns > 

a r Alaskan Native vouth: Special rural populations. In R. Edwards tbaj. 
Drug use in rural American communities (pp. 77-94). New York: Hawort 

press. 

Beauvais F & Trimble, J. E. (1992). The role of the researcher in evaluating 

B American-Indian alcohol and other drug abuse prevention P™g r ^ ms - In 
M Orlandi (Ed.), Cultural competence for evaluators working wt e nic 
minority communities: A guide fo, alcohol and other drug 
titioners (Cultural Competence Series #1, DHHS Pub. AD s i FF 

173-201). Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Serv 

Bernstein E. & Woodall, W. (1987). Changing perceptions of riskiness m 
SZnl drngs, and driving: An emergency department based alcohol 
and substance abuse prevention program. Annals of Emergency e icin , 
26,1350-1354. 

Botvin, G„ Baker, E„ Dusenbury, L„ Botvin, E„ & Tracy, 

follow-up results of a randomized drug abuse prevention trial r a W 
middle-dass population. Journal of the American Medical Association, 2 , 

1106-1112. 

Carpenter R Lyons, C„ & Miller, A. (1985). Peer-managed, self-control pro- 
gram for prevention of alcohol abuse in American Indian high school 



O 

ERIC 



28 



29 




dents: A pilot evaluation study. International Journal of the Addictions, 20 
299-310. 

Cheadle, A., Pearson, D„ Wagner, E., Psaty, B., Diehr, P, & Koepsell, T. (1995). 
A community-based approach to preventing alcohol use among adoles- 
cents on an American Indian reservation. Public Health Reports, 110, 
439-447. 

Cockerham, W. (1975). Drinking attitudes and practices among Wind River 
Reservation Indian youth. Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 36, 
321-326. 

Dick, R., Manson, S., & Beals, J. (1993). Alcohol use among male and female 
Native American adolescents: Patterns and correlates of student drinking 
in a boarding school. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 54, 172-177. 

Duryea, E., & Matzek, S. (1990). Results of a first-year pilot study in peer 
pressure management among American Indian youth. Wellness 
Perspectives: Research Theory and Practice, 7 , 17-30. 

Fleming, C. (1992). American Indians and Alaska Natives: Changing societies 
past and present. In M. Orlandi (Ed.), Cultural competence for evaluators: A 
guide for alcohol and other drug abuse prevention practitioners working with eth- 
nic/racial communities. (Cultural Competence Series #1, DHHS Pub. ADM 
92-188492) Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. 

Gilchrist, L„ Schinke, S., Trimble, J., & Cvetkovich, G. (1987). Skills enhance- 
ment to prevent substance abuse among American Indian adolescents. The 
International Journal of the Addictions, 22, 869-879. 

Gorman, D. (1996).. Do school-based social skills programs prevent alcohol 
use among young people? Addiction Research, 4, 191-210. 

Hartzberg, H. (1971). The search for an American Indian identity: Modern Pan- 
Indian movements. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press. 

Hayne, B. (1993). An eagle's view: Sharing successful American Indian/Alaska 
Native alcohol and other drug prevention programs (Vol. I). Portland, OR: 
Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 

Hayne, B. (1994). An eagle's view: Sharing successful American Indian/Alaska 
Native alcohol and other drug prevention programs (Vol. II). Portland, OR: 
Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 

Heath, D. B. (1978). Foreword. Medical Anthropology, 2 (4), 3-8, 60. 

LaFromboise, T„ Coleman, H„ & Gerton, J. (1993). Psychological impact of 
biculturalism. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 395-412. 

LaFromboise, T., & Rowe, W. (1983). Skills training for bicultural competence: 
Rationale and application. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 30, 589-595. 

Longclaws, L„ Barnes, G„ Grieve, L„ & Dumoff, R. (1980). Alcohol and drug 
use among the Brokenhead Ojibwa. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 41, 21-36. 




! U 

t ! 






i ■ 



»’ i 



o 

ERIC 




Manson, S. (Ed, (1982). 

Mental Health Research. Arnerican Indian and Alaska Native 

Manson, S. (Ed, (1989). [Entire volume]. Amenc 

Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health 

MayT(1995). The prevention of atohol a md other drug *"“ a ”°^ gton 
American Indians: A review an Preventing alcohol related prob- 

(Ed.), The challenge o, ***** ^toc(vi e MD: Center for 
lems in ethnic communities (pp.185-243). Kockvi 

Substance Abuse Prevention. A review of health 

^'pronm tion ^h?r ts^ amon^^merRan Indians. American Journal of Health 
among American Indian adolescents. Gender a 

American Journal of Community Psyc oogy, , Am erican 

Murphy, S„ & DeBlassie, R. 0984). Subs.anc^abuse and 
student. Journal of Drug Education, 14, 315-321. 

Getting, E. R. 0993). Orthogonal 

between cultural identification and un uth- Advances in research and 

Adrados (Eds ), Drug abuse among MD: 

methodology (N1D A Research Monograph No. 13U). 

National Instate on D~S £-■ of adolescent dmg use : A 

°ta®"al dass”'system for describing drug use patterns. Academy 

Psychology Bulletin, 5, 55-69^ ^ theory: Dmgs and the ado- 

lescent. Journal of Counseling and Development, 65 (1), 17 22 

„ • p mqr?) Peer cluster theory, socialization charac 

Oetting, E. R., & Beauvais, E ( • analysis. Journal of Counseling 

teristics, and adolescent drug use. A path analysis j 

Psychology, 34 CO, 205 ; 213 Bpidemiolo gy and correlates of alcohol 

Oetting, E. R., & Beauvais F. ( ) ■ P reser ,,ations. In D. L. Spiegler, D. 

use among Indian adolescen S (Eds )( Alcohol use among U.S. ethnic 

A. Tate, S. S. Aitken, & C. M. ' DHHS Pub. No. [ADM] 

minorities (NIAAA Research onogr J*P g Governme nt Printing Office. 
89-1435, pp. 239-267). Washington, DC. U.S. Oovern 



30 



31 



Oetting, E. R., & Beauvais, F. (1990-1991). Orthogonal cultural identification 
theory: The cultural identification of minority adolescents. The 
International Journal of the Addictions, 25 (5A & 6A), 655-685. 



Oetting, E. R„ Edwards, R. W„ & Beauvais, F. (1989). Drugs and Native- 
Amencan youth. In B. Segal (Ed.), Perspectives on adolescent drug use (pp. 
1-34). New York: Haworth Press. 



Oetting, E. R„ Edwards, R„ Goldstein, G. S„ & Garcia-Mason, V. (1980). Drug 
use among adolescents of five southwestern Native American tribes The 
International Journal of Addictions, 15 (3), 439-445. 

Office of Substance Abuse Prevention. (1990). Breaking new ground for 
American Indian and Alaska Native youth at risk: Program summaries 

(Technical report #3). Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. 



Owan, T., Palmer, I., & Quintana, M. (1987). School /community -based alco- 
holism/substance abuse prevention survey. Rockville, MD: Indian Health 
Service. 



Petrovsky, E„ Van Stelle, K, & De Jong, J, (1998). Prevention through empow- 
erment in a Native American community. Drugs and Society, 12, 147-162. 

Pinto, L. (1973). Alcohol and drug use among Native American youth on 
reservations: A growing crisis. In National Commission on Marijuana and 
rug Use, Drug use in America: Problems in perspective. Append Vol 1* 
Patterns and Consequences (pp. 1157-1178). Washington, DC- U S 
Government Printing Office. 



Rolf, J. (1995). Methods to create and sustain cross-cultural prevention part- 
nerships: The NAPPASA Project's American Indian-Anglo American 
example. In P. Langton (Ed.), The challenge of participatory research: 
reventing alcohol related problems in ethnic communities (pp 149-181) 
Rockville, MD: Center for Substance Abuse Prevention. ' ' 



S / i n q k ft e ' S ; Botvin ' G ' Nimble, J., Orlandi, M., Gilchrist, L„ & Locklear, V. 
(1988). Preventing substance abuse among American-Indian adolescents- 

35 «7 gT* com P etence skills approach. Journal of Counseling Psychology 



Schinke, S„ Gilchrist, L„ Schilling, R., & Walker, D. (1986). Preventing sub- 
stance abuse among American Indian and Alaska Native youth: Research 
issues and strategies. Journal of Social Service Research , 9, 53-6 7. 

Schinke, S„ Orlandi, M„ Botvin, G„ & Gilchrist, L. (1988). Preventing sub- 
stance abuse among American-Indian adolescents: A biculhiral compe- 
tence skills approach. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 35, 87-90. 

Schinke S., Schilling, R„ & Gilchrist, L. (1986). Prevention of drug and alco- 
?? 1 ft Tcf ln Amencan Indlan y° uth s- Social Work Research and Abstracts, 




32 



31 








Snipp, CM. (1989). American Indian: The first of Ms land. New York: Russell 
Saee Foundation. 

Snipp, C. M. (1996). The size and 

lation: Fertility, mortality, reside , S chaming nee ds: American 

Rindfuss, & B. Cohen (Eds.), Changing Washington, DC: National 

Indian demography and public health (pp. 17-52). Washingto , 

Academy Press. Jum p er - Thu rman, P, Beauvais, F„ & Edwards, 

S Tw «5ca„ India/ adolescent drug use and ^.ak--.on 
characteristics: A cross-cultural comparison, fonrnal of Cross-Cultural 
Psychology , 24 (1)/ 53—70. 

Thornton, R. (1996). Tribal m ™ berehi P n ^Tandefar R.wXfX 7 
Press 

•SiSS: 

• U, t n iiqqi') Fthnic specification, validation prospects and the future 

ab SS- Journal of the Addictions, 25 (2), 

149-169. 

Trimble, J. E. (1992). Acognirive-behavioralapp^d, ten drag : 

s io D n sr 

vention with ethnic minority children and adolescents (pp. 24 6- )■ 

Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Trimble,,. E. (1995). Toward - “"de— g^" .“"in 
f S C cSe a ,t S e SrTandHE S dS, Drug abuse prevention with multi-ethnic 
youth (pp. 3-27). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Trimble, J. E. (in press). Social psychological per^ Dan a 

^^dXHand^ot^^^s^ultuml/M^Hcultural Personality Assessment. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Trimble, J. E„ Padilla, A., * BelLBolek, 

minorities (Office of Science Monograph Senes). Kockvine, 

Institute on Drug Abuse. 

t or R H981) American Indian nationalism and frontier expansion 
Trosper, R. (1981). American University of 

C. Keyes (Ed.), Ethnic change (pp. 247-270). beattie, vv^ 

Washington Press. 



O 

ERIC 



32 



33 




United States Department of Education. (1982). A study of alternative defini- 
tions and measures relatmg to eligibility and service under Part A of the Indian 
Education Act [Unpublished report], Washington, DC: United States 
Department of Education. 

Van Stelle, K., Allen, G., & Moberg, D. (1998). Alcohol and drug prevention 
among American Indian families. Drugs and Society, 12, 53-60. 

Winfree, L., Griffiths, C., & Sellers, C. (1989). Social learning theory, drug use 
and American Indian Youths: A cross-cultural test. Justice Quarterly, 6, 
395-416. 

Yee, A., Fairchild, H., Weizmann, F., & Wyatt, G. (1993). Addressing psychol- 
ogy's problems with race. American Psychologist, 48 (11), 1132-1140. 

Young, T. K. (1994). The health of Native Americans: Toward a biocultural epidemi- 
ology. New York: Oxford University Press. 



O 



34 



33 





U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 



ReDroduction Basis 

jc 




This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)" form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a "Specific Document" Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form 
(either "Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 




EFF-089 (3/2000) 




