DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 354 804 HE 026 223 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 
PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Sawchuk, Marietta T» , Ed* 

The Role of Faculty Development in Multicultural 
Education. Celebrating Cultural Diversity in Higher 
Education Series* 

Mount St. Mary's Coll., Los Angeles, CA. Doheny 

Campus . 

[92] 

43p.; For a related document, see HE 026 224. 
Prism Publishing of Mount St. Mary's College, 12001 
Chalon Road, Los Angeles, CA 90049 ($16). 
Guides - Non-Classroom Use (055) — Reports - 
Descriptive (141) 

MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

College Faculty; Cultural Differences; ''Cultural 
Pluralism; ''Taculty Development; Grants; Higher 
Education; Liberal Arts; ''^Multicultural Education; 
Program Descriptions; Staff Development; Teacher 
Role; Workshops 
''Mount Saint Marys College CA 



ABSTRACT 

This monograph examines the process of initiating a 
faculty and staff development program in multicultural education at 
Mount St. Mary's College (MSMC) in Los Angeles, California between 
the year 1985 and 1988. As the population of Los Angeles changed 
during the 1970s and 1980s, issues of ethnical diversity at MSMC 
itself became increasingly pressing. In 1986, MSMC received a grant 
from the Consortium for the Advancement of Private Higher Education 
(with matching funds from the Times-Mirror Foundation) designed to 
make the entire faculty and staff of the college more effective in 
dealing with cultural differenceis among students through all-college 
programs and workshops. This report provides brief summaries of the 
lectures and workshops that were presented to the college community 
and discusses the selection of the guest speakers. It is noted that 
some of the invited speakers provided faculty members with resources 
on literature, art, music, and history that they could share with 
their students, while other speakers and workshops dealt with 
teaching methodologies that have been shown to be successful in a 
multicultural classroom. In addition, the guide describes the way in 
which mini-grants were awarded and administered to faculty for 
intellectual exploration concerning culture and its role in 
education. It also provides excerpts from six of the funded research 
projects. Finally, the guide presents brief excerpts from an 
annotated bibliography of African-American, Asian-American, 
Native-American, and Hispanic-American authors that was created to 
provide a resource of multicultural literature for use by the faculty 
at Mount St. Mary's College. (GLR) 



yc Vc * * yc * * * * * Vf * * * * :1V * »V Vr * * * * * Vc * * yc yc 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 
***yf*yc****yf*********yc*yf*yf*yc**yfyfyfift* 



Celebrating Cultural Diversity 
in Higher Education Series 



o 


1 he role of 




111 

jaculty development 


CO 


in multicultural 




education 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Mount St. Mary's College 

Los Angeles, California, 



Celebrating Cultural Diversity in Higher 
Education 



The Role of Faculty Development 
in Multicultural Education 



Mariette T. Sawchuk, Editor 



PrismPublishing of 
Mount St. Mary's College, Los Angeles, California 



Table of Contents 



Foreword 3 

I. Introduction 6 

n. Lectures and Workshops 9 

in. Mini-grants 15 

Awards 16 

IV. Summaries of Mini-grant Projects 18 

Multicultural Literature: An Annotated Bibliography 19 

Connections: The Relationship of Art from Different Cultures 23 

Cross-cultural Communication: A Course Module 25 

Health Care and Native American Medicine: 

A Journey of Discovery 28 

Lexicon of Religious Terms 31 

Different Voices: Multicultural Dimensions of Leadership 34 

V. Moving Forward: Beyond the Faculty/ 

Staff Development Program 38 



4 



Foreword 



Celebrating Cultural Diversity in 
Higher Education 

Educating a multi-etJinic student population for 
life in a multicultural world is one of the greatest 
challenges facing institutions of higher learning in 
the !990s. The task is complex and, in some 
respects, controversial. All facets of college life are 
involved — admissions, curricula, faculty 
development, financial aid, fund raising, library 
holdings and student development. Mount St. 
Mary's College in Los Angeles (MSMC) has been 
engaged in the process of implementing 
multicultural education on its two campuses for 
over 10 years. Grappling with the issues raised by 
multicultural education has been by turns 
exciting, difficult, frustrating, and surprising. 
Through the experience, faculty, administrators, 
and students have been immeasurably enriched. 
Cultural diversity on campus, acknowledged and 
utilized as a catalyst for learning, can be a 
tremendous source of strength for higher 
education in the United States. Mount St. Mary's 
College is publishing this series of monographs. 
Celebrating Caltxwal Diversity in Higher Education, 
to help other institutions exploring the potential of 
multicultural education. 

The MSMC experience has shown that cultural 
diversity becomes a positive force on campus 
when faculty and staff see thp.l diversity as an 
opportunity for learning rather than an obstacle. 
Therefore, faculty and staff development on the 
subject of culture and learning is crucial to 
effective multicultural education. This monograph 
describes the way in which MSMC went about 
such a faculty development program during the 
years from 1985 to 1988. In addition to outlining 
the process, the monograph includes a summary 
of one representative workshop and excerpts from 
some of the faculty and staff research projects. 



Mount St. Mary^s College, 
Los Angeles 

Founded by the Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet 
in 1925, Mount St. Mary's is an independent. 
Catholic college with a special concern for the 
education of women. The college offers a 
curricajium in which career preparation at every 
level is firmly based on the liberal arts and 
sciences. The college also emphasizes the study of 
ethics and encourages multicultural awareness 
through academic and co-curricular activities. 

For undergraduates, the college offers both two- 
year associate in arts degrees on the downtown 
Doheny campus and four-year baccalaureate 
degrees on the Chalon campus in west Los 
Angeles. The evening/vi eekend division enables 
working students to earn associate or 
baccalaureate degrees in selected majors or 
certification in paraprofessional programs. 
Graduate programs are available in 
education, psychology, physical therapy, and 
religious studies. 

Although small. Mount St. Mary's student body is 
remarkably diverse: 1,200 students self- reporting 
their places of birth listed more than 42 states and 
43 foreign countries. The ethnic diversity of the 
undergraduate student body closely parallels that 
of Southern California: 12% African-, 37% Anglo-. 
15% Asian-, and 36% Hispanic -American. 
Approximately 60% are Catholic. About half of the 
students reside on campus and half commute. 

Every aspect of a MSMC education is 
characterized by concern for the individual 
student — her goals, her talents, her development. 
This concern for the individual student led to the 
evolution of the College's dual campuses and 
programs, features which are among MSMC*s 
greatest strengths. Unified by one administration 
and one faculty, the college specializes on each 
campus. The Doheny campus offers both 
associate in atrts degrees leading to immediate 



ERLC 



5 



3 



employment and an allemalive access program 
admitting students who show a potential for 
success in college despite weak academic records. 
Alternative access students have average GPA s of 
2,50 on a 4,00 scale and average composite SAT 
scores of 660. They are often the first in their 
families to attend college and must struggle with 
poverty, inadequate high school backgrounds, and 
pressing family obligations. For many students, 
English is a second language. The alternative 
access program, a direct response to their needs, 
has been dramatically effective in enabling these 
students to succeed. Approximately 68% of those 
who come as freshmen earn their associate in arts 
degree in two years or transfer to a baccalaureate 
program. Seventy-five to 80 percent of those who 
persist go on to baccalaureate study in Mount St. 
Mary's four-year program (50%) or at other 
institutions (25-30%). Significantly, students 
transferring from MSMC's alternative access 
program do well in the four-year program, meeting 
the challenge of demanding academic standards. 
Some continue their studies further, earning 
graduate degrees. Research has been Qone on the 
alternative access program at MSMC's Doheny 
campus and a model program developed, which is 
described in this series first monograph, "Access 
and Persistence: An Educational Program Model." 

The baccalaureate program on the Chalon campus 
focuses on students who have demonstrated their 
ability to succeed academically. Baccalaureate 
freshmen have average SAT or ACT scores placing 
them in the top quartile of college-bound students 
nationwide. Minorities make up a large 
percentage of these talented students. About half 
of the candidates for MSMC's prestigious, merit- 
based President's Scholarships are African-, 
Asian- or Hispanic-American. The baccalaureate 
program has been recognized for its excellence by 
independent organizations such as U.S. News and 
World Report and Changing Times magazines. 
Special opportunities centered here include the 



honors program, the Women's Leadership 
program, the Model United Nations delegation, 
and the Minority Biomedical Research program. 



Multicultural Education 

As the population of Los Angeles changed during 
the TOs and '80s, the student body at Moiant St. 
Mary's College gradually became more ethnically 
diverse with the change initially more apparent on 
the Doheny campus. The college's own 
recruitment efi'orts at inner city high schools 
contributed to this change. Faculty working with 
students from diverse cultures became aware that 
students experienced academic difficulty when 
their cultural assumptions were difi'erent from 
those of the college. Respect for authority, for 
example, is a strong value for Asian-American 
students. Consequently, they often avoid asking 
questions in class even when they are confused 
about the subject matter. These students 
interpret the act of questioning as a challenge to 
the teacher implying incompetent instruction. 
Most faculty members, on the other hand, 
interpret student questions as a sign of interest 
and involvement in the class. Some faculty may 
even lower a student's grade for failure to 
participate. In order to avoid these 
misunderstandings and others like them, 
interested faculty and administrators began to 
explore ways to teach students and their parents 
about college assumptions and to learn about the 
world views of various ethnic cultures, English 
teachers began to look for novels, poetry and plays 
by authors from a variety of ethnic groups in order 
to stimulate student interest. Faculty came to 
"brown-bag" lunch meetings to exchange ideas 
and teaching methodologies that helped students 
succeed. Mount St. Mary's College began to 
explore the implications of multicultural education 
not only on a theoretical level, but also on a 
pedagogical one. 



In 1986, Mount St. Mary*s received a grant from 
the Consortium for the Advancement of Private 
Higher Education (CAPHE^) to increase faculty and 
staff awareness of the link between culture and 
learning, a project this monograph describes in 
detail. Matching funds for this project were 
supplied by the Times-Mirror Foundation. The 
first objective of the grant, as stated in the 
proposal, was "to make every member of the 
faculty and staff more effective in dealing with 
cultural differences among the collegers students" 
through all-college programs and workshops. The 
second was to provide funds for individual faculty 
and staff to research particular, practical topics 
related to culture and learning. 

This grant was a resounding success. It funded 
speakers for 15 all-college events aud numerous 
departmental workshops. In the "Course of the 
grant, 30 research projects were undertaken. 
Twenty departments and administrative oxfices 
were involved in these projects, and over 40 
members of the faculty and staff contributed to 
them. Many of the monographs in this series are 
a result of these CAPHE-funded research projects. 
Another important result of this faculty and staff 
development grant was a gathering momentum for 
further institutional change. The education 



department received a second grant from 
CAPHE/NYNEX matched by the ARCO 
Foundation to infuse multicultural content into 
the subject matter courses (such as English and 
history) required for an elementary teaching 
credential. Funding from the AT&T, Ford, and 
Teagle foundations has made it possible for the 
college to research the alternative access program 
and share the results with other colleges and 
universities through publications, workshops, and 
presentations at conferences. Grants from the 
Knight aind Ford foundations, the Pew Charitable 
Trust, and the Clowes Fund, Inc., have enabled 
the college to undertake a revision of the core 
curricula with the goal of making multicultural 
awareness a central component of a Mount St. 
Mary*s education. MSMC is still very much in the 
process of incorporating multicultural dimensions 
into every aspect of college life. The experience is 
a challenging and invigorating one. 

Costs associated with introducing this Celebrating 
Cultural Diversity in Higher Education series have 
been underwritten by the CBS Foundation. A 
grant from the Clowes Fund, Inc., has helped to 
defray the cost of this monograph, *The Role of 
Faculty Development in Multicultural Education." 



ERLC 



7 



5 



I 

Introduction 



As I took roll for my American literature class in the 
Fall of 1985. 1 thought. This is the United Nations: 
Alfonso, Challappa. Brady, Evans, Gonzalez, Lee, 
Marti, Otani, Ramirez, Wongr I wondered if we 
had anything in common. Perhaps by studying the 
literature of America together, we could create a 
shared experience from which we could all learn. 

—MSMC English Instructor 



The situation confronting this English professor 
was a common one at Mount St. Mary's College in 
the 1980s. A faculty and staff, which was, for the 
most part, Anglo-American, undertook the 
education of a student population growing more 
culturally diverse with each passing year. Faculty 
and administrators began to consider how to 
educate a multicultural student body more 
effectively. One response was stepped-up efforts 
to hire faculty and staff from minorities 
traditionally underrepresented in higher 
education, who could serve as role models for 
students. During the *80s, unfortunately, the 
number of doctorates awarded to African- and 
Hispamic-Americains was declining sharply. 
Competition for these graduates was, and 
continues to be, keen. The decreasing pool of 
minority doctorates, budgetary constraints, and 
the number of tenured faculty made it inevitable 
that the majority of the faculty at MSMC (as at 
most other American colleges and universities) 
would continue to be Anglo-American through 
the 1990s. 

Until the college was able to have a more 
ethnically diverse faculty and staff, faculty 
development provided a way to improve the 
education of a multicultural student body. When 
the Consortium for the Advancement of Private 
Higher Education (CAPHE) invited MSMC to 
submit a grant proposal, the administration saw a 
way to undertake faculty/staff development in 
multicultural education on a broad scale. The 



college submitted a proposal with two basic 
objectives: the first was to help every member of 
the faculty and staff become more effective in 
dealing with cultural differences among students 
through lectures, workshops, and programs open 
to all. The second was to provide faculty members 
with mini-grsints for research on specific topics 
related to culture and learning. The proposal was 
funded in Jsinuary of 1986, and the first mini- 
graint applications were filed in June of that year. 
"Unity through Diversity" became the theme of the 
1986-87 academic year. A keynote lecture at the 
faculty convocation in September 1986 launched a 
study on the relationship between culture and 
learning, the impact of which is still being felt. 



Assumptions 

There are probably as many definitions of culture 
as there are of love. This monograph will not 
attempt to offer a conclusive one, but instead uses 
as a working definition that given by the noted 
ainthropologist Sir Edward Burnett Tyior when he 
introduced the term into anthropology in his book 
Primitive Culture: "Culture is that complex whole 
which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, 
custom and any other capabilities and habits 
acquired by man as a member of society." Culture 
includes many elements of which human beings 
are conscious, such as the murals of Diego Rivera 
or the Buddhist wedding ceremony, and also 
many things of which they are usually unaware, 
such as rules governing interruptions in 
conversation. Culture underlies every aspect of 
life and behavior, including common sense beliefs 
about the world, time, space, relationships, 
courtesy and values. Misunderstandings often 
occur when people of different cultures interact, 
particularly if one or both are unaware of their 
culturally determined expectations. 

When the college began its faculty/staff 
development program on culture and learning, the 



8 



president, academic deans and grant coordinator 
shared certain assumptions. The first and most 
obvious was that everyone — students, faculty, 
staff, and even administrators — has a culture. 
One goal of the program was to help members of 
the college community become more aware of their 
own cultural expectations as well as to help them 
understand the cultures of students from various 
ethnic backgrounds. 

The second assumption underlying the program 
was that culture affects learning. Cross-cultural 
studies over the last quarter century have 
demonstrated that differing cultural contexts 
promote different kinds of development in reading, 
writing, mathematical and analytical abilities. The 
methods by which faculty members teach, their 
expectations of student behaviors, and their 
standards for evaluation are all products of 
culture. Student success or failure may be related 
to how compatible the cultures of the student and 
instructor are or how well one or both adapt to 
the other. 

What happens outside the classroom can also 
have a profound effect on the quality of a student's 
college experience. Making friends, living with a 
roommate, and balancing study with co-curricular 
activities and leisure are typical student 
experiences that have important cultural 
components. For students from a cultural 
minority background, these non-academic areas 
may present particular problems because 
differences in underlying beliefs may permeate 
their experiences yet are especially hard to 
identify. Issues of relationship and daily routine, 
moreover, are likely to be emotionally charged. 
MSMC made a vigorous effort to involve 
administrators and staff working in residence, co- 
curricular activities, and student services in the 
programs on multicultural awareness. 

A third and final assumption is that each college 
and university has its own subculture, some of 
which is written down in the college catalog and 



student handbook while other aspects are learned 
informally. Mount St. Mary's College, for example, 
has a tradition of emphasizing community service, 
an aspect of the college subculture that has been 
articulated and written down in the mission 
statement of the college. One of the college 
traditions passed on informally is the custom of 
greeting everyone on campus, even strangers. 
One goal of studying the relationship between 
culture and learning is to investigate and 
articulate aspects of MSMC's own subculture. 



Goals 

As the College prepared to initiate the faculty 
development program in 1986, the hopes of the 
administration and coordinators were relatively 
modest. The aim ivas not to make the college 
culturally neutral. As a Catholic, liberal arts 
college. Mount St. Mary's stands solidly rooted m 
Western culture. Its structure, expectations, 
goals, and curricula, like that of most American 
colleges and universities, have evolved from and 
reflect the values and assumptions of Western 
culture. The very emphasis on truth, the 
appreciation of diversity, and the exploration of 
non-majority cultures that gave impetus to the 
project is in the best tradition of Western and 
American culture. 

Neither did college administrators expect an 
immediate revision of the curricula or even a 
general consensus about the nature of 
multicultural education. The goal was rather to 
give faculty, administrators and staff additional 
tools for meeting the educational and personal 
needs of ethnically diverse students. The college 
community was invited to hear artists, 
anthropologists, educators, psychologists, 
sociologists, and writers discuss aspects of many 
ethnic cultures, providing faculty members with 
resources on literature, art, niasic and history 
that they could share with their students. Other 



ERLC 



9 



7 



speakers and workshops dealt with teaching 
methodologies demonstrated to be successful in a 
multicultural classroom. With lectures and 
conferences as catalysts, individual members of 
the faculty and staff turned to mini-grants to 
fund research into topics on multicultural 
education which offered promise of improving 
their effectiveness with the students they 
encountered daily. 

In retrospect, the faculty/staff development 
program in multicultural education was 
successful because members of the college 
community were invited to participate. They could 
be as much or as little involved as they chose. At 
times, faculty convocations that all were expected 
to attend became the forum for a guest speaker. 
In general, however, organizers of the program 
aroused interest by inviting noted scholars and 
artists, who happened to be members of minority 
groups. Faculty and staff attended because they 
were interested in the ideas under discussion. 
They were not asked to debate the merits of 
multicultural education in committee meetings or 
faculty senate; they were not plunged into 
curricula revision or exhorted to overhaul their 
courses. Free to explore new ideas from their own 
points of view, faculty members and staff seized 
the opportunity, transforming the college in the 
process. The results were not always neat or 
orderly. Some faculty and staff encountered 
obstacles in the execution of their research and 
had to change direction. Some efforts overlapped 
or duplicated one another. 

Despite, or perhaps because of, this open-ended 
process, the faculty and staff development projects 
generated an awareness of cultural diversity that 
permeates the campus today. When a student is 
in academic difficulty, her professor or advisor will 



frequently investigate to see if a cultural 
misunderstanding is part of the problem. 
Resident advisors in the dormitories and staff in 
the student development office are more aware of 
cultural issues when planning activities, 
mediating conflicts, and offering counsel. Faculty 
members draw on materials and examples from 
many different cultures when planning their 
courses. Student have formed organizations 
celebrating the heritage of African, Asian, and 
Hispanic cultures. A revision of the core curricula 
is now underway with the goal of integrating 
multicultural education into its structure and 
content. More and more, faculty and staff see the 
ethnic diversity of MSMC*s students as a resource, 
and teach these students to see their 
multicultural campus and multicultural city as 
providing opportunities for learning, growth 
friendship and understanding. 

This process of faculty and staff development in 
multicultural education is replicable by other 
colleges and universities or schools or 
departments within a larger educationad 
institution. To help other interested educators in 
beginning the process, the next chapter discusses 
the selection of guest speakers and presents a 
summaiy of a major symposium presented during 
MSMC's faculty and staff development program. 
Subsequent chapters describe the way in which 
mini-gramts were awarded and administered 
and provide excerpts from six of the funded 
research projects. 



O 3 

ERIC 



10 



II 

Lectures and Workshops 



A faculty is multicultural not only because it has 
members of various cultural groups, but because it 
thinks about culture and its importance in its 
everyday discourse. The idea of culture is part of 
the mental life of the faculty. 

— Thomas Weisner 



During the 1986-87 and 1987-88 academic years. 
Mount St. Mary's College invited a variety of 
scholars, writers, artists and educat'^rs to speak to 
the faculty, administration, and staff on various 
aspects of culture and education. The nature and 
importcince of culture is a complex and often 
controversial subject as is the topic of education, 
its goals and methods. By bringing in experts 
from many different fields to share their research 
and experience on culture and education, the 
college administration opened a dialogue among 
members of the faculty and staff with a common 
vocabulary and knowledge-base provided by the 
presenters. The goal was not to achieve 
consensus on the nature of multicultural 
education — even the experts don't agree — ^but 
rather to stimulate interest, exploration, and 
debate. The resulting colloquy, still going on 
today, has led to research, planning, and revision 
in all areas of the college. 

In selecting speakers, primary consideration was 
given to diversity. Coordinators of the program 
sought to bring to campus scholars from a variety 
of disciplines with different approaches to and 
opinions about multicultural education. Speakers 
were ethnically diverse and differed greatly in their 
style of presentation from the warm, all- 
embracing, poetic affirmations of Maya Angelou to 
the challenging, even abrasive, exhortations of 
Halford Fairchild, to the scholarly discourse of 
Douglass Price-Williams. Because of the 
impress^'c educational resources of Southern 
California and its rich ethnic diversity, most 
lecturers came from the greater Los Angeles area. 



Facultj'- and staff response to guest speakers and 
sjrmposia varied with the topic and timing of the 
program and the credentials of the presenter. 
The personalities of speakers and of individual 
faculty/staff members also played a part. Halford 
Fairchild, who spoke at the faculty convocation 
launching the program, raised hackles by 
vigorously decrying the "ethnocentrism" and 
"inertia" of American higher education. While 
some institutions may wish to choose a less 
controversial speaker for the opening event, it is 
essential that they not eschew controversy. 
The subject of multicultural education is not only 
intellectually complex, but also emotionally 
charged. At Mount St. Marys, we found that 
some conflict, resistemce to new ideas, and even 
anger, were unavoidable parts of th^ process of 
faculty development, and the resulting dialogue 
was well worth the sparks generated along 
the way. 

Space does not permit a description of all the 
lectures, workshops and presentations given 
under the auspices of this faculty/staff 
development program. (For a complete list, see the 
first monograph, "Access and Persistence: An 
Educational Program Model," pp. 42-43.) Instead, 
this section will focus on a major symposium 
given by cultural anthropologists, psychologists 
and educators in order to shai*e with the reader 
some of the substance as well as the process of 
the faculty/staff development program. 



Issues in Culture and Education 

Coordinator: Thomas Weisner, Professor of 
Anthropology and Psychology, UCLA 

For this workshop, Thomas Weisner brought 
together six scholars doing res^^arch related to 
culture and education. Some focused on an 
aspect of culture, others on the culture of a 
particular minority group, on cognition, on 



ERLC 



9 



education, and on women's health. They 
discussed culture and education from different 
points of view, at times disagreeing vigorously with 
one another, particularly about the importance of 
cultural understanding in the classroom. Brief 
sketches of each presentation are provided below 
to give the reader something of the flavor of 
the symposium. 



Thomas Weisner 

Professor of Anthropology and Psychology, UCLA 
Research interests: family and culture, human 
development and child rearing, education 



Weisner began by suggesting the breadth that is 
encompassed in the word "culture." It includes 
not only ritual, myths, holidays, celebrations, and 
foods, but tools for the mind: ideas about the 
world, about social organization, and about 
values. He differentiated culture from ethnicity, 
which is a label, sometimes negative, imposed by a 
larger social system. He also warned the faculty 
that culture was not just for exotic peoples: white, 
middle-class Americans have a culture, too. One 
paradox encountered in studying other cultures is 
that the researcher begins to see more clearly the 
basis of his own. 

Weisner also pointed out that it is not sufficient 
merely to identify important features of students* 
cultures. Once that is done, faculty and staff have 
to identify which features are salient to their goals 
and decide how best to utilize them. There are 
four responses to a particular cultural feature, any 
of which may be appropriate depending on the 
objectives the teacher has set. The first is to 
extend the cultural feature into the classroom. If 
students are used to a great deal of peer 
interaction at home, for example, the teacher can 
utilize peer interaction as a teaching strategy, 
focusing that interaction on tasks to be done or 
skills to be learned. Secondly, a teacher may 
choose to ignore a feature of the culture, neither 



forbidding nor encouraging it. (Note that this is a 
principled decision, not an oversight caused by 
insufficient knowledge.) Thirdly, one can reject a 
feature of the student's culture. If high levels of 
physical violence exist at home, facuUy and 
administration can strictly enforce mles that 
forbid hitting and other forms of violence at 
school. Finally, a particular feature of a student's 
culture can be encouraged, such as memorization 
through storytelling. 

Weisner introduced the participants in the 
symposium. As coordinator, one of his goals was 
to present scholars tackling the problem of culture 
and learning from several different perspectives to 
show something of the complexity of the research 
and the range of opinions that the topic generates. 



James Vigil 

Professor of Anthropology and Director of Ethnic 
Studies, use 

Research interests: Hispanic-American cultural 
history, Hispanic-Americans and education, and 
Mexican-American self-identity 



In the first part of his presentation, James Vigil 
outlined the way in which four different cultural 
groups — Indian, Spanish, Mexican and 
American — blended to form what he called the 
Chicano, or Mexican-American, identity. He 
briefly sketched the historical, as well as cultural 
forces that fueled this process. With this 
background, he turned to the topic of education 
and acculturation. It has long been a hypothesis 
in the larger society that the more completely 
Chicano students have become acculturated to the 
dominant society, the better they do in school. 
Vigil's research, however, turned up other 
findings. First, the path to assimilation is not the 
same for each individual. In studying Chicano 
students. Vigil identified six different subgroups at 
various stages of assimilation ranging from the 
Mexicano, who speaks Spanish, follows traditional 



12 



Mexican cultural patterns, and is eager to get 
ahead, to the fully assimilated English speaker, 
who identifies himself as an American. In between 
these two extremes were groups he called the 
cholos, streetwise teenagers, often gang members, 
who speak little or no Spanish and non-standard 
English; the Hollyw^ood swingers, also partially 
acculturated who concentrate on partying and 
may take drugs: the stoners, heavily involved in 
drugs: and a new group, the cha-cha's, first- 
generation Mexicans trying to distinguish 
themselves from the other groups. In terms of 
school performance, the partially acculturated 
students did markedly less well than the 
Mexicanos or the fully assimilated Americans. He 
found several factors predictive of student 
success, including a strong, supportive father, a 
strong work-ethic in the family, a clear ethnic 
identity (either Hispanic or American), 
encouragement from significant others, and 
individual temperament. Vigil concluded with a 
warning that no ethnic group is homogeneous. 
Seen by the insider or the careful researcher, 
there are always a variety of different subcultures 
or life paths. 



Douglass Price-Williams 

Professor of Anthropology and Psychology. UCLA 
Research interests: cultural influences on modes of 
thought and cognition 



The study of cognition has involved researchers 
from three disciplines: psychology, anthropology 
and linguistics, each with its own particular 
biases. Therefore, comparing results and making 
sense of the research can be a complex process in 
and of itself. The word cognition covers three 
broad areas: perception, memory and expression, 
all of which are subject to cultural influences. A 
key study on perception was done with simple 
optical illusions to test the hypothesis that habits 
of visual inference were influenced by the 
surrounding environment (desert, jungle, tundra) 



and by the subjects* means of livelihood 
(hunter/gatherer, farmer, fisherman). Americans 
and peoples of other Westernized cultures tended 
to perceive the optical illusion, while 
hunter/gatherers did not. A related study of field 
dependency, in which subjects were asked to find 
a specific shape in a complicated visual pattern, 
showed that fishermen tended to be field 
independent while farmers were field dependent. 

Storage of data, or memory, also seems to be 
influenced by cultural features. Researchers have 
found that the structural features of memory are 
rooted in the physical nervous system and so 
independent of culture. Control features, how an 
individual retrieves a particular piece of 
information, are dramatiCEilly shaped by culture. 
One common method for remembering items in 
Western culture is the strategy of classification. 
Given a series of random words or objects. 
Westerners often organize them into related 
groups, remembering all the words related to food 
together, for example. Many non- Western 
cultures, on the other hand, use stories to 
remember lists. In the Marshall Islands, 
navigators use a complex system of sticks tied 
together with muscle shells to remember 
important information such as distance and 
currents. The length of the sticks refers to 
distance, the shape refers to currents and swells, 
the muscle shells refer to islands. Each 
individual's bundle is different from that of any 
other because they are mnemonic devices 
not representations, 

Price-Williams used researcn in the area of 
expression to show how scholars often study 
elements of a culture in which they are interested, 
rather than those features important in the 
culture itself. Among Australian aborigines and 
Native Americans, waking dreams are important 
religious and social experiences. Western 
investigators are hampered in their study by a 
lack of anything comparable in our culture. Even 
the vocabulary available to them distorts the 



13 



11 



experience. One researcher may call a waking 
dream a vision, another a hallucination. More is 
revealed about the biases of individual researchers 
by their choice of words than is revealed about the 
culture which they are studying. 



Ronald Gallimore 

Professor of Psychiatry, Behavioral Sciences, 
Education, UCLA 

Research interests: culture and teaching, learning, 
and school innovation 



Ronald Gallimore has been the director of an 
innovative school teaching literacy skills to 
Hawaiian elementary school children. He starts 
with the premise that all teachers are responsible 
for passing on a body of knowledge to children. 
All children, whether from ethnic minorities or the 
dominant culture, moreover, come to school to 
learn new things. The classroom teacher should 
make some accommodations to the students* 
culture, but what those accommodations may be 
is determined by the individual interaction 
between teacher and student, not by reference to a 
list of culture features or theories. 

Over the years, reseaichers on education have 
found it difficult to identify what good teaching is. 
By studying the ways in which societies socialize 
their children, Gallimore has come to believe that 
good teaching is **assisted learning." It occurs 
when the teacher (who may be a parent, an older 
sibling, or a master craftsman) assists a child to 
engage in a cognitive process beyond the child's 
own ability level and brings it to a successful 
conclusion. A parent whose four-year-old child 
has lost a shoe, for example, assists the process of 
remembering by breaking down the task: **Is it in 
your bedroom? The living room? Outside?" 
Finally, the child remembers and exclaims, "Yes!" 
A cognitive process that is usually internal in an 
adult is external in the teaching process. The 
teacher and the child do 11 together. The process 



that the child is learning appears first in the 
interpersonal relationship between the teacher 
and the child. 

If teaching is to be successful, the teacher must 
make some accommodations to the child^s culture. 
Gallimore warns, however, against basing 
accommodations on generalizations about a 
particular culture. In doing so, the teacher may 
miss the needs of the particular, individual child 
who stands before him. Rather than look at 
generalizations about ethnic cultures, Gallimore 
recommends looking at the child^s eco-cultural 
niche. The eco-cultural niche is the local 
environment in which the family lives with its 
resources, strengths, and problems. The eco- 
cultural niche includes such factors as 
subsistence level, workload of the parents, child- 
care practices, sind other mundane factors 
involved in daily life. A good way to explore the 
eco-cultural niche is to map out the daily routine 
of the child, asking for each activity setting who is 
there, what is being done, why is it being done, 
and how is it being done. In Gallimore^s 
experience of running an experimental school, the 
cultured data he and his assistants obtained were 
more useful in explaining why a certain classroom 
structure was successful than in suggesting new 
strategies to try. 



Claude Goldenberg 

Lennox School District, UCLA 

Research interests: putting educational theory to 

the test in rea\ classroom settings 



Currently a first-grade teacher, Claude Goldenberg 
began by asking the questions most faculty were 
pondering: What does culture have to do with 
education? Should 1 take cultural difterences into 
account in the classroom? If so, how? Most 
people advocating multicultural education 
hypothesize that the white, middle-class 
environment of the school may be alien to children 



O 12 



h orn other cultures. If teachers learn about the 
features of a child's culture, that knowledge will, 
supposedly, help them be more responsive to the 
student. Troubled by that theory, Goldenberg 
worries that teachers may wind up teaching 
cultural abstractions not the real children in 
their classroom. 

He cites four problems with the superficial 
application of ideas about particular ethnic 
cultures. The first is that individuals differ widely 
within a culture. The various groups of Mexican- 
American teenagers that James Vigil described 
provide a perfect example of the heterogeneity 
within a "single" culture. Cultural generalizations 
do not hold true for every member of a particular 
culture. Second, individual differences within a 
culture cire often greater than those between 
cultures. Just because a particular behavior 
(reading the newspaper, for example) is less 
frequent in an Hispanic-American household than 
in an Anglo-American home does not mean that it 
is alien to the Hispanic-American child or 
infrequent in all Hispanic-American households. 
Third, the instructional consequences of cultural 
differences are far from clear. As Weisner pointed 
out, a teacher may choose to ignore or reject a 
certain cultural feature. Cultural interpretations 
of a child's behavior, moreover, may do him harm. 
If an Hispanic-American child's reading difficulty 
is attributed to the cultural generalization that 
there is less reading in the home, the teacher may 
not pursue other more important causes of his 
reading disability. Finally, focusing on cultural 
differences obscures cultural similarities. In his 
experience as an elementary and junior high 
school teacher, Goldenberg discovered that the 
vast majority of Hispanic-American parents share 
many values with Anglo-American parents, 
including a desire to be contacted when their child 
is in trouble with school work or behavior and a 
belief that parental involvement is crucial to their 
child's educational success. 




Children from ethnically diverse cultures need 
sound academic instruction first and foremost. 
Many principles of learning are valid across 
cultures, such as the need for feedback to assess 
one's progress in mastering a given task. Another 
broadly applicable principle is the need to have 
teachers relate what students already know to 
what they have just learned. Goldenberg's advice 
to teachers, then, is to establish objectives and be 
prepared to change instructional strategies when 
students do not achieve them. "Attend to the 
child," he said, "and the cultural issues will attend 
to themselves. If they are important, they will 
emerge." 



Carole Browner 

Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
UCLA 

Research interests: relationship between cultural 
beliefs and health in Hispanics 



Mount St, Mary's College has a number of strong 
academic programs in health care fields including 
pre-medical, nursing, physical therapy, physical 
therapy assistant, and occupational therapy 
assistant programs. Educating health care 
professionals to serve Southern California's 
multicultural population means paying increasing 
attention to cultural dimensions of health and 
illness. Because of the strong interest in issues of 
culture and health, the symposium included 
Carole Browner, who has done extensive research 
on this subject among Hispanic women in 
Columbia and Mexico. She focused on issues 
relating to women's reproductive health and 
control of their fertility. Not surprisingly, she 
found women's attitudes toward pregnancy 
depended greatly on their social and economic 
status. In Columbia, she studied women who 
sought abortions compared with those who 
continued their pregnancies. These women lived 
in an urban area of Columbia in traditional 
nuclear fcimilies, usually some distance from 

13 




relatives. They did not work outside the home. 
Husbands frequently carried on affairs with other 
women simultaneously. She found that the 
decision to continue or terminate a prtgnsincy was 
almost exclusively based on the strength of the 
woman's relationship with her male partner. If 
the relationship was strong, the womsin continued 
the pregnancy. If the relationship seemed 
unstable or if the man had ended the relationship, 
the woman terminated the pregnancy. If the 
woman consulted her partner, his views about 
continuing or ending the pregnancy always took 
precedence over hers. In this socio-economic 
environment, women and their children cannot 
survive without the support of a man, which made 
the marital relationship the overriding 
consideration in fertility decisions. 

Abortion is considered both a sin and a crime in 
very traditional. Catholic Columbia, and women 
known to have had abortions are stigmatized. 
Browner wondered how women gathered sufficient 
resolve to defy cultural norms. In interviews with 
over two hundred pregnant women, she learned 
that Columbian women viewed a missed period as 
late and regarded the taking of herbal and other 
remedies as a way to regulate menstruation, not 
achieve abortion. Failure to menstruate is 
regarded in Columbia as a serious threat to a 
woman's health, leading to tumors, cancer and 
other illnesses. Most women believed that it was 
morally correct to attempt to regulate 
menstruation within the first month after a missed 
period, and about half felt that efforts could 
continue into the second month as a way to 
maintain health. These remedies were regarded 
as a test of pregnancy. If a woman were not 
pregnant, they would bring on her menses; if she 
were pregnant, they would do no harm to mother 
or fetus. In casual conversations. Browner 
discovered that men seem to be largely unaware of 
these remedies. She hypothesizes that having this 
secret knowledge about remedies to regulate 
menstruation represents women's attempt to 
maintain a degree of control over their own 



fertility. Clearly, then, the way a woman thinks 
about menstruation and pregnsincy has significant 
effects on the timing and kind of health care she 
seeks; her social and economic status has a 
profound influence on fertility decisions. 



Summary 

Scholars and researchers disagree about the 
effects of culture on learning. Some scholars, 
frequently those studying classroom interactions, 
believe that it has a weak effect. Others, studying 
culture from an anthropological and psychological 
point of view, conclude it is of the utmost 
importance. Weisner suggested that both of these 
approaches are beneficial for colleges and 
universities responding to multicultural student 
populations. **In the classroom, you have to be 
responsive teachers interacting with individual 
students and using whatever techniques are 
effective — cultural accommodations or other 
methods. As an institution, however, there is a 
prior set of responsibilities that make the efforts of 
the faculty possible. There must be a collective, 
institutional cultural sensitivity that creates a 
framework in which it is possible to discuss 
culture in the classroom without becoming 
political." He urged faculty applying for mini- 
grants to select an obtainable goal — improving 
retention of Hispanic nursing students, for 
example — and to focus on the students, at the 
same time being alert to any cultural factors that 
might emerge. He urged others, particularly 
administration and staff, to do research on 
students' eco-cultural niches in order to look for 
cultural features which could be incorporated into 
campus life as well as the curriculum. 



16 



O l4 




Mini-grants 



The experience of another culture was profound. 
It touched my life so that I will never be the 
same again. 



— MSMC mini-grant recipient 



4. To make the campus more comfortable 
for multicultural students. 

5. To Improve the retention rate among 
ethnic minority students. 



The symposium summarized in the last chapter 
and other presentations created an open dialogue 
about culture and its role in education. The ideas 
presented also stimulated many of the facility and 
staff to conduct their own research into this 
complex subject. Mini-grants were the vehicle by 
which the college promoted such intellectual 
explorations. The mini-grant program was 
administered by the director of the CAPHE project 
with the help of an advisory committee of faculty, 
administrators, and staff. The application, review, 
and evaluation process which Mount St. Mary's 
adopted is described in the following pages. 



Objectives 

Faculty, administrators, and staff were 
encouraged to submit proposals related to the 
objectives outlined in the CAPHE grant: 

1. To help faculty and staff better 
understand the cultures, values and 
learning st>1es of multicultural students 
who make up an increasingly larger 
proportion of the student body. 

2. To research topics related to minorities 
and the curriculum or student services. 

3. To increase faculty and staff awareness 
of their own assumptions and cultural 
values. 



Application Procedures 

Eligibility All full-time faculty, administrators, 
and administrative staff were eligible to apply. 
Faculty, administrators, and staff working the 
equivalent of three-quarters full-time who had 
been employed by the college for more than five 
years were also eligible. 

Proposals Applicants were required to submit the 
following items in their proposals: 

1. Objectives of the project. 

2. Statement of how the project related to the 
objectives of the faculty/stalT development 
program, 

3. Description of the project, including any 
materials that would result, such as a 
bibliography, syllabus, and teaching aids, 

4. Description of how the project's 
contribution to the goals of the faculty/staff 
development program might be evaluated. 

5. Criteria, method, and timeline for 
evaluation. 

6. Staff involved. 

7. Timeline for project's completion. 

8. Budget for project (maximum gramt of 
$K000). 

9. Letter of support from department chair or 
supervisor. 



ERLC 



17 



15 



Dates Mount St. Mary's received the CAPHE 
grant in the month of January, The director and 
advisory committee established four opportunities 
to submit proposals: in June and November of the 
first year and in April and September of the 
second year. Mini-grants awarded in June or 
April had an expected completion date of the 
following September, while those awarded in 
November ran through June, and those issued in 
September finished in April. 

Criteria for Selection The ad\asory committee 
and program director evaluated all proposals. 
Successful applications demonstrated the 
following characteristics: 

1. Fulfilled the purposes and objectives of 
the faculty /staff development program. 

2. Related to the mission, current needs, and 
goals of the college. 

3. Gave promise of long-term benefits. 

4. Would significantly enhance minority 
student learning. 

5. Would impact a large number of students. 

6. Utilized qualified staff sufficient to achieve 
stated goals. 

7. Demonstrated a realistic, adequately 
documented budget. 

8. Was well organized and well wiltten. 

9. Stated clear objectives with activities 
appropriate to the achievement of the 
objectives. 

10. Indicated the staff member responsible for 
each task described. 

Project Reports Successful applicants were 
required to give the project director brief monthly 
updates of three to five sentences. They were also 
required to submit final reports at the completion 

O 3 

ERLC 



of the funding period and to share their results 
with other faculty, staff, and administrators in 
written and oral reports as deemed appropriate by 
the project director. 

Awards 

The project director and her committee were 
inundated with applications. As mentioned in the 
"Foreword," 30 research projects were funded, 
involving 20 departments and administrative 
offices and utilizing the talents of over 40 
members of the faculty and staff". In order to 
demonstrate the wide range of research stimulated 
by this faculty/staff development program, a 
partial listing of the funded projects is 
included here. 



I. Academic Area Projects 

A. Connections: The Relationship of Art 
from Different Cultures 
Norman Schwab, Professor, 
Department of Art 

B- Multicultural Literature: An 
Annotated Bibliography 
Anne Johnstone, Instructor, 
Department of English 

C. Preparing Teachers for Culturally 
Diverse Classrooms 

Nancy Davis Burstein, Assistant 
Professor, Department of Education 

D. Enhancing Student Teacher 
Instruction with Preschoolers in 
Multicultural Settings through Video 
Technology 

Sister Imelda D'Agostino, CSJ, 
Assistant Professor, Department of 
Education 




E. Secondary Teacher Education: 
Strategies for Teaching Students from 
Diverse Cultural and Linguistic 
Backgrounds 

Joel Levine, Assistant Professor, 
Department of Education 

F. Health Care and Native American 
Medicine: A Journey of Discovery 
Sharon Golub, Instructor, 
Department of Nursing 

G. How Culture Injluences the Ability of 
Pregnant Adolescents from African- and 
HispaniC'American Cultures to Meet 
Nutritional Requiremt^idz 

Catherine Casey, Assistant Professor, 
Department of Nursing 

H. Analysis of Attrition Data of Minority 
Students in Nwvying 

Mary Hicks, J. Eileen McArow, Mary 
Sloper, Nancy Taylor, Faculty, 
Department of Nursing 

I. Cross-Cultural Communication: A Course 
Module 

Zona Chalifoux, Karen Jensen, Mary 
Wilson, Faculty, Department of Nursing 

J. Nutrition from the Melting Pot 

Mary C, Colavito, Assistant Professor, 
Department of Biology 

K. Cooperative Learning Strategies in the 
Life Science Curriculum 
Jane E, Lingua, Assistant Professor, 
Department of Biology 

L. A Lexicon of Religious Terms 

Sister Karen Wilhelmy, CSJ. Assistant 
Professor, Department of Religious 
Studies 

M, Ethikon Colloquia 

Marie Egan, IHM, Associate Professor, 
Department of Religious Studies 



N. Theories and Issues in Development with 
a Cross-Cultural Emphasis 
Joanne Krakow, Associate Professor, 
Department of Psychology 

Library and Media Center 
Projects 

A, Culturally Diverse Library Acquisitions 
Mary Sedgwick and John Coultas, 
Librarians 

B. Instructional Media Center Acquisitions 
Claudia Reed, Director of MSMC Libraries 

I. Student Life and Student 
Services Projects 

A. Different Voices: Multicultural Dimensions 
of Leadership 

Cheryl Mabey, Director of the Leadership 
Program 

B. Financial Aid Opportunities for African- 
American Students 

Beverly Porter, Director of Financial Aid 

C. Academic Advisement: The Hispanic- 
American Perspective 

Angelitos Echeverria-Garrett, Instructor, 
Department of Biology 

D. A' Resource Guide for the Teaching of 
English Survival Skills to Adult 
Immigrants 

Sister Consuelo Aguilar, CSJ, Director of 
the ESOLD Program (English for Speakers 
of Other Languages and Dialects) 

E. Alumnae Mentors: Cross-referencing 
Accomplishments and Ethnicity 
Margaret Horst, Director of Alumnae 
Relations 

F. Reference Guide to Ethnic Newspapers in 
the Greater Los Angeles Area 

Derek Garbellini, News Office Associate, 
and Nina Kidd, News Office Writer 



ERLC 



19 



17 



IV 

Summaries of Mini-grant Projects 



As teachers, Jind oat what works well in the 
classroom and share it with each other. 

— ^Thomas Weisner 

As the list of projects shows, the mini-grants were 
remarkably diverse in subject matter. They were 
also different in methodology and results. Some 
generated tangible products: a bibliography of 
authors from minority cultures, a sox'rcebook of 
nutritional information on ethnic cuisines, and a 
library of slides showing graphic art by 
contemporary artists from diverse cultures. 
Others resulted in course sj'^llabi revised to include 
multicultural content. Some researchers devised 
new methodologies to use in their courses, such 
as the videotaping of practice teaching in pre- 
school classrooms, or created new materials, such 
as biology laboratory exercises based on 
cooperative learning techniques. Other results 
were textbooks on teaching in multicultural 
classrooms for use in elementary and secondary 
education courses. All projects changed the 
faculty and staff engaged in them, as well as other 
members of the college community with whom 
they shared the results through formal 
presentations, informal discussions, and written 



reports. Simultaneously, the college 
administration continued to stimulate discussion 
through in-service conferences. As greater 
numbers of faculty and staff became involved in 
mini-grants, more people added their voices to 
the dialogue. 

Summaries of six projects are presented here in 
order to reflect something of the substance of 
Mount St. Mary's faculty /staff development 
program and to spark the reader's interest in 
pursuing research on topics related to culture and 
learning. Several of the projects funded by mini- 
grants will be published in full as monographs in 
this series. 



0'8 

ERIC 



20 



Multicultural Literature: 

An Annotated Bibliography 

from Anne Johnstone, Instructor, Department of English 



Read — read everything. 

— MayaAngelou, 1986 Horizons 
Convocation Speaker 

Many liberal arts courses offered by colleges and 
universities today make no reference to the life 
experiences of ethnic minorities. Sometimes, this 
omission is the result of a philosophical decision: 
the role of the university is to convey the best that 
Western culture has to offer. More often, however, 
literature and scholarship by and about ethnic 
minorities is absent from reading lists and class 
discussions because faculty members themselves 
did not receive a multicultural education. Faculty 
and staff need resources to help them select and 
utilize works of imaginative literature, biographies, 
autobiographies, histories, and cultural studies 
representative of many minority groups. To 
provide such a resource for the faculty at Mount 
St. Mary's College, Anne Johnstone, instructor in 
the English department and director of the CAPHE 
grant, compiled an annotated bibliography of 
literature by African-, Asian-, Hispanic-, and 
Native-American authors. 

Most, though not all, entries are extensively 
atnnotated. The annotations may include 
Johnstone's own critical responses to particular 
works, quotations from the authors about 
individual works and the writing process, and 
excerpts from selected texts. The quotations, 
typical of style and content in each case, capture 
the work's primary themes and theses, making 
this bibliography something of an anthology as 
well. Annotations are more detailed on lesser- 
known works and authors; established writers 
such as James Baldwin appear with bibliograhic 
data only. Authors included meet the following 
criteria: 1) they have published since 1960; 
2) their writing merits critical analysis and is 
suitable for college courses: 3) they are Americans 



from one of the four cultures mentioned above; 
4) they write in English. 

The list of authors is incomplete because the 
project was finished in September, 1986, omitting 
important works published after this date. It is 
also limited by the difficulty of obtaining books by 
minority authors, who are often published by 
small presses with limited resources for keeping 
books in print. Most university libraries have few 
of these among their holdings to draw on and 
public libraries practically none. Despite its 
limitations, the bibliography can serve as a 
resource for librarians wishing to add 
multicultural titles to their holdings as well as to 
faculty broadening course reading lists. 

Presented below are very brief excerpts from each 
section of the bibliography. Readers interested in 
the entire 50-page bibliography should look for its 
appearance as another monograph in this series, 
to be published in 1992. 



African-American Authors 

Angelou, Maya. All God's Children Need Traveling 
Shoes. New York: Random House, 1986. 

. And Still I Rise. New York: Random 

House, 1978. 

In Part I, "Touch Me, Life, Not Softly," the 
poet calls forth and welcomes a range of 
positive and negative human experiences: 
struggle, love, work, family life, sexuality, 
relationship, remembering. The poems 
contain strong feeling intermeshed with 
commitment to individual purpose and a 
clear identity of self, particularly expressed 
in "Phenomenal Woman." In Part II, 



"Traveling," the poet portrays places and 
situations from the perspective of her 
heritage and experiences. 



,. Gather Together In My Name. New York: 
f^dom House, 1974. 



My Arkansas Asian-Ameiicaxi Authors 



There is a deep brooding 
In Arkansas 

Old crimes like moss pend 
from poplar trees. 
The sullen earth 
is much too 
red for comfort. 

Part III, **And Still I Rise," ends the 
collection with poems of transcendence: 

You may write me down in history 
With your bitter, twisted lies 
You may trod me in the very dirt 
But still, like dust. Til rise. 



. Jusi Glue Me Cool Drink of Water [fore I Die. 
New York: Random House, 1971. 
Part I, "When Love is a Scream of 
Anguish," draws subjects from emotions 
evoked when love is textured with 
obstacles and hypocrisy. Part II, "Just 
Before the World Ends," portrays the range 
of emotions inherent in struggle, 
particularly in work for civil rights and 
justice, sometimes fulfilling, but many 
times frustrating. Anger threads through 
these works recalling racial tragedy and 
echoing Langston Hughes' question, "What 
happens to a dream deferred?" Always 
within the fervor, however, is a lyric quality 
which transcends anger and despair. 



Berssenbnigge, Mei-Mei, Fish Souls. Greenwood 
Press, 1974. 

. Random Possession. New York: I. Reed 

Books, 1979. 

. Summits Move with the Tide. Greenwood 

Press, 1974. 

Berssenbrugge writes poetry with minimal 
lines and images, allowing the words 
themselves to advance and expand in the 
mind of the reader. She creates a moment 
and then fills it with implication, drawing 
from nature and Chinese symbolism, but 
disrupting these with intrusions of various 
sorts — sometimes idiomatic — ^which 
convey her view that "no beauty exists 
without danger, and no danger exists 
without beauty,*' 

. The Heat Bird, Providence: Burning Deck, 

1983, 

This book contains four sections: "Pack 
Rat Sieve," "Farolita," "Ricochet off Water," 
and *The Heat Bird." Each may be read os 
one long narrative poem or as a series of 
individual pieces. All focus on cycles — real 
and symbolic — within human experience in 
contemporary society. The title piece 
further symbolizes human experience 
through birds who live on carrion. 

Chan, Tin-Yake, The Sandalwood Mountains. 
Honolulu: Univ. of Hawaii Press, 1975, 



Chang, Diane. Eye to Eye. New York: 
Harper and Row. 



ERLC 



22 



. The Frontiers of Love. New York: Random 

House, 1956. 

Three Eurasian characters in this novel 
attempt to sift through the life situations 
they confront in order to find meaning and 
identity as Tidivlduals in a less than 
afRrming environment, Chang says of her 
work, believe an abiding interest in 
character and emotion informs all my 
work — not only because the relationships, 
situations and problems I write about arise 
out of the characters of my protagonists, 
out of their personalities, but also because 
I seem preoccupied a lot with identity or 
selfness. Being or becoming seems to be 
the underlying denominator of my work/' 
Chang was bom in New York, but spent 
her childhood in China: consequently, she 
knows of the cultural dichotomy her 
characters face. In the following excerpt, 
Sylvia, bom from a mixed mgirriage. 
I'eflects upon her mother's past. 

Americans like her mother had been 
allowed to stay out of the Intemment 
camps because of their Chinese 
husbands; instead they were required to 
wear red arm bainds with numbers 
printed on them. She was 
conspicuous — as Sylvia had always 
found her mother conspicuous — and to 
any Japanese gendarme who wanted to 
, stop her and inspect her identity card, 
Helen was 123. 

Hispanic-American Authors 

Algarin* Miguel. Body Bee Calling 'from the 2 1 si 
Century). Houston: Arte Publico, 1982. 
Algarin calls these poems "nuyorican 
folklore." His statements to the future 
come out of a multicultural environment in 
a big city. His subjects leap from the 
graphically sensual to the abstract and 



mystical, reflecting similar ranges in his 
two major influences: Walt Whitman and 
Pablo Nemda. 

.On Call. Houston: Arte Publico, 1980. 

These bilingual poems cut deeply into the 
s^lf-identity and way of life of people who 
live on the edge of survival. Algarin 
exposes the depths of human sensation in 
shocking images while not judging any 
event, only acknowledging human 
situations, conditions and prejudices. 

Rosa 

Puma called asking me to remind you 

that he made love to you, 

that he didn*t declare war against 

your legs, 
that he didn't violate your no 
that he was searching for your yes 
through the no 

that lurks beneath the seeming wanting 
to resist, 

he says it was love you made not hate, 
that it was mutual yielding 
not the severing of parts. 

. Tlxe Time is Now. Houston: Arte Publico. 

1985. 

Algarin explores connecting energy which 
he presents as "chemistry" or the 
"conversation" between the individual and 
a loved one, the individual and politics, 
and the individual and God, The 
connection expands and contracts, 
changing the proximity of the two in 
relationship, while keeping them bonded in 
a single unit. In each relationship the 
individual becomes new, but not always 
better, in response to the other. 

Alurista. Floricanto en Aztlan. Los Angeles: 
Chicano Studies Center, UCLA. 1971. 
In these "flower songs," Alurista brings a 



ERLC 



23 



21 



new dimension to the literary motif of carpe 
diem, "seize the day." Rather than using 
the argument, **Life is short and time is 
fleeting," to entice a young lover into sexual 
pleasure, here the poet calls all human 
beings, but particularly Chicanos, to walk, 
run, ride through existence, throwing off 
empty restrictions while actively seeking 
harmony and unity. 

. Nationchild Plumaroja, San Diego: 

Toltecas en Aztlan, 1972. 

Native-American Authors 

Allen, Patila Gunn (Laguna/Sioux). Studies in 
American Indian Literature: Essays and 
Course Designs, New York: Modem 
Language Association, 1983. 
Paula Gunn Allen stipulates her intention 
in this collection to provide information 
basic to an understanding which will 
prevent distortion in the teaching of Native 
American literature. She emphasizes 
"significance, context, and aesthetics," all 
arising, she believes, out of "continuity and 
culture." In her introduction, she says, 
"Significance, like beauty, is usually 
related to experience, to emotional and 
intellectual patterns, and to deep values, 
all of which one forms within a cultural 
framework." Aesthetics, she asserts, has 
meaning only within a tribal or social 
context. She offers three important 
guidelines to the non-Native-American 
instructor presenting Native-American 
literature in courses of study: 1) provide 
authentic background material so that the 
elements of the work come across as 
intended: 2) avoid attitudes of paternalism 
or colonialism which breed a sense of 
cultural inferiority and promote self-hatred 
in Native Americans; and 3) avoid cliche 
characterizations such as the "primitive" or 

r 

ERIC 



"noble savage." The book is divided into 
the following sections: **Oral Literature," 
"Personal Narrative," American Indian 
Women's Literature," '^Modern and 
Contemporary American Indian Literature," 
and *The Indian in American Literature." 

The Blind Lion, Berkeley: Thorp Springs 
Press, 1975. 

, A Cannon Between My Knees, New York: 
Strawberry, 1978. 

, Coyote's Daylight Trip, Albuquerque: La 
Confluencia, 1978 

Coyote, in the manner of a clown, mirrors 
human foibles and exposes truth through 
his antics. Allen explores these tricks and 
the creativity of Coyote in her poems while 
exposing him to varying lights of day and 
enhancing him with a contemporaiy 
perspective. Nonetheless, she reminds us 
that he is the prototype, the original, the 
first cause of human energy. She opens 
with the concept. 

The key is in remembering, in what is 

chosen for the dream. 
In the silence of recovery we hold 
The rituals of the dawn. 
Now as then. 
Watch. 

_. The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine 
in American Indian Tradition, New York: 
Beacon, 1986. 



2i 



Connections: 

The Relationship Of Art From Different Cultures 

from Norman Schwab, Professor, Department of Art 



I am a human being. Nothing human is alien to me, 
— Terence 

The art of African-, Asian- and Hispanic- 
Americans has been slow to find its way into the 
classroom. Art history courses concentrate on the 
great masters such as Michelangelo, Da Vinci, 
Rembrandt, and Van Gogh. Even classes in 
modem art tend to focus on well-known figures 
such as Pollock, 0*Keeffe, and Warhol. Professor 
Norman Schwab saw the mini-grants as an 
opportunity to add balance to his art history 
classes by photographing the work of 
contemporary ethnic artists. He compiled a 
collection of 130 slides, concentrating on the work 
of African-, Asian- and Hispanic-American artists 
exhibiting in Southern California. Although this 
geographiccd focus somewhat limits the scope of 
the project, his collection and its accompanying 
commentary indicate the diversity brought lo 
contemporary art by the thousands of minority 
artists working throughout the United States. 

The purpose of this collection is to show people, 
especially students, the great outpouring of 
creativity that diversity stimulates. (To help in 
that endeavor, Mount St. Mary's College 
anticipates making a set of slides and commentary 
available at a later date.) Artists from all ethnic 
groups contribute to, and at the same time reflect, 
the character of American society. Exposun^ to 
their work helps all Americans gain insight into 
themselves and each other. Although the survey 
shows the world as seen through the eyes of 
African-, Asian-, and Hispanic-Americans, the 
ethnic background is not always apparent in the 
work. While the art of the late '60s and early '70s 
addresses the struggle of minority groups in a very 
direct manner, the work of the late *70s and *80s 
tends to be more ambiguous, less socially oriented 
and more abstract. One of the concepts all the 
artists believe in is their importance to society. 



Although intuitive and subjective, artists do reflect 
universal truth in the crucible of the present 
moment. 

When discussing with students the work of ethnic 
artists like those in his collection, Schwab 
emphasizes the connections among art from 
various cultures. Sometimes, these connections 
are straightforward, acknowledged by the artists 
themselves. The Impressionists, for example, were 
quite explicit about their debt to Asian art, and 
the Cubists owed much to the art of African 
peoples. In other cases, the artist deliberately 
borrows from a cultural heritage. One example 
Schwab uses can be found in the work of Frida 
Kahlo, wife of Diego Rivera. Kahlo, who was 
seriously injured in a bus accident that led to over 
30 surgeries in the course of her life, frequently 
dealt with the theme of suffering in her paintings. 
ITie painting. Broken Column, for example, shows 
a woman trussed in the straps and bars of 
traction. Her body is open to reveal a shattered 
Ionic column. This column suggests the body's 
skeletal structure, now ruined and unable to 
perform its function of support. Significantly, it is 
an Ionic column, the Greek order most associated 
with the feminine. Kahlo, a Mexican painter, uses 
this image from classical Greek civilization to 
emphasize her point. 

In another painting. The Little Deer, Kahlo depicts 
herself as an antler-crowned deer that has been 
wounded by nine arrows. The subject of the 
painting is not only her physical pain, but the 
psychological suffering caused by Diego Rivera s 
frequent infidelities. In this painting, she draws 
her images from traditional pictures of the saints, 
such as Mantegna*s St, Sebastian martyred by 
arrows. The antler headdress is also an allusion 
suggesting the horns that the cuckolded husband 
of an unfaithful wife is said to sprout, according to 
a mocking European tradition. 



ERLC 



25 



23 



Some connections between artists of different 
cultures occur because they are dealing with the 
same existential dilemma. Images of the 
dismembered Osiris, so often found on Egyptian 
funerary objects, and pictures of the crucified 
Christ show artists from very different cultures 
and ages dealing with the mystery of death and 
the hope of immortality. On a gold coffer from the 
tomb of Tutankhamen the reassembled body of 
Osiris emerges from a tree to new life, just as 
Christ is often depicted rising from the empty 
tomb. Artists as different as Botticelli, Gauguin. 
Kahlo and African -American Rex Gorleigh use the 
images of vines and plants to suggest the process 
of life — ^budding, growing, bearing fruit, and dying. 
These are not borrowings so much as artists using 
images common to many human cultures. 

Some works of art deal explicitly with the clash of 
cultures and the resulting pain. Backed Into a 
Comer, an installation piece by African-American 
Sandra Roe, depicts the danger in ordinary 
situations that members of minority groups often 
face. The piece consists of abstract, sculptural 
shapes combined with painted walls to form the 
comer of a life-sized room. The viewer confronts 
the piece as if standing at the edge, looking into a 
fantastic interior space of vibrant color and 
dynamic imagery. The playful consideration of 
1 his colorful phantasmagoria, however, is soon 
replaced by anxiety as the true, ominous nature of 
the work is revealed. At closer examination, one 
notices wedges of broken glass and images of 
psychological pain laced throughout the work. In 
the corner, a network of biomorphic forms, 
perhaps suggesting a figure, is punctured 
throughout with colorfully painted steel spikes. A 
plausible interpretation is that the piece is about 
fear and entrapment. The idea that danger can be 
found where you least expect it, behind an 
innocent and seemingly frivolous facade, is central 
to the message of the piece. In the artist's 
statement, Sandra Roe uses these words to 
express htr thoughts about her art: "Life, Death, 
Loving. Living in this diverse world, and above 
all. Survival." 



Much of the art contained in Schwab's collection 
of 130 slides can be summarized by Roe's words. 
Some of the works deal with being "backed into a 
comer." Others deal with being freed from that 
comer, and still other work celebrates that 
freedom. Even the most painful of these works is 
inspiring — filled with the fierce joy of grappling 
with the human condition. That human stmggle 
to express the meaning of life most deeply 
connects works of art from all ethnic groups and 
periods of time. Using visual symbols to express 
an equilibrium between one's inner world — the 
world of self— and the outer world — the physical 
and human environment — is the job and the 
legacy of artists. They have always dealt with the 
cosmic questions: Who am I? What am I doing 
here? How can I survive? The context has 
changed, the forms of communication have 
changed, but these concems remain central to 
artistic expression. 



ERLC 



Cross-cultural Communication: 

A Course Module 

from Zona Chalifoux. Karen Jensen, and Mary Wilson. Faculty. Department of Nursing 



In order to use cultural variables ejfectively. . . you 
have to get inside the experience of the other. Its a 
reciprocal empathetic understanding that you 
ultimately have to reach. 

— ^Thomas Weisner 

Because of the rich ethnic diversity of the greater 
hos Angeles area, nurses often care for patients 
from ethnic groups other than their own. 
Communication between nurse and patient can be 
impeded by a variety of factors. Language 
difference is the most obvious barrier to 
communication. Even among people fluent in 
English, differences in cognitive styles, non-verbal 
behavior, cultural views (on time, illness, and 
status, for example), cind cultural values may 
cause miscommunication. Failure to 
communicate may have serious results such as 
inaccurate reporting of symptoms by the patient, 
misunderstanding of symptoms by the nurse, or 
failure to understand and comply with necessary 
treatment. Teachers, attorneys, and business 
people encounter similar difficulties in 
providing service because of cultural 
misunderstandings. An understanding of cross- 
cultural communication, then, is necessary if 
MSMC students are to function effectively in 
their careers. 

Faced with this reality, three members of the 
nursing faculty set out to design a course module 
on cross-cultural communication. The one-unit 
module Ccin stand on its own or be integrated into 
a psychology of communication class. As a 
prelude to the course design. Zona Chalifoux, 
Karen Jensen, and Mary Wilson undertook a 
review of the literature on cross-cultural 
communication with particular emphasis on 
health care. They prepared an annotated 
bibliography of relevant material and began 
acquiring books and articles. 



In the second phase of the project, they 
established course objectives, outlined content, 
identified teaching resources, selected learning 
activities, and designed a pre- and post-test. One 
of their hardest problems was identifying the kind 
and amount of material appropriate to a one-unit 
module. They also had difficulty defining cultural 
groups. Asicin-Americans, for example, include 
very different ethnic groups such as Chinese, 
Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese and Indonesian 
peoples. Recognizing that content would be 
limited, they developed a conceptual framework 
for students, a framework they could apply to any 
cross-cultural situation they encountered. 

The completed module attempts to help students 
develop an understanding of and a facility with 
cross-cultural communication. Because students 
at Mount St, Mary's College come from a wide 
variety of ethnic groups, the course can have a 
great immediacy and practical value. Faculty can 
model, as well as lecture about, cross-cultural 
communication. Students in the class can serve 
as resources on the values and views of their own 
culture. By articulating their beliefs to one 
another, they become more aware of the 
unconscious assumptions they may be making. 

The module begins with the following course 
description: 

Ethnic background can have a tremendous 
impact on communication stj'le. The goal of 
this unit in cross-cultural communication is 
to provide the students with a framework 
within which they can acquire knowledge and 
develop communication skills that will assist 
them in communicating more effectively in a 
culturally diverse environment. This unit will 
also attempt to foster student sensitivity to, 
appreciation of, and respect for all cultures. 



ERLC 



27 



25 



Course structure is based on seven objectives. 

Upon completion of this unit the student will 
be able to: 

1. Describe the importance of cross-cultural 
communication. 

2. Define key terms in the discipline of cross- 
cultural communication. 

3. Develop understanding of the relationship 
between culture and the communication 
process. 

4. Describe the constituent vairiables of cross- 
cultural communication. 

5. Identify variations in communication styles 
among African-, Anglo-, Asian-, and 
Hispanic-Americans. 

6. Seek opportunities for positive interaction 
with individuals of different cultural groups. 

7. Demonstrate skill in locating information on 
an ethnic minority from library holdings, 
mass media, and personal observations. 

A variety of learning activities is included for each 
objective. Faculty members can tailor 
assignments to their own personality and to the 
characteristics of the particular group of students 
they have in any given term. Assignments include 
reading, keeping a journal, writing a research 
paper from observations of cross-cultural 
communication, interacting with students of 
different ethnic groups, and taking part in 
simulations. 

For each objective, students have at least one 
assignment that involves them in experiential 
learning. Objective three, for example, is "to 
develop an understanding of the relationship 
between culture and the communication process." 
Four different learning activities have been 



designed to enable students to achieve this 
objective. They begin by reading assigned pages of 
the course text. Understanding Intercultural 
Communications by L. Samovar, R. Porter and N. 
Jain, and attending class lectures. As an 
assignment, students are required to answer the 
following questions in their communication 
notebook. 

1. Why are culture and communication 
considered to be inseparable? 

2. What is culture? How does it affect our 
daily lives? 

3. How does culture affect us throughout the 
course of our lives? 

4. What are the unique distinguishing 
characteristics of cross-cultural 
communication? How does cross-cultural 
communication differ from everyday forms of 
communication? 

5. What are the differences between cross- 
cultural, interracial and inter-ethnic forms 
of communication? 

6. What are the differences between 
subcultures and subgroups? How can we 
determine whether a particular group of 
people are members of a subgroup or a 
subculture? 

In addition, students are required to get first hand 
experience of cross-cultural communication by 
attending a cross-cultural event and reporting to 
the class. Here are their instructions. 

Attend a cross-cultural event (e.g., foreign 
students' reception on your campus, 
international students' picnic, international 
night, international students' dinner or 
similar function) involving persons from 
several countries. Try to meet some persons 
from foreign countries and find out the 



ERIC 



28 



purpose of their visit, their cross-cultural 
adjustment experiences, and their future 
plans. Keep track of your communication 
experience and problems with each person. 
In what ways are these experiences and 
problems different from communication with 
persons from your own culture? 

One major assignment, designed for objectives five 
through seven, is a research paper on the 
communication styles of African-, Anglo-, Asian-, 
or Hispainic-Americans. Students are evaluated 
on their oral participation in class (both 
discussions and oral reports), their 
communication notebooks, and their research 
papers, in addition to a final examination. 

The final examination is a complex instrument 
designed to serve a number of different purposes. 
It is administered to students at the beginning and 
end of the course module. Test results are used 
both to measure student attainment of objectives 
and to diagnose course strengths and weaknesses. 
In order to determine student attitudes toward 



various cultural groups, test designers also 
devised a series of **scale" questions. Sometimes 
students were asked to select adjectives rating 
particular cultural groups. At other times they 
were asked to report their own preferences in a 
particular situation such as the choice of a lab 
partner. Pre- and post-tests are also compared to 
determine whether changes in attitude have 
occurred. 

A complete course outline with learning activities, 
suggested resources for teachers, tests, and 
annotated bibliography will be available in this 
series of monographs in 1992. 



ERLC 



23 



27 



Health Care and Native-American Medicine: 

A Journey of Discovery 

from Sharon Golub, R.N,, Instructor, Department of Nursing 



People's beliefs and attitudes aboui health play a 
tremendous role in health care decisions, 

— Carole Browner 

Throughout the Southwest, Native-Americajis 
often receive substandard medical care. While 
access and economic constraints are a large part 
of the problem, Sharon Golub hypothesized that 
cultural misunderstandings may also stand in the 
way of treatment. Native-Americans, for example, 
may be reluctant to submit themselves to 
contemporary medicad practices because of 
cultural beliefs. Those who do seek out Western 
medicine may fail to comply with treatment 
instructions because they violate cultural values 
or are poorly explained. A nurse knowledgeable 
about traditional, Native-American medicine, 
Golub reasoned, might be able to reconcile the two 
approaches to health and improve the quality of 
care given to Native-Americans. 

Golub set out to learn more about Native- 
American medicine with the goal of passing this 
information on to students. By sensitizing 
students to the beliefs of Indian cultures, she 
could help them become better caregivers to 
Native-Americans. Learning the way culture 
impacts health in one ethnic group, moreover, 
would enable her students to explore, on their 
own, the link between culture and health in other 
ethnic populations they served. 

Funded by a mini-grant, Golub attended a 
conference in Tucson, Arizona, sponsored by St, 
Mary's Hospital and Health Center. This unusual 
facility integrates Native-American healing and 
Western medical practices. Speakers included 
Edgar Monetatchi, Jr., executive director of 
traditional Indian medicine at St. Mary's Hospital, 



Tucson, Frank Clarke, a physiciami who is also a 
Haulapai Indiami, amid Jack Whitecrow, executive 
director of the National Indian Health Board. 

Golub expected to hear about herbal remedies and 
poultices; instead, she learned about the spiritual 
and psychological dimensions of health and 
illness. At the end of the conference, she had 
changed as a person, with new attitudes toward 
her patients, her students and even her own 
health. What began as a research project became 
part of a spiritual journey. In her project report, 
she invites her reader on a similar journey, 
presenting a transcription of her notes. Her 
opening remarks and a few excerpts from her 
notes follow: 

What follows are my personal transcriptions of 
some of my personal notes from the 
conference. One of the most important things I 
learned in Tucson is that we travel different 
roads and have different time plans. We have 
different experiences to learn different lessons. 
Therefore, I present the material to you as it 
was presented to me. In the following writing, 
you may hear different things than I did. You 
must come to draw your own conclusions, 
your own lessons, your own philosophy. 



Wellness and Illness 

"In Traditional Indian Medicine we talk about 
being well. If you fcnou; that you are well, you will 
be well. You can decide to be well. Therefore, you 
can see that Traditional Indian Medicine has 
nothing to do with illness. It has everything to do 
with wellness. You choose to be well in spirit, and 
your body does it. You put the love on (the love of 
God, and of those people who love you, perhaps, 
the love of the medicine man) like another skin. 
It is ever present; you breathe in love. Pain is a 
reminder that you are not loving yourself. Be 
careful of your brain and let your spirit do the 



healing. Put your brain in your pocket and let the 
rest of you do the work. When you say, *I am sick 
aind tired of being sick and tired/ you are ready to 
get well. You come into a state of comfort; then 
you can do anything. In comfort, you can love, 
learn, create, expand. Become a lover with 
happiness, joy, pleasure. Then it will be 
impossible to be ill. 

*The caregiver nourishes himself by releasing 
guilt. You are not responsible for the patient's 
disease. He is responsible for his disease. 
Facilitate healing within each individual who asks 
for help. They must ask; then they must open 
themselves up to receive. Recognize that you can 
only help those who want help, then love them 
unconditionally, " 

— Alonzo Florcs, Cheyenne 



growth. The medicine man speaks with spirit as 
well as words. He speaks with the spirits because 
thats where he and his patient will learn the 
truth. A disease involves looking and learning. 
*What will you do with it? You wanted this 
disease. You got it. Now, what will you do with 
it?* The disease comes to you because you have 
lived in such a way as to invite it. You needed it. 
Why? How does it serve you and what will you do 
with it?** 

— Edgar Monetatchi, Jr., Comanche 
Executive Director of Traditional Indiam 
Medicine 

St. Mary^s Hospital, Tucson 



The Medicine Wheel 



"A word on humility [which the medicine man 
must possess]. It does not mean subservience or 
groveling. It means respect and recognition that 
other people need to do what they need to do to 
grow. DO NOT CHALLENGE. DO NOT JUDGE. 
You do not know where the other person is in his 



*The study of the medicine wheel leads you to 
knowledge of yourself. Its purpose is to help you 
survive, pursue cind proceed. How do you know 
where you are in the wheel? You must look within 
yourself. In the medicine wheel there are four 
points: North, South, East, and West. For each 
direction there is a color, a word, and an amimal. 



The Medicine Wheel 



West^ 
Black 
Bear 
Seeing from Within 
Character: Indecisive 



North 
White 
Buffalo or Deer* 
Strength or Wisdom 
Character: Demanding 



South 
Green 
Mouse I 
Love, Trust or Innocence 
Character: Victim 



East 
Yellow 
Eagle 
Vision or Illumination 
Character: Decisive 



ERLC 



31 



29 



*The man of the East has great foresight and 
vision. The person from the West is as a bear. He 
cannot walk a straight line. The bear person is 
unable to make a decision. The eagle person can 
see many things the bear person cannot see. If 
someone takes advantage of you, you are a person 
of the South, the mouse. You must become a 
whole person. You must be balanced in all 
attributes. You must daily learn your lessons and 
journey toward the center of the wheel. Where 
were you bom on the wheel? You must look 
inward to find out. What kind of person were you 
when you became aware of the world? If you were 
bratty, demanding, you were the buffalo. This 
means you will be a good provider, but you will be 
cold hearted if you are not balanced. You will be 
white, cold, of the North. In life you need to yearn 
for more. You must take advantage of learning 
experiences. There are 360 different degrees that 
you can take from as you move through the circle. 
E^ch will give you a slightly different experience. 
Regardless of how long you live, you must apply 
and receive the gifts of the directions." 

— Jake Whitecrow 

Executive Director 

National Indian Health Board 



consequences of their actions. Practice patience. 
Don't succumb to the unwillingness to wait. Too 
much prayer may lead to nausea. Be in balance. 
Eat something. 

"You bless us all with your presence when you 
bless yourself with your own love. Try this: see 
yourself as water in a strestm. If you see a rock 
ahead, you can go over or under it or flow around 
it gently. Don't fight obstacles. Religion is talking. 
Spirituality is walking." 

— Edgar Monetatchi 

—Paul Ortega 

— ^Alonzo Flores 



The Spiritual Life 

Religion is man's formulation of what he sees. 
But true spirituality is of God. The spiritual life 
requires a great deal of prayer. It can take many 
forms but can take place anywhere. In healing, 
bring yourself before the Great Spirit for 
purification. Then you can pray for others — 
perhaps for their healing. Offer the problem to 
God. You must stay in touch. Surround yourself 
with a loving preset e. You must be patient. 
Answers may come slowly. There is a saying *what 
goes around comes around.* When the time is 
right, the cure is easy. Conversely, there are those 
who still have lessons to learn to accept the 



ERIC 



Lexicon of Religious Terms 



from Sister Karen WUhehny, CSJ, with Eugene Frick, Alexis Navarro and Father Aloysius Michael 
Faculty. Department of Religious Studies 



Studying an aspect of culture that you don*t have 
words or concepts for is very difficult. 

— Douglass Price-Williams 

Religious beliefs, rituals, and practices permeate 
and reflect the culture from which they come. 
Because religion and culture are inextricably 
bound together, the faculty of the religious studies 
depcirtment hypothesized that cultural experiences 
would affect students* understanding of the 
technical vocabulary used in their classes. An 
African-American student, for example, may have 
associations with the words "gospel" or "salvation" 
that are very different from those of an Hispanic- 
American or Irish- American. In order to make 
sure that students understood the precise 
definitions of technical terms, the religious studies 
faculty undertook the project of constructing a 
lexicon with clear definitions and examples of 
differing cultural associations with each word. 

The faculty began by compiling and defining a list 
of words that make up the special vocabulary 
used in religious studies classes. For purposes of 
evaluation, they pre- tested students to determine 
their knowledge of a random sample of these 
terms. Of the 182 students tested, 117 students 
scored at or below 65% correct. The need for the 
lexicon was clear! Using a working draft of the 
definitions, faculty members began the project of 
refining and reworking the definitions to 
clarify them for the students. They also asked 
students to provide examples from their own 
ethnic backgrounds which would complement 
the definitions. 



This task took far more time than was anticipated, 
largely because students were unable to supply 
examples of cultural associations with the words. 
Many resorted to quizzing parents and 
grandparents with little success. Faculty 
members asked graduate students from different 



cultural backgrounds to help with the project and 
did only slightly better. Why so few examples 
emerged is not clear. One hypothesis is that the 
task was beyond the students' understanding of 
their own cultures. Another is that students 
educated in a multicultural environment come to 
share a body of cultural knowledge that is 
"American," and so agree on the definitions and 
associations of the terms. Another factor may be 
the Catholic nature of Mount St. Mary's College, 
Many religious studies courses deal with Christia. 
scripture, ethics, and theology, although there are 
courses on world religions, Judaism, Asian 
religions, and Islam. Thus, many of the terms in 
the lexicon arise from the Christian tradition, A 
majority of the college's students come from the 
Christian tradition as well; about 60% of the 
student body are Catholic and many students in 
the remaining 40% are Protestant. The cultural 
similarities among Christians of college age, then, 
may be greater than their differences. 

Faced with this unexpected result, the faculty 
decided to try to eliminate examples that were 
culturally exclusive and simplify definitions to 
help students understand them. Together, faculty 
and students rewi'ote the definitions until the 
final lexicon was achieved. In some instances 
culturally specific examples were possible, 
and these have been included in lexicon, but 
most often students and faculty agreed that no 
culturally specific examples were needed 
for clarit}'. 

The post-test done by the department indicated 
that students had gained much from the work of 
the project. Almost 89% scored 75% or better on 
an identification of randomly selected terms. The 
faculty learned as much as the students. In this 
particular instance, culture proved to be a weak 
variable as Dr. Gallimore and Dr. Goldberg 
suggested in the symposium on culture and 



33 



31 



learning. Pedagogical methods, particularly those 
strengthening learning and language skills, were 
more important than cultural misunderstanding. 
A sample of terms defined in the lexicon is 
given below. 

Excerpt from the Lexicon 

Agape The unconditional love of a Christian for 
the neighbor. Thus, agape goes beyond 
friendships and preferences based on 
mutual attraction, shared interests, ethnic 
origins and personal charm to the kind of 
love that God in Jesus has for us. Agape is 
not the Golden Rule of self-love, but the 
truth of God's love for us which is 
undeserved, unmerited, and freely given. 
The New Testament speaks of two kinds of 
love originating from agape: 1) the love of 
community (koinonia) and 2) the love of 
service (diakonia). 

Agnosticism Suspension or denial of the 

possibility of certain knowledge of the 
existence of God, the nature of God, or any 
other supra-empirical realities (e.g., 
afterlife, the Tao and its tao, BRAHMAN- 
ATMAN, and so on) because tangible and 
verifiable evidence for belief/unbelief is 
inconclusive. 

Buddha Fully enlightened One, total condition of 
enlightenment an unconditional final state 
of being beyond all (life /death & self /world) 
experiences noiTnally known. There are 
generally three kinds of buddhas or 
buddhahood levels: 1) earthly (real, 
human person), 2) heavenly- transcendent 
(spiritual being, never human), and 
3) unconditional (a state beyond all 
persons, trans-personal). Many Buddhists 
revere 1) Gotama, and /or 2) Amida, and /or 
3) Vairochana as representatives of three 
kinds rbodies'^) of the Buddha. 



God Generally, a singular, supreme Being 
(Great Spirit, Yahweh, Allah, Siva) or 
Ultimate Vital Force or Law (Tao Tien). 
Usually, God is the ultimate creator, lord, 
and destroyer of all other beings. Because 
there may be many gods in one religion 
and because there are many different 
definitions of God in many religions, 
religious scholars define God as a term or 
symbol for the unique, ultimate reality or 
being that is singular by its absoluteness, 
eternity, transcendence, and unconditional 
character. God may be person, personal, 
or non-personal in nature: a reality greater 
than all others that can be known or 
conceived: ultimate reality experienced as 
ultimate concern. 

Incarnation Generally, any person or being in 
which God /Ultimate Reality dwells or 
manifests itself— temporarily (Avatars of 
Hinduism, mahdi of Islam). In the 
Christian sense, a singular human being 
in whom the presence of and union 
with God are so intense that there is an 
identification of the two as one 
person (Jesus). 

Law/Torah This refers to the Pentateuch (the 

first five books of the Hebrew Scriptures). 
It is to be understood as norms for a life 
demonstrating Yahweh's involvement ih all 
aspects of life for Israel. 

Meditation One of the many yogas (disciplines 
that restrain and concentrate and purify) 
of the inner self, the ^'mind** (thinking, 
feeling, imagining, remembering, 
passions /desiring) and the "he-^,rt": 
meditation opens this inner self to 
God /Ultimate Reality. Aims at returning 
mind and heart to their roots in soul or 
Atman (deepest interior level or state in 
one's self) which is experienced in one of 
three ways: 1) as insight or 



9^2 



awakening/enlightenment to the truth, 
2) as tranquility of ongoing inner 
peace/quiet of abiding in silence, or 3) as 
emptiness, unconditional state beyond all 
insight or moods or activity of any kind, 
absorption in the One ultimate and 
universal reality. 

Reformation A movement in the Church during 
the Middle Ages, which resulted in the 
beginning of the division of the Church into 
various denominations. The movement 
was lead by Martin Luther in 1517 because 
of the erosion of papal authority and 
abuses such as the selling of indulgences. 

Reincarnation Rebirth of the soul or other 

components of a prior self in a subsequent 
life-form (spiritual, human, or animal, for 
example) according to deeds or karma 
(deeds and residues) or other criteria of 
evaluation (such as spiritual level of 
development). 

Religion In general, a comprehensive vision and 
way of life, rooted in an understanding or 
experience of ultimate reality, which aims 
at the total transformation of the self, its 
life, and its world in accord with that 
vision. This vision and way of life are 
interdependent and integrated into all 
areas of one's self (mind, heart, soul, body, 
psyche) and one's life (deeds, intents, 
words) and one's world (relationships, 
society); every aspect can become religious 



in orientation. The way of life usually 
includes Jiue elements: 1) rituals of 
worship and celebration; 2) moral rites, 
disciplines, ideals; 3) spiritual disciplines 
and ideals; 4) community life with 
structures of fellowship and authority; and 
5) sacred texts, traditions, and history as 
roots of identification. Generally religions 
are founded by God or by religious 
geniuses (prophets, sages, saints, 
incarnations) who more or less embody the 
basic truths, values, and ideals of life 
distinctive to that community. 

IN THE HISPANIC CULTURE: "La Religion 
is the great canopy under which Hispanics 
live. It covers every aspect of life and is 
sacred to the point that they should be 
willing to die for it. 



ERIC 



35 



33 



Different Voices: 

Multicultural Dimensions of Leadership 

from Cheryl Mabey, Director of the Leadership Program 



Let each of us so live that we will not regret years 
of useless virtue, inertia and timidity. Let each of 
us so live that in dying we can say, ^All my 
conscious life and energy have been dedicated to 
the most noble cause in the world: the liberation 
of the human mind and spirit beginning with 
my own. " 

— Maya Angelou, 1986 Horizons 
Convocation Speaker 

Mount St. Mary's College emphasizes leadership 
development as well as academic excellence. Our 
nationally recognized Women's Leadership 
Program (featured by the New York Times in a 
December *90 article) offers students the 
opportunity to study and practice leadership 
techniques through single courses or a minor in 
leadership studies. The program focuses on the 
individual — analyzing and perfecting each 
student's unique leadership style. Because of this 
emphasis on the individual, Cheryl Mabey, the 
director of the leadership program, was interested 
in studying leadership styles in minority cultures. 
Her goal was to broaden curricular materials on 
culture and leadership for the senior leadership 
seminar, the capstone experience of the program. 

She planned to survey current literature on the 
subject of leadership theory amd practice in 
minority cultures. To flesh out the theory, she 
intended to compile oral histories of MSMC 
graduates from various ethnic backgrounds for 
specific examples of the way culture affected their 
leadership styles. Almost immediately, she ran 
into a major obstacle. Information on leadership 
in minority cultures was scarce. Various works in 
the fields of educational research, history, 
anthropology and psychology touched on the 
subject as did biographies of individual leaders, 
but no work existed that synthesized diverse 



cultural views of leadership. She and her 
students would have to do the synthesis for 
themselves from primary sources. 

Fortunately, Mabey did find other scholars asking 
questions similar to hers. A conference on 
leadership sponsored by the American Association 
of Colleges examined "Leadership in Diverse 
Places." The National Women Studies Conference 
focused upon subcultures within the United 
States at its 1988 conference "Leadership and 
Power: Women's Alliances for Social Change." At 
the Wingspread Conference in March, 1988, the 
Rutgers Chair in Women's Studies identified a 
major need for research into the contributions 
which feminism and ethnic minorities can make to 
discussions of leadership amd diversity. Even the 
Center for Creative Leadership, a corporate think- 
tank. Included a luncheon round-table discussion 
on leadership and ethnic diversity at its smnual 
leadership education conference. Mabey attended 
some of these meetings, corresponded with other 
scholars studying leadership styles among ethnic 
minorities, and read extensively. She began to 
draw some tentative conclusions about the ways 
in which leadership among ethnic minorities 
differs from traditional styles of leading. One of 
her discoveries was that leadership in minority 
subcultures has many characteristics in 
common with "transformational" or "servant 
leadership" styles. 



A Different Kind of Leader 

A hierarchical model of leadership is deeply rooted 
in Western culture, so deeply rooted that it often 
goes unquestioned. When introduced to the 
concept of servant leadership, a high-ranking 
churchman asked in real confusion, "But a leader 
has to be over others. How cam he be a servant to 
them?" This pyramidal model of social 
organization, with the broad base of ordinary 
people on the bottom and the leader isolated from 



3b 



them at the top, is tlie dominant concept of 
leadership in the United States, but it is not the 
norm in many minority cultures. 

The paradox of the servant-leader is a good 
introduction to ideas about leadership from other 
cultural perspectives. Robert K. Greenleaf 
introduced this term into leadership studies in his 
book Servant Leadership, Troubled by the loss of 
public confidence in traditional forms of 
leadership, he retired from his position as Director 
of Management Research at AT&T. He began to 
search for a new paradigm different from the 
**great man" or the "organizational manager" 
described in standard texts on leadership. He 
found it in Hermann Hesse's novel. Journey to the 
East, which contains the parable of Leo. Leo, the 
humble guide on the journey, turns out to be a 
charismatic leader. Greenleaf describes Leo as 
one who "ostensibly served only in menial ways 
but who, by the quality of his inner life that was 
manifest in his presence, lifted men up and made 
the journey possible." 

Greenleaf s characterization of leadership departs 
dramatically from traditional theories, which hold 
that leadership can be defined by personality 
traits (competitiveness, ambition, forcefulness and 
so on) or by a position of formal authority in a 
hierarchical organization (president, dean, and 
chairman of the ;ard). Both of these theories 
dominated leadership studies through the 1960s 
and fit comfortably with a mainly male, white, 
European mind-set. 

Many minority cultures, on the other hand, 
discourage competition just as female socialization 
does. Traditional Hispanic-American, African- 
American and Native-American cultures strongly 
emphasize the importance of pulling together, 
helping others, and de-emphasize rivalry and 
competition. The pyramid does not represent 
leadership to them. 



Among Native-American cultures, respect and 
influence are given to people who have developed 
spiritual, physical, and artistic abilities that 
benefit the community whether or not they 
translate into marketable skills or commercial 
success. One Native-American at a recent 
women's studies conference mentioned that her 
role as "aunt" gave her more recognition in the 
tribe than her published works because "aunt" 
helped the community. Her academic success was 
less important because it represented achievement 
of individual goals. 

International scholars have theorized that each 
major culture has its own epistemology, logic, and 
processes for acting. Many of the basic premises 
about leading — its goals and processes — may seem 
alien to people of other than European extraction. 
The concern for individual acquisition of power, 
status or wealth as a major goal of learning and 
leading is consistent with European epistemology. 
Such goals are inconsistent with African -American 
cultures, which place a higher value on 
relationships between people, and Asian-American 
cultures, which place their highest value on the 
cohesiveness of the group. 

In a multicultural society, the respect for diversity 
will ultimately need to include a respect for 
different philosophical premises and leadership 
styles. The leadership studies literature — outside 
of biographies and qualitative research 
methodology — is a long way from incorporating the 
African or Asian approaches into the scientific, 
cognitive way of counting and measuring 
managers' and leaders' behavior. Such diversity 
would add depth and meaning to the narrow 
construct of leadership typical of European and 
Euro-American textbooks. 

Having found the best source of information about 
leadership and minority cultures in biographies 
and autobiographies, Mabey decided to approach 
the senior leadership seminar in an experiential 
way. Small groups of students would be assigned 



35 



to study various ethnic cultures through 
interviews, films and personal narratives. Their 
task was to identify the dominant leadership 
styles and techniques and present this 
information to the class in the words of the leaders 
themselves through a readers' theater. Her 
syllabus follows. 

Unit Plan for "Voices: 
Multicultural Ways of Leading'* 

I. Introduction to Western 
Leadership Model 

A. Review of history text in American 
History /Western Civilization for what 
characterizes a "leader" (i.e., male, 
position holder, top of hierarchical 
structure, traits). 

B. Distribute articles regarding Stanford 
University's curriculum change of "core" 
readings including former Secretary of 
Education William Bennett's view. 
Discuss why broadening the cultural 
context of students is a political issue. 
Does this university decision/public 
policy debate reflect some narrowly 
defined notion of who should be 

a leader? 

C. Outline leadership model, which Marilyn 
Loden defines as "masculine" in her 
Feminine Leadership, Is this model of 
leadership the prevalent cultural model 
in the U. S.? 



ERLC 



n. Tale ofO and Valuing 
Difference 

A. After students have read Rosabeth 
Ranter's Tale of O, list anecdotes 
from their own life stories of "O" 
experiences. Generate a list of 
possibilities — what options do "O's** have 
in the face of dominant "X" culture? 

B. Have students write their opinions 
regarding diversity. "Is it better or worse 
for society to fuse "O's" into "Xs"? 
Discuss thoughts after students 

have written. 



III. Review of Literature 

(In exploring research/writing on 
multicultural ways of leading, it is 
important to underscore tliat no text or 
major work exists focusing upon the 
cultural contexts of leading in a general 
way. In fact, as in many writings by third 
world women » the works which exist are on 
highly specialized topics or are published 
by small presses. Ideas different from the 
mainstream are difficult to explore in a 
general forum.) 

A. Extended bibliography will be distributed 
to students to review and use in 
further study. 

B. Discuss anthropological view that a 
person can not truly become another 
culture. Rejlections on Fieldwork in 
Morocco by Bruce Payne and John Ott of 
Duke University contains passages 
suggesting the more an individual 
studies/travels to a different culture, the 
more the person learns about his or her 
own culture. The "other" always remains 



"other/ Exploration and analysis of 
multicultural dimensions of leadership, 
then, cannot proceed comprehensively 
or easily. 

C* Life Story/Case Study Methodology. 
Students will select a different cultural 
perspective from their own. In order to 
construct alternative cultural models of 
leading, specific life stories of third world 
women in the U.S. (Asian-Americans, 
African-Americans, Hispanic- Americans, 
and Native-Americans) will be explored 
through reading and film. 

IV. Class Project in 

Multicultural Ways of 
Leading 

A. Initial Organization of Project: Students 
select cultural group for study. Reading 
assignments are distributed with 
dominant Western leadership model 
worksheet. 

B. Initial Group Discussion: With initial 
readings completed, students meet in 
groups and work through worksheet on 
any leadership characteristics different 
from the Western leadership model. 

C. Fieldwork/Independent Study: Students 
conduct interviews and /or read more 
extensively. Think. Keep journal with 
interview entries, reaction /quotes. 

D. Group Projects: Students discuss 
experiences in groups. Then each group 
formulates outline of "voices" from the 
selected ethnic culture. Material may 
include interviews and reading they 
choose to share with other "voices.** 
Students meet /write /compile subgroup 
"voice" for rough reading in class (not to 
exceed lifteen minutes per subgroup). 

ERLC 



E. Synthesize Project Into Readers Theater: 
Groups present their "voices" 
uninterrupted. Peer assessment in 
writing. What did the listener like? 
What did she want to know more about? 
What common themes are being 
expressed? What contradictions? Class 
forms editing group to synthesize small 
group "voices" into multicultural whole 
about living and leading. Class approves 
synthesis. Practices. Present to incited 
"experts" and interested students. 

V. Multicultural Themes 
Regarding Leadership 

A* After the students reading, viewing 
videos/films, meeting women different 
from themselves and integrating voices 
into a readers theater, the class returns 
to what, if any, generalized distinctions 
exist from the dominant/male model of 
Western leadership. Specific themes the 
class will explore include: style of 
leading, group/organizational structure, 
objective of leading, communication/ 
problem-solving style, key 
characteristics. Students will be asked 
to probe issues of self-reliance and 
community appropriate activism in what 
arenas, degree of leader-initiated /leader- 
responsive behavior. 

Final examination question will focus upon 
alternatives to Western leadership model. 



39 37 



V 

Moving Forward: 

Beyond the Faculty/Staff Development Program 



We celebrate the marvelous variety and richness 
that the ethnic cultures we share among us bring to 
each of us, and we point up the need, the serious, 
enduring need, to understand thai richness and 
Joy in it. 

— Sister Magdalen Coughlin, CSJ, Chancellor of 
Mount St Mary's College 

As the mini-grant summaries suggest, the 
faculty /staff development program occasioned 
much research and some concrete, curricular 
change in individual classes. Among the tangible 
results were course revisions in the departments 
of art, education, and biology: new courses in 
psychology, communication, and leadership: new 
methodologies in the biological sciences and 
teacher preparation classes: and new resources for 
the teaching of art and literature. Many faculty 
members who did not apply for mini-grants made 
small changes such as including a discussion of 
minority voting patterns in a political science class 
or adding a novel by an African-American author 
to a reading list. Attitudinal changes, although 
difficult to quantify or document, occurred as well. 
When asked what qualities they wished to develop 
in their students, almost every faculty member 
included an appreciation for cultural diversity. 
Faculty, administration, and staff at the college 
acknowledged that the program had been an 
effective first step in the evolution of multicultural 
education at Mount St. Mary's College. 

Although significant changes had occurred, they 
were piecemeal and tended to be in upper di\asion 
or professional courses. Faculty in the 
department of education, for example, had used 
mini -grants for revising teacher preparation 
classes to include techniques effective in 
multicultural classrooms. Their efforts were so 
successful that, of five colleges reviewed. Mount 
St. Mary's was the only one to receive full 
accreditation under the new Standards of the 



State of California, which require that 
multicultural issues be taught in professional 
(methods) courses. Spurred on by their success, 
the education faculty applied for and received an 
additional grant from CAPHE/NYNEX with 
matching funds from the ARCO Foundation to 
introduce multicultural material into subject 
matter classes, such as English and history, 
required of elementary teaching candidates. The 
Infusing Multicultural Perspectives Across the 
Curriculum program, or IMPAC, as it is called, has 
involved faculty from many different departments 
and is beginning to change lower division classes 
in the baccalaureate program. 

While the IMPAC program has made an enormous 
contribution to multicultural education at Mount 
St. Mary's, it, too, falls short of being 
comprehensive. The administration and senior 
faculty recognized that if Mount St. Mary's College 
was truly committed to multicultural education, 
an overall re\iew and revision of the curricula v/as 
needed. Major questions had to be asked, 
among them: 

• What information do students need to learn 
about other cultures? 

• What skills do they need to develop to thrive 
in and appreciate a multicultural world? 

• What departments and courses can best 
convey this information and develop 
these skills? 

• Which courses should be required and how 
should courses be sequenced? 

• What additional education will faculty need? 

• What new resources, particularly in the 
library, media center, art and music 
departments will the college need? 

40 



A presidentially appointed ad hoc committee of 
faculty and administrators from both campuses 
was assigned the task of organizing this major 
undertaking. Their four-year plan for a review and 
revision of MSMC's associate and baccalaureate 
general studies (core) curricula and selected 
majors has been funded by the Knight and Ford 
foundations, the Pew Charitable Trust and the 
Clowes Fund, Inc. 

This revision began in the fall of 1990 with 
additional faculty and staff development 
opportunities designed to help with the 
introduction of new multicultural courses and to 
stimulate discussions of what constitutes 
essential information and competencies for the 
new century, balcincing the heritage of Western 
civilization with the history, literature, arts, 
philosophy, and religions of Africa, Asia, the 
Middle East and Latin America. Some 
presentations continued the collegers exploration 
of the differing perspective that ethnic groups have 
developed because of culture and socio-economic 
conditions. In another facet of the program, 
linguistic simulations gave participants the 
vicarious experience of thinking in another 
language and trying to process the information 
received. Strategies for effectively teaching 
students whose cultural background is different 
from that of the mainstream were also examined. 

The second year has given some focus to revising 
required courses for the associate in arts degree 
and adapting content in selected majors to 
multicultural learners. Another goal in the second 
and third years is the revision of the general 
studies program to produce a baccalaureate core 
curriculum characterized by required courses that 
are multicultural in content and incorporate: 
collaborative and active learning techniques; 
structured small group activities: team teaching 
by faculty from various departments and outside 
practitioners; and alternative methods of 
measuring student learning. 



In the third and fourth years the revised curricula 
in selected majors and in the associate and 
baccalaureate degree programs will be 
implemented and evaluated with changes made as 
the evaluation warrants. In preparation for 
introducing the new curricula, faculty in the art, 
literature, and music departments have 
researched the availability of appropriate 
instructional materials that will assist them in 
balancing in their syllabi the Western heritage 
with that of other cultures, especially of Africa, 
Asia, and Central and Latin America. These arts 
and humanities faculty are working with the 
librarians and media center staff to purchase 
print and non-print materials for humanities 
courses and for art and music education. 

When the curricular revisions are completed in 
1995, Mount St. Mary's College will have a 
comprehensive program of multicultural 
education in place. What will that mean for 
students? They will experience an education that 
recognizes cultural diversity as a fact of life in 
American society and in the world. An education 
that explores what is common to all cultures as 
human beings try to answer the cosmic questions: 
Who am I? Why am I here? Where am I going? 
An education that celebrates what is unique and 
irreplaceable in each culture. In the giving and 
receiving of such an education, all of us at Mount 
St. Mary's hope to understand better our society, 
each other, and the cultures in which we have 
our roots. 



EMC 



4: 



39 



A Final Word 



Faculty and staff development Is an essential first 
step in bringing multicultural education to 
colleges and universities. The experience of 
Mount St. Mary's College indicates that a 
successful faculty/staff development program will 
be characterized by diversity, a variety of learning 
opportunities, and long-range goals. MSMC 
invited scholars from many fields — sociology, 
anthropology, psychology, and education — as well 
as artists, musicians, and writers to share their 
talents with the college community. Presenters 
came from different ethnic groups and had 
divergent viewpoints on the subject of culture and 
learning. The program was characterized by a 
range of opportunities to become involved. In 
addition to lectures and seminars, faculty and 
staff were invited to simulations and to workshops 
during which they could revise their own course 
materials. Individual research was supported 
through mini-grants. Finally, the aims of the 
program were long-term. Successful multicultural 
education involves a broadening of perspective 
that comes about only gradually through ongoing 
opportunities for learning and institutional 
support as individuals tiy out new ideas and 
techniques. Launching such a development 
program is challenging, but even small steps bring 
tangible, rewarding results and build momentum 
for further efforts. However strenuous, faculty 
and staff development on the subject of culture 
and learning is worth the effort. It prepares 
institutions, faculties and students for the world 
of the future. 



40 

ERLC 



42 



PrismPublishing™ of 

Mount St. Mary's College 



12001 Chalon Road 

Los Angeles. California 90049 



