DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 408 149 



SE 059 894 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Quail, Gwen; Behm, Charlotte 

Connections across Cultures : Inviting Multiple Perspectives 
into Classrooms of Science, Technology, Math, & Engineering. 
Mission Coll., Santa Clara, CA. 

National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA. 

96 

1 3 p . ; For full report, see SE 060 255. A Product of the 
Pac-TEC Project. 

ATE-94-273 

Pac-TEC Project, Mission College, MS21, 3000 Mission College 
Blvd. , Santa Clara, CA 95054. 

Reports - Descriptive (141) -- Reports - Research (143) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

Black Students; *Career Awareness; *Classroom Environment; 
Educational Change; Elementary Secondary Education; 
Engineering Education; *Equal Education; Higher Education; 
Hispanic Americans; Learning Strategies; *Minority Groups; 
Problem Solving; Sex Differences; Student Motivation; 
♦Technology Education 



ABSTRACT 



This document is an introduction to a larger manual on the 
Pac-TEC project. The Pac-TEC project organizes educational reform around the 
problem statement that mathematics, science, technology, and engineering 
education is not inclusive of all thinking and learning styles, and therefore 
is not addressing the present and future needs of the expanding, evolving 
culture base of the United States. The Pac-TEC project has a research 
component consisting of interviews, classroom trials, literature, research, 
discussions, textbook analysis, and visits to the learning environments of 
classroom teachers (N=26) . The teachers were chosen from elementary to 
university level and 15 of those teachers are members of groups that are 
underrepresented in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology. The 
questions that guided the research phase pertained to the reasons why some 
students are uncomfortable with science, mathematics, engineering, and 
technology; possible contributions and new perspectives that women and people 
of minority cultures can bring to the fields of science, mathematics, 
engineering, and technology; a picture of what a Native -American, 
African-American, Hispanic-American, or woman- centered technology style would 
look like; and what motivates students to study and remain in science, 
mathematics, engineering, and technology. This document explains the reasons 
behind the Pac-TEC research project, how some underrepresented individuals 
cope with the majority educational system, and includes some sample 
solutions. Contains 22 references. (DDR) 



****************************** ********* **************************** ************* 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

******************************************************************************** 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 
^ HAS BEEN GRAFTED BY 

-Cl-£ Ik 





TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Researcn and Improvemem 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
y CENTER (ERIC) 

fl^This document has been reproduced as 
' received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Inviting Multiple 
Perspectives into 
Classrooms of Science, . 
Technology, Math, & Engineering 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



let VI* Hear Pro tA You 

• This publication is written as an introduction to a larger 
manual of 160 pages. 

• If our brochure is of interest to you, we would be glad to 
send you a copy of the manual. 

• Because the production of the manual was supported in part 
by a grant from the National Science Foundation's Advanced 
Technological Education Program, we can send the manual 
to you at no cost. 

AU o: 

• The Pac-TEC project is interested in hearing comments, 
questions, and suggestions concerning its work. 



• We are interested in establishing partnerships with other 
people or groups interested in our work. 

• What has worked well in your classroom? We'd love to hear 
about it! 



You ca* contact u* at tVNe a«Mre**e* telovu: 



NSF Pac-TEC Project 
Gwen Quail 
Mission College, MS-18 
3000 Mission College Blvd. 
Santa Clara, CA 95054-1897 
(408) 748-2764 

e-mail: pactec@wvmccd.cc.ca.us 



NSF Pac-TEC Project 
Charlotte Behm 

Frances Willard Neighborhood School 
2855 Lincoln Street 
Eugene OR 97405-2798 
(541) 687-3375 




Chapter Introduction 



UlV>at Question* Wle /dicing? 









What about the science, math, engineering, and technology fields is 
uncomfortable to students? 



Do students feel that they do not fit in 
or are unwelcome? 

Native Americans, African Americans, Hispanics, 
and women together comprise 65 percent of 
the student population. Despite their large 
population, these four groups continue to 
be severely underrepresented in the fields of 
science, math, engineering, and technology. Why? 




• Do women and people of minority cultures have something different to offer — 
perhaps new perspectives — that can benefit these disciplines? 



• How can technical fields value and utilize the unique talents and skills that students 
from underrepresented groups have to offer? 



• What would an African American-centered, Native American-centered, Hispanic-centered 
or women-centered technology style look like? 



• What can we learn from schools and academic fields that successfully attract 
and retain members of these groups that are underrepresented in science, math, 
engineering, and technology? 



• What motivates students to study and remain in science, math, engineering, 
and technology? What leads others to chose something else or leave these fields? 



UlKo »5 fKe Pac-TEC Project? 

The Pac-TEC Project started with a network of twenty-six classroom teachers. 
Fifteen are members of groups which are underrepresented in science, math, 
engineering, and technology. Sixteen work in technical fields, ten specialize in 
humanities. 

Teachers from elementary, middle, and high schools, colleges, and a university 
are included in the project. 



ERIC 



1 



4 



Itt+ro<Jv/ct»o* 



UIV>2f Is Our Proce^^ 

Our process has consisted of interviews, classroom trials, 
literature research, discussions, textbook analysis, and visits 
to classrooms of innovative and award-winning teachers. 
We use the diversity of our own group to explore and 
understand varying preferences, perspectives, and styles. 

Other resources in the community are also used. For 
example, we visited industry sites to compare the working 
environments of engineers and artists, and we observed 
at a local summer math institute for Hispanic students. 




Did Ule FivxJ UlKdf Did Ufe Do IaJi+Vn 



The Pac-TEC project found common themes in the styles and preferences of the four 
underrepresented groups. Since many of these styles and preferences are absent in 
science, math, engineering, and technology education, it follows that these fields 
do not offer the optimum learning environment for the majority of Hispanics, 

Native Americans, Africian Americans, and women. 

The Pac-TEC project used this information to create a variety of criteria that teachers can 
use to develop solutions that add balance and support diversity in the classroom. Each 
teacher can easily adapt her or his existing teaching to meet the criteria. Solutions do not 
necessarily replace current curriculum, but augment and enrich the curriculum by establishing 
new and creative teaching methods (see pages 5 to 8). 

The project participants discovered that, even though we started with a focus on 
underrepresented groups, our work benefits the entire student population by improving 
the classroom environment, in both technical and humanities classrooms. 




5 

l 



Copter Two: Wky i$ +Ke fac-TEC Project Rejearckimg TVeje foi/e*? 



The conditions which motivate us to pursue this work are 

well documented. 

1. Declining student interest in math and science based 
careers causes concern and demands innovative change. 

2. Traditional methods of teaching are not effective for 
many students. 

3. New options for incorporating diversity in the classroom 
are needed. 

4. The skills needed in the workplace are changing. 




REFERENCES THAT 
CLARIFY and SUPPORT: 




Even though workforce projections 
show a 36% increase in the need for 
people with technical and scientific 
backgrounds in the next ten years, 
student interest in many of these fields 
is decreasing. (Hubbard 1995) 

By 2030, the total elementary school- 
aged cohort of the United States will be 
about equally divided between non- 
Hispanic whites and all other racial/ 
ethnic groups combined. As the work 
force expands, it will be increasingly 
minority and female, the very groups 
who are currently underrepresented in 
technical fields. (Fisher 1992, Day 1993) 

Whereas we might wish to be able to 
treat all students, regardless of ethnic 
origins, the same, the reality is that we 
fail to provide them with the best 
education when we do that. For that 
reason, there is a real concern when 
teachers indicate that they make no 
distinction between their Hispanic 
American and Euro-American students. 
Perhaps, as has been suggested earlier, 
that is part of the problem . (Rakow and 
Bermudez 1993) 



Without changing the substance of 
their courses, teachers can change 
elements of their style and of the 
atmosphere they set in the classroom, 
and trust that such changes wil I have a 
significant impact on students. (Brush 
1980 pg. 105) 

A Native Alaskan teacher speaking 
on what she learned in teacher 
education courses: "I only learned 
how to teach white kids. I didn't 
learn one thing about teaching 
Native kids. It is different, you know. 
But I don't think they even thought 
about that." (Delpit 1995 pg. 107) 

Usually, we are supposed to learn 
it the way men see it. Men move 
quickly to impose their own 
conceptual schemes on the 
experiences of women. (Belenky et 
al 1986 pg. 202, Duras 1975 pg. 1 1 1) 



3 

6 




Afro-American people tend to 
view things in their environment 
in entirety rather than in isolated 
parts. They tend to approximate 
concepts of space, number, and 
time rather than aiming at 
exactness or complete accuracy. 
(Shade 1982) 

The workplace demands very 
d iff erent ski I Is tha n the workplace 
of 1950 did. But if you look at 
our typical math or science or 
language arts curricula, they 
haven't changed that much since 
1950. (O'Neil 1995) 

The organization of science is 
becoming more flexible as the 
boundaries between fields 
become more permeable. As a 
result, employers place high 
value on engineers who can 
communicate, collaborate, and 
work across disciplines. (Griffiths 
1995 pg. 29) 



Cv^p+er Tv>r?e: U*^errepr ejected Group* 



1. Survival Skills* 

Many students from underrepresented groups make 
significant personal adjustments in order to survive 
in the educational system. 



i. Different States: Wv>a+ h 




Many members of underrepresented groups have particular styles and preferences 
which are absent in many classrooms of math, science, technology, and engineering. 
In fact, several of these missing styles and preferences are common characteristics of 
students from all four underrepresented groups: Native Americans, African Americans, 
Hispanics, and women. Of course, one must be careful not to stereotype all members 
of a group as being the same. 



J REFERENCES THAT 
* CLARIFY and SUPPORT: 



Many Hispanic students at our college, 
which has a high Hispanic population, 
learn to be rigid and give up themselves 
to study engineering. (Martinez 1995) 

Although a woman's grades in college 
suggest that she mastered the masculine 
mode, she felt that it really never quite 
"took. " Someday she hopes to master it. 
(Belenky et al 1986 pg. 199) 

Native American students have to be 
convinced that mathematics relates to 
their life, or they will avoid the subject 
and/or refuse to fully participate in the 
learning process. (Green 1989) The first 
challenge math instructors of Native 
American students must face isto create 
a classroom environment in which 
mathematics is seen as relevant and 
meaningful. (Megginson 1990, National 
Science Foundation 1994 pg. 40) 



There is often a gross mismatch 
between the storytelling styles of 
African American children and those 
of their teachers. Many teachers 
from Eurocentric cultures have a 
linear storytelling style. Many 
African American children exhibit a 
spiraling style with many departures 
from an initial point, but with a 
return to make a whole. Many 
African American children concen- 
trate on many stimuli at one time 
rather than learning to concentrate 
on one. The misunderstanding of 
behavioral styles leads educators to 
misread achievement in academic 
subjects, such as creative expression. 
(Banks 1988, Delpit 1995, Guild 1994, 
Hilliard 1989, Shade 1982) 

More and more of the younger 
women scientists of today are 



questioning whether science has to 
be that way. They are beginning to 
envision a time when a critical mass 
of women will be reached, and the 
rules themselves could begin to 
change. They are eager "to change 
science" rather than "changing 
women" until they fit this funny 
mold that has been created in their 
absence. (Barinaga 1993) 

The architecture of Native Peoples 
differs from that of Euro-Americans. 
Native People tend to have space 
designed for communal activity. 
They have soft forms. The earth is 
not paved. In contrast, Euro- 
Americans tend to have space 
designed for separation and privacy, 
hard-edged forms, and earth 
covered with concrete. (Mander 
1991 pg. 215-9) 




4 



7 



Chapter* four +hrv We*: Criteria for Solution amJ Sample Solutions 



A SOLUTION fRESENTS THE WORLD AS A DYNAMIC SYSTEM OF DISCOVERY 





Allows a Discovery Process and 
Acknowledges Uncertainty in 
Acquiring Knowledge. 

The solution allows for false starts and detours 
whereby knowledge is acquired. Teaching 
materials illuminate and support the journeys 
to discovery along with the endpoints. The 
solution acknowledges that science is 
continually discovering new ideas and that 
scientific models are not the same as "truth." 




Insures Subjects are Alive and Holistic 

The solution emphasizes the wholeness and 
wonder of the human experience where there 
is a connection between living and non-living 
systems. The solution develops understanding 
and mastery of whole systems thinking and 
synergetic behavior among the components of 
the system. The solution teaches whole 
concepts, rather than discrete separate skills 
and isolated information. The solution avoids 
presenting information out of context. 






Includes Open Ended Problems. 

The solution uses problems with 
multiple possible outcomes and routes 
to get to those outcomes. The entire 
solution must not be known (to the 
teacher) at the beginning. The solution 
provides a variety of tasks with 
conclusions that are not pre-determined. 



Explores Technology's Role in 
Society. 

Solutions emphasize that technology is 
one of many choices and that there are 
good and bad consequences associated 
with it. Low-tech or intermediate-tech 
examples are included as well as 
technology used in a variety of cultures. 
Military, aggressive, or destructive 
models or examples are omitted. 



Promotes Social Interaction and 
Human Interconnections. 

Solutions include social interactions, 
interpersonal relationships, fellowship, 
and community as part of teaching 
methodology. Solutions value 
interconnections between humans 
and other parts of nature. 




SAMPLE SOLUTIONS 



Teachers change questions, so that instead of there being one correct answer 
there are many possible correct answers. A traditional math problem, such 
as "What percentage of the chairs in the room are blue?" has one correct 
answer. In contrast, a problem which states "Find examples of objects in 
your life that make up 20% of a whole" has many answers. These open- 
ended math problems become personalized to students' lives by encouraging 
them to create their own solutions from their own experience. 





5 



8 



Cri-KYia for Solv+ioty $3f*p|e Solution 



A SOLUTION CREATES a safe, stimulating- environment 



ERIC 




Develops a Comfortable Classroom 
Environment. 

The environment is physically comfortable, 
nurturing, safe, inviting, and friendly to non- 
traditional students. It's okay to reach and fail; 
it's safe to ask questions and be tentative or 
wrong; a student is not criticized, put down or 
dismissed. The students' intelligence is 
respected. Information builds on prior 
knowledge, wisdom, and experience 
constructed from student awareness. 




Supports a Cooperative Learning 
Environment 

The solution motivates by affiliation rather 
than competition. The solution uses and 
develops cross-curricular partnerships that 
model cooperation for students. It emphasizes 
and nurtures collaborative learning 
environments that encourage interdependency 
between group members. 




Uses Technology Tools Holistically. 

Technology tools are only a part of the solution 
process, not a topic unto itself; they support 
learning and doing. Students direct the use of 
technology in solving problems, keep ownership 
of their learning process, and personally validate 
their results. The use of technology tools 
requires human interaction or dialogue. 
Technology tools bring people and various topic 
and subjects together, rather than isolate them. 
Technology that incorporates violence is not 
used. 




Embraces Collaborative Conversation 
Styles. 

The solution uses an exploratory, non-linear, 
collaborative, and non-hierarchical 
conversation mode. It enlightens students on 
defensive word-warrior dynamics of typical 
classrooms. The solution puts concepts in a 
story format. 



A Vitalizes Physical Space. 

S? The classroom (a) is constructed and 

decorated with various inviting colors and 
textures, (b) includes items, colors, and 
decoration styles that reflect the students' 
cultures, (c) contains sufficient flexible space 
for free movement of students and 
furniture, (d) promotes collaborative groups 
and reflects community, (e) has varied 
shapes, especially rounded and curved, 

(f) has hanging items, (g) contains natural 
lighting and indirect lighting, (h) is visually 
peaceful and inviting, but also stimulating, 

(i) allows students and instructors to interact, 
and (j) includes 
nature. Suites 
of room are 
interconnected. 

Technology tools 
are peripheral to 
the focus of the 
learning space. 




i 

, 0^ SAMPLE SOLUTIONS 
I 

One day when I was discussing recruiting and retaining 
women engineering students with a local high school vice 
principal, I learned that her daughter was studying 
engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT). This young woman had reported to her mother 
that even the rooms at MIT reeked of masculinity. I decided 
to make a tour of our classrooms. I found our engineering 
rooms undecorated, relatively joyless and stark, in contrast 
to the considerably more interesting rooms that women 
teachers call their own. By putting up calendars and posters 
and strategically placing a few plants, the rooms look more 
colorful, cheerful, and diverse. (Eagan 1994) 

(o 



Is it possible to base some of the programming on 
language content rather than on mathematics 
content? Such a change might attract a new segment 
of the high school population to computer science 
classes. (Gilliand 1984) 

To create a sense of collaborative work, teachers involve 
their students in a simulated council meeting centered 
around an environmental issue. Representatives from 
industry, science, community, and politics can be role- 
played. One of the goals of the council meeting is to 
develop strategies for solving problems using a 
conversation style that brings the different groups to a 
consensus. 

9 



Cri-Kria for $©ki+iov<5 3wl $3Mp|e Solution? 



A SOLUTION EXPANDS PARTICIPANT PERSPECTIVES 




Promotes Multi-Perspectives. 

The solution presents a new way of 
looking at something in the student's 
current life. Students look outside 
traditional paths and environments for 
solutions. Multiple perspectives close in on 
truths. 




Integrates Family and Community. 

The solution integrates the family and 
the outside community into the 
classroom and is sensitive to balancing 
family roles with learning. It promotes 
desired behavior 
by community 
affiliation rather 
than authority. 





Encourages the Use of Original 
Resources. 

The solution includes primary source 
readings (not the textbook), such as 
scientific reports, non-fiction, fiction, 
and interviews. The readings are used 
to elicit oral, written, and artistic 
student responses that are personal or 
analytical. The mind is initially 
expanded, not contracted. Personal 
experiences and opinions of students 
are valued. 




Adapts to Diverse Learning Styles. 

The solution is inclusive of a variety of 
learning styles. Teachers and students 
assume the roles of facilitator, coach, 
student, and lecturer at least once during 
the semester. 




Uses a Variety of Assessment Tools. 

The solution includes frequent evaluation 
by more than one different assessment 
tool. The assessment includes the 
learning styles of "right-brain" groups. 
Stakeholders with an interest in student 
assessment work together to develop 
clear criteria for assessment. 




SAMPLE SOLUTIONS 



In math, writing may take the form of a "math 
autobiography" assignment on the first day of Algebra I, 
where students tell not only their learning history, but 
their feelings about math as well. In science, there are 
abundant writing opportunities: formal lab reports, 
essay questions on tests, and research projects. The act 
of keeping a journal will put students in touch with 
their own innate sense of problem-solving. This project 
will encourage creativity and individuality, and will help 
students avoid mimicry and acceptance of generic 
approaches to thinking. (Kruschwitz and Peter 1995) 



After an activity or field trip, students (or teachers) 
divide into groups to review and discuss their 
feelings and experiences. An interesting exercise is 
to divide groups by culture and/or gender, then let 
each group report separately by talking, writing, or 
other forms of communication. Afterwards, the class 
compares and contrasts reports generated by the 
diverse groups. 



Criteria for Solution! and Sample Solution 



A SOLUTION MOTIVATES STUDENTS TO PEPSONAUY EXPERIENCE 
ANO INTERPRET MATERIAL 




Engages Students. 

Students are actively engaged in the 
process; no "lecture-only" curriculum. 
Students feel good about accomplishing 
an activity. Student-teacher contacts and 
roles are expanded. Students engage 
more than their minds in the education 
process. 




Involves Working in Groups and 
Develops Interpersonal Skills. 

Students help to achieve the goals of a 
cooperative group, communicate well 
with other members, make sure the 
group works well together, and take 
on a variety of tasks within a group. 




Encourages Reflection. 

The solution encourages students to 
discuss and evaluate their work. The 
solution gives students the opportunity 
to reflect upon, revisit and revise their 
work during quiet time. 




Values Feelings and Intuition. 

Feelings, a sense of belonging, and 
intuition are valued. The solution 
factor in the intuitive, emotional 
component of intelligence. 




Is Relevant to Students. 

Solutions provide connections with real-life 
contexts that reflect the home 
environment, as well as social, political, 
and economic conditions of the real world. 
Students' life experiences and previous 
knowledge provide a foundation for 
learning and for exploring the subject 
matter. 




# 

/ 0^ SAMPLE SOLUTIONS 
I 

When asking students to write about important 
events in their lives, the teacher asks, "How did you 
feel?" in addition to the usual questions about time, 
date, and list of events. For instance, a teacher asks, 
"How did you feel during and after the earthquake 
of 1989?" 

To access emotions that may be masked by 
conversations, teachers have their students design 
and choreograph a ten minute silent lecture. The 
students are directed to design their lecture to elicit 
an emotional response concerning a subject or 
situation related to science. 



Teachers encourage students to make connections 
between their technical and humanities classes. In 
cooperative groups, students develop links 
between what they are learning in science, math, 
technology, and engineering classes to subjects of 
art, music, literature, and history. Each group 
focuses on a different subject area and then devises 
a strategy to share the results of their efforts. 
Groups are encouraged to look for patterns and 
relationships among a diverse set of ideas and 
fields of thought. 

li 



9 

ERIC 



8 



References 



+ *r 



Banks, James A. "Ethnicity, Class, Cognitive, and Motivational Styles: 
Research and Teaching Implication." The Journal of Negro Education, 



Barinaga, Marcia. "Is There a 'Female 
Style' in Science?" Science , Vol. 260, 
pages 384-391, April 16, 1993. 

Belenky, Mary, Blythe Clinchy, Nancy 
Goldgerger, and Jill Tarule. Women's 
Ways of Knowing. New York: Basic 
Books, 1986. 

Brush, Lorelei R. Encouraging Girls in Mathematics, The Problem 
and Solution. Abt Books, Cambridge Massachusetts, 1980. 

Day, Jennifer Cheesman. Population Projections of the United States, 
by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin: 1993 to 2050. Bureau of the 
Census, Current Population Reports, Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Commerce, pages 25-1104, 1993. 

Delpit, Lisa. Other People's Children. Cultural Conflict in the 
Classroom. New York: New Press, 1995. 

Duras, M. "Interview by Susan Hasserl-Kapit." Signs: Journals of 
Women in Culture and Society, Vol. 1, No. 2, pages 423-434, 1975. 

Eagan, James L. "Engineering Openings-Women Wanted." 
Innovation Abstracts,- Volume XVI, No. 22, The National Institute 
for Staff and Organizational Development (NISOD), EDB 348, Austin, 
Texas 78712, October 7, 1994. 

Fisher, Arthur. "Crisis in Education Part 
1, Science + Math = F." Popular Science, 
Vol. 241, Issue 2, page 58, August, 1992. 

Gilliand, Kay. EQUALS in Computer 
Technology, The Computing Teacher, page 42, April 1984. 

Green, M. F. Minorities on Campus: A Handbook for Enhancing 
Diversity. Washington, D.C. American Council on Education, 1989. 




57, pages 452-466, 1988. 




Griffiths, Philip A. "Breaking the Mold." ASEE PRISM, pages 27-31, 
November, 1995. 

Guild, Pat. "The Culture/Learning Style Connection," Educational 
Leadership, pages 16-21, April 1994. 

Hilliard, Asa G. , III. "Cultural Style in Teaching and Learning." The 
Education Digest, December, pages 21-23, 1989. 

Hubbard, Pat Hill. "Women Scientists and Engineers in Industry: Why 
So Few?" National Research Council's Committee on Women in Science 
and Engineering, Presentation to the 18th Annual Asia and Pacific 
Sciences Conference, Beijing, China, June 5-9, 1995. 

Kruschwitz, Kate and Carolyn McClintock 
Peter. "All-Girl Settings for Teaching Math 
and Science." The Education Digest, pages 
60-62, February, 1995. 

Mander, Jerry. In the Absence of the Sacred: 
The Failure of Technology and the Survival of the Indian Nations. San 
Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1991. 

Megginson, R. Mathematics and Native Americans , Mathematical 
Association of America, Washington, D.C. , 1990. 

National Science Foundation. Women, Minorities, and Persons With 
Disabilities in Science and Engineering: 1994, Document #NSF 94- 
333, November, 1994. 

O'Neil, John. "On Preparing Students for the World of Work: A 
Conversation with Willard Daggett." Educational Leadership, pages 
46-48, May 1995. 

Rakow, Steven J. and Andrea B. Bermudez. "Science is 'Ciencia:' 
Meeting, the Needs of Hispanic American Students." Science 
Education, Number 77, Vol. 6, pages 669-683, 1993. 

Shade, Barbara J. "Afro-American Cognitive Style: A Variable in School 
Success?" Review of Educational Research, Volume 52, No. 2, pages 
219-244, Summer, 1982. 





Let Ur Hear Fro CA You 





Partial support for this work was provided by the 

National Science Foundation 

Advanced Technological Education Program 
through grant #OUE-9602345 
Opinions expressed are those of the authors 
and not necessarily those of the Foundation 




Written by: Charlotte Behm 
Design and Desktop PublishingH.in Marelick, Hozi Ringor 



12 




NSF Pac-TEC Project 
Gwen Quail 
Mission College, MS-18 
3000 Mission College Blvd. 
Santa Clara, CA 95054-1897 
(408) 748-2764 

e-mail: pactec@wvmccd.cc.ca.us 



NSF Pac-TEC Project 
Charlotte Behm 

Frances Willard Neighborhood School 
2855 Lincoln Street 
Eugene OR 97405-2798 
(541) 687-3375 



13 



ni n-ci-or 1'iUH 0* 01 



P, 03 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title 



(2? OvT» /s«-cAnTO <\4 i\crO 



S S> 



llle lMf|A|(<MlM«le4W iiKltfHUMM 







Author (s): SchiA,, ^ctc-TSTC fro 

Corporate Source: 

W\;«,5io«N 6>U^ , 'ioo® rv\;ss>,<^ 6>(l<jc 

3o.<y-h»- C\g *^ a L C ft p TOS^I 






»•*« uleiafMM M9lim«««ln«l II 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



) Publication Date: 

i nu 



, disseminata as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced 

<n the monthly abstract Journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education {RIE), ere usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced 
paper copy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is 
given to iho source of each document and, if reproduction release Is granted, one of the following notices Is affixed to the document 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following two options and sign at 
the bottom of the page. 




f 



Check here 
For Level 1 Release: 

Permitting reproduction In 
microfiche (4* x 8‘ film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g.i electronic or optical) 
and paper copy. 



The aample sticker shown below will be The sample etiekor shown below wilt be 

affixed to aU Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2 documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 


DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 




DISSEMINATE THIS 


HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 






COPY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


A® 




\9< 


.^V 

C& 













TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




Check here 
For Level 2 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4* x 6' film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical), 
but nof in paper copy. 



Level 1 



Level 2 



Documents will bo processed as Indicated prodded reproduction qualify permits. II permission 
to reproduce Is granted, but neither box Is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1. 



Sign 

here-* 

please 



O 




*1 hereby grant to tho Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to re pro duce nn d diss 6 mi ns to 
this document as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optlcal media by persons other than 
ERIC employees and its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for nonprofit 
reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy in forma lion ne eds of educators In response to discrete inquiries . ' 



Signatwe: a 



<5Vg oWA^r5«: * 

V'ATssio a CdUecvC- , ® 

Col\ 

cVc^AjCA ^5054 






I Printed Name/Position/Tide; " 

cxc*lo^ £><W 

ITeT^pForie: “ ,,A JKBT 

nnarxaamSK — rr*-- 

|^c+c.c.<2 | 

j C (.4 . cc .Co. .U, & ; 



z~l(i>( c n 



