DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 469 297 



RC 023 725 



AUTHOR Apthorp, Helen S : ; D'Amato, Elaine DeBassige; Richardson, Amy 

TITLE Effective Standards-Based Practices for Native American 

Students: A Review of Research Literature. 

INSTITUTION Mid-Continent Research for Education and Learning, Aurora, 

CO. 



SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED) , 
Washington, DC. 

2002-09-00 
23p . 

ED- 01 -CO- 00 06 

For full text: http//www. mcrel . org/products/standards/ 
Practices_NAstudents.pdf. 

Information Analyses (070) -- Reports - Evaluative (142) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

Academic Achievement; Academic Standards; Action Research; 
Alaska Natives; ^American Indian Education; ^American Indian 
Students; Bilingual Education; Cognitive Style; ^Culturally 
Relevant Education;. Curriculum Development; Educational 
Needs; ^Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary 
Education; ^Instructional Ef fectiveness ; Language Arts; 
Mathematics Education; Navajo (Nation) ; . Partnerships in 
Education; School Community Relationship 
Alaska; ^Hawaii; Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 

This report reviews education programs and practices that 
have improved Native American student achievement in English language arts 
and mathematics. In Navajo tribal schools, teaching Indigenous language and 
literacy first, followed by teaching English and promoting bilingualism, 
helped students perform well on tests of vocabulary, comprehension, and 
writing. In Hawaii, a culturally congruent English language arts program 
significantly improved Native Hawaiian children's achievement in reading. 
Emphasis on- comprehension over mechanics and. phonics allowed children to 
learn in ways .that were congruent with their everyday experiences outside of 
school.- The use of ethnomathematics, based on the same principles of cultural 
congruence, led to improved student achievement for Native Hawaiian children 
and Alaskan rural middle school student's . All these programs required 
extensive collaboration and time. Although limited in scope, the evidence 
suggests that congruency between the school environment and the culture of 
the community is critical to educational success. Collaborative research and 
development efforts, carried out at the local level, are needed. Seven action 
steps are recommended in this regard. An appendix outlines McREL' s plan for 
further research. (Contains 31 references.) (TD) 



ERIC 






Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



r- * 
o\ 

On 



EFFECTIVE STANDARDS-BASED 
PRACTICES FOR NATIVE AMERICAN 
STUDENTS: 

A REVIEW OF RESEARCH LITERATURE 



/J4? , J£ I § RAF ? TM , ENT 0F EDUCATION 
vjffic© of Educational Research and Improvamant 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

ffr This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Regional Educational Laboratory 
Contract # ED-01 -CO-0006 
Deliverable #2002-06 

Office of Educational Research 
and Improvement 
U.S. Department of Education 
Washington, DC 20208 

Prepared by 
Helen S. Apthorp 
Elaine DeBassige D’Amato 
Amy Richardson 

September 2002 



MREL 



■X 

c— 

ns 

o 

<0 

ERIC 



Mid-continent Research for 



Education and Learning 

2550 South Parker Rd., Suite 500 
Aurora, CO 80014 



303.337.0990 (phone) 
303.337.3005 (fax) 
www.mcrel.org 



2 



8EST copy AVAILABLE 



M!REL 

©2002 McREL 



To order copies of Effective Standards-Based Practices for Native American Students: A Review 
of Research Literature, contact McREL: 



Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning 
2550 South Parker Road, Suite 500 
Aurora, CO 80014 
303.337.0990 (phone) 

303.337.3005 (fax) 
www.mcrel.org 



This document has been funded at least in part with federal funds from the U.S. Department of 
Education under contract number ED-0 1 -CO-0006. The content of this publication does not 
necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Education nor does mention of trade 
names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsements by the U.S. Government. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Introduction 1 

English Language Arts 2 

Mathematics 9 

Summary and Conclusions 12 

References 15 



Appendix A 



INTRODUCTION 



One tenet of standards-based reform is that every student should have a quality education. A 
quality education is one that helps a student gain deep understanding of and ability to use 
important concepts, facts, skills, and habits of mind to improve his or her future (National 
Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 2000). To many Native American educators, developing 
and implementing content standards is a useful and positive process for improving education for 
Native American children (Alaska Native Knowledge Network, 1998; Fox, 2000). “Schools,” 
however, “must see themselves as accountable for providing the educational program and support 
necessary for Indian students to meet the standards” (Fox, 2000, p. 9). 

To better understand the qualities of education programs and support necessary for Native 
American students to reach standards, researchers and technical assistance providers at Mid- 
continent Research for Education and Learning (McREL) have reviewed research and related 
literature and are conducting field studies. In this report, we synthesize research and related 
literature produced primarily, but not exclusively, by Native American scholars and educators. 
Our purpose is to establish access to Native American research by recognizing the educational 
innovations developed by Native American people, their purposes and outcomes, and lessons 
learned and to propose a plan of research services that will benefit Native Americans in the 
seven-state Central Region served by the regional education laboratory at McREL. This report is 
written for educators, researchers, and policymakers working to improve educational 
opportunities and outcomes for children. In accordance with our obligations as a regional 
education laboratory, this line of inquiry aims to generate and utilize evidence about how to 
transform low-performing schools into high-performing learning communities for Native 
American students. Our focus is on improving Native American students’ learning in reading and 
mathematics. Our sources of information are previous research reviews, and case study and 
program evaluation reports on innovative programs as identified in searches of the ERIC database 
and adjunct clearinghouses. 1 Additionally, we reviewed research reports identified in the 
references of the initial set of reports. 

We originally planned to synthesize evidence about effective classroom practices for teachers of 
Native American students. We expected to provide guidance that was well grounded in results of 



1 We searched publications between 1970 and 2002 at htlp://ericir.syr.edu/Eric/adv search. shtml and 
http://www.indianeduresearch.net/ with the following keywords: instructional practices, effective 
instruction, teaching practices, learning styles, cultural compatibility. Native American students, American 
Indian students. 




1 



5 



research systematically linking classroom practices to academic learning. What we primarily 
found, however, were descriptions of curricula and very few reports on students’ academic 
achievement when the curricula were implemented. We did find case study and evaluation reports 
that included academic achievement results in association with multi-year, multi-component 
program innovations. These innovations were implemented and evaluated in schools serving 
Native American students. For the most part, the studies were conducted under naturalistic 
conditions with little control over student variables prior to the innovation or systematic recording 
of the implementation procedures or conditions. Nonetheless, we draw our conclusions on the 
best evidence available, acknowledge limitations, and make recommendations when appropriate. 

The content of this report is organized into two sections. Native American research and related 
literature on education practices and outcomes in English language arts are reviewed, followed by 
a review of Native American research and related literature on education practices and outcomes 
in mathematics. Each of the sections also includes a summary of procedural knowledge gained 
from reform projects that explicated and connected Indigenous and Eurocentric knowledge to 
develop and align curriculum and assessment. This report concludes with recommendations for 
research and development steps that should benefit Native American clients in McREL’s region. 

English Language Arts 

Research and evaluation findings support the effectiveness of two types of programs for 
developing Native American student literacy in English. One type of program teaches literacy in 
a community’s Indigenous language first, then promotes bilingualism by maintaining that 
language while teaching English language and literacy. Evidence supporting this type of program 
primarily comes from demonstration projects in Navajo community-controlled schools. The 
second effective program creates cultural congruence for Native American students in school, but 
not necessarily bilingualism. Evidence supporting this approach primarily comes from 
evaluations of an elementary school program designed for Polynesian-Hawaiian children. 

Indigenous Language and Literacy First, Bilingualism Second. Federal policymakers 
supported the role of school in developing Indigenous language and literacy prior to World War 
II. John Collier, named Indian Affairs Commissioner in 1933, supported bilingual education for 
Native American students, initiated a retraining program for teachers to become knowledgeable 
and more sensitive to Native cultures, and closed some boarding schools, replacing them with day 
schools (Reyhner, 1992). Collier also assisted in the development of the Johnson O’Malley Act in 
1934, which was amended in 1975 as the Indian Self-Determination and Educational Assistance 
Act (P.L. 93-638). Although cut short by World War II, Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) personnel 
in the 1940s worked with Native language speakers to develop bilingual programs and reading 
texts written in Indigenous languages for American Indian students (Lomawaima & McCarty, 
2002 ). 



It was not until the 1960s that federal policymakers again recognized the value of 
bilingual/bicultural curriculum and materials for Native American students. In the late 1960s, 
Rough Rock Demonstration School emerged as a tribally run, community-oriented school in the 
center of the Navajo Reservation in northeastern Arizona several hours drive from the nearest 
towns on the border of the reservation (McCarty, 1989). The Rough Rock education program was 
designed to expose children to important values and customs of both Navajo culture and the 
dominant society. The school used “an innovative English-as-a-second-language program, 

Navajo language and social living classes, cultural presentations by community members, and the 
development of textbooks on Navajo life” (McCarty, 1989, p. 489). Both Navajo and English 
were used as languages of instruction (Holm & Holm, 1995). 

The school’s heralded outcomes in the late 1960s were not about academic success, but rather, 
about improved economic vitality, Navajo pride, and self-governance in the community. School 
jobs at Rough Rock doubled the local per-capita income. School board members acquired 
leadership and administrative skills for operating federal programs, which led to new facilities 
and roads, opening the door to the wider community (McCarty, 1989). McCarty (1989) reports 
the sequence of changes that occurred in response to Rough Rock’s demonstration: 

In 1968, Senator Robert Kennedy, then Chairman of the Special Senate 
Subcommittee on Indian Education, declared that “Rough Rock has proven its 
point . . . and should serve as a model for all Indian schools to study and 
emulate.” He also called for a “bold new statement of policy coupled with the 
commitment and resources necessary to carry it out.” Those resources followed 
in 1972 and 1975 when Congress passed, respectively, the Indian Education Act 
(adopted as Title IV amendment to the Elementary and Secondary Education 
Act), and the Indian Self-Determination and Educational Assistance Act. The 
legislation provided funds for bilingual-bicultural and adult education, and 
formalized the procedure for tribes and Indian communities to contract directly 
with the federal government for education monies. By 1976, six Indian 
communities had followed Rough Rock in contracting with the Bureau to run 
their own schools, several tribes had community -control led colleges, and 
hundreds of public schools across the country had Title IV funds for Indian 
education, (p. 492) 

The story of the school’s education program, however, is more modest. According to McCarty 
(1993), the bilingual/bicultural program at Rough Rock was difficult to sustain because of 
inconsistent federal funding and unstable and insufficient numbers of bilingual staff and curricula 
materials. Seeking stability in the early 1980s and an increase in student scores on norm- 
referenced tests, the Rough Rock school board adopted a commercial English basic skills 
program involving teacher-directed instruction (McCarty, 1993). During the period of its use, 
staff and parents observed that the students had “near-perfect English diction, but with little 




3 

7 



comprehension of oral English or text” (McCarty, 1993, p. 183). To move to a greater emphasis 
on comprehension, in 1987 Rough Rock partnered with the Kamehameha Early Education 
Program (KEEP). KEEP is an English language arts program (described in more detail in the next 
section) that emphasizes language and cognitive development through culturally congruent 
curriculum and activities and emphasizes comprehension rather than mechanics or phonics. In 
addition to the KEEP approach, teacher-researcher teams at Rough Rock developed and used 
thematic units and other curricula in Navajo. Classroom teachers also implemented 
“contextualized reading, process writing, cooperative learning centers, language experience 
activities, and questioning designed to encourage critical thinking (McCarty, 1993, p. 184). Three 
years later, between spring 1990 and spring 1991, K-3 students’ percentile scores in reading 
vocabulary on the California Test of Basic Skills “more than doubled,” though they were still 
below the national norm (McCarty, 1993). 

Two schools that like Rough Rock, are tribally run, are Rock Point Community School and Fort 
Defiance Elementary School, both also serving Navajo communities in Arizona. In 1971, Rock 
Point Community School became a tribally controlled school and received Title VII Indian 
bilingual funds to implement a Navajo-English bilingual program. Students learned to read and 
write first in Navajo; in second grade, students began learning to read and write in English. 
Thereafter, students read and wrote in both languages. In each primary classroom, two teachers, a 
Navajo Language Teacher and an English Language Teacher, worked simultaneously at either 
end of the classroom. Holm and Holm (1995) reported that the students alternated between 
working with the two teachers and engaging in independent work. At first, the faculty included 
both degreed and non-degreed teachers. Over time, through collaboration with a regional 
university providing on-site and off-site courses and practicum experience, about 50 educators 
and community members earned their degrees. 

Across the three core content areas of language arts, mathematics, and social studies (science was 
added later), instructional practices emphasized language and thought — “students were expected 
to show they knew what they were doing” (Holm & Holm, 1995, p. 147). The program also 
included curriculum-specific, criterion -referenced tests, high expectations, and coaching. 

Results of program evaluation conducted at Rock Point Community School supported the 
effectiveness of the Navajo-literacy-first instruction. Rosier and Farella (1976) compared English 
reading comprehension of the fourth- and fifth-grade students who participated in this program 
with national average achievement levels. For the Rock Point students, the typical one-and-one- 
half-year gap in performance between Native Americans and the national average was reduced to 
one-half year in association with Navajo-literacy-first instruction. Moreover, rate of growth in 
English reading achievement for students at Rough Rock Community School was faster over the 
three years between second and fifth grade than that for students attending non-tribally controlled 
Bureau of Indian Affairs schools (Rosier & Farella, 1976). Finally, close to 50 percent of the 
fifth-grade group who received the Navajo-literacy-first instruction scored at or above a grade 




8 



4 



equivalent of 5.5 (Rosier & Farella, 1976). Prior to the program’s implementation, no fifth-grade 
group averaged at or above a grade equivalent of 5.0. 

At Fort Defiance Elementary School, kindergarten and first-grade instruction was almost entirely 
in Navajo, with 40 minutes a day of small-group instruction in English. In second and third 
grades, students began learning to read and write in English; half the day’s instruction was in 
Navajo, half was in English. Thereafter, students read and wrote in both languages and 
mathematics was taught in both languages. Similar to the Rock Point curriculum, the Fort 
Defiance curriculum emphasized language and thinking. In addition, “process writing and 
cooperative learning approaches were extensively used” (Holm & Holm, 1995, p. 150). 

Academic results at Fort Defiance Elementary School showed that although students participating 
in the Navajo-literacy-first instruction performed as well on English language tests as Navajo 
students taught in English, their performance on English reading tests was slightly behind. 
According to Holm and Holm (1995), however, the Navajo-literacy-first instruction students 
performed far above the English-only students on standardized tests of mathematics and on local 
assessments of writing-in-English. 

Although not replicated at Fort Defiance Elementary School, the Navajo students’ English 
literacy achievements documented at Rock Point Community School are consistent with other 
research findings confirming the facilitative role of becoming initially literate in one’s first 
language before learning to read and write in a second language (Calderon, Hertz-Lazarowitz, & 
Slavin, 1998; Saunders, 2001). 

The conditions necessary for successful implementation of an elementary school program that 
teaches Native language and literacy first supports maintenance of this language, and teaches 
English language and literacy include (1) a bilingual faculty with low turnover and ample, high- 
quality learning opportunities, and (2) sufficient learning materials aligned with the sequence of 
content and skills emphasized in the bilingual curriculum assessed by the accountability 
measures. At both Rough Rock Demonstration School and Rock Point Community School, ten or 
more years was needed to create these conditions (Holm & Holm, 1995; McCarty, 1989; 
McLaughlin, 1995). Moreover, the conditions were created by collaborative efforts between 
community leaders and university faculty in nearby teacher preparation programs, and the 
ongoing, time-consuming efforts of successful grant-writing administrators (Holm & Holm, 1995; 
McCarty, 1989; McLaughlin, 1995). Often, McCarty (1989) observed, the efforts required to 
secure school funding diverted attention and energy away from improving the pedagogical 
program and caused discord between board members as they became invested in a multitude of 
different initiatives. 

This section reviewed empirical evidence for the effectiveness of primary grade programs 
emphasizing Indigenous language and literacy first, then English and bilingualism. The evidence 




5 



9 



is mixed and limited. On the one hand, achievement outcomes showed growth in reading 
vocabulary and achievement of grade-level competencies in reading comprehension (McCarty, 
1993; Rosier & Farella, 1976). On the other hand, at another site, reading performance was 
slightly lower for program students compared to non-program students, but local writing 
assessments showed greater achievement for program students (Holm & Holm, 1995). We also 
noted that the effectiveness of transitional bilingual programs, such as the ones implemented at 
the Navajo community schools, has been confirmed in schools serving Latino students (Calderon, 
Hertz-Lazarowitz, & Slavin, 1998; Saunders, 2001). Yet, in all these studies, the English 
Language Learners comprised a large majority of the schools’ student population. The relevance 
of these examples to schools serving populations with low percentages of Native American 
students, or students with other culturally and linguistically different backgrounds, is limited. 

Culturally Congruent English Language Arts . Demmert’ s (2001) review of research 
concludes that cultural congruence between Native American students’ home and schooling 
improves academic achievement. He bases this conclusion on the positive outcomes of four 
demonstration projects for native students in Arizona, Hawaii, and New Zealand. In reports (e.g., 
Stiles, 1997), outcome measures did not include academic achievement; instead, measures 
indicated increased attendance, reduced dropout rates, increased community pride, and 
strengthened sense of identity. The Hawaiian project, however, measured academic achievement. 

Cultural congruence, not bilingualism, characterizes the Kamehameha Early Education Program 
(KEEP) in Hawaii (Jordan, 1984). KEEP was developed in Honolulu in the early 1970s with the 
goal of improving achievement levels of low-income and at-risk Native Hawaiian students in 
grades kindergarten through three. As an English language arts program, KEEP includes a 
behavior management component that creates a social organization and peer interaction styles 
that are similar to Native Hawaiian sibling and companion group interactions at home. Four other 
features also distinguish KEEP: (1) a comprehension-oriented approach to reading instruction 
instead of emphasis on mechanics or phonics, (2) an emphasis on language and cognitive 
development, (3) use of individualized instruction with continuous monitoring of progress, and 
(4) a quality control system for teacher performance. 

KEEP classrooms are organized around learning centers in which high rates of peer interaction 
and help occur and satisfactory task performance per individual is expected. In addition, children 
in KEEP classrooms are divided into five or six reading groups, according to level of reading 
competence, that meet daily with the teacher. Each child attends five centers each day, one of 
which is always focused on the reading group lesson (Jordan, 1984). Moreover, during reading 
group sessions, teachers spend as much time as possible interacting with and coaching the 
members of the group. Classroom norms also are established so that other children do not 
interrupt the teacher working with the reading group. 



ERIC 




Tharp (1982) conducted two studies on the effectiveness of KEEP; one was conducted in a 
laboratory school, and the other in a sample of four public schools. After two years of 
implementation in the laboratory school, results supported the effectiveness of KEEP. Average 
standardized test scores in reading comprehension for children participating in KEEP were close 
to or above the 50th percentile compared to an average at the 23rd percentile or below for 
children in non-KEEP classrooms. When KEEP was implemented in 19 other classrooms 
spanning four public schools (serving mostly Native Hawaiian students in an urban locale), 
average scores on the Gates-Machinate and Metropolitan standardized reading tests were at the 
53rd percentile, while the average scores for children in comparison classes were at the 32nd 
percentile (Tharp, 1982). Children were not randomly assigned to type of classroom or school, 
but all participating schools were in the same locale, “an economically depressed belt of the city” 
(Tharp, 1982, p. 511). Moreover, systematic observations of KEEP and comparison classrooms 
showed clear differences in the instructional practices. During the English language arts period, 
teachers in KEEP classrooms spent 66 percent of the time teaching comprehension, while 
teachers in comparison classrooms spent only 30 percent of the time on comprehension. KEEP 
teachers also used criterion-referenced tests more frequently to monitor students’ progress and 
used small-group arrangements more often. 

In the 1980s, KEEP program developers also worked with teachers at the Navajo Rough Rock 
Demonstration School in Arizona. Modeling KEEP practices in the classroom, and observing and 
listening to the children, program developers helped Rough Rock teachers incorporate learning 
experiences that were culturally compatible with their Navajo students. The third-grade children, 
for example “clearly preferred — and often demanded — to hear or read a story through to the 
end before starting discussion, rather than discussing it in piecemeal successive sections” (Tharp 
& Yamauchi, 1994, p. 7). Evidence on the effectiveness of these experiences for developing 
children’s reading comprehension, however, was not available. 

With respect to written expression, our review identified culturally specific thinking patterns and 
discourse norms for Native American students, but found little evidence on the effectiveness of 
approaches that accommodated or built on these strengths. According to Sawyer’s (1988) review 
of reports written by teachers of Native American students, descriptive and narrative writing, for 
example, is easier for Native American students whose language tradition is oral. Unfamiliar to 
many Native American students, especially if accustomed to circular story grammars, may be the 
linear thesis-support-summary structure typical of the five-sentence paragraph and five-paragraph 
essay. “Most difficult for Indian students,” Sawyer (1988) suggests, “is comparison and 
argumentation because of a more harmonious sense of order that views certain Western cognitive 
processes (e.g., cause and effect, comparison/contrast, Aristotelian logic) as unnecessarily 
complicated and even untruthful” (p. 19). 

Sawyer (1988) emphasizes the importance of student motivation in learning how to write 
effectively. He advocates for, as do St. Charles and Costantino (2000), holistic approaches to 



ERIC 




writing instruction for Native American students. Holistic approaches combine listening, 
speaking, reading, and writing and embed grammar lessons in the context of writing as a means 
of communicating something personal and vital, usually through the process of revision rather 
than as a prerequisite to writing. Use of authentic language and literature and embedded skills 
instruction are practices consistent with recommendations for improving language arts skills of 
Native American students (Fox, 2000). However, we found no empirical evidence on the 
effectiveness of these approaches for developing Native American students’ writing. 

An alternative approach, and perhaps one that would complement the holistic, personalized 
approach advocated by Sawyer (1988) and Fox (2000), is to teach directly, and scaffold students’ 
use of, the skills and strategies needed to successfully write in ways required for school success. 
Wilcox (1996) provides limited evidence that such explicit instruction on strategies may be 
effective for Native American students. Wilcox (1996) conducted case studies on the use of 
TOWER + EDITS with two Native American students, one in seventh grade and one in ninth 
grade, both attending the Winnebago Public Schools in Nebraska. TOWER + EDITS is an 
acronym for Think, Organize, Write, Edit, and Rewrite combined with teacher-assisted EDITS 
(i.e., Embellish, Delete errors, Insert corrections. Tally progress, and Submit for grading). The 
acronym and sequence of strategies it stands for help students visualize and monitor their writing 
process. 

Wilcox (1996) analyzed the students’ writing samples from before and after TOWER + EDITS 
instruction for the number of words, number of sentences, length of sentence, and vocabulary 
grade level. The first student showed an increase in the number of words per essay, the number of 
sentences, and the length of sentences. Vocabulary use remained at the fifth/sixth-grade level. 

The second student did not have a pre-intervention writing sample; however, over five months, 
the student moved from refusing to write anything to writing essays that exceeded 300 words. 

To summarize, one program of research and development, the Kamehameha Early Education 
Program (KEEP), provided evidence of the effectiveness of culturally congruent English 
language arts instruction for Native Hawaiian students (Tharp, 1982). Findings were replicated 
across two types of settings (laboratory school and public schools). In the public schools, 
economic conditions were comparable and there were documented differences in instructional 
practices between KEEP classrooms and non-KEEP classrooms. These findings and study design 
features lend confidence to the conclusion that cultural congruence, rather than extraneous 
variables, contributed to the higher reading achievement of the Native Hawaiian students. 

The effectiveness of bilingual/bicultural programs, culturally congruent instruction, and explicit 
instruction on strategies in English language arts for Native American students is supported by a 
small amount of empirical evidence. Case studies of Navajo demonstration schools in Arizona, 
single-subject research in Nebraska, and program evaluation of KEEP in Hawaii show that these 
practices can be effective for improving Native American students’ reading and writing 




12 



performance (Holm & Holm, 1995; McCarty, 1989; Rosier & Farella, 1976; Tharp, 1982; 

Wilcox, 1996). This evidence is particularly limited by type of school population and locale. The 
majority of Native American students do not attend tribally controlled schools, but, rather, attend 
public schools where they are in the minority (U. S. Department of Education & U. S. 

Department of the Interior, 2001). In response to the limitations of existing evidence, the 
American and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda (U.S. Department of Education & U. S. 
Department of the Interior, 2001) calls for large-scale, multi-site research on the education 
experiences and outcomes of Native American students. A priority research topic is the level of 
Native American and Alaskan Native student achievement on standardized assessments by type 
of school and grade (U. S. Department of Education & U. S. Department of the Interior, 2001). 

Mathematics 

In mathematics, ethnomathematics is the recommended approach for connecting home and school 
and promoting academic success in classrooms and schools with culturally diverse groups of 
students. Although the principles of ethnomathematics are well articulated, and numerous 
curricular projects have been developed that are aligned with the NCTM Principles and Standards 
(NCTM, 2000), research on the effectiveness of ethnomathematics for Native American students 
is limited. 

Ethnomathematics is the study of traditional and everyday mathematics and the integration of 
findings from this study into the development and use of curricular methods and materials that are 
aligned with content standards (Brenner, 1998; Davidson, 1989). Ethnomathematics 
“acknowledges the value of the knowledge base that children themselves bring to school” and 
engages children in activities based on everyday mathematics in ways that help them “develop 
meaningful problem solving and greater mathematical power” (Brenner, 1998, p. 239). 

Brenner’s (1998) multi-year research and development in ethnomathematics led to several 
changes in a kindergarten and second-grade math program in the KEEP laboratory school in 
Hawaii. For one or two years, Brenner (1998) conducted ethnographic and cognitive research to 
learn about children’s everyday mathematics. She interviewed, observed, and assessed Native 
Hawaiian children attending the KEEP school during both in-school and after-school settings. 
Based on her findings, Brenner and KEEP teachers (1) altered the sequence of topics and 
textbook chapters to match what children had demonstrated was easier or more difficult to learn, 

(2) incorporated Hawaiian Creole English terms for some mathematics concepts into instruction, 

(3) added manipulatives to students’ independent work (e.g., block counting), and (4) added a 
game center with mathematical content to the classrooms. Compared to a control group, the 
children participating in the kindergarten classroom in which these changes took place scored 
significantly higher on a standardized math test. The control class averaged at the 54th percentile, 
while the experimental class averaged at the 82nd percentile (Brenner, 1998). Moreover, children 




13 



9 



in the classroom using the alternate sequence of topics and textbook chapters progressed faster 
through workbook exercises that children in the control classroom. 

Brenner’s (1998) experiences also revealed how use of everyday mathematics activities in the 
classroom can detract from developing children’s greater mathematical power. In a second grade 
classroom, where a school store was established to engage students in purchasing and selling, 
Brenner (1998) observed a lot of contrived tasks and mundane work running the store, such as 
counting the inventory, that were not mathematically challenging. These observations are 
consistent with warnings that ethnomathematics must avoid trivial cultural connections 
(Dukepoo, 1993, as cited in Nelson-Barber & Estrin, 1995). To help students develop deeper 
understanding and move from concrete and semi-concrete levels to more abstract mathematics, 
Davidson (1989) suggests use of systematic language activities, such as having students describe 
and explain their procedures and solutions, and create and solve story problems in writing. 

On a large scale, the work of the Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative (RSI), supported by National 
Science Foundation (NSF) grants, demonstrates application of the principles and practices of 
ethnomathematics to the reform of mathematics and science in rural schools. Focusing on 
mathematics and science, the Alaska RSI is a set of initiatives whose purpose is to study and 
document “the indigenous knowledge systems of Alaskan Native people and develop pedagogical 
practices that appropriately incorporate indigenous knowledge and ways of knowing into 
educational programs” (AKRSI, Year Three Report , n.d.b, p. 1). One component of the Alaska 
RSI is Elders and Cultural Camps, based on Kawagley’s (1999) model of Alaskan Native camps. 

The purpose of the Alaska RSI is to implement a set of initiatives to systematically document the 
indigenous knowledge systems of Alaska Native people and develop pedagogical practices that 
appropriately incorporate indigenous knowledge and ways of knowing into educational programs 

For Kawagley (1999), content standards should specify Indigenous knowledge and Eurocentric 
knowledge as complementary rather than competing learning goals. 

It is absolutely necessary that students learn Eurocentric concepts as well as their 
own ways of recognizing patterns, symbols, estimation/intuitive measurement, 
and ways of keen observation of place. Native students have to realize that our 
ways of measuring and knowing are identity-building processes, and that in- 
depth knowledge of these ways need not interfere with one’s being and 
connection to the earth. Native students can then pursue careers in mathematics 
and the sciences buttressed by a Nature-way worldview giving them a kind and 
polite disposition to the world, (p. 49) 

Kawagley (1999) proposes that learning activities in Alaskan Native camps be planned so 
traditional and Eurocentric mathematics and science are compatible with one another. Content for 
the camps should be selected judiciously, and students should evaluate its utility. He proposes 




three types of camps: Language Development Camp, Immersion Camp, and Bridging Camp. At 
Bridging Camp, for example, Yupiaq knowledge is taught by elders and augmented with useful 
Eurocentric science and mathematics. The following practices are used at Bridging Camp: 

• Traditional estimation/intuitive measurement is used; recognition of patterns and 
symmetry is stressed (without mathematical equations to confuse the issue — the 
universe is not all numbers). 

• The most useful Eurocentric scientific terms are determined and Native words for 
those terms are coined with help form elders and students. 

• In using the Eurocentric science knowledge and theories, students determine 
whether that knowledge will add to or detract from one’s Native identity. 

• Youth determine whether Eurocentric knowledge is useful and applicable locally; 
or whether it is just show and tell/extraneous knowledge. (Kawagley, 1999, p. 

48) 

Although evidence was not found on the impact of student learning when these particular 
practices have been implemented, the Alaska RSI evaluation results offer some evidence for the 
effectiveness of a similar camp. After participating in a regional science camp that exposed 
students to knowledge embedded in many traditional activities of the local Native people, middle 
school students showed a significant gain over their previous year’s academic performance and 
over the performance of a control group of students who did not attend camp (AKRSI, Year Four 
Report , n.d.b). Similarly, in a Montana school district serving a population with 49 percent of the 
students from the Crow tribe, Zwick and Miller (1996) found that culturally relevant, field-based 
science activities in a nearby wildlife preserve were effective for improving fourth-grade student 
achievement. 

Overall, the Alaska RSI outcomes are positive. Dropout rates have declined in Alaska RSI partner 
schools and the percentage of eighth-grade students scoring in the top quartile on standardized 
achievement tests in mathematics increased in Alaska RSI Partner schools, while the percentage 
stayed the same in non-Alaska RSI Partner schools during 1996 and 1997 (AKRSI, n.d.a). The 
Alaska RSI evaluators concluded that “the cumulative effect of increasing the connections 
between what students experience in school and what they experience outside school appears to 
have a significant impact on their academic performance” (AKRSI, Year Three Report , n.d.b, p. 
3). 

The conditions necessary for successful implementation of the principles and practices of 
ethnomathematics include time and resources to (1) identify culturally specific and everyday 
knowledge, (2) develop and field-test responsive curricular materials and learning activities, and 
(3) use formative evaluation to make adaptations and revisions. In both Brenner’s (1998) project 




i?. 



and the Alaska RSI, collaborative working relationships between researchers, community 
members, and teachers allowed access to elders and families for the study of culturally specific 
and everyday knowledge, and development of methods, materials, and programs that were 
aligned with both this knowledge and content standards from the more formal school curricula. In 
conclusion, the research and evaluation findings in mathematics education for Native American 
students suggest that curricula and practices that acknowledge and build on traditional and 
everyday mathematics are effective for improving students’ academic success. The evidence 
reviewed here, however, is limited to studies from only three sites, kindergarten and second-grade 
classrooms in Hawaii, a network of rural schools in Alaska, and two fourth-grade classrooms in 
one district in Montana. More research is needed to find, generate, and disseminate knowledge 
gained from studies in schools in a variety of locales and jurisdictions. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

This report reviewed evidence on the effectiveness of different education programs and practices 
for improving Native American student achievement in English language arts and mathematics. 
Case study and program evaluation reports indicate that in tribally controlled schools serving 
Navajo communities, teaching Indigenous language and literacy first, followed by teaching 
students to read and write in English and promoting bilingualism, helps students perform well on 
norm-referenced tests of reading vocabulary and comprehension and local assessments in writing 
(Holm & Holm, 1995; Rosier & Farella, 1976). Results of a program evaluation conducted in 
Hawaii indicated that a culturally congruent English language arts program significantly 
improved Native Hawaiian children’s achievement in reading (Tharp, 1982). In the KEEP 
program, children engaged in activities and instruction that emphasized comprehension over 
mechanics and phonics and allowed children to interact and learn in ways that were congruent 
with their everyday experiences outside of school. 

This report also summarized evidence on the effectiveness of mathematics curricula materials and 
instruction developed on the same principles of cultural congruence. In both an urban and rural 
setting, ethnomathematics led to improved student achievement for Native Hawaiian children and 
Alaskan rural middle school students (AKRSI, Year Four Report , n.d.a; Brenner, 1998). 

In all cases — the Navajo tribally controlled schools, the Hawaiian KEEP lab schools, and the 
partner schools of the Alaska RSI — the development, implementation, and ongoing 
improvement of curricula programs, materials, and practices required collaborative relationships 
and time. Local community members, educators, university faculty, outside researchers or 
evaluators, and local, state, or BLA agency officials collaborated to identify Indigenous and 
everyday knowledge and create culturally congruent education programs and materials. Time 
across multiple years was needed to conduct this research and development work. Moreover, 
members of the networks and teams needed to know how to function in two linguistically and 




16 

12 



culturally different worlds, apply for and manage outside funding from a variety of sources, and 
help teachers improve their practices through university course work, ethnographic research, and 
on-the-job mentoring and modeling. 

Unquestionably, the generalizability of the evidence reviewed in this report is limited. It is limited 
by type of school and locale. In response to these limitations, the American and Alaska Native 
Education Research Agenda (U.S. Department of Education & U. S. Department of the Interior, 
2001) calls for large-scale, multi-site research on the education experiences and outcomes of 
Native American students. A priority research topic is the level of Native American and Alaskan 
Native student achievement on standardized assessments by type of school and grade (U.S. 
Department of Education & U. S. Department of the Interior, 2001). 2 

Although limited in scope, the evidence synthesized is consistent with Demmerf s (2001) 
conclusion that “congruency between the school environment and the language and culture of the 
community is critical to the success of formal learning” (p. 9). Our synthesis confirms the need to 
replicate the collaborative research and development efforts reported in the studies included in 
this review. In schools serving Native American students who are not meeting standards, the 
following action steps are recommended to improve student achievement: 

1. Establish and support collaborative partnerships between community members, 
researchers, teacher education faculty, district- and school-level administrators, 
and teachers to create congruence between everyday, culturally specific 
knowledge from outside of school and the official content standards inside the 
school. 

2. Use interviews, observations, and informal assessments to explicate and develop 
understanding of students’ everyday and culturally specific knowledge, patterns 
of thought, and familiar ways of learning and social interaction. 

3. Support teams of teachers and external partners with time and funding to (a) 
evaluate the cultural congruence of existing curriculum and materials and (b) 
develop and/or adapt curriculum and learning materials that incorporate everyday 



2 

Researchers and technical assistance providers at McREL are planning to contribute directly and 
indirectly to this agenda by conducting research on Native American student achievement in one or more of 
the seven Central Region states: Colorado, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, and 
Wyoming. An overview of our plan for this research is provided in Appendix A. 



and culturally specific knowledge in ways that connect with content-area 
knowledge and skills. 

4. Establish benchmarks for learning that mark progress toward increasingly more 
powerful and flexible reading comprehension, communication, and mathematical 
reasoning. 

5. Develop or adopt multiple measures, including formal measures aligned with 
national content standards, to assess students’ attainment of the benchmarks. 

6. Establish observation protocols to document classroom implementation of the 
culturally congruent curriculum and materials. 

7. Use the multiple measures and observation protocols to support field-testing, 
collection of evidence, and revision of culturally congruent curriculum and 
materials so that students’ learning time is optimized and trivial matters are 
minimized. 



18 




14 



REFERENCES 



Alaska Native Knowledge Network. (1998). Alaska standards for culturally responsive schools. 
Anchorage, AK: Author. Retrieved August 15, 2002, from 
http://www.ankn.uaf.edu/standards/standards.html 

Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative (AKRSI). (n.d.a). Year four annual progress report: Executive 
summary (1998-1999). Retrieved August 1, 2002, from 
http ://w w w. ankn. uaf .edu/ Y earFourExecSum. html 

Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative (AKRSI). (n.d.b). Year three annual progress report 
( 1997-1998). Retrieved August 1, 2002, from 
http://www.ankn.uaf.edu/YearThreeReport.html . 

Brenner, M. E. (1998). Adding cognition to the formula for culturally relevant instruction in 
Mathematics. Anthropology & Education Quarterly , 29(2), 214-244. 

Calderon, M., Hertz-Lazarowitz, R., & Slavin, R. (1998). Effects of Bilingual Cooperative 

Integrated Reading and Composition on students making the transition from Spanish to 
English reading. Elementary School Journal , 99(2), 153-165. 

Davidson, D. M. (1989). An ethnomathematics approach to teaching language minority children. 
In J. Reyhner (Ed.), Effective language education practices and Native Language 
Survival. Proceedings of the Annual International Native American Language Issues 
Institute (9th, Billings, Montana, June 8—9, 1989). (ERIC document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 354 776) 

Demmert, W. J., Jr. (2001). Improving academic performance among Native American students: 
A review of the research literature. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural 
Education and Small Schools. 

Deyhle, D., & Swisher, K. (1997). Research in American Indian and Alaska Native education: 
From assimilation to self-determination. In M. W. Apple (Ed.), Review of research in 
education, volume 22 (pp. 113-194). Washington, DC: American Educational Research 
Association. 

Fox, S. J. (2000). Standards -based reform and American Indian/Alaska Native education. 
Retrieved August 5, 2002, from http://www.indianeduresearch.net/SJFox.pdf 

Holm, A., & Holm, W. (1995). Navajo language education: Retrospect and prospects. The 
Bilingual Research Journal, 19(1), 141-167. 




15 19 



Jordan, C. (1984). Cultural compatibility and the education of Hawaiian children: Implications 
for mainland educators. Educational Research Quarterly , 5(4), 59-71. 

Kawagley, A. 0. (1999). Alaska Native education: History and adaptation in the new millennium. 
Journal of American Indian Education , 59(1), 31-51. 

Lomawaima, K. T., & McCarty, T. L. (2002). When tribal sovereignty challenges democracy: 
American Indian education and the democratic ideal. American Educational Research 
Journal , 39(2), 279-305. 

McCarty, T. L. (1989). School as community: The Rough Rock demonstration. Harvard 
Educational Review, 59(4), 484-503. 

McCarty, T. L. (1993). Language, literacy and the image of the child in American Indian 
classrooms. Language Arts, 70 , 13-34. 

McLaughlin, D. (1995). Strategies for enabling bilingual program development in American 
Indian schools. The Bilingual Research Journal, 79(1), 169-178. 

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for school 
mathematics. Reston, VA: Author. 

National Center for Education Statistics. (1999a). The nation's report card: NAEP 1998 
mathematics state report: North Dakota. Retrieved August 2, 2002 from 
http://nces.ed. gov/nationsreportcard/states/profile.asp?state=ND 

National Center for Education Statistics. (1999b). The nation s report card: NAEP 1998 reading 
state report: Kansas. Retrieved August 2, 2002 from 
http://nces.ed. gov/nationsreportcard/states/profile.asp?state=KS 

Nelson-Barber, S., & Estrin, E. T. (1995). Bringing Native American perspectives to mathematics 
and science teaching. Theory into Practice, 34(3), 174-185. 

Reyhner, J. (Ed.). (1992). Teaching American Indian students. Norman, OK: University of 
Oklahoma Press. 

Rosier, P., & Farella, M. (1976). Bilingual education at Rock Point — Some early results. TESOL 
Quarterly, 70(4), 379-388. 

Saunders, W. M. (2001). Improving literacy achievement for English learners in transitional 

bilingual programs. In R. E. Slavin & M. Calderon (Eds.), Effective programs for Latino 
students (pp. 171—206). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 




20 

16 



Sawyer, D. (1988). The writing process and Native students. Canadian Journal of Native 
Education , 15(2), 15-21. 

St. Charles, J., & Costantino, M. (2000). Reading and the Native American learner: Research 
report. Olympia, WA: Washington Office of the State Superintendent of Public 
Instruction. Office of Indian Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 
451 026) 

Stiles, D. B. (1997). Four successful indigenous language programs. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 415 079) 

Tharp, R. G. (1982). The effective instruction of comprehension: Results and description of the 
Kamehameha Early Education Program. Reading Research Quarterly , /7(4), 503-527. 

Tharp, R. G., & Yamauchi, L. A. (1994). Effective instructional conversation in Native American 
classrooms. National Center for Research on Cultural Diversity and Second Language 
Learning (Educational Practice Report: 10). Retrieved May 22, 2002, from 
http://www.ncela.gwu.edu/miscpubs/ncrcdsll/eprlO.htm 

U.S. Department of Education & U.S. Department of the Interior (2001, November). American 
Indian and Alaska Native education research agenda in response to Executive Order 
13096. Washington, DC: Author. 

Wilcox, D. J. (1996, October). A visual strategy for teaching written expression: Meeting the 
challenge presented by students of Native American heritage. Paper presented at the 
Annual Conference of the Northern Rocky Mountain Education Research Association, 
Detroit Lakes, MN. 

Zwick, T. T., & Miller, K. W. (1996, January). A comparison of integrated outdoor education 
activities and traditional science learning with American Indian students. Journal of 
American Indian Education , 35(2). Retrieved June 20, 2002, from 
http://iaie.asu.edu/v35W35S2com.htm 




21 

17 



APPENDIX A 



The consequences of standards-based reform for Native American students are unclear. Some 
observers contend that the reform’s emphasis on stronger assessment and accountability systems 
has escalated pressures for standardization (Lomawaima & McCarty, 2002). From Lomawaima 
and McCarty’s (2002) perspective, high-stakes testing devalues the knowledge that American 
Indian students bring to school and jeopardizes their “life opportunities by threatening to deny 
them a high school degree” (p. 298). Our review suggests that in order to achieve equity and 
excellence through standards-based reform, implementation of culturally congruent curricula and 
practices needs to become a higher priority than implementation of high-stakes testing. For the 
Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative, the development and implementation of culturally congruent 
curriculum and practices is top priority. The progress of this initiative and other standards-based 
reforms for American and Alaska Native children needs to be carefully observed. Fox (2000, p. 
11) proposes that research on the implementation of standards for American and Alaska Native 
students be designed to answer such questions as: 

• Were content and performance standards developed with the input of Indian 
people? 

• Are Indian students receiving standards-based instruction? 

• Are Indian students being assessed with multiple measures? 

• Has Indian student achievement increased as a result of standards-based 
instruction? 

McREL researchers and technical assistance providers plan to conduct collaborative research to 
address questions such as those posed by Fox (2000) and to strengthen the evidence base 
regarding effective practices for Native American student achievement. In some of the Central 
Region states, assessment results suggest that many Native American students are not meeting 
standards. In Kansas, on the fourth-grade reading test of the National Assessment of Education 
Program (NAEP), 22 percent of Native American students performed at or above proficient 
(National Center for Education Statistics [NCES], 1999b). In North Dakota, on the fourth-grade 
mathematics test, 42 percent of Native American students performed at or above proficient 
(NCES, 1999a). In a year 2000 survey, local educators in the Central Region identified effective 
instruction for students with diverse backgrounds as a critical issue for which their districts 
needed assistance. McREL is addressing this need. 

Our research will be conducted according to procedures presented by Deyhle and Swisher (1997): 
(a) “formation of an advisory committee, (b) selection of trained Indigenous, bilingual 




22 

18 



interviewers, (c) preparation of culturally sensitive instrumentation, and (d) consent from tribal 
officials representing target communities” (p. 179). Initially, the research will focus on gathering 
demographic data to document numbers and distributions of Native American students across the 
region by type of school, grade, locale, accountability system, and achievement. Next, the 
advisory committee will identify and select key research questions about the effectiveness of 
educational programs, supports, and practices for improving Native American student 
achievement. A research design will be developed and implemented in selected schools during 
the 2003-2004 academic year. It is expected that the process and findings will benefit Native 
American clients in the Central Region states. 



23 

o 

ERLC 



19 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




Educational Resources tnlormolion Center 



NOTICE 



Reproduction Basis 



This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release (Blanket)" 
form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all or classes of 
documents from its source organization and, therefore, does not require a 
"Specific Document" Release form. 



X 



This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may be 
reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form (either 
"Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 




•F-089 (1/2003) 



