DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 467 995 



RC 023 684 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Fox, Sandra J. 

Creating Sacred Places for Students in Grades 9-12. 
National Indian School Board Association, Poison, MT . 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED) , 
Washington, DC. 

2001 - 00-00 

274p.; For other grade levels, see RC 023 681-683. 
R215C000058 

NISBA, P.O. Box 790, Poison, MT 59860. credit card orders: 
800-542-4922 (Toll Free) ($25.00 plus $3.95 shipping). 
Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC11 Plus Postage. 

Academic Standards; * American Indian Education; American 
Indian Literature; Class Activities; ^Culturally Relevant 
Education; Curriculum Development; High Schools; History 
Instruction; Integrated Curriculum; Language Arts; 
Mathematics Instruction; Science Instruction; Secondary 
School Curriculum; *Units of Study 



ABSTRACT 

This guide attempts to help teachers of American Indian 
students in grades 9-12 provide a culturally relevant education that takes 
place in the regular classroom, includes content related to Indian students' 
lives, makes students proud, expands to other experiences, and enhances 
learning. Creating sacred places means responding appropriately to students' 
academic, social, emotional, physical, and spiritual needs. Research has shown 
that to empower Indian students to learn, their school programs must 
incorporate their language and culture, involve parents and community as 
partners, provide appropriate instruction, and use appropriate testing 
methods. The approach presented here coordinates the teaching of various 
subject areas and reinforces classroom instruction with language and cultural 
activities by using American Indian literature as a basis for instruction. 
Materials and activities are aligned with challenging content standards. This 
guide outlines 24 thematic units, which include background information, 
relevant Indian literature, objectives, activities, evaluation methods, and 
content standards. Eight science-based units cover geology and fuel resources, 
care of land and animals, keeping the water supply safe, caring for water 
resources, caring for health, use of healing plants, abuse of alcohol and 
drugs, and Indian art. Eight social studies and history-based units cover 
tribal histories, before 1600, 1600s and 1700s, 1800-68, 1869-99, 1900-52, 
1953-2000, and water rights. Eight language arts-based units cover oral 
tradition and oratory, Indian stories, poetry, short stories, student writing, 
novels, drama, and essays. American Indian and Alaska Native authors are 
listed. A final section lists additional resources and sources for books. (SV) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 




* I 

G& 

! 

c*o • 
CM a 
Q ■ 




© National Indian School 
Board Association 2001 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 






U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

H This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

O Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 






• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Creating Sacred Places for Students 

in Grades 9-12 



8 Science-Based Units 

8 History/Social 
Studies-Based Units 

8 Language Arts-Based 
Units 




by 

Sandra J. Fox D.Ed. 



© National Indian School 
Board Association 2001 



This publication is based on work sponsored wholly, or in 
part, by the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
Department of Education, under Contract Number 
R215C000058. The content of this publication does not 
necessarily reflect the views of OERI, the Department or 
any other agency of the U.S. Government. 




ERiC 



4 



Contents 



Introduction i 

Creating Sacred Places 1 

Background, Materials, Activities, Standards for Science-Based Units 5 

Geology/Fuel Resources 6 

Care of Land and Animals 32 

Water 55 

Keeping the Water Supply Safe 57 

Caring for Water Resources 80 

Health 1 00 

Caring for Health 1 03 

Use of Healing Plants 116 

Abuse of Alcohol and Drugs 1 33 

Indian Art 157 

Background, Materials, Activities, Standards for History/Social Studies Units 1 83 

History/Lives of Tribal Groups 186 

Before 1600 190 

1600’s and 1700’s 194 

1800 to 1868 197 

1869 to 1899 200 

1900 to 1952 203 

1953 to 2000 205 

Water Rights 208 

History Standards 219 

Background, Materials, Activities for Language Arts-Based Units 237 

The Oral Tradition and Oratory 238 

Indian Stories 240 

Poetry by Indian Authors 243 

Short Stories by Indian Authors 245 

Student Writing 247 

Novels by Indian Authors 249 

Drama by Indian Authors 25 1 

Essays by Indian Authors 252 

Some American Indian/ Alaska Native Authors 254 

Language Arts and Math Standards To Be Addressed in Creating Sacred Places 

for Students in Grades 9-12 255 

Language Arts Standards 256 

Math Standards 260 

Where to Get Books and Other Resources 265 



O 



5 




o 

ERLC 



6 




INTRODUCTION 



This book is an attempt to help teachers provide the culturally relevant curriculum that 
has long been the dream of Indian educators. The relevant curriculum that we have 
envisioned takes place in the regular classroom, includes content related to the lives of 
Indian children, makes them proud, expands to other experiences and enhances learning. 

It used to be that there was limited funding available to develop culturally relevant 
curricula, and some materials were developed. Few of those materials are still available, 
and the funding has all but disappeared. There is a renewed interest in the dream, 
however, and now Indian literature is a resource that can provide the basis for a 
comprehensive culturally relevant curriculum. There are many more Indian authors 
writing books for children and more good Indian literature is being published. 

This document provides teachers with background, materials (Indian literature), and 
activities for 24 units: eight are science-based thematic units, eight are social 
studies/history-based, and eight are language arts thematic units, all for students in grades 
9-12. They are aligned with new, required science, social studies/history, language arts 
and mathematics content standards so that teachers are teaching what is expected of them 
and, at the same time, are making instruction more meaningful to the students. The units 
are to be taught in a multidisciplinary approach. This approach promotes close 
coordination and cooperation of regular teachers with each other and with cultural 
instruction teachers and their work. This is not a canned curriculum; it contains the 
ingredients necessary for a school to develop its own culturally-based curriculum for the 
high school level. 

This document also pays tribute to many: Indian and other authors who write books for 
and about Indians, Indian and other organizations that distribute books by and about 
Indians, Indian and other organizations that have made the improvement of teaching 
Indian children their aim, and teachers who have developed and implemented culturally- 
based curricula in their classrooms. 

Some of the materials and activities included here have been taken from the work of 
others. Some of the math and science activities included were developed by teachers of 
Indian students at summer workshops at Haskell Indian Nations University taking place 
from 1992-1994 or at the University of Kansas by teachers in the MASTERS (Math and 
Science Teachers for Reservation Schools) Project. Other science materials are from the 
Science Learning Center at Northern Arizona University. 



ERIC 



7 



I have not read every book listed in this document, and if I did, I would not be able to 
guarantee their being free of cultural bias or inaccuracies. I did utilize the publication 
Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Children by Beverly Slapin 
and Doris Seale to avoid books that may be offensive. I tried to promote books written 
by Indian authors. I recommend that sometimes books should be reviewed by local 
Indian people to be sure they are appropriate, especially if they are about their tribe(s). If 
it is found that a book is not acceptable to Indian people or to a tribe, especially, the book 
should definitely not be used. There is guidance for reviewing books and curriculum 
materials in Through Indian Eyes and in a document developed by the Indian Community 
School of Milwaukee fisted in the last section of this book. If the use of the approach 
outlined in this document works, it should promote a resurgence of local storytelling 
and/or the writing of more children’s books by Indian people. 

The development of this document is part of an effort of the National Indian School 
Board Association to provide an Indian model of school reform that includes the 
Effective Schools framework with several enhancements: tribal values and 
organizational culture; wellness, healing and prevention strategies; leadership based on 
vision, wisdom and courage; the Learning Record performance-based assessment system; 
and the integration of Indian curriculum. 

It is hoped that this document will be useful to parents, tutors, teachers, aides, 
administrators and school board members at schools where there are Indian students. I 
hope that Title IX and Johnson O’Malley programs can utilize it. I hope that parents who 
are homeschooling their children will find it helpful. I hope that teachers of nonlndian 
students will use it. 

Most of all, I hope this document will help students somewhere. I great ly enjoyed 
developing it. I hope others will find it useful as they strive to create sacred places for 
Indian young people. 



-SJF, Oglala Lakota, Albuquerque, NM 



CREATING SACRED PLACES 



Creating Sacred Places means responding appropriately to students’ academic, social, 
emotional, physical and spiritual needs. This document addresses improving the teaching 
of Indian students and empowering them to learn by addressing these needs. The 
research is quite clear on the matter. If Indian students are to be empowered to learn, 
their school programs must include four characteristics (Cummins, The Empowerment of 
Indian Students): 

1. Language and culture must be incorporated into the school program. 

Considerable research suggests that for minority groups experiencing school 
failure, the extent to which students’ language and culture are incorporated into 
the school program constitutes a significant predictor of academic success. 
Educators who see their role as encouraging their students to add a second 
language and culture to supplement rather than supplant their native language and 
culture are more likely to create conditions in which students can develop a sense 
of empowerment. Educators who see their role as getting their students to replace 
their home language and culture with English and white values in order to 
assimilate them into the dominant culture are more likely to create the conditions 
for student failure. Students who develop s kills in two languages have been found 
to have learning advantages over students who have only one language. 

2. There must be an unbreakable bond between school and community. 

When educators involve parents as partners in their children’s education, parents 
communicate to their children a positive attitude toward education that leads to 
improvement in the students’ academic achievement. Teachers operate along a 
continuum from collaborative to exclusionary. Teachers with a collaborative 
orientation work closely with teachers or aides fluent in the student’s first 
language and/or knowledgeable of the community in order to learn from them 
how to communicate effectively with parents. Teachers with an exclusionary 
orientation tend to regard teaching as their job and are likely to view collaboration 
with parents as either irrelevant or actually detrimental to children’s progress. 
Students can become empowered only when education becomes a true community 
enterprise involving an equal partnership between educators at school and 
educators in the home, the children’s families. In addition, the collective 
experience of the community must be used as the context for all learning in the 
school. 



1 




9 



3. Appropriate instruction must be provided. 

Research indicates that the learning difficulties of minority students are often 
caused by the way we teach them. These students frequently receive intensive 
instruction that confines them to a passive role and induces a form of “learned 
helplessness.” This kind of instruction follows the transmission model in which it 
is the task of the teachers to impart knowledge or skills they possess to their 
students who do not yet have these skills. The teachers initiate and control the 
interaction, constantly orienting it toward the achievement of instructional 
objectives. In contrast, the experiential-interactive model of instruction focuses J 
on giving students hands-on classroom experiences that provide students with a 
basis for understanding more abstract academic curricula. The interactive model 
also incorporates what we know about the relation between language and learning 
and promotes language-rich classrooms. The transmission model entails the 
suppression of students’ experiences. The experiential-interactive model entails 
an additive orientation toward students’ cultures and languages, an openness to 
collaborate with community resource persons, and active use of written and oral 
language skills. Learning styles of students must also be taken into account. 

4. Appropriate testing must be used. 

Classroom and psychological testing have disempowered and disabled minority 
students. Minority students are overrepresented in special education because of 
improper testing. To challenge the disabling of minority students, assessments 
must focus on the extent to which children’s language and culture are 
incorporated within the school program, the extent to which educators collaborate 
with parents as partners in a shared enterprise, and the extent to which children 
are encouraged to use language (both tribal and English) actively within the 
classroom. In other words, the primary focus should be on remediating the 
educational interactions that Indian children experience. Further, it is being 
recognized that, while formal testing has a role to play, its impact is considerably 
greater when combined with classroom assessment. The longitudinal observation 
and monitoring of student progress throughout the school year by classroom 
teachers yields valuable data and is much more accurate and fair than formal 
testing, thus the present emphasis on performance-based assessment. 

These four characteristics that address needs of Indian students must be considered 
carefully by every school seeking to educate Indian learners. Consider this quote from 
Ron Edmonds of the Effective Schools movement: 

We can, whenever and wherever we choose, successfully teach all children 
whose schooling is of interest to us. We already know more than we need 
to do that. Whether or not we do it must finally depend on how we feel about 
the fact that we haven’t so far. 



2 




10 



We are at a time when it is being demanded that schools produce higher achievement. 
Students must learn to read and write at higher levels, they must be able to solve more 
difficult math and science problems, they must be adequately prepared to meet the world 
and function successfully in the 21 st Century. We must change the way we do things in 
order to produce these results. Schools have been failing students. Part of the problem is 
that we don t do what we know should be done, as Ron Edmonds states. We don’t listen 
to what the research says. 

Schools are involved in various school reform activities at this time. Teachers are being 
asked to do many things including: 



align curriculum with the new content standards and new assessments, 

do a better job of teaching reading, writing and math, 

utilize an integrated approach to teaching the various content areas, 

teach for understanding and application and focus on depth, 

teach disabled and gifted students in the regular classroom, 

promote positive student behavior through a school-wide approach, and 

provide meaningful parental involvement in the instructional process. 

In addition, teachers of American Indian students are asked to: 

incorporate American Indian content standards, 

provide instruction for Indian students that is based upon research, 

provide culturally relevant instruction within the regular classroom, and 

promote the use of native languages to strengthen student’s language ability. 

This is only a partial list of the many things that teachers have to do. This document will 
provide assistance to teachers who really want to create sacred places for students and 
will help coordinate all that they have to do. 

Essentially, the approach presented here promotes coordinating the teaching of various 
subject areas and reinforces classroom instruction with language and cultural activities by 
utilizing American Indian literature as a basis for instruction. The materials and activities 
are aligned with the new, more challenging science, social studies/history, language arts 
and math content standards and American Indian content standards for each area. 




3 



11 



To use the approach recommended by this book, teachers must - 

1 . Work closely with the cultural instructors at the school or in the community. The 
regular teacher and the cultural instructor could team teach these units. If not, the 
cultural instructor must provide input to the regular teacher to help integrate 
culture into the regular classroom. A less effective approach would be that both 
the regular teacher and the cultural instructor teach the same topic, but separately. 
The science units provide good language immersion topics for teaching the native 
language while reinforcing classroom instruction. This would also be ideal. 

2. Decide what units to teach and what order to teach them in. If all the science, 
English and social studies teachers in the high school are using this book, they 
may want to determine which units or parts of the units each one will use. If you 
are the only teacher in those grades using this book, you may want to use all of 
the units in your teaching area(s) or only some of them. You should align them 
with what you are already teaching. You should collaborate with other teachers. 
For example, if a history teacher is teaching a certain period of time, the English 
teacher could utilize a piece of Indian literature that relates to that time, the 
cultural studies teacher can provide the local history relating to that period of 
time, etc. 

3. Decide what literature and activities to use. Of course, literature that deals with 
the local tribe(s) is best. You will want a variety of levels of literature to reach 
various students in your classroom. The example activities included can be 
adapted to your own tribe(s) and to the grade level you teach. Include your own 
ideas for additional materials and activities. Work closely with your librarian. 

4. Align the McREL standards with your own content standards. The standards 
included were developed by the Mid-Continent Regional Educational Lab 
(McREL) and summarize all the state standards. You will want to cross check 
them with the content standards your school has chosen to follow. Review the 
standards provided in this book to give you ideas for further activities and more 
cultural information. The language arts and math standards cover all the units. 

5. Plan a parental involvement strategy. Let the parents know what are studying. 
They will be interested in these topics and will then be more supportive of their 
students’ learning. Provide activities that involve parents and grandparents such 
as interviewing them about certain periods of history, their knowledge of the uses 
of plants, etc. 

6. Utilize good teaching strategies. Continue to utilize cooperative learning, have 
students read widely, use literature circles where various students are assigned to 
formulate questions for the reading, find interesting parts, etc. Many of the 
suggested activities are based on constructivism or project-based learning. Use 

a form of performance-based assessment to track student progress. 

4 



12 



• Background 

• Materials 

• Activities 

• Standards 

for Science-Based Units 




GEOLOGY/FUEL RESOURCES 



Geology is a field of science that directly affects American Indian people. It is the study 
of earth and rock formations and resources found in the earth. Resources such as coal, oil 
and gas are sources of energy that have contributed to more convenient lifestyles for 
American Indians and others. But they have also contributed to destruction. Many tribes 
and tribal members have received money for coal, oil and gas found on their lands, but it 
is usually not without a price. Land is destroyed and sometimes lives have been 
destroyed. The Osage Tribe in Oklahoma was particularly devastated by the discovery of 
oil on their lands. 

LITERATURE FOR GEOLOGY/FUEL RESOURCES UNIT - 

Morning Star, Black Sun, Northern Cheyenne Indians and America’s Energy Crisis by 
Brent Ashabranner, Dodd, Mead, 1982. 

Mean Spirit by Linda Hogan (Indian Author), Ivy, 1990. About the Osage. 

Sundown by John Joseph Mathews (Indian Author), University of Oklahoma Press, 

1988. About the Osage. 

Wolfsong by Louis Owens (Indian Author), West End Press, 1991. About open-pit 
mining. 

The Invasion of Indian Country in the Twentieth Century: American Capitalism and 
Tribal Resources by Donald L. Fixico (Indian Author), University Press of Colorado. 

Ecocide of Native America: Environmental Destruction of Indian Lands and Peoples by 
Donald A. Grinde, Jr. and Bruce E. Johansen. 

Section on Indian land in Our Brother’s Keeper: The Indian in White America ed. by 
Edgar S. Cahn, A New Community Press Book, 1969. 

Red Ribbons for Emma by New Mexico People & Energy Collective, New Seed Press, 
1981. 

All Our Relations: Native Struggles for Land and Life by Winona LaDuke (Indian 
Author), 1999. 

ACTIVITIES FOR UNIT - 

1 . Have the students learn about coal, oil and gas, the mining and drilling and 
uses of these natural resources, read cultural materials and hear cultural 
perspectives relating to this topic, and observe related impacts. 

6 




14 



2. Have the students do research papers on the use of products from coal, oil and 
gas in their area/reservation. What are the effects? Are there any negative 
effects? Are these products being used efficiently and conservatively? 

3. Have the students read about how the discovery of oil and gas affected the 
Osage Tribe of Oklahoma and about other exploitations of fuel resources on 
Indian lands. 

4 . Does the local tribe(s) have coal, oil and/or gas resources? Have the students 
do research to find out what the status is of the use of these resources? What 
is the rate of production? How has this affected the land and lives of the tribal 
members? List positive and negative effects. Have the students summarize 
their findings in written reports. 

5. Discuss the reasons for the fluctuation of oil and gas costs. What do oil 
and gas cost now? Why are these natural resources especially sought? 

6. How is mathematics utilized in the coal, oil and gas industries? Develop some 
problems and solve them. 

7. Have students observe a meeting of the natural resources committee of the 
tribal council. Have the class prepare questions and then invite a member of 
the committee to their class to answer questions the class may have. 

8. Have the class draw conclusions from their study of geology/fuel resources 
and make a power point presentation to others about the topic. 

Following are materials and example activities developed by teachers of Indian students 
who attended the MASTERS project at the University of Kansas and a math and science 
workshop at Haskell Indian Nations University. Adapt these activities to meet your 
students’ needs. Review the science standards for this unit. They will suggest further 
science and math activities. 



7 



O 

ERLC 



15 



Pierce Harrison 



by Wally C. Strong 



Mr. Harrison is employed with the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(BIA), Yakima Indian Agency, Toppenish, Washington, as a 
Supervisory Highway Engineer. He has been employed with the BIA 
for the past 17 years. He received a Bachelor of Science degree in 
Civil Engineering from Washington State University, Pullman, 
Washington in 1974. Civil Engineering is the branch of engineering 
that involves the planning and supervision of such large scale 
construction projects as bridges, dams, tunnels and highways. How 
did Pierce decide on a career in Engineering? 

In reminiscing about preparation for his career he looks back 
at high school. "I never had any problems with math, I liked 

chemistry, I was good in chemistry. I didn't know what Engineering 
was. I wanted to work on heavy equipment. I heard some people 
talk about the ’big bucks' to be made in heavy equipment." Since 
civil engineers have to understand the use of cranes, bulldozers, 
power shovels and other heavy construction equipment, Pierce’s 
interests and the requirements for a civil engineering degree 
dovetailed. 

After high school Pierce was drafted into the Army. Upon 
completion of basic training he was shipped to Heavy Equipment 
Mechanic School. Next he was sent to Vietnam for two years and 

spent a tour of duty as a door gunner in a helicopter. 




16 



8 



ERIC 



o 

ERLC 



Upon receiving an Honorable Discharge from the Army he used 
his military schooling in Heavy Equipment to land a job with the 
State of Washington Highway Department, where he drove a 
snowplow on the highway through the Cascade Mountains on 
Snoqualmie Pass. His next job was on the Yakima Indian Reservation 
in Central Washington. He was hired by the Bureau of Reclamation 
as a Crane Operator/Oiler. In looking toward the future this job was 
top of the line; it was also a dead end for Pierce though. It was 
during his employment at the Bureau of Reclamation that he met his 
wife Linda. They decided that it would be in the best of both of their 
personal and career interests to return to college. So, they returned 
to college. Pierce studied for a degree in Engineering and Linda a 
Master’s degree in Community College Administration - she already 
had a B.A. in Secondary Education. Their son, Pierce III, "Sonny" was 
born in the Washington State University college town of Pullman. 



Yes, we have our son, Sonny - he is quite active in a lot of 
things - has his special hobbies and sports, especially racquetball." 
Pierce, Sr. is proud of his son's capabilities. When asked if he is 
inspired by his family, he replies: "I never grew up or lived on an 

Indian Reservation. My father was employed off the Reservation. I 
think about my son," he reflects, "being able to go to school, make 
friends, attend traditional Native American get-togethers. I don't 
regret coming here. In fact, I will probably stay put, in my job, until 
our son graduates from high school. My wife Linda is employed at 
the Yakima Nation Cultural Center as a Manager of the Restaurant 
Enterprise, so we have our roots set for a while. Maybe later I will 
retire. I now have 17 years with the Bureau (BIA) and I'm thinking 






17 



9 



about getting a degree in Management, because we work with many 
contracts and there is a lot of legal contractual language to interpret." 

"So much to consider," Pierce ponders and returns to the 
original question of family inspiration. "I play racquetball, but Sonny 
is a good racquetball player. I’m a B player, my son is an A player. 
He is good enough for national competition. I put everything into 
helping our son." 

Are you inspired by what you do, your career choice as a 
Supervisory Highway Engineer? "When I was a senior at Washington 
State University I was recruited quite a bit," he recalls. "I narrowed 
my choices outside the Yakima Reservation to Standard Oil in San 
Francisco and Hercules Corporation in Utah. Although these were 
good long term prospects and offered good job security," he recalls, "I 
debated deep in my mind whether it was a mere minority tokenism 
offer. They would be hiring me because I was Native American and 
it would fulfill their minority affirmative action quota." 

"I ended up moving with my family back to the Yakima Indian 
Reservation. I had no job lined up, but I wasn't worried. I applied to 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs and was soon hired as an Engineer 
Technician at the Yakima Indian Agency, Toppenish, Washington. I 
have been here 17 years, and I enjoy living and working here. As I 
stated earlier I don't regret coming here." 

What is your work schedule? "I'm on the supervisory level, 

out in the field about 10% of the time. Some days I observe the 
Maintenance Crew who repair and resurface the roads. The 
Maintenance Crew also takes care of the roadsides, shoulders and 
bridges. They are responsible for snow and ice removal, putting up 





10 



18 



road signs and painting the road stripes. On other days I observe the 
Construction Crew, who clear the land and actually build the roads. 
Building roads first requires clearing the right of way of trees, 
stumps and other materials and relocating any buildings that must 
be moved. The next step is grading the road which means evening it 
out by leveling the hills and filling in the valleys. Next a foundation 
is laid and finally the road is surfaced. 

Besides the Bureau of Indian Affairs' roads, there are also the 
Yakima Nation Tribal Roads to maintain, roads to traditional areas, 
food gathering, cemeteries, long houses, churches. Sometimes we're 
caught in the tribal traditional political flack of maintaining the 
natural land area. 

"It is ironic that those with the common sense view of roads for 
the future are the elder people of the Tribe. They recall that the 
roads were for horses and wagons. The old people say, 'Today we 
have automobiles, trucks, that take us to our traditional areas. We 
need the roads built and maintained.' It is a question of how long 

the Reservation Closed Area is going to remain closed to non-tribal 
members. 

"We have short term and long term projects. A short term 
project may take a day or five years and include building such 
structures as bridges, manholes, culverts, and detours." 

"A long term project may be in the planning, approval and 
construction stage for 20-30 years. It depends on budgets, research, 
land use planning, who will be delegated to do the work, what kind 
of design, and what level of need it has. We need tribal members’ 




11 



19 



input, Tribal Council Roads Committee approval and either Tribal or 
Bureau of Indian Affairs' appropriation of funds. This can all get 
quite involved and technical," Pierce asserts. "Especially trying to set 
up the long-term planning. We try to set up a yearly plan in August 
and September complete with budgets, but the budgets are 
constantly being upset. In the future the roads system will be 

t 

incorporated into Land Use Planning." 

A degree in Civil Engineering requires many different science 
courses. One course that Pierce took was Engineering Geology. A 
highway engineer needs to be able to identify the kind of rock that 
one will be blasting into to construct a culvert or a bridge abutment. 
There are just three basic rock types: igneous, metamorphic and 

sedimentary. Igneous rock is volcanic in origin and it is this kind of 
rock that if found primarily at the surface on the Yakima reservation. 
Sedimentary rock is an aggregate rock made of fragments of other 
rock deposited by wind or water or material precipitated from 
solutions. Metamorphic rock is rock that has been changed by 

temperature or pressure. The different rock types require different 

types of machinery and different periods of time for removal. 
Different rock types are more susceptible to sliding or are not good 
for compacting. For Pierce's job it is essential that he have this kind 
of information. 

Pierce also tooks a soils course which helps him make the many 
day to day decisions that must be made. For road construction, if the 
soil is not naturally firm then it must be leveled off and packed by 
heavy machines. The base must be sufficient to support the surface 
and to keep out moisture. Pierce does a lot of soil testing and is 




12 



20 



especially interested in drainage patterns. He may have to make the 
decision about whether to add lime or fly ash to s.abil.ze or harden 

the SOil - . tVw. 

For the future Pierce states: "I. is hard to say whether 

Reservation will remain closed or decide to pursue, plan, des.gn, and 
research development enterprises where good roads are needed. 

Ski resort has been proposed, but the question ». do the trt a 
members wan. development, which would bring jobs, or do they 
want to keep a closed and traditional natural land area?" 

- lt is quite an interesting job," Pierce contends. I am 
responsible for planning the roads. 1 have to know where the people 
live where they wan. to go and how they wan. to get there. so 

need to know what products need to be brought to the reserva.ton 
and Where the users are. Traffic counts help me figure out how 
many when and wha, kind of vehicles use the reserva.ton roads. 

Pubim input is essentia, though and that's why planning is such a 
long process." 

Looking ahead to his own future Pierce says, "1 will retire tn a 
few years, maybe return to school to get an MBA (Management 
Business Administration) degree and start my personal 
consul, an, ship business. The things planned during my tenure as an 

Engineer will continue with those that step into my job. 

Sitting in his office, Pierce wears his hair in traditional long 
braids and dresses in a way in which he is comfortable, out in the 

field or in the office. He chuckles and states, "If someone wants 

, ran pet it It’ s just a matter of applying 

something bad enough they can get it. J 

oneself. Once while in college I hit an all time low, academically on 



3 

ERIC 



13 



21 



probation, but I also climbed to the top academically - Dean's List, 
4.0. So just hang in there - want it bad!" 



O 

ERIC 



14 



22 



activities 



1 . Have students do research and write papers on various kinds of engineering professions. 

„ „ letters to the American Indian Science and Engineering Society, the 

2 ' ,0 the local tribe(s) asking what kinds of engineers are 

being sought. 

3 If there are Indian engineers or engineer technicians in the area, have the class write to 
thfm Xvite them to make a presentation to the class about then jobs. 

4 Have the class write papers comparing the political issues 

to open the reservation to expand economrc development or to keep it more closed 

such. 



SCIENCE/MATH - 



"Energy is Where You Find It" 



CURRICULUM AREAS: Science 

Math 

Social Science 
Language Arts 
Art 



TIME FRAME: 



2-3 Weeks 



DESIRED LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
Students will: 

1. Investigate the positive and negative impact of the 
fossil fuel industries upon the students' lifestyles, 
their environment, and tribal economics 

2. Construct and illustrate the geological time scale 

3. Collect and interpret data relating to the fossil fuel 
industries 

4. Research issues concerning Native Americans, regarding 
the production and use of fossil fuels 

5. Identify and/or define pertinent vocabulary and 
abbreviations 

6. Construct and assemble a portfolio of all materials 
developed in the unit to include one written request for 
additional information on a subject of his/her interest 
relevant to fossil fuels. 



TEACHER'S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 



Among Native American people, there are many stories that reflect 
the values and beliefs of Native people about natural resources 
that are found within Mother Earth. The Nisgually of the Pacific 
Northwest tell the tale of Loo-Wit, the Fire Keeper (adapted from 



Keeper's of the Fire): 



© , 
"ERIC 1 







16 



“iU ^ on a 

g“bm£- V o° Ca p bUl i a 4 ry of 1 Dinoiaurs "and^Power " F ° SSil En * r9Y 

BIA-Bureau of Indian Affairs 

BLM-Bureau of Land Management 

SCS-Soil Conservation Service 

USGS-United States Geological Survey 

petrochemical 

petroleum 

geology 

fossil fuels 

injection well 

artisan well 

Bureau of Reclamation 

renewal resources 

non-renewal resources 

ACTIVITY ONE: DISCUSSION 

the students th « legend of Loo-Wit as summarized in 
®“okground Information. This story emphasizes the 
importance of treating Mother Earth with resoect as 

ftud2n^ r ° ted H b ^ *£? ^ otation «t the end of the summary The 

between 6 rllt hi * t0 identif y* define, and distinguish 

renew able and non-renewable resources. Bring 
pictures, examples, models, etc. to class. 

SXS'LJU* W 2 y of life, before the fossil fuel industries 
5®?“?, Wlth nodern day life. Ask "What does the need for 
fossil fuels do to the land?". 

" a l the students to research issues of concern to them and 

their people regarding the environmental impact the fossil 

fuel industries have had upon their lands. What are the 

la . nd ° f Strip ninin 9f coal burning, power 

5™™«.f nd d Z!‘ lllng 011 and 9 as. How can these 

desecrations be corrected? 



ACTIVITY TWO: INTRODUCTION 

Introduce and familiarize the students with the unit 
vocabulary and the abbreviations used for the various 
organizations. 

Have a display of various "Petrochemical Products" (see list 
background information.) Ask, "What do these products have iA 
common?" Have students generate reasons why the study of 
fossil fuels is important. students should brainstorm in 

: 25 



17 



in the beginning. The Creator was very generous and gave 
two tribes, the Klickitats and Muitnomahs , everything 
they could ever want. The people were greedy, however, 
always coveting whatever the other had. When The Creator 
saw this. He took fire away from then. When the people 
becane cold and niserable, they begged to have fire back. 
An old woman naned Loo-Wit was the only one who had fire 
left. The creator said "if you will share your fire will 
all the people, I will give you whatever you wish. Tell 
me what you want". "I want to be young and beautiful, 
said Loo-Wit" and so it was. Loo-Wit was instructed to 
"keep the fire burning to renind people that their hearts 
nust stay good and to give the fire to those who nade up 
their quarrels". 



When the chief of the Klickitat and the chief of the 
Multnonahs cane to Loo-Wit's fire, and saw how beautiful 
she was ; they both wanted to narry her and began to 
quarrel and fight again. This nade the Creator so angry 
that the chief of the Klickitats was changed into Mount 
Adans and the chief of the Multnonahs into Mount Hood. 

"Loo-Wit was heartbroken over the pain caused by her 
beauty and no longer wanted to be a beautiful young 
wonan. She could no longer find peace as a human being" 
and so the Creator changed her into the nost beautiful of 
all nountains. Mount St. Helens, which stands to this day 
between the other two nountains. "...it was intended 
that humans, too, should look at her beauty and 
remember ... to share the land and treat it well. If we 
human beings do not treat the land with respect, the 
people said, Loo-Wit will wake up and let us know how 
unhappy she and the Creator have become again. So they 
said long before the day in the 1980s when Mount St. 
Helens woke again." (Summarized from Keeper's of the 
Earth, pp. 41 and 43). 

The values and beliefs reflected in this story contribute to our 
understanding of the world view of Native Americans. Balancing 
these ways of understanding and living life with knowledge of 
natural resources is important for Native people as they work 
towards self-sufficiency for their tribes. 

Native American students should investigate the growing global 
concern about the use of fossil fuels and the economic and 
environmental impact the fossil fuel industries have upon the 
students' tribes and tribal lands, as well as upon society as a 
whole. v 



Reference materials from the BIA, BLM, MMS (see vocabulary list), 
and the Department of Energy are available for background 
information and student use. Please review them before beginning 
the activities in this unit. Also, make a copy of the sixteen page 
booklet, "Dinosaurs and Power Plants" for each student. 



* 




18 



26 



crrouns compare lists , and make a unified class list* 
?he tea^her P r'eads "Hhy Should We Study Oil and Gas” (background 
information) • 

Show the video: "Producing Oil- (contact thejureau 

Sscussrn ge a"nd nt ask t o^ ’again why we ’should study fossil 
fuels. 



ACTIVITY THREE: HISTORY 

Have the students read pages 1 and 3 of their booklet 
"Dinosaurs ana Power Plants then ^cow 

“^sL^ime" scale u^5 U^era! 

They should measure using the metric system. 

UnL 8 in the classroom or : hallway . If ne“ 
activity?"^ drcu^\h 9 e 0 triVinof a fo a ss P n C fuels and how they 

came £o Y be trapped in the earth. 



ACTIVITY FOUR: DRILLING AND WILDCATTING 



Have the Btudents read ffi 4, 9 ■ ™ 

"Dinosaurs and Power Plants . *"««« * * activ ity, the 

f ? S diits f will'tak2 a "core“ainplet" from the earth. To simulate 
strata? have the students layer bread, peanut ^tter,Jelly^ 
IS cheese. The peanut gutter represents the oil ™d the 

cheese is the shale ££S£J%, l«Zr5" • clear 

SSS5S straw!'*" Contact" an o“ P company for a real core 

sample . 

on is Where ycu find it s tf , nt s 

I i lices TO of S b t re'l P d?n elected Spot's, then t-n ^read over^n 
butcher paper. Students random y^ ^ place to discuss the 

“ana risks i^S^ln'arillin, for oil. 



ACTIVITY FIVE: OIL WELLS 

H the 

Yar^Ir than sSa bottles so that one of the two o 
£ll<!w will fit in their oil derrick. 



and oil 
derricks 
il wells 




19 



The two types of oil wells here are taken from activities in 
the book, 700 Science Exoeriments - 



1 . 



2 . 



Making a 'gusher' with compressed air: 

Secure a large narrow-necked bottle such as 
is used for soda water. Place a one-hole 
stopper in the bottle. Through the stopper, 
put a 10cm length of glass tube which has 
been drawn to a jet on the outside end. With 
a short length of rubber tube, attach a 
length of glass tube that will extend nearly 
to the bottom of the bottle. Fill the bottle 
about half full of water. Insert the stopper 
firmly and hold it in with your fingers. 
Next, blow hard into the bottle and when 
release the pressure, point the bottle away 
you. What happens? (#2, p. 85). 




The model of a hydraulic ram (#15, p. 107-8) can be 
adapted to represent an injection well. Since oil 
is lighter than water, injection wells are often 
drilled to force oil up through the oil well by 
injecting water down under the oil. 



Secure a soda water bottle from which the bottom 
has been removed. Fit the bottle with a one-hole 
rubber stopper carrying a short length of glass 
tubing. Connect this to a glass or metal T-tube 
which has a piece of rubber 
tubing on one end and a jet 
tube connected to it with a 
rubber tube as shown in the 
diagram. Fill the bottle 
with water and pinch the tube 
at the end. Let the water 
run from the end of the tube. 

Stop the flow suddenly by 
quickly pinching the tube and 
note the height to which the water squirts from the 
jet tube. Let the water flow and stop alternately. 




ACTIVITY SIX: 

The Burnham Chapter is a Navajo community located on the 
border of NE Arizona and NW New Mexico. It is presently 
a coal mining area, although previously uranium, coal, 
and gas were mined or produced there. Have groups of 
students read the "Burnham Resistance" article to answer 
these questions. 



1 . 



What benefits were the Navajo promised for the 
removal of these natural resources from the land? 

2. What were the threats to the Navajo people and 
Mother Earth? 

3. Why were the Navajo people opposed to removal of 
these resources? 

The last date mentioned in the article is 1981. Call or 
write the Burnham Support Group for an update on their 
progress to stop the desecration of Mother Earth for 
one's own benefit. 

Research and report on other areas having similar 
problems . 



ACTIVITY SEVEN - STATISTICS 

The students will make posters to present statistical 
information. For example, a poster which shows how a 42 
gallon barrel of crude oil is used for petroleum products 
can be made. Use the information sheet from the 
background information packet which shows how 100% 
of the crude oil is used. Students draw a large picture 
of a barrel (one meter high). Metric measurement can be 
used. Each whole percent will equal one 
centimeter and each tenth of a percent will be 
represented by one millimeter. Therefore, one meter will 
equal 100% and 9cm 8mm will equal 9.8% . 

Each group of students should come up with a different 
set of statistical information that could be represented 
by line graphs, bar graphs, circle graphs, etc. It is 
interesting to compare populations of countries with the 
amount of oil they consume and produce, for example. 



ACTIVITY EIGHT: TRANSPORTATION AND OIL SPILLS 

Generate a discussion about the desecration of tribal 
lands. Refer to the article titled "Burnham Resistance" 
in the teacher background information materials. 

Have the students read page 11 and complete the activity 
on page 16 of "Dinosaurs and Power Plants." 

Then they will do the "Oil Spill!" activities. 

This activity is taken from Earth Notes (Fall, 1991) 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
401 M Street, S.W. (A-107) 

Washington, DC 20460 



OIL SPILL! 

Nature begins to clean up the moment an oil spill occurs. 
The oil separates into heavier and lighter parts which 
are spread by winds and currents. Some of it evaporates 
and some of it is consumed by bacteria called 
"petrophiles . " For many reasons, however, people grow 
impatient with these slow natural processes. Success in 
cleaning up oil spilled in a lake or ocean depends upon 
human preparedness and rapid action. 

Using common household supplies, teams of students can 
test their skills during a miniature environmental 
disaster. To begin, you will need water and 10ml of 
vegetable oil. Also give each group of students a set of 
thp following materials: an aluminum pie pan or empty 

butter tub, 25cm sections of twine, a handful of sand 
paper towels, liquid detergent, an eye dropper, and 
newspaper. Have the students cover their work surface 

with the newspaper. 

As vou fill each pie pan with water, explain that an oil 
tanker has just sprung a leak on each "lake" and it is 

each team's responsibility to clean up ES^e^rio^ 
minimal damage to the environment. Describe the various 
techniques which are available to them. These include 
containment, using a circle of twine: recovery, using the 
eye dropper removal by sinking, using the sand: removal 
U absorption, using the paper towels: ahd 'dispersal, 
using the detergent. Allow groups a few minutes to plan 
their strategy, then add 2 drops of oil to their water 

and let them begin. 

Once everyone is finished, discuss the advantages and 
disadvantages of each method, drawing on the students 
experiences. What techniques were used to clean up the 
Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska? Was that effort 

successful? Do all methods actually eliminate the oil 
from the environment or do some only remove it from 
sight? When class is over, remember not to pour the 
rnrmi-aiiii nated water down the sink! 

(Adapted from an activity by Stephanie Martin and Rosanne 
W. Fortner in Oil Spill, OEAGLS Investigation #17.) 



CTIVTTY NINE: CULMINATION 

view the video, "Inspection of an Oil Well". 

(It can be obtained from the U. S. Bureau of Recl 2 m ^^°a' 
Natural Resources Section of BLM, Bozeman, Montana, 

59717. 

Ppsd Daae 12 and choose 3 of the 6 "Things to Do" from 
page f 3 of Dinosaurs and Power Plants to be completed in 
cooperative learning groups. 

an BE 




Using page 15 for addresses, students will request 
information on a fossil fuels topic of his/her interest. 

EVALUATION: 

Students will present a portfolio of materials and 
learning activities assembled representing their work 
during the course of this unit. 



RESOURCES : 

1. Bureau of Land Management, oil and Gas. Math and 
Science Workshop. Haskell Jr. College. 1993. 

2. Caduto , Michael J. and Joseph, Bruchac. Keepers of 

the — Earth t. Golden, Colorado. Fulcrum, 1989. d. 

31. K 

3. Heimler , Clark H. and Neil, Charles D.. Principles 
of Science Book 2. 4th Edition. Publisher, 
Charles Merrill Co.. Columbus, Ohio. 1979. 

4. U. S. Department of Energy. Dinosaur and Power 

Plants. Washington, D. C. . 1991. 

5. 700 Science Experiments for Everyone. Compiled by 
UNESCO. Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, Inc. , 666 
Fifth Ave., NY, NY 10103. 

6. Earth Notes. U. S. EPA. Communications, 

Education, and Public Affairs. 22k-1001, Fall, 
1991. 401 M Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20460 




31 



u 



’ETROCHEMICAL PRODUCTS 



Petroleum feedstocks provide us with 
more than 3,000 different products. 
Bere are just some of them. 



Ink 


House paint 


Mops 


Heart valves 


Rollerskate wheels 


Beach umbrellas 


Crayons 


Guitar strings 


Ballpoint pens 


Parachutes 


Ammonia 


Boats 


Telephones 


Eyeglasses 


Nall polish 


Enamel 


Ice chests 


Golf bags 


Transparent tape 


Life jackets 


Tool boxes 


Antiseptics 


TV cabinets 


Caulking 


Vacuum bottles 


Car battery cases 


Tape recorders 


Purses 


Insect repellent 


Curtains 


Deodorant 


Ice buokets 


Vitamin capsules 


Pantyhose 


Fertilizers 


Dashboards 


Rubbing alcohol 


Hair coloring 


Putty 


Shag rugs 


Toilet seats 


Percolators 


Epoxy paint 


Denture adhesive 


Skis 


Oil filter* 


Loudspeakers 


Tool racks 


Pajamas 


Movie film 


Slacks 


Upholstery 


Fishing boots 


Yam 


Hearing aids 


Candles 


Insecticides 


Car sound insulation 


Water pipes 


Fishing lures 


Dresses 


Car enamel 


Perfumes 


Cassettes 


Shower curtains 


Shoe polish 


Motorcycle helmets 


Credit cards 


FWroleum jelly 


Pillows 


Aspirin 


Faucet washers 


Clotheslines 


Permanent-press clothes 


Food preservatives 


Shower doors 


Golf balls 


Antihistamines 


Soap dishes 


Detergents 


Cortisone 


Shoes 


Sunglasses 


Dyes 


Tobacco pouches 


Glue 


LP records 


Refrigerator linings 


Fishing rods 


Vaporisers 


Electrical tape 


Linoleum 


Solvents 


Model cars 


Plastic wood 


Cigarette fitters 


Folding doors 


Soft contact lenses 


Roofing 


Floor wax 


Dice 


Cold cream 


Sweaters 


Trash bags 


Bynthetic rubber 


Sports car bodies 


Hand lotion 


Glycerin 


Tires 


Shampoo 


Rubber cement 


Dishwashing liquids 


Shaving cream 


Nylon rope 


Unbreakable di6hea 


Safety glass 


Fan baits 


Toothbrushes 


Awnings 


Umbrellas 


Combs 


Salad bowls 


Paint rollers 


Toothpaste 


Plywood adhesive 


Luggsgs 


Tents 


Cameras 


Antifreeze 


Hair curlers 


Anesthetics 


Refrigerants 


Lipstick 


Artificial turf 


Typewriter ribbons 


Ice cube trays 


Artificial limbs 


Footballs 


Electric blankets 


Bandages 


Paint brushes 


Tennis rackets 


Dentures 


Balloons 



~ 'O' 0 cups 




14 



32 



WHY SHOULD WE STUDY OIL AND GAS 

° If you were to be asked how important is the 
petroleum industry, you would probably answer by 
saying "very important"; however, few people 
understand the impact that the petroleum industry 
has on every man, woman, and child in the world. 

° In addition to products such as gasoline, diesel 
fuel, fuel oils, lubricants, kerosene, jet fuel, asphalt, 
etc.,' hundreds of other products are made from 
crude oil. 

° The petroleum industry is one of the largest 
customers of almost every other major industry in 

the U.S. 

° The petroleum industry today provides 75 
percent of our energy needs. Coal provides 19 
percent and 6 percent comes from other sources, 
such as nuclear, wood, geothermal resources, wind, 

sun, etc. 



33 

o 

ERIC 



25 



° The Petroleum Industry is made up of a 
mixture of Corporations and Companies, some very 
large and some very small. A major operating 
company may consist of a corporation that provides 
services throughout the world through thousands of 
interdependent organizations; whereas, the smallest 
may consist of a husband and wife company that 
operate and produce a small producing oil or gas 
well. 

° The U.S. has over 42,000 companies associated 
with the Petroleum Industry. 

° The petroleum industry is owned by over 3 
million stockholders. 

° The petroleum industry employees over 11/2 
million workers. 

° The petroleum industry pays enormous amounts 
of money in taxes each year. 

° Almost every citizen of the U.S. are customers 
of the petroleum industry. 




26 



34 



TRIBES THAT RECEIVE ROYALTY FOR OIL AND 



WICHITA, CADDO, DELEW ARE 
BLACKFEET 
F ORT MOHAVE 
CHEYENNE- ARAPAHOE 
CROW 

ASSINIBOINE-SIOUX 

HOPI 

JICARILLA APACHE 
CHOCTAW 
CREEK 






CHEROKEE, CHOCTAW, CHICKASAW 
CHICKASAW, CHOCTAW 
NAVAJO 
PAWNEE 
PONCA 

CHHjOCCO INDIAN SCHOOL 
CHIPPEWA-CREE 
SAC AND POX 
SOUTHERN UTE 
UTE MOUNTAIN UTE 
UTE (NORTHERN UTE) 
SHOSHONE AND ARAPAHOE 
TOHONO O’ODHAM/PAPAGO 
CITIZEN BAND POTAWATOMI 
ALABAMA-COUSHATTA 




A REVIEW 

MA.IQR PbTROLEUM REGIONS OF THE W ORLD 

LL rjsd Irom being primanly a Urmed dramatically illustrates t hie growing importance of the 

^ n and consumption pattern that ^.® s , twJ States « \ x faces th© challenge ot meeting its in- 

(S’S. .nd ^'®^l^r r ^i^o*rowi^*depinclen«*on S |OTeign sources. A summary o. the major 
Osinfl energy re ?, u !L wor |d and their relative impor tance is shown below. 

* ,r °' eUm " JjT ^inioLiuM REGIONS OF THE WORLD 

0 



0 

0 



realm 


percent 

OF WORLD 
POPULATION 1 


PERCENT 1 
OF WORLD 
PRODUCTION 


MAJOR I 

PRODUCING 
AREAS Y 


PERCENT 
OP WORLD 
CONSUMPTION 


PERCENT 
OF W0RL5 
RESERVES 


UNITED STATES 


6% 


16% 


TEXAS 1 

ALASKA 1 

LOUISIANA 1 


34% 


4% 


AMERICAN 




13% 1 


MEXICO ~ "1 

| VENEZUELA | 

CANADA 


1 6% 1 


1 1 3% 


EURASIAN 


64% 


33% 


U.S.S.R. 

CHINA 

UNITED KINGDOM 


54% 


Pl6% 


middle eastern 


2% 


25%T 


SAUDI ARABIA^ 

UAE 

IRAN 


3%~ 


|~559fe 




1 VI M 

1 NIGERIA 


3% 


12% 


AFRICA, AUSTRALIA 

and pacific 


fl9% 


13%" 


i liluUi nn 

INDONESIA 
1 LIBYA _ 



ERIC 



28 



36 



THE UNITED STATES 




RESERVES 






16 % 






The United States produces over 
3 billion barrels of petroleum 
a year, representing about 16% 
of the world’s total. Although 
still a major producer of petroleum, 
its percentage of the world’s 
production has declined steadily 
in recent years from the first half 
of the 20th century when the 
United States produced from 45 
to 60% of the world’s total. 



The United States currently 
consumes almost 34% of the 
entire world's production of 
petroleum. This figure is 
expected to increase drama- 
tically in the projected future 
with consumption almost 
doubling in the next few 
decades. These increases in 
the demand for petroleum will 
further aggravate the limited 
supplies available. 



Although the United States 
historically has been a major 
world producer of petroleum, 
its future is uncertain since 
only 4% of the known reserves 
of petroleum are located within 
the United States. This is further 
supported by the fact 
that fewer major discoveries 
are being made each vear, and 
those that are, require drilling 
to greater depths in increasingly 
remote areas. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



o 

ERLC 



29 



37 



SCIENCE STANDARDS ADDRESSED IN GEOLOGY/FUEL RESOURCES UNIT 

Standard - Understands the convictions scientists share about the nature of the world and 
what can be learned about it 

Benchmarks- , 

Understands how science improves its predictions and explanations of the world through the 

continuous testing, revising and occasional discarding of theories; this leads to better 
understanding of the world, but not to absolute truth 

Understands that science can inform (but not resolve) moral decisions and other matters that 
cannot be proved or disproved, by identifying the likely consequences of particular actions 

Standard - Understands the main individual, social, ethical and institutional aspects of 
science 

Benchmarks — ... 

Understands that the traditions of accurate record keeping, openness, replication and peer review 

keep the majority of scientists within the bounds of ethical behavior; violations of this behavior 
are eventually exposed and strongly condemned 

Standard — Understands essential ideas about the composition and structure of the 
universe and the motions of the objects in it 
Benchmarks — 

Knows that current, increasingly more accurate technological tools include visual, radio and x- 
ray telescopes that provide information across the entire spectrum of electromagnetic waves and 
computers that manage large and complex data 



Standard — Knows basic concepts about the earth 
Benchmarks — # 

Knows that energy storage in ancient plants is still available to us in fossil fuels, which provide a 
convenient, transportable fuel for vehicles 

Standard - Understands the cycling of matter and flow of energy through the living 

environment 

Benchmarks - 

Knows that millions of years ago, plants and marine organisms grew faster than decomposers 
could recycle them, resulting eventually in the stored energy of great coal beds and oil pools; and 
that the bur ning of these fossil fuels, rapidly releasing the stored energy back into the 
environment as heat along with carbon dioxide, has serious implications for our future 
Knows that human technology can upset the balance of ecosystems, forcing them to draw on 
their reserves of living and dead biomass which can result in soil leaching, the enlargement of 
deserts and other reductions in the fertility of land 



— McCrel Compendium of Standards 



30 




ERIC 



38 



AMERICAN INDIAN SCIENCE STANDARDS ADDRESSED - 

L^ansti^ente^oukl develop an of natural naterialsto 

through leachmg, the firing of clay to tr^ke 

traditional Indian ceramics. . j; 0 f kinetic and potential energy, heat and energy 

inditm students should develop an unde ^ Indian tectaologies such as 

Sow S’ »ow“ he use of heatrng stones, the thermodynanncs of a sweat lodge. 
f„S smdemsslumM develop an u^erstand^of the 

S 1C ^o^oSf ^an Indian — e Uefs such as the Mother Earth 
concept, reverence for water and wtnd, the power of the Cade. 

Science and Technology intprartion of science and technology - 

Indian students should develop the atohty to ^"1 scientific knowledge 

how new technolog.es ud™cej.en kn f sci( , ntific ski u s and knowledge 

are manifested in the development of American Indtan 

cultures, especially within then owntnbes ^ of knowledge about science 

SSTSS X"n SSSK. communities in such areas as natural 

resource development, management and conservation. 

understanding of various opportunities for science career. 



American Indian Standards by ORBIS Associates for Bureau of Indian Affaire 



31 






39 



CARE OF LAND AND ANIMALS 



All through history, animals have been important to Indian people for food and clothing 
purposes and sometimes for shelter. In the past, animal parts were also used for tools and 
utensils. Animals were, and are, a vital part of the cycle of life. 

When the Indian people killed a buffalo, they used every part of it. They did not waste 
any part. The respect for the buffalo and for the land he grazed on was very important. 
Without that respect the buffalo would not have been able to thrive. 

Until the middle of the 19 lh century, the lives of the Plains Indians were totally 
interwoven with the life of the migrating buffalo herds. The buffalo provided a 
wonderful assortment of gifts for people to use. Some of the gifts were food, clothing, 
shelter, musical instruments, games, tools and weapons, cooking pots, and carrying bags. 

Before Indians got horses, the Plains tribes followed the buffalo by foot. They used dogs 
to carry their goods. The horse changed the way that Plains tribes hunted buffalo. They 
rode these sturdy horses on buffalo hunts and during battle. Indians loved their horses 
and took good care of them. 

Today many Indian people are ranchers and use horses and dogs to help them in the 
raising of cattle or sheep. Some raise buffalo. The cattle, sheep and buffalo provide a 
livelihood for the ranchers who have learned how to best take care of their animals and to 
care of the land and plants necessary to raise them. They recognize the importance of all 
animals and plants in the natural system and view the earth as a mother that gives life to 
all things. 

LITERATURE FOR CARE OF LAND AND ANIMALS UNIT - 

Passing of the Buffalo in Keepers of the Animals or Native American Animal Stories by 
Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1997. Kiowa 

Buffalo Days by Diane Hoyt-Goldsmith, Holiday House, 1997. Crow 

Thunder Bear and Ko: The Buffalo Nation and Nambe Pueblo by Susan Hazen- 
Hammond. 

Gifts of the Buffalo Nation, Intertribal Bison Cooperative, South Dakota. 

Hokshila and the Red Buffalo by Moses Nelson Big Crow (Indian Author). Lakota 

Buffalo by Tiffany Midge (Indian Author), Scholastic Books. Stories from Seneca, 
Omaha, Ojibwa, Wichita, Apache, Kiowa 

The Secret of the White Buffalo, an Oglala Tale by C. J. Taylor (Indian Author). 

32 





i * r : 




40 



Dog People, Native Dog Stories by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author). 

The Horse and the Dog in Hidatsa Culture by Gilbert Wilson, J. &. L. Reprint Co. 

Vol 10. 

How Wad Horses Were Captured by Montana Conned for indian Education, BUhngs. 

0„t of the Saddle: Native American Horsemanship by G. Pony Boy (Indian Author). 

Horse, Follow Closely: Native American Horsemanship by G. Pony Boy, (Indian 
Author). 

American Indians as Cowboys by Clifford E. Trafcer. 

What’s the Most Beautiful Thing You Know about Horses by Van Camp. 

After Columbus: The Horse’s Return to America by Herman Viola, 1994. 

The Horsecatcher by Mari Sandoz. Cheyenne 

Legends of Our Times: Native Cowboy Life, University of Washington Press. 

. Mountains- Navajo Stories and Lessons from the Land, Rock Point 
C:ril a slol andian Author), University of Arizona Press. 

When the Navajo Had Too Many Sheep by George Boyce, Indian Historian Press, 1974. 

Navajo Livestock Reduction: A National Disgrace, Navajo Community CoUege Press. 

American Indian Environments: Ecological Issues hi Native American History, Syracuse 
University. 

The Indian Way, Learning ,0 Communicate with Mother Earth by Gary McLain, John 
Muir Pub., 1990. Choctaw 

Who Speaks for Wolf: A Native American Learning Story, A Tnbe of Two Press. 

A Natural Education, Native American Ideas and Thoughts by Stan Paddla (Indian 
Author), Book Publishing Co, 1994. 

Dwellings: Reflections on the Natural Work, by Linda Hogan (Indian Author), Norton. 

Words of Power: Voices from Indian America ed. by Norbert S. Hill, Jr. (Indian 
Author), Fulcrum Pub., 1994. 

33 



ERIC 



41 



ACTIVITIES FOR CARE OF LAND AND ANIMALS UNIT - 

1. Have students learn about care of land and animals, read cultural materials 
and hear cultural perspectives relating to this topic. 

2. Have the students research the importance of certain animals and plants to the 
local tribe(s). Have various students write reports on the most important 
plants and animals. 

3. Have the students research what is being done to care for various animals and 
plants in the area/reservation. What offices are in charge of these things? Get 
and read copies of their brochures or reports indicating their activities. 

4. Is there any overgrazing of the land? Are the deer overpopulated? 

Is erosion taking place? Are there other situations that may threaten the plants 
and/or animals? How is science applied? How is math applied? 

5. What kind of livelihood does the raising of livestock provide today? 

Compare it to the livelihood provided by the buffalo. What do ranchers have 
to do to care for the land? For animals? 

6. What does the class think about the cloning of animals? What animals have 
been cloned and where? 

7. Have the students draw conclusions from their study of care of land and 
animals and create a handbook on the matter. 

Following are example activities developed by teachers of Indian students who attended 
the Math and Science Teachers for Reservation Schools (MASTERS) Project at the 
University of Kansas and by Northern Arizona University’s Science Learning Center. 
Adapt these activities to meet your students’ needs. Review the science standards for this 
unit. They will suggest further science and math activities. 



34 



42 



Hashke Vildeswood Tsosi 

by Roger E. Tsosie 

"Sheep herding could be big business if land and water were in 
ample supply," said Hashke as he rolled a shiny pebble in his hand 
while tending sheep. 

Hashke, a Navajo, was raised in a beautiful land of mesas and 
canyons near Tselani Trading Post in the vicinity of Chinle, Arizona. 
He has lived in this part of the reservation for a long time, among the 
ever-enduring junipers and pinyon pine trees. "This place may look 
deserted; however, the Great Spirit of this clear-open-sky has kept 
everything in balance so that the animals, the plants, the ground and 
the sky are in perfect harmony," declared Hashke as he loaded 
another pebble into his sling shot. 

Hashke is a long-time sheepherder. He has never been to 

school to learn the ways of the Anglo world. He enjoys his lifestyle. 
His unity with the environment is obvious. As he rolls another 
pebble around in his hand and then loads it into his slingshot he tells 
us that this, this land, this place, has been his classroom. It is a huge 
open classroom and mother nature is his teacher. Hashke has been 
off the reservation only three or four times to work on the railroad 
as a seasonal laborer. 

When Hashke married a beautiful Navajo woman in 1953, he 
discovered that his new wife had many sheep without a 
sheepherder. He explained that since there was no one to care for 
his wife's sheep, he had to tend to the sheep. While sheep herding 



er|c 



35 



43 



seemed to be a tiresome assignment, he came to love ,t just ^ ^ J 

as he loved his Wife. "1, became a lifeume flung J^m ^ ^ 

"and of course if you were to stay mame an 

to fry potatoes and golden fried bread, cou 

C ' 0US th m y wife! It was like striking a golden concha 

resist, but to stay wi intriguing article 

be.,!” he chuckled. [A concha belt >s a umq 

A nr» the Navaio reservation around lo/U. 

Of adornment that appeared on the Navajo 

The circular or ovate plate gives the belt its name.l ^ 

Hashke claimed he was aware, to some exten , # 

Indian children were learning in their classrooms. 1 never sp 
• le day in a classroom like today's Navajo chtldren, 

claimed "Our children are very fortunate, and they should stay 
Ts OO. to -earn to count and discover the good things about our 

continued Hashke while motioning his dogs to r 

• n »T had t o learn the hard way out here in 

up the animals once again. 

the hills and canyons,” he protested. natura l 

Navajo children are learning much about them atural 

environments in school. They study biomes all over the globe, 

biome consists of all of the animals and plants that live » a reg, 
I a particular climate. They learn that the Navajo reservat.on has 
deserts, grasslands and coniferous forests. Gontferousjees ^re^ con $ 
bearing trees like pines and junipers which have nee ^ 

Because they loose a few needles at a time all year roun 

. ric Deciduous trees like oaks and maples lose 

often called evergreens. Deciduous ire 

all of their leaves every fall. They also learn that the name or 
scientists who study plants is botanists and for scienttsts who 

animals, zoologists. 

1C 36 44 




Hashke recalled that according to the Navajo marriage 
tradition, when a young Navajo man got married, he had to take on 
the responsibilities of all of the members of his wife's family. He was 
expected to immediately build his hogan near his mother-in-law, but 
he was to avoid eye contact with his wife's mother. To do so (even 
accidentally) meant misfortune or impoverishment. However, if he 
was clever to maintain eye avoidance, he was able to gain respect 
and even wealth within that family. 

This was the case with Hashke when he got married. Half of 
his wife's one-hundred-eighty-four sheep belonged to the rest of the 
family. "She claimed that they were her sheep!" he cried. He had to 
tend to those sheep from sunrise to sunset. And so, that's how he 
became a sheepherder, by marriage and by the expectation of his in- 
laws. 



There's something about those sheep," Hashke wondered, "they 
lack knowledge to spread out in pastures, but if you have a number 
of goats, say a ratio of four goats to every twenty sheep, then they 
pasture out evenly." He explained that the goats are like leaders. 
"They lead the flock and they move fast. The goats are very 
energetic; they can climb steep hills. But you have to be careful 
where you herd them or how you herd them among the hills," 
Hashke cautioned. "If they climb straight up into the hills, they lay 
open channels for water erosion when it rains, but if you allow them 
to move sideways then the rain or snow water will settle into their 
tracks and eventually there will be fresh vegetation for them," he 

said. Hashke has obviously had many practical lessons in soil 
conservation. 



ERIC 



37 



45 



Hashke's practical knowledge of conservation practices gained 
from sheepherding is often repeated in schools on the Navajo 
reservation. In science classes students study wise use of natural 
resources and good conservation practices. 

Hashke said that it was clever for a sheepherder to know 
something about predators, like coyotes. He said that his sheep eat 
only vegetation (herbivores), but that coyotes are meat eaters 
(carnivores). He explained that since coyotes are meat eaters, they 

may be very sly, and can quickly snatch one of your fat sheep. 
"Coyote is the snicker you have to be careful of!" he yelled. 

Hashke might be surprised if a Navajo student joined him for a 
walk and could identify an animal from a jaw bone found on the 
ground. In school students learn that carnivores have many sharp 
canine teeth to tear and shred meat and that herbivores have many 
large flat molar teeth along the sides of their mouths to crush and 
grind plants. 

A story, "Never Cry Wolf," often read by young students in the 
classroom, was described to Hashke at this time. ("Never Cry Wolf' is 
about a young boy who is herding sheep and alerts the townspeople 
that a wolf is nearby. There is really no wolf but he wanted to fool 
the people. He does this a second time and is reprimanded. The 
third time, when the young boy crys, "Wolf", no one comes. This time 
there really is a wolf but because of his previous behavior no one 
believes him.) At the conclusion of the the story, he chuckled and 
said, "Yeah, but the goats are wiser, because they can yell for help 
when they're being attacked. But the sheep, they act so innocent and 
never cry wolf!" 

•5 i 





38 



Through his many years of herding sheep, Hashke has kept the 
maximum number of sheep permitted by his tribe, in spite of 

weather conditions including seasons of drought . He has a Navajo 
Tribal grazing permit which allows him one-hundred-fifty sheep and 
eight horses. The permit has a statement that requires him to keep 
his livestock in the best of health. He attends a community chapter 
meeting once a month to be informed by the Chinle Agency Grazing 
Committee Members about the types of vaccinations needed to 
immunize the sheep against different diseases. Often he takes his 

injured animals to a veterinarian in Chinle for treatment. Hashke 

also uses herbal medicine for his sheep when he recognizes 

symptoms of specific diseases and knows the appropriate treatment. 

Hashke observes the night sky, the air movements, the clouds 
in the sky, the insects and the lengths of different types of grasses, to 
predict the condition of the coming winter. If a hard, cold, snowy 
winter is coming, the insects are plentiful and are very busy 

gathering food from early dawn to late in the evening. "For 
instance, he said, 'there would be countless red ants going every 
which way gathering food as though this is going to be the last 

winter!" When he finds an unusual amount of edible grass, above 

knee high, for sheep, "that indicates the height of the coming snow," 
declared Hashke. 

Hashke might be surprised to know that many scientists are 
interested in his observations because they also think that looking at 
patterns in nature helps predict the best planting and harvesting 

times. Phenology involves the recording of dates and times and 

weather for many natural phenomena (blooming times of different 

ERjt 



39 



47 



plants, the return of migrating bird species, the hibernation of 
animals, etc.) and using this information to predict other events, 

••Herding sheep is a great teaching too.," explained Hashice. I 
teaches you to be responsible, patient, loving and land. » teac es 
you to be a good decision maker. You could go on and on to na ^ ^ 
kinds of good qualities sheep herding has allowed me to eve op 
commented. He wishes that Navajo could keep gra.tng sheep, b 
kn „ws that the land is getting smaller because of ever popula g 
generations, and that the people are changing due to t e P 
education for the young people. However, "sheep her mg cou 

h' business . . .," he said, "because sheep prov.de income w e y 

' 8 ,. •• "You can shear the wool to trade it 

trade them to the trading post. You 

,0 ,be store or you can even weave the woo, into beautifu ha d 
Hashke, sheep herding is big business! 



O 

ERIC 



48 



40 




CONTENT QUIZ 

Is is true or false? 

1. Hashke's environment is like a huge open classroom with 

nature acting as the teacher. 

2. Hashke has been in school three or four years. 

3. Hashke believes the Indian children should stay out of school 

to learn about the environment. 

4. The goats act like leaders. 

5. There's less erosion if the sheep are herded sideways against a 

steep hill. 

6. The goats never cry "wolf." 

7. Hashke has a tribal grazing permit for 150 sheep and 8 horses. 

8. If he recognizes the symptoms of the disease and knows the 

appropriate treatment, Hashke uses herbal medicine to treat 
his animals. 

9. When there are countless red ants busy gathering food, Hashke 

predicts a hard winter. 

10. The sheep are both plant and meat eaters. 



O 




41 



49 




Synonyms 

Synonyms are 
in the left column 



Match the words 

r, >■ *• «* 



column. 

thrifty 

responsibilities 

prairie 

environment 

vaccinations 

erosion 



plenty 

poor 

destruction 

boring 

frugal 

duties 



destitute 

tradition 

tiresome 

ample 



custom 

shots 

grassland 

surroundings 




50 

ERIC 



42 



TSersuars-u: rtf. 7 - 

Write the letter on the line under each word. 



vegetation 



veterinarian 



symptom 



| pred 



ict 



kn owledge 



restrai 



D 



herbal medicine 






| economical 








pasture 





A. Understanding or wisdom 

B. An outward sign, such as fever 

C. To foretell or to guess before it really happens 

D. An open field or meadow 

E. Traditional plant medicine 

F. Not wasteful 

G. Plants 

H. An animal doctor 

I. To keep from doing something 



O 

ERIC 



43 



51 



WORLDS WITHIN YOUR WORLD 
An Overview of Local Habitats 
Student ' s Gui de 




Focus of Inquiry: Are you familiar with all of the different aeas or habitats 

of your tribal lands? Can you locate the different habitats on a local map 
and ecologically describe these areas? 



Tn this activity, you will first map out and color code the various habitats 
found on your reservation. You will then discuss these areas or habitats with 
an elder at home or from the community who has known the area for a long time 
and quite well. You will record this information and then pool it as a class. 
Finally, in class, you will be part of a group and together you will develop 
an overall profile or detailed description of one of the areas you have re- 
searched. You will combine ecological information and the information from 
home to develop the profiles. Again, these final profiles will be shared with 
the entire class. 



Why Is This Important? 

You will be more familiar with your own reservation environment. 
This can help you work with your environment to the best advantage 
and prevent misuse of it. 

You will gain skills of map creation and interpretation. 

You will learn and remember knowledge from your relatives. 

You may consider becoming an ecologist or working in Natural 
Resources, this activity gives you experience for those fields. 




44 52 





Procedure: 

Materi a 1 s : 



Phase I 

copies of reservation 
map 

set of colored pencils 



Phase II 

color-coded naps 
questionnaire forms 
tape recorder (optional) 



Phase III 

completed question- 
naire forms 

ecological profile forms 
display or presentation 
material s 



Phase I: 



^ ^s^cher will have his or her map on the overhead projecter and 

will be working there, while you have your nap and colored pencils 
and are working at your place. The teacher will ask you to suggest a 
color to represent a certain habitat. One of you will respond. The 
teacher will start a key by drawing a swatch of that color at the top 
of the map and adding the name of the habitat next to it. You will 
do the same. , 

2 The teacher will question you about the habitat: Where is it? What 

is it like? What are its important ecological characteristics? What 
is the habitat's name? 

3 After a short discussion, the habitat will be shaded in on the nap, 
and the name placed next to its color code at the top of the nap. 

4 Repeat this procedure for all the possible habitats. 

5 Add in other natural landmarks: rivers, springs, swamplands, moun- 

tain peaks, etc. Use special symbols to represent these landmarks. 
Write in their names in the tribal language. 

6 Discuss the overall picture; ask questions. Be sure that these areas 
are separate habitats within a general environment. 

A What is the name of your general environment? 

Phase II: 



To help you with this assignment, the teacher will pass out the 
questionnaire form which you will take home. You will discuss it, 
and the teacher will give you examples on how to do it. 

Take home your maps and questionnaires. As you have been instructed, 
interview a knowledgeable relative(s) or older friend and write down 
what they tell you. You may wish to tape record the conversation and 
then finish your forms. 

Bring the assignment back to class. The information may now be 
pooled and shared in class. 




45 



53 



Phase III: 



1 You will form groups. Each group will be responsible for a certain 
habitat. 

2 As a group, you will complete the ecological profile form for your 
habitat. Add in what you have learned from home. You may also ask 
other class members what they learned from home about your habitat if 
you need more information. Finally, everyone in class will fill out 
profiles of all habitats based on presentations in class sharing all 
information. 

3 Each group may either make a presentation to the class about its 
habitat or create a display about its habitat which gives more than 
enough information to the other students for them to fill out a 
habitat form. Whether you give a presentation or create a display 
for your habitat, you shnuld~NOT simply give only the information for 
the charts for other students to copy. Be creative; let the other 
students figure out the information from the wealth of information 
you provide in either your presentation or display. 

4 A review will be held in class. 

5 All work is to be turned in -- the color-coded maps, the interview 
forms, and the ecological profile forms. 

NOTE: You may make field trips to the various habitats either before or afte r 

this activity. 

Self Check: Do you know the following words? habitat, ecological, profile, 

color-coded, swatch, key, topography, geology, hydrology. 

Your teacher may evaluate you on your maps, interviews, group work, class 
sharing, and may give you a quiz or test on the subject of thi s acti vi ty . 

Going Further: You may wish to: 

(Re)visit the areas you have studied. 

Create a microhabitat in class. 

Write letters to appropriate authorities voicing concern about any- 
thing you have learned about your lands. 

Create color-coded maps of your state, the country or the world. 
Investigate the borderline areas between habitats. 

Create a map with all the names in your tribal language. 

Additional Resources: 

Ecology texts 
Local atlases 

Tribal history texts or other publications 
rofessional s in natural resources 
Local, state or national park employees 
Local hunters 

Local people other than the one(s) you spoke with for your interview. 

.'46 54 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Related Careers: You may wish to consider the following careers because the 

techniques you've used in this investigation are used by the following 
professionals: 

Ecologist 

Rancher 

Natural resource specialist 
Geographer 






55 



HAB ITAT PROFILE CHART 



NAME OF HABITAT: 



ALTITUDE: 



WEATHER CONDITIONS (throughout the year, include winds and precipitation): 



SOIL: 

topography and geology of the area. 




HYDROLOGY: (What or where is the source of water? What are the patterns of 

ter movement? Are there bodies ot.water?.).: 



DOMINANT PLANT (S ) : 



VARIETY OF PLANT LIFE: Very Much 

Number of different types of plants: 20-30 

ANIMAL LIFE: 







HAS THIS AREA BEEN DISTURBED BY PEOPLE? 



CAN THIS HABITAT BE IMPROVED? 



IF SO, HOW? 



SUMMARY: WHAT ARE THE MAJOR FACTORS WHICH MAKE THIS HABITAT WHAT IT 1ST 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



O 

ERiC 



K O 
48 Ot> 



LEARNING FROM YOUR ELDERS ABOUT THE LOCAL ENVIRONMENT 



Directions: Take your pap and this assignment hone to discuss the different 

habitats with an ol der , rel ati ve or friend. Find someone who is familiar with 
many areas of the local environment. Explain what you are doing and discuss 
each of the habitats on your map with your relative or friend. Give them good 
directions for where the habitat is located. Then for each habitat, ask the 
following questions: What is the area like now? What kinds of plants or 

animals might you find there? Is there water? What is the soil like? What 
is the weather like? What was the area like many years ago? How has it 
changed? Have people affected the area? What is the area good for? 

(You may find out alot of information about one habitat but little on another; 
simply do the best you can.) 

Use a separate sheet for each habitat and set it up like the sample below. 
★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ 



Name of Habitat :_ 

Person with whom you spoke (grandmother, grandfather, father, mother, aunt, 
uncle, cousin, friend, other: 

How far back can the person remember the habitat? 

What was said: 




O 

ERIC 



49 



57 



WORLDS WITHIN YOUR WORLD 
An Overview of Local Habitats 
Teacher's Guide 



Overview: It is surprising to find out how many students are unfamiliar with 
their reservation lands and their environmental characteristics. This activ- 
ity not only familiarizes the students with the overall ecology of their 
environments but also allows the students to learn from their elders about the 
historical and natural character! - sties of the different areas of the reserva- 
tion. 



The activity is composed of three phases. First, a local reservation nap 
is used upon which the students delineate various habitats and color/key code 
them. Then, in the second phase of the activity, students take their maps 
home, show them to their families, and gain information from members who are 
familiar with the history and ecology of the various habitats of the reserva- 
tion. The information from home is recorded and brought back to class to 
share. 

Objectives: The students will: 

-- Familiarize themselves with the habitats of their reservation lands 
(many of the students are not familiar with all areas of their 
1 ands ) . 

Delineate and code all the various habitats on a map of the reserva- 
tion. 

-- Research information about the various habitats of the reservation 
with family members or friends. 

Focus on one habitat in a group and share their information with the 
class through displays the group creates or presentations the group 
gi ves . 

-- Compose an environmental profile on each of the habitats from the map 
which combines information from the teacher, the text, their families 
and other cl assmates . 

Techniques and Information: Either from your introduction or from their read- 

ings, the students will need some background about what is meant by habitat, 
what determines and affects habitats, and other factors or ideas related to 
the concept of habitats. As you know, ecological terms and concepts are often 
confusing, and so it seems best that you approach the introduction in a way 
that is most effective for your students. In some cases, habitat may be 
described in terms of the abiotic factors. In other cases, the description of 
habitat involves an indication of environmental factors from the point of view 
of various species or biotic factors. In this case, since the students are 
first dealing with habitats geographically (the maps), you may want to 
approach the concepts of habitat from a more abiotic point of view. Then tie 
in the biotic with most of your concentration on the flora rather than fauna, 
since the names of the habitats are almost always based on the dominant 
species of plants. 



O 

ERIC 



50 



58 



Resources: You nay wish to consult with a cultural liaison to determine what 

is reasonable for the student to learn at hone to complement this lesson. If 
necessary, invite the cultural liaison to class to share additional relevant 
cultural information. 

A very good reference to use for your introduction is found in Modern 
Biology , which offers an entire chapter entitled "The Habitat." The chapter 
deals with terms and concepts or factors, such as the definition of habitat, 
limiting factors of the habitat, soil, temperature, water, light, the 
atmosphere, tolerance, niche, etc. As you analyze the habitat profile sheet 
that the students will be working with, you can see that these are appropriate 
topics to use for your specific introduction or for your larger unit in 
ecology, of which this activity may be a part. 

For local ecological information, you may find a wealth of materials in a 
comprehensive Environmental Impact Report or other governmental publications 
pertaining to the reservation. Often an EIR will provide not only long lists 
of ecological information but also maps delineating habitats, showing land 
use, topography, soil types, etc. These reports may be available through the 
tribe, the BIA, or other environmentally related offices. In these offices, 
you may find resource people as well who may give you leads about information 
appropriate for this activity. 

A wide variety of maps offering ecological information to the students is 
also available from the nearest USGS agency. Maps of the reservation should 
be available through tribal offices. Once you obtain a simple map of the 
reservation lands, make copies for the students and make an acetate copy for 
your use on the overhead projector (many thermofax or copy machines can do 
this). You will also need a set of colored markers which work on the acetate 
map to color-code the habitats. Before you use the maps with the students, 
develop a set of symbols for specific characteristics, such as swamplands, 
springs, irrigation land, etc. You may refer to standard maps for these 
symbols. 

There is some flexibility to this activity when it comes to the students 
visiting the habitats. It is obviously up to you to design the most appropri- 
ate and convenient arrangements for traveling far and wide. As a class, you 
may wish to visit the habitats specifically for this activity. Or, since this 
can cover many miles, visiting the habitats from an ecological point of view 
can be combined with visiting the habitats during the Bicultural Plant Collec- 
tion activity. It would help the students to know ahead of time, which area 
is the special habitat for which their group is responsible. Another alter- 
native would be to have the students visit the habitats on their out-of-school 
time as homework. At any rate, it is strongly encouraged that the students 
visit the habitats in conjunction with this activity. 

The students may wish to photograph the habitat for their displays or 
presentations. Another alternative would be that you photograph the habitats 
if it is impossible for the class to visit all the areas needed for this 
activity. The students may also want to do drawings depicting the habitat. 







O 

ERLC 



51 



59 



NOTE: Except for visiting the habitats, which can take place earlier in the 

year, this lesson plan is a good winter activity in that most of it takes 
place indoors. Also, since the students are to ask many questions of their 
elders, traditionally winter is the time to tell stories and relate informa- 
tion. 



For the third phase, the result should, be that each student has a Habitat 
Profile Chart completed for each habitat in the local environment. They do 
this by serving in a group which concentrates on one habitat and then all 
groups share information. In this way, all students wind up with all the 
information they need for each habitat. The students may like to serve in a 
group which works on a habitat that is of personal interest to them -- perhaps 
this is where they live, have land, or where they obtained particularly good 
information from their home research. The group size should be around 3 or 4; 
if there are not many habitats in the local environment you may wish to have 
several groups work on the same habitat. It will be necessary to make enough 
copies of the Habitat Profile Chart so that each student hJs the number he or 
she needs to report on each habitat being studied. 

In this third phase, the groups have a choice of how they are going to 
share their special habitat information with the rest of the class. Either 
choice they make--whether they give a presentation or create a display--the 
information they share should not simply be only the information that goes on 
the Habitat Profile Charts. They should provide an ecologically thorough and 
creative picture of the habitat which ties in the information from home. It 
will be from this larger source of information that the other ' students can 
find the information they need for their charts. 

For a display, the students may wish to include drawings, photographs, 
model habitats, collages, etc. For a presentation, the students nay again 
wish to use slides, drawings and other creations. The scheduling recommended 
would be to devote one day for students to tour the displays and find the 
information they need, and one day to hear the presentations for the informa- 
tion they need on those habitats. 

Evaluation: The Objectives may be used as guidelines when you design your own 

evaluation to this activity. (Don't forget to evaluate non-academic skills 
such as technique, a "willingness" to try or teamwork.) 

Extension: 

Visit or revisit the habitats, perhaps with elders. 

Recreate representative microhabitats in the classroom. 

Write letters to appropriate authorities voicing concern over 
specific issues in the environment revealed in this activity. 

Create similar maps for the state, the United States, and the world. 
Add in as many tribal names as possible to various places on the 
maps . 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



P, 



O 

ERIC 



52 



60 



SCIENCE STANDARDS ADDRESSED IN CARE OF LAND AND ANIMALS UNIT - 
Standard - Knows about the diversity and unity that characterize Bfe 

5 e ” Ch toUta diversity of organisms within a species increases the likelihood that at least some 
Knows that the diversity o e changed conditions 

members of the species wlU su ™^ “ mferred&om similarity in their molecular structure 

H=S3SE»“-— “ 

similarity of their DN A sequences 

Standard — Understands the genetic basis for the transfer of biological characteristics from 
one generation to the next 

Benchmarks- . - nmnonents called chromosomes, convey encoded 

Knows that genes the sub_ ^ ? f “ ce ll product, and can often be identified with a trait 
information directing the synthesis ot a cell pro 

^low^fii^ the us^g ^ 

X^Tp^ome^ic instructions used depending on a cell's nnmediate 

environment fnM A molecules and that inserting, deleting, or substituting 

tnSTcS gels; changes in DNA (mutations) can also occur when a cell . 
exposed to certain kinds of rt adiation 1 on to offspring; if change occurs 

£E£tl"s P Sig effeCt ° n ^ 

standard - Understands how species depend on one another and on the env.ronn.ent for 
survival 

“Stl interdependence ^I^of ySs 

Knows tim^eco^stems a , wa y^!^^ ^^^^^^c^fd^^rate^or hmdvertetd^^^m^^) 

floo^ or fire occurs, the damaged ecosystem is likeiy to recover 

in stages that yield a s y st ™ l^^check by one or more environmental factors; 

. - — ■ 

53 



O 

ERIC 



61 



Standard - Understands the cycling of matter and flow of energy throngh the living 

environment 

Benchmarks - . SUDDOrt is limited by the available energy, 

aMity ofecosystems t0 recycle ,he residue ofdead 

organic materials UDSet the balance of ecosystems, forcing them to draw on 

bioiLs which can result in soil leaching, the enhrgement of 

•* “■ organisms ’ as we “ 35 for ,he 
energy flow in ecosystems __ McCREL Compe ndium of Standards 



AMERICAN INDIAN STANDARDS ADDRESSED IN UNIT - 

Life Science , . j; no n f the fundamental tension between living 

Indian students should develop an understand g 0 f environments and resources and 

in order to relate : this knowledge to tradrt.ona, 
American Indian behefs about he interdependence of living thing . 

Science and Technolop . exnlain the interaction of science and technology - 

Indian students should develop the P ^ how new scien tific knowledge 

how new technologies advance^ient^c kn ld ^ inquiry skills and knowledge 

cultures, especially within their own tribes. 

Science in Personal and Social Perspectives contemporary contributions of 

Indian students should conservation and healthy ecological practices and 

^S^ma^Sions of modem science and technology to local, regional, national and 

global circumstances/problems. 



=s^^=sss;“— 



WATER 



Water is central to all life processes. It has been an important element in Indian cultures 
and is a sacred substance. There is a spiritual connection to the clouds and to the rains. 
Water is one of the four elements, with fire, air and earth, sometimes referred to as the 
Four Ancestors by Indian people. These elements are gifts and must be treated with 
respect. We cannot keep polluting our water sources. About 20 countries are currently 
water-scarce or water-short. The number is to double by 2020 (United Nations). The 
need to care for Mother Earth and her gifts has to be taught to all ages. 

Water and fish are important tribal natural resources. Water is sought by others for a 
variety of reasons, and tribal water resources have been taken or changed in ways that 
oppose tribal views and tribal sovereignty. 

LITERATURE FOR WATER UNIT - 

Gardens in the Dunes by Leslie Marmon Silko (Indian Author), Penguin. 

The Invasion of Indian Country in the Twentieth Century: American Capitalism and 
Tribal Resources by Donald L. Fixico (Indian Author), University Press of Colorado. 

Ecocide of Native America: Environmental Destruction of Indian Lands and Peoples by 
Donald A. Grinde, Jr. and Bruce E. Johansen. 

The Fight Against Garrison Dam in Of Utmost Good Faith ed. by Vine Deloria, Jr., 
Straight Arrow Books, 1971. 

Indian Land in Our Brother’s Keeper: The Indian in White America ed. by Edgar S. 
Cahn, A New Community Press Book, 1969. 

Four Ancestors: Stories, Songs and Poems from Native North America by Joseph 
Bruchac (Indian Author), Bridgewater, 1996. Includes selections about water. 

The Man Who Loves Salmon by Sherman Alexie (Indian Author). 

Rain: Native Expressions from the American Southwest by Ann Marshall. 

Green Grass, R unn ing Water by Thomas King (Indian Author), Houghton Mifflin , 
1993. 

Wind from an Enemy Sky by D’Arcy McNickle (Indian Author), Harper & Row, 1978. 
Solar Storms by Linda Hogan (Indian Author), 1995. 

55 




63 



ACTIVITIES FOR UNIT - 



1 . Have the students learn about water and water conservation, read cultural 
materials and hear cultural perspectives relating to this topic, and determine 
the local and tribal water situations. 

2. Have the students research to learn what the water source(s) are for the area / 
reservation. What is the source for the drinking water at the school? Are the 
water resources maintained and kept clean? 

3. How precious is water? What does it cost? How is it purified for the 
community? How much does it cost to purify the water? How much does an 
average family spend for water in a month? How much would it cost if a 
family had to buy bottled water? Other math applications? 

4. Have the class visit the local water system and water sources. 

5. Are water or fish tribal natural resources that are sought after by others? Have 
there been any problems for the tribe(s) regarding water rights? Has there 
been any taking or using of water resources by others? What have been the 
effects of this taking or using? 

6. Have the students read and discuss Indian literature about water and Indian 
people. 

7. Have the students draw conclusions from their study of water and write an 
article for the school newspaper. 

Following are materials and example activities for two units developed by teachers of 
Indian students who attended the MASTERS project at the University of Kansas and by 
the Outdoor World Science and Mathematics project at Northern Arizona University. 
Adapt these activities for your students. Review the science standards for this unit. They 
will suggest further science and math activities. 



56 




: :/4 



64 



Fred Charette 



By Richard Preite 

Water towers exist in almost every city. Some are larger than 
others but they all serve the same purpose . . . storage of city 
drinking water. Did you ever wonder how the water gets from the 

underground spring or reservoir or river to the top of the water 
tower and then to your faucet? What keeps these water towers 
working and what makes them a safe storage facility for drinking 
water? These interesting and important questions will be answered 
by Construction Representative, Fred Charette, of the Northern 
Cheyenne Indian Reservation in Montana. 

Construction Representatives are responsible for a lot of 
different jobs on the reservation. Fred must maintain the tank in 
which the drinking water is stored. He must test the drinking water 
to be sure it is safe to drink. He must be careful to maintain a water 
level safe enough to handle emergencies such as fires. He also 
monitors the reservation's waste water and designs wells, septic 
systems, sewer and water lines. 

He is also familiar with the operation of the entire water 
distribution system. There are two submersible pumps about one 
hundred feet underground. Each pump is six inches in diameter with 
a four inch pipe running from it. This pump propels the water at a 
rate of fifty-five gallons per minute into a six inch water main. On 
the water main there is a "T" going to the water tower which is a one 
hundred thousand gallon tank. The pump brings the water to the 




57 



65 



surface and into the service lines for the homes. Whatever isn't used 
will go up to the tank for storage. 

Fred has an automatic water control device called an Autocon 
that works off pressure from the main line. He has calculated the 
difference from that point where he takes the pressure off in the 
pumphouse to the top of the tank. There are 2.31 pounds/square 
inch of pressure required to raise water one foot. He has calculated 
it so that the pump turns off just prior to the tank overflowing. He 
has a twenty pound differential, meaning the pump turns off at 
seventy pounds and when the pressure drops to fifty pounds, the 
pump will start again and increase the pressure in the system until it 
reaches seventy pounds. 

What happens if everyone flushes their toilets at once? Well, 
Fred explains that there are two pumps and each is capable of 
putting out fifty-five gallons of water per minute. Mathematically . . 

. fifty-five gallons per minute multiplied by sixty minutes in an hour 
is a total of three thousand three hundred (3,300) gallons of water 
per hour. Now, let's say there are four gallons of water used every 
time you flush. Three thousand three hundred gallons per hour 
divided by four gallons per flush equals eight hundred twenty-five 
flushes per hour. You would have to flush toilets eight hundred 
twenty-five times in one hour to match what the pump is putting 
out. 

The pump doesn't know whether it is night or day. You can 
water your lawn all day long and the pump will put out this three 
thousand three hundred gallons of water per hour. But, at night, 
when all is shut off, it's going to catch up and fill the one hundred 



O 

ERIC 



i r 



58 



66 



has the night to 



thousand gallon tank. Because the system 
recuperate, it has been the only back-up Fred needs. 

Let's S ay there was a major fire or something that ac.ua y 

would tax the system. The lead pump would start out. Let's say tt 
couldn't keep up, then the second pump would kick in. Now, mstea 
Of three thousand three hundred gallons of water per hour, there are 
six thousand six hundred gallons and that is an awful lot- of water. 

There was one occasion in which there was not enough 
being pumped in. Fred discovered a leak in one of the pipes. The 
pump would pump the water upward but some would drop bac 
down from the leak. The water was just circulating. Needless to say, 

the pipe had to be repaired. 

Does the water in the water tower storage tank freeze? o, it 
sure doesn't. There is enough activity in the tank where it may 
freeze on the walls but not solid. There is just too much fluctuahon." 

Maintenance of the tank is another duty of Fred's. He must 
drain the tank completely to be cleaned, painted and resealed instde 
and out. Mastic, a plastic epoxy type of substance is used for 

painting and resealing water tanks. 

The whole process is done entirely inside the large tank. 

hois, is used to bring fans or other air-moving equipment to the 
tank. This is necessary due to the toxic odor of the Mastic. 

First, the inside must be sandblasted. Once completed, Fred 
must climb into the tank and measure the pits where the metal has 
corroded. He does this to determine whether or hot the skin of the 
rank will need to be patched. After the Mastic is applied, Fred must 
measure once again to determine the thickness. 



59 



67 



Fred comments that I have just asked some questions which 
could demonstrate another basic science concept. About the water in 
the tank freezing, that is an example of a physical change. Water just 
changes state. It goes from a liquid to a solid. But the corrosion of 
the water tank, that's a different matter. The metal has been 
oxidized or chemically changed by the reaction of oxygen and the 
metal tank in the presence of water. The metal tank is now a 
completely different chemical material where it has rusted and that's 
why the pits are there and why the tank has to be patched. The 
oxygen (O) in the air has combined with the iron (Fe) in the presence 
of moisture to form rust or iron oxide (Fe^0 3 ). "Now you know the 
difference between physical and chemical changes", Fred said. 

How much does the tank weigh? Well, water weighs eight 
pounds per gallon so if it is a one hundred thousand gallon tank, it 
would weight eight hundred thousand pounds. Now that's a lot of 
water. 

Fred is also responsible for maintaining high quality drinking 
water on the reservation. This requires a great deal of monitoring or 
water quality testing. At least once per week (Fred does it three 
times), the water must be tested for fluoride content. Fluoride is an 
important dietary supplement for the young and old alike. If the 
fluoride content is low, more is added. A sample is drawn and sent 
to a state certified laboratory for mandatory testing of several other 
chemicals. In addition, Fred takes a sample back to his laboratory 
and incubates it for 24 hours to see if there are biological 
contaminants. This is all Fred will test for in his laboratory. 





so 63 



If there is a break in the water line or the water line is opened 
for repair, the system is chlorinated to prevent biological 
contaminants. Chlorine is added to the water system to kill coliform 
bacteria or whatever else may be harmful to humans. This will kill 
most things in the water except Giardia. Giardia is a protozoan that 
comes from animal feces. It is commonly found in surface water 
and can also be found in ground water. Giardia can cause intestinal 
problems if untreated. If a contaminated system is discovered, a 
process called super-chlorination is utilized. Although there are 
some disadvantages of chlorinating a system, such as disagreeable 
odors or tastes, chlorine helps prevent waterborne diseases. 

In addition to monitoring drinking water, Fred also monitors 
the reservation's waste water. Fred draws water samples from 
sewage lagoons which are sent to the Environmental Protection 
Agency laboratory to make sure that streams in the area are not 
being polluted. 

Rarely are any chemicals put into lagoons. Occasionally in the 
Spring a perfume is added to mask the unpleasant odors. Also, 
enzymes may be added to activate bacteria. Enzymes (a group of 
chemical substances called proteins, which means they're made up of 
carbon and hydrogen compounds, do not enter into the chemical 
reaction but increase the rate of the chemical reaction) help bacteria 
grow and break up the solids in the sewer systems. There are not 
many problems with lagoons other than the odor. The Spring is 
particularly bad when the water "turns over". As the ice melts from 
the lagoons in early Spring the surface water, heated by the sun, 
warms up. When the water temperature reaches 4 degrees Celsius it 



ERIC 



61 



69 



sinks and causes the water beneath it to mix. (Density is 
temperature dependent and water is most dense at 4 degrees 
Celsius.) Soon, the water throughout the lagoon is at 4 degrees and 
even the slightest wind can cause complete circulation of the water 
from surface to bottom. When the nutrients on the bottom rise to 
the surface they bring along the bad smells cause by anerobic decay 
(decay without oxygen). This is why the odors from the lagoons are 
worst at spring turnover. 

Fred also has construction duties. He designs wells, septic 
systems, lagoons, sewer lines and water lines, and inspects work 
being done. If there is no engineer involved in the construction, Fred 
writes the specifications and puts the work out for bid, reviews the 
bids, and reviews submittals of various components that will be used 
in whatever kind of construction is being done. He also inspects the 
work as it is being completed to ensure that it is being constructed 
properly and to government specifications. Fred must sign a drawing 
of the construction so the contractor can get paid. Finally, an overall 
inspection is completed to make sure everything is right and nothing 
has changed since the preliminary construction inspection. 

In Fred's job understanding machinery and understanding 
energy are important. Fred knows that both kinetic energy and 
work involve motion. Anytime work is done, scientifically speaking, 
motion must be involved. The scientific formula for work is 
work=force x distance. This is represented by the equation: W=F x D. 

Force equals mass times acceleration or force is simply any push or 
pull that causes something to move or change its speed or direction 
of motion. Kinetic energy is energy possessed by moving things as a 



O 

ERIC 



62 



70 



result of their motion. (Energy is the property of something which 
makes it able to do work.) Potential energy is energy stored in an 
object as a result of a change in its position. Fred observes kinetic 
energy and potential energy every day. While the water is moving 
through the pipes it has kinetic energy but while it sits in the storage 
tank it has potential energy. Energy can not be created or destroyed 
but it can change forms. When the stored water moves down the 
pipes toward your kitchen faucet then the potential energy is 
converted to kinetic energy. 

As you have no doubt gathered, Fred's daily routine is 
frequently interrupted, thus, most of his days are varied. One of his 
official duties is acting as a consultant to the tribe. If they call him 
and need help with something, then he's obligated to stop whatever 
he is doing and assist them. 

Fred also helps the Indian Health Services staff recruit young 
doctors to the Indian Health Service field. He works with the recruits 
two or three days out of a six week period. They tour the 
reservation and Fred tells them what it was like just a short twenty- 
five years ago when they first started putting sanitary sewers on the 
reservation. Prior to that, it was privies and water from wherever 
they could get it. A few lucky families had pumps and driven wells. 
It was very unsanitary all the way around. 

There has been a tremendous change in the lifestyle and health 
of the Northern Cheyenne Indians living on the reservation. Fred 
relates that this has been his goal - to improve the health of the 
people on the reservation. "Whatever it takes to get there, that's 



O 

ERIC 



63 



71 



what I want to do. That's one of the more enjoyable parts of my 
work." 

He finds his career challenging and rewarding. It gives him a 
good feeling when health and living standards are upgraded. 

"I think I have the best of both worlds in engineering. I work 
inside designing systems and then I go out and actually watch them 
being built and finally, I get to see them in operation. I work with 
the whole thing - from surveying in the very beginning to the 
construction of a water or sewer line or a lagoon, the testing, and all 
the way through to operation. Then I get the satisfaction of seeing 

how many people it can help. I think I have the best position. A lot 
of engineers design things, send it out of the office and that s the last 
they see of it. I see the entire thing." 

Although Fred is an extremely busy man, he has time for his 
family, his church, and always a friend. He is not only interesting, 
but very cordial. He truly believes in what he is doing . . . improving 
the health of his people. His science background has helped him do 
this quite effectively. 



ERIC 



64 



72 



ACTIVITIES 



1 . Have the students do research and prepare written reports on the benefits of 
having fluoride in the drinking water. 

2. Have the students do research and prepare written reports on Giardia and how 
it affects people. 

3. Have the students do research and prepare visual presentations on the types of 
minerals found in the local water supply and what, if anything, is done to 
remove minerals. 

4. Have the students do research and prepare visual presentations explaining the 
types of chemicals used to purify the local drinking water supply and how the 
process works. 



65 73 



erJc 




VOCABULARY ACTIVITIES 




o 

ERIC 



66 



74 






















Across 

I. An act of surrender 

3. maintains favorable 

conditions for growth 

6. to get well or recover 

7. a spokesperson 

8. to shift irregularly 

II. A chemical compound 

containing Fluorine 

12. A shallow body of water 

13. to treat with chlorine 



Down 

1. Capable of being covered with 

water 

2. moving about 

4. Checking out the contour 
of the land 



5. Place for storing 
7. left over, remaining 

9. A gaseous chemical element 

used in water purification 

10. A protein substance that acts 
like a catalyst in chemical 

reactions 



14. One who gives advice 

15. Waste matter excreted from the bowels 



Word List: 

CHLORINATE 

CHLORINE 

CIRCULATING 

CONSULTANT 

ENZYMES 

FECES 




FLUCTUATION 

FLUORIDE 

INCUBATES 

LAGOON 

RECUPERATE 

REPRESENTATIVE 



RESIDUAL 

STORAGE 

SUBMITTAL 

SUBMERSIBLE 

SURVEYING 



67 



75 



Answers 






68 



76 






WHAT YOU DRINK IS WHAT YOU ARE: 
AN ANALYSIS OF OR INKING WATER 

Student's Guide 




Focus of Inquiry: How well do you know your drinking water? For example: 

When you drink water, do you know where it is from? 

-- Do you know what is in it? 

How do you know it is safe to drink? 

If you were in the environment, away from "civilization," how could 
you tell if the water is safe or how could you find water which is 
safe to drink? 

If in that situation, what techniques could you use to purify the 
water or make sure it is safe to drink? 

In this activity you will find answers to those questions through your experi- 
ments in lab and by visits and outings with water experts. One of these 
experts will be from the tribal community -- someone who is familiar with 
traditional ways of finding or preparing water which is safe to drink. The 
other expert will be an employee from the public water system. 



Why Is This Important? 

You will learn a type of survival skill which you may use one day to 
heTp you and/or others to live. 

You will be learning valuable techniques used by tribal members which 




may offer new techniques to other scientists or water experts. 

You will be performing laboratory techniques which may help you in 
college or in your profession. 

You will become more aware of your drinking water and the system that 
brings it to you. 

You will add to your understanding of hydrology (the subject of 
water) on your reservation. 

Based on this activity, you may make recommendations to improve the 
water situation in your community if it is necessary. 



Procedure : 

Materi a 1 s : clipboards, tape-recorder, equipment needed for the tribal method 
of water purification, graduated cylinder, collecting jars (plastic or glass), 
phenol pht ha 1 ei n , wide range and narrow range pH papers, pipettes or medicine 
droppers, 4% sodium hydroxide solution, safety goggles, 250 ml flasks with 
stoppers, solutions 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 as described in lesson plan, "Going with 
the Flow I II--Chemi stry of the Stream" beakers. 

Note: adequate eye protection is required in the laboratory. 

For the first part of this activity, you will have two visitors to class 
and you will go out into the field with them. Both of them will have exper- 
tise with drinking water. One of them will be a member of the community who 
knows traditional ways of purifying water or of finding pure water in the 
local environment. He or she will explain these ways and demonstrate them 
either in class or in the field. The other visitor will be someone familiar 
with the local public water supplies. He or she will explain and show the 
system to you and how water remains pure in this system. He or she will also 
demonstrate procedures of this system either in class or when you go out into 
the field. 



You will be taking notes or recording and transcribing (writing down) 
their talks. 

**WARNING: Since this is a laboratory experience, do not drink any of the 

water involved with this activity.** 

In the field 



The tribal expert and the water system expert may accompany you into the 
field for demonstrations and guidance. 

In sterile containers, you are to collect at least 300 ml of 4 water 
samples: one from a spring, one from a well, one before traditional water 

purification and one after traditional water purification. (If there is a 
judgment of good or bad water rather than a water purification technique, take 
one sample of what is considered "bad" water and one sample which is consid- 
ered "good" water.) 

Mark each jar with a number and, for that number, describe the water 
source below: 



0 

ERIC 



70 



78 



Sample 1: . . 

Sample 2: . 

Sample 3: . 

Sample 4: . 

Sample 5: Tap water. 

Sample 6: This will be distilled water you obtain in lab for the control in 

the tests you run on the above samples . 

Back in the lab .... 

1 For each sample, use a clean beaker which has been rinsed with 

distilled water. Pour approximately 100 mL of each sample into the 
individual beakers. Label the beakers. Using the wide range pH 
papers first, determine the pH of each of the 6 water samples. Then 
use the most appropriate narrow range pH papers for more accurate pH 
results. Record your findings on the pH graph on the data page. 

2 Using the procedure in "Going with the Flow 1 1 1 --Chemi stry of the 

Stream," determine the carbon dioxide content of your water samples. 
Record your results in the graph on your data page. Your teacher 
will let you know what to put on the vertical axis of your graph. 

3 Using the procedure in the same activity, determine the oxygen 

content of your water sample. Record your results in the graph on 
your data page. Your teacher will tell you what to put on the 
vertical axis of your graph. 

4 Determine the bacterial count of your water samples (both varied 

bacteria and coliform bacteria). Use the procedure in "Going with 
the Flow IV--How Clean is This Stream?" for bacterial plating and 
analysis starting at Step 2 "In the Lab ... " Record your results in 
the data chart on your data page. 

5 Make wet mount slides for each of your water samples. Scan the en- 

tire slide and estimate the number of protists (one celled organisms) 
in the water. Use the following code for recording on your data 
chart: 0 = none seen; + = one or two seen; +++ = between 2 and 4 

seen; ++++ = more than 4 seen. 



79 



71 



DRINKING WATER ANALYSIS 



I. £H 



DATA PAGE 



pH 



12 3 4 

water sample 



1 1 . Oxygen Content 



ppm O 2 



12 3 4 

water sample 



III. Carbon dioxide Content 



ppm CO 2 



12 3 4 

water sample 



80 
er|c 



72 



IV. BACTERIAL COUNTS 



Dilution: 


0 


1:10 


1:100 


1:1000 


1:10,000 


1 : 100,000 1” 1:1,000,000 


Water Agar 

sample Type 
















N.agar 

1 

E .agar 
















N.agar 

2 

E .agar 
















N.agar 

3 

E .agar 
















N.agar 

4 

E.agar 
















N.agar 

5 

E.agar 
















N.agar 

6 

E.agar 


















81 

73 



V. PROTIST OBSERVATIONS 



Sample § 


Rel at i ve Count 


1 




2 




3 




4 




5 




6 






■i < 



74 



CO 



Self Check: Do you know the following words? purify, hydrology, transcribe, 

distilled, data, bacteria, profile., liter, coliform. 

1 For each water sample, write a paragraph describing that water based 
on your data. Discuss its pH, oxygen content, carbon dioxide con- 
tent, bacterial count, and relative protist count. At the end, based 
on your description, answer these two questions? "Is the water fit 
for human consumption?" "Could a trout live in this water?" 

Hint: Here are the Federal standards for drinking water. Bacterial 

content: water is considered consumable if it has 5 coliform bac- 

teria per milliliter or less and 100 non coliform bacteria or less. 
Oxygen content: the range for a trout living in this water is: 4 to 

7 ppm of oxygen (7 ppm for a healthy life, 4 ppm for a somewhat un- 
healthy but liveable life). 

2 Rank the water sampl es. i n -.order . - Start with the water you would most 
-like to drink and end with the water you would least like to drink. 

Explain why you gave them this ranking. Support your answer with 
your data from your experiments. 

3 What were the differences between the "before" and "after" samples of 
water having to do with traditional techniques? 

4 If you had only one test to perform on water to determine its drink- 
ability, which one would it be. Why? 

5 Describe the scientific basis for traditional techniques of water 
purification or with traditional judgment of good/bad water. 

6 Based on what you have learned in this activity, what would your 
recommendations be for improving the drinking water in your local 
environment? Support your ideas with reasons from the data of your 
experiment. 

Going Further: 

Bring water from home to run tests on if it is different from the 
water you used in this activity. 

Research various illnesses which may come from drinking water. 

Learn other methods of finding good water or purifying water when out' 
in the environment. 

Look into water-related issues on the reservation, in the state, and 
in the rest of the country. 

Try some ideas and experiments on your own which may help improve the 
water in your community. 

Try setting up a home water purification system. 

Additional Resources: 

Environmental health specialists 
Chemists 

Tribal, state or federal agencies responsible for water in the area 
Individuals familiar with survival techniques in the "wilderness" 



Related Careers: You may wish to consider the following careers because the 

techniques you've used in this investigation are used by the following 
professionals: 

Hydrologist 

Chemist 

Environmental Scientist 
Traditional Water Expert 
Geologist 

Environmental Health Expert for the Tribe 




ERIC 



V 



76 



84 



WHAT YOU DRINK IS PART OF WHAT YOU ARE- 
AN ANALYSIS OF DRINKING WATER 
Teacher's Guide 



Overview: In this activity, the student takes an extensive look at drinking 

water in the local environment. Water is considered very important both 
culturally and technically on reservations. The activity begins with class 
visits and then field trips with two water experts--an expert of the tribe and 
a conventional expert. Their talks and information in class are followed by 
demonstrations and sample collections in the field. Extensive lab work then 
takes place in which the students test the samples of water for pH, oxygen 
content, carbon dioxide content and bacterial content. The students then 

analyze and compare the various water samples and purification techniques for 
human use. 

Objectives: The students will: 

-- “Hear, observe and practice the traditional techniques and beliefs 
dealing with drinking water. 

Analyze the information and techniques involved in the public water 

system. 

Enhance their understanding of the larger picture of hydrology on 
their reservation. 

Possibly develop some survival skills in finding and preparing safe 
drinking water. 

Apply the laboratory techniques of pH determination, titrations, and 
bacterial plating. 

Make recommendations for improving the local drinking water. 

Techniques and Information: You may wish to have the students draw up ques- 
tions for the water expert guests before the visits to the class and the field 

outings. Based on the guests' presentations, note-taking, tape recording, 
translation and transcription can be done by the students for language arts 
benefits. 

Since these laboratory procedures are rather complex, it benefits the 
students to repeat them so that the practice may improve their understanding 
and skills with these relatively sophisticated lab techniques. 

Be sure to read both the student's version and the teacher's version of 
tie lesson plan entitled "Going with the Flow Ill-Chemistry of the Stream" 
t ioroughly, as several of the lengthy and complex procedures in this experi- 
ment are drawn from that activity. 

Directions for preparation of all solutions for this activity are found 
in the Teacher's section of the activity, "Going with the Flow 1 1 1 — Chemi stry 
of the Stream." 

You may opt for using a commercial kit for this activity. Almost every 
major science supply catalogue has kits available; you'll find them listed in 
the index under "water testing." 



O 

ERIC 





77 



In bicultural matters, you may wish to first contact a cultural liaison 
to discuss what possibly the students may learn from a traditional water 
expert . 

Encourage the traditional member of the community to discuss or demon- 
strate: how to find pure water in the environment, how to purify questionable 
water, how to conserve water, the history of the tribe's water sources, and 
any traditional stories about drinking water. 

You may encourage the person from the public water system to talk about 
the system itself, how the water is purified, tests which are done to monitor 
the water, how to conserve water and the future outlook for the water supply. 

Each speaker should come to class on a different day and, preferably, go 
into the field with. the students on different days as well. Be sure to plan 
the field outing in consultation with the guest water expert. 

Determine which water samples will be collected during each field out- 
ing. Scout out the sites for water collection: well, spring, drinking water 
from tap, and the before/after traditional techniques applied to water. For 
the water sample reflecting traditional, tribal techniques, basically what you 
are trying to do is to get before and after water samples which flank the 
traditional practice for ensuring "good" water. The practice may either be an 
actual technical process of treating the water or using specific ways of 
judging good water. Basically then, if there is a traditional process, try it 
in the field or in the lab and compare water samples of before and after the 
process.. If there are specific ways of judging good water, get a sample which 
is traditionally considered good and one traditionally considered bad. 

The ranges on the Y ordinates of the graphs have been purposely left off 
so that you may set them up according to you r local water samples and so that 
they will reflect as sensitive a range as possible. This then requires that 
you do some of the lab work before the students do and let the students know 
what scale should go on the y ordinate before they begin the lab. 

Since there is so much lab work, you may wish to reorganize the lab and 
assign each team a sample. Then have the teams pool their information in 
class. 

Warn the students that they are NOT to drink any of the water in this 
activity because the water may be accidentally contaminated in the source or 
by the laboratory equipment and dangerous chemicals. 

Evaluation: The Objectives may be used as guidelines when you design your own 

evaluation to this activity. (Don't forget to evaluate non-academic skills 
such as technique, a "willingness" to try or teamwork.) You may wish to have 
the students answer the questions they find connected with the procedures 
taken from other activities. Answers to those are in their related teacher 
sections. 




86 



•BEST 



78 



Answers to questions in students' evaluation section: 



1 Look for good data and analyses of the data. Water is drinkable if 
equal to or better than the federal standard. Same as with the 
trout. 

2 Depends on student's data. Explanations should make "scientific" 
sense. 

3 Depends on the outcomes. 

4 Hopefully it would be the bacteria or microscopic examination for 
protists. Then again, if there were chemical poisons in the water 
bacteria and protists may not be able to survive in it. So perhaps 
this one is up for grabs for the students. 

5 Open to student opinion. 

6 Depends on outcomes -- up to student opinion. Try to encourage 
opinions based on data from the experiments. 

Extensi on : 

Students may wish to bring water from home to run tests on if their 
water is different from the water used in the activity. 

Tie in knowledge of drinking water with water-related illnesses. 

Students may wish to learn other methods of finding water or water 
purification when out in the environment. 

Look into water-rel ated issues on the reservation, in the state, in 
the rest of the country and in the world. 

Try some ideas, experiments, or projects with the class which may 
help improve the water in your community. 

Try setting up a water purification system. 




87 

79 



Chuck Hanson 

by Susan Brasgalla 



Chuck Hanson was born in 1959 on the Leech Lake Reservation 
in Cass Lake, Minnesota. He is a member of the Minnesota Chippewa 
Indian Tribe, also referred to as Ojibwa (or Ojibway). He attended 
public school in Cass Lake from kindergarten through grade twelve. 
The enrollment in Cass Lake Public Schools is approximately 50% 
Native American. 

After graduation from high school, Chuck chose to attend 
Brainerd Area Vocational Technical Institute to pursue a two year 
degree in the field of science. He had always been interested in 
science and nature and wanted to have a job where he could work 
outdoors doing science related activities. When he graduated from 
Brainerd AVTI he was employed by the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe 
as a water quality technician. 

There are seven Chippewa reservations in the northern half of 
Minnesota: Leech Lake, Nett Lake, Red Lake, Mille Lacs, Fond Du Lac, 
White Earth, and Grand Portage. Chuck's job is water quality testing 
on all seven of the reservations. He tests the ground water before a 
builder is allowed to dig a well. If the water doesn't meet drinking 
water standards, the well must be dug somewhere else. Drinking 
water standards are maximum levels of certain chemicals thought to 
be safe. These chemicals include elements such as arsenic (As), 
barium (Ba), cadmium (Cd) and lead (Pb) and compounds such as 
benzene (C^ H^). Elements all have chemical symbols which can be 

O 

ERIC 



80 



88 



o 

ERIC 



found on a chart called a Periodic Table. Compounds, such as 
benzene, are made up of two or more elements. Benzene is made up 
of carbon and hydrogen. 

Chuck must use special equipment to dig down to get a water 
sample. Sometimes he digs through black dirt or sand and 

sometimes through gumbo (clay), loose rock, or solid rock. If the 
material is too difficult to dig through then he must use a drill. After 
a well is constructed the water sample is then tested in a laboratory 
to see if it is pure enough to drink and if there are any chemicals in 
it that should not be there. 

Chuck also tests water around sewage facilities and septic tanks 
to make sure no impurities are going into the drinking water. 

Chuck keeps an eye on water levels in lakes too. The 
Chippewa people harvest wild rice and in order for it to grow, a 
specific water level must be maintained. Drought conditions can 

severely damage the wild rice crop and whenever possible water is 
pumped to the low rice beds from nearby lakes and streams. 

The town of Cass Lake is right next to a lake of the same name. 
Cass Lake is one of the lakes on the Mississippi River chain. The Cass 
Lake area has been designated as a target area to receive a Super- 
Fund allotment for cleanup of the lake. Super-fund legislation was 

passed in 1980 to provide for clean up of hazardous waste sites. A 
number of years ago there was a Champian Lumber Company that 
used a treatment on its wood products. Right next to the company 
was a settling pond where a large amount of chemicals from the 

wood treatment collected. The settling pond was half a mile from a 

channel that connected Cass Lake to Pike Bay, a neighboring small 

89 



81 



lake. Chemical contaminants got into the lake and also into the 
Mississippi River. Pentachlorophenol, a chemical that was once used 
to treat (preserve) wood, was one of the contaminants. The 
production of this chemical has now been outlawed because it is a 
known carcinogen (causes cancer). As a result of all this. Chuck must 
now test the lake water on a regular basis to monitor contaminant 
levels. He also checks wells in the immediate area and makes sure 
strict guidelines are followed to insure safe drinking water. People 
drilling new wells there have to be especially careful to make sure 
they have water they can drink. 

The largest part of Chuck's job involves a fishery owned and 
operated by the Leech Lake Band of Chippewa Indians. Chuck 
works with them monthly to test their water. The fishery has three 
six foot wells that are hundreds of feet deep to supply the water to 
their holding tanks. There is an agreement between the State of 
Minnesota and Leech Lake that allows the fishery to harvest rough 
fish. Rough fish are non-game fish such as suckers, bullheads, red 
horse, and burbot that have no limit on numbers caught. They keep 
these fish in the live holding tanks and Chuck must check the water 
in the tanks to make sure the pH levels (levels of acidity and 
alkalinity) are correct and that it is kept clean enough to keep the 
fish alive. The pH scale is a scale which indicates acidity and basicity 
or alkalinity. Acids are sour substances that contain a hydrogen ion 
(H+). Bases are slippery substances that contain a hydroxyl ion (OH-). 
A pH of 1 to 6 indicates acidity (the lower the number the stronger 
the acid), 8-14 basicity (the higher the number the stronger the 
base) and 7 neutral. The pH scale is logarithmic which means that 

ERIC 



R? 



SO 



every number is ten times greater (or less) than the number before 
it and ten times less (or greater) than the number after it. For 
example, water with a pH of 5 is ten times more acidic than water 
with a pH of 6 and ten times less acidic than water with a pH of 4. 
Water with a pH of 1 1 is ten times more basic than water with a pH 
of 10 and ten times less basic than water with a pH of 12. 

The workers at the fishery milk the fish for eggs. When the 
eggs hatch they use the small fish to restock area lakes. The water in 
the hatchery has to be strictly monitored by Chuck to make sure 
healthy baby fish can be born and survive to be released. 

Most of the people that work at the fishery are Chippewa 
Indians like Chuck and many of them use science in their jobs. John 
Ringly, the director of the fishery, has a college degree in aquatic 
biology. 

Brenda Northbird is in charge of the net making. The fishery 
makes different nets for different purposes to sell to people who fish. 
The nets are made of nylon and pointed weights and they are all 
hand tied. A trap net is used to capture fish like bullheads when 
they are ready to spawn so they can be milked for their eggs. Gill 
nets are to catch game fish like walleyes and northerns. 

There are also many Indian loggers that work to bring wood to 
the fishery. The water is heated for the hatchery in a boiler by 

burning the wood. 

Chuck has to keep a close eye on the sewage system at the 
fishery plant. They process over 35,000 pounds of rough fish per 
year and have a lot of waste materials. Fish scales can plug up the 
sewage system. If a plug up happens, water from farm wells in the 

ERIC 



83 



91 



area can become unfit to drink. It's part of Chuck's job to see that 
this doesn't happen. 

In a normal month Chuck gets to drive around one of the most 
beautiful states in the United States to collect his water samples. He 
sees the seasons change and enjoys the wildlife. He spends a lot of 
time with nature and uses science in his work. Life is going pretty 

much according to Chuck's plan. 




CONTENT QUIZ 

1. What does Chuck Hanson Do? 

2. What tribe does Chuck Hanson belong to? 

3. How much education after high school did Chuck have to have to 
become a water quality technician? 

4. What is the name of the place where they keep fish alive for 
milking? 

5. What is important about Chuck's job with the hatchery? 

6. Name the four things Chuck may need to dig through to get water 

samples. 

7. Based on the story do you think Chuck enjoys his job? 

8. Name two rough fish. 

9. What does Brenda Northbird do at the fish hatchery? 

10. Where does Chuck do his work? 




85 



93 



Match the numbered items on the left with the correct 
definition on the right. 

1 . water control technician 



2. vocational technical institute 

3. laboratory 

4. water table 

5. rough fish 

6. fishery 

7. hatchery 

8. milking 

9. contamination 



a. non-game fish 

b. process of getting eggs 
from fish 

c. person who tests water 

d. place where fish are 

kept to be milked and 
processed 

e. bad things like chemicals 

and pollutants that can 
get into the air and water 

f. place where water 
samples are tested 

g. school that offers two 
year courses 

h. place where baby fish 
are kept 

i. the level underground 
where water collects 




94 

86 



GOING WITH THE FLOW IV 
How Clean Is This Stream? 
Student's Guide 




Focus of Inquiry: Is there bacteria in your stream, and if so, how much 

bacteria is in the water? 

How clean is your stream? By doing this research activity, you'll find out! 
You will be collecting many different water samples from your local stream and 
testing them for the concentration of bacteria in the water. You will test for 
bacteria in general, and specifically for coliform bacteria. Coliform bacteria 
are bacteria that normally live in the human intestine. The presence of 
coliform bacteria such as E. coli is evidence of sewage pollution. This may 
indicate the possible presence of bacteria that can cause serious illness. 

You will find out how much bacteria is in the water by growing the 
bacteria on agar plates. There is a special ingredient in one of the types of 
agar which reveals the coliform or E. coli bacteria. 

You will use your findings to analyze the extent of pollution in your 
stream in several ways. First, you will detect differences in bacteria at 
different sites along the stream. Then you will uncover possible human 
effects on the types and amounts of bacteria in the stream. Finally, you will 
analyze the effects bacteria may have on other biotic and abiotic factors in 
the stream's community. 



Why Is This Important? You may find this activity important to do because: 

You will have a better idea of the degree of pollution in your 
stream. 

If there is pollution, you are in a better position to do something 
about the pollution by having statistical information about it. 

You will practice some lab techniques which you may use some day in 
college and/or professionally. 

You may prevent the spread of disease in your community by your 
awareness and action about bacteria in the stream. 



Procedure : 

Materials: 12 sterile bottles- for water sample collection, glass marking 

penciTj 56 Petri dishes containing nutrient agar, 56 Petri dishes containing 
Endo agar, 13 sterile pipettes, distilled water, 13 sterile beakers (any 
size), 10 mLincubator, colony counter (optional). 

In the field: 

1 Using sterile collecting bottles, collect samples of stream water 

from each of your 7 sites at your stream station. Label each bottle 
according to which site it is from, along with your initials. Then, 
along the stream at a variety of different sites chosen by your 
teacher, collect 5 more samples. Label each of these bottles S-l, 
S-2 etc. Describe the important characteri sties of the sites below: 
Site 1: 

Site 2: 

Site 3: 

Site 4: 

Site 5: 

In the 1 aboratory : 

2 For each sample, and for a distilled water control, organize 7. Petri 

dishes of nutrient agar and 7 Petri dishes of Endo agar. Label each 
dish with the water sample it will be for, and label each dish in 
preparation for the dilutions of the water sample inoculations it 
will receive. Refer to the data chart you will be using on the fol- 
lowing page. (Each sample and the control will have 14 plates pre- 
pared for it: 7 of nutrient agar; 7 of Endo agar. So there will be 

8 samples x 14 plates = 112 plates total.) 

A Why is it necessary to start with sterile glassware in this 
experiment? 




88 



96 



4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 



Using a different sterile pipette for each water sample and the dis- 
tilled water control, transfer 1 mL of each water sample and the con- 
trol to its appropriate 0 dilution Petri dish of nutrient agar. Do 
the same for the 0 dilution dishes of Endo agar. Gently swirl the 
inoculum over the agar to distribute it evenly. Rinse each pipette 
with distilled water and return the pipette next to its water sample. 

B Why is it important to use the same pipette with the same sample 
all the time? 

Label 13 sterile beakers with the names of the 13 water samples. 

To make the first dilution, take 1 mL of the water sample, using its 
own pipette, and place it in its sterile beaker. (Remember to rinse 
the pipette with distilled water.) Add 9 mL of distilled water from 
a sterilized graduated cylinder. You now have a 1:10 dilution of the 
water sample. Repeat this procedure with each of the other 12 water 
samples and the control. 

Usi'ng the 1:10 dilutions of the water samples you just created, inoc- 
ulate the appropriate Petri dishes as you did in step 3. 

Take 1 mL of the 1:10 dilution of each water sample from its beaker. 
Rinse the beaker with distilled water. Put the 1 mL of the 1:10 di- 
lution back into the beaker and add 9 mL of distilled water. If you 
just diluted a 1:10 dilution by 10 again, you now have a 1:100 dilu- 
tion. Right? Inoculate the appropriate Petri dishes with this dilu- 
tion. 

Repeat the di 1 uti on/i nocul ati on steps . You will finish with the 
1:1,000,000 dilution stage. 

C Even though the beakers and pipettes were used for their own 
water samples, why was it important to rinse the beakers and 
pipettes each time you used them? 

Incubate the plates-for 43 hours at 35-37 degrees Celsius. 

WARNING: NEVER OPEN THE PLATES! 

Examine the plates for bacterial growth. You will now count the col- 
onies (using a colony counter?) and record on your data chart in the 
corresponding squares. For the nutrient agar, count all the differ- 
ent colors and types of colonies. In the Endo agar, you are looking 
only for coliform bacteria. They will appear dark red with red col- 
oration of the surrounding agar. Count only the coliform bacteria 
fitting this description. 

NOTE: If in any of the plates the colonies are too numerous to 

count, write, in the appropriate place in your chart, TNTC (too 
numerous to count). If there are no colonies, simply write 0 in the 
appropriate place on your chart. 

Return the plates to your teacher, who will dispose of them safely. 





89 



97 



12 Calculate the concentration of bacteria per ml of each water sanple 
and record in your data chart of results. To do this, for each water 
sanple or the control choose the dilution that produced the "most 
easily countable" bacterial colonies. (Your teacher will advise you 
on this.) Note the dilution for that plate. You want to figure how 
many bacteria there would be in one ml of the original water sam- 
ple. So, if you know there are a certain number of bacteria in your 
countable dilution sample, then you need to multiply the number of 
bacteria so it would reflect how many bacteria are in the sample with 
no dil ution : 

# bacteria x 10 n = # of bacteria in 1 ml of original sample 
(where n = power of 10 of the dilution you used) 

For instance, if you found in the 1:1000 dilution that there were 32 
colonies, then: (Remember 1000 is 10 3 ) 

32 x 10 3 = 322,000 bacteria per ml 

Do all of your calculations in the spaces of your calculations 
page. Do the calculations for each water sample and each type of 

agar. That will be 8 water samples (including control) x 2 types of 
agar = 16 sets of calculations. 

13 Enter the results in your data chart of results. 



+ ★****:< 



Sample name: 

Agar type: Nutrient Agar or Endo Agar? 

Bacteria type: (circle one): varied coliform 

Dilution of plate with most countable bacteria: 

# of Bacteria in that plate = ; 

Calculations: 



Result: coliform / varied bacteria per ML of sample 




Use the above format for all the rest (15) of your calculations 



O 

ERiC 



90 



.98 



DATA CHART 



Dilution: 0 1:10 moo 1:1000 1:10,000 1:100,000 1:1,000,000 



Water Agar 

sample Type 


1 : 10 1 


1 : 10 2 


1 : 1 0 3 


1 : 1 0 4 


LO 

O 


1 : 1 0 6 


Plot 1 N. agar 














E. agar 














N. agar 

D 1 nt 9 














r I 0 l c 

E. agar 














N. agar 

n i /*> + l 














rIOI 0 : 

E. agar 














N. agar 














Plot 4 _ 

c « agar 














N. agar 














Plot 5 r 

E. agar 














N. agar 














Plot 6 r 

E. agar 














N. agar 














Plot 7 _ 

E. agar 














N. agar 

Cifo 1 














bile, i 

E. agar 















O 

ERLC 



91 



99 



Dilution 0 


1:10 


1:100 1:1,000 1:10,000 


1:100,000 


1 : 1 ,000,000 


Water Agar 

Sample Type 


I : 1 0 1 


1 : 1 0 2 


I : 1 0 3 


4 

1 :10 


1 : 10 5 


1 : 1 0 6 


N. agar 

Si te 2 














E. agar 














N. agar 














Site 3 

E. agar 














N. agar 














o lie h 

E. agar 














N. agar 














Site 5 

E. agar 














Dis-. N. agar 














tilled 

Water E. agar 
















92 



100 



CHART OF RESULTS 



BACTERIA per mL: 






Nutrient Agar 


Endo Agar 


% of total bacteria 


(total 


(col i form 


which is coliforn 


bacteria) 


bacteri a ) 


(just divide total 


SAMPLE NAME 




bacteria by coliforn) 




Self Check: Do you know the following terns? coliforn bacteria, nutrient 

agar, bacterial colony, incubator, sterile, control (noun), inoculate, 
d i 1 uti on . 



1 Which water sample had the highest count of coliforn bacteria? 
Why do you think this is so? 

2 Which water sample had the highest count of varied bacteria? 
Why do you think this is so? 



3 Did the control show any evidence of bacteria? 

If so, where do you think these came from? 

To obtain a true count of bacteria in all the water samples, do you 
think it would be correct to subtract the numbers of the controls's 
bacteria? Why, or why not? 

■LMi gg$T CO PY MAILABLE 



93 



101 



4 Were there any differences in coliform bacteria between the "up- 
stream" and "downstream" sample sites? 

Explain with numerical examples from your data. 

5 Do you think that there could be differences in the number of bacter- 
ia between sections of the stream which were fast moving and slow 
moving? Explain. 

6 Were there major differences in the bacteria count of the samples 
from your sample plots along the stream? If so, were they between 
the coliform or varied bacteria or both? (Support your answer with 
numerical data.) 

7 If the governmental standard for drinking water were 100 bacteria per 
ml., would the stream be drinkable as is? (Support your answer with 
numerical data.) 

8 What could be done , _ i n ' terms of reducing bacteria, to improve your 
stream's water quality? Give sample bacterial concentrations which 
you believe would be acceptable to have in the stream. 

9 How do you think bacteria affect other biotic and abiotic factors in 
the stream's ecosystem? (Look through past activites of the stream 
for ideas about these factors.) 

Going Further: 

Stain and observe the bacteria under the microscope 

Attempt using a strict, sterile technique and compare results. 

Test for gram + and gram - bacteria. 

Try ideas and experiments for cleaning up the stream and retest for 
bacterial counts. 

Try a community campaign to change human habits which pollute the 
stream (contact appropriate authorities), or try a personal campaign 
by simply writing letters. 

Look into the connection between local illnesses and disease and the 
bacteria in the stream water. 

Additional Resources: 



Microbiologists 

Environmental health departments and specialists 
Medical professionals (both traditional and conventional) 



Related Careers: You may wish to consider the following careers because the 

techniques you've used in this investigation are used by the following 
professional s : 



Bacteriol ogi st 
Ecol ogi st 
Biol ogist 
Hydro 1 ogi st 

Enviromental health specialist 



0 



102 



GOING WITH THE FLOW IV: 

How Clean Is This Stream? 

Teacher's Guide 

Overview: The students will analyze and compute the bacteria found at their 

stream plots and at five other sites along the stream. The point of the 
activity will not only be to see proof of the bacteria in the stream at their 
plots and to analyze the ecological relationships of bacteria to the 
environment, but also to see relative differences in the amounts and types of 
bacteria according to human influences along the course of the stream. The 
entire spectrum of bacterial types will be studied and a focus on col i form 
bacteri a will be made . 

This activity will be somewhat challenging to the students for the com- 
plex lab techniques it calls for. 

Objectives: The students will: 

Identify the bacteria that exist in the stream, the role it plays in 
the stream's ecosystem, and the effects humans have on the bacteria 
in their local stream(s). 

Prepare a series of 7 dilutions of the samples and pi ate out the di- 
lutions on two types of agar. 

Analyze, count, and calculate the growth of bacteria per ml of water 
sampl e . 

Distinguish and analyze the types of bacterial growth with particular 
emphasis on coliform bacteria. 

Interrelate the amounts and types of bacteria with other abiotic and 
biotic (particul arly human) effects on the environment. 

Techniques and Information: This activity is so complex (procedural ly) that 

it probably needs a good, conceptual introduction and talk about dilutions, 
selective agar plating, and colifonm bacteria. 

Demonstrating the procedure is highly recommended. 

Students will sample from 7 plots at their stream stations and 5 sites 
you choose along the stream which may reflect differences in bacteria due to 
human influences: Choose sites such as a site upstream to human habitation; a 
site downstream to human habitation; a site near a septic tank or sewer out- 
let; a site near agricultural use; etc. If the stream does not pass through 
inhabited areas, choose one that does for your 5 site samples, such as at a 
nearby town or city. 

Remind the students that one colony started with one bacterium and to 
choose the plates for numerical analyses which would be the most countable-- 
those with distinct colonies and a good number, of say 10 to 40. 

To cut down on time or supplies, you can make your own culture plates; OR 
just do 5 water samples from various sites along stream instead of including 
the 7 stations from the students' sample stream plots; OR have the class work 
in 8 teams, with each team responsible for one sample. 



103 



Endo agar is used specifically for indicating coliform bacteria. Nutri- 
ent agar will reveal the range of many different types of bacteria. You may 
subst i tute- Endo agar with eosi n • methyl ene blue agar. If using eosin methylene 
blue agar, cross out all Endo agars mentioned throughout the lesson plan. The 
evidence of coliform bacteria on eosine methylene blue agar is that it grows 
with a flat surface and a greenish metallic sheen. 

WARNING: Students should use caution when handling the cultures, since 

E. col i is pathogenic in certain body regions and tissues. They should never 
open the plates. Taping the edges is recommended. 

Evaluation: The Objectives may be used as guidelines when you design your own 

evaluation to this activity. (Don't forget to evaluate non-academic skills 
such as technique, a "willingness" to try or teamwork.) 

Answers to student questions during the procedure : 

A It is important to “use “steri 1 e' gl assware so that no bacteria are in- 

troduced into the cultures from the glassware, rather than the water 
sample itself. Contamination will affect the results. 

S It is important to keep the pipette with the same sample so that 
bacteria from other samples do not get mixed with it. 

C It is important to rinse them so that bacteria from a more concen- 

trated dilution do not enter the new dilution. Again, another form 
of contaminati on . 



Answers to students' questions in their Self Check section : 



1 Depends on actual samples used. May be due to human influences. 

2 Depends on actual samples used. Reasonable concentration/check data 
sheet. May tie in with human influences or slow movement of stream, 
or naturally decaying organic matter. 

3 This will depend on the sterility of the water. Came from either the 
water or the air. 

Yes. Because the bacteria would have been coming from the distilled 
water rather than the water sample. If you subtract the control, you 
will get a more accurate count of bacteria just from the sample 
rather than the distilled water. 



4 This will depend on your sites. Data should be higher downstream 

than upstream. Reason: the organic matter humans put into the 

stream give "food" for bacteria to live on. More human organic 
matter downstream. 

5 Yes. Fast flow moves bacteria along too fast' to stay and grow on 
nutrient substances. 

6 Depends on results. 



0 





96 



104 



7 If concentration of student data is higher than standard: nondrink- 
able. If lower than standard: drinkable. 

8 Concentration of bacteria should be lowered by putting in less "pol- 

lutants" on which the bacteria feed or live. Putting in less could 
include: stop dumping garbage; stop agricultural runoff; stop septic 

tank leakage into; stop sewers entering. Clean up debris or anything 
to make stream move faster. Bacterial concentrations given should 
make sense and perhaps relate to the governmental concentrations for 
drinking water. 

9 Should relate to taking up the oxygen, giving off carbon dioxide-- 
result in less animal life, more plant life, such as algae. Breaks 
down organic "stuff" in water. Blocks off light? Poisonous to ani- 
mal life; enters their systems? Changes the condition of the bottom 
of the stream? 

Extension: 

Stain and observe the bacteria from the colonies under the microscope 
using sterile techniques. 

Attempt using the strict sterile technique and compare results. 

Test for gram + and gram -. 

Try ideas and experiments for cleaning up the stream and retest for 
bacterial counts. 

Try a community campaign to change human habits which pollute the 
stream (contact appropriate authorities); work with social studies 
classes in this effort. 

Look for other organisms in the stream that would be from the human 
intestine. 

Procedures adapted from: 

Hummer et al . : Probing Levels of Life - A Laboratory Manual, , 1976 . 

Charles E. Merril Publishing Co. Columbus, OH. 



ERIC 



97 



105 



SCIENCE STANDARDS ADDRESSED IN WATER UNITS - 



Standard - Understands the main individual, social, ethical and institutional aspects of 
science 

Benchmarks — 

Understands that the traditions of accurate record keeping, openness, replication and peer review 
keep the majority of scientists within the bounds of ethical behavior; violations of this behavior 
are eventually exposed and strongly condemned 

Standard - Knows basic concepts about the earth 
Benchmarks - 

Knows that life is adapted to conditions on earth, including the strength of gravity to hold an 
adequate atmosphere and an intensity of radiation from the sun that allows water to cycle 
between liquid and vapor 

Knows that solar radiation - direct and through the winds and rivers it creates on the earth’s 
surface - is continually available, and can be transformed into electrical energy, which is then 
distributed widely for lighting, heating, and running machinery 

Standard - Understands how species depend on one another and on the environment for 

survival 

Benchmarks - 

Knows that like many complex systems, ecosystems have cyclic fluctuations around a state of 
rough equilibrium 

Knows that ecosystems always change when climate changes or when very new species appear 
as a result of migration or evolution (or are introduced deliberately or inadvertently by humans) 

Standard - Understands the cycling of matter and flow of energy through the living 

environment 

Benchmarks - 

Knows that the amount of life any environment can support is limited by the available energy, 
water, oxygen, and materials, and by the ability of ecosystems to recycle the residue of dead 
organic materials 

Standard - Understands how germ theory differs from earlier notions about what causes 
illness and how germs were discovered and linked to disease 
Benchmarks - 

Knows that today, high-power imaging and biotechnology make it possible to investigate how 
microorganisms cause disease, how the immune system combats them, and how they can be 
manipulated genetically 

Knows that Pasteur showed that microorganisms were involved in animal disease 



98 



.1. 



106 



Standard - Understands what constitutes a system and how the idea of systems is used in 
different contexts 
Benchmarks - 

Knows that understanding how things work and designing solutions to problems of almost any 
kind can be facilitated by systems analysis 

Knows that in defining a system, it is important to specify its boundaries and subsystems, 
indicate its relation to other systems, and identify what its input and its output are expected to be 
Knows that the feedback of output from some parts of a system to input of other parts can be 
used to encourage what is going on in a system, discourage it, or reduce its discrepancy from 
some desired value, thus the stability of a system can be greater when it includes appropriate 
feedback mechanisms 

Knows that only in very simple systems (and not all of them) is it possible to predict what the 
result of changing some part or connection will be 



AMERICAN INDIAN STANDARDS ADDRESSED IN WATER UNITS - 
Physical Science 

Indian students should develop an understanding of structure and properties of matter and be able 
to discuss analogies/differences between empirical and traditional American Indian concepts 
about matter; for example, discussing the interactions of energy and matter in relation to the 
traditional representation of earth, air, fire and water as parts of the Medicine Wheel. 

Life Science 

Indian students should develop an understanding of how atoms and molecules cycle among the 
living and nonliving components of the biosphere and be able to relate these to traditional tribal 
paradigms such as the Circle of Life, the Beauty Way, the Red Road, etc. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of the fundamental tension between living 
organisms’ capacity for infinite growth and the finite nature of environments and resources and 
to relate knowledge of this tension to traditional American Indian values about ecology. 

Science in Personal and Social Perspectives 

Indian students should develop an understanding of factors - including cultural beliefs and 
values, historic/contemporary practices - that contribute to their tribe or community’s overall 
health. 

History and Nature of Science 

Indian students should develop an understanding of science as it is practiced by American Indian 
scientists and science/technology related professionals in their communities. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of various opportunities for science careers. 
Indian students should develop an understanding of American Indian contributions to science in 
such areas as medicine, botany, psychology and ecology. 



99 




107 



HEALTH 



American Indian people suffer from the effects of diabetes, especially, at an alarming 
rate. They need to be aware of requirements to maintain good health and must have good 
health care. Indian people also have access to health remedies handed down through 
Medicine People. Many of the medicines used in the modem health field today were first 
used by Indian people. Indian Medicine People have been called upon by the National 
Institute on Health to help with finding cures for cancer, Aids, etc. 

Alcoholism/drug addiction is another of the most serious health problems facing the 
Indian people today. This fact is now clearly recognized both by Indian leaders and by 
the Indian Health Service. A task force of the Indian Health Service suggested this 
definition for alcoholism: “A disease, or disorder of behavior, characterized by the 
repeated drinking of alcoholic beverages which interferes with the drinker’s health, 
interpersonal relations and/or economic Sanctioning.” Some view addiction as a disease 
and cite findings that show a biological basis for it. Others see it as rampant among 
Indian people as the result of intergenerational trauma. Whatever the cause, the majority 
of suicides, murders, accidental deaths and injuries among Indians are associated with it, 
as are many cases of infection, cirrhosis and malnutrition. By far the majority of arrests, 
fines and imprisonments of Indians are the result of addiction. The associated loss of 
productivity and the resulting abnormal social adjustments are by-products of 
considerable importance. Addiction among Indian people is a problem that deserves the 
best efforts of everyone working together to address the urgency of the situation. Many 
Indian people who have become addicted have been helped to stop using through 
treatment programs and/or Indian spirituality. 

LITERATURE FOR HEALTH UNIT - 

Susan LaFlesche Picotte, MD by Benson Tong. 

Native American Doctor by Jeri Ferris. 

Carlos Montezuma by Peter Iverson, Raintree, 1990. 

From Deep Woods to Civilization by Charles A. Eastman (Indian Author). 

Healers, American Indian Lives Series, available from Four Winds Indian Books, York, 
NE. 

James Joe, Navajo Medicine Man by Susan Thompson. 

Gift of Power: The Life Teachings of a Lakota Medicine Man by Archie Fire Lame Deer 

(Indian Author). 

Fools Crow by Thomas E. Mails, University of Nebraska Press, 1979. 

100 




103 



The Seven Visions of Bull Lodge by George P. Horse-Capture (Indian Author), Bison 
Books. 

A People’s Ecology ed. by Gregory Cajete (Indian Author), Clear Light. 

How Indians Use Wild Plants for Food, Medicine and Crafts by Frances Densmore. 

Teachings of Nature by Adolph Hungry Wolf (Indian Author), Book Pub. Co., 1989. 

Cherokee Plants: Their Uses - A 400 Year History by Paul B. Hamel & Mary U. 
Chiltoskey, Book Pub. Co. 

American Indian Medicine by Virgil J. Vogel. 

Earth MedicineEarth Food by Michael A. Weiner. 

Indian Doctor available from Four Winds Books, York, NE. 

Indian Herbology of North America by Alma Hutchens. 

The Heart of a Chief by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author). 

The Death of Jim Loney by James Welch (Indian Author), Penguin, 1979. 

The Sacred Tree, Four Worlds Development Project, 1984, 403-320-7144. 

Wounded Warriors: A Time for Healing by Dr. Doyle Arbogast. 

The Broken Cord by Michael Dorris (Indian Author). 

Honour the Sun by Ruby Slippeijack (Indian Author), Pemmican Pub. 

I Have Spoken: American History Through the Voices of the Indians by Virginia I. 
Armstrong, Swallow Press, 1971. Contains Indian oratory concerning use of alcohol. 

Poetry: Muted War Drums by Adrian C. Louis, Better to Avoid Her by Luci Tapahonso, 
Houston and Bowery, 1981 by Diane Bums, Song-Maker by Anita Endrezze-Danielson 

(Indian Authors). 

Where the Rivers Meet by Don Sawyer, 1988. 

Halfbreed by Maria Campbell (Indian Author), 1973. 

American Indian Life Skills Development Curriculum by Theresa LaFromboise, Univ. of 
Wisconsin Press, 1996. 

101 



10 9 



ACTIVITIES FOR UNIT - 



1 . Have the students leam about health issues, read cultural materials and hear 
cultural perspectives relating to this topic. 

2. Have the students do research to find statistics relating to the incidence of 
diabetes nationally and locally. Compare them. Chart the findings. 

3. Have the students read about an early Indian doctor, a Medicine Person, and 
about Indian medicines. 

4. Have the students do research to find statistics relating to alcohol and drug 
abuse nationally and locally. Compare them. Chart the findings. 

5. Have students do research to find information relating to studies and findings 
regarding cause and treatment of addiction and diabetes. 

6. Have students read oratory, novels or poetry including effects of substance 
abuse and addiction. 

7. Have the students visit and leam about local programs and efforts to address 
health and wellness. 

8. Have the students invite professionals to come to the class to speak on 
the topics of diabetes and addiction. 

9. Have students write personal narratives about how diabetes and substance 
abuse/addiction affects their community. 

10. Have the students draw conclusions and discuss their conclusions in a talking 
circle. 

Following are materials and example activities for three units developed by teachers of 
Indian students who attended the MASTERS Project at the University of Kansas and 
math and science workshops at Haskell Indian Nations University, and by the Outdoor 
World Science and Mathematics Project at Northern Arizona University. Adapt these 
activities to meet your students’needs. Review the science standards for this unit. They 
will suggest further science and math activities. 



102 



110 



Dwayne Deegan 

by Nancy Larson 



Imagine, if you can, in this age of technology, a health 
professional who still makes housecalls! A myth? No, there are still 
people in the medical field interested enough in and willing to go to 
the people, instead of waiting for the people to come to them. 

Dwayne Deegan is such a person. 

Dwayne Deegan is a member of the Fort Totten Sioux Indian 
Tribe in North Dakota. He is also a public health nurse for the entire 
reservation. In his own words, Dwayne says, "my work takes me 

from one end of the reservation to the other. I am responsible for all 
the Indians that live here. 1 go to homes, schools, and sometimes 
even to the stores. I go wherever I have to go to find my poeple who 
need help. I help them wherever, whenever and however I can." 

Although Dwayne likes his job, he has not always been in this 
line of work. While in the Army for ten years, he was assigned to a 
hospital and found he enjoyed taking care of sick people. When 

Dwayne left the Army he decided to go to college to become a nurse. 

To become an R.N. (Registered Nurse) Dwayne had to spend four 
years in college. 

In college, Dwayne learned all about how the human body 
works. He studied the major organs like the heart, lungs, brain and 
kidneys which are part of the following body systems: the 
circulatory, respiratory, nervous and excretory systems. 



103 



Hi 



When he completed his college degree in nursing, it only 

seemed natural for Dwayne to return to North Dakota, the place he 
knows as home. His father was born and raised on the Fort Totten 
Sioux Reservation, so he was familiar with the land and its people. 

Public health nurses work in the community, not in hospitals. 

Dwayne visits homes and schools to educate people about health care 
concerns that ^effect them directly. The topics that he discusses most 
frequently are aerobic conditioning, well balanced diets, heart 
disease, communicable diseases, and diabetes. Dwayne feels that 
these are the major health concerns of his people at this time. 

Much of the care Dwayne gives is without direct supervision of 
a doctor; he has his own caseload of patients and is responsible for 
their plan of care. Because he cares for all ages, babies, moms and 
dads, and the elderly, Dwayne must know a lot about health care. 

A very good indicator of general health condition is pulse rate. 
Pulse is the rhythmical throbbing of the arteries produced by the 

regular contractions of the heart. Your pulse can easily be felt at 

certain points on the body where the arteries are close to the surface. 
The wrist is a good pulse point. Dwayne encourages his patients to 
check their pulse rates regularly. He tells his patients about the 
value of aerobic conditioning and how changes in pulse rate can be 
used to indicate levels of fitness. By exercising regularly you can 
increase the efficiency of your heart to deliver needed oxygen to 
your body's blood cells. Thus, as you exercise and get in shape you 
become more ‘physically fit and your heart becomes stronger and 
your pulse rate drops because your heart can deliver the necessary 
oxygen with fewer beats than when you were in poor physical 




104 



112 



condition. (Remember the oxygen (O^ you need is in the air. Air is 
approximately 20% oxygen and 80% nitrogen (N^. It contains about 
.03% carbon dioxide (CO^J. The air that you exhale from your lungs 
contains about 4% carbon dioxide and about 16% oxygen.) Dwayne 
also knows that pulse rate varies with body size and age and 
therefore all of his patients cannot use the same pulse rate 
guidelines. 

Dwayne talks about how important a well balanced diet is in 
helping to maintain good health. Dwayne tells his patients that it is 
important to eat foods from the four basic food groups at every meal. 
He reminds them that the four food groups are 1.) meats, 2.) fruits 
and vegetables, 3.) breads and cereals (grains) , and 4.) milk, eggs 
and other dairy products. 

He also tells them about low-cholesterol diets and recommends 
specific foods which are low in cholesterol. Dwayne explains that 
cholesterol is a fatty substance found in all animal tissues. The 
human body makes most of its own cholesterol but some enters the 
body in foods such as butter, eggs, fatty meats and organ meats 
(brain, liver, etc.). The body needs cholesterol but too much 
cholesterol can cause hardening of the arteries (arteriosclerosis). 
This happens when fatty deposits containing cholesterol collect on 
the inner walls of the arteries and slow blood flow, increasing the 
opportunities for blood clots to form. If a blood clot blocks an artery 
of the heart it can result in a heart attack. Many health 
professionals recommend a diet low in cholesterol and saturated fats 
as they cause the body's production of cholesterol to increase. 

Dwayne also teaches his patients about communicable diseases. 



ERjt 



105 



113 



Communicable diseases are contagious diseases, diseases that can be 
transmitted or spread from one person to another. Colds and flu, 
measles and mumps are among the contagious diseases that Dwayne 
talks about. Although he does get involved in home nursing (such as 
changing dressings, etc.) his main concern is teaching people how to 
keep healthy and avoid diseases. 

Dwayne visits five to six homes each day. He examines 
anyone who is sick, answers questions, sets up clinic appointments 
and does whatever else he can to help meet his patients' needs. If no 
one is sick, he will spend time teaching the people how to stay 
healthy. 

Included on his list of visits are people who must take 
medication regularly. He checks the pills to be sure they are being 
taken as the doctor prescribed. 

Among his patients are a number of diabetics. People with 
diabetes have to take insulin, a hormone, that helps to control how 
cells use sugar in the blood. Some diabetics can take oral medication 
but others must inject (give themselves a shot with a hypodermic 
needle) the needed insulin. Diabetics do not have enough insulin in 
their bodies. If the body does not have enough insulin then too 
much sugar builds up in the blood. This condition is called diabetes. 
Insulin is produced by the pancreas, an organ which is also an 
endocrine gland (endocrine glands are glands in the body that 
produce hormones) located behind the stomach; Diabetics have a 
dysfunctional pancreas. A simple urine test will tell you whether or 
not you have sugar in your urine. Normally, there should be no 
sugar in the urine and diabetics test their urine to be sure that the 

f. 



106 



114 



ERjt 



dosage of medicine that they are taking is sufficiently controlling the 
sugar in their blood. Dwayne demonstrates the test tape which has a 
sugar color indicator in it and makes sure that his diabetic patients 
know how to use it, how frequently to test their urine and how to 
interpret the color results of the test. 

Dwayne has a great need for science as he uses it every 
day in his work. It was very important for him to take many science 
courses in college to become a nurse; microbiology was his favorite. 
Here he learned all about germs (which are microorganisms to 
scientists). Microbiology means the study of (ology) living 
organisms (bio) that are too small to see with the unaided eye 
(micro). He says, "germs are like insects - some are good and some 
are bad. Much of my work is with the bad germs, the ones that 
make us sick. These germs are called pathogens." Pathogens cause 
communicable diseases. 

Dwayne encourages everyone to become involved with learning 
about science. He says, "we all use. science every day - riding the 
school bus, driving a car, the food we eat, the TV we watch, this is all 
science." 

Just as science is important, Dwayne feels family is also 
important. He says, "Family is always important. You cannot survive 
without family. All Indians know this. That is why we have so 
many cousins, grandmas and aunties." Both Dwayne and his family 
are very active in community and cultural events. He likes to go to 
pow-wows to watch his six-year-old daughter dance, and to work 
with the flags. He is a veteran, and only veterans are allowed to 
work with the flags. Also, as a member of the Fort Totten Veterans 



11 5 



107 



Club, he helps with school and church activities. When asked what 
he likes about the community where he and his family live, Dwayne 
replies, "I'm from North Dakota and I love it. I like living in the 
country. My dad was born and raised in Tokio, so this is home for 

ft 

me. 

Dwayne is very serious about maintaining the health of his 
people, but every now and again he runs into a situation even he 
cannot help laughing at, such as this experience: A woman 

telephoned Dwayne and told him her son had hurt his eye on a tree 
branch, and wanted to know if she could put her eyedrops in his eye. 

When Dwayne asked, "What kind?" she replied, "How do I know 

what kind of tree it was?!" 

This story is funny, but it also represents a bond of trust 
between Dwayne and the people he cares for. Those people that 
would feel afraid to call a "real" doctor would not be afraid to call 
someone they feel is their friend and neighbor. In doing his job, 

Dwayne is filling a great need on his reservation as well as making a 
lot of friends. 



116 



ACTIVITIES 



1. Have the class do research on academic courses and college requirements needed to 
work in various health professions. 

2. Have students interview people in various health professions. Have the class develop 
a list of standard questions to ask each person and then write papers about each 
person. 

3. Have the students write papers on why they would or wouldn’t want to work in the 
health field. 



MATH AND SCIENCE -- 



“THE FOUR CHAMBERS OF THE HEART” 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVE 

Students will acknowledge that the heart is the center of one’s world and 
spirit. 

MATH OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

construct simple line and bar graphs, tables, and charts 

read and interpret a given set of information contained in a table, 
graph, or chart 

draw conclusions and make predictions from line and bar graphs, 
charts, and tables. 



SCIENCE OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

identify the body systems and the organs comprising them 
describe the structures and functions of the circulatory system. 



118 



no 



TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

Nekumonta, a chief of the Mohawks, wandered through the dark forest where 
he was searching for medicine herbs to cure the plague. There had been 
many moons of sickness in his village and the Mohawk had nothing with 
which to fight the plague. 

Nekumonta’s heart was heavy, for Shanewia, the light of his wigwam, was 
stricken with the plague. Nekumonta decided that he would find the cure to 
the plague to save his wife. After three suns of searching, he finally fell 
exhausted. In his troubled dream, he heard singers who murmured that they 
were the healing waters of the Great Spirit and if he could take the waters from 
their prison, then his wife would live. 

Nekumonta dug deep in the earth and finally released the Healing Waters, 
allowing them to run merrily down the face of Mother Earth. He fashioned a 
jar to contain the Healing Waters. At the dawning of the fourth sun, he 
returned home where his Shanewia was cured back to health by drinking from 
the jar of Healing Waters. 

Adapted from ’’The Healing Waters," in Legends of the Iroquois by William 
W. Canfield. Port Washington, New York, 1972 (re-issued). 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 

1 . After presenting the story about the healing waters, discuss the four 
chambers of the heart, including the following: 



Introduce the lesson about the heart with any maze puzzle. You can 
choose a maze of your choice. Ask the students how they are enjoying 
it and if it is difficult to do. Then hand out the maze of the heart. Discuss 
how the path of the blood flows through the heart using the heart ditto. 

Introduce the vocabulary words. Have the students look them up in 
a dictionary and then write the definition in their own words. Discuss 
the words and where they are located on the heart chart. 



Vocabulary 



heart 

atrium 

artery 



valve 

aorta 

capillaries 
pulmonary artery 
pulmonary vein 



ventricle 

vein 



Show the class an instructional film on the heart and tell the m the ways 

in which the chambers of the heart are like a maze. Discuss each part 

and what it does. Ask the class to label the correct name for each part. 

Teach the class how to find their pulse rates. 

a. Working in groups of 3-4 students, have the stude nts make a 
chart including height, weight, and age. 

b. Have the students explain what a pulse is and why they think 
it changes or stays the same. 

c. Demonstrate the proper procedures for taking your own pulse. 
Have the students find their own pulse and take their own. 

d. Then, using musical tapes of Native American flute or drum 
music, have the students sit with their eyes closed. They are 
to be quiet. This will help them to concentrate on the music. 
Play one complete song. Have the students take their pulse 
and record it on the chart. 

e. Afterwards, discuss the feelings they had while they were 
listening to that piece of music. 

f. Do the same thing for different kinds of music, both slow and 
fast-paced. 

g. At a specific time, have an unexpected guest come to the class 
with a surprise announcement. Take everyone’s pulse after it. 
After taking the pulse, let the students know that it was part of 
the experiment. 

h. When the activity is over, take all the data and graph it. Discuss 
the findings. 

i. You may wish to record pulses first thing in the morning, after 
meals, after recess or after exercising to see changes. 

Determining blood pressure. 

a. Contact your local Indian Health Service area office and invite 
a nurse to speak to the~clas5~about blood pressure. Have the 
nurse take everyone’s blood pressure. 

b. Have students make a chart so that they can graph the 
blood pressures taken by the nurse. 



c. Have the nurse take their blood pressure 4 times during the 
day. Suggestions: early A. M., before lunch, after lunch, before 
P.E., after P.E., before the end of the day. Use a different color 
marker for each reading to be graphed 

d. Discuss the results of the experiment on the followi ng day. Why 
does age make a difference? Why does the time of day make 
a difference? Why does physical activity make a difference? 

5. Tell the students the legend of the "Lake of the Bleeding Heart" and 
encourage them to re-enact the story as a play. 



"THE LAKE OF THE BLEEDING HEART" 



This is a story about how the lake got its name and why not many people go 
there. Long ago, a spirit chief lived with his daughter near this lake. His wife 
had died so he had to raise his daughter alone. She was very beautiful and 
she made very good cooking baskets. 

Many times, she had seen people catching fish on the other side of the lake. 
She asked her father why none of them would come to their side of the lake. 
Her father told her that she was the daughter of a big spirit chief. Strangers 
would not come to visit because they were not spirit chiefs. 

Another spirit chief - who was a very young man known as the "grizzly bear 
man" — went to a sweat lodge to hear some others talk. One man said that 
he had gone fishing by this lake and had seen the daughter of the big spirit 
chief. He watched her as she went fishing in the lake and then she noticed 
him. She quickly ran out of the water and onto the bank. There, he saw her 
turn into a big rock shaped like a stone. He was so afraid that he ran away 
and said he would never go back to the lake again. 

The young spirit chief claimed that he was not scared by this story, and he 
would go to the place to see the spirit girl. So he went to this place, he was 
wearing lots of beads, an otter skin arrow bag, and he had a white chief bone 
in his nose. When he arrived there, the old chief sawhim and told him to leave 
or else he would be turned into a rock, have his heart cut out, and thrown into 
the lake. 

But the young man spoke to his elder chief and told him that he wanted to stay 
with him and would hunt, trap, and fish for him. The old chief replied that he 
would give his young daughter as a bride to the visitor. Although he spoke 
kindly, in the back of his mind, the old chief planned to kill the stranger. 



However, because the young man was also a spirit chief, he knew about this 
plot. When he went to sleep that night, the young man’s spirit voice went out 
to speak to the beautiful object of his desire. His spirit voice told her to go 
down to the lake where he would marry her. 

The young girl walked down to the lake, but her suitor ran very fast, so fast 
that he did not see the old chief following behind him with bows and arrows. 
The young spirit chief looked upon the waters of the lake and saw that it was 
red, like blood. The spirit girl yelled to him to turn around, but it was too late; 
the father attacked her suitor. 

Because the maiden yelled to her father, demanding that he stop the attack, 
he turned her into a big heart-shaped rock. (She is still on the shore near the 
lake today.) 

The fight continued throughout the night and all of the next day. As he had 
warned, the old chief finally killed the young man, tore out his heart, took it, 
and poured the blood onto the rock that had been his daughter, saying, 
"Stand here always and watch. Every spring at this time, you will see the 
blood come back." He then threw the heart far out into the lake. 

Large waves came up, he heard loud thunder, and saw lightning. He heard 
the young spirit chief yell far, far away, sounding very sad. Again, he heard 
the young spirit chief yell, proclaiming that he was going home to die. 

The old chief left that sad spot and went to the sweat house where he lay down 
and fell asleep. While he was dreaming, he rolled over on the hot stones, 
which burned off his magic powers, and so he died. 



Adapted from Marcelle Masson, A Bag of Bones - Legends o f the Winto 
Indians of Northern California. Naturegraph Company, 1966, pp. 128-130. 




122 



EVALUATION ACTIVITIES 



Each activity has its own built-in evaluation, such as analyzing the causes of 
change in blood pressure and pulse rate, and recognizing the parts of the 
heart. 



RESOURCES: 

Angier, Bradford. Field Guide to Medical Wild Plants . Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania: Stackpole Books. 

American Indian Science and Engineering Society. Science Activities for 
Children: A Collection of Lesson Plans . June, 1987. 

Canfield, William W. "The Healing Waters," in Legends of the Iroquois . Port 
Washington, New York: 1972 (re-issued). 

Adapted from Marcelle Masson, A Baa of Bones - Legends of the Winto 
Indians of Northern California . Naturegraph Company, 1966, pp. 128-130. 



DEVELOPED BY 

Diane Cleveland 
Elaine Hendricks 
Renata Griego 




ERiC- 



115 



123 



Sam Begay: Medicine Man 



by Darlene Todechine 



Spring finally arrived for Big Beard and his wife Lady 
Bitterwater. They were extremely happy this spring due to the 
arrival of their first born, a baby boy. The baby was born in early 
spring when flower buds were forming on plants. Big Beard was 
especially proud to have a son, who would help provide for the 
family when he was old enough. 

The baby was welcomed into the family by a ritual that had 
been passed down from generation to generation. The baby was 
given a sacred Indian name by his maternal great-grandmother. He 
was named Conqueror of All. The name itself was an indicator of 
how one would lead his life. 

As Conqueror of All got older he began to question the elders' 
comments, especially the ones dealing with names. One day his uncle 
Gray Horse came to visit and he asked his uncle why people are 
never to repeat their sacred names. His uncle told him that if one 

repeats his name, his ears would shrivel up and fall off. On the 
serious side, his uncle told him that sacred names are holy. Sacred 
Indian names are used in prayers to identify the individual to the 
gods of nature. They are used when an individual goes into combat 
so the gods protect the individual from harm and they are used to 
identify the patient who seeks a cure for his illness. Gray Horse went 
on to tell him that some names were earned by the individual, like 
the man who went hunting all the time for rabbits, he was called 




116 124 



Rabbit Scratcher. Conqueror of All was satisfied with his uncle’s 
explanation and never questioned the elders again. 

Big Beard was a medicine man who sang songs to heal his 
patients' spiritual being. Conqueror of All was a good helper but 
lacked the ability to sing. The ability to sing long hours is a 
requirement to become a singer so Conqueror of All was 
disappointed. 

But his father Big Beard showed him another route to follow 
and that was to become a medicine man who uses medicinal plants to 
heal patients. Conqueror of All was enthusiastic and did his best for 
many years. His training took years because he had to learn about 
the interrelationships of plants and the solar system. "My training to 
become a medicine man would have taken less years if I knew how 
to read and write. I would have written everything down on paper 
and I could have done some reading on plants, but I had to learn 
everything by memorization. Now that I am old, sometimes I have 
to think about the right medicine that I would give a patient." 

"During my training, I learned the names of plants and how to 
combine plants for a certain cure. I became aware that some plants 
were male and some were female and could only be gathered at a 
certain time of the season." 

Today many Navajo children study plants (botany) in school. 
The classification system that botanists use to identify plants is 
different than the classification system that Conqueror of All learned. 
Botanists use a taxonomic classification system based on form and 
function and a Latin binomial (two-name) naming system designed 
many years ago by the Swedish naturalist Linnaeus. 




117 125 



Conqueror of All learned that the solar system played a major 
role in gathering plants. That is because the time of the year 

determines where specific chemicals which have a medicinal effect 

are concentrated in different parts of the plant. The concentrations 
of the different medicinal substances also vary with the time of year. 

Plants are collected only when the moon is in certain phases. 
Conqueror of All learned early about the phases of the moon. 
Throughout each month of the year the moon appears with several 
different faces. The faces always follow one another in a specific 
sequence: a full moon is followed by a nearly full moon, a half moon, 

a crescent moon, no moon, a crescent moon, a half moon, a nearly full 

moon and back to a full moon again. Today s Navajo children study 
the phases of the moon in school. They know that the different 
phases of the moon are caused by the relationships of the positions 
of the moon (as it rotates around the earth in about a month), the 
earth (as it rotates around the sun in 365 days) and the sun. 

No plant was sought out for pure enjoyment. Before plants 
could be collected, an offering was made to the sun before dawn and 
the patient’s sacred Indian name was used in the prayer. 

"Nowadays, I get patients who do not have sacred Indian 
names, so they give me an American name and sometimes it's hard 
to remember their names because I can't really relate an American 
name to anything in nature." Patients come from all over the Navajo 
reservation to seek a cure and often are referred to him by other 
medicine men. "I ask my patients questions related to their illness 
and I select medicinal plants based on the information they provide. 
Sometimes, patients come back to tell me that they have been cured, 



and I feel happy for them." Mr. Begay went on to say, "I learn 

something new every day, even at my age, so I feel that one is never 
too old to learn. Just put your mind to it." 

Conqueror of All, Mr. Sam Begay, belongs to the Bitterwater 
and Bigwater clans. He is living today in a small community called 
Tselina in northeastern Arizona. He celebrated his ninety-sixth 
birthday this spring (1988). Conqueror of All can still be seen 

walking up to the mesas at dawn to seek out the gods for a spiritual 
cure for yet another patient. 



er|c 



119 



127 



ACTIVITIES 



1 . Have the students identify what science Sam Begay had to know to be 
a medicine person. 

2. Have the students ask their parents about home remedies they use. 

3. Have the students invite a local Medicine Person to visit and speak to the class. 



120 



ERJC 



128 



TWO-WAY PLANTS 




Foci of Inquiry: Are you familiar with the plants in your environment? Do 

you know their tribal names? Their tribal use and preparation? Their taxo- 
nomic names? If they are edible or poisonous? Where to find them? How to 
classi fy them? Etc.? 

The use and knowledge of plants by people of American Indian tribes have been 
very important to the world. American Indian people's botantical expertise 
has greatly contributed to the fields of medicine, agriculture, chemistry and 
numerous other areas. Illnesses, such as malaria, which affect people around 
the world are cured by chemicals derived from plants which American Indian 
people discovered to be medicines. 



It is very important to preserve the valuable plant knowledge your tribe 
may hold. It may help you in your own survival; you may find it important for 
your tribe to pass on to develop its technical knowledge; and it is important 
for the world, for there are certainly tribal discoveries by which the entire 
world may benefit. 

So, you will have a special opportunity in this activity to develop some- 
thing important. You will be creating a plant collection, but it will not be 
an ordinary plant collection. Your collection will be one that includes not 



EMC - BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



121 



129 



only scientific names but also the tribal names of the plants, the trib 1 
of the plants, and how they are traditionally prepared. (This will 3 ii USes 
done only for plants considered acceptable to the tribe). 3 



be 



Why Is This Important? You may find this activity important: 

For your survival: to understand which plants are useful or danqer 

ous to you. y 

For preservation of your tribal knowledge: to learn more from your 

rel ati ves . 

For familiarity with your environment: so that you know what is out 

there, how it might change, and how you might make wiser decisions 
concerning your land. 

For future careers: you may wish to choose a profession which deals 

with plants. 







Procedure r 



Materials : 



PROFESSIONAL 


PURPOSE 


IMPROVISED 


tags with string 


to number individual 
plants when collected 


cut index cards into pieces i" x i"; 
punch hole and attach small pieces 
of string 


va scul urn 


to keep the plants in 
which have been collected 
while still in the field 


large plastic trash bag 


blotting driers 


to dessicate plants while 
being pressed 


newspapers 


plant press 


to preserve and flatten 
plants 


plant press created from plywood, 
innertube strips and corrugated 
cardboard inserts 


















cardboard Inserts 


mounting paper 


for displaying pressed 
plants with information 


mimeograph paper 


herbarium tape 


to attach plants to paper 


tape or glue 


mylar envelopes 


to store finished plants 


legal size file folders tied with strin' 



GENERAL 



plant books 
water containers 
information labels 
(sample provided) 
cl i pboards 
scissors or knives 
field forms 



plant identification 

for plants to be left in overnight before pressing 

for providing plant information, on finished, displayed plai 

for writing outside 
for cutting plants 

for recording field notes (sample provided) 




123 



131 



1 Listen well and ask questions during the introduction given to you by 

the teacher of this project/activity. y 

Whom do you think you will talk with at home concerning your plants? 

2 P repa re you r tags . 

3 The teacher will demonstrate the procedure for collecting plants. It 
is described in Steps 5 through 9 for your information. When you are 
out in the field, if you wish to add something to this procedure (for 
instance, in a traditional way), you may want to let the teacher know 
you will be doing this. 

4 Get ready for the field outing: (a) be dressed properly; (b) obtain 

and organize your equipment properly; (c) find out where to meet; and 
(d) find out the limitations you have for what types of plants to 
collect, and where you can go. 

What types of plants are you NOT supposed to collect? 

CAUTION: When out in the field be very careful where you put your hands and 

feet. There may be creatures there which you do not want to come into contact 
wi th. 





O 



124 



132 



In the field: 



Name of Coll ector: 
Date: 



HABITAT: 

P LAHT » APPROXIMATE SIZE DESCRIPTION 



1 





125 



133 



5 



When you spot a plant for collection, on your field form you should 
assign it a number, estimate its size and generally describe it. Be 
sure to indicate the area or habitat where you are collecting at the 
top of your form. 

Why do you think it is good to record a description and a number of 
your plant on your field list? 

6 Because so many people will be entering an area to collect, it is 
recommended that the "official" botanical style of collecting the 
entire plant be changed. Collect just part of the plant so that the 
plant will not be killed. The part to collect should at least have a 
flower, leaves and parts of the stem . Use scissors or a sharp knife 
to cleanly cut the plant, rather than pulling or breaking it. Cut 
below a leaf nodule. 

7 After writing your name and the plant's number on the tag, tag the 
plant by securely looping- the- string- around an upper part of the 
plant. Place the plant in the vasculum or plastic bag. If using a 
plastic bag, try to keep it inflated with your breath, which may bet- 
ter preserve the plants by adding carbon dioxide and moisture. 

8 Clean up the area so that it looks just as you found it -- or improve 
on it! Pick up any trash you might be able to throw away later. 
Make sure you have all your equipment. 

9 Go on to find another plant and repeat the procedure. Stay 

organi zed! 

10 The teacher or other students may point out to you any unique plants 
they come across -- so keep your ears and eyes open to your fellow 
collectors. You, too, may wish to share some of your "finds." 

Back at school: 

11 If you have to leave your plants overnight, you may place the cut 

ends of your plants in containers of water to help preserve them. 

12 When you are about to press your plants, again try to stay organized. 
First, gather your plants and all needed materials around your work- 
ing space. 

13 Place the plant on the blotting paper or newspaper; allow as much 

paper to each plant as possible. If you are using newspaper, place a 
double sheet between each sheet which has a plant on it. Because you 
may be adding more and more plants to your press as the days go by, 
place one plant on one piece of blotting paper just for the first 
day(s) until you have more plants to add. Then move those that have 
been in the press together to share blotting papers, since they will 
already be somewhat dry. 

14 You and the teacher can judge the best amount of time for pressing. 
If you live in a dry area, you can mount the plants even when they 
are not completely dry. Yet. they will be flat. In this way they 




will finish drying on the mounting paper and they will retain more of 
their original colors. If you live in a humid area, check the plants 
once every three days and replace the blotting papers or newspaper, 
if necessary. 

A. How does pressing preserve the plants? 

To mount the plants: 

15 Attach an information label to the lower left or right corner of the 
paper to be used. Write your name, and date collected on the lower 
part of the label. Write the number of the plant on the back of the 
mounting paper. In an attractive arrangement, glue or tape the 
pressed plant onto the paper. The plant may be trimmed if necessary. 

To research information at home: 

16 You may decide to talk to one person or several people who know some- 
thing about plants. Please do not expect to gain information on 
every plant--just as many as possible. Use your imagination about 
who to talk to. The person may be a relative, friend of the family, 
senior citizen, or someone who your teacher recommends. Keep trying 
to find someone--don 't give up! 

Take home your collections and show each plant to a knowledge- 
able person and ask the name. Spell it in the tribal alphabet or try 
to just sound it out. Record it on the label. Ask the person, "How 

is this plant used?" Write what they tell you on the label. If 

there is a use, ask your home/tribal resource person, "How is the 
plant prepared and in which season should it be collected?" Add this 
information on the bottom section of the label. 

17 Write a paragraph describing what you did at home to find out about 
the plants. For instance, who did you talk with? What did he or she 
generally say about the plants? Were you told about other plants you 
did not have? Did you go out with them to look for more plants? 

To find the scientific names of your plants: 

18 Bring your plants back to class, where you will find the teacher's 
"master" collection displayed. Match your plants with the teacher's, 
and you will then find the scientific name. Be sure they are exactly 
the same species of plants. Write the scientific name in the correct 
space on your label. If you have plants which cannot be found in the 
master collection, check with the teacher, who may ask you to key it 
out using reference books. The teacher may ask you to donate your 
plant to the master collection. 

19 Finally, follow the instructions your teacher gives you about the 
finishing touches on your collection and about turning the collection 
in. 




13 5 



Self Check: Do you know the following words: classification, binomial 

nomenclature, taxonomy, malaria, botanical, nodule, preserve, moisture, humid 
habitat ’ 

Your teacher, and perhaps a member of the community, may grade your col- 
lection. Along with the paragraph in Step 17, you may also be asked to write 
a paragraph about how you liked doing the collection. 

You will probably be tested on what you learned by doing the collection. 
Your teacher will let you know what to expect on the test. 

Going Further: 

-- Contribute plants to the class for a master collection. 

-- Create one or several displays to be shown in public places around the 
community. 

Enter nice-looking plants i-n a-sehool art show. 

Sell individually pressed plants for fund raising. 

-- Make drawings of the plants and include all the information for 
producing a small book about local plants. 

-- Compare your tribe's use of plants with other tribes. 

-- Research the contributions American Indian people have made to the 
world through their knowledge of plants. 

— Keep collecting plants to increase your collection. 

— Take your own "field trips" with elders to learn more about plants. 

Additional Resources: 

Different experts of the tribal community 
-- Scientific plant "experts" in the area, such as people in the field of 
natural resources or park rangers 
Botanical associations and clubs 

— Special publications or articles on your tribe's use of plants 

Related Careers: You may wish to consider the following careers because some 
of the techniques you've used in this investigation are used by some of the 
following people: 

-- Tribal Plant Specialist 
-- Botanist 
-- Biologist 
-- Ecologist 

Natural Resource Person 







128 



136 



TWO-WAY PLANTS 

A Bicultural Plant Collection 
Teacher's Guide 



Overview This activity spans the realms of both conventional and American 
Indian botany. Basically, each student gathers a collection of plants and 
identifies them in two ways. At home, from relatives or family friends, they 
learn the Indian name, uses, and preparation. Then, in class they identify 
them taxonomi cal ly and by their common English names. All possible nforma- 
tion is recorded for each plant by each student. The result for one class of 
say, 24 students is a huge collection of local plants having very thorough 
local and taxonomic information. 



Objectives: The students will: 

Bicul tural ly apply the fundamentals of classification.. 

Improve communication between themselves and community and family 
members via plant research and discussions. 

Preserve traditional scientific knowledge. 

Gain a base for future activities and experiments using local plants. 



Techniques and Information: 



IMPORTANT NOTE’ Before you carry out this lesson plan, ensure that it is 
modified for and approved by the community of which your students are a part. 
You may ensure this in several ways which are discussed in the introductory 
sections of the teachers' guide. 



A unit or introduction to classification should preceed this activity so 
that the students will be familiar with taxonomy and binomial nomenclature. 
If there is a tribal system of classification, it may be researched by stu- 
dents and included as another type of classification. 



The students may experience some difficulties in finding someone at home 
to help them with their plant identification. Encourage them to try alterna- 
tives but not to give up. There are numerous tribal resource routes the stu- 
dent and you may take. See the introductory section regarding tribal resource 
people in the beginning of this teacher's manual. As this may be one of the 
first bicultural activities you use, you may wish to ask a knowledgeable per- 
son from the community to come to class to talk about various uses of plants. 
This will show the students that it IS POSSIBLE to speak with an elder about 
the plants at home. What is also very effective is to ask an elder to 
accompany students when going out to collect plants. 

This activity is adjustable in how extensive you design it. If the class 
attempts to gather plants from all areas of the reservation or locale then 
this activity can be combined with studies which require visiting all local 
habitats. For example, the class may also be concerned with soil studies and 
at the various locations collect soil samples. Or they may be doing ecologi 
cal habitat studies such as in the water or land research activities. Ihis 
saves numerous trips to distant locations. Also, peruse the other lesson 
plans which require the use of plants so that you may coordinate their gather- 
ing with this activity. 




129 



13 7 



The Master Collection : It would be very valuable if you. the teacher could 

previously visit the collecting sites, photograph a slide of all the plants to 
be collected (with a relative measure . in the picture), collect the plant, and 
create a master collection. This (laminated?) collection would not only’have 
a slide of the plant attached to the paper holding the pressed plant but also 

have the taxonomic information keyed out so that students can identify their 

plants using the displayed master collection. Keying all the plants by having 
the students use references may not be suitable to large classes, since keying 
the plants is very time consuming and might take the botanical sleuth to some 
esoteric books. By using a master collection, students may still do some 

keying if they have plants not found in the master collection, but they may 
concentrate their efforts on gathering information at home. Also, they may 
borrow the slides from the master collection when their relatives do not 
recognize the plant in its pressed form due to discoloration from pressing. 

When it comes time for the students to scientifically identify their 
plants, simply tape your master collection up along the walls within range for 
the students to be able to read the navies. (Eventually you may wish to add 
i nf ormat i on the students bring from home to the back of your plants.) 

You should supply the students with label forms for their specimens. 

Sample labels are included at the end of this Teacher's Guide. 

For resources, the teacher may wish to use: 

Plant taxonomy guides -- a wide variety usually helps 
References dealing with plant use by American Indian tribes for gen- 
eral ideas and comparisons 

Local plant experts, not only in the tribe but also in the environ- 

mental sciences professions 

Original research in possible classification systems used by the 
tribe. 

Botanical references appropriate to the Southwest include: 

Dodge, Natt N. (1963) 100 Desert Wildflowers of Southwest Uplands in 
Natural Colors , Southwestern Monuments Association, Globe, AZ. 
Dodge, Natt N^ H967) 100 Roadside Wildflowers of Southwest Uplands 
in Natural Colors, Southwestern Monuments Association, Globe, 
AZ. 

Fox, Eugene J. and Sublette, Mary (1978) Ro ads i de F lowers of New 

Mexi co , Llano Estacado Center for Advanced ProfesiTonal Studies 
and Research, Eastern New Mexico University, Portales. 

Gould, Frank W. (1977) Grasses of Southwestern United States . 

University of Arizona Press, Tucson. 

Martin, Alexander C. (1972) W eeds (A Golden Guide) , Golden Press, New 
York . 

Patraw, Pauline. (1977 ) Flow ers o f th e Southwest Mesas , Southwest 

Parks and Monuments Association, Globe, AZ 
Spellenberg, Richard. (1979) The Audobon Society Field Guid e to 

North American Wildflowers (Western ~Re~gion ), kno'p'F New York. 




138 



During your introduction (A) as an assignment have the students identify 
who at home or in the community they will talk to about plants- (B) assure 
students that sensitivity to tribal ethics will be followed and plants with 
religious importance will not be collected (C) notify students of any legal 
rules and regulations. 

Plant collecting can be done with professional grade equipment, if avail- 
able. or with improvised materials Improvised plant presses such as stacks 
of books or rocks on boards work well. (Pressing plants under a car has 
worked successfully and only takes overnight!) Both lines of equipment are 
suggested in the students' materials sections. During the explanation of the 
activity, the professional terms for the equipment will be used (optimis- 
tically). 

For clear identification, it is easiest to limit students to collecting 
plants in bloom trees, shrubs, cacti or anything else unique and relatively 
easily identified. (Grasses, though important, are somewhat difficult, as are 
nonblooming plants) If the students return to class with plants which need 
to be kept overnight, for organization use one container of water per student 
-- the bottom halves of plastic jugs work well You may want the students to 
press plants as soon as they have brought them in; in this case, have the 
presses ready to go. 

Before the students attempt to press their plants, you may wish to demon- 
strate how to press plants using the procedure they have been given or adding 
your modifications. 

Evaluation; The Objectives may be used as guidelines when you design your own 
evaluation to this activity (Don't forget to evaluate non-academic skills 
such as technique, a "willingness" to try or teamwork.) You may wish to eval- 
uate the students on the following or on other criteria 

Their field techniques and plant preservation techniques. 

The description by students of the research process they went through 
at home. 

The plant collections (try to bring in experts from the community to 
judge or grade them) 

The subjective paragraph written by students at the end of the unit 
describing their reactions to the activities 

A quiz or unit test on the plant collections, including biological 
test on identification, tribal identification of plants, familiarity 
with tribal uses of plants, knowledge of techniques for traditional 
preparation. 

Extension: 

Research tribal cl as s i f i cat i on systems. 

Identify subspecies or other variations of common local plants. 

Set up displays in the community. 

Produce publications. 

Use pressed plants for fund raising. 

Compare the plant usage of the local tribe with that of other tribes 
Trace medical pharmacopaeia to plants used by American Indians. 

Look into the world-wide history of New World (indigenous) plant 
"d iscoveri es . " 



131 



O 



139 



Note: Label the top section with the name of the tribal language. Below that 

add the word for "name": in the tribal language. 

SAMPLE LABELS (cut into four on dotted lines) 



Local Uses: Local Uses: 



ENGLISH ENGLISH 

Name: Name: 

Scientific Name: Scientific Name: 

Characteristics: Character!' sti cs : 



Collected by: Collected by: 

Date Collected: ' Date Collected: 



Local Uses: 



Local Uses: 



ENGLISH 

Name: 

Scientific Name: 
Character!' sti cs : 



ENGLISH 

Name: 

Scientific Name: 

Character! - sti cs : 



Collected by: 
Date Col 1 ected : 



Collected by 
Date Collected: 






j •; '■ ■ 



132 



140 



Anthony Flores 

by Jeanne T. Bagnall 



Recently the Papago People have changed their name to Tohono 
O’odham which means Desert People. The Tohono O'odham (To-ho- 
no-Ah-thumb) Reservation is located along the Mexican border in 
Central Arizona. The Reservation covers 3 million acres of land, and 
is second in size to the Navajo Reservation. About 15,000 people live 
in the 50 villages on the Reservation. The Reservation is divided into 
11 political districts each with its own governing body, an elected 
council. Each elected council selects two representatives to the Tribal 
Council. The Tohono O'odham Agency Headquarters is located in 
Sells, Arizona. Sells is the Tribal Capital, and has a population of 
about 3,000 people. Most of the jobs are in Sells. The major 
employers, accounting for over 95 percent of the jobs are the Tohono 
O’odham Tribe, the Tohono O'odham Agency, and the various Indian 
Health Service programs. 

One program under the Indian Health Services is the 
Alcoholism Counseling section. Anthony Flores is an Alcoholism 
Youth counselor for his tribe. An Alcoholism Counselor works with 
and treats people who are abusers of alcohol. Before becoming a 
counselor, he was an Educational Aide at San Simon School (41 miles 
west of Sells) in kindergarten, first, second, and fifth grades. He 
taught his students to be proud of who they are and where they 
came from. Anthony felt that this concept would be the most 
important one his students would ever need to know. This is also a 



er|c 



133 



141 



self concept he has grown up with and one he takes great pride in. 
Being the traditional person that he is, he's had to struggle often with 
modern society and the influences they have had on him and his 
people. This is one of the reasons he became fluent in both his 
Native tongue and the English language. He realized that he would 
need both languages in order to survive in today's world. Anthony 
has tried to live in harmony with all creation and all people. This is 
the reason he feels his Creator brought him to the surface of the 
earth, to be respectful of nature and others, as well as oneself. He 
has learned to find uses for most everything he encounters in nature. 
He is not wasteful of nature. He does not rely on "modern 
technology" to survive, although he does use it at times. 

Anthony lives in a village 60 miles west of Sells. He travels to 
and from Sells every day to go to work. Anthony has a large family 
whose members live in different villages throughout the Reservation. 
He is a strong leader in his family. He has helped both himself and 
his family to become almost alcohol free. He plans • and organizes 
family outings to keep in close contact with all his family members. 
This also helps to secure and strengthen their family bond. 

Since Anthony chose to become an Alcoholism Counselor for his 
people, he accepts a big challenge every day of his life. His primary 
reason for becoming an Alcoholism Counselor was his concern for 
children that come from alcoholic families. He saw tremendous 
abuse of alcohol taking place among his people, and a great deal of 
precious life being wasted. Alcohol abuse and its effects were 
present in the students that he taught at school. Also, since he 
himself came from an alcohol-dependent family he was even more 



134 



142 



aware of the crisis. Coming from an alcohol-dependent family also 
helps him to understand and relate to the situations that his clients 
are in. 

Ethyl alcohol, or drinking alcohol, belongs to a class of chemical 
compounds that contain the elements Carbon (C), Hydrogen (H) and 
Oxygen (O). All alcohols contain a hydroxyl group-a combination of 
oxygen and hydrogen written chemically as -OH. Ethyl alcohol is 
made chiefly from grains including corn, rye and barley or fruits like 
grapes that have been allowed to ferment. Fermentation means that 
yeast convert the sugar in these foods to alcohol and carbon dioxide 
(the bubbly gas that rises to the surface when alcoholic drinks are 
opened or poured. This is the same gas in non-alcoholic carbonated 
drinks.) All alcoholic drinks-wine, beer, gin, whiskey, etc. contain 
the same kind of alcohol-ethyl alcohol: some just contain more 

alcohol than others. 

Alcohol has little food value and in large amounts it can 
interfere with normal behavior. Alcohol is a drug called a depressant 
because it slows the activities of the central nervous system. It is 
illegal to drive if your blood alcohol concentration is too high. Blood 
alcohol concentration is determined by the amount of alcohol 
ingested and the blood volume of the user. Alcohol is absorbed 

directly into the bloodstream. It does need to be digested before it is 
absorbed. 

Some adults like to drink alcoholic beverages because they like 
the taste, it improves their appetite or it helps them to relax. Some 
people, however, have an overwhelming desire to drink alcoholic 
beverages. These people are called alcoholics and the disease that 



er|c 



135 



143 



they have is called alcoholism. Alcohol is one of the leading causes of 
death each year and problems caused by alcoholism are especially 
severe on many Indian reservations. Some scientists believe that 
alcoholism has a genetic origin. That is, the compulsion to drink 
alcohol is a characteristic that is passed from parents to children. 
Some scientists believe that psychological factors such as stress may 
cause alcoholism. Whatever the cause, the effects are the same. 
People who ingest too much alcohol experience mental confusion, 
cannot walk steadily or talk clearly. Mothers who drink alcohol 
when they are pregnant risk having babies with fetal alcohol 
syndrome. These babies are abnormally small at birth, may have 
malformed organs and may be mentally retarded. The treatment for 
alcoholism involves caring for both the alcoholic's physical and 
emotional needs. 

Anthony counsels both junior high and high school age 
children. He takes a personal interest in each client's well being and 
welfare. He always puts the clients first and does what's best for 
them. In counseling his clients, he uses a variety of treatment 

methods. He uses one-to-one counseling in which he and the client 
work together to seek treatment. He also uses group counseling. In 
group counseling, he tries to develop student leaders among the 
group of clients. The student leaders help themselves, but also learn 
to help their fellow students as well. He uses several outdoor 
activities with his clients to show them that there are alternatives to 
alcohol use. He conducts both clinics and educational sessions within 
each school system. These sessions inform the students of the harm 
alcohol can cause and ways to prevent it. Anthony's primary concern 



136 



144 



in dealing with his clients is to help them find and accept their own 
identity. He also helps them to develop a good self concept since 
having a poor self concept is one reason many people turn to alcohol 
in the first place. Anthony also works under the Court Diversion 
Program for the Tribal Court System. The Court assigns him juvenile 
offenders that are in need of counseling. Anthony feels there is a 
tremendous amount of pressure involved in working with both 
juvenile offenders and young alcoholics. 

One traditional treatment that Anthony uses for himself and 
his family is the sweat lodge. The sweat lodge has a frame that is 
domed shape with one opening. It is constructed from willow tree 
branches, strips of cloth, and old tarps. The sweat lodge is 
considered a very sacred place and is treated with both honor and 
great respect. A large pit is dug outside the sweat lodge and a fire is 
built inside the pit. Huge rocks are then placed within the pit and 
remain there until they are hot enough to begin the ceremony. 
When the rocks are hot enough, they are carried on a pitch fork to 
the pit that's been dug inside the sweat lodge. Water is then 
sprinkled onto the rocks which creates steam. This cleanses a person 
and takes away any impurities (such as alcohol in the body). There 
are a lot of shared feelings and often, many emotions are displayed 
during the sweat lodge ceremony. 

For Anthony and his family another method of treatment is 
found in the Native American Church. In the Native American 
Church, which takes place in a traditional tee-pee, several types of 
traditional instruments are used. A kettle drum which consists of a 
tanned hide, a few small pebbles, a small amount of water, a rope. 



a'nd a kettle pot emits a beautiful sound when played upon. A gourd 
with small pebbles inside it also creates a soothing rhythmic sound, 
especially when it is played along with the drum. Singing is also 
included along with the playing of the music. Together this creates a 

most powerful display inside the tee-pee church, that can be heard 

from miles away. The Native American Church is also a very sacred 

and highly honored place. Although it is not the answer to all, it is 
the one that Anthony and his family have found to be of great 
strength. 

At the present time, Anthony is taking classes to become a 
State Certified Counselor. Since he is a member of his tribe they are 
helping him financially to complete his schooling. Anthony feels that 
all students should remain in school and do the best they can. They 
will need the schooling in order to become a better person in the 
working world. They also will then be in a better position to help 
their own people with their daily struggles. Anthony Flores knows 

what he’s talking about! 




138 



146 



ACTIVITIES 



1. Have the students write personal papers telling how it makes them feel when 
someone they know gets drunk or high. 

2. Have the students write papers explaining why alcoholism is referred to as a family 
disease. 

3. Have the students write papers explaining how each person in a family is important to 
the makeup of the whole family, how family members need each other’s help and 
support, and how the actions of family members affect other members. 

4. Have the students write papers telling what makes them feel good and bad and how 
they manage their feelings. 



139 



O 



147 



MATH QUIZ 



2 + 2=4 



1. Is alcoholism a problem on your reservation? What about on 
other reservations? Make a bar graph showing the percentage of 
alcoholism in at least five tribes. 



Using the sheet "How to Calculate Blood Alcohol Concentration Levels" 
answer the following questions: 

2. Whose blood alcohol concentration level is higher 

a man who weighs 200 lbs. and drinks 3 beers or 
a woman who weighs 120 lbs. and drinks 2 beers? 



3. Tom had 5 beers tonight. He weighs 150 lbs. What is his blood 
alcohol concentration level? 



148 

o 

ERiC 



140 



How To Calculate Blood Alcohol Concentration Levels (B.A.C.) 

Information Needed and Sample Problem 

B.A.C. is defined as the weight of alcohol (in grams,g) in 100 
milliliters (mL) of blood 

FACTS: 

In males, 60% of the total body weight is water weight (blood). 

In females, 55% of the total body weight is water weight (blood). 

1 can of beer (12 ounces) usually contains 3.2% alcohol by volume. 
That can be expressed as 3.2 mL of alcohol/100 mL of water. 

1 ounce contains 30 mL. 1 Kilogram contains 2.2 pounds. There are 
1000 mL in a Liter (L). There are 1000 g in a Kilogram. 

The density (g/mL) of water is 1. The density of alcohol is .8. 

PROBLEM AND SOLUTION: 

Calculate the B.A.C. level of a 175 pound male who just drank three 
beers. 

a. ) convert body weight from lbs. to kilograms 

175 lbs x 1 Kg/2.2 lbs = 79.5 Kg 

b. ) calculate body water (blood) volume 

79.5 Kg x .6 x lmL/lg x 1000g/l Kg x 1L/1000 mL = 

47,700 mL 

/ 

c. ) calculate the weight of alcohol in 3 cans of beer 

3.2 mL alcohol/100 mL water x 12 ounces/1 beer x 3 beers x 
30 mL/1 ounce x .8 g alcohol/1 mL alcohol = 27.6 g alcohol 



O 

ERIC 



141 



149 



d.) calculate B.A.C. (g alcohol/100 mL blood) 

27.6 g alcohol/47,700 mL blood = x g alcohol/100 mL blood 
(cross multiplying to solve the proportion we get: 

47,700x = 27600 

dividing both sides of the equation by 47,700 we get: 

x = .058 or rounding to hundreths, x = .06 

In Kansas, you can be cited for driving under the influence of alcohol 
if your B.A.C. is .1 or higher. 




150 



142 



OBSERVING THE EFFECTS 
OF ALCOHOL USE 
Student's Guide 




Focus of Inquiry: In real -life situations, how does alcohol affect humans, 

physically and behavioral ly? 

In this activity, you will be scientifically observing and analyzing the way 
alcohol affects people, both physiologically (in their bodies) and behavioral-, 
ly (in the way they act). You may also be making economic estimates as to how 
much money is spent on alcohol in a given day. You will be encouraged to 
develop your own ideas about the way alcohol affects people. Most of this 
will take place in a realistic situation, because you cannot necessarily learn 
everything about alcohol from a book. 

You will visit a local drinking spot or the local "drunk tank" and 
scientifically observe what is happening there. You will take field notes and 
complete the chart and eventually the worksheet which is provided. 

When you go into these realistic situations, please try to remain objec- 
tive when you observe people. If you see someone you know, please think of 
him or her as a neutral human being. The person will be referred to in your 
notes by letters, such as Person A or Person B, etc. Most societies in the 






143 



151 



world have problems with drinking. It is a human problem. In fact, you will 
probably encounter people of different backgrounds during this activity. 



Why Is This Important? This activity may be important to you: 

-- To see and learn about alcohol in a real situation. 

To try to scientifically observe a situation which you may find 
difficult to be objective in. 

To identify and observe the physiological and behavioral effects of 
al cohol . 

To estimate how much money is being spent and made on alcohol 
locally. 

To try to better understand the entire complex picture of alcohol 
use . 

If you go into medical fields or -counsel ing , experiences such as this 
-may benefit your professional work. 



Procedure: 

Material s : Clipboards, field form, binoculars (optional) 

1 In class, this activity will be introduced to you by your teacher, 

who will discuss how to go about the activity, the importance of 

being scientifically objective, and treating the experience 

seriously. 

2 On foot, or in a bus, you and the class will travel to a local drink- 
ing spot or "drunk tank." At the location, you should remain as dis- 

tant and unobtrusive as possible, while still being able to observe 
the people there. 

3 Observe how various people are acting. Use your binoculars if it is 
necessary and acceptable. Complete the field chart according to the 
instructions you find at the top. 

4 If you are at a place where liquor is being sold, try to keep a 
"guesstimate" of how much money is spent on liquor over a half hour 
period. Record on your chart. Do the calculation, when you are back 
in class. 

5 When you return to class, or, if you have time while you are still 
observing, review the behavioral and physiological character!' sties of 
the individuals you observed. Then, using the chart provided on your 
worksheet, estimate the number of drinks and blood alcohol level of 
the individuals you observed. 




144 



Observing the Effects of A1 cohol --F IELD CHART 



INSTRUCTIONS: Under the heading, Observed 3ehavior, you will describe what 

you see people doing in as much detail as possible. You will be looking for 

people who you believe have been or are drinking. If there are not many 

people there, the teacher may describe a hypothetical situation for you. 

Please put one action per box and assign letters to people, such as 
referring to someone as Person A or Person B, etc. 

In the second and third columns, you will be interpreting the resulting 
physiological and behavioral effects alcohol has on these people. You may 
select a physiological and/or behavioral characteristic from the following 
lists which you believe explains the action or behavior which you have de- 
scribed. Write these in the corresponding sections to the observed behavior. 

OR, you may wish to develop and write in your own 1 nterpretat ion--that means, 
not using one from the lists, but writing in your own ideas of what is causing 
them to behave the way they are. If you observe something which you do not 
believe is explained by the characteristics on the lists, again develop your 
own explanation. Your teacher may give you several examples for your chart. 



warmth and extremities 
become red 
-- Unconsciousness 
-- Death 

Lack of nutrition due to substi- 
tution of calories by alcohol 
Cirrhosis of 1 i ver--jaundiced 
(yellow color) or swollen liver 
Pellagra (lack of vitamin B leads 
to digestive problems and red spots 

(Remember to refer to people as Person A, Person B, Person C, etc.) 



PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS 



-- Central nervous system depres- 
sant (especial ly in cerebral 
cortex and reticular acti- 
vation systems) 



BEHAVIORAL EFFECTS 

Increase in verbal and 



assertive behavior 



Kidney function--di uretic 
Vasod il ator--feel ing of 



-- Reduction of anxiety 
Reduction of inhibition 
Aggression/violence 
-- Reaction time reduced 




J45 



153 



OBSERVED PHYSIOLOGICAL BEHAVIORAL 

BEHAVIOR EXPLANATION CHARACTERISTICS 




i 

I 



i 



T 

i 





154 

146 



Observing the Effects of Alcohol -- SUMMARY WORKSHEET 



On this worksheet, you will summarize your findings and estimate the 
amount of alcohol the person had consumed and approximate their alcohol blood 
levels using the chart provided below. 



Person Summary of behavioral and Estimated number Blood 

(letter) physiological symptoms of drinks Alcohol 

Level 




Financial Calculations: 

1. List here what you've seen purchased over the half hour period and 
estimate how much was spent on each purchase. 

What was Purchased Cost Estimate What was Purchased Cost Estimate 




147 




2. If that much was purchased consistently over a twelve-hour period, 
how much would be spent? 



3. If twelve hours of sales are normal for each day of the week. How 
much would be spent over a week, month, and year? 
(Week ) 

(Month) 

.(Year) 



4. ~What would you suggest to be a better use for this money? 





148 -^6 



BLOOD 

ALCOHOL 

CONTENT 


EFFECT 


NUMBER 

OF 

ORINKS 


.03 % 


Person becomes relaxed 
lessening of inhibitions 




.06 % 


Decrease in fine motor skills 
decreased coordination 


CM 

o 

to 

CM 


.09% 


Exaggerated behavior 
loss of good judgment 


1 

4 * or 4 


.12% 


Loss of coordination and balance 


S Mo, 5 ^ 


.15% 


Person is totally uncoordinated 
lack of alertness 


l 

- kKii 

6 9 or 6 


.4C% 


Unconsciousness occurs 


1 

<9 or 17 fcjJ 



1 ounce of 100-proof whiskey • 1 12-ounce beer 



NOTE: The above estimate nay vary with body weight and an individual's 

chemical make-up. 

Self Check: Do you know the following words? counselor, anonymous, rehabili- 

tation, physiological, behavior, cirrhosis, vasodilator , 5 diuretic, objective- 
ly, cerebral cortex, depressant, central nervous system, reaction time, 
hypothetical . 

In a paragraph or two, describe what you have learned by doing this 
activity. 





149 



1 57 



Going Further: 



-- Continue to look for ' phys i ol og ical /behavioral effects when you can 
observe people who have been drinking. 

-- Go to the local hospital to talk with doctors about their experience 
and ideas relating to alcohol. 

Visit a rehabilitation center. 

-- Research the most recent medical findings about alcohol use and 
abuse . 

Additional Resources: 

-- Alcohol or substance abuse counselors 
-- Alcoholics Anonymous 

-- Speak to a former or current heavy drinker 
-- Medical people -- both traditional and conventional 

Related Careers: You may wish to consider the following careers because the 

techniques you've used in this investigation are used by the following 
professionals: 

Psychologist 
-- Sociologist 

-- Substance abuse counselor, etc. 

-- Law enforcement 
-- Alcohol researcher 





O 

ERIC 



V. 



150 



153 



OBSERVING THE EFFECTS 
OF ALCOHOL USE 
Teacher's Guide 



Overview: With field research, this lesson reinforces classroom education 

about the physiological and behavioral effects of drinking alcohol. Although 
this activity is unusual and perhaps even controversial, it is, nevertheless, 
an amazingly effective means of studying alcohol consumption. 

The students visit a local drinking spot or local drunk tank and try to 
scientifically observe what is occurring. They take field notes and make 
interpretations . If they are observing at a place where liquor is sold, they 
also estimate the financial transactions taking place. The students do tend 
to take the activity seriously and are left with more objective and insightful 
impressions about drinking alcohol. 

This lesson plan was inspired by a comment from a professional (American 
Indian) health educator who claimed that one of the strongest impressions she 
had of alcohol, was when her junior high school teacher took the class to the 
"drunk tank" to simply observe people there. She attributed her moderate 
drinking habits to that experience. This activity is a modification of that 
profound educational experience. This activity incorporates scientific skills 
and concepts; it has options that may be carried out at a location that is not 
quite as intense as jail, is outdoors, and is probably easier to reach than a 
1 arge, 1 ocal jail . 

IMPORTANT NOTE: Before you carry out this lesson plan, ensure that it is 

modified for and approved by the community of which your students are a part. 
You nay ensure this in several ways which are discussed in the introductory 
sections of the teachers' guide. 

Objectives: The students will: 

-- Observe the effects of drinking alcohol in a realistic situation. 

-- Apply the physiological and behavioral concepts learned in class to a 
realistic situation. 

-- Calculate an estimation of money spent over a day, week, month and 
year. 

-- Develop or discover some insights about alcohol through original 
analysi s . 

Strive to remain objective in a situation which often warrants 
nonobjective reactions. 

Techniques and Information: This activity may be incorporated well into a 

unit dealing with alcohol or substance abuse. If it is to be used as part of 

a Physiology course, you may also tie it in to units such as blood chemistry 
or the nervous system -- anything related to the affects of alcohol. 

The class should already have a background or introduction to the socio- 
logical, physiological and behavioral effects of alcohol so that the informa- 
tion included on their charts is a review. For additional information about 
the physiol ogical /behavioral effects of alcohol, you may refer to college 
texts or references specifically concerning the subject. 





151 




In the field, the important point to impress upon the students is to try 
to remain objective. They should be encouraged to form their own opinions 
based on their observations. Try to schedule the activity at a time when you 
think there will be many subjects to observe. If nothing is going on in the 
field, you may wish to ask students to develop some hypothetical situations to 
use for their studies. Or, you may develop some scenarios and describe some 
behaviors which you hypothesize. Finally, you may try a blend of combining 
both the behaviors which are really taking place and filling in with some 
hypothetical situations. In all of these cases, it may be easiest to create 
characters such as Person E or Person R for the students to use to record on 
their charts. 

Evaluation: The Objectives may be used as guidelines when you design your own 

evaluation to this activity. (Don't forget to evaluate non-academic skills 
such as technique, and a "willingness" to try.) 

You may choose to use the following or other criteria for evaluating the 
students on this activity: 

-- The field and follow-up charts they complete. 

-- Their subjective paragraph about "what they learned." 

-- What their attitudes were to this somewhat different experience: did 

they remain objective? 

Extension: 

-- Research physiological effects on the cellular level --exactly what 
happens to nerve cells or other cells? 

-- Cooperate with a Social Studies, Sociology or Psychology class and 
research the effects of alcohol from a more sociological point of 
view. 

-- Research the latest findings in the effects of alcohol on the body 
and on behavior. 

Visit a rehabilitation center. 

-- Visit a local hospital and talk to doctors about the effects of 
al cohol . 

-- Ask a substance-abuse counselor, medical person or tribal specialist 
to give a guest presentation regarding the effects of alcohol.. 



O 



160 



SCIENCE STANDARDS ADDRESSED IN HEALTH UNITS - 



Standard — Understands the convictions scientists share about the nature of the world and 
what can be learned about it 
Benchmarks — 

Understands how science improves its predictions and explanations of the world through the 
continuous testing, revising and occasional discarding of theories; this leads to better 
understanding of the world, but not to absolute truth 

Understands that science can inform (but not resolve) moral decisions and other matters that 
cannot be proved or disproved, by identifying the likely consequences of particular actions 

Standard - Understands that scientific inquiry works in particular ways 
Benchmarks — 

Understands that experiments are done for different reasons, including to explore new 
phenomena, check previous results, to test a theory, and to compare different theories 
Understands that new/old ideas often encounter vigorous criticism in science, but are ultimately 
judged on how they fit with other theories and their capacity to explain and predict 
Understands that science has different traditions about what is studied and how, but there are 
shared beliefs in the value of evidence, logic and good arguments, and that progress in science 
comes from intelligence, hard work, imagination and even chance 

Standard - Understands the main individual, social, ethical and institutional aspects of 
science 

Benchmarks - 

Understands that research involving human subjects may be conducted only with the informed 
consent of the subjects 

Understands that science disciplines differ from one another in what they study, their techniques 
and goals, but share a common purpose and philosophy 

Standard - Knows about the diversity and unity that characterize life 
Benchmarks — 

Knows that the degree of kinship between organisms or species can be estimated from the 
similarity of their DNA sequences 

Standard - Understands the genetic basis for the transfer of biological characterisitics from 
one generation to the next 
Benchmarks — 

Knows that genes are segments of DNA molecules, and that inserting, deleting, or substituting 
portions of the DNA can alter genes; changes in DNA (mutations) can also occur when a cell is 
exposed to certain kinds of radiation or chemical substances 

Knows that fragments of DNA can be analyzed to identify the individual from which the sample 
of DNA came, diagnose human genetic abnormalities, and to study populations 

153 



161 



Standard - Knows that general structure and functions of cells in organisms 
Benchmarks - 

Knows that many molecular aspects of life processes of multicellular organisms occur in cells: 
cells are the sites of chemical syntheses and energy conversions essential to life 
Knows that cells are highly organized collections of chemical substances; the fundamental 
chemical substances of life are long chains of carbon atoms with differing functional groups, 
including carbohydrates, lipids, proteins and nucleic acids 

Knows the complex interactions among the different kinds of molecules in the cell cause distinct 
activities, such as growth and division; each metabolic event consists of many chemical 
reactions, each catalyzed by a specific enzyme 

Knows that exposure of cells to certain chemicals and radiation increases mutations and thus 
increases chances of cancer, a gene mutation that results in uncontrolled cell division 
Knows that when mutations occur in reproductive cells, the changes in genetic information can 
be passed on to successive generations 

Standard - Understands the human body as a system of cells with specialized and 
coordinated functions 
Benchmarks - 

Knows that the lungs take in oxygen for the combustion of food and release the carbon dioxide 
produced; the urinary system disposes of other dissolved waste molecules; and the skin and lungs 
rid the body of heat energy (which most of the energy in food eventually turns into) 

Knows that the immune system provides protection against microscopic agents/organisms that 
enter the body and against cancer cells that may arise from seemingly normal cells 
Knows the nervous system exerts its influences by electrochemical signals along nerves and 
from one nerve to the next 

Knows that the hormonal system exerts its influences by chemicals that circulate in the blood 
Knows that some drugs mimic the molecules involved in transmitting nerve or hormone signals, 
and therefore disturb normal operations of the brain and body 

Standard - Understands the conditions necessary for maintaining good physical health and 
why they are necessary 
Benchmarks - 

Knows that the body can sometimes “mistakenly” attack some of its own cells 

Knows that body parts or systems may work poorly for entirely internal reasons, such as a faulty 

gene: some genetic diseases become evident only when an individual has inherited a certain 

faulty gene from both parents (who may never have shown signs of the disease themselves) 

Knows that the environment may contain dangerous levels of substances that can be harmful to 

humans 

Knows that new medical techniques, efficient health care delivery systems, improved sanitation, 
and a fuller understanding of the nature of disease give today’s humans a better chance of staying 
healthy than their forebears had 

Knows that most people now live in conditions that are very different from the conditions under 
which the species evolved; some of the differences may not be good for health 

154 



ERIC 



162 



Standard - Understands how germ theory differs from earlier notions about what causes 
illness and how germs were discovered and linked to disease 

Knows that today, high-power imaging and biotechnology make it possible to investigate how 
microorganisms cause disease, how the immune system combats them, and how they can be 
manipulated genetically 

Standard — Understands some aspects of good mental health and the conditions that 
promote it 
Benchmarks — 

Knows that people differ greatly in the ways in which they attempt to cope with emotions 
Knows that ideas about what constitutes good mental health and proper treatment for abnormal 
mental states vary from one culture to another and from one time period to another 



AMERICAN INDIAN SCIENCE STANDARDS ADDRESSED IN HEALTH UNITS - 
Science as Inquiry 

Indian students should develop an understanding about science inquiry as a specific 
process/framework for investigating natural phenomena in order to infer how similar, but not 
necessarily identical, processes- involving skills such as acute observation, formulation of 
hypotheses, classification, measurement, and communication - were used by different American 
Indian peoples in the past to investigate and explain natural phenomena. 

Life Science 

Indian students should develop an understanding of how atoms and molecules cycle among 
living components and relate that to traditional tribal paradigms such as the Circle of Life, the 
Beauty Way, the Red Road, etc. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of the fundamental tension between living 
organisms’ capacity for infinite growth and the finite nature of environments and resources and 
to relate knowledge of this tension to traditional American Indian values about ecology. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of the chain of plant and animal life and relate 
this knowledge to the traditional American Indian beliefs about the interdependence of living 
things. 

Science and Technology 

Indian students should develop an understanding of the importance of knowledge about science 
and technology as it applies to contemporary Indian communities. 

Science in Personal and Social Perspectives 

Indian students should develop an understanding of factors - including cultural beliefs and 
values, historic/contemporary practices - that contribute to their tribe or community’s overall 
health. 



155 



* 

ft 



O 




163 



Indian students should develop an understanding of historic and contemporary contributions of 
American Indians to current knowledge about conservation and healthy ecological practices and 
how these relate to application of modem science and technology in local, regional, national and 
global circumstances/problems. 

History and Nature of Science 

Indian students should develop an understanding of science as it is practiced by American Indian 
scientists and science/technology related professionals in their communities. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of various opportunities for science careers in 
heath and health/related fields. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of American Indian contributions to science in 
such areas as medicine, botany, psychology and ecology. 



156 



0 



i v >. 



164 



INDIAN ART 



There are artists in every Indian tribe. This has always been the way. Every tribe 
probably had something only they made - a special way of showing their artistic talent. 
Indian people used things in their natural environments to make art objects. That’s one 
reason Indian art is not the same in one place as it is in another. Over the years culture 
groups borrowed from each other. Indian artists are still at work making things that tell 
us about their tradition. Some Indian artists are borrowing from the art of the past or 
from other tribal groups to create something brand new. Pieces of Indian art help us 
understand what cultures were like and are like today. Indian people have found many 
ways to express their love of beauty and their creative talents and have used science in 
their endeavors. 

LITERATURE FOR INDIAN ART UNIT - 

Native Artists of North America by Reavis Moore. 

Patrick Desjarlait: Conversations with a Native American Artist by Patrick Desjarlait 
(Indian Author and Artist), Runestone Press. Ojibwa 

Contemporary American Indian Artists by Dawn Reno. 

R. C. Gorman-Navajo Artist, Available from Four Winds Books, York, NE. 

Tending the Fire, The Story of Maria Martinez by Juddi Morris. Pueblo 

This Song Remembers: Self-Portraits of Native Americans in the Arts ed. by Jane Katz, 
Houghton-Mifflin, 1980. 

Artists and Craftspeople, American Indian Lives Series, available from Four Winds 
Indian Books, York, NE. 

All My Relations: Sharing Native Values Through the Arts by Catherine Verall and 
Lenore Keeship-Tobias. Canadian Alliance in Solidarity with Native Peoples, 1988. 

Sea and Cedar by Lois McConkey, Firefly, 1973. Northwest 

Morning Star Quilts by Florence Pulford. 

The Star Quilt, a Symbol of Lakota Identity by Marla N. Powers, Lakota Books, 1990. 
Simply Seminole: Techniques and Designs in Quiltmaking by Dorothy Hanisko. 

Indian Basketry by George Wharton James. 



157 



O 

ERIC 



165 



Basketry by E. J. Christopher. 

American Indian Basketry by Otis Tufton Mason. 

Native American Beadwork by Georg J. Barth. 

Complete Guide to Traditional Native American Beadwork by Joel Monture (Indian 

Author). 

The Technique of Porcupine Quill Decoration by Wm. C. Orchard. 

Navajo Rugs by Don Dedera. 

Weaving a Navajo Blanket by Gladys A. Reichard. 

Making North American Pottery by Michael Simpson (Indian Author). 

Zuni: A Village of Silversmiths by James Ostler, Marian Rodee and Milford Nahohai 

(Indian Author), 1996. 

Native America: Arts, Traditions & Celebrations by Christine Mather. 

Check your libraries for other books on Indian art. 

ACTIVITIES FOR INDIAN ART UNIT - 

1 . Have the students learn about Indian art, read cultural materials and hear 
cultural perspectives relating to this topic, and experience Indian art through 
observation and projects. 

2. Have the students research Indian art objects from the local tribe(s) and their 
history. 

3. Have students visit local museums and other displays of Indian art. Who are 
some tribal artists? Have them visit the class and explain their art. 

4. What science was utilized in the making of various art objects? What math 
was utilized? What math is utilized in marketing art objects? 

5. Have the students research the cost of Indian art. Have students learn that 
many artists are self-employed and the economics of that. Some Indian 
artists work for others. What sorts of jobs might they have? 

6. Have students select various types of Indian art, read about it and read about 
artists that do that kind of art. 

158 



166 



7. Have the students do various art projects. 

8. Have students draw conclusions from their study of Indian art and display 
them along with their art projects at the Tribal office or other public place. 

Following are example activities developed by teachers of Indian students who attended 
math and science workshops during 1992-1994 at Haskell Indian Nations University and 
the Math and Science Teachers for Reservation Schools (MASTERS) Project at the 
University of Kansas. Adapt these activities to meet the needs of your students. Review 
the science standards for this unit. They will suggest further science and math activities. 



159 



167 



Louise Bigmeat Maney 

by Lillie Larch 



Louise Bigmeat, a Cherokee, grew up on the Qualla Boundary of 
the Eastern Cherokee Nation located in Western North Carolina. As a 
little girl of four or five years of age, Louise recalls that pottery 
making was a family affair. She recalls that her older brother would 
hitch up the steer to their sled and the whole family, including 
Louise and three older sisters would travel to a place on Soco Creek 
near Macedonia Church. There the family dug clay out of the ground 
and put it into sacks. Then they hauled it home which was three or 
four miles away. It seemed a long trip in those days. The trip was 
hot and dusty and the main Soco road was unpaved. 

Once the clay was home, it was spread out on the ground to 
dry. When dry, the clay was pounded with hammer stones until it 
was a coarse powder. Then it was put into water and allowed to set. 
Bits and pieces of sticks, grass, and leaves would float to the top 
where they were removed. This process usually took a week or 
longer. The bits of grass, sticks and leaves that float to the top of the 
water-clay mixture are less dense than water. That is why they 
float. Things that are more dense than water would sink. Density is 
a scientific term that means mass (or for our purposes, weight) 
divided by volume. The equation for this is written D=M/V. The 
density of water is 1 gram (g)/milliliter(mL) which means that 1 
gram of water takes up 1 milliliter of space. The density of the 
floating materials must be less than than 1 g/mL then. 

168 

160 



It is important to remove foreign materials like leaves and 
grass because if they are not removed the pottery would probably 
crack when fired because different materials expand at different 
rates when heated. 



When the pot was completed, it was decorated. Cherokee 
pottery tools were very simple, consisting of a smooth river stone, a 
small piece of pointed stick used for incising, and a carved wooden 
paddle which was slapped against the sides of the pottery. A 
common paddle design was the checkerboard pattern. After the 
designs had been added to the pottery, it was allowed to dry for a 
few days, depending on the weather. 



When the pottery was dry, it was rubbed and polished inside 
and out using the river stone. The stone was kept wet by constantly 
dipping it into water. As the wet stone is rubbed against the clay pot 
the rough surface is smoothed. The particles of clay that stand out 
are removed by polishing. The water on the stone makes it easier to 
move the stone against the clay (reduces friction) and also washes 
away the particles of loosened clay. The smooth surface of the clay is 
flat and this changes its reflective properties. It is much like 
polishing wooden furniture except the rough surfaces are filled in 



rather than worn off. 

When a number of pottery pieces had been completed, they 
were ready for firing. Clay is fired or dried with heat so that it will 
not decompose. If clay is just air-dried it will crumble and return to 
mud if it is mixed with water. When clay is fired a chemical change 
occurs (clay is converted to ceramic) but when it is air-dried a 
physical change occurs. Clay is earth but not all earth is clay. Clay is 




161 



169 



hard when it is dry but sticky and slippery when it is wet. Clay is 
earth that is made of decomposed granite called feldspar. Feldspar is 
a mixture of silicates including these two common chemical formulas: 
KjO'AljCy bSiO^ and Na^O'A^Oj'bSiO^. Clay is found in many places 
because granite covers much of the earth's surface. 

When Louise was a small girl, two methods of firing were being 

used on the Qualla Boundary. One quick method, to save time was to 

fire the pottery in the cook stove. The other method Louise 
described was one using an outside fire. This was the traditional 
method. A hole was dug in the bank. A fire was built in the hole 

(dirt makes great insulation). The pottery was placed near the fire 

and as the pottery heated, it was moved closer to the fire. When the 
pottery was hot it was placed face down in the hot coals and bark 
was placed on top. This was left to bum overnight. When the ashes 
cooled the pottery was removed. Pieces would often break during 
the firing process because the pots were heated too quickly or 
unevenly and thus some areas of the pots expanded more quickly 
than other areas. 

Louise states that sometimes her family used the cook stove 
method and sometimes a combination of the two methods were used. 
The pottery was first heated in the oven and then fired outside. 
Today Louise fires all of her pottery in an oil drum. 

There is an interesting facet of the firing process which 
involves the burning of different types of wood. Clay found on the 
Qualla Boundary is white clay. When pots made from white clay are 
fired using hard woods such as locust or oak, the pottery takes on 
pink or grey tones. When soft woods such as pine are used the 



O 

ERIC 



162 



170 



pottery is dark or black. (Hard wood refers to the wood of 

deciduous trees while soft wood refers to the wood of coniferous 
trees. The terms hard wood and soft wood have nothing to do with 
the texture of the wood.) This is because different woods produce 
different temperatures when they are burned. The firing 
temperature affects both the appearance and the strength of- the 
pottery. Oftentimes unusual effects are achieved in the blending of 
tones. The results of firing pottery in this method can be observed in 
present day pottery. 

Pottery making has been very much a part of Louise's life. She 
was selling her own pottery by the time she was seven years old. 
Louise also has two older sisters who make pottery and the name, 
Bigmeat Pottery, is recognized by many. Louise states that during 
her teen years she stopped making pottery. But she married and 

took up pottery making again. The one difficulty Louise faced with 
her pottery was selling it. She had to sell her pottery because she 

needed the income; but she found it demeaning to have to approach 
the shops and ask the owners to buy her pottery. She would have to 
accept whatever they paid her. Her one desire concerning her 

pottery was to have people come to her and ask to buy her pottery. 

Louise has worked at the Cherokee Elementary School for the 
past nineteen years as a paraprofessional. She is a member of the 
cultural heritage committee there and because of her desire to teach 

pottery to the children, she took classes at Western Carolina 

University located near Cherokee. There she learned to make 

pottery using the wheel. Three years ago Louise and her husband, 

John Henry, opened their own shop on Soco Road and are doing very 



well in their business. Much of their pottery is made on a wheel and 
an oil drum is used for firing. The clay is also bought commercially. 
When talking to Louise she said, "Finally people are coming to me to 
ask to buy my pottery." 

One main concern that Louise has today is that the young 
people are not learning traditional crafts. She wants to get a cultural 
center started at school or elsewhere if she has to, where children 
can go and learn pottery making and other traditional crafts. By 
doing so some of the Cherokee heritage will remain alive. 



172 



CONTENT QUIZ 




1. Where did the Cherokee people get their clay? 

2. Why was pottery making called a family affair with the 
Bigmeat family? 

3. Why did the sticks and stones have to be removed from the 
clay? 

4. Why didn't the early Cherokees use the quick method to make 
pottery? 

5. What tool was used to polish the pots before the firing? 

6. What is meant by polishing the pottery? 

7. Tell what would happen if the pottery was not heated before it 
was placed in the hot coals. 

8. What two types of woods are used for firing the pottery? 

9. Explain what effect soft woods and hard woods have on the 
pottery. 

10. Why does Louise want to teach children to make pottery? 

1 1 . What tools were used in Cherokee pottery making? 



VOCABULARY EXERCISES 




Look at the words on the left. Find the correct definition from 
the list on the right. Match each word to the correct definition. 



1 . 


blend 


a. 


an oven for drying or hardening 
pottery 


2. 


coarse 


b. 


a form of civilization, particularly the 
beliefs, arts, and customs 


3. 


coil 


c. 


the regular way of doing something 


4. 


culture 


d. 


objects molded from clay and fired 
by intense heat 


5. 


cylinder 


e. 


below the surface 


6. 


depression 


f. 


having large particles 


7. 


effect 


g* 


to mix together smoothly 


8. 


heritage 


h. 


general shape; form 


9. 


incising 


i. 


a series of connecting rings 


10. 


kiln 


j- 


the culture that is passed down from 
one generation to another 


11. 


method 


k. 


something produced by a cause 


12. 


mold 


1. 


something handed down by past 
generations 


13. 


pottery 


m. 


tints or shades of color 


14. 


tones 


n. 


making or cutting into with a sharp 
tool 


15. 


traditional 


0 . 


a long, round object 




166 



174 



Mary Charley Rafael 

by Nancy R. Yazzie 



Mary was born in Manuelito, New Mexico on August 15, 1915, 
of the Mexican clan. She knew only her mother; her father died 

when she was very young. She is a descendant of Chief Manuelito's 
second wife. She married Steven Charley at age 14 and lived with 
him for ten years. After Steven died, she married Tom Rafael. She 
herded sheep and wove rugs for a living. Her husband then became 
a councilman for the Navajo Tribal Government in 1956 and during 
this time Mary learned how to work with silver and make jewelry 
for the traders. 

Mary is a woman of many talents. In addition to ranching, 

(Mary raised sheep and cattle and also trained riding horses and 
work horses because there was no one else in her family to do it.), 
weaving, and jewelry making, she is also an herbalist and a medicine 
woman. 

As a silversmith, rings are a favorite of Mary's. To make a ring 
you need 24 gauge silver for the bottom plate, 30 gauge silver for 
the bezel (bezels are frames for stones) and half round silver wire 
(round on one side, flat on the other thus . . . half round) for the 
shank. The sizes of the plate, bezel and shank all depend upon the 
size and design of the ring. 

Designs such as leaves can be cut from bottom plate scraps. 
Balls are easy to make because as silver scraps are heated the silver 
melts and forms naturally into spheres. 



er|c 



167 



175 



To join the parts of the ring together they are soldered. 
Soldering requires silver solder, flux and an acetylene torch. Flux is 
a substance applied to prevent oxide formation and facilitate flowing. 
Beginning jewelers often work with copper rather than silver as they 
learn the art. Copper is much less expensive and yet it has a melting 
temperature (1083° C) that is somewhat close to that of silver (961° C). 
The malleability (ability to be hammered into various shapes) of 
copper and silver is similar making the transition from copper to 
silver easy. 

To put the ring together, you size the bezel around the stone 
you are going to use. Apply flux with a fine paint brush to the area 
to be soldered. Carefully heat the silver and fluxed area. When the 
flux is heated and starts to blend over the silver, lightly touch silver 
solder to the joined area. The solder should quickly melt, soldering 
the two edges together. Be careful not to heat it too much or it may 
melt. Make sure the bezel fits the stone before soldering it onto the 
bottom plate. After the bezel is soldered to the plate, you can design 
your ring using leaves and silver balls. The shank has to be flattened 
out about a quarter of an inch from the end and filed to smooth out 
the rough edges. Then the shank is shaped on the ring size 
(mandrel). After the top piece is designed to specification, it is 

finally soldered onto the shank. The finished product is then cleaned 
in a solution of sulfuric acid (H^SO^), rinsed and dried. Finally the 
stone is put into the bezel. The ring is now ready to be polished. 

The thickness of silver wire or sheet is measured with a wire 
gauge. The gauges of silver used for rings and bracelets range from 
18-30. The smaller the number, the thicker the plates are. The 



168 176 



larger the number, the thinner the plates are. The concept of these 
numbers can be compared with fractions in mathematics. The 
smaller the denominator, the bigger the piece. The larger the 
denominator, the smaller the piece. 

The first recorded Navajo silversmithing (around 1853) was 

done by Atsidi Sani (Old Smith) known to the Mexicans as Herrero 

Delgadito. He probably learned silversmithing from a Mexican 
captive. By 1864, there were two or three Navajos making a few 
silver buttons and bracelets. The first examples included both plain 
and engraved items. Later crude handmade punches were used to 
make patterns copied from saddle patterns. The first silver used was 
obtained from silver dollars furnished by the soldiers at Fort 
Defiance, Arizona and Fort Wingate, New Mexico. 

In 1871 a trading post was opened in Ganado and Navajos 

traded silver jewelry for other items. Leonard, an early owner of the 
Trading Post, furnished the Navajos with American half-dollars 
which they used for silver. Colonial artisans also used U.S. coins as 
the metal for their silver work. About 1890, the U.S. government 
enforced laws against defacing coins. Another Trading Post owner, 
John Hubbell, imported Mexican pesos which the silversmiths 

preferred because pesos were easier to work with than half-dollars 
due to their higher silver content. Later, the Mexican government 
forbade the exportation of their pesos so John Kirk of Chinle asked a 
refinery to send him silver disks the size of a peso. The refinery 
could not make these but instead sent him small squares of silver 
weighing one ounce each. By 1932, slugs from Los Angeles’ 
refineries had replaced the pesos. Silver sheets (plates) of various 



169 



177 



thicknesses were introduced in the late 1920's eventually replacing 
the slugs. These silver sheets are the ones Mary uses today to make 
her jewelry. 

Silver, a precious metal, is a mineral that is mined from the 
ground. It is the most purely white of all the metals. Its chemical 
abbreviation is Ag from the Latin word for silver, argentum. 
Because its chemical abbreviation can be found on the Periodic Table 
of the Elements that means that silver is an element. There are 92 
natural elements (can be found in nature) and elements are the 
simplest form of matter. The metals are located on the left side of 
the Periodic Table while the non-metals are located on the right side. 
There are many more metals than non-metals though. Nearly 80% of 
the known elements are metals. Most metals are shiny. They are 
good conductors of heat and electricity. Copper (Cu), silver (Ag) and 
gold (Au) are all metals. Copper and silver are found in the same 
column in the Periodic Table. Elements found in the same column 
are said to belong to the same family. They have similar properties 
such as melting point. Nonmetals are not shiny and are not good 
conductors. Nonmetals are found nearly everywhere. Oxygen (O), 
Hydrogen (H) and Nitrogen (N) are all nonmetals. 

Silver is the oldest known metal. It was mentioned in Chinese 
classics as early as 2500 B.C. Silver is a very soft metal although it is 
harder than gold. Objects made of silver contain varying amounts of 
other metals to make them hard and durable. For example, sterling 
silver contains 92.5% silver and 7.5% copper. Silver resists organic 

acids and is used for lining vats, tanks and other containers in the 
chemical and food industries. Large quantities are used for electrical 

170 





conductors, dental fillings and surgical wires and plates. Silver is 
mined in Idaho, Arizona, Utah and Montana. It comes in the form of 
ore (which means that it is found with other materials in the ground) 
and it has to be refined (and separated from the other materials) 
before it is used in jewelry and other products. Metals are non- 
renewable resources. 

In the early 70's when silver became a booming industry in the 
Southwest, Mary was asked to teach silversmithing in an Adult 
Education class for six months. She used copper for her instruction. 
Many students she taught are making Indian jewelry for a living. 

Although she has never attended school, Mary is always willing 
to share her knowledge and skills in both silversmithing and 
weaving. Mary's talent for silversmithing is well known in Navajo 
land. Perhaps one day you will purchase and wear a piece of jewelry 
that Mary or one of her many students made. 




1 79 

171 



CONTENT OIJTZ 




True or False 

1. The art of soldering is easy for beginners. 

2. Solder means to join metal together. 

3. Silver is used to make Indian jewelry. 

4. You need 24 gauge silver for the bezel. 

5. You need 32 gauge silver for the bottom plate. 

6. Heating and soldering temperatures are about the same for 

silver and copper. 

7. In the 1800's, the silver ornaments worn by the Navajos were 
obtained from the Mexicans. 

8. The Navajos learned silversmithing from the Mexicans. 

9. Atsidi Sani was the first known Navajo silversmith. 

10. Silver is no longer used for jewelry. 

1 1 . The chemical symbol for silver found on the periodic chart is 

Esl. 

12. Silver is mined in California, Texas and New York. 

13. A silversmith is a person whose occupation is making and 

repairing articles of silver. 

180 



172 




VOCABULARY ACTIVITIES 




Define these words 


and use each word 


in a sentence. 


solder 


acetylene 


soldering 


ornaments 


silversmith 


gauges 


silver 


shank 


ore 


bezel 


flux 


weld 


copper 


precision 


transition 


knowledge 


ailments 


specification 


denominator 


refine 


mineral 



AMAM1 A ©Q g 

BEbT uuri? mttibttOLC 



181 

173 



O 

ERIC 



MATH - 



“YOUR GUESS IS AS GOOD AS MINE” 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

Students will understand how to estimate numbers, volume, and water 
displacement of culturally relevant objects. 

MATH OBJECTIVE: 

Students will know how to use whole numbers, fractions, decimals, and 
percent equivalents interchangeably in making estimates. 

TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

Maize (Indian com) and beans are shown on a Hopi medallion sharing a 
circle. They grow together through the center and complete the two halves 
of the design with their leaves. Beans and maize have a spiritual unity since 
they grow best together. The cornstalk provided a pole for the beans to climb. 
The bean roots contain nitrogen-fixing bacteria providing needed elements 
to the soil for the maize. This is a natural partial symbiosis (a relationship 
between two species in which each provides something the other can use). 
This was only one way the Native Americans preserved the fertility of the soil. 
Maize plants were seen as holy people and were raised with the care one 
would give a baby. Beans constituted the second staple crop of Southwestern 
farmers-chiefly kidney, lima, and tepary beans. 

Trees were respected and not wasted so as not to offend them. Plants were 
created before animals. They could exist alone. Each tree contains its own 
soul-spirit giving it a physical form, growth, and self-healing gift. It could join 
with other members of its own species to form a corporate spirit. They have 
many purposes, all of them good. Plants help men in their growth and 
existence, some heal, others give beauty and inner strength. The fluid of 
trees is nutritious. 




182 

174 - 



•THE LEGEND OF THE BIRCH TREE" 



'The birch tree suffered enormously from the itch; he squirmed, he writhed 
in discomfort. Though he had enormous limbs, arms, and fingers, he could 
not scratch. There was nothing the birch tree could do to relieve his 
sufferings. 

In his agony the poor birch called out to the squirrels and porcupines and 
beavers to pick out the ticks, grubs, and beetles that were tormenting him. But 
the squirrels and porcupines and beavers were too busy to offer any help. 
The best they could do was to give their sympathy without limit. 

Next the birch called out to the birds. They too felt sorry for the birch, but they 
could do nothing. Only the woodpeckers came to help. Coming to the aid of 
the poor tree, the downy woodpecker, his cousin, the red-headed woodpecker, 
the flicker, and the chickadee all picked every pest from beneath the bark of 
the birch. The birch tree ceased itching. 

Many years later the woodpeckers were in distress. Not knowing what to do 
or from whom they could find help, they, at last came to the birch and related 
a sad story. In the long rainless spell, the woodpeckers were dying from thirst. 
The woodpeckers were unable to drink from pools and lakes and streams, 
like other birds could. 

’Could’ they asked, ’you do something?’ 

The birch, remembering the help that he had received from the woodpeckers 
said to them, 'Go to my trunk and drill two holes near each other and they will 
presently fill up with my sap.' 

The desperate woodpeckers flew down and drummed away at the trunk of the 
tree, until they had drilled two tiny holes. Almost immediately the holes began 
to fill up and yield a rich flow of sap. Thirstily, the woodpeckers drank and they 
have been drinking from trees since that time. 

From the woodpeckers the Anishinabeg learned that trees yield sap and that 
trees could be tapped. Like the woodpecker, the Anishinabeg tapped the 
birch for a vinegar tasting drink and later tapped the maple for a sweet drink." 



From Native American Science and Mathematics. Don Anderson, Federal 
Education Division N. A. S. & M. 



O 

ERIC 




This story tells how the Cherokees learned howto use clay to make pottery. 
(Taken from Cultural Curriculum for Communities.) 

In ancient times, there lived a kindhearted girl who was good to all living 
creatures. She was especially kind to insects. She felt they needed 
protection since most of them were so small. If she found a butterfly caught 
in a stream, floating unable to fly, she would take the butterfly out of the water 
and place it on the ground to dry. She was always helping insects who were 
in trouble. 

One day she went to the spring to get some water. She was carrying her bark 
bucket. This was the kind of bucket the Cherokees used to carry water. 
These buckets were made of bark and put together with a sticky substance 
that held the bark together. They were good for carrying water. It took 
considerable time to make these buckets, so they were used with care. A 
hard jolt or dropping the bucket would surely break it. 

She was careful never to drop the bucket. She bent down to dip her bucket 
into the spring. She heard a strange buzzing sound. She stood up, trying to 
locate the sound. It was coming from the spring. Shesawamuddauberwasp 
stuck in the water. It looked tired and exhausted from trying to get out of the 
water. It was going in circles. The dauber wasp could not get out of the water. 
The mud dauber’s wings were wet and he couldn’t fly. She wanted to help 
the dauber wasp, but she was afraid. She was afraid it would sting her. She 
filled her bark bucket with water from the spring. She walked several steps 
and stopped. She felt bad about leaving the dauber wasp in the water. It 
would die. She returned to the spring. 

She decided to help the wasp even if it stung her. She took a long stick and 
put the stick down in the water near the wasp. She moved the stick nearer 
the wasp for him to climb upon. The wasp climbed upon the stick. He looked 
very wet and tired. She knew his wings were too wet for him to fly. She 
decided to take the stick out of the water. She placed the stick with the wasp 
on some dry leaves in the sunshine. It could lie safely in the sun until its wings 
were dry enough to fly. 

She picked up her bark bucket and went home. Her mother was waiting for 
the water. Sometime later she returned to the spring to get more water. She 
tripped on some rocks and fell. Her bark bucket flew through the air and 
shattered into many pieces as it hit the ground. She began picking up the 
pieces. She didn’t knowwhatto do with them. She had been told it took many 
hours to make a bark bucket. She couldn’t make one. She didn’t know how, 
and besides she was told to hurry back with the water. 



T8t 



She began to cry. She sat down on a log and sobbed so hard her tiny body 
shook. There was a buzzing sound nearby. She couldn’t hear the sound for 
her crying. It was the dauber wasp she had rescued several days earlier. The 
mud dauber buzzed near her ear. He wanted her to stop crying and hear what 
he had to say. She finally heard the buzzing sound. She looked down and 
next to her on the log was a dauber wasp. The dauber wasp wasted no time 
in speaking for fear she would begin crying again. The dauber wasp said, 
"Don’t feel so badly, I will teach you something very useful. I will teach you 
to make many things. You will be able to teach your people. You will be of 
great help to your people." 

The dauber wasp told the girl to follow him to the creek. He flew ahead of her. 
He stopped and landed on the soft clay next to the creek. The girl sat down 
on a log and watched him. He began to take small lumps of clay from the creek 
bank. He took these lumps of clay to the log where the girl was sitting. The 
mud dauber wasp flew back and forth from the log to the creek bank. When 
he had enough clay to make a small pot, he stopped. He told the girl to watch 
closely. He began to mold and shape a small pot. The small pot was shaped 
like an acorn. The dauber wasp had a small wooden paddle. He used the 
paddle to make designs on the pot. When he had finished, it was a beautiful 
pot with many small designs on it. He told the girl to remember all he had done 
in making the pot. He told her to go to her people and share her knowledge 
with them. The little girl went home. She took the small pot with her. She 
showed it to her people. She told them of the wise mud dauber wasp. The 
people in her village were surprised. They had never seen such a beautiful 
pot. It was a well-made pot. The designs on it were beautiful. 

The girl’s father listened carefully. He made her a wooden paddle. He carved 
beautiful designs on it. Next, he went to the creek and got some clay. He 
worked the clay as the mud dauber wasp had instructed. The girl helped her 
father. Together they worked all sticks and rocks out of the clay. They let the 
pure clay set for a while before they shaped and molded it for a pot. They were 
careful not to forget anything the dauber wasp had said. When they had 
finished the pot, they patted designs on the outside with the wooden paddle. 
It was almost like the pot the dauber wasp had made. However, it was much 
larger. It was large enough to hold water. It would hold as much water as her 
bark bucket. The girl and her father were happy. This was the beginning of 
pottery making for the Cherokees. It all began because a little girl was kind 
to a wise mud dauber wasp. 




177 



This Chitimacha legend tells how this Native American tribe of southern 
Louisiana learned to make dugout canoes: 

One day the Great Spirit came and took several men out to the forest and told 
them to take some mud, place it around the cypress tree about shoulder high, 
then set the trunk of the tree afire and let it bum until it fell. The mud was 
packed tight, and the fire could not go above it. When the tree had fallen, He 
showed them how to pick the right part of the tree and length they needed for 
a canoe. This accomplished, they were shown how to bum off the bottom and 
ends, also using the mud pack to control the fire. When the burning was 
finished, they were told to take clam shells and scrape all the charred part off. 
The outside complete, the canoe was set upright, a fire was made on the top 
of the log for the full length. This was left to bum and to the desired depth and 
if they wanted to stop it from burning too much on the sides they could pack 
it with mud so the burning could go to the right depth. The canoe was then 
scraped in the same manner as the bottom. (Taken from The Chitimacha 
People .) 




186 

o 

ERLC 



178 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 



1 . Ask students to share all they know about the importance of com to the 
Am©rican Indian. Show students a 1/2 cup of unpopped com. Have 
them estimate how many times the popcorn will increase. Pop the com 
and measure. 

2. Discuss background information on beans. Estimate how many 
beans will fill a cylindrical container. Calculate the volume of the 
cylinder. Count the beans to check the estimate and calculation. 
Challenge question: Find the average volume of a bean. 

3. Tell the legend about the birch tree and discuss it. Estimate the 
number of leaves on a tree. How can the estimate be checked for 
accuracy? 

4. Tell the legend of how the Cherokees learned to make pottery from 
clay. Estimate the amount of clay to be used to make a solid figure of 
a certain size. Make the figure to determine the accuracy of the 
estimation. 

5. Have students each take a ball of clay of equal mass, make different 
objects and explain the ability to have many different types of objects 
from the same amount of clay. The groups can compare ideas and 
examples. 

6. Discuss the legend of how the Chitimacha Indian men were taught to 
make dugout canoes. Explain the difference in weights of canoe and 
water displacement. Why did different tribes use different materials 
to make their canoes? Each student could make a birchbark or a 
dugout canoe. Create a chart or graph to illustrate findings. 

7. Talk about the significance of drums to Native Americans. Tell the 
class they are going to begin the construction of two drums. Have 
students use two pieces of cardboard the same size. Roll one piece 
of cardboard horizontally and calculate the volume of the cylinder. 
Roll the other piece vertically and calculate the volume of the cylinder. 
How are the two volumes related? Are they the same or different? If 
different, which one is larger? Check answer by pouring dried beans 
in each cylinder io see which one holds more. 





O 

O i 



179 



EVALUATION: 



Teacher observation of participation in activities and use of problem-solving 
techniques is the best evaluation for these lessons. 



RESOURCES: 

Anderson, Dan. Native American Science and Mathematics . Fond Du Lac. 
Minnesota: American Indian Language and Culture Education Program, 
1987. 

Preston, Vera (lesson developed by). Cultural Curriculum for Communitiees . 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma: Oklahoma Department of Education, 1989. 

Hoover, Herbert T. The Chitimacha People . Phoenix, Arizona: Indian Tribal 
Series, 1975. 

DEVELOPED BY: 

Phyllis Darden 
Grover Parsons 



188 

o . 

ERJC 



180 



SCIENCE STANDARDS ADDRESSED IN INDIAN ART UNIT- 



Standard - Understands the convictions scientists share about the nature of the world and 
what can be learned from it 
Benchmarks — 

Understands how science improves its predictions and explanations of the world through the 
continuous testing, revising and occasional discarding of theories; this leads to better 
understanding of the world, but not to absolute truth 

Standard - Understands that scientific inquiry works in particular ways 
Benchmarks - 

Understands that science has different traditions about what is studied and how, but there are 
shared beliefs in the value of evidence, logic and good arguments, and that progress in science 
comes from intelligence, hard work, imagination and even chance 

Standard - Understands the main individual, social, ethical and institutional aspects of 
science 

Benchmarks — 

Understands that science disciplines differ from one another in what they study, their techniques 
and goals, but share a common purpose and philosophy 

Standard - Understands basic concepts about the structure of matter 
Benchmarks - 

Knows that atoms consist of negative electrons, which occupy most of the space in the atom, and 
very tiny nuclei consisting of neutrons and positive protons, each almost two thousand times 
heavier than an electron 

Knows that the arrangement and number of electrons determine the properties of an element (see 
periodic table) and how an atom can interact with other atoms 

Knows the rate of reactions among atoms and molecules depends on the concentration, pressure, 
and temperature of the reacting materials and a suitable catalyst 

Knows that the properties of a molecule are determined by the number and types of atoms it 
contains and how they are arranged 

Knows that shapes are particularly important in how large molecules interact with others 
Knows that substances can be represented by formulas or three-dimensional models showing the 
number, types, and/or relative positions of the atoms that make up the substance 

Standard — Knows the forms energy takes, its transformations from one form to another, 
and its relationship to matter 
Benchmarks - 

Knows that heat energy in a material consists of the disordered motions of its colliding atoms or 
molecules 

Knows that some changes of atomic or molecular configuration require an input of energy, 
whereas others release energy 




189 



181 



Standard - Understands the nature of the Chemical Revolution 
Benchmarks - 

Knows that Dalton’s modernization of the ancient Greek ideas of element, atom, compound, and 
molecule strengthened the new chemistry by providing a physical explanation for chemical 
behavior that could be expressed in quantitative terms 

Knows that the advancement of chemistry since the time of Dalton and Lavoisier now makes 
possible an explanation of the bonding that takes place between atoms during chemical reactions 
in terms of the inner workings of the atoms 

Knows that chemical change can be explained in terms of rearrangements of atoms, which is 
made possible by the breaking and forming of chemical bonds 

Knows that chemical reactions can be classified into general types based on the nature of the 
changes involved (acid-base, oxidation-reduction, precipitation, polymerization) 



AMERICAN INDIAN STANDARDS ADDRESSED IN INDIAN ART UNIT - 
Science as Inquiry 

Indian students should develop an understanding about science inquiry as a specific 
process/framework for investigating natural phenomena in order to infer how similar, but not 
necessarily identical, processes - involving skills such as acute observation, formulation of 
hypotheses, classification, measurement, and communication — were used by different American 
Indian peoples in the past to investigate and explain natural phenomena. 

Physical Science 

Indian students should develop an understanding of structure and properties of matter and be able 
to discuss analogies/differences between empirical and traditional American Indian concepts 
about matter; for example, discussing the electrical force in atoms in relation to the Algonquian 
concept of Manitou, or the interactions of energy and matter in relation to the traditional 
representation of earth, air, fire and water as parts of the Medicine Wheel. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of chemical reactions and be able to apply this 
knowledge to traditional American Indian technologies such as processing of natural materials to 
make dyes or the firing of clay to make traditional Indian ceramics. 

Science and Technology 

Indian students should develop an ability to propose hypothetical science and technology 
problems/solutions inherent in the development of traditional American Indian technologies such 
as used in Indian art. 

History and Nature of Science 

Indian students should develop an understanding of science as it is practiced by American Indian 
people in their communities. 

Indian students should develop an understanding of various opportunities for science careers. 



182 



O 

ERIC 



ISO 




# Background 
* Materials 
# Activities 
* Standards 

for 

History/Social Studies- 

Based Units 



183 



191 




HISTORY/SOCIAL STUDIES 



The units on history/social studies will help Indian students understand their backgrounds 
and realize their rich histories, cultures and uniqueness. 

Many states require that information on Indian history/culture of the tribes in that state be 
taught. Many Indian schools require that a course(s) on their own tribe(s) be taught. For 
these purposes, the materials focusing on the various tribes for the first unit will be 
helpful. They should be coupled with other available resources - written, audio-visual 
and human — to verify information and to provide for a complete study of the tribe(s). 

Especially in Indian schools, general Indian history should be taught. If there is no 
separate class on general Indian history, that history should be woven in with regular 
history in Indian schools and in all schools. Or the Indian history teacher and the regular 
history teacher(s) should collaborate and coordinate their efforts. The literature 
teacher(s) could also coordinate their instruction with Indian history content. The 
following resources are recommended for the teaching of general Indian history: 

Indian Country: A History of Native People in America by Karen D. Harvey and Lisa D. 
Harjo (Indian Author), North American Press, 1994. 

The Encyclopedia of Native America by Trudy Griffin-Pierce. 

Timelines of Native American History by Carl Waldman, Prentice-Hall, 1994. 

North American Indians by Herman Viola. 

Lasting Echoes: An Oral History of Native American People by Joseph Bruchac (Indian 
Author), 1997. 

A to Z of Native American Women by Liz Sonnebom. 

Extraordinary American Indians by Susan Avery and Linda Skinner (Indian Author). 

Maps of American Indian Tribes or of North American Indians or atlases available from 
Four Winds Books, York, NE. 

The Chronology of Native North American History by Duane Champagne, ed., Gale 
Research, 1994. 

Native American Tribalism: Indian Survivals and Renewals by D’Arcy McNickle 
(Indian Author), Oxford University Press, 1973. 

Native Time: A Historical time Line of Native America by Lee Francis (Indian Author), 
Saint Martin’s Press. 

184 




3 



192 



ACTIVITIES FOR THE UNITS - 



1 . Engage students every way possible. “Read the chapter and we’ll discuss it” is 
not a good way to teach. Neither is lecturing all the time. Chapters can be read 
aloud together, or parts of chapters — a chapter does not have to be read at one 
time. Students can be assigned to be responsible for reporting on various parts of 
a chapter or on various books. Books, chapters or parts of chapters can be read 
after discussion or Other activities rather than only before. 

2. Instruction should include field trips, guest speakers, projects, audio-visual aids, 
higher order thinking questions, and how happenings in history affect the lives of 
Indian people today. 

3. Students can be provided questions for which they are to find answers by using 
various resources and give presentations with visuals, perhaps Power Point 
presentations, indicating their findings. 

4. Review the American Indian standards for U.S. History. The explanatory 
narratives included provide ideas for activities that make happenings in history 
relevant to the lives of individual Indian people and tribes today. 

5. If a particular aspect of history, i.e. the Lewis and Clark expedition, had particular 
relevance to the local tribe(s), special research projects, interviews of elders, 
reenactments, making of videos, etc., should be included. 

6. Special attention should be given to such subjects as sovereignty, water rights, 
Seff-determination, etc., especially as they impact local tribe(s). 



185 



O 

ERIC 



193 



HISTORY/LIVES OF TRIBAL GROUPS 



The following are to be used in a study of the tribes of the state and/or the local 
tribe(s). 

Books by Virginia Driving Hawk Sneve (Indian Author), on various tribes, Holiday 
House. Title include The Iroquois, The Navajos, The Nez Perce, The Seminoles, The 
Sioux, The Hopi, The Cheyennes, The Apaches, and The Cherokees. 

Indian Nations Series, Raintree (Includes Indian Authors) includes books on various 
tribes. 

Indians of North America Series ed. by Frank W. Porter, Chelsea House. Includes many 
books on various Indian tribes, The Yankton Sioux, The Crow, The Coast Salish, The 
Apache, The Aztecs, The Cherokee, The Cheyenne, The Chickasaw, the Chumash, 
The Comanche, the Iroquois, The Mohawk, The Navajos, the Nez Perce, the Ojibwa, 
the Pueblo, The Seminole, The Wampanoag. 

First Americans Series by Facts on File includes California Indians, Indians of the 
Plains, Indians of the Arctic and Subarctic, Indians of the Plateau and the Great 
Basin, Indians of the Northeast, Indians of the Southeast, Indians of the Pacific 
Northwest and Indians of the Southwest. 

Scholastic Encyclopedia of the North American Indian by James Ciment and Ronald 
LaFrance. 

The Choctaw Nation by Allison Lassieur, 2001. 

Navajo History by Ethelou Yazzie (Indian Author), Rough Rock, 1971. 

The Wampanoags of Mashpee by Russell Peters (Indian Author), Indian Spiritual and 
Cultural Training Council, 1987. 

Migration of the Iroquois by Ray Fadden, Tehanetorens (Indian Author), White Roots 
of Peace, 1972. 

The Zunis by K and D. Doherty, Franklin Watts, 1993. 

The Wabanakis of Maine and the Maritimes: A Resource Book about Penobscot, 
Passamaquoddy, Matiseet, Micmac and Abenaki Indians, AFSC, 1 989. 

The Mishomis Book: The Voice of the Ojibway by Edward Benton Benai (Indian 
Author), Red School House, 1979. 

We Are Mesquakie: We Are One by H. Irwin, Feminist Press, 1980. 

186 



O 

ER i.C 



194 



The Yaqui: A People and Their Place by F. S. Molina, Arizona Humanities Council. 

The Story of the Cherokee People by Tom Underwood. 

Red Thunder by Dave Matheson (Indian Author). Couer d’Alene 
People of the Ice by Jillian & Robin Ridington. 

Indians of the Northeast by Colin G. Calloway. 

Indians of the Northeast Woodlands by Beatrice Seigel. 

The Woodland Indians by C. Keith Wilbur. 

People of the Three Fires: The Ottawa, Potawatomi and Ojibway of Michigan with 
teacher’s guide available from Four Winds Indian Books, York, NE. 

Ojibway Family Life in Minnesota by Priscilla Buffalohead, Anoka-Hennipen Indian 
Education Program. 

The Lasting of the Mohegans: The Story of the Wolf People by Melissa Jayne Fawcett 
(Indian Author), Mohegan Tribe, 1995. 

Land of the Four Directions by Frederick J. Pratson, Chaatham, 1970. Passamaquoddy, 
Micmac, Maliseet 

Inuit by Ulli Steltzer, University of Chicago, 1982. 

The Sioux Today by Frank LaPointe (Indian Author), Macmillan, 1972. 

Pochee Goyo: History and Legends from the Shoshone by Rupert Weeks (Indian 
Author), Jelm Mtn. Press, 1981. 

From the Heart of the Crow Country: The Crow Indians’ Own Stories by Joseph 
Medicine Crow (Indian Author), Orion, 1992. 

The Sun Came Down: The History of the World as My Blackfeet Elders Told It by Percy 
Bullchild (Indian Author), Harper & Row, 1985. 

Pretty Shield: Medicine Woman of the Crows by Frank B. Linderman, University of 
Nebraska Press, 1962. 

The Way to Rainy Mountain by N. Scott Momaday (Kiowa), University of New Mexico 
Press, 1969. 



187 



195 



Black Elk Speaks by John G. Neidhardt, University of Nebraska Press, 1988. Lakota 

Storyteller by Leslie Marmon Silko (Laguna Pueblo), Seaver, 1981. 

Cheyenne Memories by John Stands in Timber (Indian Author), and Margot Liberty, 
University of Nebraska Press, 1972. 

Saanii Dahataal: The Woman Are Singing by Luci Tapahonso (Navajo), University of 
Arizona Press, 1993. 

Two Leggings: The Making of a Crow Warrior by Two Leggings ed. by Peter Nabakov, 
Crowell, 1967. 

Fools Crow by James Welch (Blackfeet/Gros Ventre), Viking, 1986. 

American Indian Stories by Zitkala-Sa (Gertrude Simmons Bonnin, Yankton Sioux), 
University of Nebraska Press, 1985. 

Generation to Generation by Edward Benton-Benai (Anishinabe), Red School House, 
1991. 

Night Flying Woman by Ignacia Broker (Ojibway), Minnesota Historical Society, 1983. 

Goodbird, the Indian by Edward Goodbird (Hidatsa), Minnesota Historical Society, 

1985. 

When Buffalo Ran by George Bird Grinnell, University of Oklahoma Press, 1966. 
Cheyenne 

The Ways of My Grandmothers by Beverly Hungry Wolf (Blackfeet), Quill Press, 1982. 

The Middle Five: Indian Schoolboys of the Omaha Tribe by Francis La Flesche (Indian 
Author), University of Wisconsin, 1963. 

The Osage, Children of the Middle Waters by John Joseph Mathews (Indian Author), 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1961. 

My Indian Boyhood and My People the Sioux by Luther Standing Bear (Indian Author), 
University of Nebraska Press, 1988 and 1975. 

Yellowtail: Crow Medicine Man and Sun Dance Chief by Thomas Yellowtail (Indian 
Author), University of Oklahoma Press, 1991. 

Buffalo Bird Woman’s Garden by Waheenee (Hidatsa/Mandan) translated by Gilbert 
Wilson, Minnesota Historical Society, 1987. 

188 




196 



Waheenee: An Indian Girl’s Story by Waheenee (Hidatsa/Mandan) translated by Gilbert 
Wilson, University of Nebraska Press, 1981. 

The People Named the Chippewa: Narrative Histories by Gerald Vizenor (Indian 
Author), University of Minnesota Press, 1984. 

Waterlily by Ella Cara Deloria (Yankton Sioux), University of Nebraska Press, 1988. 

Indian Boyhood and Old Indian Days by Charles A. Eastman (Santee Sioux), Fawcett, 
1972. ' 

Madonna Swan: A Lakota Woman’s Story by Mark St. Pierre, University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1991. 

Standing in the Light by Severt Young Bear and Theis. Lakota 

Lame Deer, Seeker of Visions by Lame Deer (John Fire, Lakota) and Richard Erdoes, 
Washington Square Press, 1972. 

Our Grandmothers’ Lives As Told in Their Own Words by Freda Akenekew and H.F. 
Wolfort, Fifth House, 1992. Cree 

The Soul of An Indian by Charles Eastman (Dakota), University of Nebraska, 1980. 

White Roots of Peace: The Iroquois Book of Life by Paul Wallace, Clear Light, 1994. 

A Pima Remembers by George Webb (Pima), University of Arizona, 1959. 

Two Old Woman: An Alaska Legend of Betrayal, Courage and Survival by Velma 
Wallis (Indian Author), Epicenter, 1993. 

Dahcotah Life and Legends of the Sioux by Mary Henderson Eastman. 

Lakota Sioux Children and Elders Talk Together by E. Barrie Kavasch, Power Kids 
Press, 1999. 

Selu: Seeking the Com Mother’s Wisdom by Marilou Awiakta (Cherokee), 1993. 

Voices and Dreams, Mendicino County Library, 1991. California 

Kaibah, Recollections of a Navajo Girlhood by Kay Bennett, Westemlore, 1964. 

CHECK YOUR LOCAL LIBRARIES FOR BOOKS AND OTHER MATERIALS 
ON LOCAL TRIBES. 



189 



O 

ERIC 



i 97 



BEFORE 1600 



50,000 B.C. Archeologists believe that this is when people begin to cross the Bering 
Strait land bridge and dispersed throughout North and South America. 

But Indian people, in general, and others don’t believe this theory. Indian 
people believe they have always been in the Americas, and nonlndians 
keep discovering evidence that may refute the Bering Strait theory. Indian 
people have their own creation stories. 

1000 B.C. -200 A.D. 

Adena Mound Building culture in and near the Ohio Valley 
300 B.C. -700 A.D. 

Hopewell Mound Building culture in the East 

300 B.C. - 1000 A.D. 

Mogollon culture in the Southwest 

100 B.C. - 1500 A.D. 

Hohokam culture in the Southwest 



100B.C.- 1300 A.D. 

Anasazi culture in the Southwest 

700-1700 A.D. 

Mississippian Mound Building culture in Southeast 

985-1014 A.D. 

Eric the Red and Leif Ericson establish settlements in Greenland and 
North America 



1492 

1513 

1528-1536 

1532-1541 

1539-1542 

1560-1570 



Columbus - 5 million Indian people in North America, excluding Mexico. 
Juan Ponce de Leon of Spain sailed to Florida. 

The Panfilo de Narvaez Expedition of Spain through the Southeast and 
Southwest 

Frenchmen explore the Atlantic Coast and the St. Lawrence River system. 

Spanish explore the Southwest, Southeast and Pacific Coast. 

The Iroquois League consisting of the Mohawk, Oneida, Onondaga, 
Cayuga, and Seneca tribes formed by Deganawida and Hiawatha. 



190 



198 



1562-1565 


The French establish colonies in South Carolina and Florida but 
are driven out by the Spanish. 


1565 


The Spanish establish St. Augustine in Florida, the first permanent 
European settlement in North America. 


1568 


The Catholic Church starts the first missionary Indian school in Flavana 
for Indian children brought from Florida. 


1576-1579 


Englishmen explore the Northwest and the California Coast. 


1585-1590 


Englishman Sir Walter Raleigh established two colonies on Roanoke 
Island, North Carolina. Both of them failed. 


1586 


A potato crop was taken to England. 


1598 


Spaniard Juan de Onate founded colony in New Mexico. Today it is 
San Juan Pueblo. 


1598-1599 


Indians of Acoma Pueblo in New Mexico attack Spanish. Juan de Onate 
and forces kill eight hundred Indians. 



LITERATURE FOR UNIT - 



Red Earth, White Lies: Native Americans and the Myth of Scientific Fact by Vine 
Deloria (Indian Author), 1997. 

Archaeology of Native Americans, Indians of North America Series ed. by Frank W. 
Porter, Chelsea House. 

The Earliest Americans by Helen Roney Sattler, Clarion, 1993. 

Clash of Cultures: Prehistory- 163 8 by Christopher Collier, 1998. 

Mounds of Earth and Shell: Native Sites, the Southeast by Bonnie Shemie, 1994. 

The Earthshapers: Midwest Moundbuilders by Karen Speerstra. 

Ancient Indians of the Southwest by Alfred Tamarin and Shirley Glubok, Doubleday. 
The Ancient Cliff Dwellers of Mesa Verde by Caroline Arnold, Clarion, 1992. 

Mesa Verde/National Park by Ruth Shaw Ladlauer. 

Native Americans and Mesa Verde by Hazel Martell, 1993. 

Canyon de Chelly: The Story of Its Ruins and People by Z.A. Bradley, National Park 
Service, 1973. 

Cities in the Sand: The Ancient Civilizations of the Southwest by S. Warren, Chronicle 
Books, 1992. 

The Anasazi by Eleanor Ayer, 1992. 

Journey to Center Place by Viola Gates, Council for Indian Education. 

Children of the Longhouse by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Dial, 1996. 

Dawn Song by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Dial. 

A Coyote Columbus Story by T. King (Indian Author), Groundwood, 1992. 

Rethinking Columbus: Teaching about the 500 th Anniversary of Columbus, by 
Rethinking Schools. 

Columbus/His Enterprise by Hans Koning, Monthly Review, 1991. 

192 





200 



Hiawatha - Founder of the Iroquois Confederacy, North American Indians of 
Achievement Series. 

Hiawatha: Messenger of Peace by D.B. Fradin, McElderry Books, 1992. 

The Amazing Potato by Milton Meltzer. 

Aztecs, Indians of North America Series ed. by Frank W. Porter, Chelsea House. 
Pueblo, Indians of North America Series ed by Frank W. Porter, Chelsea House. 
The Pueblos, Indians of the Americas Series. 

Native Americans and the Spanish, Indians of North America Series ed. by Frank W. 
Porter, Chelsea House. 



193 



O 

ERIC 



201 



THE 1600’s AND 1700’s 



1600 


Sheep were brought to the Southwest by the Spanish. 


1600-1770 


The use of the horse by Indian people spread from Mexico into the 
Southwest and into the Great Plains. 


1607 


The English established their first permanent settlement at Jamestown, VA 
under John Smith. 


1609-1613 


John Smith captured by Indians. Story that Pocahontas, Powhatan’s 
daughter, interceded on Smith’s behalf. Pocahontas is captured by the 
settlers, marries John Rolfe, travels to England where she dies. 


1615 


Frenchman Samuel de Champlain attacks Onondaga villages with 
Huron war party and turns Iroquois League against the French. 


1620 


The Pilgrims arrive at Plymouth. Squanto had been kidnapped and taken 
to England earlier and teaches them how to plant com. 


1621 


With Squanto acting as interpreter, the Pilgrims make a pact of peace with 
the Wampanoags and celebrate the first Thanksgiving. 


1622 


The Powhatan confederacy of 32 tribes under Opechancanough attacked 
Settlers at Jamestown. 


1626 


The Canarsee Indians sell Manhattan Island to Peter Minuit, governor of 
New Netherlands for sixty guilders worth of trade goods. 


1627 


The Company of New France is chartered to colonize and develop fur 
trade with the Indians. 


1638 


Pequot War in New England claims the fives of 600 Indian men, women 
and children. 


1661 


The Spanish raid the sacred kivas of the Pueblo people to detroy their 
culture and religion. 


1675-1676 


King Phillip, Wampanoag, wages war against the colonies and several 
other tribes that joined forces with the colonists. 


1680 


Pueblo Indians revolt against Spanish rule. Spanish return in 1689. 


1689-1697 


French and Indian War. The Iroquois sided with the English and 
Algonquin nations with the French. 

194 


O 

ERIC 


o no 



202 



1703-04 


Queen Anne’s War between England and France in the Northeast and 
England and Spain in the South. 


1744-1748 


King George’s War between French and English divides the Indian tribes. 


1751 


Benjamin Franklin sites Iroquois League as a model for his plan for 
government. 


1755 


Iroquois League sides with the British against the French. 


1760 


War between the colonists and the Cherokee 


1761 


The Aleuts of Alaska revolt against the Russians. 


1763-1764 


Chief Pontiac rebels against the English in the Great Lakes region. 


1769 


California is claimed for Spain and missions were established. 


1775-1783 


The American Revolution. Declaration of Independence signed in 1776. 


1778 


The first U.S.- Indian treaty is signed between the U.S. and the Delaware. 


1778 


The Iroquois, under Joseph Brant, and British regulars attack American 
Settlers in New York and Pennsylvania. 


1779 


A counteroffensive against the Iroquois breaks the power of the League. 


1781-1789 


The Articles of Confederation include the principle that the central 
government should regulate Indian affairs and trade. 


1784 


The Congress orders the War Office to provide troops to assist the 
Commissioners in their negotiations with the Indians. 


1787 


The Northwest Ordinance calls for Indian rights, the establishment of 
reservations and the sanctity of tribal lands. 


1789 


Congress establishes a Department of War and grants the Secretary of 
War authority over Indian affairs. 


1787-1789 


The Constitution contains the power to regulate commerce with foreign 
nations, among the states, and with Indian tribes. 


1794 


The Battle of Fallen Timbers takes place. Miami and Shawnee defeated. 



195 



203 



LITERATURE FOR UNIT - 



Clash of Cultures: Prehistory - 1638 by Christopher Collier, 1998. 

Pocahontas - Powhatan Peacemaker, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

The Invasion of America: Indians, Colonialism, and the Cant of Conquest by Francis 
Jennings, Norton, 1976. 

Thanksgiving: A Native Perspective by Doris Seale, Carolyn Silverman (Indian 
Authors) and Beverly Slapin, Oyate, 1996. 

King Phillip - Wampanoag Rebel, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

Pontiac - Ottawa Rebel, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

Joseph Brant - Mohawk Chief, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

The Iroquois by Virginia Driving Hawk Sneve (Indian Author), Holiday House. 

Iroquois, Indians of North America Series ed. by Frank W. Porter, Chelsea House. 

Indian Roots of American Democracy by Jose Barreiro, ed., Akweson Press, 1992. 

The Great Law of Peace and the Constitution of the United States of America, 
Akwesasne Notes. 

A Simple and Informative Guide to Understanding Treaties by Jan Hare (Indian Author) 

A Mission for the People: The Story of Purisima by Mary Ann Fraser, Henry Holt, 1998. 

A Time of Resistance: California Indians During the Mission Period, 1769-1848,by 
Sarah Supahan, Klamath-Trinity Joint Unified School District, 1992. 

Digger: The Tragic Fact of the California Indians from the Missions to the Gold Rush by 
Jerry Stanley. 

Indians, Settlers and Slaves in a Frontier Exchange Economy: The Lower Mississippi 
Valley before 1783 by Daniel H. Usner, Univ. of North Carolina Press, 1990. 

The Encyclopedia of Native American Biography by Bruce Johansen and Donald Grinde. 

Great Native Americans by Peter Copeland. 

Turtle Meat and Other Stories by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Holy Cow Press. 

196 




204 



1800 TO 1868 



1802 


Congress appropriated funds to “civilize and educate” Indian people. 


1803 


The Louisiana Purchase adds a large Indian population to the U.S. 


1803-1806 


Lewis and Clark expeditions open up the West. 


1809-1811 


Tecumseh, a Shawnee chief, tries to unite tribes against the U.S. 


1809-1821 


Sequoyah creates the Cherokee alphabet. In 1830, the Cherokees 
started their own educational system using the alphabet. 


1812-1815 


The War of 1 8 1 2 between the U.S. and England. Tecumseh is killed. 


1813-1818 


Andrew Jackson takes Creek lands, invades Florida to punish Seminoles. 


1830 


The Indian Removal Act calls for relocation of eastern Indians to Indian 
Territory west of the Mississippi River. 


1831-1839 


Five Civilized Tribes of the Southeast relocated to Indian Territory. 


1832 


The Bureau of Indian Affairs is organized as part of the War Department. 


1845-1853 


The Spanish Southwest and its many Indian tribes become part of U.S. 


1848-1849 


Gold discovered in California, destruction of California and Plains 
Indians. 


1849 


Bureau of Indian Affairs is transferred to the Dept, of Interior. 


1851 


The Treaty of Ft. Laramie between the U.S. and Northern Plains tribes. 


1853-1856 


U.S. acquires 174 million acres through 52 treaties, all broken by whites. 


1858-1859 


Gold is discovered in Colorado. 


1864 


The Navajo people are forced on the “Long Walk” to Bosque Redondo. 


1864 


Three hundred Cheyenne and Arapaho killed at Sand Creek Massacre. 


1865 


Government gives contracts with missionaries to start Indian schools. 


1866-1868 


War for the Bozeman Trail includes Sioux, Cheyenne and Arapaho 
under Red Cloud. Second Ft. Laramie Treaty. 

197 


ERIC 


205 



LITERATURE FOR UNIT - 



Seeds of Extinction: Jeffersonian Philanthropy and the American Indian by Bernard W. 
Sheehan, Norton, 1974. 

Sacagawea - Westward with Lewis & Clark, North American Indians of Achievement 
Series. 

Sacajawea by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author). 

Osceola - Seminole Rebel, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

John Hawk, A Seminole Saga by Beatrice Levin, Council for Indian Education. 

Tecumseh — Shawnee Rebel, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

Sequoyah - Inventor of the Cherokee Alphabet, North American Indians of 
Achievement Series. 

Sequoyah’s Gift: A Portrait of the Cherokee Leader by J. Klausner, Harper Collins, 

1993. 

In the time of Wolves by Eileen Charbonneau (Indian Author), Tom Doherty, 1994. 

Cherokee 

The Ghosts of Stony Clove by Eileen Charbonneau (Indian Author), Tom Doherty, 

1988. 

Black Hawk: An Autobiography by Black Hawk (Sauk), ed. by Donald Jackson, 
University of Illinois, 1990. 

Sparrow Hawk by Meridel LeSeuer, Holy Cow!, 1987. Mesquakie 

Longwalker’s Journey: A Novel of the Choctaw Trail of Tears by Beatrice Orcutt Harrell 
(Indian Author), Dial, 1999. 

The Trail of Tears by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Random House. Cherokee 

Night of the Cruel Moon, Cherokee Removal and the Trail of Tears by Stan Hoig. 

Mountain Windsong, a Novel of the Trail of Tears by Robert Conley (Cherokee), 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1994. 

Indian Removal: the Emigration of the Five Civilized Tribes of Indians by Grant 
Foreman, University of Oklahoma Press, 1989. 

198 



O 

ERLC 



206 



The Glorious Quest of Chief Washakie by Ralph and Mary Tillman. Shoshone 

Navajo Long Walk by N.M. Armstrong, Roberts Rhinehart Pub., 1994. 

Red Cloud — Sioux War Chief, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

Red Cloud by Ed McGaa (Indian Author), Dillon, 1977. Lakota 

Through Dakota Eyes: Native Accounts of the Minnesota Indian War of 1862 by Gary 
C. Anderson and Alan R. Woolworth, Minnesota Historical Press. 

Red Wing and Shakopee in They Led a Nation by Virginia Driving Hawk Sneve (Indian 
Author), Brevet Press, 1975. Dakota 

Cochise - Apache Chief, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

The Encyclopedia of Native American Biography by Bruce Johansen and Donald Grinde. 
Native American Leaders by Janet Hubbard-Brown. 

Great Native Americans by Peter Copeland. 

Indian Heroes and Great Chieftains by Charles Eastman (Indian Author). 

Battlefields and Burial Grounds by Roger C. and Walter Echo-Hawk (Indian Authors), 
Lemer, 1994. 



199 



ERIC 



207 



1869 TO 1899 



1868-1869 


Southern Plains War involves Cheyennes, Sioux, Arapahos, Kiowas and 




Comanches. 


1869 


President Grant’s Peace Policy instituted. Lasts untill 871 . 


1869 


Ely Parker (Seneca) becomes first Indian Commissioner of Indian Affairs. 


1869 


Transcontinental railroad is completed, joined at Promontory Point, UT. 


1871 


Congress passes law forbidding further treaties with Indian tribes. 


1871 


Western Indians not to leave reservations without permission of agents. 


1871 


White hunters begin wholesale killing of buffalo. 


1874 


Gold discovered in the Black Hills of South Dakota. Miners ignore 
treaties. 


1876-1877 


Sioux War for the Black Hills under Sitting Bull and Crazy Horse. 


1876 


Battle of the Little Bighorn. Custer defeated. 


1877 


Nez Perce under Chief Joseph take flight. 


1878 


Congress provides for Indian police. 


1879 


Richard Pratt starts Carlisle Indian School in Pennsylvania to assimilate 
Indians. Start of government boarding schools. 


1881 


Sitting Bull and his band surrender at Ft. Buford, North Dakota. 


1881-1886 


Apache resistance under Geronimo in the Southwest. 


1885 


The last great herd of buffalo is exterminated. 


1887 


Congress passed the Allotment Act (Dawes Act) and gave individual 
Indians parcels of land and opened up surplus to whites. 


1890 


The Ghost Dance Movement led by Wovoka (Paiute) gains influence. 
The Wounded Knee massacre in South Dakota. 


1890-1910 


The population of Indians fell to a low point of less than 250,000 in U.S. 

200 


ERIC 


208 



208 



LITERATURE FOR UNIT - 



Quannah Parker - Comanche Chief, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

Riel’s Saskatchewan Rebellion by F. W. Anderson, 1987. 

Louis Riel by R. Neering, Fitzhenry & Whiteside, 1992. 

War of the Mormon Cow: Crazy Horse Chronicles by Richard Jepperson. 

They Led a Nation by Virginia Driving Hawk Sneve (Indian Author), Brevet, 1975. 
Biographies of 20 Sioux leaders. 

Wooden Leg: A Warrior Who Fought Custer by Thomas Marquis, University of 
Nebraska Press, 1931. Cheyenne 

Killing Custer: The Battle of the Little Big Horn and the Fate of the Plains Indians by 
James Welch (Indian Author) with Paul Stekler, Norton, 1994. 

Chief Gall — Sioux War Chief, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

Sitting Bull - Sioux Leader, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

Sitting Bull by Herman Viola, American Indian Stories Series, Raintree. 

Crazy Horse - Sioux War Chief, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

The Life and Death of Crazy Horse by R. Freedman, Holiday House, 1 996. 

Chief Joseph — Nez Perce Leader, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

Days with Chief Joseph by Erskine Wood, Rosewind Press, 1970. 

Indian School: Teaching the White Man’s Way by Michael Cooper, Houghton Mifflin, 
1999. 

The Middle Five: Indian School Boys of the Omaha by Francis LaFlesche (Indian 
Author). 

The Ledgerbook of Thomas Blue Eagle by Gay Matthaei and Jewel Grutman. 

Geronimo and the Struggle for Apache Freedom by Russell Shorto, Alvin Josephy’s 
Biography Series of American Indians, 1990. 

Geronimo - Apache Warrior, North American Indians of Achievement Series. 

201 




209 



Geronimo by David Jeffery, American Indian Stories Series, Raintree. 

Geronimo: His Own Story by Geronimo (Apache) ed by S. M. Barrett, Dutton, 1970. 

A Creek Warrior for the Confederacy by Chief W. G. Grayson (Creek), ed. by W. David 
Baird, University of Oklahoma Press, 1988. 

Sprit of the White Bison by Beatrice Culleton (Indian Author), Book Pub. Co., 1985. 

Sarah Winnemucca — Northern Paiute Writer and Diplomat, North American Indians of 
Achievement Series. 

Sara Winnemucca by Mary Francis Morrow, American Indian Stories Series, Raintree. 

Susette LaFlesche by Marion Marsh Brown. Omaha 

Wounded Knee, Adapted for Young Readers by Amy Erhlich. Lakota 

Wounded Knee, Lest We Forget by Alvin M. Josephy Jr., Trudy Thomas and Jeanne 
Eder (Sioux), Artcraft Printers, 1 990. 

The Encyclopedia of Native American Biography by Bruce Johansen and Donald Grinde. 
Native American Leaders by Janet Hubbard-Brown. 

Great Native Americans by Peter Copeland. 

Battlefields and Burial Grounds by Roger C. and Walter R. Echo-Hawk (Indian 
Authors), Lemer, 1 994. 

Indian Heroes and Great Chieftains by Charles Eastman (Indian Author). 

The Vanishing Race: The Last Great Indian Council by Joseph Komuth Dixon, Popular 
Library, 1972. 

Plenty Coups: Chief of the Crows by Frank B. Linderman, Univ. of Nebraska Press, 

1962. 

Education for Extinction: American Indians and the Boarding School Experience, 1 875- 
1928 by David Wallace Adams, University of Kansas, 1995. 

A Cheyenne Sketchbook by William Cohoe, University of Oklahoma Press, 1964. 



202 



erJc 



' 210 



1900 TO 1952 



1902 

1906 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1914-1918 

1917-1920 

1921 

1924 

1928 

1928 

1934 

1941-1945 

1944 

1946 



1949 



The Reclamation Act encourages settlement of the West. 

The federal government seized 50,000 acres of wilderness land including 
the sacred Blue Lake of the Taos Pueblo. 

Teddy Roosevelt issues executive order transferring 2.5 million acres of 
Indian timber lands to national forests. 

U.S. government forbids the Sun Dance among Plains Indians. 

The Society of American Indians was formed as an activist group. 

Many Indian people enlisted in the armed forces during WWI. 

Many Indians lost their lands to corrupt Anglos. 

The Dept, of Interior responsible for Indian education and social services. 

Congress awarded American citizenship to all Indians. Some had already 
obtained it. 

Charles Curtis, Kaw Indian and U.S. Senator, was elected vice-president 
under Hoover. 

The Merriam Report deplored Indian living conditions and declared the 
allotment system a failure. 

The Wheeler-Howard Act provides for tribal ownership of land and tribal 
self-government. 

Twenty-five thousand Indians served in active duty during WWII. The 
code talkers used their language as a code the enemy couldn’t decipher. 

The National Congress of American Indians was organized. 

An Indian Claims Commission was created to settle tribal land claims 
against the U.S. 

The Hoover Commission recommended termination of the federal-Indian 
trust relationship. 

BIA program for voluntary relocation of Indians to urban areas for work. 
203 





1952 



LITERATURE FOR UNIT - 



A Final Promise: The Campaign to Assimilate the Indian by Frederick E. Hoxie, 1 880- 
1920, Cambridge University Press, 1989. 

Boarding School Seasons: American Indian Families, 1900-1940 by Brenda J. Child 
(Indian Author), 1998. 

Ishi, Last of His Tribe by Theodora Kroeber. California 

Native Americans and the Reservation by Anita Louise McCormick. 

Carlos Montezuma by Peter Iverson, American Indian Stories Series, Raintree. Y avapai 

Flight of the Red Bird, The Life of Zitkala-Sa recreated by Doreen Rappaport. 

Native American Doctor by Jeri Ferris. Story of Susan LaFlesche, Omaha. 

Charles Eastman - Sioux Physician and Writer, North American Indians of Achievement 
Series. 

Charles Eastman: Physician, Reformer, and Native American Leader by Peter Anderson. 
Mean Spirit by Linda Hogan (Indian Author), Ivy, 1990. 

Sundown by John Joseph Mathews (Indian Author), University of Oklahoma Press, 
1988. 

The National Congress of American Indians: The Founding Years by Thomas W. 
Cowger, Bison Books. 

The Code Talkers: American Indians in W.W. II by Robert Daily. 

Navajo Code Talkers:America’s Secret Weapon in WWII by Nathan Aasang. 

Flags of Our Fathers, Heroes of Iwo Jima by James Bradley and Ron Powers. 

The Encyclopedia of Native American Biography by Bruce Johansen and Donald Grinde. 

An Album of the American Indian by Rosebud Yellow Robe (Indian Author), Watts, 
1970. 

Great Native Americans by Peter Copeland. 

Jim Thorpe by Robert Lipsyte. 

204 



O 

tKJC 



212 



1953 TO 2000 



1953-1956 

1953 

1961 

1961 

1964 

1964-1968 

1968 

1968 

1969-1971 

1970 

1970 

1972 

1973 

1974 
1978 
1978 
1988 
1992 

2000 



The Termination Resolution. Sixty-one groups were terminated. 

Congress empowered certain states to have law and order jurisdiction 
of Indian reservations without the consent of the tribes. 

Tribes allowed first opportunity to purchase individual Indian lands. 

Keeler Commission on Rights, Liberties and Responsibilities of the 
American Indian recommended self-determination/resource development 

The Office of Economic Opportunity was created and provided anti- 
poverty programs on reservations. 

The Civil Rights Act led to the decree that states cannot assume law and 
order jurisdiction on reservations without the consent of tribes.. 

American Indian Movement founded. 

President Johnson calls for self-determination to replace termination. 
Indians occupied Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay. 

A federal policy of Indian self-determination was formulated. 

Blue Lake Wilderness Area in New Mexico returned to Taos Pueblo. 
AIM occupies and destroys BIA offices in Washington, DC. 

AIM and Oglala Sioux occupied Wounded Knee for 7 1 days. 

Federal Acts provided housing and loans to Indians for businesses. 

Indian activists organized the “Longest Walk” to Washington, DC. 

The American Indian Freedom of Religion Act passed. 

The Indian Gaming Act was passed. 

Indian people throughout the Americas protested the celebration of the 
Columbian Quincentennial. 

Indian population in U.S. 4 Million-U.S. Census 





205 



LITERATURE FOR UNIT - 



Maria Tallchief by Maria Tallchief. 

From the River’s Edge by Elizabeth Cook-Lynn (Dakota), Arcade, 1991. 

Termination and Relocation: Federal Indian Policy, 1945-1960 by Donald L. Fixico, 
University of New Mexico Press, 1990. 

Slash by Jeanette Armstrong (Okanagan), Theytus, 1990. 

Columbus Day: Poems, Drawings and Stories About American Indian Life in the 
Nineteen Seventies by Jimmie Durham (Cherokee), West End Press, 1983. 

Dennis Banks - Native American Activist available from Four Winds Books, York, NE. 

Ojibwa 

Lakota Woman by Mary Crow Dog (Indian Author) & Richard Erdoes, Harper, 1990. 

The Life and Death of Anna Mae Aquash by Johanna Brand (Indian Author), J. 
Lorimar, 1978. 

Ben Nighthorse Campbell — Cheyenne Chief, U.S. Senator, North American Indians of 
Achievement Series. 

Peter Macdonald — Former Chairman of the Navajo Nation, North American Indians of 
Achievement Series. 

Wilma Mankiller - Principal Chief of the Cherokee, North American Indians of 
Achievement Series. 

Wilma Mankiller by Jacki Thompson Rand, American Indian Stories Series, Raintree. 
Notes from Indian Country by Tim Giago (Indian Author), State Publishing, 1984. 
Great Native Americans by Peter Copeland. 

The Encyclopedia of Native American Biography by Bruce Johansen and Donald Grinde. 

Shooting Back from the Reservation: A Photographic View of Life by Native American 
Youth by Jim Hubbard, New Press, 1994. 

An Album of the American Indian by Rosebud Yellow Robe (Indian Author), Watts, 
1970. An oveview of history up to 1970. 

206 




214 



Native America in the 20 th Century by Mary B. Davis 

Native Americans and the Reservation by Anita Louise McCormick. 

Alcatraz: Indian Land Forever and You Are on Indian r an H ir„t T , 

1 994 and 1 995. ndian Land! % Tr <>y Johnson, UCLA, 

American Indian Facts of Life bv Geon?p Rnwpii /fna a a a*. \ 

Winds Books, York NE. IndiaLlogy lof Au * hor) aVadable from Four 

American Indian Contributors to American Life by John M. Franco and others, Beneflc. 



by Eagk ^ (Gtny McClain, 



Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian Manifesto 
Oklahoma Press, 1988. 



by Vine Deloria, 



University of 



Seeing the White Buffalo by Robert B. Pickering, Denver Museum of Natural Histoty. 
American Indian Identity, Today’s Changing Perspectives by Clifford E. Trafzer. 
American Indians Today compiled by Ray Gowan. 

Nations Within, The Past and Future of American Indian Sovereignty by Vine Deloria, Jr, 

“ d Th “ Trftes ’ «“»»<* for Young America, by 



American Indian Citizenship in Balance: 
Close Up Foundation. (800) 256-7387. 



a Two-Week Curriculum Unit, Grades 9-12, 



math and science - 



"Water Rights" 



TEACHER'S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

. . . this section is to touch briefly on a few of the high 

points te concerning ^he* origins, present status, and unresolved 

issues surrounding water rights. 

• a * -in recent vears have become mcreasxngly 
Native American tribes ; 1 n ± * land base . Along with this 

aware of the value ^ of ^ - B has b| en placed upon the importance 
new awareness, greater F land Amonq the resources, water 

of the resources on and under indeed * in mTny cases, without the 

is of critica *®P ^ without value. The importance of water, 

p^icu^in ^e Se a 1 rid iS la W nds h o“f the Western United States, cannot 

be over-emphasized I 



A. Water Laws 

in the early treaties ^tveen the 

Indian tribes , the s j settled the eastern seaboard 

f ound° a* cl imate ^ *£££ 3 ' ~ 

Europe . Abundant rainfall made water plentiful. 

1 m Riparian Doctrine 

The water law which evolved in this se V :1 ®^ 
i ne waw .. . WpEtGrn Europe , which was 

riparian 

?iat h s d tream e9U “ln "he eastern United States, the 

system worked very well. 

• _a. i 1 1 law of the eastern 

Riparian doctrine is s _ e intensified water 

greater anises of water by 

the respective states • 

Appropriate doctrine or -appropriation" 

With the migration westward.^^owever, ^ew 
approaches in deali g these lands by miners 

seeking" 7 * th^r ""fortune precipitated the 



2 . 



establishment of a water doctrine which is uniquely 
encan the doctrine of prior appropriation . 

?rt!I£I«* ra * rel /i d ^ scovered mineral ore immediately 
adjacent to flowing streams. Yet, for the ores to 
be processed, quantities of water were necessary. 

c ° nstructed elaborate conveyance systems 
to bring water from areas of supply to areas of 

be e u*nai t iow e ^i riP i^f ian law ' these conveyances would 
hor-rtlTr 1 Jh ^ abl ® 5603086 the place of use did not 

S tho I s “• The lands in the west were 

thi d *T.S ™ erS Wer ® the first users of water in 

the area. The practical solution to their water 

problems, the appropriation doctrine, evolved into 

SMr r iJ h ?i2 P h° Pr iS ti w n doctrine » the first water 
user in time has the best water right; the second 

most senior water user has the next best rights. 

Water users do not necessarily have to be along the 

bU £ Can USe canals or pipelines to convey 

neld Ster fr0m thS source or EU PPly to the area of 

In times of water shortage, the most junior water 
first to have to stop diverting. If 
JJl® fH ea “ £ 1oW dwindles until there is only enough 
£?f senior appropriator , then he receives 

the total flow of the stream. 



Federal Reserved Rights 

In 1908, the doctrine of Federal "reserved rights" 
was first enunciated in the "Winters v. United 
States (207 US 564) case. The United States 
brought suit against non-Indian water users along 
the Milk River in Montana to restrain them from 
constructing or maintaining dams or reservoirs 
which would prevent water from reaching the Fort 
Belknap Indian Reservation. The non-Indians 
claimed' the right to the water under prior 
appropriation through the laws of the State of 
Montana . 

Winters v. U. S. was eventually decided by the 
United States Supreme Court. In its decision, the 
court stated that when the Indian Reservation was 
formed, there was reserved or confirmed not only 
the land, but also the right to enough water to 
irrigate the irrigable portions of the reserved 
lands or otherwise fulfill the purposes of the 
reservation. 




After fifty-odd years of controversy over the legal 
principles and ramifications espoused in Winters, 
the U. S. Supreme Court strongly reemphasized the 
5°^5 ine . of Feder al reserved rights in "Arizona v. 
California" (373 us 546) decision in 1963: 



"The Court in Winters concluded that the 
Government, when it created that Indian 
Reservations, intended to deal fairly with the 
!ndians by reserving for them the waters without 
which t * eir lands would have been useless. 

Winters has been followed by this court as 
recently as 1939 in U. S. v. Powers (305 US 527). 



We follow it now and agree that the United States 
did reserve the water rights for Indians effective 

as ® ™ e time the Indian Reservations were 
created. " 



Arizona v. California was an original action filed 
il? Supreme Court of the United states in which 
the basic question or controversy was how much 
water each state (California, Arizona, and Nevada) 
had a legal right to use from the Colorado River 
ant ^ ^ r *kutaries. The United states intervened 
on behalf of the Indian and Federal interests alonq 
the lower river. 



One of the findings of the Special Master appointed 
to hear the case, and affirmed by the court in its 
decision, was that in creating the Chemehuevi, 
Cocopah, Yuma, Colorado River and Fort Mohave 
Indian reservations, the U. S. reserved enough 
water from the Colorado River to irrigate the 
irrigable parts of the lands 

(commonly referred to as "PIA" or practicably 
irrigable acreage reserved for future as well as 
present needs. Such water rights were entitled to 
priority based on the date of reservation 
establishment. 

With this decision, the Supreme Court confirmed the 
doctrine of a Federal reserved water right to 
Indian reservations created by Acts of Congress and 
Executive Orders. The Winters decision determined 
water rights for reservations created by treaties. 

The ^Winters Doctrine" is based entirely upon 
judicial decisions. There is no body of statutory 
authority governing the reserving of water for 
Indian reservations. 

BEST COPY AV AILA BLE 



• ' 210 



218 



B. WATER ISSUES 



Wa t er ^Rights for agricultural purposes on Indian reservations have 
been judicially recognized. Other beneficial uses, however, also 
exist. 

kike their counterparts in non - Indian communities , tribes may wish 
to use water for fishery maintenance, recreation, municipal and 
industrial purposes, or other reasons. Such desires add a new 
facet to the subject of Indian water rights. 

A singular example was the litigation over water on the Pyramid 
Lake Indian Reservation in western Nevada. 

The Pyramid Lake Paiutes inhabited the area around Pyramid Lake 
long before the coming of the non-Indians. Fishing is their 
livelihood since time immemorial. 



the development of the Newlands Reclamation Project on the 
Truckee River in 1905, Pyramid Lake began to recede. Truckee River 
water that once flowed into Pyramid Lake was diverted by 
the New^andS' Project to the Carson River watershed. Since the 
first diversion, the lake receded by some 90 feet. 

Increased salinity caused by lake evaporation and sedimentation 
problems caused by the now unstable river channel have complicated 
the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe's problems. More recently, the 
Fallon Paiute Shoshone Tribe and Walker River Tribe, have entered 
into litigations concerning their water rights — these reservations 
are also recipients of water flowing down the Truckee river. 
Agricultural production is the main concern of the Fallon Paiute 
Shoshone Tribe. The Walker River Tribe's main concerns are 
agricultural and recreational. 

The Pyramid Lake litigation, "United States v. Nevada" (463 US 110) 
was fought over the issue of whether or not the Pyramid Lake Paiute 
Tribe has the right Truckee River water for stream and lake 
maintenance to preserve their fishery. 

The legal precedent established by the eventual court decision may 
have implications and ramifications to other Indian tribes in other 
geographical areas. 

Modern day technology has created still other water questions for 
American Indian tribes. 

For example, when the Navajo Indian Reservation was created, most 
Colorado River water was inaccessible because its flow was 
entrenched deep in the canyon of the river. Dam construction and 
enormous investment now make the water more readily available. As 
a consequence of technological advances, this shift in water 
availability poses new questions as to the scope of the reserved 
right. Such issues have not been resolved. 



C. Groundwater 



Groundwater, until recently, has been a little used natural 
resource. Judicial or congressional determination of Indian rights 
to groundwater has not been made. In a 1976 Supreme Court 
decision, "United States v. Cappaert" (426 US 128), the existence 
of a federally reserved right to groundwater was first enunciated. 
This decision allowed for the protection of an existing groundwater 
pool from diminishment by outside pumping in the Devil 's Hole 
National Monument. At stake was the survival of one species of 
desert pupfish which is found only in Devil's Hole. 

In "United States v. Papago Indian Tribe v. City of Tucson" (Civ. 
No. 75-39; P.L. 97-293 [1982]), the Papago Indian Tribe's issue was 
to establish an Indian right to the underflow and groundwater of 
the Santa Cruz River in southern Arizona. 

The Papago Indians have been farming on the site of their present 
reservation since time immemorial. Within recent years, non-Indian 
water use upstream has caused the Santa Cruz River to 
be a dry channel through the reservation reach except in time of 
flood . 

Of f -reservation groundwater pumping has become too great as to 
cause the groundwater underlying the reservation to flow off. From 
1940 to 1965, the decline in the groundwater table underlying the 
reservation was at an average rate of 2.5 feet per year. Since 
that time, the rate of decline has averaged 10 feet per year. This 
drastic drop in the groundwater level has hampered current farming 
efforts on the reservation. Through litigation, the tribe and the 
United States as trustee are striving to establish a reserved right 
to groundwater for Indian reservations. 

As in the Pyramid Lake litigation, the legal precedents established 
by the eventual court decision may have value to other Indian 
tribes in other geographical areas. 

The leasing of Indian water is yet another area which needs to be 
addressed. Many tribes and individuals feel they should be able to 
lease their water if they are not now using it on the reservation. 
This issue is touched upon in the National Water Commission Study 
of 1973. The Wind River Tribe in Wyoming and the Fallon Paiute 
Shoshone Tribe are presently exploring the possibilities involved, 
although, there are many problems to overcome. 



D. Water Rights Priorities 



Since their admission to the United States as territories, the 
western states have organized and adopted water statutes which meet 
the needs and desires of their citizens. Arizona and Oregon 
adopted initial appropriation systems as early as 1864; other 
states acted later with South Dakota completing the process in 



1907. 

O 




212 





Based on this statutory authority, the orderly development of each 
respective state's water resources was made possible. Water rights 
P ^ 1 wf lties were . established and accepted — each state having its 
* Volve « sightly different time and in a slightly 
different way. Certificate of Right were issued to individual 

US * e ^>f * ? < Ih nfl i C v S between users were settled in the state 
states Wlthln the statutor y framework established by the separate 

stltutJr^i 11 W + e - Ste " StatCS d . eve l°P®d comprehensive water right 

SSr? 5 ^ a PP ro P riat ion doctrine prior to the Supreme 

Court decision in Winters v. U. S. v 

Zjj* l ff l Ct Z f - the winters decision was not immediately apparent. 

Re( i lainatlon era began in the west with the passage of the 
S , n / Ct 1902 k* Pr °jects were pushed for ea?h of the 

h . ® tate p each state striving to hroaden its economic 

base with agricultural development. 

^ al 5- a ? e P, tUry ' t * e United States Government found 
nl H f OV1I 2? * n dissimilar positions in regard to water rights. 
d^oWi-.?” 6 hand '. the Government lent backing to the reclamation 
£«°lK CtS '*.f >peratlng under ***• a PPropriation doctrine. 

other hand, the Government was also trustee for Indian 
rights and was bound to follow Winters. 

Down through the years the two lines may have touched, but they did 
not really come together until the Arizona v. California case. 



E. Water Conflicts 



The conflict between states and Indian water right claims has been, 
til will be enormous. Indian water rights are a threat to some 
established ^state water rights. The uncertainty of the total scope 
of Indian rights has created a great uncertainty for state water 
administrators. 



The debate focuses on the question of quantum. The U. S. Supreme 
Court in the Arizona v. California decision, suggests that the 
right can be fixed by reference to the number of irrigable acres 
located on the reservation (PIA). This leaves unanswered the 
question of what will happen should the reservation see another use 
other than irrigation (?) requiring a greater supply of water? 

The water rights of many tribes and individuals have not been 
quantified. Some groups have urged against quantification — others 
have favored quantification. 



The Bureau of Indian Affairs has a trustee's responsibility to 
protect and conserve the Indian water resource until the tribes 
themselves decide on a future course of action. 



E. Current Trends 

As can be seen in this brief overview, the issues are many and 
complex. There have been many proposals on how to deal with the 
problems involved. Comprehensive treatment of the subject is the 
present day issue (refer to references and the preceding lesson, 
"Water: Culture/History" for more information). 

Lloyd Burton, author of "American Indian Water Rights and the 
Limits of Law" (1991), provides recent insights and updates on 
various litigations concerning water rights. In his opening pages, 
he guotes , "...Navajo Tribal Chairman Peterson Zah, describing his 
tribe's efforts to ensure water supply. 'When I was a kid in 
geography class, I was taught that water always 

flows downhill, ...What I've learned since is that water flows to 
money and power, wherever they may be.' ...The remark casts light 
on the fundamental interrelationship between environmental and 
social policy in the United States. The 'life, liberty, and 
pursuit of happiness' of every social group in our country is 
inextricably linked with the question of how we should inhabit our 
environment and partake of the natural riches it provides. 
•••There has been a tendency to treat decision making in resource 
management and environmental protection as if these actions were 
somehow structurally separable from their social consequences." 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVES 
Students will : 

develop an understanding of the interrelationship between 
environmental and social policy as it pertains to Native 
Americans 

develop a working knowledge of legislative decision making and 
process regarding Tribal resource management and environmental 
protection 

analyze and make decisions based on Native American cultural 
values and heritage. 



MATH OBJECTIVES 
Students will : 

be able to estimate quantities based on standard units of 
measurement 

be able to construct and interpret graphs, tables, and charts. 




SCIENCE OBJECTIVES 
Students will: 



research, gather , and analyze data 



understand and apply information and concepts 



will be able to develop and predict 
hypothetical situations. 



outcomes 



based on 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 



1 . 



Have the students debate contemporary issues that arise in the 
process of negotiating and authorizing Indian water rights 
settlements keeping in mind that there are no absolute 
solutions . 



2 . 



Use the following suggested topics for debate — the format 
focuses on key issues, what points should be brought out 
during debate, and suggested conclusions that can be drawn 
( see Attachment B ) . 



Have the students do a mock trial of the Supreme Court. 

Ever since Indian reservations were established, conflicts 
have existed over jurisdiction within their boundaries. Over 
the past two centuries, the U. s. Supreme Court has handled 
ozens of cases involving fights over whose laws has effect. 



Students should demonstrate the three (3) major forces weighed 
by the Supreme Court in deciding jurisdictional disputes in 
Indian Country. The following concept can serve as a basis 
or selection of students in advocating a particular role 
keeping in mind that there are no specific number of key 
players or witnesses all students can be assigned a role. 



TRIBAL SOVEREIGNTY 




(Note: This model is based on the model provided in "Tribal 
Water Management Handbook, 1988, American Indian Lawyer 
Training Program, Inc., 319 MacArthur Boulevard, Oakland CA 



At the top of the triangle lies "TRIBAL SOVEREIGNTY," which 
acts to keep regulatory jurisdiction with the tribe to the 
exclusion of state law, and to a lesser degree of federal law. 
The next component of the triangle is "FEDERAL PLENARY POWER," 
a concept that provides Congress with broad discretion to 
impose laws and regulations upon tribal vertex lies "SPECIAL 
INTERESTS," such as BLM, BOR, DOE, Fish & Wildlife 
ecologists, biologists, Solicitor's Office, hydrologists' 
ecologists, and other agencies or key players as needed. The 
state is not a key player in this instance — the Supreme Court 
uses the state to implement its laws. 

Have the students perform a PIA ANALYSIS (Practicable 
^ rr ^- 9 a t’le Acreage). (Based on the PIA Analysis as outlined 
in the "Tribal Water Management Handbook, 1988. American 
Indian Lawyer Training Program, Inc., 319 MacArthur 
Boulevard, Oakland, CA. 94610) 

Identifying practicably irrigable acreage is a complex and 
costly task. It involves extensive investigations by 
hydrologists, soil scientists, economists, agronomists and 
engineers who must coordinate their efforts in the laboratory 
office and field. 1 



Various strategies for assessing PIA can be formulated, each 
usually embodies the following components: 

1. Identify arable land on the reservation (i.e. land 
amenable to sustained agricultural use). 

2. Determine feasible cropping patterns on the arable land. 

3. Calculate the amount of irrigation water needed by the 
crops . 

4. Design an irrigation network sufficient to deliver the 
required water. 

5. Compare the costs of production to crop income in order 
to establish the acreage that is economical to irrigate. 

6. Have the students do a simplified cross-matrix. 

This matrix will provide a way for the students to consider 
systematically the impacts of all future feasible water uses 
on all existing reservation resources. 

This matrix will be used in hypothetical situation(s) and will 
employ creative and critical thinking skills. 

The impact of each use on each resource can be evaluated in 
terms of whether it is seen as positive, negative, or neutral; 
whether the impact is profound, moderate, or insignificant; 
and, whether it is short-term or long-lasting. 



Across the top of the matrix is an abbreviated list of the 
reservation resources inventory. On the lefthand side of the 
matrix is the list of future feasible water uses identified. 
The matrix helps the planner predict or "map out" the probable 
impact of each future feasible use on each existing 
reservation resource (see Attachment C) . 



EVALUATION: 

Students will demonstrate their knowledge of Native American water 
rights and its interrelationship between environmental, social and 
political policy in the United States through: 

1. Discussion in a historical context 

2. Role playing 

3. Definition of key terms 

4. Citation of major landmark cases. 

Students will be able to create a reservation and 
hypothetically analyze its feasible water uses by using a 
simplified cross-matrix. 

Students will be able to identify the various components 
involved in performing a PIA Analysis. 



RESOURCES : 

American Indian Resources Institute (1988). "Tribal Water 
Management Handbook". American Indian Lawyer Training 
Program, Inc., 319 MacArthur Boulevard, Oakland, CA. 

Arizona v. California (1963). (373 US 546) U. S. Supreme Court. 

Bureau of Indian Affairs (1978). "Indian Water Rights: A fact 
book" (Document). U. S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D. C. (Stock No. 024-002-0063-2). 

Burton, L., (1991). American Indian Water Rights and the Limits 

of Law . University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. 



House Reports (January 25-December, 1982). United States 
Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C. United States 
Congressional Serial Set (Serial Number 13482)= 

Little, Joe (June, 1993). "Water Rights" (Workshop presenter). 
Native American Math and Science Workshop, Haskell 
Institute, Lawrence, Kansas. 

United States v. Cappaert (1976). (426 US 128) U. S. Supreme 

Court . 



United States v. Nevada (1983). (463 US 110) U. S. Supreme 



ERIC. 



225 II 



217 



Court . 



United States v. Powers (1939). (305 US 527) U. S. Supreme 

Court . 

United States Congress (January 30-31, 1989 and February 1, 

1989). "Federal Government's Relationship With American 
Indians" (Hearing before the Special Committee on 

Investigations). Select Committee on Indian affairs. U. S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C. (S. Hrg. 101- 
126, Pt. 1 - 11) 

United States Senate (June, 1984). "Indian Reserved Water 

Rights" (Report). Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. 
U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C. (S. Prt. 
98-280) . 

United States Senate (April, 1989). "Indian Water Policy" 

(Hearing). Select Committee on Indian Affairs. U. S. 

Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C. (S. HRG. 101- 
142) 

Winters v. United States (1908). (207 US 564) U. S. Supreme 

Court . 





226 

218 — 



U. S. HISTORY STANDARDS ADDRESSED - 

Standard -Understands the status and complexity of pre-Columbian societies of the 

Americas 

Benchmarks - 

Understands the culture and agricultural practices of Native American societies along the 
eastern seaboard and in the Southwest where the first North American interactions 
occurred with the English and Spanish explorers 

Standard -Understands the long-term consequences of the meeting of three worlds 
from the beginnings to 1607 
Benchmarks - 

Understands the redistribution of the world’s population and the catastrophic losses of 
indigenous populations of the Americas, largely to diseases 

Standard -Understands how the European colonies in North America were peopled 
in the colonial period (1585-1763) and how the colonists interacted with Native 
Americans and with one another 
Benchmarks - 

Understands how relations between colonists and Native Americans varied between that 
characterized by William Penn’s peaceful relations with the Delaware chiefs to such 
extents as the Pequot massacre in 1637 

Understands how European wars drew the English colonists along with their Indian allies 
into conflict with the Indian allies of Spain and France 

Standard - Understands how the values and institutions of European economic life 
took root in the colonies 
Benchmarks - 

Understands the natural setting that Europeans found and the manner in which they began 
to shape and exploit the American land (e.g., alteration of the continent’s plant and 
animal life, the concept of land as a commodity) 

Standard -Understands the causes and character of the American Revolution, the 
ideas and interests involved in forging the revolutionary movement, and the reasons 
for the American victory 
Benchmarks - 

Understands the major stages of the Revolutionary War and the reasons for the American 
victory including the role of American Indian leaders 

Standard -Understands how the American Revolution changed or maintained social 
and economic relationships among the nation’s many groups and regions, and how 
these relationships changed from 1754-1815 
Benchmarks - 

Understands the revolutionary goals of different social groups including Native 
Americans and the Revolution’s transformation of social, political, and economic 
relationships among them 



219 



Standard -Understands how American external relations changed during the 
Revolution and in the era of the early republic (1754-1815) 

Benchmarks - 

Understands the relations between the new American nation and Native Americans after 
the Revolution (e.g., the series of military campaigns and treaties that transferred Indian 
title of much of the Old Northwest territory to the new nation) 

Standard -Understands U.S. territorial expansion between 1800 and 1861, and how 
this involved changing relations with external powers and Native Americans 
Benchmarks - 

Understands the frontier as a zone of cultural interaction between Native Americans 
already in the region and new arrivals moving westward from the eastern U.S., northwrd 
from Mexico, and eastward from Asia 

Understands 19 th century federal policy toward Native Americans, including the crisis of 
1829 following Jackson’s election, and removal of the six southern nations to the western 
territories 

Standard -Understands how massive immigration and internal migration after 1870 
led to new social patterns, conflicts, and ideas of national unity amidst growing 
cultural diversity between 1870 and 1900 
Benchmarks - 

Understands how the Homestead Act of 1 862 fueled the expansion of migration on the 
Great Plains and the Second Great Removal of Native Americans 

Standard -Understands the foundations established during the 1920’s for the 
nation’s political economy and culture 
Benchmarks - 

Understands that large parts of the U.S. population, including Native Americans, were 
left outside the era of opportunity and advancement 

Standard -Understands social changes in American society brought about by the 
Civil Rights movements 
Benchmarks - 

Understands the parallel civil rights movements of Hispanic and Native Americans (e.g., 
the rise of the United Farm Workers, Native American struggles for restoration of land 
and water rights) 

- McRel Compendium of Standards, 1994. 



220 




228 



AMERICAN INDIAN STANDARDS FOR HISTORY ADDRESSED - 



The student understands the patterns of change in indigenous societies in the 
Americas up to the Columbus voyages. 

The student is able to draw upon data provided by archaeologists and geologists to 
explain the origins and migration from Asia to the Americas and contrast them with 
Native Americans own beliefs concerning their origins in the Americas. 

Indian students should understand that Native Americans believe that their origins are in 
the Americas and that these beliefs are exemplified by the many and varied 
creation/origin stories of different tribes. Students should also note that these beliefs 
conflict with the anthropological theory known as the Bering Strait theory. Students 
should be able to note problems with the Bering Strait theory, such as the matter of when 
Indians would have had to arrive in the Americas - specifically, either 40,000 or 12,000 
years ago, which are the periods of the last two Ice Ages in which the land bridge opened 
up across the strait. Some scientists have found evidence of Native American people 
living here tens of thousands of years earlier. At the very least, students should 
understand that humans were in the Americas at the time that humans and Neanderthal 
man were living in Europe. 

The student is able to trace the spread of human societies and the rise of diverse 
cultures from hunter-gatherers to urban dwellers in the Americas. 

It should be noted that many American Indian people feel that the term “rise” is biased 
and unfair when used to describe changes in or evolutions of cultures. It forces a 
qualitative assessment of the histories of diverse Indian civilizations, and invites 
comparisons among them. 

Indian students should understand that thousands of years before the Columbian voyages, 
Native American societies existed across a wide spectrum of cultural patterns, including 
small to large groups of hunter-gatherers, as well as small to large agricultural 
communities. Students should know that cultures were influenced by geographic and 
environmental resources. Native American communities were not static, but changed as 
they adapted to new resources and technologies. Some of these new technologies wee 
com agriculture, ceramic pottery-making and stone/metal tool-making. Students should 
be able to reconstruct the historical patterns of succession and movement of these 
technologies. 

Indian students should be able to explain that although certain Native American cultures 
may have been small hunter gatherer bands, their cultures were quite complex in terms of 
their languages, philosophies of ecological relationships, astronomical knowledge, and 
knowledge of plants/medicines. Students should be able to trace the trade networks that 
stretched across America for thousands of miles. For example, turquoise from the 

221 




229 



Southwest was graded for shells and parrot feathers from the Yucatan Peninsula in 
Mexico. Great Lakes copper was traded for com, conch shell and other goods from the 
lower Mississippi River and Gulf area. Obsidian from the Rockies and pipestone from 
Minnesota were traded as far east as present-day Ohio. 

The student is able to explain the common elements of Native American societies 
such as gender roles, family organization, religion, and values and compare their 
diversity in languages, shelter, labor systems, political structures, and economic 
organizations. 

Indian students should know that for thousands of years before the Columbian voyages. 
Native Americans had engineered a variety of complex and rich societies. Students 
should be aware of and compare the diversity among the various Native American culture 
areas across the Americas. They should also understand the cultural history of their 
respective tribes prior to 1492. Prior to 1492, there were at least 4.4 million - and 
perhaps even 1 0 million - Native Americans in North America (excluding Mexico) 
speaking over 200 languages. Students should know that in Mexico and Central America 
there were at least 27 million - and perhaps even 50 million - people speaking at least 
350 languages. Students should know that in the Caribbean area and South America 
there were at least 20 million - and perhaps as many as 45 million - people speaking over 
1,000 languages. Students should be aware that some tribes/cultures lived under 
governing systems that included women in roles as leaders. 

The student is able to explore the rise and decline of the Mississippian mound- 
building society. 

Indian students should understand that by 750 AD an agricultural society of Native 
Americans flourished along the Mississippi River valley and its tributaries. This culture 
is now known as the Mississippian Mound-builder culture, so named for the earthen 
mounds they built and on which they constructed large ceremonial temples and rulers’ 
residences. The culture reached its zenith in about 1200 AD - the large city known as 
Cahokia had a population of about 50,000. Located along the banks of the Mississippi 
near present-day St. Louis, Cahokia was dominated by a huge earthen mound standing 
over 100 feet in height, with a base 1,000 feet long and 700 feet wide. The people of the 
Mississippian culture had a highly developed ceremonial structure, and they farmed a 
wide variety of plants - amaranth, squash, maize, goose foot, sunflowers. They also used 
copper in making blades and ornaments. The culture eventually died out, probably due to 
epidemics of diseases brought by Europeans. Students should understand that the barrage 
of diseases introduced into the Americas was not necessarily the result of face-to-face 
encounters between Europeans and Indians. It is more probable that waves of disease, 
carried by infected Indian traders and refugees from infected villages, resulted in the 
spread of epidemics from Indian community to community. Students should be able to 
analyze the multiple causes that brought about the decline of the Mississippi Mount- 
building society. Students should also be familiar with other large, complex, agricultural 
societies that existed in pre-Columbian America. 

222 




9 



30 




The student understands the differences/similarities among Africans, Europeans, 
and Native Americans who converged in the western hemisphere after 1492. 

The student is able to compare political systems, including concepts of political 
authority, civic values, and the organization and practice of government. 

Indian students should understand that while most European and African societies were 
ruled by monarchies, most Native American societies were egalitarian in nature. 

Although not all Native governing systems were egalitarian, leaderships within most 
Indian groups was a shared responsibility. In very few places in the Americas could a 
single leader speak for an entire tribe and expect his decisions to be followed. Rather, the 
more typical form of Native American government embodied concepts such as decision 
by consensus, representative government, clan structures represented in government, 
separation of powers, and limited systems of checks and balances. Students should be 
able to compare and contrast these traditional political systems with their contemporary 
counterparts elsewhere in the world, as well as with today’s U.S. system. 

The student is able to compare social organizations, including population levels, 
urbanization, family structure, and modes of communication. 

Indian students should know that scientists now estimate that there were at least 4.5 
million people in North America - excluding Mexico - and possibly as many as 10 
million, prior to European arrival. For the Western Hemisphere as a whole, there were 
probably over 57 million people - and possibly as many as 90 million - in contrast with 
60 to 70 million people in Europe at that time. Students should understand that European 
societies lacked waste disposal, had higher densities of people and were affected by 
widespread plagues for centuries. This is a great contrast to the standard of living in most 
Native American societies in North America at that time (excluding Mexico) where, for 
the most part, people lived in small towns (of about 2,000 people) and smaller farming 
villages. These small towns and villages were much healthier places in which to live that 
their European counterparts due to the fact that fewer people living in a larger space have 
much less of an impact on the environment. Students should also understand that in 
Europe famines were rampant, as opposed to in the Americas where Native peoples 
enjoyed an abundance of natural resources, as well as cultivated foodstuffs, that were the 
result of healthy ecological practices. Additionally, in Europe most natural resources 
(e.g. wood) and most land was held by an aristocracy; therefore the majority of the 
people were peasants and serfs. These are a few of the contrasts in social organization. 

Indian students should, however, also be able to compare the small village life of most 
Native Americans with the several large urban centers in the Americas which rivaled 15 th 
century European cities in population size; for example, Cahokia (where St. Louis is 
today) was about the size of Rome (population 55,000); Tenochtitlan in Mexico was 
about the size of London (population 75,000). Before that time, there were other large 
cities in Mexico - such as Teotihuacan, which at its peak in 400-600 A.D. had around 
200,000 inhabitants. These cities were important centers of large complex societies. 

223 



Such societies flourished across the Americas during different periods. Indian students 
should learn about the cultural and scientific achievements of the Mississippian people, 
the Hopewell, the Adena, the Mayans, the Aztecs, the Anasazi, and the Hohokam. 
Students should also understand that American Indian societies were built upon large 
extended family networks that were organized into other social units, e.g., clans, 
matriarchal/patriarchal systems, and moiety systems. 

The student is able to compare economic systems, including systems of labor, trade, 
concepts of property, and exploitation of natural resources. 

Indian students should understand that European and American Indian economic systems 
were based on fundamentally conflicting views of how land and natural resources should 
be exploited. Following biblical injunction, European economic systems were based on 
“dominion over nature.” American Indian economic systems, on the other hand, were 
based upon building an awareness of ecological relationships and managing natural 
resources without depleting them. Students should be aware that the European world 
view feared the natural world (including man’s nature) and viewed it as something to be 
subdued. Thus, forest with their wild animals were cleared for farmlands and quickly 
over-harvested to near depletion. For example, by 1086, England was only 20% forested 
- of that, only 2% was virgin forest. There were enormous alterations in the European 
landscape by the 15 th century. European attitudes toward animals were markedly 
different from those of American Indians. For example, Europeans pursued activities 
such as sport hunting, bear baiting, cockfights and bullfights - some of which are 
considered barbaric today. In contrast, hunting practices among most if not all American 
Indian societies involved respect for the life of the animal being hunted. 

The student is able to compare dominant ideas and values including religious belief 
and practice, gender roles, and attitudes toward nature. 

Indian students should understand that most if not all American Indian societies viewed 
natural resources - including wildlife - as sacred. Native American world views stressed 
the interconnectedness of all living things. This belief shaped the purpose and scope of 
natural resource usage and was in sharp contrast with the beliefs of European settlers. 

The student understands the stages of European oceanic and overland exploration, 
amid international rivalries, from the 9 th to 17 th centuries. 

The student is able to evaluate the significance of Columbus’ voyages and his 
interactions with indigenous peoples. 

Indian students should understand that Columbus never actually set foot upon, or even 
saw. North America, let alone “discover” America (i.e., the land area encompassed by the 
United States). He also did not discover a “New World,” but unintentionally came upon 
a very old land which was well established with sophisticated societies. Students should 
understand that the Native peoples with which Columbus actually interacted - primarily 

224 



the Arawaks, Taino, Carib and other tribal groups in the West Indies - were essentially 
decimated from a population of about a quarter-million to a population of under 20,000 
within a span of 20 years. Students should understand that this decimation was not only 
the result of new diseases, but also the result of systematic and harsh enslavement of 
Native people. 

The student is able to evaluate the course and consequences of the Columbian 
Exchange. 

Indian students should understand that the “Columbian Exchange” had devastating 
effects on American Indian nations. Both exposure to new diseases, as well as more 
effective European weapons resulted in the deaths of millions of Indians. Death rates of 
up to 90% were common among American Indian tribes/nations. Students should also 
understand that many of today’s foods common to Europeans and Americans were 
originally domesticated, cultivated, or farmed by Native Americans and introduced to 
Europeans - among these are turkeys, potatoes, com, chili peppers, tomatoes, pumpkins 
and squash, avocados, peanuts, pineapple, chocolate, vanilla. Many native objects — such 
as pottery, basketry, canoes, furs, snowshoes, etc. - were also adopted by early European 
settlers. Among the European items that were introduced to the Americas were citrus 
fruits, apples, bananas, peaches, pears, wheat, cabbage, and domesticated animals (cows, 
sheep, chickens, hogs, horses). American Indian groups quickly adopted items like guns, 
textiles and metal cookware. 

The student understands the Spanish and Portuguese conquest of the Americas. 

The student is able to explain and evaluate the Spanish interactions with such 
people as Aztecs, Incas, and Pueblos. 

Indian students should understand that Spanish conquest of the Aztecs and Incas 
contributed to the eventual decimation of those societies and the destruction of their 
empires. The Spanish also attempted conquest of the Pueblo Indians of the Southwest, 
but the Pueblos successfully rebelled in 1680, forcing the Spanish out of what is now 
New Mexico: however, within 12 years the Spanish resettled in Pueblo country. 

However, the Pueblos were given land grants by the Spanish crown that were later 
recognized by the U.S. government under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. 

The student is able to describe the evolution and long-term consequences of labor 
systems such as encomienda and slavery in Spanish and Portuguese America. 

Indian students should understand that in Spanish America, Christopher Columbus and 
his followers enslaved tens of thousands of Indians. In the early 1500s, the legal 
instution of “encomienda” was developed on the island of Hispaniola, and later spread to 
other regions the Spanish encountered. Under this system, groups of Indians were 
assigned to individual Spaniards (known as “encomenderos”) to work for them as “free 
vassals” - in theory, the Indians performed work in exchange for wages and under the 

225 



requirement that they conduct themselves in the manner of Christians. The encomienda 
was codified as the Laws of Burgos of 1512. Students should understand that the Spanish 
made a distinction between encomienda and enslavement - although the effective 
difference remained slight: encomenderos bought and sold Indians, exploited them in 
labor, abused them, and treated them as if they were slaves. 

The student understands the European struggle for control of North America. 

The student is able to analyze relationships between Native Americans and Spanish, 
English, French, and Dutch settlers. 

Indian students should understand that there were some differences in the relationships 
between Native Americans and Spanish, French, English and Dutch settlers in the 17 th 
and 1 8 th centuries. Spanish interaction with Native Americans can generally be 
characterized as subjugation by conquest, forced labor, and forced religious conversion. 
Early French interactions can generally be characterized as more benign: for example, 
French traders married Indian women, and often lived in Indian communities. However, 
later French interactions changed to be more similar to those of the Spanish - in other 
words, they were centered on the religious conversion of Natives, as well as the 
exploitation of Native American communities and resources. English interactions with 
Native Americans were generally based on exploitation of Native American lands and 
resources. Since Indians wee seen as “uncivilized,” English religious sects saw little 
value in saving “heathens,” and thus had few qualms about dispensing with them in 
exchange for property. Later, French and English interactions with various Native groups 
were based on competing military alliances established to protect their respective colonial 
and economic interests. Early Dutch interactions were primarily based on the desire to 
control the fur trade with Native Americans. As English and French alliances with 
Native groups grew, the Dutch influence was marginalized. 

Indian students should understand the roles and actions of key American Indian leaders in 
forming and responding to tribal relationships with European colonists. 

The student is able to compare how English settlers interacted with Native 
Americans in New England, mid-Atlantic, Chesapeake, and lower South colonies. 

Indian students should understand that interactions between English settlers and Native 
Americans differed in New England, the mid-Atlantic and Chesapeake areas, and lower 
South colonies. In New England, Native American communities had become small as a 
result of exposure to European diseases as well as attacks on their villages. Their small 
numbers rendered them relatively defenseless against English incursions into their 
territories. In the mid- Atlantic and Chesapeake areas, on the other hand, the early 
English presence itself was smaller, and thus more precarious. Thus, early relations with 
Indians were initially relatively amicable. Discontent among the Indians grew, however, 
as the English presence became more invasive. This discontent resulted in an attack in 
1622 by Powhatan warriors on the English in Jamestown. The English then retaliated 

226 




v«x 



234 



with such force that they essentially eliminated the Powhatan Confederacy from being 
any further threat. In the southern colonies, the smaller coastal Indian tribes had been 
decimated by disease and English attacks. However, because the English were not as 
strong a presence as they were in New England, large tribal confederacies were able to 
sustain large communities further inland and away from colonial English settlements. 

Students should also understand that the nature of relationships between American Indian 
tribes and European groups varied. While many relationships were adversarial, other 
relationships were more peaceful and mutually respectful. For example, in his dealings 
with the Lenape people of Pennsylvania, William Penn attempted to respect the tribe’s 
rights of land ownership and governing its own people. Unfortunately, after his death, 
some of Penn’s followers adopted an adversarial approach in dealing with the tribe. 

The student is able to see how various Native American societies changed as a result 
of the expanding European settlements and how they influenced European Societies. 

Indian students should understand that Native American societies and cultures were 
forever changed as a result of devastating disease, genocide and displacement by 
European settlements. European expansion and economic activities not only created their 
own conflict with Native Americans, but also created conflict between Native American 
groups themselves. Students should learn that European societies were able to sustain 
larger populations and broaden commerce because of their usurpation and exportation of 
North American resources - such as foodstuffs and furs. 

The student is able to analyze Native American involvement in the colonial wars and 
evaluate the consequences for their societies. 

Indian students should understand that Native Americans were sought as allies by 
competing European colonial interests in order to boost colonial military strength and to 
provide valuable tactical knowledge. During the colonial wars. Native Americans often 
had little choice but to form alliances with one or more of the competing entities. For 
example, in the Northeast the Iroquois allied themselves with the British; in the South, 
the Cherokee allied themselves with the Spanish; in the Midwest, several tribes including 
the Ottawas and Ojibway allied themselves with the French. In most cases, these 
alliances had devastating effects on the respective Native American groups. Many tribes 
lost large contingents of their men to warfare. There were also other dire consequences 
for tribes as the colonial wars played out. For example, when the French were ousted by 
the British, the tribal allies to the French were stunned. For over a century, they had 
carefully played a diplomatic game of placing one colonial force against another. Now 
tribes were left to deal with only one force, the bitter legacy of which was a serious loss 
of bargaining power. Students should know that heavy retribution was often levied 
against Native Americans who fought on losing sides of the colonial wars. Executions 
and tribal displacements were common outcomes for the tribal allies of the losing 
colonial power. The perspectives of “fair play” were certainly very different among the 
different players in the colonial wars. 



227 



The student understands the factors affecting the course of the Revolutionary War 
and contributing to the American victory. 

The student is able to compare and explain the different roles and perspectives in 
the war of men and women, including white settlers, free and enslaved African 
Americans, and Native Americans. 

Indian students should understand that, in the early years of the Revolution, both the 
British and the revolutionaries tried to maintain friendships with Indians living on the 
edges of colonial settlements. Indian tribes, however, realized that the revolutionaries 
represented the ever-growing number of farmers who were destroying the Indian way of 
life. Thus, siding with the British gave Indians a chance to continue fighting the 
encroaching frontiersmen. For this reason, warriors, in cooperation with the British, 
made extensive attacks along the frontier borders - particularly in Kentucky, western 
Pennsylvania and New York. At the same time, American patriots were destroying 
Indian villages in western New York and in what was to later become Ohio and 
Tennessee. Students should also understand that, despite the fact Ohio and Tennessee. 
Students should also understand that, despite the fact that the Continental Congress 
established Indian commissions — in the north, south and middle states - and agents to 
deal with Indians, the states still conducted their own relations with Indian tribes. 

Indian students should know that because of their strategic location along the Hudson 
River, the pro-British Iroquois played an especially significant role during the 
Revolutionary War. Since they formed a wedge between New England and the mid- 
Atlantic colonies, the Iroquois were able to assist British troops attacking from Canada. 

In turn, the colonists tried to court other Indian allies, such as the Delaware and 
Cherokees. As an incentive for their alliance, the colonists promised Indians their own 
states or representatives in the new government to be formed. These overtures were, 
however, usually rejected by the tribes. Additionally, students should understand that it 
is also unlikely that the new government would have followed through with those 
promises even if tribes had agreed to the plans. Once the Americans won, whether Indian 
groups had been their allies or ores, they received much the same treatment. Many 
eastern tribes lost their freedom and their lands, and were slowly displaced or sought 
refuge with tribes further west. In general, tribal groups were interspersed and many lost 
their Native languages, and their cultural distinctiveness changed as they were forced to 
mix with other tribes. 

Indian students should understand the roles played by key American Indian leaders - Old 
Briton (Miami), Pontiac (Ottawa), Joseph Brant (Mohawk), Tecumseh (Shawnee), 
Pushmataha (Choctaw), Alexander McGiUivray (Creek), and Black Hawk (Sauk) - in 
affecting important events during the American Revolution and subsequent new eras. 

The student is able to analyze the terms of the Treaty of Paris and how they affected 
U.S. relations with Native Americans and with European powers that held 
territories in North America. 



228 



Indian students should be aware that prior to the Revolutionary War, Great Britain had 
guaranteed protection - as well as territory - to some of its Indian allies; in fact, the 
Proclamation of 1763 prohibited European settlement beyond the crest of the 
Appalachian Mountains. However, the British made no reference to any Native land 
rights when they signed the Treaty of Paris in 1783, in which they surrendered claim to 
all land east of the Mississippi. When this happened, both the Indians and the British 
agents representing the crown were shocked at the lack of consideration of Indian rights. 
The American negotiators, however, felt Indians no longer had rights to any lands. This 
action was particularly ironic for those tribes who allied with the colonists. The Oneidas 
- the only Iroquois group allied with the Americans - saw their land base in New York 
decrease from five million acres, to little more than a thousand even though they had 
negotiated more than 30 treaties between 1785 and 1842. Students should understand 
that the Treaty of Paris’ ultimate legacy for tribes was continued warfare, particularly for 
tribes further to the west as the U.S. expanded. 

The student understands the Revolution’s effects on different social groups. 

The Indian student is able to compare the reasons why many white men and women 
and most African Americans and Native Americans remained loyal to the British. 

Indian students should understand that there were many factors affecting Native 
American loyalties to the British. For example, many tribes had long-established trade 
relations with the British. These tribes were convinced that the British had greater 
military strength and, therefore, that tribes had the most to gain for their communities by 
helping the British win the war. These perspectives and concerns for their people’s 
welfare served as the basis for tribal choices in alliance. 

The student understands the international background and consequences of the 
Louisiana Purchase, the War of 1812, and the Monroe Doctrine. 

The student is able to assess how the Louisiana Purchase affected relations with 
Native Americans and the lives of various inhabitants of the Louisiana Territory. 

Indian students should understand that the Louisiana Purchase paved the way for ever- 
increasing incursions in Native American lands. Since it was almost impossible to 
acquire land in Europe, landless people in Europe viewed the “new country” as offering 
them great opportunities - of course, at the expense of Indian lands and lives. As a result 
of the Louisiana Purchase, the same effects that had already been felt by Indian people 
along the Atlantic and in other regions like the Southwest would now be felt by tribes in 
the vast interior regions. 

The student is able to assess why many Native Americans supported the British in 
the War of 1812 and the consequences of this policy. 




.237 



229 



Indian students should understand that for American Indian tribes, the War of 1812 was 
seen as their last hope in the face of Manifest Destiny. Tribes supported the British in 
hopes of containing the young United States. Students should also be aware of the roles 
played by Tecumseh and his brother Tenskwatawa (the Prophet) who tried to unite Indian 
tribes in the Midwest against the Americans. Students should be aware of the major 
impact these two Shawnee leaders had against the Americans and that the British failed to 
match the tenacity of their Indian allies. It was this tenacious spirit of the Indians that the 
Americans, after the war, tried very hard to break. When the War of 1812 ended with the 
1814 Treaty of Ghent, the real losses were most felt by the Indians. Ironically, while the 
U.S. still maintained relations with the British after the war, they sought to devastate 
Indian country. 

The student understands federal and state Indian policy and the strategies for 
survival forged by Native Americans. 

The student is able to compare the policies toward Native Americans pursued by 
presidential administrations through the Jacksonian era. 

Indian students should understand that from the time of Washington’s administration and 
up to the late 1820s, the dominant U.S. policy toward Indians was one that attempted to 
purchase Indian land as cheaply as possible and avoid further war with Indian tribes. It 
was felt that this policy would benefit both Indians and frontiersmen. Interest in pursuing 
a “moral” Indian policy largely stemmed from two factors: (1) the early American 
leaders’ grounding in 18 th century philosophy regarding the natural rights of man and (2) 
early American leader’s desire that the new nation be an example to the world - beliefs 
particularly espoused by Thomas Jefferson. Of note, of course, is that this policy of 
peace and purchase was cheaper for the young nation than an Indian policy of war and 
conquest would have been. Students should also understand that this “moral” policy 
established very important precedents for dealing with Indian nations as equals, i.e., 
negotiating treaties with them for successions of land. These precedents have been key in 
Indian/Federal relations up to today. Indian students should also be familiar with the 
Trade and Intercourse Acts of 1790s and their implications for subsequent years. 

Indian students should understand that the American plans to “civilize” Indians were 
based on feelings that the American way of life was the “highest” achieved since classical 
times. Thus, assimilating Indians into the American way of life was considered the 
height of generosity. Students should understand that this attitude prevailed until the 
1 840s and 1 850s. At that juncture, the common attitude about Indians changed to the 
view that Indians were incapable of fitting into American society. Students should also 
understand that Indian tribes strongly resisted efforts to “Americanize” them. By 
Monroe’s administration in the 1820s, the federal policy had changed to one of trying to 
exchange Indian lands in the East for lands West of the Mississippi. This policy was 
made possible by the Louisiana Purchase. By the time of the Jackson administration in 
the 1 830s, the federal policy of Indian Removal - i.e., forced move to the west - was 

230 



O 

ERJC 



238 



underway. Students should be particularly aware of the constitutional crisis caused when 
Jackson defied Chief Justice John Marshall’s Supreme Court ruling which favored 
Cherokee claims over the state of Georgia’s attempts to enact state jurisdiction over 
Cherokee lands. Jackson’s desired policy ideas had run head long into the Supreme 
Court’s interpretation of constitutional and Indian treaty rights. 

The student is able to compare federal and state Indian policy and explain Whig 
opposition to the removal of Native Americans. 

Indian students should understand that the policy of Indian removal was bitterly debated 
both in Congress and in the public press. The advocates of Indian removal declared that 
it was the only means of protecting Indians; opponents of removal, led by prominent 
Whig politicians and Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall, argued that justice 
demanded the protection of Indians’ rights as guaranteed by treaty. Students should 
understand that President Monroe’s proposal to initiate the Indian Removal Policy 
stemmed from his efforts to honor the federal government’s promise to the state of 
Georgia - a promise that essentially guaranteed the federal extinguishing of all Indian 
title to land within Georgia in exchange for the state ceding its western lands to the 
federal government. Students should understand that the state of Georgia had been 
outraged by the Cherokee Nation’s adoption of a constitution in 1827 and the tribe’s 
declaration of sovereign jurisdiction over its own territory; the state saw this as an 
unacceptable challenge to its authority. The discovery of gold within the boundaries of 
the Cherokee nation only further intensified this state and Indian conflict as Georgia 
residents wanted access to the gold. Students should understand that the federal policy of 
Indian Removal, while supposedly proposed as a humane compromise between Indians 
and Georgians, was in actuality very cruel as implemented under the Jackson 
administration, and as attested to by the historical accounts of the Cherokee Nation’s 
“Trail of Tears.” 

The student is able to analyze the impact of removal and resettlement on the 
Cherokee, Creek, Chickasaw, Choctaw, and Seminole. 

Indian students should be able to explain the terrible impact that the Removal Policy had 
on tribes. Indian people were uprooted from land they had known as their homes for 
centuries and were forced to leave behind their ways of life as well as the graves of then- 
ancestors. Some of the tribes that were forcibly moved had even fought under General 
Andrew Jackson in the First Seminole War in exchange for a guarantee that they would 
not be removed. Ultimately, that guarantee was not honored. A huge number of Indians 
died along the journey west from exposure and sickness. Tribes were often divided when 
some members were removed to the west while others hid in order to remain in then- 
homelands. Those individuals who did survive the harsh move had to establish new 
homes and communities in lands that were totally u nfamiliar to them and very different 
from anything their ancestors had known before. Students should contrast the survival 
strategies of those tribal groups who were removed with those of Indian groups/families 
which remained behind in the East. 



231 



The student is able to investigate the impact of trans-Mississippi expansion on 
Native Americans. 

Indian students should understand that for most of their daily needs, the Plains tribes, like 
the Sioux and Cheyenne, relied heavily on the vast buffalo herds which roamed the 
northern Great Plains. In the 1 840s, tensions began to grow between the Plains tribes and 
the emigrants traveling by wagon along the Oregon Trail. In the late 1840s and 1850s, 
other trails were created to take miners and settlers to California and Colorado. Settlers 
also began pouring in to Kansas and Nebraska. The wagon trains and influx of new 
people began pouring into Kansas and Nebraska. The wagon trains and influx of new 
people began driving the buffalo away from the traditional Indian hunting grounds. This 
began to have serious effects on tribal ways of life. Thus, friction between Indians and 
the new settlers and miners increased and in 1854 resulted in the first open warfare in the 
West between whites and Indians. By the close of the Civil War, this hemming in of the 
Plains tribes accelerated even more. Soon, the buffalo herds were totally destroyed by 
the newcomers and the Plains tribes were forced onto reservations. The cause-and-effect 
relationship of western expansion had taken a serious toll. 

The student is able to explain and evaluate the various strategies of Native 
Americans such as accommodation, revitalization, and resistance. 

Indian students should understand that Native American leaders faced many dilemmas in 
dealing with the relentless expansion of the United States. In general, the concerns of the 
tribal leaders had to do with protecting their people and preserving what they could of 
their ways of life. The strategies they implemented to do this depended on many things - 
their geographic location, their ability to muster military strength, their strategic 
importance to the United States, their desire for peace, the treatment they received at the 
hands of United States citizens and the military, and so on. Military resistance was often 
a last resort that occurred only when negotiations broke down or earlier treaty promises 
were broken. Indian students should understand the strategies employed by their own 
tribes and leaders in dealing with the United States’ conquest of their lands. They should 
evaluate the short and long-term effects of those strategies on their tribes’ histories and 
cultures. 

The student understands how the resources of the Union and Confederacy affected 
the course of the war. 

The student is able to describe the position of the major Indian nations during the 
Civil War and explain the effects of the war upon these nations. 

Indian students should be aware that this country’s Indian nations did not all take the 
same side during the Civil War. At least 3,000 Indians fought for the North. On the 
other hand, the five civilized tribes in the “Indian territory” - the Cherokees, Chickasaws, 
Choctaws, Creeks and Seminoles - officially joined the Confederate States of America. 
Since many of their tribal leaders were themselves slaveholders, they were sympathetic to 

232 





the southern cause. The Confederate States also offered them more than the United 
States. However, in some cases, loyalties were even split within individual tribes. For 
example, the Oklahoma Cherokees and the Creeks each had members who formed and 
participated in military units on both sides of the conflict. This factionalism created deep 
and long-lasting schisms in the social structure of some tribes. 

Indian students should understand that the Civil War resulted in an expanded and more 
capable military presence in the West. This had an effect on relations between western 
tribes and the United States, particularly during the 1 5-20 years following the Civil War. 



The student understands how agriculture, mining, and ranching were transformed. 

The student is able to analyze the role of the federal government particularly in 
terms of land policy, water, and Indian policy in the economic transformation of the 
West. 

Indian students should understand that this period saw the end of wars between the 
United States government and Native Americans. Treaties and federal policies had 
reduced Native American populations and land holdings to a miniscule fraction of their 
original size. This resulted in vast tracts of land being available for non-Indian 
settlement, agricultural development, mining and ranching. 

The student understands various perspectives on federal Indian policy westward 
expansion, and the resulting struggles. 



The student is able to identify and compare the attitudes and policies toward Native 
Americans by government officials, the U.S. Army, missionaries, and settlers. 



Indian students should understand that during this period of American history, attitudes 
and policies toward Native Americans were largely paternalistic and focused on 
controlling Indians and forcing them to change. Native Americans were basically 
confined to their reservations and forced to adopt totally foreign ways of life - plow 
farming and ranching being notable examples. Federal Indian agents exerted a great deal 
of control on reservation lands. These agents were often corrupt, stealing the annuities 
and commodities that were intended for the Indian communities. Students should 
analyze this federal policy of assimilation, that is, forcing Native Americans to adopt the 
culture and ways of mainstream Americans. This effort was reinforced by various 
Christian religious denominations, who were given exclusive contracts to send 
missionaries to certain reservations. Missionaries often used assimilation strategies that 
were demeaning and brutal. Traditional religious practices were outlawed. This period 
of American history also saw the advent of the boarding school era, a time in which 
Native American children were forced to attend schools far from home and family, and 
where their traditional ways of life were totally banned and severe punishments were 
exacted for even speaking a tribal language. 




241 



233 



Students should consult community oral histories and documents — such as 
autobiographies or scholarly research - which have recorded American Indian 
perspectives about these attitudes and policies. 

The student is able to compare survival strategies of different Native American 
societies during the second great removal. 

Indian students should understand that during the Civil War the federal government 
concluded that it was no longer feasible to allow the Western tribes a free existence; 
rather, it was decided that these Indians would have to give up their traditional nomadic 
lifestyle and accept living in confined reservation areas. Many tribes — including the 
Sioux, Northern Cheyenne, Kiowa, Comanche, Southern Cheyenne, Arapaho, and 
Western Apache - did not submit willingly to this new policy, and they remained largely 
unconquered until the 1880s. From 1866 to 1886, federal troops campaigned 
continuously against the Western tribes. Geronimo’s Chiricahua Apache band was one 
of the last to hold out, not capitulating until 1886. Students should also be aware that 
after the Civil War, the Five Civilized Tribes of the Indian Territory acquiesced to the 
surrender of the western half of Indian Territory to the national government. This forced 
ceding of land was the government’s penalty on tribes for their earlier alliances with the 
Confederate states. In fact, the Seminole were forced to cede their entire reservation to 
the United States. Federal officials wanted the western half of Indian Territory for the 
express purpose of relocating tribes from other sections of the west. 

The student is able to explain the provisions of the Dawes Severalty Act of 1887 and 
evaluate its effects on tribal identity, land ownership, and assimilation. 

Indian students should understand that the Dawes Severalty Act was another government 
attempt at forced assimilation of Indian people. The Act specifically attacked the 

important traditional Native American social principal of communal land ownership. 
Dividing tribal lands among individual owners not only contradicted the traditional 
Indian concept of communal property, but it also affected tribal identity by undermining 
tribal cohesiveness. In addition, its implementation eroded the traditional Indian concept 
of extended family by separating family members from one another, sometimes by many 
miles. Students should examine the impact the Dawes Act had on their own tribe. 

The student is able to evaluate the legacy of 19 th —century federal Indian policy. 

Indian students should understand that Indian policies of the late 19 th century further 
damaged and brought turmoil into the lives of Indian people who were already reeling 
from the devastating effects of the Indian wars and forced life on reservations. 

Misguided attempts at assimilation had the effect of destroying community cohesiveness, 
undermining the social and cultural fabrics of tribes, and creating a sense of alienation. 

The actions of this era led to various social ills for many Indian people, including extreme 
poverty and alcoholism. 



234 



Each Indian student should understand the effect of 19 th century federal Indian policy on 
his/her tribe’s history - for example, in terms of treaties, warfare and changes in land 
bases. 

The student understands the limitations of Progressivism and the alternatives 
offered by various groups. 

The student is able to evaluate the changing attitude toward Native American 
assimilation under Progressivism and the consequences of the change. 

Indian students should understand that during the last 1 2 years of the 1 9 th century, the 
primary vehicle for assimilating Indian people into American society was the education 
of young Indian people. By and large, reliance on sectarian education came to an end, 
although mission schools continued to operate along side government schools on many 
reservations. The Federal government began to encourage local school districts to enroll 
Indian students; nevertheless, local prejudice against Indians caused school districts to be 
largely unresponsive to this federal urging. Students should understand that Indian 
peoples continued to tenaciously resist these efforts to be absorbed into American 
society. Students should also be aware that in the 1920s a vigorous reaction to these 
federal assimilation policies was growing among various “Indian rights” societies, 
spearheaded by non-Indians. The Progressive movement stemmed from the rising 
interest in the relatively new fields of anthropology and conservationism. The movement 
became particularly active in response to proposed legislation affecting tribes in New 
Mexico and Arizona. Since tribal cultures in the Southwest were fairly intact in the early 
1 900s, they were the subject of considerable interest to artists and social scientists. 
Progressivist policies de-emphasized total assimilation. Instead, they stressed 
maintaining as many Indian cultural beliefs and life ways as possible. This change in 
attitude resulted in a brief attempt to place viable elements of tribal culture into the 
government school curriculum - most notably in the arts. This Progressive era was short- 
lived, however, given this country’s shift in attention to the problems brewing in pre- 
World War II Europe and their potential economic and international implications for the 
United States. 

Indian students should be able to explain the significance of the Indian Citizenship Act of 
1924, the Meriam Report of 1928, the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, and the 
creation in 1946 of the Indian Claims Commission. Indian students should understand 
That despite passage of the Indian Citizenship Act, many state constitutions did not allow 
for “Indians non-taxed” to vote in state and local elections. In fact, it was not until Indian 
veterans returning from World War II brought litigation against states to gain voting 
rights that many states enfranchised their Indian citizens. In Arizona, for example, this 
did not happen until 1948; in New Mexico, this did not occur until 1962. Students should 
also be aware of the impact of World War II - a time when many American Indians first 
experienced life off the reservation for an extended period of time - on cultural, social 
and political aspects of tribal life. Students should consult community oral histories and 
other sources which will provide tribal perspectives about these issues. 

235 



The student understands the Second Reconstruction and its advancement of civil 
rights. 

The student is able to evaluate the agendas, strategies, and effectiveness of various 
African Americans, Asian Americans, Latino Americans, and Native Americans, as 
well as the disabled, in the quest for civil rights and equal opportunities. 

Indian students should understand that in the early 1950s the federal government initiated 
the Relocation and Termination Policies. The intent of these policies was, once again, to 
bring Indians into the American mainstream. The Relocation Policy encouraged, through 
job training programs, the movement of reservation Indians to major urban areas like Los 
Angeles, Chicago, Denver and Dallas. The Termination Policy’s intent was to terminate 
the nation-to-nation relationship between tribes and the federal government. It resulted in 
withdrawal of federal support to affected tribes whether or not they wanted or were 
prepared for this. Responsibility for tribes was transferred to the states in which the 
tribes were located. In all, termination was imposed on about twelve tribes and bands 
before lawmakers were convinced by tribes and their allies to abandon the policy 
altogether. 

The student is able to assess the reasons for and effectiveness of the escalation from 
civil disobedience to more radial protest in the civil rights movement. 

Indian students should be able to explain how Native American political activism became 
especially strong during the 1960s with the founding of various groups, like the National 
Indian Youth Council, the National Indian Education Association and the American 
Indian Movement. Radical political actions, such as the takeovers of the Wounded Knee 
Church at Pine Ridge in South Dakota, and the Interior Department Building in 
Washington, DC, also helped focus national attention on the deplorable conditions on 
reservations and in Indian communities in general. This heightened awareness in the 
American public led to federal legislation designed to improve health, housing, education 
and economic development opportunities for Native Americans. Students should fully 
understand how the new federal policy of Self-Determination enabled tribal governments 
in the 1970s to assert their authority and to take more active roles in their communities 
and in dealing with the United States government. Through better educational 
opportunities, more Indian leaders became poised to prevent continuing attacks on tribal 
sovereignty. Tribes have successfully used the legal system to advance their causes. In 
addition, they have developed various economic strategies to generate tribal revenue. 
Students should be able to explain that tribal sovereignty is the nation-to-nation 
relationship between the United States government and tribes, and that this relationship 
was established by more than 600 treaties ratified by the U.S. Congress and repeatedly 
reaffirmed by the Supreme Court and various Executive Orders. 

Footnote: In Sept., 2001, tribes are meeting because sovereignty is being threatened. 

-American Indian Content Standards, ORBIS Associates for Bureau of Indian Affairs. 

236 






■fr Background 
■fr Materials 
■fr Activities 

for 

Language Arts-Based Units 





23245 



THE ORAL TRADITION AND ORATORY 



Indian people are known for having an oral tradition. Even though they sometimes 
utilized forms of writing, their main way of handing down history and stories was by 
telling such information to others. Indian people were also great orators. Although 
they usually used few words, their words sent powerful messages. Consider the 
following: 

“Everything on earth has a purpose and every person a mission.”- Mourning Dove, 
Salish 

“I have seen that in any great undertaking it is not enough for a man to depend simply 
upon himself.” — Lone Man, Lakota 

“Your mother’s the one that does everything for you. The Mother Earth does the 
same.” — Lena Sooktis, Northern Cheyenne 

“You must speak straight so that your words may go as sunlight into our hearts.” — 
Cochise, Apache 

“Somebody will always be looking at you as an example of how to behave. Don’t let 
them down.” - Karen Wynn, Yokuts 

“Politeness goes far, yet costs nothing.” - Seneca 

“The more you know, the more you will trust and the less you will fear.” - Medewiwin, 
Ojibway 

“Live a quiet life and be kind to all, and listen to the advice of the old. People will 
respect you if yu do this.” - Nodinens, Chippewa 

“My children, as you travel along life’s road never harm anyone, nor cause anyone to 
feel sad.” - Winnebago 

“Teach children what is right to do and they will live that way and get on well in the 
world.” - Chippewa 

“If everyone did something for somebody else, there wouldn’t be anyone in need in the 
whole world.” - Marlene Richard, Tuscarora 

“Knowledge is like the wind... once obtaining it you can go anywhere.” — Yellow 
Horse 

“The man who preserves his selfhood is ever calm and unshaken by the storms of 
existence.” - Ohiyesa 

238 



O 

ERIC 



246 



LITERATURE FOR THE ORAL TRADITION AND ORATORY UNIT - 



A Natural Education: Native American Ideas and Thoughts by Stan Padilla (Indian 

Author), Book Pub. Co., 1994. 

Words of Power: Voices from Indian America by Norbert Hill, Jr. (Indian Author), 

Fulcrum Pub., 1994. 

Indian Oratory: Famous Speeches by Noted Indian Chieftains compiled by W. C. 

Vanderwerth, University of Oklahoma Press, 1989. 

Women of the Native Struggle: Portraits and Testimony of Native American Women 

by Ronnie Farley, Orion, 1993. 

In the Trail of the Wind: American Indian Poems and Ritual Orations ed. by John 

Bierhorst, Dell, 1975. 

ACTIVITIES FOR UNIT - 

1 . Have the students read and/or hear about how the oral tradition is important, 
i.e. learning from elders and sharing stories, knowledge and thoughts to 
keep the culture alive. Discuss the appropriate use of language in various 
situations and the effects of cultural context on language use. 

2. Have the students read some Indian oratorical statements and paraphrase 
them. 

3. Have the students do research on those who made the statements, if 
known. 

4. Have the students develop statements on topics they feel strongly about and 
present. 

5. Encourage the students to present their oratory in their Native language. 

5. Have the students hear about the tribe’s oral tradition, including the mores 
for story telling from a tribal elder/storyteller and other tribal mores around 
listening and speaking. 

6. Have students write a proposal to be presented to the tribal council or the 
culture committee outlining how the oral tradition can be preserved and 
strengthened. 

8. Have the students include their writing in a writing portfolio system. 

239 





i 



INDIAN STORIES 



As a part of the oral tradition, Indian people told stories. Their stories often taught 
lessons to the young people. Grandparents were most often the storytellers. Some 
stories were very long and could not be told in one sitting. Stories were usually only 
told at certain times, mainly in the wintertime. Indian stories are often referred to as 
legends, stories coming down from the past. It is important to preserve the Indian 
stories and storytelling among Indian people. 

“Legends are an important and integral part of the Native American culture. Legends 
are a vehicle for teaching young people lessons and proper behavior, maintaining and 
recording Indian community history and an oral preservation of traditional beliefs and 
values explaining natural phenomenon and teaching respect to the natural world. All 
Indian tribes have recognized the importance of preserving this oral tradition.” 

— Legends Across Indian Nations, ORBIS Associates, Washington, DC. 

LITERATURE FOR INDIAN STORIES UNIT - 

Mishomis Book: The Voice of the Ojibway by Edward Benton-Banai (Indian Author), 
Indian Country Communications, 1991 . 

Native American Animal Stories or Keepers of the Animals by Joseph Bruchac (Indian 
Author), Fulcrum. Many tribes 

Native American Stories or Keepers of the Earth by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), 
Fulcrum. Many tribes 

Native Plant Stories or Keepers of Life Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum. 
Many tribes 

Keepers of the Night by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), 
Fulcrum, 1994. Many tribes 

When the Chenoo Howls by Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Walker Books. 

American Indian Myths & Legends by Richard Erdoes & Alfonzo Ortiz (Indian 
Author), Pantheon, 1982. 

Hoksila and the Red buffalo by Moses Nelson Big Crow (Indian Author), Tipi Press, 
1991. Lakota 

Tales of Ticasuk: Eskimo Legends and Stories by Emily Ivanoff Brown (Indian 
Author), University of Alaska Press. 

Seneca Indian Stories by Leo Cooper, Ha-yen-doh-nees (Indian Author), Bowman. 

240 




^48 



The Snake That Lived in the Santa Cruz Mountains and Other Ohlone Stories by Linda 
Yamane (Indian Author), Oyate, 1998. 

American Indian Stories by Gertrude Bonin, Zitkala-Sa (Indian Author), University of 
Nebraska Press, 1979. Dakota 

Old Indian Legends by Gertrude Bonin, Zitkala-Sa (Indian Author), University of 
Nebraska Press, 1985. Dakota 

Creation of a California Tribe by Lee Smith and Clifford E. Trafcer (Indian Authors), 
Sierra Oaks. 

Earthmaker’s Lodge: American Indian Folklore, Activities and Foods by Barrie 
Kavasch (Indian Author). Many tribes 

Skywoman: Legends of the Iroquois by Joanne Shenandoah (Indian Author) and 
others, 1998. 

Myths and Legends of the Sioux by Marie L. MacLaughlin, Tumbleweed Press. 

Earth Lodge Tales from the Upper Missouri: Traditional Stories of the Ankara, 
Hidatsa and Mandan, Mary College. 

Navajo Coyote Tales by William Morgan (Indian Author). 

Stories of the Sioux by Luther Standing Bear (Indian Author), University of 
Nebraska. 

Stories of the Metis by B. Sealey, Manitoba Metis Federation Press. 

Two Old Women by Velma Wallis (Indian Author), Harper Pere nnial, 1993. 

Athabascan 

The Bear-Walker and Other Stories, The Star-Man and Other Tales, Tales of the 
Anishinaubaek by Basil Johnston (Indian Author), Royal Ontario Museum. Ojibwa 

Ojibway Tales by Basil H. Johnston (Indian Author), Bison, 1993. 

The Story Catcher by Mari Sandoz, 1963. Lakota 

Six Micmac Stories by Ruth Holmes Whitehead, Nova Scotia Museum, 1992. 

Indian Legends from the Northern Rockies by Ella E. Clark, Univ, of Okla. Press. 

The Sound of Flutes by Richard Erdoes, Pantheon, 1976. Lakota 

241 



249 



Dakota Texts by Ella Cara Deloria (Indian Author), Dakota Press, 1992. 

The Bear Who Stole the Chinook by Frances Fraser, Douglas & McIntyre, 1990. 

Blackfeet 

Coyote Stories by Mourning Dove (Indian Author), University of Nebraska Press, 

1990. 

Stories That Make the World by Rodney Frey, University of Oklahoma Press, 1995. 

Northwest 

Blackfeet Indian Stories by George Bird Grinnell, Applewood, 1913. 

Myths and Traditions of the Crow Indians by Robert H. Lowie, University of Nebraska 

Press, 1993. 

Lakota Myth by James R. Walker, University of Nebraska Press, 1983. 

American Indian Legends by Zitkala-Sa (Gertrude Simmons Bonnin, Indian Author), 

University ofNebraska Press, 1985. 

Tonweya and the Eagles and Other Lakota Indian Tales by Rosebud Yellow Robe 

(Indian Author), Dial, 1979. 

Check your library or bookstores for other books of Indian legends, especially 

those of the local tribe(s). 

ACTIVITIES FOR INDIAN STORIES UNIT- 

1 . Have the students read and discuss Indian stories, mainly from their own 
local tribe(s) or regions. Do they teach lessons? When are they to be told? 
Who compiled the stories? Discuss the effects of cultural contexts on 
communication. 

2. Have the students verify the accuracy of the stories from local tribes by 
conferring with tribal elders, etc. There may be other versions that are more 
accepted by the local people. 

3. If it is the appropriate time, have an elder(s) visit the classroom and tell 
Stories and/or talk about story telling. 

4. Have the students create a booklet of tribal stories. Have them use the 
writing process so it will be as professional as possible. 

5. Have the students keep their written work as part of a portfolio system. 

242 



O 

tKJC 



£50 



POETRY BY INDIAN AUTHORS 



Indian young people should know and read the poetry of Indian authors. Poetry 
provides a special way to communicate feelings and can provide a way for young 
people to connect with and recognize others’ feelings and thoughts. 

LITERATURE FOR POETRY BY INDIAN AUTHORS UNIT - 

The Business of Fancy Dancing by Sherman Alexie (Spokane/Coeur d’Alene), 
Hanging Loose Press, 1992. 

Old Shirts and New Skins by Sherman Alexie (Spokane/Coeur d’Alene), University 
of California Press, 1993. 

At the helm of twilight by Anita Endrezze (Yaqui), Broken Moon Press, 1992. 

Reinventing the Enemy’s Language: Contemporary Native Women’s Writing of Native 
America ed. by Joy Harjo (Muscogee) and Gloria Bird (Spokane). 

Songs from This Earth on Turtle’s Back ed. by Joseph Bruchac (Abenaki), Greenfield 
Review Press, 1983. 

Dancing on the Rim of the World: Anthology of Northwest Native American Writing, 
University of Arizona Press, 1990. 

Harper’s Anthology of 20 th Century Native American Poetry ed. by Duane Niatum 
(Klallam), Harper & Row, 1988. 

No Borders by Joseph Bruchac (Abenaki). 

In Mad Love and War by Joy Harjo (Creek), Wesleyan University Press, 1990. 

A Breeze Swept Through by Luci Tapahonso (Navajo), University of Arizona Press, 
1987. 

S’aanii Dahataal/The Women Are Singing by Luci Tapahonso (Navajo), University of 
Arizona Press, 1993. 

A Cheyenne Sketchbook: Selected Poems 1970-1991 by Lance Henson (Southern 
Cheyenne), Gree nfi eld Review Press, 1992. 

Full Moon on the Reservation by Gloria Bird (Spokane), Greenfield Review Press, 
1994. 



A Quick Brush of Wings by Mary Tallmountain (Athabascan), Freedom Voices. 

243 



Summer in the Spring by Gerald Vizenor (Chippewa), University of Oklahoma Press, 
1993. 

Riding the Earthboy 40 by James Welch (Blackfeet/Gros Ventre). Confluence Press. 
1971. 

Clans of Many Nations: Selected Poems 1969-1994 by Peter Blue Cloud (Mohawk), 
White Pine. 

Durable Breath: Contemporary Native American Poetry by John E. Smelcer and D.L. 
Birchfield (Choctaw/Chickasaw), 1994. 

Columbus Day: Poems, Drawings and Stories About American Indian Life and Death 
in the Nineteen Seventies by Jimmie Durham (Cherokee), West End Press, 1983. 

Native North American Literary Companion by Joseph Bruchac (Abenaki) and Janet 
Witalec, Visable Ink, 1998. 

Contemporary Native American Authors: A Biographical Dictionary, CRC Publishing 
Co., Eagle Rock Books. 800 268-2059 



ACTIVITIES FOR POETRY BY INDIAN AUTHORS UNIT - 

1 . Have students read poetry selected by the teacher for all students to read. 
Students should understand the speaker, the meanings of words, the 
grammar and punctuation, and the organization of the total composition. 
Students should feel the actual sounds and rhythm of the poem’s language 
and its appeal to their senses. Students should “experience” the poetry and 
understand that people respond differently to literature. 

2. Have the students respond and reflect upon poetry by presenting a role play, 
journaling, or doing a media project. 

3 . Have students choose selections that they wish to read and prepare at 
least one reading and response to be presented to the class. 

4. Have students report on the Indian poets they have read. 

5. Have students do research to find poetry by local tribal members and 
develop a relationship/correspond with those poets. 

6. Have students write their own poetry and publish it. 

7. Have the students include their writing in a writing portfolio system. 

244 





SHORT STORIES BY INDIAN AUTHORS 



Indian young people should know and read the work of Indian authors of short stories. 
A story presents us with a world of the author’s imagination. The author combines 
people, places, events and ideas to create a unique, fictional world. In putting these 
parts together to form a story, the author wants to illustrate a truth - a generalization - 
about life. A good short story presents enough lifelike qualities to help us better 
understand ourselves and our world. A short story should be readable in one sitting. 
The author works with basic elements: plot, character, setting, point of view, and 
theme. 

LITERATURE FOR SHORT STORIES BY INDIAN AUTHORS UNIT - 

The Bleeding Man and Other Stories by Craig Kee Strete (Indian Author), 
Greenwillow, 1977. 

The Hawk is Hungry and Other Stories by D’Arcy McNickle (Salish), University or 
Arizona Press, 1992. 

The Power of Horses and Other Stories by Elizabeth Cook-Lynn (Dakota), Arcade, 
1990. 

That’s What She Said: Contemporary Poetry and Fiction by Native American Women 
ed. by Rayna Green (Cherokee) Indiana University Press, 1984. 

The Man To Send Rainclouds: Contemporary Stories by American Indians ed. by 
Kenneth Rosen, Vintage Books, 1975. 

American Indian Literature: An Anthology by Alan R.Velie, University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1991. 

Plains Native American Literature, Multiculture Literature Collection ed. by Virginia 
Seeley, Globe, 1993. 

Native North American Literary Companion by Joseph Bruchac (Abenaki) and Janet 
Witalec, Visible Ink, 1998. 

Talking Leaves: Contemporaty Native American Short Stories ed. by Craig Lesley, 
Laurel, 1991. 

The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven by Sherman Alexie (Spokane/Coeur 
d’Alene), The Atlantic Monthly Press, 1993. 

Turtle Meat and Other Stories by Joseph Bruchac (Abenaki), Holy Cow! Press, 1992. 

245 




253 



Tribes by James Welch (Blackfeet/Gros Ventre) in Ploughshares, Spring, 1994. 

Voice of the Turtle: American Indian Literature 1900-1970 ed. by Paula Gunn Allen 

(Laguna/Sioux), Ballantine, 1 974. 

One Good Story, That One by Thomas King (Cherokee), 1993. 

Earth Power Coming: Short Fiction in Native American Literature ed. by Simon Ortiz 

(Acoma Pueblo), 1983. 

Bead on an Anthill: A Lakota Childhood by Delphine Red Shirt (Lakota), 1998. 

Men on the Moon: Collected Short Stories by Simon Ortiz (Acoma Pueblo), 1999. 

Growing Up Native American: An Anthology ed. by Patricia Riley, Morrow, 1993. 

The Sound of Rattles and Clappers: A Collection of New California Indiem Writing ed. 

by Greg Sarris (Coast Miwok), 1994. 

Food and Spirits by Beth Grant (Mohawk), 1991. 

Achimoona ed. by Maria Campbell (Metis), Fifth House, 1992. 

ACTIVITIES FOR SHORT STORIES BY INDIAN AUTHORS UNIT - 

1. Have the students read short stories selected by the teacher. Let them know 
the purpose for the reading. Have them discuss the plot, characters, setting, 
point of view and theme. Have them predict. Have them determine if the 
story(ies) offer a generalization about life. Have them evaluate the stories 
and recognize that people respond differently to literature. 

2. Have the students choose and read other short stories. Have them prepare 
reports about the stories they have chosen. 

3. Have the students do research and report on the authors of the stories. 

4. Have the students write short stories and have them published. Have them 
use writing and editing process. Have them exchange stories with students 
in other schools. Sell their book of short stories at tribal museums, casinos, 
etc. 

5. Have the students research to find local short story authors and establish 
a relationship with them including having them visit the class. 

6. Have the students include their writing in a writing portfolio system. 

246 



STUDENT WRITING 



It is very important that Indian students become good writers. Many schools are trying 
harder to teach students to write well. There is a great need for Indian people to know 
how to write effectively. Tribal government workers, for example, acquire money and 
programs for the tribal members by writing proposals that must compete with others for 
funding. Some Indian young people may eventually make their living by writing; 
maybe they will be authors or news reporters and be able to tell the story of Indian 
people. All people need to be able to write well to function in society. This unit will 
highlight the published works of Indian students. Students might write poetry, short 
stories or essays or may capture historical information or stories from elders. Some 
schools informally publish their student’s work and that is just as important and should 
be included and read by other students. Student’s written work should be published 
regularly. 

LITERATURE FOR STUDENT WRITING UNIT- 

Courageous Spirits: Aboriginal Heroes of Our Children by Jo-ann Archibald, Val 
Friesen and Jeff Smith (Indian Author), Theytus, 1993. Canada 

Giving: Ojibwa Stories and Legends, Children of Curve Lake Reserve, Waapoone, 
1985. 

When the Rain Sings: Poems by Young Native Americans by Lee Francis (Indian 
Author), Simon & Schuster, 1999. 

Angwamas Minosewag Anishinabeg: Time of the Indian, students of the Red School 
House, Indian Country Communications, 1977. 

Just Talking About Ourselves: Voices of Our Youth (Vols. 1, 2 & 3) by Marlena Dolan, 
Theytus, 1994. 

Rising Voices: Writings of Young Native Americans by Arlene B. Hirschfelder 
(Indian Author) and Beverly Singer, Scribner, 1992. 

It’s Like My Heart Pounding: Imaginative Writing of American Indian Students by 
Mick Fedullo, Weber State College, 1990. 

Touching Home: Stories, Essays & Poems by Tribal College Students, Tribal College 
Press. 

Reclaiming the Vision, Past, Present, and Future: Native Voices for the Eighth 
Generation ed. by Lee Francis (Laguna Pueblo) and James Bruchac (Abenaki), 
Greenfield Review Press, 1996. 

247 



O 

ERIC 



255 



ACTIVITIES FOR STUDENT WRITING UNIT- 



1 . Have students read and respond to the works of other students from other 
places and/or classes. 

2. Stress the use of a writing process such as: pre-writing, first draft, peer 
conference, revise, edit, publish, and share. Let them know that authors 
and students who have their works published follow this, or a similar, 
process. 

3. Have students write poetry, short stories and essays. 

4. Have students interview elders and gather historical information or stories. 

5. Have the students publish their work including all of the steps necessary to 
print and sell them. Have them figure the cost of publishing their work in a 
booklet(s), how much they would have to charge for them, related costs. 

6. Assign students various tasks, editing, illustrating, marketing, selling, etc. 

7. Enter students’ works in writing contests or in other opportunities to be 
published. 

8. Have the students include their work in a writing portfolio system. 



248 



256 



NOVELS BY INDIAN AUTHORS 



Indian young people should know and read the work of Indian novelists. Because of its 
length, a novel can picture life with all of its richness, complexity, and contradiction. A 
novel uses the same elements as a short story: plot, character, setting, point of view, and 
theme; but the greater length of the novel allows novelists to deal with more complex 
aspects of these elements. 

LITERATURE FOR NOVELS BY INDIAN AUTHORS UNIT - 

Indian Killer by Sherman Alexie (Spokane/Coeur d’Alene), Atlantic Monthly Press, 
1996. 

Reservation Blues by Sherman Alexie (Spokane/Coeur d’Alene), Warner Books, 

1996. 

The Owl’s Song by Janet Campbell Hale (Coeur d’Alene), Bantam Books, 1991. 

Jailing of Cecelia Capture by Janet Campbell Hale (Coeur d’ Alene), Random House, 
1985. 

The Surrounded by D’Arcy McNickle (Salish), University of New Mexico Press, 1936. 

House Made of Dawn by N. Scott Momaday (Kiowa), New American Library, 1968. 

Cogawea, the Half-Blood by Mourning Dove (Okanagan/Colville), University of 
Nebraska Press, 1981. 

The Sharpest Sight by Louis Owens (Choctaw/Cherokee), University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1992. 

Wolfsong by Louis Owens (Choctaw/Cherokee), West End Press, 1991. 

My Name is Seepeetza by Shirley Sterling (Salish), Groundwood Press, 1992. 

Medicine River by Thomas King (Cherokee), Viking, 1990. 

Green Grass, Running Water by Thomas King (Cherokee), Houghton Mifflin 1993. 
Green March Moons by Mary TallMountain (Athabascan), New Seed Press, 1987. 

The Grass Dancer by Susan Power (Sioux), Berkeley Books, 1997. 

Ceremony by Leslie Marmon Silko (Laguna Pueblo), Signet, 1977. 

249 




257 



April Raintree by Beatrice Culleton (Metis), Pemmican, 1994. 

A Yellow Raft in Blue Water by Michael Dorris (Modoc), Henry Holt, 1987. 

Love Medicine by Louise Erdrich (Chippewa), Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1984. 

Tracks by Louise Erdrich (Chippewa), Henry Holt, 1988. 

Dead Voice: Natural Agonies in the New World by Gerald Vizenor (Chippewa), 

University of Oklahoma Press, 1 992. 

The Death or Jim Loney by James Welch (Blackfeet/Gros Ventre), Penguin, 1979. 

Winter in the Blood by James Welch (Blackfeet/Gros Ventre), Penguin, 1987. 

Indian Lawyer by James Welch (Blackfeet/Gros Ventre), Penguin, 1990. 

Sundown by John Joseph Mathews (Osage), University of Oklahoma Press, 1988. 

Silent Words by Ruby Slipperjack (Ojibway), Fifth House, 1992 . 

ACTIVITIES FOR NOVELS BY INDIAN AUTHORS UNIT - 

1 . Have the students read a novel together. Utilize literature circle strategies. 
What do they already know about the book and the topic? Have them 
discuss the plot, character, setting, point of view, and theme. Have them 
respond. 

2. Have the students select novels to read. Have them prepare a report to be 
presented to the rest of the class. Have them explain the purpose of the 
reading, their response and discuss the plot, character, setting, point of view, 
and theme. 

3. Have the students do research on Indian authors and report. The book 
Contemporary Native American Authors: A Biographical Dictionary should 
include most Indian authors. Books including works of Indian authors 
should have some information on them. 

4. Have the students study the book review section of a newspaper. Then have 
them write book reviews on the novels they have read for the newspaper. 

5. Have the students encourage family members to read the novels they have 
read and lead a discussion on the book(s) with the family member(s). 

6. Have the students include their written work in a portfolio system. 

250 



258 



DRAMA BY INDIAN PLAYWRIGHTS 



Indian young people should know and read the work of Indian playwrights. 
There are fewer Indian writers in this genre than in the others. Drama consists 
of stories that are written to be performed for an audience. The playwright 
writes two things: dialogue that the actors speak and stage directions that give 
instructions to the various people involved in putting on the play, including the 
actors. The actual putting on of the play is called staging and it involves 
scenery, costumes, lighting, and props - as well as the activities of the actors. 
Drama as a form of literature dates back to the ancient Greeks and seems to 
have had its origins in religious ritual. 



LITERATURE FOR DRAMA BY INDIAN PLAYWRIGHTS UNIT - 

New Native American Drama: Three Plays by Hanay Geiogamah (Kiowa), 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1980. 

Toronto at Dreamer’s Rock/Education Is Our Right by Drew Hayden Taylor 
(Ojibway), Fifth House, 1990. 

The Rez Sisters by Thompson Highway (Cree), Fifth House, 1988. 

Smoke Signals by Sherman Alexie (Spokane/Coeur d’Alene), 1998. 



ACTIVITIES FOR DRAMA BY INDIAN PLAYWRIGHTS UNIT - 

1 . Have the students read a play or screenplay together. 

2. Have the students do research to learn about the author. 

3. Have the students act out a portion or all of the play. 

4. Have the students present a play to a community audience. Give 
roles and responsibilities to each class member. 

5. Have the students keep a journal of their experiences and feelings 
in regard to the play. 

6. Have the students keep their written work as part of a portfolio 
system. 



251 




259 



ESSAYS BY INDIAN AUTHORS 



Indian young people should know and read the essays of Indian authors. An 
essay is a moderately brief nonfiction work that deals with a particular topic. 
The form dates back to the French philosopher Montaigne (1533-1592), and the 
word essay comes from the French essai, which means “an attempt.” Essays 
may be classified as formal or informal A formal essay is a carefully structured 
attempt to instruct or persuade. It has a serious tone, presents its argument 
logically, and generally refrains from personal references. An informal essay is 
an attempt to entertain the reader while exploring a topic. Its tone is light, its 
structure somewhat sprawling, and it may make personal references. In fact, 
informal essays are sometimes called personal essays. 

LITERATURE FOR ESSAYS BY INDIAN AUTHORS UNIT - 

Growing Up Native American: An Anthology ed. by Patricia Riley, Morrow, 
1993. 

American Indian Stories by Zitkala-Sa (Gertrude Simmons Bonnin, Yankton 
Sioux), University of Nebraska Press, 1985. 

Notes from Indian Country by Tim Giago (Oglala Sioux), State Publishing, 
1984. 

Dwellings: A Spiritual History of the Living World by Linda Hogan 
(Chickasaw), 1995, 

Speaking for the Generations: Native Writers on Writing ed. by Simon Ortiz 
(Acoma Pueblo), 1998. 

Family Matters, Tribal Affairs by Carter Revard (Osage), 1998. 

Funny, You Don’t Look Like One: Observations from a Blue-Eyed Ojibway by 
Drew Hayden Taylor (Ojibway), 1996. 

Works by Vine Deloria, Jr. (Dakota) 

ACTIVITIES FOR ESSAYS BY INDIAN AUTHORS UNIT - 

1. Have the students read essays selected by the teacher. Discuss the 
content of the essays and the form of an essay. 

2. Have the students select essays to read and respond to in writing. 



252 



260 



3. Have the students find essays in the newspaper. Invite a newspaper writer, 
editor to visit the class. 



4. Have the students write essays about something they feel strongly about and 
have some of them published alone or with other types of student writing. 

5. Have the students keep their writing as part of a portfolio system. 



253 



261 



SOME AMERICAN INDIAN/ALASKA NATIVE AUTHORS 



Sherman Alexie (Spokane/Coeur d’Alene) 
Annette Arkeketa West (Otoe_Creek) 
Jeanette Armstrong (Okanagan) 

Marilou Awiakta (Cherokee) 

Moses Nelson Big Crow (Lakota) 

Duane Big Eagle (Osage-Sioux) 

Gloria Bird (Spokane) 

Peter Blue Cloud (Mohawk) 

Beth Brant (Mohawk) 

Joseph Bruchac (Abenaki) 

Diane Bums (Anishinabe) 

Barney Bush (Shawnee-Cayuga) 

Maria Campbell (Metis) 

Janet Campbell Hale (Coeur D’Alene) 
Gladys Cardiff (Cherokee) 

Eileen Charbonneau (Cherokee) 

Elizabeth Cook-Lynn (Dakota) 

Beatrice Culleton (Metis) 

Nora Dauenhauer (Tlingit) 

Charlotte de Clue (Osage) 

Ella Cara Deloria (Dakota) 

Vine Deloria, Jr. (Dakota) 

Michael Dorris (Modoc) 

Virginia Driving Hawk Sneve (Lakota) 
Debra Earling (Flathead) 

Ed Edmo (Shoshone-Bannock) 

Anita Endrezze (Yaqui) 

Louise Erdrich (Ojibwa) 

Lee Francis (Laguna Pueblo) 

Tina Freeman-Villalobos (Modoc) 

Diane Glancy (Cherokee) 

Rayna Green (Cherokee) 

Paula Gunn Allen (Pueblo- Sioux) 

Ruth Ann Hall (Hidatsa) 

Joy Haijo (Muscogee) 

Lance Henson (Cheyenne) 

Roberta Hill Whiteman (Oneida) 

Shirley Hill Witt (Mohawk) 

Linda Hogan (Chickasaw) 

Beverly Hungry Wolf (Blackfeet) 

Roger Jack (Colville) 

Rita Joe (Micmac) 



Maurice Kenny (Mohawk) 

Thomas King (Cherokee) 

Michael Lacapa (Apache/Hopi) 

Carol Lee Sanchez (Laguna/Sioux) 
D’Arcy McNickle (Salish) 

Leslie Marmon Silko (Laguna) 
Tiffany Midge (Standing Rock) 
Judith Minty (Mohawk) 

N. Scott Momaday (Kiowa) 

Judith Volborth (Apache/Comanche) 
Duane Niatum (S’Kallam) 

Jim Northrup (Anishinabe) 

Simon Ortiz (Acoma Pueblo) 

William S. Penn (Nez Perce) 

Russell Peters (Wampanoag) 

Susan K. Power (Standing Rock) 
Juane Quick-to-See Smith (Salish) 
Carter Revard (Osage) 

Mickey Roberts (Nooksack) 

Wendy Rose (Hopi-Miwok) 

Gayle Ross (Cherokee) 

Greg Sarris (Pomo-Miwok) 

Cheryl Savageau (Abenaki/Metis) 
Kathleen Shaye Hill (Klamath) 

Ruby Slippeijack (Ojibway) 

Shirley Sterling (Salish) 

Virginia Stroud (Cherokee) 

Mary TallMountain (Athabascan) 
Luci Tapahonso (Navajo) 

Clifford Trafzer (Wyandott) 

Paula Underwood Spencer (Oneida) 
Richard Van Camp (Dogrib) 

Gerald Vizenor (Ojibwa) 

Anna Lee Walters (Pawnee/Otoe) 
Rupert Weeks (Shoshone) 

James Welch (Blackfeet/GrosVentre) 
Baje Whitethome (Navajo) 

Darryl Babe Wilson (Pitt River) 
Phyllis Wolf (Assiniboine/Ojibway) 
Elizabeth Woody (Wasco-Navajo) 
Ray Young Bear (Mesquakie) 

Ofelia Zepeda (Tohono O’odham) 




Language Arts & Math Standards 
Addressed in Creating Sacred Places 
for Students in Grades 9-12 





255 

263 




LANGUAGE ARTS STANDARDS TO BE ADDRESSED IN CREATING 
SACRED PLACES CURRICULUM - 

Standard - Gathers information effectively through reading, listening and viewing 
Benchmarks - 

Synthesizes a variety of types of visual information including pictures and symbols 

Effectively uses indices, appendices, glossaries and table of contents 

Determines figurative, idiomatic and technical meanings of terms through context 

Determines meaning of abbreviations and acronyms from context 

Uses cross referencing while gathering information 

Scans passage to determine whether a text contains relevant information 

Determines meaning of codes and symbols from context 

Understands mathematical notation presented in writing 

Understands that reading, viewing and listening are gradual processes of constructing 

meaning and makes revisions of initial understandings 

Uses questions as a way of understanding a text 

Uses discussions with peers as a way of understanding information 

Accurately illustrates information that others have presented 

Writes basic description of events to record information 

Summarizes dialogues for the purpose of collecting information 

Represents key ideas and supporting detail in outline form 

Appraises a written communication for its clarity 

Standard - Reads and responds to literature 
Benchmarks - 

Relates personal response to the text with that intended by the author 
Recognizes when and why the student is responding to the text 
Understands that reactions to a text will change throughout the text 
Traces the origins of own responses to literature 
Voluntarily shares responses to texts with peers 

Understands that a single text will elicit a wide variety of responses, each of which is 
valid from a personal, subjective perspective 

Understands that readers have the right and even the responsibility to bring their own 
values to bear as they respond to a text 

Standard — Gathers information from technical documents, graphs, charts and 
tables 

Benchmarks - 

Accurately interprets information from a data matrix 
Detects inconsistencies in a data matrix 

Identifies main theme and supporting detail in technical documents 
Distinguishes between relevant and irrelevant information in technical documents 
Follows basic linear paths in organizational charts 
Scans completed forms to identify specific information 
Identifies major sections in schematic designs 

256 



v 264 



Identifies parts from a key or legend 

Uses the linear path of a flow chart to provide visual and textual directions to a procedure 
Isolates a problem component in a schematic diagram and traces it to the cause of the 
problem 

Interprets symbols in a flow chart to indicate flow of direction, text points, components 
and diagrammatic decision points 

Identifies details, labels, numbers and parts from technical illustrations and pictures 
Interprets a drawing of a cross section for assembly or disassembly 
Obtains a factor specification from a two-column chart to find information 
Obtains a factor specification from an intersection of row by column in a table or chart 
Uses tables and charts to identify malfunctions 

Standard - Communicates ideas and information in writing 
Benchmarks - 

Enters information into basic forms correctly 
Evaluates a written communication for its clarity 
Writes technical reports 
Expresses ideas about mathematics in writing 
Uses personal response to text as a basis for writing 
Writes effectively for highly public audiences 

Standard - Understands and applies basic principles of language use 
Benchmarks — 

Understands the influence of gender on language use 
Carries out investigations of unanswered questions regarding language 
Engages in public speaking around issues of personal concern 
Understands the effect of specific aspects of culture on language use 
Compares form, meaning and value of different kinds of language 
Understands the political implications of using different forms of language 

— McREL, The Systematic Identification and Articulation of Content Standards and 
Benchmarks 




257 

* 

265 



AMERICAN INDIAN LANGUAGE AND LITERACY CONTENT STANDARDS 
TO BE ADDRESSED IN CREATING SACRED PLACES CURRICULUM 

Indian students should show growth and increasing sophistication in: 

Understanding and using forms and features of language that vary within and across 
individual speakers, diverse cultural communities, and different situations. 

Developing and applying Native language literacies while developing/applying English 
literacies. 

Understanding the effects of cultural contexts, particularly of their tribe, on what students 
read, write, hear, say, and view. 

Listening, speaking, writing, and responding respectfully but critically in large and small 
groups. 

Becoming aware of, monitoring, reflecting on, and articulating their own processes and 
strategies in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. 

Developing oral communication skills to perpetuate the American Indian oral tradition. 

Analyzing, evaluating, and assessing what they read, write, hear, say and view - e.g., 
comparing American Indian and non-Indian perspectives in historical records. 

Reading popular and classical literature from diverse cultures and times, especially 
American Indian literature, for a variety of purposes and in a variety of genres, and 
becoming aware of the ways readers and writers are influenced by personal, social, 
cultural, and historical contexts. 

Developing multiple strategies to appreciate, interpret, and critique various types of 
literature and of the print and nonprint text, including student work - e.g., evaluating 
literature with Indian themes by non-Indian writers in contrast with literature by Indian 
writers. 

Recognizing, reflecting on, and articulating their participation in the aesthetic dimensions 
of literature. 

Writing for a variety of real world purposes and audiences and in a variety of genres, 
including those which allow them to communicate well in their own communities. 

Learning, understanding, and using formal conventions of English. 




266 



258 



Understanding the origin and structure of language to become more proficient users of 
language. 

Using a range of technological forms of communication and understanding and 
evaluating critically the conventions, demands, opportunities, and responsibilities of 
technologically based discourse. 

Exploring ideas and feelings imaginatively through a variety of creative modes, e.g. 
journals, story telling, drama, and media projects. 

Defining, synthesizing, hypothesizing, drawing conclusions, and evaluating within the 
use of multiple resources. 

Building upon Native language and experience in school learning. 



American Indian Content Standards developed for the Bureau of Indian Affairs, 
Office of Indian Education Programs by ORBIS Associates, Washington, DC. 



MATHEMATICS STANDARDS TO BE ADDRESSED IN CREATING SACRED 
PLACES CURRICULUM 



Standard - Effectively uses a variety of strategies within the problem solving 
process 

Benchmarks - 

Designs and carries out statistical experiments 
Uses linear programming to solve problems 

Classifies problem solving strategies or problem types by underlying general 
characteristics 

Represents problems using algebraic functions and graphs of those functions 
Uses difference equations to solve problems 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced properties of numbers 
Benchmarks - 

Understands characteristics of the real number system and its subsystems 

Understands the relationship between roots and exponents 

Solves problems involving roots and exponents 

Models numbers using three-dimensional regions 

Compares and contrasts elements of the real number system 

Standard - Uses basic and advanced procedures while performing the process of 

computation 

Benchmarks - 

Adds and subtracts algebraic expressions 
Analyzes rounding errors via calculator or computer 

Standard — Understands and applies basic and advanced methods of measurement 
Benchmarks - 

Understands the basic characteristics of the concept of capacity and how it is measured 
Has a basic understanding of the concept of velocity and how it is measured 
Has a basic understanding of the concept of acceleration and how it is measured 
Determines precision and accuracy of measurements 
Analyzes absolute and relative errors in measurement 

Standard — Understands and applies basic and advanced concepts of geometry 
Benchmarks - 

Understands the basic features of vectors 

Understands the relationship between parallelism and perpendicularity 

Understands the characteristics and uses of Pythagorean relationships 

Performs synthetic translations/rotations/reflections of basic shapes 

Solves problems involving vectors 

Solves problems involving the Pythagorean relationship 

Analyzes the intersection of three-dimensional figures 

Classifies figures based on congruence 



260 



Standard — Understands and applies basic and advanced concepts of data analysis 
and distributions 
Benchmarks - 

Understands the basic features of data sets (matrices) 

Understands the basic features of the standard normal distribution 
Understands the basic measures of dispersion (i.e., standard deviation, variance) 
Understands the basic features of outliers and procedures to deal with them 
Represents data using stem and leaf plots and scatter plots 
Solves problems using data matrices 

Standard - Understands and applies basic and advanced concepts of probability 
and statistics 
Benchmarks - 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of random variables 

Understands the similarities and differences between joint and conditional probability 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of independence 

Understands the basic features of a statistic 

Determines probability through trees, formulas, permutations and counting 
Solves problems involving conditional probability and joint probability 
Compare experimental results with mathematical expectations of probabilities 

Standard — Understands and applies basic and advanced properties of functions and 

algebra 

Benchmarks - 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of a function 

Understands characteristics and uses of basic trigonometric functions 

Has a basic understanding of the concept of inequalities 

Has a basic understanding of parameters and their effects on curve shape 

Understands that a correlation measures the linear relationship between two sets of data 

Has a basic understanding of polynomial equations 

Understands basic trigonometry functions 

Solves problems involving polar coordinates 

Determines the maximum and minimum points on a graph 

Fits a line to a set of points 

Fits a curve to a set of points 




—McREL, The Systematic Identification and Articulation of Content Standards and 
Benchmarks 



AMERICAN INDIAN MATHEMATICS STANDARDS TO BE ADDRESSED IN 
CREATING SACRED PLACES CURRICULUM 



Mathematics as Problem Solving 

Indian students should be able to apply integrated mathematical problem-solving 
strategies, within the context of problems related to tribal community activities, school 
situations, classroom projects, and group participants ’shared interests. 

Indian students should be able to apply the process of mathematics modeling to real- 
world problem situations, such as tribal road-building projects, or quantifying data on 
water or other tribal resources. 

Mathematics as Communication 

Indian students should be able to appreciate the economy, power, and elegance of 
mathematical notation and its role in the development of mathematical ideas applied to 
tribal situations. 

Indian students should realize one’s own contribution to the tribe as it relates to 
promoting the local tribe’s economic and technological growth. 

Indian students should understand the power of mathematical representation to preserve 
tribal human and natural resources. 

Mathematics as Reasoning 

Indian students should make and text conjectures in context of issues related to their own 
tribal community. 

Indian students should formulate counterexamples (comparing to other tribes). 

Indian students should judge the validity of arguments (don’t avoid moral dilemmas.) 
Indian students should construct simple valid arguments (link to positions of various 
members in a community). 

Mathematical Connections 

Indian students should be able to use and value the connections among mathematical 
topics (link to study of tribal kinship systems). 

Indian students should be able to use and value the connections between mathematics and 
other disciplines. Students should find mathematics in various disciplines with a 
connection to American Indian topics, such as social studies, tribal history, 
literature/art/music, tribal language and ethno sciences. 

Algebra 

Indian students should represent situations (germane to particular tribe or community) 
that involve variable quantities with expressions, equations, inequalities, and matrices. 

Functions 

Indian students should be able to model real-world phenomena with a variety of functions 
and represent and analyze relationships using tables, verbal rules, equations, and graphs, 
such as in the growth of tribal gross national product or individual incomes as a function 
of tribal economic ventures. 



262 



Geometry from a Synthetic Perspective 

Indian students should be able to interpret and draw three-dimensional objects of 
American Indian cultural nature, using appropriate tools including computers. 

Indian students should be able to classify figures in terms of congruence and similarity 
and apply these relationships (include opportunities for students to identify their own 
findings from local tribal/intertribal experiences). 

Geometry from an Algebraic Perspective 

Indian students should be able to identify congruent and similar figures using 
transformations (relating Indian beadwork designs to Pascal’s Triangle). 

Statistics 

Indian students should be able to construct and draw inferences from charts, tables, and 
graphs that summarize data from real-world situations, such as tribal/intertribal 
newspapers or reports and advertising related to Indian communities. 

Indian students should be able to understand and apply measures of central tendency, 
variability, and correlation in statistical data related to their tribe. 

Indian students should be able to design a statistical experiment to study a tribally-related 
problem, conduct the experiment, and interpret and communicate the outcomes (to show 
as “whole project” to parents, public, use presentation software). 



ERIC 



263 



or? i 
c f 1 



NOTES 




WHERE TO GET BOOKS 



North American Native Authors Catalog, Greenfield Review Press, P.O. Box 308, 
Greenfield Center, New York 12833 (518) 583-1440 http://nativeauthors.com 

Indian Books Catalog, Four Winds Indian Books, P.O. Box 544, York, NE 68467-0544 
(402) 362-5654 http://www.fourwindsINDIANbooks.com 

Amazon.com Bookstore and bookcenter@nativeweb . org All selections are linked 
directly to Amazon.com bookstore so that you may purchase them online at a discount. 

Prairie Edge Book and Music List, Prairie Edge, 6 th & Main, Rapid City, SD 57701 
(800) 541-2388 prairie@rapidnet.com www.prairieedge.com 

Native American Catalog, Book Publishing Company, P.O. Box 99, Summertown, TN 
38483 (931)964-3571 bookDubl@usit.net 

The Native Book Centre, 150 York Hill Blvd., Thornhill, Ontario, Canada L4J 2P6 
(905) 881-7804 http://www.9to5.com/9to5/NBC/ 

Medicine Root Inc., Native Earth Products of North America, P.O. Box 353, Louisville, 
CO 80027 (303) 661-9819 Fax (303) 664-5139 

Pemmican Publications, Unit #2 - 1635 Burrows Ave., Winnepeg, Manitoba R2X 0T1 
Canada (204) 589-6346 pemmican@,fox.nstn.ca htt p://fox.nstn.ca/~ pemmican 

Clear Light Distribution, 823 Don Diego, Santa Fe, NM 87501 (800) 253-2747 
www.clearllightbooks.com 

Tipi Press, St. Joseph’s Indian School, Chamberlain, SD 57326 (800) 229-5684 

Lakota Books, P.O. Box 140, Kendall Park, NJ 08824 Fax 908 940-9429 

Oyate Catalog, 2702 Mathews Street, Berkeley, CA 94702 (510) 848-6700 fax: (510) 
848 4815 ovate@aovate.org www.oyate.org 

REVIEWING BOOKS/MATERIALS 

Won in the Classroom, Guidelines for the Selection of Culturally Appropriate Materials, 
Indian Community School ofMilwaukee, Inc. (414) 345-3040 www.ics-milw.org 

Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Children by Beverly Slapin 
and Doris Seale, University of California, 1998. Oyate, 2702 Mathews St., Berkeley, CA 
94702 




265 

9 n q 
4 . t o 



* 



TEACHER RESOURCES 

Earth’s Caretakers and Signs of Tradition: Native American Lessons, Math and Science 
Teachers for Reservation Schools (MASTERS) Project, University of Kansas, 1993 & 
1994. (785) 864-4435 i newland@ukans. edu 

Native Science, Natural Laws of Interdependence by Gregory Cajete, Clear Light Pub., 
2000. 

Ignite the Sparkle: A Native American Science Education Curriculum Model by Gregory 
Cajete, Kavaki Press, Skyland, NC, 1999. 

Indian Country: A History of Native People in America by Karen D. Harvey and Lisa D. 
Haijo, North American Press, 350 Indiana Street, Suite 350, Golden, CO 80401, 1994. 

American Indian Citizenship in Balance: A Two Week Curriculum Unit, Grades 9-12, 
Close Up Foundation, Alexandria, VA (800) 256-7387. 

Roots and Branches: A Resource of Native American Literature - Themes, Lessons and 
Bibliographies by Dorothea M. Susag, National Council of Teachers of English, 1998. 

Light of the Feather: A Teacher’s Journey into Native American Classrooms and Culture 
by Mick Fedullo, Wm Morrow, 1992. 

Reclaiming the Vision - Past, Present and Future: Native Voices for the Eighth 
Generation, Greenfield Review Press. Includes exercises to generate work from student 
writers. (505) 584-1728 



ORGANIZATIONS AND PROJECTS 

American Indian Science and Engineering Society, P.O. Box 9828, Albuquerque, NM 
87119 Publishes Winds of Change Magazine. (505) 765-1052 www.aises.org 

Science Through Native American Eyes, Cradleboard Teaching Project, Nihewan 
Foundation for American Indian Education founded by Bufiy St. Marie. Interactive 
Multimedia CD Rom for grades 5-adult, www.cradleboard.org 

D’ Arcy McNickle Center for the History of the American Indian, The Newberry Library, 
Chicago, Summer Institutes for Secondary and Tribal College Teachers on Indian 
Literature. 312 943-9090 

Wordcraft Circle of Native Writers and Storytellers publishes Moccasin Telegraph 
newsletter, 9 East Bumam Road, Columbia, MO 65203 

266 




274 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




EJocfllloanI fesjuitsj tnlormnNan CenJei 



NOTICE 

Reproduction Basis 



This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release (Blanket)" 
form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all or classes of 
documents from its source organization and, therefore, does not require a 
"Specific Document" Release form. 




This document is Federally- funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may be 
reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form (either 
"Specific Document" or "Blanket"). . 



o 



9 ( 1 / 2003 ) 



