DOCUMENT RESUME 

FL 015 120 

Ki tao , Ken j i ; Ki tao , S . Kathleen 

Effects of Social Environment on Japanese and 

American Communication • 

85 

16p. 

Reports - Descriptive (141) 
MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

Comparative Analysis; *Cultural Differences; English; 
*Group Behavior ; * Individual ism; * Inter cultural 
Communication ; Japanese ; Literature Reviews ; *North 
American Culture; *Social Environment 
^Japanese People 



The social backgrounds of Japanese and Americans 
differ in ways that impede complete communication. The Japanese 
people, historically controlled by the forces of nature, have formed 
groups as the minimum functioning social units. The individual is 
only part of the group, and individual rights and obligations have 
not been clearly developed. Disagreement, if expressed, is expressed 
ambiguously. Relationships are vertical, and people must determine 
the level of politeness to use in interactions. To maintain 
harmonious relationships, good speakers place themselves below the 
listeners, sometimes not saying enough and expecting the listener to 
understand by inference. Since the subject of a sentence is often not 
stated, speakers may give their opinions as someone else's or someone 
else's opinions as their own. In contrast, native English-speaking 
peoples historically have not been as dependent on each other for 
survival; individualism and privacy are well-developed, and 
individual rights and obligations are clear. Individuals express 
their own opinions and emotions clearly. Human relationships are 
horizontal, and people like to think of themselves as equal to 
everyone else. This is expressed in gestures, manners of speaking, 
and eye contact. Teaching these cultural differences in language 
classrooms would help improve intercultural communication . (MSE) 



ED 260 579 

AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 
ABSTRACT 



********************************************* 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 
*********************** ****************s^***'* ************************** 




U^. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 

CENTER (ERIC) 
tS^This documtnt has been reproductd as 
received Uom the person or organization 
originating it. 
( ' Minor changes have been made to improve 
rtproduction quatity. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this docu 
ment do not necessarily represent offictal NIE 
position or policy 



EFFECTS OF. SOCIAL^ ENVIRONMENT ON JAPANESE 



AND AMERICAN COMMUNICATION 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



Kenji Kitao ^ c 
(Doshisha University) 

8. Kathleen Kitao 
(Doshisha Women's College) 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



o 
lu 



The purpose of language is communication, but communication 
cannot be achieved through language alone. Communication is part 
of a total cultural pattern, so good communication requires a 
shared cultural understanding. 

Culture dictates, to a great extent, assumptions in communi- 
cation and norms in physical contact and distance > time and place 
of communication, tone of voice, sex, etc. Because Japanese and 
Americans do not share this, knowledge , understanding of the total 
message is impeded.! 

The discussion of the cultural backgrounds of Japanese and 
Americans can include two aspects: natural environment and social 
environment . 

First of all, natural environment affects ways of thinking, - 
attitudes, and language. Natural calamities on their islands 
contributed to the Japanese sense of passive resignation toward 
nature. The Japanese see nature as the overall universe, of 
grammar, where actions and emotional atmosphere are emphasized 
rather than actors and receivers of actions. In England, where 
the English language developed, nature is milder and so people 
have the perception, at least, that they,- control it. They see 
the universe as a background for human action. The actor is 
given primary emphasis in the English language, as the writers have 
already discussed. 2 

Japanese people had to help each other cope with their harsh 
natural environment. They formed groups, in part, to do this. 
The group became the minimum functioning unit in the society, of 
which an individual person was only a part. Cultivating rice had 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



made the s^nse of group stronger. A long feudal history 
strengthened^Hhis, "group sense" further, and many kinds of groups 
were born: families, relatives, neighbors, occupations, social 
classes, etc. Thus, clear individual rights and obligations were 
not developed, and individualism and privacy were not strongly 
held concepts. Once they became a member of a group, they usually 
remained there forever. It was not easy to change groups. 

In traditional Japan, the individual persons in the group 
were governed by the group, and they lived as a part of the 
group. Harmony within a group was very important, and as long as 
the members didn^t disturb it, they could stay there comfortably. 
The first constitution of Japan, which was proclaimed by Prince 
Shotoku in the early seventh century, pointed out the importance 
of "wa" [harmon^Q in civil life. The first of the seventeen 
articles of the Constitution reads: "Harmony is a virtue, and 
make it a rule not to dispute. People tend to form factions and 
few men are reasonable.... When superiors maintain harmony while 
subordinates keep good company among themselves and do not argue, 
reason will stand on its own. "3 These early Japanese protected 
one another and strictly distinguished their group from others. 
It was very difficult to enter a new group, and members were very 
afraid of being expelled from their own groups. Murahachibu 
[ostracism} was one of the major punishments. If people were 
ostracized by the villagers, they lost all friends and means for 
living. 

As a result of this historical background, individuals in 
modern Japan are very passive and receptive in their group. They 
k^ep silent rather than argue. They tend to wait until they are 
asked to speak. When they do speak, they do not give their own 
opinions but suggest opinions representative of their position in 
the group or express their own opinions as if they were someone 
else's." They seldom express their " honne " [real intention]] in 
public but instead express " tatemae " [facade of what one is 
expected to say, given his position and role. J Honne and tatemae 
may be very different and sometimes even opposite. Group members 
seldom disagree openly among themselves. They do not express 
their emotions and their true reactions. Most sounds are pro- 
duced at the back of the mouth and the lips do not move much in 
talking.^ They try to do as they are supposed to do in a group. 
Even if they do not express themselves clearly, others can under- 
stand them because they have close relations ambng themselves.* 
They set a high value on haragei [psycht^logical interpretation in 
siloncoj and ishj.ndenshin [telepathy .1 5 



30 



In contrast, people in Britain did not need to expend as' 
much effort in defending themselves against nature- They could 
concentrate on their own activities. They were not faced with 
the strong necessity of forming groups that the Japanese were. 
People were more mobile, and in their society the rights and 
obligations of individual persons became clear; individualism and 
privacy had been well developed. Even the feudal age, indivi- 
dual persons were independent, and they belonged to the group by 
agreement. Rights and obligations were clear. They could change 
groups if they did not like them or if they did not receive any 
benefits. 

Influenced, at least in part, by this background, the British 
(and, by extension, Americans) in modern times do not have the 
strong group ties that Japanese people have. Since their group ties 
are not close, they must express themselves more clearly than 
Japanese people do to be understood by others. Individuals may ex- 
press their opinions and emotions more clearly. They use many dif- 
ferent channels, including facial expressions and gestures, to ex-, 
press themselves. Many sounds are produced at the front of the 
mouth, resulting in more lip movements in English. 6 xhus, they try 
to express themselves well in order that others can understand them 
better. 

Even now a strong sense of the group exists in Japan. M.any 
companies and schools have uniforms. Many companies provide 
lunches for their employees, and everybody eats the same lunch 
together. The employees are provided with entertainment during 
lunch and on weekends. They may take trips in a group. Once 
people join a group, they receive many other benefits and are under 
obligations besides the main ones. It is not easy to enter a group 
and become a real member, and it is not easy to withdraw from one. 
Many Americans don't understand the reasons for this, 7 but to the 
group members, harmony in the group is more important than the dif- 
ferent interests of each individual. People try to enter good 
groups because once they belong to a group, they can belong perma- 
mently. The alumni of each college form a group, 8 ^^^^^ one reason 
that many people try to ^o to a good college is to belong to a good 
alumni group. 

Japanese people feel as if they are just part of the group. 
They do everything as a group and dislike being too independent .9 
Barbara and Nancy Okada have pointed out that "basically the 
Japanese business man thinks and makes decisions as a group; The 
American businessman thinks, individually . "10 Masaaki Imai also 



has pointed out decision making in Japanese companies has been 
born out of collective participation of people at many different 
levels of management.il Most Japanese tourists travel in groups. 
They remain together from departure to return. Members try to 
keep harmony in their group. 

The sense of group is expressed in these Japanese proverbs. 
These proverbs are vjell known in Japan and often used in daily 
life. 

Tabi no haji wa kakisute . (It is all right to be ashamed 
where no one knows you.) 

Yoraba taiju no kage . (Rely upon a powerful person (or a 
group ) . ) 

Peru kui wa utareru . (A taller stake is hit, and all stakes 
will be even. ) 

Nouaru taka wa tsume o kakusu . (An able hawk hides its 
nails . ) 

Nagai mono niwa makarero . (You'd better not disagree with 
more powerful pe<pple.) 

Tenseki koke musazu . (If you often change your occupations, 
etc., you will never achieve anything.) 

Individualism has been developed in the United States as. 
well as iti Britain. Americans like to be indepen'dent . If they 
go abroad for trips, they may be in a group in order to get 
cheaper rates on chartered flights, but they like to travel by 
themselves after they arrive at their destination . 12 jp^ American 
tourist groups, members are seldom restricted by their groups. 13 
Thus, they pay less attention to others in a group than do the 
Japanese. 

In a group, Americans might pursue the main goals together, 
but they tend not to do other things together. Thus, they do not 
have extra benefits and obligations. Once the main goals are 
achieved, and the purpose for the group has ceased to exist, t\\e 
group is disbanded. 

Another expression of the value that is put on group harmony 
is in the family. The Japanese would put harmony within the 



32 ^ 

family abaiLt the happiness of the individuals. Americans, par- 
ticularly in recent years, tend to put the fulfillment of the 
individual above the family. Advice columns reflect this dif- 
ference. When responding to a letter from an unhappy wife, 
advice from Japanese and non-Japanese advice columnists mat "be 
very different. The Japanese is likely to give the wife advJx^e 
as to what she can do to improve the relationship; a non- Japan 
may advise the wife to at least consider leaving her husband. 

James N. Gillespie and Gordon W. Allport studied the atti- 
^ tudes of youths in ten different countries toward their personal 
lives and future careers. They found that Japanese young people 
especially valued the qualities of "good citizenship," "social 
usefulness," and "service to society," which are obviously con- 
nected with their strong sense of social obligation to their 
society. On the other hand, they found that the Americans empha- 
sized their rights rather than their duties to their social group 
and put much emphasis on the value of individuality . 15 This 
study supports the assertion Ijhat the sense of group in Japan and 
of individualism in the United States reflect the different at- 
titudes of those people. 

Another study. Dean '(?. Barnlund's contrasted profiles, shows 
the differences between these two nationalities well. Barnlund 
conducted a study of 122 Japanese students and '42 American students 
in Tokyo. He asked tliem to des^cribe the attitudes of the two 
nationalities when they talk by selecting five adjectives ^ from a 
list of thirty-four . 1" The adjectives most favored in describing 
the Japanese people were "reserved," "formal," "silent," "cautious, 
"evasive," and "serious;" and those favored for describing the 
Americans were "frank," "self-assertive," "spontaneous," "informal, 
and "talkative. "17 . 

In another study on how the Japanese people react toward: 
other people, Barnlund asked his Japanese students at Interna- 
tional Christian University in 1968 to write ten sentences to des- 
cribe themselves. The most frequent ideas given were: 

I try to behave according to my rolfe and circumstance. 

I try to be as polite as possible. 

I try to pretend to be calm and cool even when I am not. 

I rarely show my true self. 

I don't say all of what I think. 

I avoid difficult questions. 

I try to keep the conversation pleasant. 

I use words that won't hurt anybody. 

I try to behave smoothly. 

I never talk about inner feelings. 

I try not to disagree. 18 



In Japanese society, keeping a good position is importait, 
and people are afraid of causing shame to other members of v'.heir 
group. In Japanese homes, when parents want to tell their cMl- 
dren not to do a certain thing, they say that if the children do 
it', othars will laugh at them. So children learn what they c'.re 
not supposed to do and say. They learn not to express their true 
feelings in public. 

Anthropologist Chie Nakane called the Japanese society a 
vertical organization and analyzes human relationships in groups 
and intergroups in her book, JapanpHR . Snr.i ety . ^9 Sumako Kimizuka, 
scholar of teaching English, supports Nakar^e's idea and 
characterizes Japan as a nation of vertical, human relationships, 
and the United States as a nation of horizontal relationships ! 20 
Since human relationships are vertical in Japan, people have to 
judge whether other people are higher or lower than or equal to 
themselve's, and they have to decide on a level of politeness to 
use when they talk with them. When people meet each other, they 
often exchange name cards that tell which group th^y represent 
and what title or positioii they hold in those groups. Then they 
can decide who is higher.^ On the phone, it is more difficult to 
decide, and people use the .politest expressions until they find 
out their relative positions. Even in English, there are several 
ways to express politeness , but in Japanese there are many more. 
One characteristic of a good speaker is his ability to assume a 
position lower than that of the people he is talking with in 
order to be polite to them. 

People are often referred to by their positions, particularly 
in the cases of superior people, using their family name and 
title, for example, teacher, manager, chairman, president, etc. 
Often, the position or title is used instead of the name. Some 
people use their position or title instead of "I." For e;^ample, 
a teacher may say^ "You have to listen to the teacher." 

There is a stronger tendency for a Japanese speaker to put 
his listener in the center of the conversation than for an Amer^ 
ican to do so. This is a matter of politeness in Japan, and there 
are many v/ords or expressions which make the listener the refer- 
ence point. For example, iji Japanese, the use of "yes" and "no" 
does not show the affirmative or the negative content of the 
speaker's judgement but whether his answer (judgement) agrees or 
disagrees with the question. For e3cample, in Japanese if one 
asks, "You don*t like this, do you?" the answer is, "No, I do," 
if he does, and "Yes, I don't," if he does not. 



31 

Japanese people try to respond according to the expectations 
of their listeners. They try to avoid saying "no" clearly be- 
cause they do not like disagreements, particularly with superior 
people, as Seiji Yamaoka has pointed out*21 "(Saying no) is rude, 
impolite, uncivilized, demoralizing, and might hurt "the other 
person's feelings. Saying no is a cardinal sin in Japan," 
Masaaki Imai says.^^ if disagreement is necessary, there are 
sixteen ways to avoid saying no. 23 one of the most common ones 
is saying yes and then following this with an explanation which 
may last half an hour and which, in effect, means no. Another 
one is saying no ambiguously .24 though the speaker does not 
express disagreement clearly, listeners are expected to under- 
stand by inference, .. Since, in Japanese, the conclusion appear^ at 
the end of a sentence, speakers can change their conclusions 
according to the reaction of the speaker as they speak. Also, 
the subject is often not stated, and speakers can give their 
opinions as if they were someone else's or someone else's as 
their own. "It is said..." is a commonly-used expression in 
Japanese. Yamaoka has pointed out that American newspapers are 
very strict to state clearly whose opinion they are giving, but • 
not so Japanese newspapers . 25 Speakers can omit the conclusion 
at the end and let listeners guess. Japanese is good for am- 
biguous expressions. 

In contrast, in English the speaker is usually the center of 
utterances. His judgement of "yes"^or "no" may be based on his 
own idea and not in agreement with the question. For example^ if 
one asks "You don't like this, do you?" the other answers "Yes, I 
do," if he does and "No, I don't," if he does not. Americans are 
more likely to state their opinions clearly. They show their 
disagreement more openly than the Japanese. Americans tend to 
assert their ideas directly and clearly as their own ideas, even 
if they go against the listener's wishes. 

In English, the speaker is the center of utterances, and 
individualism is well developed; thus, there is tendency for 
Americans to use "I" and the Japanese, "we." When the President 
of the United States gives an official speech, he says, "I" 
instead of "we." The speaker is most important, and many utter- 
ances are from the point of view of the speaker. One of the 
common forms for compliment is along the line of "I like your 
shirt." In Japanese, a speaker" would seldom pay a compliment by 
stating what he likes". He would be more likely to describe how 
nice the shirt is or state that its color is nice. 



8 



35 

Japanese people try to avoid saying '^I." Japanese prime 
ministers usually say. "we" instead of "I." The Americans tend to 
talk individually and the Japanese, as a member of a group. 

The sense of responsibility is treated in the same way. In 
the American society, the individual person has his own clear 
responsibility, but for the Japanese, responsibilities are not as 
clear. Japanese people tend to take 'responsibility as a group. 
In many cases, company decisions are approved with a consensus, 
rather than a vote, in meetings, and it is difficult to express 
disapproval when other people agree. In many cases, spade work is 
I done before the m'eeting, and. the majority of people already agree . 

1 with the agenda. Even if something goes wrong, an effort is 

!' not usually made to find out who is responsible and assign blame. 

! Americans, on the other hand, would be likely to try to find out 

who was responsible for a mistake. Individual responsibility is 
very weak among the Japanese. 

t Generally speaking , ^Americans do not like to apologize be- 

' cause an apology means that they are taking responsibility for 

some thing. ^'^ On* the other hand, the Japanese often say "Sumimasen 
^ (I'm sorry even when they are not at fault, to preserve 

harmony in the group. One example that demonstrates this dif- 
ference is the ^story of a, tour guide who was supposed to meet an 
i American tourist at his hotel. Due to a misunderstanding about 

! the place they were supposed to meet, the tour guide did not 

i find his custuiPer until an hour after the agreed time. When 

' the guide apologized ,ythe American took this as an admission that 

; it was his mista.te and became angry. However, the tour guide had 

not intended to lake responsibility for making a mistake but only 
■[ to smooth over the situaJ;ion.^^ 

Just as individualism is a highly developed concept in 
American society, so is. the idea of equality of position among 
individuals. Americans tend to think of themselves as equal to 
everyone else, in theory, at least. Yoshihisa Narita pointed out 
that individualism was well expressed in the use of expressions 
such as "please," "thank you," "you're welcome," "excuse me," and 
"certainly," because expressions of gratitude, etc., are neces- 
; sary between individuals, where they might not be in a group, 

! „ with its lines of obligation and benefit. ^9 in America, a speak- 
\ er may keep his position the same as the listener's. He is more 

I likely to express his opinions straight-forwardly^^ and show 

' agreement or disagreement more clearly than a Japanese would, 

i . 

' People are not equal in Japanese society. Relative positions 

! . ■ ' 

ERIC 9 ' 



36 

are decided by age, sex, social position, economic and social 
class, educational background, etc. Levels of politeness are 
very complicated. There are many levels of expression. ^Another 
characteristic feature is thaf^ Japanese people do not try to 
assume a position equal to that of their listeners but rather a 
lower one. This is very modest in their view, and to be modest 
is very important. The reason for this is that Japanese people 
try to keep their ppsitions in their groups, and to do so they 
have to keep peace ^ith the others. Japanese people try to 
refrain from accepting things offered by other people the first 
time. This is a part of Japanese manners, and the host repeats 
the offer to them.31 Takeo Doi followed this Japanese manner 
when he visited an American friend, and so received no ice 
cream. 32 

The Japanese people distinguish expressions used with the 
members of their group from those used with nonmembers. Peqple 
are dependent upon one another and interact with one another more 
frequently. They expect o^thers to understand even if they do not 
express themselves well. Particularly, subordinates expect their 
superiors to take care of them well. People try to do as they 
are suppojsed to do, and if they cannot do that, they are ashamed. 
They hate to be ashamed, and they do not do anything that is 
unnecessary or that they do not have confidence^' that they can do. 
As it is nost important to keep peace with others, it is not 
important for the individual to be honest about his feelings. 
People j-Uist try to avoid disagreement, and often affirmatively 
nod even though they do not agree. They keep their positions 
lower than others; they do not look at each other's eyes, but 
look down. This looks dishonest to Americans. 

For Americans, eye contact is very important, and this is a 
way to keep equal personal relations. If people are walking on 
the street and happen to make eye contact, they smile, and even 
say "Hi!" even though they do not know each other. This was true 
in Hawaii,, Michigan, and New York.^^ 

Individualism and privacy are very important in American 
culture. Making a reverse use of these produces trust and friend 
ship. 3 Americans have more definite personal space around them- 
selves, and they try to avoid physical contact with strangers. 35 
If they do touch someone, they say, '^Excuse me." To show friend- 
liness, Americans use physical contact, such as shaking hands, 
hugging, kissing, etc. In shaking hands, an American may put a 
hand on the other *s shoulder if the relationship has some degree 



10 



of closeness. They put their hands or arms on or around each 
other to show very close friendliness . 3^ 



In American culture, the best hospitality is to invite 
guests into the home and show them the house. However, this 
does not include giving the guest the seat of the host or the 
hostess at the dinner table. The host and hostess also keep their 
own rooms, not giving them up to their guests, and maintain their 
positions as heads of the house. Children of ten participate in 
the hospitality . 38 V\/hile guests may not exactly be part of the 
family, they are not complete outsiders, and they are treated in- 
formally. They do not expect the schedule of the family to re- 
volve around them, but they try to fit in with the family's 
schedule. 

In entertaining, formality is most important for the Japanese. 
The best hospitality is to bring guests to nice restaurants. The 
hosts seldom have guests at home. If they do, the guests are the 
masters of the home, and they are given the best seats at the 
table and stay in the best room there. The family's living sche- 
dule may be completely changed for the guests. Guests are still 
outsiders, and they can see only a part of the house; they may 
see only the husband and wife; they may eat dinner without the 
host and the hostess, who may just wait on the guests. Except 
in very informal cases, guests do not eat meals with all members 
of the family. The host and hostess keep .themselves lower than 
guests. They offer tea and. food saying like, "Here is some 
poor tea," or "This is nothing special to eat, but please eat 
it." The host and hostess have to make best decisions for the 
quests and choose the best drink, food, method of cooking, etc. 
Since every guest is served the same thing, it ,is very difficult 
to choose what is best for everyone. They even decide how much 
sugar and cream should be put in their s^iest's coffee.. 

In summary, Japanese people are controlled by nature, and, in 
order to cope with it, they must help one another. To this end, 
they have formed groups , which have become the nifLnimum functioning 
units of society. The individual is only a part of the group. 
This group-consciousness has been strengthened by their long 
feudal history and by the cultivation "^of rice. Individual rights 
and obligations have' not been clearly developed. Harmony in the 
group is the overriding concern. Therefore, individuals are pas- 
sive and hesitant to disagree. .If they do express disagreement, 
they try to do so ambiguously. 

In Japan, relationships are vertical and people have to 




38 



judge whether other people are higher, lower, or equal to them- 
selves in order to know what level of politeness to use when 
talking to them. In order to maintain h^armonious relationships, 
a good speaker places himself lower than the listener. Some- 
times, the speaker does not say enough and expects the listener 
to understand by inference. Since the subject of the sentence is 
often not stated, a speaker may give his opinion as someone 
else^s or someone else^s as his own. 

In contrast, the people of Britain experienced milder 
weather and so were not required to be as dependent on one an- 
other for survival. In Britain as well as the United States, 
individualism and privacy are well developed and individual 
rights and obligations are clear. Individuals express their own 
opinions and emotions clearly. Human relationships are horizon- 
tal; Americans like to think of themselves as equal to everyone 
else. This is expressed in gestures, manners of speaking, and 
eye contact. 

As has been shown in this paper social backgrounds diffar 
between Americans and Japanese. These differences impede com- 
plete communication. Teaching these cultural differences in 
language classrooms wc5uld surely help improve intercultural com- 
munication. 

NOTES 9. 

1. Kenji Kitao, "Difficulty of Intercultural Communication-- 
Between Americans and Japanese — ," Doshisha Literature , No. 29 
(December, 1979), P-P. 155-169. 

Reprinted in fechnoloi^y & Mediated Instruction: NALLD 
Journal, Vol. 14, No. 2 (Winter, 1980), pp. 22-30. . 

ERIC document ED 191 328 

2. Kenji Kitao, "How Does Natural Environment Affect American 
and Japanese Ways of Expressing Themselves?" Doshisha 
Studies in English , No. 28 (January, 1982), pp. 117-130. 

3. Masaaki Imai , Never Take Yes for an Answer — An Inside Look at 
Japanese Business for Foreign Businessmen , Tokyo:. The Simul 
Press, 1975, pp. 3-4. 

4. Haruhiko Kindaichi, Nihongo [Japanese Languagej (Tokyo: 



ERLC 



12 



39 

Twanami Shoten, 1957), pp» 72-73. 

5. Shigehiko Toyama, "Eigo no Ronri; Nihongo no Ronri [^Logic 
in English and Logic in Japanese]," Eigo Kyoiku [The English 
Teacher's ^R^nvAno} Vol. XXV, No. 1 (April, 1976), p. 20. 

6. Kindaichi, o£. cit . , p. 72. 

7. Mayako Ikeda, Nihongo Saihakken [ Rediscovery of the Japanese 
Language] (Tokyo: Sanseido, 1973), pp. 5^^-62. 

R. Chie Nakane, "The Social System Reflected in Interpersonal - 
Communication," in Intercultural Encounters with Japan : 
Communication-"Contact and Conflict , ed. by John C. Condon 
and Mitsuko Saito (Tokyo: The Simul Press, Inc., 197^), 
pp. 127-128. 

9. Psychiatrist Takeo Doi analyzes the dependency of the Japanese 
people well in his book Anatomy of Dependency (Tokyo: 
Kodansha, 1973). 

10. Barbara Teri Okada and Nancy Takeo Okada, Do's and Donets 
for the Japane .?e Businessman Abroad (New York: Regents 
Publishing Compar»y, Inc., 1973), p. 3- 

11. Masaaki Imai , o£. cit . , p. 4. 

12. Haruyuki Araki , Nihonjin no Kodo Yoshiki [The Mode of 
Japanese Peo p le ^s Behavior J , Tokyo: Kodansha, 1973), p. 15. 

13. Ibid. , p. 15. 

I'l. Richard Yorkey, Reply Requested : 30 Letters of Advice , 

(Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley , 1981). Reviewed by Chris 
McCooey, JALT Newsletter , Vo. VIII, No. 1 (January, 1984), 
pp. 60-64. 

15. James N. Gillespie and Gordon W. Allport , Youth Outlook on 
the Future : A Cross National Study (Garden City, New York: 
Doubleday & Co . Inc., 1955), p. 29. 

16. Dean C. Barnlund, "The Public Self and the Private Self in 
Japan and the United States," in Intercultural Encounters 
with Japan: Communication — Contact and Conflict , ed. by 

John C. Condon and Mitsuko -Saito (Tokyo: The Simul Press, Inc., 
1974), p. 53. 



13 

1^ 



40 



These thirty-four adjectives were: formal, independent, 
talkative, close, shallow, serious , dependent , calculating, 
warm , tense , reserved , frank , trusting , competitive , 
masculine, spontaneous, open, impulsive, cool, seeking a 
protective relationship, relaxed, evasive , silent , self- 
assertive, informal, distant, deep, suspicious, humorous, 
cautious, indifferent, cooperative, feminine, and responsive. 

17. Ibid., pp. 54-55. 

18. Ibid . , p. 56. 

19. Chie Nakane, Japanese Society (London: Weidenfeld and 
Nicolson, 1970). 

20. Sumako Kiniizuka, Teaching English to Japanese (Los Angeles: 
Anchor Enterprises, I968), p. II7. 

21. Seiji Yamaoka, "Jiko Shucho no Shikata no Chigai ^The Dif*- 
ferences of Expressing Oneself j," Eigo Kyoiku , Vol. XXIII, 
No. 3 (June, 1974), p. 16. 

22. Masaaki Imai , 16 Ways to Avoid Saying No , (Tokyo: The Simul 
Press), 1981, p. 7. 

23. Keiko Ueda, "Sixteen Ways to Avoid Saying "No" in Japan," 
Intercultural Encounters with Japan : Communication — Contact 
and Conflict , ed. by John C. Condon and Mitsuko Saito (Tokyo; 
The Simul Press), 1974, pp. 185-192. 

24. Imai (1981), o£. cit, pp. 7-8. 

25. Seiji Yamaoka, "Eigoryoku wa Ronri no Sekai kara LHigh Eng- 
lish Proficiency from the World of Logic]," Eigo Kyoiku , 
Vol. XXV, No. 1 (April, 1976), p. 22. 

26. Imai (1975), cit., pp. 4-5. 

27. Seiji Yamaoka, "American-jin no Jiko Hyogen no Tokushitsu 
[.Characteristics of American Ways of Expressing Oneself]," 
Eigo Kyoiku , Vol* XXII, No. 3 (June, 1973), p. 10. 

28. Reiko Naotsuka, et. al. Mutual Understanding of Different 
Cultures , Tokyo: Taishukan, I98I, pp. 17-19. 

29. Yoshihisa Narita, "Kojinshugi C^oyo no Jo Joson Danhi 



ERIC 



14 



[individualism •Age Order* Ladies First]," Eigo Kyoiku , 
Vol. XXIII, No. 9 (November, 19?^), p. 13. 

30. Yamaoka (197^0, og. cit . , p. 16. 

31. Nobuo Kanayama, "Nichi-Bei Bunka Chizu (4)--Shujin to Kyaku 
no Kankei ][A Map of Japanese and American Cultures (4) — 
Relation between a Host and a Guest] , Eigo Kyoiku , Vol. XXV, 
No. i\ (July, 1976), p. 38. 

32. Doi, o£. cit . , pp. 1-2, 

33. Narihiko lizuka, "Shotaimen-no Manner--Sono Soko ni Arumono o 
Chushin ni L'Manners in a First Meeting — Backgrounds of Such 
Manners^ ," Eigo Kyoiku , Vol. XXIII, No. 9 (November, 197^), 
p. 8. 

3'K Yamaoka (1973), cit . , p. 11. 

35- Sen Nishiyama, Gokai to Rikai: . Nihonjin to America-jin 
iLMisunderstanding and Understanding : The Japanese and 
Americans] (Tokyo: The Simul Press, Inc., 1972), p. 89. 

36. Barnlund, op. cit . , p. 7^ - 

37. Yamaoka (1973), og. cit., p. 11. 

38. Yuji Aida, Nihonjin no Ishiki Kozo: Eudo * Rekishi * Shakai 
[ structure of the Japanese People's Consciousness : Climate ^ 
History, and SocietyJ (Tokyo: Kodansha, 1972), pp. 6-7. 

*In this study the writers have referred to many selections 
of Japanese literature. All translations in this study have 
been made by him, referring to Koh Masuda's Kenkyusha^s New 
Japanese-English Dictionary (Tokyo: Kenkyusha, 197^). In 
order to keep as close as possible to the original idea 
in English, he has translated each selection as directly as 
possible. For the convenience of readers, the writer has 
translated all titles of Japanese books, articles, and per- 
iodicals unless they were given English titles by authors or 
editors . 

In the description of Japanese words, the writer again has 
referred to the method adopted for Masuda^s Kenkyusha 's New 
Japanese-English Dictionary (p. xiii) and tried to transcribe 



ERIC 15 



l\2 



them as closely as possible into English pronunciation. Borrowed 
words from English were given English spelling even in Japanese 
in order to avoid confusion. Japanese words are underscored and 
translations bracketed for clarification. 



16 



