DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 408 569 



CS 012 848 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Ouzts, Dan T. ; Calvert, Wanda L. 

Using Caldecott Medal and Honor Books To Motivate Middle 
School Readers . 

Nov 96 

lOp . ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the College 
Reading Association (40th, Charleston, SC, October 
31-November 3, 1996) . 

Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) -- Speeches/Meeting 

Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; Art Appreciation; Black Culture; 
Class Activities; Intermediate Grades; Junior High Schools; 
Literature Appreciation; Middle Schools; Picture Books; 
Reading Instruction; ^Reading Materials; ^Reading Motivation 
African Americans; *Caldecott Award; Middle School Students; 
Native Americans; *Trade Books 



ABSTRACT 



Noting that an important trend in middle school reading 
instruction has been the increased use of literature and trade books, this 
paper suggests that using Caldecott Medal and Honor books in the middle 
school classroom is an effective way to expose students to high quality 
literature. The paper notes that promoting the use of such books also aids in 
developing an appreciation for art, art styles, and media used by 
illustrators. The paper then lists procedures for using Caldecott Medal and 
Honor books in the classroom and presents a list of 53 such books by topic 
(African-American stories, Native American stories, cultures around the 
world, concepts/lessons, and rhyming books) . The paper also presents ideas 
for comparing and contrasting Caldecott books; a list of Caldecott books 
suitable for illustrator emulation; and brief descriptions of additional 
class activities based on such books. (RS) 



***************************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



U S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

0 This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Using Caldecott Medal and Honor Books to Motivate Middle School 

Readers 

PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 



DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

A 



Dan T Ouzts to the educational resources 

INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

Wanda L. Calvert 



An important trend in middle school reading instruction has been the 
increased use of literature and trade books. Unfortunately, many teachers 
do not have a great deal of experience in implementing a literature-based 
program in their classrooms. Since this is a trend that is likely to 
continue, it is imperative that teachers at the middle school level have 
the necessary exposure to literature, as well as strategies and teaching 
methods for implementing the literature. 

One such method involves the use of the Caldecott Medal and Honor 
books. As most teachers are aware, illustrations are a motivating factor 
for students when selecting a book. This interest in illustrations certainly 
continues as students reach middle school, but the opportunity for 
students to read and enjoy these types of books often does not. Because 
picture books are generally used in elementary classrooms, they are 
seldom used in middle school reading programs even though there are 
often many delayed or reluctant readers who would benefit from 
instruction using these books since many of these books are written on 
lower grade levels. If this unit is implemented at the beginning of the 
school year, it can be a positive way to interest reluctant readers and less 
able readers who do not feel as pressured to perform. 

Promoting the use of Caldecott books also aids in developing an 
appreciation for art, art styles, and media used by illustrators. Recently 
published Caldecott books would particularly be of interest since many 
middle school students have probably not read a picture book since 
elementary school. Many middle school students enjoy drawing but are 
seldom given the opportunity. There are several activities that can be 
incorporated into this unit to tap into those talents such as illustrator 
emulation where students imitate an illustration using the same or a 
similar medium, illustrating their own Caldecott book, and comparing and 
contrasting older Caldecotts with more recent ones, or citing 
technological advances which affect changes in illustrations. Several 
Caldecott Medal and Honor books have been illustrated by the same person, 
which could serve as a study of a particular artist’s style. 

By choosing thirty or forty Caldecott Medal and Honor books, the 



teacher can provide for sustained periods of independent reading and allow 
students to engage in self-selection by choosing the Caldecotts they 
would like to read. Students can keep a log of the books they read for the 
purpose of summarizing, analyzing, and evaluating. The books can also be 
divided into cultures and concepts such as African-American Caldecotts 
or Caldecotts that teach a lesson and activities can be correlated to each 
category. 

Using Caldecott Medal and Honor books in the middle school 
classroom is an effective way to expose students to high quality 
literature. It promotes critical thinking skills as well as independent 
reading and helps to foster an appreciation of literature through a positive 
learning experience. 




3 



Caldecott Book Log 



The Caldecott Book Log is designed to help students 
remember what they have read and to allow them to 
critically analyze and evaluate the children’s books that 
they read. 

Procedures 

*Select 30-40 Caldecott Medal and Honor books to 
use in the classroom. 

*Students should be allowed to choose the books 
they want to read. 

*Students should use the Caldecott Book Log form 
to assess the books they read. 

*Log forms can be turned in for a grade, used to 
complete projects, and for students’ own reflection. 

*Teachers should assign the required number of 
books to be read based upon the amount of time 
they plan on teaching the unit and the reading level 

Of the Students. (Lower level students may not be able 
to read the same amount of books as more able 
readers in the same time period.) 




4 



Caldecott Medal and Honor Books 



African-American Stories 



Medal Books 
Ashanti to Zulu 
A Story, A Story 

Why Mosquitoes Buzz in People’s Ears 
The Snowy Day 

Honor Books 

Anansi the Spider 

Jambo Means Hello 

Moja Means One 

One Wide River to Cross 

Mufaro’s Beautiful Daughters 

Tar Beach 

The Talking Eggs 

Native American Stories 



Medal Books 

Arrow to the Sun 

The Girl Who Loved Wild Horses 

Honor Books 

Raven 

The Desert is Theirs 
Hawk, I’m Your Brother 
In My Mother’s House 
The Way to Start a Day 
When Clay Sings 
Where the Buffaloes Begin 

Cultures Around the World 



Medal Books 




Grandfather’s Journey (Japan) 
Mirette on the Highwire (France) 
Lon Po Po (China) 



5 



Mei Lei (China) 

The Funny Little Woman (Japan) 

Baboushka and the Three Kings (Russia) 

The Fool of the World and the Flying Ship (Russia) 
Always Room for One More (Scotland) 

Nine Days to Christmas (Mexico) 

St. George and the Dragon (England) 

Honor Books 

The Boy of the Three Year Nap (Japan) 

The Crow Boy (Japan) 

Pepe the Lamplighter (Little Italy, USA) 

Concepts/Lessons 

Medal Books 

Hey, All 
Jumanji 
Fables 

Why Mosquitoes Buzz in People’s Ears 

Duffy and the Devil 

One Fine Day 

Once a Mouse 

Chanticleer and the Fox 

Where the Wild Things Are 

Honor Books 

Yo?Yes! 

Andy and the Lion 
The Treasure 

Mufaro’s Beautiful Daughters 

Rhyming Books 

Medal Books 

Drummer Hoff 
Madeline’s Rescue 
May I Bring A Friend? 

Honor Books 

The Judge 
Journey Cake, Ho! 

Madeline 

Three Jovial Huntsmen 




6 



Compare/Contrast 



Ideas for comparing and contrasting Caldecott 
books: 

1. Books illustrated by the same person 

2. Books written by the same person 

3. Contrast two books in the same category (i.e. 
two concept books on 

friendship) 

4. Books with animals 

5. Books from the same country/culture 

6. Old and new Caldecott books 

The class can be divided into small groups and each 
group can be assigned a different compare/contrast 
activity. The attached form is helpful to students 
when using completing these activities. 



1 1 1 ustrator Emulation 



The following Caldecott Medal and Honor books can be assigned to individual 
students or to small groups. Students should use a medium similar to the one used by 
the illustrator. 



Title 


Author 


Illustrator 


Suagested 

Medium 


Jumanji 


Chris Van Allsburg 


Same 


Charcoal pencil 


The Snowy Day 


Ezra Jack Keats 


Same 


Construction paper 


Mei Lei 


Thomas Hanforth 


Same 


Black marker/pen 


Raven 


Gerald McDermott 


Same 


Construction paper 
Black marker 


Lon Po Po 


Ed Young 


Same 


Water colors (red 
orange, black) 


Working Cotton 


Sherley Williams 


Carole Byard 


Water colors 


Madeline’s 

Rescue 


Ludwig Bemelmans 


Same 


Black marker 
Yellow marker 


Why Mosquitoes 
Buzz in People’s 
Ears 


Verna Aardema 


Leo& Diane Dillon 


Various colors of 
construction paper 
cut into shapes 


Baboushka and 
the Three Kings 


Ruth Robbins 


Nicolas Sidjakov 


Black marker, 
water colors, 
colored chalk 


Smoky Night 


Eve Bunting 


David Diaz 


Various objects in 
book (cereal, 
plastic, etc.) pasted 
as a collage 




Other Caldecott 
Activities/Suggestions 



Elementary Activity Folders 

-Each student is given a manila file folder. Construction paper is provided. 

-Students are shown a sample folder and instructed to choose a Caldecott book 
from their log to make a folder of activities for a young child to complete 
after reading the book. 

-Students decorate the folder. 

Example: A Tree is Nice by Janice May Udry 

-List all of the things you can think of that are made from trees. 

-List all of the things that you can do with a tree. Draw your favorite tree 
activity. (Climbing, tire swing, etc.) 

-Count the number of trees in your yard or on the playground at school. 

-Alphabetize these types of trees. (Names of various trees are placed in a 
pocket in the folder.) 

-List some of the foods we eat that grow on trees. Draw your favorite. 

-The saying “Money doesn’t grow on trees” means that money is hard to get. 
Write a story about what you would do if you woke up one morning and 
discovered a money tree growing in your yard! 

Folders can be laminated and shared with elementary feeder schools. 

Classroom Caldecott Books 



-Allow students to work in groups to write and illustrate a children’s story. 
-Groups will submit books for a “Caldecott Medal” or “Honor Medal”. 

-A panel of teachers or the class can decide on the medal book and 2 or 3 
honor books. 

Caldecott Read-Aloud 



-Students who are not inhibited by reading orally can earn extra credit by 
selecting their favorite Caldecott book and reading orally to the class. 

-Those who prefer not to read in front of their peers can read a Caldecott book 
to a young child at home. The parent of the child can sign a form verifying 
that the student read the book to the child. 



Caldecott Categories Activities 



African-American Stories 

1 . From the books The Talking Eggs and Mufaro’s Beautiful Daughters , 
compare Rose and Manyara and compare Blanch and Nyasha. 

2. Color and label on a map of Africa the setting 
of each story. 

3. Which of the books attempt to teach a lesson? List each and the 
lesson it teaches. 

4. • Compare and contrast the illustrations in Why Mosquitoes Buzz in 

People’s Ears to those of Ashanti to Zulu , both illustrated by Leo and 
Diane Dillon. 

Native American Stories 

1 . Compare and contrast the illustrations in Raven and Arrow to the Sun. 

2. In both of these tales, describe the elements that let the reader know 

that the story could not have really happpened. 

3. Explain the style used to write the story, The Desert is Theirs . Why do 
you think the author chose to write in columns? 

4. Students can be divided into small groups to research and present 
orally their findings on the various tribes mentioned in the books. 

Cultures Around the World 

1 . Compare and contrast Lon Po Po with Little Red Riding Hood. 

2. Compare and contrast the illustrations in Grandfather’s Journey and The 

Bov of the Three Year Nap, both illustrated by Allen Say. 

3. What do you learn about special holiday occasions in Mexico and China 
from Nine Davs to Christmas and Mei Lei ? Compare and contrast them 
to customs in the United States. 



Wou*ld you like to put your paper in ERIC? Please send us a clean, dark copy! 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: p a p er presented at the 40th College Reading Association (Charleston) Conference 
Using Caldecott Medal and Honor Books to Motivate Middle School Readers 

Dan,, T r Ouzt s and „ Wa n d a L . Calvert 

Corporate Source: | Publication Date: 

| October 31-Nov. 3, 19 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced 
in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced 
paper copy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is 
given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following two options and sign at 
the bottom of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2 documents 





X 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 








DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 




DISSEMINATE THIS 








HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 












COPY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


Check here 


A0 






For Level 1 Release: 


<<$ 




AT 


Permitting reproduction in 








microfiche (4" x 6" film) or 


<✓ 






other ERIC archival media 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


(e.g., electronic or optical) 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


and paper copy. 












Check here 
For Level 2 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4" x 6" film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical), 
but not in paper copy. 



Level 1 



Level 2 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission 
to reproduce is granted, but neither box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1. 



Sign 

here^> 

please 




7 hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate 
this document as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optical media by persons other than 
ERIC employees and its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit 
reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries . " 



Signature: 

OC 




Org an izat lorVAdcl re ss: 

Department of Education 

The Citadel-171 Moultrie 
Charleston, SC 29409 



Street 



Printed Name/Position/Title: 

Dan T. Ou z t s -As s o c ia t e Professor 






803-953-5097/501 

E-Mail Address: 

0UZTSD @ C i t . e du 



7 803-953-6797 

Date: 

July 3, 1997 



(over) 




III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, 
please provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is 
publicly available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are 
significantly more stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and address: 



Name: 



Address: 



$ 



V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 












ERIC/REC 
2805 E. Tenth Street 
Smith Research Center, 150 
Indiana University 
Bloomington, IN 47408 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 



ERt C -Pr oc e ssing and R e fe rence Fa ci lity 

1+6e-We9t-StfeeV2d-Fk)OP- 
L-auretrMa ry l a nd 207 07-359& 

Tefephoner-30T=497=4080- 
Toft- Fr ee: 8 00- 799 - 37 42- 
FA X ; 3 0 1 - 953 -0263- 
8-ma4U-eftcf a c @ ineted^ov- 
www^-http.//ei tefac^teBantxscxom— 



5/96) 



