DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 351 171 



RC 018 850 



AUTHOR Roy, Loriene, Comp. 

TITLE Pathfinders for Finding Information on Native 

Americans with Disabilities. 
PUB DATE [Jul 92] 

NOTE 84p.; Papers presented at the Conference on American 

Indians with Disabilities (Phoenix, AZ, June, 3, 
1992) . 

PUB TYPE Guides - Non-Classroom Use (055) — Reference 

Materials - Bibliographies (131) 

EDRS PRICE MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS Access to Information; ^Acquired Immune Deficiency 

Syndrome; *Alcoholism; ^American Indians; 
Amputations; Annotated Bibliographies; Assistive 
Devices (for Disabled); Diabetes; Disabilities; 
^Physical Disabilities; Research Tools; *Visual 
Impairments 

IDENTIFIERS '"'Americans With Disabilities Act 1990; Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome; ^Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 

This bibliography offers strategies for locating 
information on selected topics of concern to those working with 
Native Americans with disabilities. The strategies are arranged in a 
format called a pathfinder. Each pathfinder follows a similar format, 
beginning with a brief overview of the topic, followed with an 
annotated bibliography, and concluding with the pathfinder that lists 
different types of information on the topic. The pathfinder 
identifies and describes available sources > including journal 
articles, monographs, data files, government documents, research 
reports, and videos or audio tapes. Pathfinders also cover indexes, 
catalogs, directories, dictionaries, CD-ROM projects, or online 
databases. The bibliography contains the following pathfinder titles 
and authors: (1) "Native Americans and Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: A 
Pathfinder" (Holly B. Koelling); (2) "Native Americans and AIDS: A 
Pathfinder" (Holly B. Koelling); (3) "Locating Information on Native 
Americans with Diabetes and Visual Impairments: A Pathfinder" (Craig 
R. Dowell); (4) "Native Americans and Alcoholism: A Guide to 
Searching the Literature" (Mike Steckel) ; (5) "Finding Assistive 
Devices for Disabled Native Americans: A Pathfinder" (Coby Condrey) ; 
and (6) "Rehabilitation Counselors Serving Adult Native American 
Amputees: A Pathfinder" (Linda Parker); and (7) A Pathfinder on the 
Financial Implications of the Americans With Disabilities Act" (Lisa 
Sjoblom). (KS) 



********************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 
,c from the original document . * 

*********************************************************************** 



1— < PATHFINDERS FOR FINDING INFORMATION ON NATIVE 

AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES 

CO 



Loriene Roy 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



Off.ce of EducatKjnal Research «nd Improvement 

^ONAL^UBCES.NFORMAT.ON 

^This document has been reproduced as 
f receded from the person or organization 
originating it. v 

O Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy 



2 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



SCOPE OF INTEREST NOTICE 

Tha ERIC Facility htt assigned 
this document for proeeaaing 



to 



ERLC 



In our judgment, this document 
is also of interest to the Clear- 
inghouses noted to the right. 
Indexing should reflect their 
special points of view. 



PATHFINDERS FOR FINDING INFORMATION ON NATIVE AMERICANS WITH 

DISABILITIES 
Introduction 
by 

Loriene Roy, Ph.D. 
In The Broken Cord , Michael Dorris wrote of coming to terms 

with the fact that his son Adam had a handicap as a result of 

fetal alcohol syndrome. He wrote: 

"As I grudgingly began to concede that he might have some 
handicaps, sc.ne of them potentially beyond the ability of my 
love, of my energy, to affect or cure, I turned once again 
to the familiar reassurance of intensive study. I was 
trained to believe that the answers to almost everything 
resided in the library, ready for discovery if one looked in 
the right card catalogue and with enough persistence. 
Research meant authority, and authority, I once believed 
spelled power." [Michael Dorris, The Broken Cord , p. 76] 

Libraries and information centers do house authority, in the 
information specialists who have experience and training in 
answering questions or pointing out where answers might be 
found . 

What follows are strategies for locating information on 
selected topics of concern to those working with Native Americans 
with disabilities. The strategies are arranged in a format 
called a pathfinder. Each pathfinder follows a similar format, 
beginning with a brief overview of the topic, followed with an 
annotated bibliography, and concluding with the pathfinder or 
guide to locating information on the topic. The pathfinder 

i 



£L 



identifies and describes some of the best sources available, 
whether the information is packaged as a journal or monograph, 
data file, government document, research report, video or audio 
tape. They also illustrate how someone might locate valuable 
resources by using paper indexes, CD-ROM projects, or online 
databases. While the sources included are limited to those in 
the holdings of the General Libraries at the University of Texas 
at Austin, we hope that anyone in need of these materials is 
located near a library or information setting that either owns 
them or can borrow items from other facilities. 

These pathfinders may help answer the following types of 
questions : 

Which agencies would fund a community program for serving 
Native Americans who have visual impairments? 

Is there any recent research on Native Americans and fetal 
alcohol syndrome? 

How many Native American's have AIDS and how does this 
figure compare to the number of cases in other ethnic groups? 

Is there a company that sells communication devices that 
Native American children with communication difficulties can use? 

Are there any descriptions of success programs that counsel 
Native Americans on alcohol and substance abuse? 

Who publishes articles and research reports on services to 
Native Americans with disabilities? 

The pathfinders were prepared by students enrolled in the 
Spring 1992 "Information Resources in the Social Sciences" class 

ii 

ERIC 4 



at the Graduate School of Library and Information £ :ience at the 
University of Texas at Austin. Craig Dowel 1/ Holly Koelling, 
Liisa Sjoblom, and Mike Steckel presented summaries of their work 
at the Conference on American Indians with Disabilities in 
Phoenix, Arizona on June 3, 1992. 



ERIC 



PATHFINDERS FOR FINDING INFORMATION ON NATIVE AMERICANS WITH 

DISABILITIES 



Table of Contents - 

page 

Native Americans and Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: 

A Pathfinder by Holly B. Koelling 1-12 

Native Americans and AIDS: A Pathfinder by 

Holly B. Koelling 13-23 

Locating Information on Native Americans with 

Diabetes and Visual Impairments: A Pathfinder by 

Craig R. Dowell 24-36 

Native Americans and Alcoholism: A Guide to Searching 

the Literature by Mike Steckel 37-45 

Finding Assistive Devices for Disabled Native 

Americans: A Pathfinder by Coby Condrey 46-58 

Rehabilitation Counselors Serving Adult Native 

American Amputees: A Pathfinder by Linda Parker . . . 59-67 

The Americans with Disabilities Act (Public Law 

101-336) by Liisa Sioblom 68-78 



eric 



iv 

G 



Native Americans and Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: A Pathfinder 

by 

Holly B. Koelling 

The first reports of what would later be called Fetal 
Alcohol Syndrome, or FAS, came from studies conducted in France 
in 1968. FAS originated as a diagnostic term in a 1973 study by 
Jones and Smith of American children who exhibited physical 
malformations and other pre- and postnatal deficiencies. These 
children were born to alcoholic women. 

FAS describes a range of irreversible defects, generally 
characterized by growth deficiency, physical abnormalities in the 
face and head, dysfunctions of the central nervous system, and 
arrested mental development that result from maternal consumption 
of alcohol during pregnancy. 

Although FAS is not limited to specific population or racial 
profiles, the prevalence of alcoholism in Native American 
communities, coupled with a high percentage of women who drink 
heavily and habitually, has led to a particularly high incidence 
of FAS within this population. 

The purpose of this pathfinder is to facilitate access to 
information on Native Americans and FAS through sources and 
reference tools available in a large academic library. 
Sources were chosen based on whether they might be of interest to 
the attenders of the Conference on Native Americans with 
Disabilities, scheduled in Phoenix, June 1992. Attending will be 
disabled Native Americans, educators, health care professionals, 
and researchers. 

1 



ERLC 



7 



Definitions and overviews will lay a foundation for 
attenders not already familiar with FAS . At tenders will most 
likely be interested in broadening their understanding of FAS — 
its history, current research, prominent authors in the field, 
its relationship to Native Americans, and personal accounts of 
FAS victims and families. They may also desire the most recent 
statistical and clinical data on FAS, as well as government 
activity concerning FAS. The conference attender may want to 
make connections to sources, organizations and persons outside 
the reach of this pathfinder. 

Appropriate sources include: 

A) Those specifically addressing FAS as concerns Native 
American populations. 

B) Those providing background and/or detailed information on 
FAS, non-specific to Native Americans. 

C) Those able to lead the user to further informational 
resources, associations or persons. 

Methodology : 

I began my search for monographs and government documents 
with a subject and keyword search under the term "Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome" in UTCAT Plus, the online catalog at the University of 
Texas at Austin. Next I browsed CD-ROM products available for 
current articles. I then focused on directories. Authors' notes 
and bibliographies were considered in making selections for the 
pathfinder. I aimed for currency, but felt some "classic" 
monographs should be included to compliment recent government 



documents and online citations and to give historical 
perspective. Materials were not selected if impenetrable to a 
general, yet likely well-educated audience, due to technical or 
medical language. 




9 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



BIBLIOGRAPHIES : 

Abel, Ernest L . 1985. Fetal alcohol exposure and effects: A 

comprehensive bibliography . Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood 
Press . 

Abel compiles a 300 page bibliography of publications on alcohol 
and fetal development. Sources are included from Abel's private 
collection, the reference lists of the publications included, 
contributions made by researchers in related disciplines, and 
from online databases such as Dialog and Medline . Entries are 
arranged alphabetically by author, as is an addendum. All entries 
are assigned a number that is used as a location indicator in the 
subject index provided at the back of the volume. The cutoff date 
for inclusion is 1984. An introduction supplies condensed data on 
alcohol, and on "Major Characteristics Associated with Fetal 
Alcohol Syndrome and Fetal Alcohol Effects". This source leads 
the user to materials for further study. 



. 1986. Fetal alcohol syndrome: An annotated 

bibliography . New York: Praeger Publishers. 

Although this bibliography contains many articles of interest 
only to researchers and/or medical professionals, a number of the 
annotations refer to readable articles for the general audience, 
from journals such as Science , D rug and Alcohol Dependence , 
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research , and Journal of 
the American Medical Association . Abel arranges his bibliography 
by subject, such as 'Mental Retardation', 'Behavioral Effects', 
and 'Incidence'. The annotations are concise and descriptive. 



DIRECTORIES : 



American Indian and Alaskan Native newspapers and periodicals, 

1971-1985 . 1984- . vol. 3. ed. by Daniel P. Littlef ield, Jr., 
and James W. Parins. New York: Greenwood Press. 

The editors of this reference work have brought together a union 
list and directory of newspapers and periodicals published by 
Native Americans, including Alaska Natives, that focus on current 
issues and information specific to these population rroups. 
Entries are arranged alphabetically by title and include a scope 
note, publication history, and information sources where the 
publication can be found. An index guides the reader to 
publications featuring specific subjects, such as FAS, alcoholism 
and alcohol treatment. Appendices include a list of titles by 
date of establishment, and a list of titles by state of 

4 



ERLC 



10 



publication. Brief biographical sketches of contributors ^ to the 
work are provided. Although slightly dated, this is a unique and 
valuable resource for locating periodicals addressing FAS 
published by and circulating in Native American communities. 



Andriot, Donna. 1991. Guide to U.S. government publications . 
McLean, Virginia: Documents Index Incorporated. 

Andriot has compiled an invaluable source for not only 
identifying the major agencies, bureaus and departments of the 
U.S. Government, but for locating annotated lists of their 
purposes, publications and Superintendent of Documents 
classifications. She provides access to government organizations 
producing literature and, in many cases, bibliographies on FAS, 
alcohol, and Native Americans. Agencies falling under the 
Department of Health and Human Services, such as the Indian 
Health Service; the Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental Health 
Administration; the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism; and the Administration for Native Americans, are 
listed in a clearly delineated table of contents. The user may 
contact the organizations for their publications, or browse the 
government depository section of the library within their 
Superintendent of Documents classification numbers for pertinent 
documents . 



Butynski, William, Ph.D. 1985. Resource directory of national 
alcohol-related associations, agencies and organizations . 
Washington, D.C.: GPO. 

A comprehensive listing, developed for the NIAAA, National 
Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, of U.S. national, 
organizations concerned with a broad spectrum of alcohol-related 
issues. Standard directory-style information is provided, 
including name, address, telephone number, contact person, 
purpose, services and publications of 93 not-for-profit or 
governmental organizations. An alphabetical table of contents by 
association and a subject index help the user to locate 
associations involved in and disseminating information on FAS, 
among other alcohol-oriented topics. Although this source is six 
years old, no other source brings these types of organizations 
together in one volume. 



The Serials directory: An international reference book . 1991. 5th 
ed. vol. 1. Birmingham, Alabama: EBSCO Publishing. 

Over one hundred serials are listed, alphabetically by title, 
under 'Drug Abuse and Alcoholism' in this international guide to 
serial publications. Although none specifically focus on FAS, nor 
more specifically on Native Americans and FAS, it is a valuable 

5 



u 



source for locating the address, phone number, circulation, cost 
and focus of publications on alcohol-related issues. Government 
publications, technical and annual reports, medical and other 
journaJs, clearinghouses, are listed. This work is valuable for 
locating sources commonly known to contain articles on FAS , 
including those pertaining to Native American Communities. Also 
supplied is data on where these publications are indexed and 
abstracted. 



ENCYCLOPEDIAS : 



McGraw Hill encyclopedia of science and technology . 1987. 20 
vols. New York: McGraw Hill, Incorporated. 

Intermediate level signed essays relevant to topics on alcoholism 
and alcohol-related effects such as FAS, as well as articles 
relating to pregnancy and pre/postnatal development, can be found 
in this encyclopedia. Cross references to significant related 
topics are provided. Articles are arranged alphabetically. Volume 
20, the final volume, is a subject index to the encyclopedia. 
Bibliographies can be found at the end of essays as aids to more 
in-depth study. A fine source for general overviews on these 
issues . 



O'Brien, Robert and Morris Chafetz, M.D. 1991. The encyclopedia 
of alcoholism . 2nd ed. New York: Facts On File, 
Incorporated. 

This subject -specif ic encyclopedia contains brief articles 
designed to acquaint the reader with the terminology of 
alcoholism. The work, co-authored by the founding director of the 
NIAAA, offers concise, introductory material on FAS, among other 
terms possibly useful to FAS research. In a controversial 
preface, Chafetz warns against a potential alarmist attitude 
toward drinking wrought by those concerned with alcohol-related 
conditions of the magnitude of FAS. 



GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS: 



National institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 1988. Alcohol 
and birth defects . Washington, D.C.: GPO. HE 20 .8302 :B53/2 . 

The NIAAA produces this pamphlet of quick facts on FAS. Included 
are descriptions of FAS, facts on the prevalence of FAS with 
specific reference to Native American populations, susceptibility 
to FAS, and effects of moderate alcohol consumption during 
pregnancy. This is a brief, to the point introduction to the 

6 



12 



syndrome. NCADI, the National Clearinghouse of Alcohol and Drug 

Information, is listed with full directory information, as a 
source for further study. 

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 1987. Program 
strategies for preventing fetal alcohol syndrome and 
alcohol-related birth defects . Washington, D.C. s GPO. HE 
20.8302:F43. 

Program directors and planners will find practical information 
for implementing FAS and other alcohol-related birth defects 
(ARBD) awareness programs at community levels, by modeling them 
on existing local, state and national programs. Following, a 
general overview on FAS and ARBD, the reader will find 
information describing strategies for planning a prevention 
program. Appendices comprise the final third of the manual. State 
campaign coordinators, special population groups such as low- 
income women or Native Americans with FAS, and organizations are 
listed here. The presentation is logical and clear, and leads the 
reader through a series of steps designed to aid in the creation 
of much needed FAS/ ARBD help groups. A bibliography is included. 



Streissguth, Ann Pytkowicz, Ph.D. 1988. A manual on adolescents 
and adults with FAS with special reference to American 
Indians . 2nd ed. Washington, D.C.: GPO. HE 20.9408:Ad7. 

This manual, which targets "those involved in giving care and 
providing services to adolescents and adults with FAS n 
(introduction, 1) in Native American communities, is a research 
report derived from a study which diagnosed 61 FAS/FAE (Fetal 
Alcohol Effect) Native Americans past young childhood. 
Streissguth--an eminent researcher in the FAS field and 
frequently cited by others writing FAS literature--presents 
general background information on FAS, describes the research 
report, and offers recommendations for aiding this particular FAS 
group. The work is compact, well-written. Charts and black and 
white photographs are provided to illustrate its content. A 
bibliography of 40 selected sources is helpful for further 
reading on the topic. 



U.S. Congress. Senate. 1990. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: Hearing 

before the Subcommittee on Social Security and Family Policy 
of the Committee on Finance . 101st Cong., 2d Sess. 
Washington, D.C. : GPO. Y4 .F49 : s .hrg. 101-1262 . 

This document contains the transcripts of the 1990 hearing on FAS 
before Congress, which attempt to "call attention to the 
prevalence and effects of prenatal exposure to alcohol" (Sen. 

7 



ERiC 13 



Moynihan) . Witnesses of special note include Michael Dorris, 
author of The Broken Cord ; Jeaneen Grey Eagle, Director of 
Project Recovery at Pine Ridge Reservation, S.D.; and Jack Trope, 
staff attorney for the Association on American Indian Affairs in 
New York. These transcripts record the opinions, viewpoints, and 
statements of fact, including statistical data, of a broad 
spectrum of individuals and groups involved with FAS. Issues, as 
well as projected governmental involvement in the FAS crisis, are 
presented . 

INDEXES : 



CINAHL. (CD-ROM). (1983- ). New York: SilverPlatter . 

The print version Cumu lative Index to Nursing and Allied Health 
Literature has its computerized twin in CINAHL. Indexed in this 
database are articles from the majority of the English-language 
journals of nursing, in addition to journals representing 
thirteen other health-oriented fields. CINAHL offers a thesaurus 
for accessing controlled vocabulary search terms. Successful 
terms on the topic of FAS and Native Americans are "Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome" and "American Indians". Omission of the second search 
term will produce a list of recent citations for FAS that are 
non-specific to Native Americans. 



Medline . (CD-ROM). (1987- ). New York: SilverPlatter. 

Medline is the National Library of Medicine's online database, 
holding the bibliographic citations of Index Medicus , and 
including select citations from the Index to Dental Literature , 
and the International Nursing Index . Indexed topics include 
health care, anatomy, diseases, biological and physical sciences, 
social sciences, chemical and drugs, selected from a total of 
3200 national and international journals. Fifty percent of all 
citations are abstracted, frequently by the author of the 
original article. "Fetal Alcohol Syndrome" entered as a search 
term produces a sizable list of current citations on the topic, 
with emphasis on medical implications. 



PsycLit . (CD-ROM) . (1/74-12/82) and (1/83- ). New York: 
SilverPlatter . 

Psychology and psychology-related citations are indexed from over 
1300 international journals in 27 languages and are entered into 
PsychlNFQ , the parent database for PsycLit . Citations and 
abstracts of articles on FAS and Native Americans are available 
through this database, from publications representing a psycho- 
social perspective. PsycLit operates on a controlled vocabulary 

8 



ERIC 1 4 



via a print media or online thesaurus. "Fetal Alcohol Syndrome" 
and "American Indians" supply an abundance of relevant citations. 



Sociof ile . (CD-ROM). (1/74- ). SilverPlatter . 

Sociology and sociology-related articles in disciplines such as 
education, anthropology, economics, philosophy and social 
psychology are cited and abstracted in this database. Scanned for 
inclusion are "1600 journals in 30 different languages from about 
55 countries" (online/onscreen introduction to Sociof ile ) . 
Sociof ile articles, not unlike those found in PsvcLit , emphasize 
the sociological, demographic and generally non-medical aspects 
of FAS. Citations for FAS specific to Native Americans can be 
found, however, Sociof ile has more current citations on FAS in 
general. Search terms from a controlled vocabulary are "Fetal 
Alcohol Syndrome" and "American Indians". 



BOOKS : 



Abel, Ernest L. 1990. Fetal alcohol syndrome . Oradell, New 
Jersey: Medical Economics Books. 

Abel presents the most recent clinical data available on FAS and 
FAE (Fetal Alcohol Effects) . The first half of the book discusses 
the many facets of FAS by reviewing the clinical information of 
500-plus FAS cases laid out in the appendices comprising the 
second half of the book. Although it contains an abundance of 
medical terminology, this material is readable and likely of 
great value to those in health-related or research professions. 
Abel is of renown in the FAS field of study. A 23 page 
bibliography concludes the work. 



Dorris, Michael. 1989. The broken cord . New York: Harper and Row, 
Publishers. 

This is the absorbing and affecting personal account of Michael 
Dorris and Adam, his adopted Native American son and a FAS child. 
The father's journey toward an understanding of the nature of his 
son's defects is beautifully constructed, written with eloquence 
and feeling. Dorris provides a significant body of information on 
FAS, on its effect on Native American communities. An intimate, 
eminently readable book. Dorris supplies the reader with an 
extremely useful bibliography, and highlights four sources he 
found to be of particular value. 



Plant, Moira. 1985. Women, drinking and pregnancy . New York: 
Tavistock Publications. 



9 



ERIC 



15 



It is common to find this work in the bibliographies of current 
FAS literature. The book covers a wide range of basic information 
on alcohol drinking during pregnancy and on its effects on the 
fetus. Plant furnishes data on studies involving alcohol 
consumption during pregnancy, outcome of such pregnancies, and 
follow-up on the babies of women who drank while pregnant. 
Interpretations of the results of these studies are included. A 
forty page bibliography concludes the volume. 



Rosett, Henry L . , M.D., and Lyn Weiner, M.P.H. 1984. Alcohol and 
the fetus; A clinical perspective . New York: Oxford 
University Press, 

FAS is treated from many perspect ives--historical , medical, 
technical, methodological--and in an economy of language, 
comprehensible to the general audience. It is self -described as a 
scholarly work, "yet practical in scope" and which contains "much 
sound advise". The authors were, respectively, medical and 
program director of the Fetal Alcohol Education Program at Boston 
University School of Medicine at the time this book went to 
press. It contains a sizable bibliography. 



VIDEO: 



What's wrong with my child ? 1976. 26 minute videocassette (VHS) . 
Deerfield, Illinois: MTI Film and Video. 

The effects of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and its impact on victims 
and their families are the focus of this edition of "20/20", an 
ABC production reported by Tom Jarriel. Several families with a 
young adult FAS member are profiled, including Michael Dorris, 
Louise Erdrich and Adam, their adopted Native American son. The 
video explores FAS from the various perspectives of health care 
professionals, parents and FAS victims, with contributing remarks 
from experts in FAS research. This is a valuable, personal 
introduction to FAS, produced three years following the labeling 
of the syndrome. 



10 

16 



NATIVE AMERICANS AND FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME 



A PATHFINDER 



Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) describes a characteristic range of birth defects 
that result from the consumption of alcohol during pregnancy. As alcoholism is 
a prevailing problem in Native American communit ies , incidence of FAS is high 
and of great concern. 



ENCYCLOPEDIAS , DICTIONARIES AND INTRODUCTORY MATERIALS... 

are helpful for establishing a basic working definition of the topic. 



McGraw Hill encyclopedia of science and technology . 1987. 20 vols. New York: 

McGraw Hill, Incorporated. 
Introductory essay on FAS in volume 7, pages 89-90. See the subject index in 
volume 20 for locations of other alcohol-related topics. 

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 1988. Alcohol 

and birth defects . HE . 83 02 : B53 12 . 
Four page quick fact pamphlet introducing and defining FAS. 

O'Brien, Robert and Morris Chafetz, M.D. 1991. The encyclopedia 

of alcoholism . 2nd ed. New York: Facts On File, Incorporated. 
Brief one paragraph to one page articles designed to acquaint you with FAS and 
other alcohol-related terminology. 



VIDEOTAPES. . .can provide a uniquely effective and highly informative 
introduction to the topic. 



What's wrong with my child? . 1976. 26 minute videocassette (VHS) . 

Deerfield, Illinois: MTI Film and Video. 
The impact of FAS on victims and families is the focus of this edition of 
"20/20" on videotape. 



BOOKS... can be located through your library's online or card catalog and are 
good sources to deepen your understanding of the topic. 



Abel, Ernest L. 1990. Fetal alcohol syndrome . Oradell, New Jersey: Medical 

Economics Books . 
The most recent clinical data available on FAS. 

Dorr is, Michael. 1939. The broken cord . New York: Harper and Row, Publishers. 
The personal account of a man and his Native American FAS child. 



ERLC 



ii 

17 



GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS . . .provide detailed, informative materials pertinent to 
Native Americans with FAS. 



Streissguth, Ann Pytkowicz, Ph.D. 1988. A Manual cn adolescents 

and adults with fetal alcohol syndrome with special refer ence to 
American Indians . HE 20.9408:Ad7. 

Background, research and recommendations on FAS among Native Americans. 

US Congress. Senate. 1990. Fetal alcohol syndrome: Hearing b efore the 

Subcommittee on Social Security and Family Policy o f the Committee on 
Finance . Y4 . F49 : s . hrg . 101-1262 . 

Transcripts of the 1990 hearing on FAS , with emphasis on Native Americans. 



BIBLIOGRAPHIES. . .contained in the other sources and bibliographies published 
individually on the topic will list materials for further study. 



Abel, Ernest L . 1985. Fetal alcohol exposure and effects: A comprehensive 

bibliography . Westport, Connecticut : Greenwood Press . 
Bibliography compiled by a well-known FAS researcher. 



INDEXES lead to the most current articles on the topic. 



Medline . (CD-ROM) . (1937- ). New York: SilverPlatter . 

Online database listing articles on FAS published in medical journals. 

PsycLit . (CD-ROM). (1/74-12/82) and (1/83- ). New York: SilverPlatter. 
Online database of psychology and related journals of relevance to the topic. 



DIRECTORIES. . .supply publications, associations and individuals to contact 
for further information. 



Butynski, William, Ph.D. 1985. Resource directory of national alcohol- 
related associations, agencies and organizations . Washington, D.C: GPO . 
Complete listing of U.S. organizations concerned with alcohol-related issues. 

Tae serials directory: An international reference book . 1991. 5th ed. vol. 1. 

Birmingham, Alabama: EBSCO Publishing. 
A subject ] ist of serials in which current articles on FAS are found. 



ORGANIZATIONS. . . 



National Clearinghouse of Alcohol and Drug Information (NCADI) 

Box 2345, Rockville, Maryland 20852, (301) 468-2600 
Make available bibliographies and other materials on FAS and Native Americans. 

NEED MORE INFORMATION? ASK A LIBRARIAN. 




12 



16 



Native Americans and AIDS : A Pathfinder 
by 

Holly B. Koelling 

Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, or AIDS, is a fatal disease caused 
by the HIV virus which leaves the immune system unable to combat opportunistic 
diseases. The HIV virus is transmitted through body fluids, most commonly 
from saliva or tears to blood, or from blood to blood. Sexual contact with an 
infected person and sharing contaminated hypodermic needles are the most 
common ways the disease is spread. 

Homosexuals and bisexuals, heterosexual partners of HIV-infected 
parsons, intravenous drug users and other substance abusers, prostitutes of 
both genders, and anyone not practicing safe sex or not educated in safe sex 
practices, are considered high risk for becoming infected with the HIV virus. 

Native Americans are in all AIDS high-risk groups, with a high 
percentage of IV drug users, alcoholics, homosexuals and bisexuals. They 
have, as well, a high incidence of other health problems that may speed the 
development o£ AIDS, such as diabetes and poor diet, and have inferior access 
to health care. They are the least educated population in the United States 
and are less likely than other populations to learn safe sex pract ices /fact s 
about AIDS. 

In addition to its presence in urban Native American populations, AIDS 
has reached the most remote Native American communities. In 1989 an estimated 
two percent of the total Native American population in the United States was 
infected with the HIV virus. Native Americans diagnosed with AIDS lack 
support services, guidance and treatment available to other populations. 

This pathfinder is designed to provide information on Native Americans 
and AIDS through the resources available in a large academic library. The 
selection of resources reflect the possible interests of the attenders of the 
Conference on Native Americans with Disabilities, June 1992. These interests 
include : 

1. materials on AIDS and its history for a general audience 

2. materials providing the most current information on the rapidly changing 

13 

ERIC 1 S 



issues of AIDS 

3. materials providing direction to other AIDS information tools both 
inside and outside the library environment 

4. materials specifically addressing Native Americans with AIDS 
Sources include general reference tools such as dictionaries, introductory 
works, and compilations for general information; online databases and subject 
specific magazines for the most current information; visual resource guides, 
bibliographies, handbooks and directories for locating other resources on 
AIDS; and resources specific to Native Americans and AIDS. 

Methodology : 

UTCAT Plus, the online catalog of the University of Texas at Austin was 
searched under "Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome" and "Indians of North 
America" combined with various health-related subheadings for books, 
magazines, and government documents. Directories and handbooks found through 
UTCAT Plus were used to locate other relevant materials, such as 
videocassettes and organizations. CD-ROM products were scanned for current 
article citations. Resources were selected for currency; most were published 
after 1990, and no sources are included that were published before 1989. No 
highly technical or medical materials are included. 



14 



2ij 



ERIC 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



BIBLIOGRAPHIES ; 

AIDS bibliography series . 1985- . Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press. 

Designed to gather on a regular, periodic basis "the most 
significant material covering all aspects of the AIDS crisis", 
this semi-annual publication cites approximately 500 articles on 
AIDS and related issues. The social, ethical, and scientific 
aspects of AIDS are emphasized. Citations are annotated and 
articles considered the most useful are indicated with _ boldface 
type. Articles are chosen for inclusion if readily available and 
readable by the general public, this source provides citations to 
some of the best literature being produced on AIDS issued in a 
given year. Together, the volumes in this series offer a 
chronology of the literature produced on the AIDS epidemic since 
1985. 

Weissberg, Nancy C. 1988. AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency 

Syndrorce) : Bibliography for 1981-86 . Troy, NY: The Whitston 
Publishing Company. 

Almost 1000 journals are cited in this bibliography on AIDS and 
AIDS-related topics. The volume is divided into two sections. The 
first 300 page section lists citations by article title. The 
second 350 page section lists article citations in subject 
categories such as "Diagnosis", "Education", "Prevention", 
"Research", and "Treatment". This is a valuable source for 
tracking journal articles on the history of AIDS for the years 
1981-1986. Included are a five page subject index and a twenty- 
five page author index. 

BOOKS : 

Flanders, Stephen A. and Carl N. Flanders. 1991- Library in a 
book : AIDS . New York: Facts On File, Inc. 

"The purpose of this book is to provide a one-stop source for 
reference information about AIDS" (viii) . The book is divided 
into two parts. The first 115 pages offer an overview of the AIDS 
epidemic, including a chronology of important events in the 
history of the epidemic, significant AIDS court cases, and 
biographical sketches of notable persons involved in the history 
of the AIDS epidemic. The second part is an almost 100 page 
bibliography of AIDS sources covering a wide range of media. 
Materials were chosen for readability and availability. In 
addition, a directory of key AIDS organizations and associations 
is included, alphabetical by state. 



15 



ERLC 



McKenzie, Nancy F., Ph.D., ed. 1991. The AIDS reader; Social , 
political, and ethical issues . New York: Meridian. 



This reader is intended to introduce, through a collection of 
essays, the essential concepts of the AIDS epidemic. The book is 
divided into six main sections, including the history of the 
virus, the sociology of the virus, health care, prevention, 
politics, and the community, each section begins with an 
introductory overview by the editor and is followed by a series 
of essays by authors from a wide range of academic disciplines 
and professions. This is a valuable collection for gaining a 
basic understanding of the facts, debates and controversies 
surrounding AIDS. 

DICTIONARIES : 

Taber's cyclopedic medical dictionar y. 1989. 16th ed. 
Philadelphia: F.A. Davis Company. 

This dictionary of medical terminology contains definitions of 
AIDS, HIV and AIDS-related complex, presented clearly and with 
detailed descriptions of diagnosis, mode of transmission, high 
risk groups, prevention, and treatment. Definitions are not 
technical or difficult to understand. Rather, they are designed 
to make the topic clear to the general reader. This is a good 
introductory source for basic information on the topic. 

DIRECTORIES : 

Burek, Deborah M . , ed. 1991. The Encyclopedia of associations 
1992 . 3 vols. 26th ed. Detroit: Gale Research, Inc. 

This source provides numerous listings for organizations and 
associations dealing with health, funding, and AIDS, as well as 
Native American associations that may offer support and 
assistance to persons with AIDS. The name/keyword in volume 3 of 
this source, under "AIDS 11 , "Native American" , and "Indian", 
provides references to many associations' entries in the first 
two volumes. The address, founding date, phone number, and 
contact person, among other information, is supplied through this 
directory . 

Learning AIDS : An information resources directory . 1989. 2nd ed. 
New York: American Foundation for AIDS Research. 

The over 1700 sources listed in this book were reviewed and 
evaluated by experts in AIDS, education, and related fields. 
Source information was obtained through a national survey 
conducted by AmFAR, and is listed by subject category, such as 
"Black Community", "Children and Adolescents", "IV Drug Users" 
and "Women" . Entries include all pertinent identifying 
information, including title, type of work (book, film, brochure, 



16 



ERLC 




etc.), price, and ordering information. The experts evaluatively 
annotate each work. Works reviewed but not recommended are also 
listed, but without full directory information. A 37 page 
reference bibliography is provided for further study. In 
addition, the source contains a 30 page directory of both 
national and international organizations, agencies, producers, 
and distributors of information on AIDS. A unique feature of this 
resource is an index of sources in non-English languages. 

Malinowsky, Robert H. and Gerald J. Perry, eds. 1991. AIDS 

information sourcebook 1991 -92. 3rd ed. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx 
Press . 

The purpose of this sourcebook is to disseminate information to 
the general public about AIDS and the educational resources 
available on AIDS. It is primarily a directory, alphabetical by 
state and city, of organizations that focus on public education 
on AIDS issues. Many organizations included in this sourcebook 
publish or distribute literature. Full directory information on 
each organization is provided, including contact person, 
languages spoken, and available literature. Also included in the 
sourcebook are a chronology of the AIDS epidemic, an appendix of 
AIDS statistics, a glossary of terms, and a 45 page bibliography 
of AIDS-related literature. The bibliography is divided into type 
of material, such as books, bibliographies, periodicals, 
audiovisud 1 sources , curriculum/educational programs , 
directories, and fiction, among others. This source lists 
organizations for Native Americans with AIDS as well as other 
minority AIDS organizations. 

Murphy , Edward C . 1991. AIDS funding: A guide to giving by 

foundations and charitable organizations . The Foundation 
Center . 

Grant-seekers will find this guide invaluable for locating a wide 
variety of support funding for AIDS/HIV programs, projects and 
services. Listed in this guide are almost 450 foundations, 55 
charities, and 49 corporate gift programs that currently grant 
funds to AIDS programs or have expressed significant interest in 
doing so in the future. The guide provides step-by-step advice on 
locating funding from these organizations for AIDS/HIV programs. 
Entries are arranged alphabetically by state and f under. Each 
entry can have up to 28 specific components, including grants 
paid, application information, and recent grants for AIDS 
awarded. A two page bibliography of other AIDS funding literature 
is included. 

National AIDS Information Clearinghouse. 1989. Directory of AIDS- 
related databases and bulletin boards . Rockville, MD: NAIC. 

NAIC's resource database contains 93 organizations that provide 
electronic information services, such as online sources, 

17 



ERIC 



databases and bulletin boards, that disseminate information on 
AIDS and related issues. Entries are alphabetical by name of 
producer and contain full directory information in addition to a 
detailed description of the database and its methods of access. 
Electronic media frequently contain the most current information 
available and will be of benefit when pursuing information on a 
disease with rapidly changing data. 

The National directory of AIDS care: The authoritative reference 
for health care providers , community support systems, and 
consumers 1991-92 , 1991. Albuquerque, NM: Kelenmae Hammrich 
and Jeanette M. Dunn, Publishers. 

This source is designed to serve as a desk reference for AIDS 
care providers, administrators and the general public. It is 
comprehensive at national, state, and county levels. The source 
provides full directory information for AIDS organizations 
throughout the country. Included in a separate section are 
detailed descriptions of several federal ac^ncies and their role 
in the AIDS epidemic. This is a clear, well organized source with 
abundant detailed information for each state, county and city, as 
well as at the national level. 

Seeing through AIDS: A guide to over 70 of the best films and 

videos on AIDS and AIDS-related issues , 1989. Includes 1991 
supplement. New York: Media Network. 

With the supplement, almost one hundred videos and films 
addressing AIDS and related issues are listed with detailed 
descriptive annotations in this source. Information on price, 
availability, length and producer is also included. Full 
directory information is supplied for all distributors. This 
guide also recommends the audience for which the film/video is 
best suited, examples being "women", "youth", 11 act ivists " , 
" f undraising" and "parents groups". In addition the source lists 
other organizations involved in AIDS-related audiovisual and 
educational materials. 

The Serials directory; An international reference book . 1991. 5th 
ed. 3 vols. Birmingham, AL: EBSCO Publishing. 

Numerous serials are listed, alphabetically by title, under 
"AIDS"' in this international guide to serial publications. 
Although none focus specifically on Native Americans with AIDS, 
it is valuable for locating the address, phone number, 
circulation, and cost of publications on AIDS in general. Also 
supplied is data on where these publications are indexed and 
abstracted. Government publications, technical and annual 
reports, medical and other journals, and clearinghouses are 
listed. 



18 



GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS : 



National Commission On Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome. 1991. 
America living with AIDS: Transformi n g anger, fear, and 
indifference into actio n. Washington, D.C.: GPO. 
Y3:Ac7 :2Am3. 

Recommendations for the best action to take concerning the many 
aspects of AIDS in America are made by the Commission in this 
report. Chapters discuss prevention and education, care for 
persons with AIDS , financing health care, and governmental 
responsibility in the AIDS crisis. Each chapter concludes with 
the recommendations and a one to five page bibliography of 
selected sources for further study on the topic addressed in the 
chapter. This is a good, general source for an overview of AIDS 
related topics. 

Walke, Roger. Congressional Research Service. 1991. Federal 
programs of assistance to Native Americans . Washington, 
D.C.: GPO. Y4.IN2/ll:S.prt. 102-62. 

This report provides detailed, current information on federal 
assistance programs for Native Americans, as well as information 
necessary to gain access to those programs. Fifteen pages are 
devoted to detailed instructions for gaining assistance from the 
Department of Health and Human Services and Indian Health 
Services. This is likely the best source to understand the 
availability of federal assistance to Native Americans with AIDS, 
and of eligibility of tribe or individual to receive that 
assistance . 

HANDBOOKS : 

Lingle, Virginia A. and M. Sandra Wood. 1988. How to find 

information about AIDS . New York: Harrington Park Press. 

The goal of this reference source is to point to "key access 
points" for information on AIDS. Chapters treat organizational 
resources; health departments; research institutions, grant 
funding sources, and federal agencies; hotlines; computerized 
sources of information; print urces of information; and 
audiovisual producers. This is a good, general starting point for 
finding necessary information on AIDS and related issues. 

McCormack, Thomas P. 1990. The AIDS benefits handbook; Everything 
you need to know to get social security , Medicaid, Medicare , 
foodstamps, housing/ drugs and other benefits . New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press. 

This handbook provides crucial information for PWAs (Persons With 
AIDS) on income, health, and housing disability entitlement. Each 
chapter treats a particular agency, such as Social Security 

19 



Disability Insurance, Aid to Families with Dependent Children, or 
Veterans Administration Benefits, and informs the reader how to 
get assistance as a PWA from the agencies. The text of 
approximately twenty agencies is followed by 14 appendices that 
include sample reports, forms, general statistics on AIDS and 
government agencies, and organizations, among others. A ten page 
glossary of terms allows the reader to become familiar with the 
acronyms and terminology necessary to get help from these 
agencies. An annotated, 15 page bibliography directs the user to 
sources for further help. 

INDEXES : 

ERIC . (CD-ROM). (1982- ). New York: SilverPlatter . 

The U.S. E>epartment of Education sponsors this database comprised 
of sixteen clearinghouses with subject, specialties in education. 
ERIC (Educational Resources Informative Center) has two primary 
files. The first, RIE (Resources In Education) indexes document 
citations and the second, CUE (Current Index to Journals in 
Education) indexes article citations from 750 professional 
journals in education. "AIDS" and/or "Acquired Immune Deficiency 
Syndrome" provide, as search terms in this database, numerous 
article citations non-specific to Native Americans. "American 
Indian" used as a search term in combination with the other terms 
will provide several articles specific to Native Americans with 
AIDS . 

Medline. (CD-ROM). (1983- ). New York: SilverPlatter. 

Medline is the National Library of Medicine's online database, 
holding the bibliographic citations of Index Medicus , and 
including select citations from the Index to Dental Literature , 
and the Internal- ional Nursing Index . Indexed topics include 
health care, anatomy, diseases, biological and physical sciences, 
social sciences, chemicals and drugs, selected from a total of 
3200 national and international journals. Fifty percent of all 
citations are abstracted, frequently by the author of the 
original article. "AIDS" and/or "Acquired Immunodeficiency 
Syndrome" used as search terms produce a large number of current- 
citations on the topic. Although many of the citations represent 
highly technical or medical articles, a significant number are 
also listed for general reading. 

MAGAZINES ; 

AIDS patient care . 1987 New York: Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. 

This bi-monthly journal publication is "devoted exclusively to 
issues involving the diagnosis, treatment, care and prevention of 
HIV disease" . Articles cover many disciplines that are involved 
in some manner in combatting the AIDS crisis. Article types 

20 



ERLC ?6 



include research reports, personal commentary, case reports, in- 
depth analyses and reviews. Articles are readable by a general 
audience. Not all articles treat medical aspects of the disease; 
legal, ethical, political and social issues are included as well. 
This subject specific periodical will be of use in keeping up to 
date on the most recent issues and data concerning AIDS. 

SOURCES FOR WOMEN ; 

Watstein, Sarah Barbara and Robert Anthony Laurich. 1991. AIDS 
and women; A sourcebook '91 . Phoenix, AZ; Oryx Press. 

This sourcebook provides reference resources, with summary 
annotations, on women and AIDS. Books, pamphlets, articles both 
popular and academic, public documents, and research reports are 
included. Emphasis is placed on materials addressing special 
populations of women--lesbians , minority women, incarcerated 
women, and prostitutes. Statistical tables accompany subject- 
specific chapters of reference sources. Examples of chapters are 
"Heterosexually Transmitted AIDS", "Transmission Through IV Drug 
Use: and "Women of Color and AIDS". Chapters present one to two 
pages of factual information followed by 20-40 selected reference 
sources. Four appendices are included that supply directory 
information on audiovisual sources and national and state AIDS 
organizations that focus on AIDS and women. Sources are chosen 
for inclusion if readily available and readable by the general 
population . 

VIDEOS ; 

Her giveaway; A spiritual journey with AIDS . 1989. Produced by 
Skyman Smith and the Minnesota AIDS Project. 20 min. 
Videocasette (VHS) . 

This brief video focuses on Carol Lafavor, an American Indian 
woman with AIDS, whose "mission" is to talk to people about AIDS 
in hopes of preventing others from becoming infected with the 
virus. Lafavor and others, including Lori K. Beaulieu of the 
Minnesota American Indian AIDS Task Force, discuss both personal 
and clinical aspects of AIDS and AIDS transmission. Lafavor 
believes AIDS to be the greatest challenge ever faced by native 
peoples and warns against ignorance and hysteria in native 
communities. She claims reservations need a special awareness of 
Native Americans with AIDS as Indians will return home from 
cities and other locations to die. 



NATIVE AMERICANS AND AIDS - A PATHFINDER 



Wliat 18 AXDS? 



Taber's cyclopedic medical dictionary . 1989. 16th ed. Philadelphia: F. A. 
Davis Company . 

This medical dictionary provides a good, basic definition of AIDS. 



wnat are tne tacts about AIDS? 



McKenzie, Nancy F. , Ph.D., ed. 1991. The AIDS reader: Social political 

and ethical issues . Ne<- 7 York: Meridian. 
A collection of essays on the essential concepts of the AIDS epidemic. 

Flanders, Stephen A. and Carl N. Flanders. 1991. Library in a book: AIDS . 

New York: Facts On File, Inc. 
A one-stop source for reference information on AIDS. 

National Commission on Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome. 1991. America 

Living With AIDS . Washington, D.C.: GPO. Y3 : Ac7 : 2Am3 . 
A good source for a general overview of AIDS and AIDS-related topics. 



wnat is tne most current information on aids? 



ERIC . (CD-ROM). (1932- ). New York: SilverPlatter . 

Online educational database listing recent articles on AIDS and 

Native Americans. 

Medline . (CD-ROM). (1983- ). New York: SilverPlatter. 

Online database listing current articles on AIDS published in medical 
j ournals . 



wnat magazines are published on AIDS? 



The Serials directory: An international reference book . 1991. 5th ed. 

3 vols. Birmingham, AL: EBSCO Publishing. 
Listed under "AIDS" are a wide variety of available serial publications. 

AIDS patient care . 1987- . New York: Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. 
Bi-monthly magazine devoted to AIDS and AIDS-related issues. 

i 
i 

What visual resources are available on AIDS? 



Her Giveaway: A spiritual journey with AIDS . 1989. Produced by Skyman Smith 

and the Minnesota AIDS Project. 20 min. Videocassette (VHS) . 
A video on Carol Lafavor, a Native American woman with AIDS. 

Seeing through AIDS: A guide to over 70 of the best films and videos on 

AIDS and AIDS-related issues . 1989. Includes 1991 Supplement. New York: 
Media Network. 

Listed are almost 100 videos and films on AIDS and related issues. 



ERIC 22 p s 



wnat rosources lead to rurtnar study on aids? 



] 



AIDS bibliography series . 1985- . Phoenix, AZ : Oryx Press. 

Semi-annual publication lists and annotates the 500 most important articles 
on AIDS and related issues. 

Learning AIDS: An information resources directory . 1989. 2nd ed. New 

York: American Foundation for AIDS Research. 
Lists and annotates 1700 information resources on AIDS, such as books, 
audiovisual sources, brochures and pamphlets. 

Lingle, Virginia A. and M. Sandra Wood. 1988. How to find information 

about AIDS . New York: Harrington Park Press. 
Points to "key access points" for information on AIDS, such as government 
agencies, health departments, and sources for AIDS literature. 

What information is available on assistance to persons witfc AIDS? 



Murphy, Edward C. 1991. AIDS funding: A guide to giving by foundations 

and charitable organizations . The Foundation Center. 
Invaluable for locating a wide variety of support funding for AIDS programs, 
projects and services. 

McCormack, Thomas P. 199 0. The AIDS benefits handbook . New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press. 

Provides information for persons with AIDS on income, health, and housing 
disability entitlement for many government agencies and programs. 

Walke, Roger. Congressional Research Service. 1991. Federal programs 
of assistance to Native Americans . Washington, D.C. : GPO. 
Y4 .IN2/ 11: S.prt .102-62 . 

Detailed, current information on federal health service and other assistance 

programs for Native Americans. 



Malinowsky, Robert H. and Gerald J. Perry, eds . 1991. AIDS information 

sourcebook 1991-92 . 3rd ed. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press. 
A directory of organizations that focus on public education on AIDS. 

The National directory of AIDS care . 1991. Albuquerque, NM: Helenmae 

Hammrich and Jeanette M. Dunn, Publishers. 
A comprehensive directory listing AIDS organizations at national, state, 
county, and city levels. 



National Native American AIDS Prevention Center 
3515 Grande Ave., Suite 100 
Oakland, CA 94610 

(510) 444-2051; (800) 283-2437 -- Native American AIDS Hotline 

Offers assistance in training, technical and information services to Native 

Americans in the United States. 



What resources list AIDS organizations? 



Native American AIDS Organizations 



NEED FURTHER ASSISTANCE? ASK A LIBRARIAN. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



9 

ERJC 




Locating Information on Native Americans with Diabetes 
and Visual Impairments: A Pathfinder 

by 

Craig R. Doweli 

INTRODUCTION 

Native Americans currently make up about one percent of the 
total United States population. Health care for this population has 
remained inadequate, and Native Americans today suffer the worst 
health of any minority in the country. 

One of the largest problems facing Native Americans today is 
diabetes. In 1988, the age adjusted mortality rate for diabetes 
mellitus was 2.6 times the U. S. average or 1 55 percent greater than 
the U. S. All Races population 1 . Diabetes was rare in Indian tribes 
prior to 1940; 

by 1989, half of all Pima Indians over age 35 were afflicted 2 . While 
genetic predisposition most certainly puts an individual at risk for 
the disease, other risk factors are poor nutrition and obesity 3 . In 
1989, more than 2,000 American Indians from 15 tribes were 
screened and 77 percent of them were labeled as obese 4 . 

People who suffer from diabetes can improve their condition 
through increased awareness of their disease and through better 
nutrition, weight loss and exercise. Health care providers can 
provide better and more appropriate service to their diabetic clients 
through increased awareness of Indian culture and tradition. This 
pathfinder will attempt to guide Native Americans toward sources 
that will help them understand their illness, and will guide health 
service providers, researchers, administrators and other interested 
individuals into the broad field of health care for Native Americans 



24 



and toward current and relevant information on diabetes and visual 
impairment. 

In order to meet the information needs of such a variety of 
individuals, sources included in this pathfinder range from 
introductory information for those new to the field of Indian health 
care to detailed guidelines for health care programs for experienced 
Indian health care providers. Sources will answer a range of 
questions such as "What is diabetes?," "What foods should diabetics 
avoid?" and "What sources are available to educate people about 
diabetes?" 

The sources presented in this pathfinder were all located at 
the General Libraries at The University of Texas at Austin (UT) but 
this search can be duplicated at any large academic library. 
Searching the Library of Congress Subject Headings, I found that 
information regarding Native Americans is listed under the heading 
"Indians of North America." I then searched UTCAT, the online 
catalog of the General Libraries, searching various subheadings such 
as "—Health and Hygiene" and "—Medical Care." 1 compiled a list of 
possible sources and located several government documents through 
shelf browsing. 

Sources were selected using several criteria. Sources needed 
to be readily available for examination. I also wanted to include the 
most current information available, particularly regarding statistics, 
so most of the sources selected for inclusion were published after 
1984. Ease of use was another consideration. In this instance, I 
looked for works with detailed indexes or tables of contents that 
would facilitate access to the information contained in the source. I 



ERLC 



25 

31 



also performed searches on ERIC and other electronic indexes in 
order to determine the availability of current journal articles. Titles 
and abstracts were helpful in determining relevancy to the topic, 
and UTCAT proved helpful for locating those items in the collection. 



1 Department of Health and Human Services , Trends in Indian Health— 1 99 1 . 
(Washington, D. C: Government Printing Office, 1991), 3. 

^•Indian Health Service Diabetes Program, Diabetes Nutrition Teaching Tools: A 
Resource Guide for Dietitians . (Washington D. C : Government Printing Office, 1989), 1. 
3 Ibid. 
4 Ibid. 



26 

32 



ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 



I. STYLE MANUALS: 

Turabian.KateL. 1 987. A Manual for Wr iters of Term Papers 
Theses and Dissertations . 5th ed., revised and expanded. 
Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press. 



Garner, Diane L., and Diane H. Smith. 1 984. The Complete Guide to 
Citing Government Docu ments: A Manual for Writers and 
Librarians. Bethesda.MD: Congressional Information Service, 
Inc. 



II. GENERAL SOURCES: 

Library of Congress Subject Headings . 1 4th. ed., 3 vols. 1991. 
Washington, D. C: Library of Congress. 

An alphabetical listing of the official subject headings 
created by and used in the Library of Congress for cataloging 
purposes. Look under the main heading "Indians of North America" 
for appropriate subheadings. 



Subject Guide to Books in Print . 5 vols. 1991. New York: R. R. 
Bowker Co. 

An alphabetical listing of books in print, arranged by 
subject, according to Library of Congress Subject Headings. Search 
here for books which may be found in your library, or acquired 
through inter library loan. Look under "Indians of North America- 
Health and hygiene" for a list of books on the topic of Indian health. 



The Encyclopedia of Associations . 26th ed., 3 vols 1 99 1 . Edited by 
Deborah M. Burek. Detroit: Gale Research Inc. 

Indexes and describes all types of associations, both 
national and international, in all fields of work and leisure. Provides 
phone numbers, addresses, names of contact people, history and 
publications of the organization. A good place to search for 
information on organizations that may be able to provide help, 
information or support, such as the National Indian Health Board of 



ERIC 



27 

To 



Denver, CO. Provides descriptive listings, indexes, as well as name 
and keyword indexes. Access these associations through the term 
"American Indians." 



Klein, Barry T. 1 990. Ref erence Encyclopedia of the American 
Indian . 5th ed. West Nyack, New York: Todd Publications. 
Organizations of, for and about Native Americans, 
covering aspects of daily life, government agencies and education. 
Use this source to find titles and addresses of associations for and 
relating to Native Americans, such as The American Health Care 
Association of St. Paul, MN. Includes bibliographies, arranged 
alphabetically and by subject; Audio /Visual sources, such as 
"Hunger in America," which deals with hunger and malnutrition 
among the Navajo Indians of Arizona; a Publishers Index; and 
Biographies. An excellent classed table of contents makes this 
source easy to use 



Make Mv People l iv e: The Crisis in Indian Health . John Mansfield, 
executive producer. (New York: Time-Life Video, 1984), 
video cassette. 

An excellent exploration of the health care crisis facing 
Native Americans, provides background and historical information 
on the health status of the Indian nation. Also provides statistical 
information on major health concerns of Native Americans, 
including diabetes and alcoholism. Illustrates the United States 
Government's failure to provide adequate health care. An excellent 
starting point for those unfamiliar with the status of Indian health 
care. 



III. JOURNAL ARTICLES: 

Lowrey, Leon, "Rehabilitation Relevant to Culture and Disability," 
Journal of Visual Imp airment and Blindness 8 1 , no. 4, (April 
1987): 162-164. 

Examines stresses placed on Native Americans by 
rehabilitative personnel and advocates due to lack of understanding 
of Indian culture and family values and the difficulties incurred by 
Indians because of this ignorance. An excellent source for 
information on the development of culturally relevant services to 



28 



the visually impaired and those otherwise disabled. This particular 
issue of the Journal is devoted exclusively to American Indian topics. 



Orlansky, Michael D. and Jennifer J. Trap, "Working With Native 
American Persons: Issues in Facilitating Communication and 
Providing Culturally Relevant Services." Journal of Visual 
Impairment and Blindness 8 1 . no. 4. (April 1 987): 151-155. 
Explores special concerns for health care providers in 
dealing with Native Americans with health problems, including 
visual impairments. This source suggests methods for improving 
communication and understanding, fostering deeper sensitivity of 
Indian culture and concerns, especially when dealing with health 
issues. This issue of the Journal is devoted exclusively to Native 
American topics. 



IV. GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS: 

National Library Service to the Blind and Physically Handicapped. 
Blindness and Visual Impairments: National Information and 
Advocacy Organizations . Washington: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1990. (282-178 / 20016). 

Offers information on advocacy organizations, directories 
and other publications that list agencies, services and resources, and 
state agencies which administer special education and rehabilitative 
services. Provides addresses and phone numbers of organizations 
and descriptions of the services they provide, and lists publications 
of such organizations. Provides bibliographic information for 
directories and other publications that list agencies, services and 
resources. Lists state agencies alphabetically by state that offer 
special education and rehabilitative services. 



U. S. Department of Health and Human Services. Trends in Indian 
Health-- 1 991 . Washington: Government Printing Office, 
1991. (1991—300-165/50070). 

Provides basic statistical information regarding health 
trends in Native Americans for the year and identifies historical 
trends. This source provides numerous tables and charts of 
statistics regarding population, infant and general mortality and 
community health. Draws comparisons with other populations. A 



ERIC 



29 

35 



detailed table of contents facilitates access to statistics of interest to 
the user. Look especially for "Age-Adjusted Diabetes Mellitus 
Deaths and Mortality Rates," "Diabetes Mellitus Deaths and Mortality 
Rates" and "Leading Causes of Hospitalization." 



U. S. Indian Health Service. Clinician's Guide to Resources . 

Washington: Government Printing Office, 1984. (1985—584- 
629). 

Although somewhat dated, a comprehensive list of 
programs, contact persons and phone numbers of numerous clinical 
and administrative support programs for clinicians, such as 
"Physician Recruitment, Retention and Support Branch." Describes 
Indian Health Service and government agency programs, as well as 
Native American Health Organizations. Look here to find the names 
of programs, contact persons, addresses, phone numbers, description 
of programs and services provided by them. A detailed table of 
contents and subject index facilitates use. In the table of contents, 
look for "Diabetes Program" and "Diabetes Control Program" under 
the heading "Clinical Support Programs." In the index, look for 
"Diabetic Consultants" and "Diabetic Training." 



U. S. Indian Health Service Diabetes Program. Diabetes Nutrition 

Teaching Tools: A R esource Guide for Dietitians . Washington: 
Government Printing Office, 1 989. (1990—775- 
796/25123). 

Describes various kinds of materials concerning diabetes 
nutrition education for American Indians and Alaska Natives. 
Designed for dietitians, to expand their awareness of nutrition 
educational materials. This source provides an overview of 
particular sources, patient comments, likes and dislikes, teaching 
tips, suggestions for presentation and adjustment, and ordering 
information. It encourages dietitians to expand their teaching 
techniques and serves as an example of how to review and evaluate 
other teaching materials. Provides a "grid" to aid dietitians in 
identifying materials covering a specific topic, or at a particular 
level of difficulty. 



U. S. Indian Health Service Diabetes Program. Family Food Choices: 
A Guide to Weight and Diabetes Cont rol Washington: 
Government Printing Office, 1989. (1990—776-620/25167). 



ERIC 



30 

3G 



Offers a brief description of diabetes and how it can be 
managed through diet. Written specifically for Native Americans, 
this source offers tips for weight loss, and briefly discusses fat levels 
in meat and dairy products. Offers suggestions as to which foods to 
avoid, as well as those to eat most often. Stresses importance of 
fiber in the diet. Encourages avoidance of alcohol and foods high in 
sugar. Simply written, avoids technical jargon. 



U. S. Indian Health Service Diabetes Program. Gestational Diabetes: 
How to Have a Healthy Baby . Washington: Government 
Printing Office, 1990. (1991—834-188). 

A brief, illustrated booklet which defines gestational 
diabetes, and how it can affect pregnancy. See this source for 
information specifically written for pregnant Native American 
women regarding diet and exercise. Stresses the importance of 
medical supervision before, during and after the pregnancy. A good 
source for expectant mothers, it avoids technical jargon and is easy 
to read. 



V. ELECTRONIC CD-ROM INDEXES: 

CINAHL (Current Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature): 
1983-December 1991. SilverPlatter 2.00. 

Covers subjects in nursing and allied health from 1 983 
through December 1991. A good source for locating titles and 
abstracts of current articles on Native Americans and Diabetes. Not 
helpful for articles on visual impairment. Index terms to search 
include "Native Americans" or "American Indians" and "Diabetes." 
Be sure to check the CINAHL thesaurus for other relevant search 
terms. 



ERIC (Educational Resources Information Center): 1 982-December 
1991. SilverPlatter 2.01. 

Covers subjects in education and library and information 
science. An excellent source for locating titles and abstracts of 
current articles on diabetes and visual impairments in Native 
Americans. Search under terms such as "American Indian Studies" 
or "American Indians" and "Diabetes" or "Visual impairments" or 
"Blindness." Other relevant search terms can be located in the FR1C 
thesaurus. 



ERIC 



31 

37 



MedLine : 1983-present. SilverPlatter 2.0 1 . 

Covers subjects in medicine, nursing, dentistry, and 
public and environmental heath. An excellent source for locating 
titles and abstracts of current articles on diabetes in Native 
Americans. A good source for information concerning visual 
impairment also. Use search terms such as "Indians, North 
American" and "Diabetes, gestational" or "Diabetes mellitus" or 
"Blindness" or "Vision disorders" or "Vision screening." The Medical 
Subject Headings 1 .ist will contain other search terms as well. 



PA IS (Public Affairs Information Service) International : 1 972- 
present. SilverPlatter 2.01 . 

Covers public affairs, political science, social sciences 
and government. One of the least helpful indexes I searched. 
Located one article titled "Hunger and Nutrition Problems Among 
Native Americans" which was related to the diabetes aspect of the 
topic. Search terms included "Indians" and "Diabetes." Check the 
EAIS thesaurus for other terms. 



Psvchl.IT: 1983-December 1991. SilverPlatter 2.0 1 . 

Covers topics in psychology. A marginally helpful index, 
a searcher should still check for the sake of thoroughness. Indexes a 
few articles on diabetes and visual impairment. Use search terms 
such as "American Indians" and "Diabetes" or "Dia^tes mellitus" or 
"Visually handicapped" or "Visual perception." Otrier search terms 
can be located in the thesaurus. 



Sociofile : 1 974-December 1991. SilverPlatter 2.0 1. 

Covers topics in sociology, social planning and policy. 
Like PAIS, was not very helpful regarding the topic. A single article 
titled "The Changing Dimension of Native American Health" was 
found which was related to the diabetes aspect of the topic. Search 
terms included "American Indians" and "Diabetes." As always, check 
the thesaurus for other terms. 



VI. UNION LISTS: 



32 



American Indian and Alaska Native Newspapers and Periodica ls. 

1826-1924. 1925-1970. 1971-1985 . 1986. Edited by Daniel 
F. Littlefield, Jr. and James W. Parins. New York: Greenwood 
Press. 

A national union list of newspapers and periodicals either 
edited or published by American Indians or Alaska Natives. Useful 
for locating bibliographic information of sources located in an 
electronic index. Somewhat more current than Native American 
Periodicals and Newspapers (see below), but does not list all holding 
institutions. Titles are arranged alphabetically, for ease in locating a 
specific periodical. Also provides titles listed chronologically by 
original publication date, and by state holding location, for use in a 
specific geographical area. 



Native American Pe riodicals and Newspapers 1 828-1 982: 

BibliograPhv . Publishing Record and Holdings . 1984. Edited 
by James P. Danky, Maureen E. Hady, comp. Westport, 
Connecticut and London, England: Greenwood Press. 

A national union list of American Indian periodicals and 
newspapers, from 1 828 to 1982. Useful for locating full 
bibliographic information of sources located in one of the electronic 
indexes, as well as holding institutions. Dictionary arrangement, by 
title, facilitates use. Also provides subject and geographical indexes, 
as well as a "catchword" index. 



Murphy, James B. and Sharon M. Murphy. 1981. Let Mv People. 

Kno w; American Indian Journalism. 1 828-1 978 Norman: 

University of Oklahoma Press. 

American Indian publications and broadcasts from 1 828 
to 1978; Also Agency, Tribal and Intertribal Publications. Although 
dated, this source provides excellent in-depth background/historical 
information on Indian journalsand journalism in various media. An 
updated edition is needed. Well indexed. Arranged by class: 182 8- 
Civil War, Civil War- 1 960, 1 96 1 - 1 978. 



ERIC 



33 



Locating Information on Native Americans 
with Diabetes and Visual Impairments: 
A Pathfinder 



Where do I start? 

Those unfamiliar with the issue of Indian health should see 

Make M v People Live: The Crisis in Indian Health . John 

Mansfield, executive producer. (New York: Time-Life 

Video, 1 984), video cassette. 
This hour-long video focuses on major health concerns of Native 
Americans including alcoholism and diabetes, and illustrates the 
United States Government's failure to provide the Indians with 
adequate health care. 

Another excellent source is 

U. S. Department of Health and Human Services. Trends in 
Indian Health— 1991 . Washington: Government 
Printing Office, 1991. (1991—300-165/50070). 
This government document provides concise statistical information 
regarding health trends in Native Americans for the year, and 
compares these statistics with other population groups. 

How do I find out what sources my library has? 

Begin with the Library of Congress Subject Heading s. 
Information will be indexed under "Indians of North America," with 
numerous sub-headings. The most useful subheadings were "— 
Diseases," "—Health and Hygiene" and "—Medical Care." Be sure to 
check other terms you might think are appropriate. 

Next, go to your library's card or online catalog and search by 
subject, using the Library of Congress Subject Headings. Write 
down call numbers and titles of books that seem appropriate. 

What if my library doesn't have any books on the subject, 
or the books are not on the shelf? 

Try Subject Guide to Books in Print Look under Library of 
Congress Subject Heading terms, and have your librarian arrange 
an inter library loan to allow you to borrow these books from other 
libraries. 



9 

ERJC 



34 

40 



How can I find journal articles on the topic? 



Try searching CD-ROM indexes like ERIC and Med Line . Try 
search terms such as "American Indians" and 'Diabetes" for FRIC . 
and "Indians, North American" and "Diabetes mellitus" for Med Line . 
Remember that search terms vary by index, so be sure to check the 
index's search term list, called a thesaurus. 

Are there sources written for Native Americans with 
diabetes 9 

Yes. Two very good sources are 

U. S. Indian Health Service Diabetes Program. Family 
Food Choices: A Guide to Weight and Diabetes 
Control . Washington: Government Printing Office, 

1989. (1990—776-620/25167). 

U. S. Indian Health Service Diabetes Program. 

Gestational Diabetes: How to Have a Healthy 
Babv . Washington: Government Printing Office, 

1990. (1991—834-188). 

Are there sources for professional health care providers? 

By all means. 

U. S. Indian Health Service. Clinician's Guide to 

Resources . Washington: Government Printing 
Office, 1984. (1985—584-629). 

This source has a comprehensive list of programs and services 
for health care providers. Note especially the Diabetes and Diabetes 
Control Programs listed in the table of contents. Also, the April 1 987 
issue of the Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness is devoted 
exclusively to Native American topics and means of culturally 
appropriate treatment. 



35 

41 



Are there organizations that can help? 

Certainly. Look in the Encyclopedia of Associations under 
"American Indians." You'll find many organizations that can provide 
information or assistance like the "National Indian Health Board", P. 
O. Box 6940, Denver, CO 80206, (303) 270-5598. This organization 
advocates improvement of health conditions for Indians, and seeks 
to inform the public of Indian health concerns. 

IF YOU NEED FURTHER HELP, SEE YOUR LIBRARIAN 



36 

4 



Native Americans and Alcohol Abuse: A Guide to Searching the Literature 

by 

Mike Steckel 

In 1975, among Native Americans, alcohol related deaths were six and one half 
times the national rate, the suicide rate was two and a half times higher than that of the 
general population and even higher among youth, around half of the adult population 
was chemically dependent, and over 50 percent of Native Americans surveyed, "had 
immediate-family problems due to drinking" (Dorris, p.86-7). 

This Pathfinder aims to help the reader understand Native American alcoholism 
in a variety of ways. Sources of information are included for those who are attending 
the National Conference on American Indians and are unfamiliar with the problem and 
would like to know more, as well as for attendees who may be already working with 
Native Americans as health care professionals or researchers and would like to 
expand that knowledge. Topics placing Native American alcoholism within a larger 
context such as the general health status of the Native American population, 
underlying causes, or treatment of the individuals needed inclusion. Treatment was 
especially important since new ideas are developing involving methods growing out of 
the beliefs and lifestyles familiar to Native Americans. 

A strict set of criteria is easily set in place because of the large number of 
materials published on the topic and many different kinds of sources could 
consequently be examined. For the most part, I tried to select sources that were 
produced from the mid-1970s to the present, within the bounds of the United States 
and Canada, and excluded sources devoted to particular tribal groups. People 
searching for this type of more specific literature can still find it easily by following the 
methods and sources outlined below. It is nearly impossible to divide the United 

37 



ERIC 



43 



States from Canada on this topic, so they remain together. This large geographical 
area was important since people from all over the country may be attending in Arizona. 
Another limitation placed on information gathering was availability on the campus of 
The University of Texas at Austin, however, sources chosen may be found in any major 
academic library. 

I began by using the university on-line catalog, UTCAT, to identify specific 
books, as well as which journals had recurring mention of the problem. For books, 
Library of Congress numbers E 98 (or E99 if one is looking for information on specific 
tribes) and Z 1209 are good places to begin browsing. Magazines such as Human 
Organization, Contemporary Drug Problems, and White Cloud also often covered the 
topic. I quickly discovered that it is easier to find sources on Native Americans and 
search for alcoholism or alcohol use as a subcategory within that source than it is to 
find sources primarily on alcoholism and look for material on Native Americans. After 
books and journals gathered from UTCAT, I searched bibliographies, indexes, and 
government documents to fill out areas such as health statistics for the population and 
treatment issues that had not been addressed. 

Conference attendees may be interested in material from Native American's 
own point of view, especially on treatment. This is important because of the high rate 
of failure for treatment programs imposed from the outside the community, and this 
type of information is needed for health care professionals. Literature on Native 
Americans seems to be producing important studies on drinking attitudes among youth 
and intervention needs for treatment and this would be where the conference 
examination of "assistive" or "low-technology" fits into this topic. This is a good trend in 
that it moves from descriptive materials common in mid-1970s and early 1980s to 
more consideration of the roots of the problem, and, ultimately, it is these roots that 
need to be examined and improved. 

38 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Citation Manual: 

Turabian, Kate L. Students Guide for Writing College Papers. Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press, 1976. 



Danky, James P Native American Periodicals and Newspapers 1828 - 1982: 
Bibliography, Publishing Record, and Holdings. Westport, Connecticut: 
Greenwood Press, 1 984 Z 1 209 
A listing of over 1 ,000 newspapers and periodicals about or by Native Americans 
without subject limitations. Two periodicals are listed in the index as being about 
Native American Alcoholism in particular - number 402, Indian Alcohol Times and 
number 926, Shenabe QuaL The former has been since 1981 and the second ran 
from 1979 to 1981 . Both are available from the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 
at Madison and ordering information is in the book. One could try interlibrary loan. 



Dorris, Michael. The Broken Cord. New York: Harper and Row, 1989. RG 629 F45 D67 
A chronology of the author's discovery of the depth of alcoholism within the Native 
American community, specifically Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, through becoming the 
adoptive parent of an FAS child. Chapter 6 (p.77) discusses the general problem of 
alcoholism, specifically within the Lakota community, including a historical account 
and some theories as to why the problem hits native Americans. Chapter 11 (p.171) 
gives some discussion of treatment. There is a very extensive bibliography at the end 
which is highly recommended for those researching this type of problem. Anyone who 
has an interest in the Native American people should read this book. 



Finley, Britt, "Social Network Differences in Alcohol Use and Related Behaviors among 
Indian and Non-Indian Students, Grades 6-12," American Indian Culture and 
Research Journal (special issue on Native American Health), vol. 13, nos. 3-4, 
pp. 33-48. E75 A5124 
A specific article indexed in Sociofile and Sociological Abstracts that explored the 
relationship about the attitudes toward drinking in the two communities. Although the 
article focuses its research on children or young adults, the conclusions drawn about a 
higher tolerance within the Native American community towards drinking or drunken 
behavior are important to know for the tone of the topic as a whole in regards to adults. 

Frazier, Gregory W. The American Indian Index. Denver: Arrowstar Publishing. 1985. 
E 76.2 F7 

A listing of organizations and publications of interest to Native Americans, including a 
list of reservation based Indian Alcoholism programs alphabetical by state (pp.137 - 
144). A good way to find quick information. 

39 



ERLC 



45 



Hass, Marilyn L Indians of North America: Methods and Sources for Library 

Research Hamden, Connecticut: Library Professional Publications, 1983. 
Z 1209 H22 

An introduction to the topic of research in Native American study, including general 
library methods, databases, call numbers, subject headings, classification systems, 
tools for using government documents, and other such "tips." A general bibliography 
of "Indian topics" and books on specific tribes are included at the end. There is not 
much on alcoholism, but it works as a stepping stone to the general topic of Native 
American studies. 

Klein, Barry, T. The Reference Encyclopedia of the American Indian . New York: Todd 
Publications, 1990. 

This is a listing of a wide variety of organizations, centers of information, publications, 
and more on Native American interests. Pages 129- 140 form a chapter called, 
"Native American Centers" that lists organizations providing services for Native 
American communities, including alcoholism treatment. However, those for treating 
alcoholism are not separated out from the rest so all must be skimmed. 

La Fromboise, Teresa D.; Trimble, Joseph E.; Mohatt, Gerald V., "Counseling 
Intervention and American Indian Tradition: An Integrative Approach," 
Counseling Psychologist, October 1990, pp. 628-654. BF 637 C6 C 64 
This article, indexed in Sociofile, Sociological Abstracts, and Social Sciences Index, 
is not specifically on alcoholism, but on mental health counseling in general. The 
authors discuss why "traditional counseling" is not often sought and does not often 
work as being related to cultural differences between counselors, or their methods of 
intervention, and the "norms" of most Native American communities. Essential article 
for the issue of treatment, but not introductory. 

Mail, Patricia, and McDonald, David R. Tulapai to Tokay. New Haven: Hraf Press, 

1980. Z 1209.2 N67M33 
This book is a bibliography on the topic of Native Americans and alcoholism with a 
comprehensive introductory chapter addressing issues of history, suicide, crime, and 
why the problem is so severe and including a literature review. If someone was 
interested in a particular aspect of the problem, there is a subject bibliography at the 
back that is well cross referenced. This book is not, however, particularly up to date. 

Manson, Spero M., et al. Psychosocial Research on American Indian and Alaska 

Native Youth . Westport: Greenwood Press, 1984. Z 1209.2 U5 P78 
A list of Dissertations on many topics, Alcoholism is covered in the index under 
"Alcohol Use" and "Alcoholism Treatment". A good tool for placing the topic within a 
large variety of contexts. Using the index is really the only way to find your way to 
topics of interest, but citations sometimes are only peripherally related. 



40 



46 



Mitchell, Wayne, and Galletti, Marie. Native American Substance Abuse: An 

Anthology of Student Writings. Tempe: Arizona State University, 1972. E 98 
L7 N38 

The Authors of these seven articles are recent graduates of the Arizona State School 
of Social Work. Includes information on Alcohol and Native Americans almost 
exclusively within well researched, easy to read articles that include a separate 
bibliography for each one. It would help to have an index, but as it is, a reader simply 
has to read each article. It is not for beginners. 

O'Brien, Robert and Chafety, Morris. The Encyclopedia of Alcoholism . New York: 

Facts on File, 1991. pp. 28 - 33 HV 5017 E5 
Reference work covering many topics related to ) issue of alcoholism as a whole. 
Excellent, short introductory essay under "American Indians" giving historical 
background, graphs of alcoholism rates by sex and age, tables of mortality rates, death 
rates, attempts at explanations of why rates are so high, ways the Indian Health 
Service is trying to help, and short bibliography at the end. A very good starting point 
for someone newly or casually interested or needing quick and concise facts to form a 
quick overview of the topic. 

Parker, Linda. "The Missing Component in Substance Abuse Prevention Efforts: A 
Native American Example," Contemporary Drug Problems, vol. 17, no 2 
Summer 1990, pp. 251-270. HV 5800 C66 
This article also helps explore why treatment for alcoholism does not usually work for 
Native Americans and tries to establish a new method of intervention. A community 
program that included cultural identity as the foundation for substance abuse 
education helped formulate a different, more positive attitude toward drug use. 
Although this article is focused on young adults, its implications spread to intervention 
at all age levels. 

Sociological Abstracts. San Diego: Sociological Abstracts Inc., 1952 - 
An index for Sociology which has a CD-ROM version called Sociofile. Nonevaluative 
abstracts are listed for sociology as well as for related fields of study. Articles can be 
found by looking up "American Indians" in the Index and reading the titles (there are 
usually 20-25 so they are easily scanned) for those on alcoholism or alcoholism 
related topics. When using Sociofile, a Boolean combination of "American Indians" 
and "Alcoholism" turned up 39 hits on a wide variety of topics that included abstracts. 
Good source for currency and many articles on new and important areas of study such 
as treatment and youth trends. 

Social Sciences Index New York: Wilson, 1974 - 

A quarterly Wilson index of 353 periodicals for the social sciences listed by title and 
subject. Search terms for information related to this topic are "Indians of North 
America" with a sub-heading of either "Alcohol use" or "Alcoholism." More general or 
popular titles than Sociological Abstracts. Good source for related topics such as 
alcoholism among minorities, health and hygiene, suicide, and economic conditions. 

41 



47 



Sorkin, Alan. The Urban American Indian. Toronto: Lexington Books, 1978 
E 98 U 72 S 67 

Economic and social problems for Native Arr ricans who live in urban areas with 
special focus on education, housing and social services, and models of adjustment 
Chapter 4 is entitled "Indian Health and Alcoholism" and begins by discussing how 
difficult it is for Indians to get adequate health care. The section on Alcoholism alone 
is short (pp. 56 - 63), but some useful, general statistics are offered with an extensive 
bibliography. 

Thornton, Russell, et al. The Urbanization of American Indians: A Critical Bibliography. 

Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1982. E 98 U72 T47 
A small book with a large range of inclusion and a presentation style that is generally 
prosaic, placing the articles selected within a framework or an argument. Pages 39 - 
44 discuss literature on "Alcohol Consumption" listing articles the author finds 
important, placing special emphasis on cultural meanings attached to alcohol. 

Unger, Steven. The Destruction of American Indian Families. New York: The 

Association on American Indian Affairs, 1977. E 98 C5 D44 
A series of essays on a wide array of topics including analysis of Federal Programs, 
parent-child relationships, and family life showing the degeneration of Native 
American life in recent times. The fifth essay of the volume (pp. 22 - 29) is entitled, 
"The Drunken Indian': Myths and Realities" and, although short, discusses myths 
about the problem of Alcoholism within the community of Native Americans and how 
the differences between that community and the larger American society often conflict 
in ways that are detrimental to the social image of Native Americans. Underneath the 
words, one can sense that the author is trying to dispel the notion that Native 
Americans are genetically predisposed to alcoholism. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Health Status of Minorities and Low 
Income Groups. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1991. 
HE 20.9302:M66/3/991 
A publication which tries to answer how healthy minority populations are, but gives 
almost no notice to Native Americans. However, the short mention with relation to 
alcohol is very good. Page 251 offers a good statistical overview of a chart (on page 
265) showing a decline in alcoholism mortality during the period 1969-1986, although 
the rates of alcoholism are still over four times as high as the general population. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Indian Health Service Report. 

Indian Health Service. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 

1989. HE20.9402:st8 
Published by the Department of Health and Human Services. This report explains how 
the IHS works to bring tribes together and what programs in various geographic areas 
offer what. Not much on alcoholism, but inclusion places the topic of the pathfinder 
within a larger context and could answer related questions. 



42 



U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. In Focus: Alcohol and Alcoholism 
Audiovisual Guide. Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration - 
Treatment and Prevention Programs. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1980. HE 20.8308: Au 2/2 
Published by the Department of Health and Human Services in 1980, so one cannot 
be sure what is still available. Under the heading "alcoholism" in the subject index, 11 
titles are listed, many only available to Native American communities. Ordering 
information, price, and a summary are also included. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. National Directory of Drug Abuse 
and Alcoholism . Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration - 
Treatment and Prevention Programs. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1990. HE 20.8302:990 
Published by the Department of Health and Human Services, this is a listing of 
treatment and prevention programs broken down by state. Unfortunately, each entry 
must be skimmed along the bottom where specialties are listed to find the "Al" which 
means that particular program specializes in Native American treatment. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Trends in Indian Health. Indian 
Health Service. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1991. 
HE 20.9421 :991 

Published by the Indian Health Service and the Department of Health and Human 
services for the years 1989-1991 . Covers specific programs and other ways Native 
Americans get health care and offers general health statistics, with alcohol statistics 
under the Community Health category. There is a written overview of Indian Health 
Programs and the rest is primarily charts and graphs on a variety of subjects. 

Waddell, Jack O. and Watson, O. Michael American Indian in Urban Society Boston: 

Little, Brown, and Company, 1971 . E 98 S 67 W 3 
This book takes as its starting point the rapid migration of Native Americans into urban 
areas in the 1960s and tries to examine many aspects of the topic. For the purposes of 
this topic, a chapter (pp. 275-311 ) called, "Drinking and Drunkenness among Urban 
Indians" examines possible reasons Native Americans drink, economic factors, 
backgrounds, psychological factors, social factors, conclusions, and a good 
bibliography up to the early 1970s. 



43 



Native Americans and Alcoholism: A Guide to Searching the Literature 

A guide to introducing the topic of Native Americans and alcoholism and to 
strengthening basic knowledge to include research topics, health care, and treatment. 

I don't know much about this topic. Where is a good place to start? 

Dorris, Michael. The Broken Cord. 

A gocd place to begin. Easy to read account of a father whose child has Fetal 
Alcohol Syndrome. He discusses the problem of Native American Alcoholism. 

O'Brien, Robert andChafety, Morris. Tfre Encyclopedia of Alcoholism . 

For a quick discussion of general, introductory facts under the heading 
"American Indians". Particularly good if looking to use this topic as a 
supplement to a related topic. If time doesn't permit reading the book above, 
this is an excellent place to start. 

Mail, Patricia, and McDonald, David R. Tulapai to Tokay. 

This book basically works as an introduction to an in-depth study of the problem 
by serving as a bibliography but it has a good introduction to the topic. 

Hass, Marilyn L. Indians of North America: Methods and Sources for Library 
Research . 

This book also works as an introduction, but is more general in its scope. For 
those researching Native Americans in general or topics related to their 
alcoholism. 

Now I would like the most current information including research. Where 
should I go? 

Social Sciences Index - look under "Indians of North America" 

Published four times a year, this lists many current articles that are usually 
very readable and intended for a general audience. Good for beginners. 

Sociological Abstracts, which is also Sociofile on CD-ROM - look under "American 
Indians" 

Similar to the Index above but much more scholarly and research oriented and 
most issues will have something on the topic. 
Danky, James P. Native American Periodicals and Newspapers 1828 - 1982: 
Bibliography Publishing Record, and Holdings. 

Two periodicals listed here are specifically on Native American alcoholism, but 
many related topics are covered and ordering information is enclosed. 
Mitchell, Wayne, and Galletti, Marie. Native American Substance Abuse: An 
Anthology of Student Writings. 

A scholarly work that is somewhat outdated, but has a lot of good historical 
information and approaches to the study. 

Why is the alcoholism problem so severe in the Native American 
community? 

44 



50 



Currently, this is an unanswerable question, but each of the books below 
studies it, sometimes indirectly, by examining issues such as migration patterns 
to urban areas and the psychology involved in being Native American. Each 
book has its own context for the alcoholism problem. 

Unger, Steven. The Destruction of American Indian Families. 

Thornton, Russell et al. The Urbanization of American Indians: A Critical Bibliography. 

Sorkin, Alan. The Urban American Indian. 

Waddell, Jack O. and Watson, O. Michael. American Indian in Urban Society. 

Are there statistics specifically on the general health of the Native 
American population? 

Yes, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has published the 
following reports and most of the other sources will have information with which 
to compare: 

Health Status of Minorities and Low Income Groups (HE 20.9302: M66/3/991) 
Indian Health Service Report - December 1989 (HE 20.9402:st 8) 
Trends in Indian Health (HE 20.9421 :989) 

Where can I learn about new studies on intervention and treatment 
methods that seem to be working? 

Parker, Linda. "The Missing Component in Substance Abuse Prevention Efforts: A 
Native American Example," Contemporary Drug Problems. Summer 1990, pp. 
251-270. 

La Framboise, Teresa D. ; Trimble, Joseph E. ; Mohatt, Gerald V., "Counseling 
Intervention and American Indian Tradition: An Integrative Approach" 
Counseling Psychologist, October 1990, pp. 628-654 

Finley, Britt, "Social Network Differences in Alcohol Use and Related Behaviors among 
Indian and Non-Indian Students, Grades 6-12," American Indian Culture and 
Research Journal (special issue on Native American Health), vol. 13, nos. 3-4, 
pp. 33-48. 

Are there lists of centers that specialize in alcoholism programs in my 
community? 

Yes, the following books contain information that includes alcohol treatment center 
listings alphabetical by state: 

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Directory of Drug 

Abuse and Alcoholism (HE 20.8302:990), 
Klein, Barry, T. The Reference Encyclopedia of the American Indian . 
Frazier, Gregory W. The American Indian Index. 

45 



Finding Assistive Devices for Disabled Native Americans; 

A Pathfinder 
by 

Coby Condrey 

This pathfinder is an aid to finding resources in library 
collections concerning assistive technology for disabled Native 
Americans. I have divided the search for this topic into two 
areas of sources: those that identify assistive devices for the 
disabled and those that identify sources of financial assistance 
or other services and support for the disabled or for Native 
Americans. The latter sources were selected based on the 
inclusion of information about funding, either distinctly for 
Native Americans or for a more general audience (e.g. handicapped 
individuals, social service workers) . All sources were selected 
based on the regional geographic focus being the United States, 
and on the inclusion of indexes, bibliographies or other tools 
aiding in the use of the source or directing the user to further 
information. I excluded those works that were published before 
1980 and serials that currently have gone out of publication. I 
have attempted to include representative sources of various 
types: books, government publications, periodicals, inaexes to 
periodical literature, on-line databases, and organizations. 

Assistive technology is understood as devices specifically 
designed for use by persons who are blind, deaf, mute or 
mobility-impaired. Sources for information on assistive devices 
can be found in the form of product announcements and reviews in 
educational and scientific periodical literature, as databases of 
commercial product vendors and of information centers sponsored 

46 



by the federal government, and as monographs published by public 
and private interests. In the selection of sources for this area 
there is a focus on aids for daily living needs. The sources 
cited usually address multiple disabilities rather than one 
particular handicap . 

Sources about financial assistance and other support 
generally describe organizations that provide funding to other 
organizations and to individual disabled persons or Native 
Americans, according to the association's mission and goals. 
Limitations of space require citation of fewer actual associa- 
tions than of sources for associations; the associations included 
are but a few which may have funding for special needs or groups. 

In order to locate the needed information, I searched the 
Library of Congress Subject Headings to determine the terms 
utilized by UTCAT (and other on-line public access catalogs) . 
The most important terms are self-help devices for the disabled, 
handicapped and Indians of North America. In the catalog I 
checked under each of these terms for subdivisions such as 
services for, information services, medical care, appropriations , 
and scholarships, fellowships, etc. Other terms I identified as 
somewhat helpful were federal aid to handicapped services, 
grants-in-aid— United States, and rehabilitation . 

I consulted with two social science librarians and a 
rehabilitative education specialist about this topic for further 
ideas on resources. From their recommendations and my inspection 
of the many sources in the libraries at the University of Texas, 

47 



I selected those that provided widest range of appropriate 
information or that gave explicit instructions in finding further 
information . 



48 



Assistive Technology for Native Americans 



Select Bibliography 
Sources Describing Assistive Devices 

ABLEDATA . Newington, CT: Adaptive Equipment Center, Newington 

Children's Hospital, 1988- . Available from BRS Information 
Technologies . 

ABLEDATA is an on-line database containing information 
on rehabilitation products from more than 1,900 companies. 
Products featured can be for personal care, therapeutic, 
sensory, educational, vocational or transportational uses. 
A sample entry contains generic and brand names of products, 
the manufacturer, and the device's availability, cost, 
description, and comments or evaluations. ABLEDATA Fact 
Sheets (product listings by category) are also available by 
mail from the Newington Children's Hospital. Consult with 
the librarian to find out if BRS Information Technologies 
services are available at your institution. 

Veterans Administration. Directory of Living Aids for the 

Disabled Person . Washington, DC: VA Office of Procurement 
and Supply, 19 82. 

A plethora of aids are described in this directory. 
The three major divisions of the work are a list of products 
with descriptions, a list of manufacturers with addresses, 
and a list of products according to state of manufacture. 
The products descriptions are not evaluative, but each entry 
has a subject designated in the margin. For example, "one 
handed writing board" has the designation Communication 
Device. Other subjects include Maintenance, Dressing, 
Mobility, Hygiene, Exercise, Recreation, Eating and Therapy. 

HV 1568 L 86 
Perry Castaneda Library 

Lunt , Suzanne. A Handbook for the Disabled: Ideas and Inventions 
for Easier Living . New York: Scribner's Sons, 1982. 

The Handbook provides information on all types of 
make-it -yourself and order-f rom-manuf acturer assistive 
devices. The final chapter addresses getting government 
money, jobs and basics for making devices oneself. Company 
names and addresses are located in the appendix at the end. 
A large bibliography, classified by disability, is provided. 

HV 1568 L 86 
Perry Castaneda Library 



49 



ERLC 



5ii 



Goiter, Marjorie, comp. The International Directory of Job- 
Oriented Assistive Devices . Marina Del Rey, CA: Lifeboat, 
1983 . 



Three indexes at the beginning of this source list 
devices according to job titles, functions or disabilities. 
The remainder of the work contains job-title entries with 
descriptions of the disability served, the problem in 
executing the job, the solution and how it works, and a 
contact, address and phone number for availability of the 
product . 

HD 7255 G 64 
Perry Castaneda Library 

Indexes to Periodical Literature Covering Assistive Devices 

ERIC (CD-ROM). New York: Si lverplatter , 1966-1981 and 1982- 
1991. 

The Educational Resources Information Center clearing- 
houses accumulate many formats of information in the 
education field for publication in Current Index to Journals 
in Education (Phoenix, Ariz.: Oryx, 1969-) or in Resources 
in Education (Phoenix, Ariz.: Oryx, 1975-). RIE covers 
non-periodical items such as conference proceedings or other 
fugitive materials which do not appear in periodical sources 
indexed by CUE . ERIC provides this information to the 
public, upon request (sometimes there is a small fee) or on 
microfiche in the library. The index uses a system of 
classified search terms which can be found in the Thesaurus 
of ERIC Descriptors (11th ed. Phoenix, AZ : Oryx, 1987.) 
Suggested terms for this topic are assistive devices, 
disabilities , American Indians and grants. This source is 
also available on-line through DIALOG Information Services, 
Inc . 

Reference Room CD-ROM Stations and Microfiche Collection 

Perry Castaneda Library 

Index Medicus . Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 
I960-. 

Index Medicus is published under the auspices of the 
National Library of Medicine and other governmental agencies 
to provide indexing of current medical literature by a 
vocabulary of medical subject headings. Terms indexed 
include handicapped, self holp devices, rehabilitation and 
Indians, North American . It is available on-line as a part 
of the MEDLINE database through DIALOG Information Services, 
Inc., Mead Data Central's NEXIS database, and BRS Informa- 
tion Technologies . 

R 100 C 85849 

Public Affairs Library, Life Science Library 
50 



ERLC 



Periodicals Concerned With Assistive Devices 

AT Quarterly [Assistive Technology Quarterly] / RESNA Technical 
Assistance Project . Washington, DC: RESNA Press, 1990- . 

The Rehabilitation Engineering Society of North America 
(RESNA) produces many informative sources on self help 
devices for the disabled. AT Quarterly includes a special 
column entitled Information Resources in each issue; this 
feature notes innovations in assistive technology, providing 
a brief description and a contact person or agency for the 
product. RESNA also publishes Rehabilitation Technology 
Review , a source which evaluates current self help devices. 

U.S. Government Document No. EDI. 7 9/3: 
Perry Castaneda Government Documents Collection 

NARIC Quarterly: A Newsletter of Disability and Rehabilitation 
Research and Resources . Silver Spring, MD: The National 
Rehabilitation Information Center, 1988- . 

NARIC is a government agency that conducts research in 
the areas of disabilities and rehabilitation and that pro- 
duces numerous information sources for the disabled. NARIC 
Quarterly provides in each issue a column that addresses 
various resources available through NARIC, including 
acquisitions to the NARIC library as well as types of tech- 
nology, computers or databases overseen by the agency. 
NARIC helps produce two on-line databases: REHABDATA , a 
literature index, and AB LED AT A , a consumer products index 
(see entry above) ; the databases are available through BRS 
Information Technologies. 

U.S. Government Document No. EDI. 7 9/2: 
Perry Castaneda Government Documents Collection 

Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development . Washington, 
DC: Veterans Administration, Dept. of Medicine and Surgery, 
Rehabilitation Research and Development Service, 1983- . 
Quarterly . 

Although this source is generally for an audience of 
engineers, it does contain literature abstracts, book 
reviews, and a classified listing of publications of 
interest to the disabled. In the latter, one should check 
under the general and vocational headings and the topics 
prosthetics , sensory aids- -hearing , speech, visual, and 
robotics and independent living. The Journal is indexed by 
Index Medicus (see entry above) . 

RD 130 B 8 
Engineering Library 



51 



y& ' ' BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Exceptional Child Education Resources . Reston, VA: Council for 
Exceptional Children, 1969- . Quarterly. 



ECER abstracts current books and periodicals concerned 
with handicapped and gifted children. Its publisher, the 
Council for Exceptional Children, is a part of ERIC (see 
entry above) , acting as the Clearinghouse on Handicapped and 
Gifted Children. The source is available as an on-line 
database through the Council. The subject index contains 
two important headings: assistive devices (for disabled) 
and sensory aids. 

LC 3969 E 9344 
Perry Castaneda Library Reference 

Sources of Services for Disabled Persons 

United States Department of Education, Office of Special Educa- 
tion and Rehabilitative Services, National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research. Directory of 
National Information Sources on Disabilities . 5th ed. 
Washington, DC: NIDRR, 1991. 

This directory is an extremely important source for 
determining appropriate organizations or individuals which 
provide information, referral or direct services relating to 
disabilities. Organizations are usually national in scope; 
there is an emphasis of information providers over service 
providers. Most entries contain information on the 
disabilities and user groups served, the background and 
goals of the organization, and the information services 
provided . 

U.S. Government Document No. ED 1.3 0/2:D63 
Perry Castaneda Government Documents Collection 

Shrout, Richard Neil. Resource Directory for the Disabled . New 
York: Facts on File, 1991. 

Names and addresses of organizations or services 
concerned with travel, recreation, socialization, employ- 
ment, training and education are included in this directory. 
Publications of interest are noted as well as some appli- 
ances and devices. The work is divided into four major 
areas: General Sources for the Disabled, Resources for the 
Mobility Impaired, Resources for the Visually Impaired, and 
Resources for the Hearing Impaired. There is an index at 
the end of the work with bibliographical references. 

HV 1569.5 S 57 
Perry Castaneda Library Reference 



52 

56 



Organizations and Directories 

on Disabled Persons and Native Americans 

Encyclopedia of Associations . 26th ed. 6 vols. Detroit: Gale 
Research, 1992 . 

An excellent source describing over 30,000 non-profit 
international, national, state and local associations, this 
annual multi-volume work has entries classified in subject 
groups, such as Social Welfare Organizations. Note that the 
"volumes" are in some cases actually as many as three 
separate books. The Name and Keyword Index can be searched 
under Indian, American Indian, Native American, disabled or 
handiccipped . This source is also available on-line from 
DIALOG Information Services, Inc. 

HS 17 G 3 26th 
Perry Castaneda Library Reference 

Research Centers Directory . 16th ed. 2 vols. Detroit: Gale 
Research, 1992 . 

This directory of U.S. and Canadian research centers 
has a subject index with entries listed under Indians 
(American) and Handicapped. The entries are listed by state 
or province and provide the address and organizational focus 
of the facility. Three centers cited in the work that 
conduct research concerning Native Americans and disabi- 
lities are Northern Arizona University's American Indian 
Rehabilitation Research and Training Center, the University 
of South Dakota's Center for Developmental Disabilities, and 
the Assistive Device Center at California State University, 
Sacramento. The RCD appears with a number of other direc- 
tories in the Research Centers and Services Directory , an 
on-line database from DIALOG Information Services, Inc. 

AS 25 D 5 16th 
Perry Castaneda Library Reference 

National Congress of American Indians, 900 Pennsylvania Ave. SE, 
Washington, DC, 20003; (202) 546-9404. 

The NCAI aims to improve the health, education and 
economic conditions of Native Americans through various 
means, including the NCAI Fund (for charitable or 
educational purposes) and through its organizational 
committees (e.g. Health and Housing Committee). 



53 



Native American Community Board, P.O. Box 572, Lake Andes, SD, 
57356-0572; (605) 487-7072. 

The NACB sponsors charitable programs as well as other 
services for children and adults. In addition to education 
and placement services, the organization also runs the 
Native American Women's Health Education Resource Center. 

Information Center for Individuals with Disabilities, Ft. Point 
Place, 27-43 Wormwood St., Boston, MA, 02210; 617-727-5540. 

This information and referral center aids individuals 
with disabilities in finding appropriate resources, agencies 
and facts that encourage an increasingly independent life- 
style. It collects, cross references and stores information 
on many topics, including equipment and personal care, and 
on state , federal , public and private agencies . 

Clearinghouse on Disability Information, U.S. Department of 

Education, Office of Special Education and Rehabilitation 
Services, Switzer Building, Room 3132, Washington, DC, 
20202-2524; 2 02-732-1241. 

The Clearinghouse disseminates information concerning 
federally-funded programs and federal legislative actions 
and their impact on services. It also makes referrals when 
appropriate . 

Other Educational and Health Care Information Sources 

Indian Health Service. A Comprehensive Health Care Program for 
Ameiican Indians and Alaska Natives . Rockville, MD: U.S. 
Dept. of Health & Human Services, Public Health Service, 
Indian Health Service, 1989. 

This booklet describes the Indian Health Service's 
organization, goals, history and accomplishments . It lists 
IHS hospitals, health centers, and administrative offices. 
It also has a map of IHS health facility locations. 

U.S. Government Document No. HE 2 0.9402:Am3 
Perry Castaneda Government Documents Collection 



54 

60 



U.S. Department of Education. Information About the Office of 

Special Education and Rehabilitative Services . Washington, 
DC: Government Printing Office, 1991. 

Three program areas are described in this publication: 
Office of Special Education programs, Rehabilitative 
Services Administration, and the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research. The types of 
services offered are delineated with addresses for further 
information . 

U.S. Government Document No. ED 1.2:In3/13 
Perry Castaneda Government Documents Collection 

Sources for Financial Assistance 

Schlachter, Gail Ann, and R. David Weber. Financial Aid for the 
Disabled and Their Families 1988-1989 . Redwood City, CA: 
Reference Service Press, 1988. 

The types of assistance listed in this work are divided 
according to groups (e.g. developmental disability, visual 
disability, families of the disabled) . Scholarships, 
fellowships, loans, grants, awards and internships are 
documented from national and state sources. There is also 
an annotated bibliography of general financial aids direc- 
tories for further research, as well as numerous indexes 
according to program title, sponsoring agency, geographic 
location, subject, and calendar deadline dates. 

HV 1553 S 34 
Perry Castaneda Library Reference 

Katz, Alfred H., and Knute Martin. A Handbook of Services for 
the Handicapped . Westport , CT: Greenwood, 1982 . 

Two features are of particular interest in this book. 
The third chapter is Financial Aids for the Disabled, which 
can be very helpful in locating and applying for aid. Ap- 
pendices at the end of the work include listings for state 
and for national organizations providing services or advo- 
cacy for the disabled. 

HV 1553 K 37 
Perry Castaneda Library 




Directory of Information Resources for the Handicapped: A Guide 
to Information Resources and Services for the Handicapped , 



Santa Monica, CA: Ready Reference Press, 1980. 



The index to this work has listings for financial 
assistance and funding information. There are six basic 
sections in the work, including advocacy organizations, 
information sources and vendors, federal government 
agencies , professional and trade agencies , f acilit ies and 
schools, and service organizations. 

HV 1553 R 4 
Perry Castaneda Library Reference 

Klein, Barry T. Reference Encyclopedia of the American Indian . 
5th ed. West Nyack, NY: Todd Publishers, 1990. 

Comprehensive listings of tribes and affiliated 
organizations, museum and library collections, Indian health 
services, schools, financial aid and periodicals are 
included in the Reference Encyclopedia. Entries are listed 
alphabetically or alpha-geographically within broad topical 
areas. Each listing gives the address, phone, contact 
person, and a description of the activities of the entry. A 
subject index is included. Look here to find government 
agencies particularly concerned with Native Americans' 
issues, such as the Bureau of Indian Affairs or the Indian 
Health Service. 

E 76.2 K58 

Perry Castaneda Library Reference 



56 



ERLC 



Finding Assistive Devices for 
Disabled Native Americans: A Pathfinder 

Assistive devices are implements that help the disabled lead more 
independent lifestyles. These devices range from door-knob 
extension handles, eating utensils and reachers, to talking ^ books 
and watches, wheelchairs, and safety seats for toilets. This 
pathfinder will assist in finding library sources for assistive 
devices, for reviews of assistive technology, and for identifying 
possible funding resources or supportive organizations. 

How should I begin my search for assistive devices? 

Go to your library's subject catalog and look for books or other 
items under the terms self help devices for the disabled, 
handicapped, and rehabilitation. 

If you are looking for a specific type of device, ask your 
librarian if she or he can search ABLEDATA , an on-line database. 
The database contains generic and brand names of more than 16,000 
assistive devices, their costs, some evaluations, and the names, 
addresses, and telephone numbers of over 1,9 00 companies. 
ABLEDATA is available from BRS, an on-line database vendor. 

How can I find journal articles about assistive devices? 

Look in periodical indexes such as ERIC and Index Medicus . ERIC 
contains Current Index to Journals in Education (Phoenix, AZ : 
Oryx Press), and Resources in Education (Washington, DC: Govern- 
ment Printing Office) . In ERIC check under the term assistive 
devices. Cited articles are on microfiche, if it is available, 
according to the "ED" (ERIC Document) number, or the article may 
be in journals in your library's collection. In Index Medicus 
(Washington, DC: Government Printing Office) use the term self 
help devices. After finding a citation, check the list of 
abbreviations near the beginning of the book to find the full 
name of the journal containing the article. Then check the 
catalog for the journal title and its location in your library. 

What periodicals are there on this topic? 

Two good newsletter- type publications are AT Quarterly (Washing- 
ton, DC: RESNA Press) and NARIC Quarterly (Silver Spring, MD: 
National Rehabilitation Information Center) . They regularly 
discuss assistive devices. Two other periodicals are Journal of 
Rehabilitation Research and Development (Washington, DC: Veter- 
ans ' s Administration) and Exceptional Child Education Resources 
(Reston, VA: Council for Exceptional Children) . The first jour- 
nal lists pertinent publications under the topics prosthetics , 
sensory aids, and robotics and independent living. The second 
journal identifies and summarizes current books and periodicals. 
Check this source under assistive devices (for disabled) and 
sensory aids. 

57 

K3 



What other sourcer are there for the disabled? 



One very important book is the Directory of National Information 
Sources for the Disabled , 5th ed. (Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office, 1991) , produced by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research. It describes organiza- 
tions (such as the National Rehabilitation Information Center) 
and individuals that give information, referral and direct 
services to disabled persons. 

How can I find organizations for 
Native Americans or for the Disabled? 

Look in the Encyclopedia of Associations 1992 (Detroit, MI: Gale 
Research) in the Subject and Keyword Index under the terms 
Indian, American Indian, Native American, disabled and handi- 
capped. Read the entries carefully to find out if the organiza- 
tion provides the type of support you need. Check the Research 
Centers Directory (Detroit, MI: Gale Research, 1992) under the 
terms Indians (American) and handicapped. The centers listed in 
this work may be able to make a referral for you or help you find 
an appropriate organization to help you. 

Are there sources for financial aid? 

Gail Schlachter's Financial Aid for the Disabled and Their Fami- 
lies 1988-89 (Redwood City, CA: Reference Service Press, 1988) is 
a good source for this type of information. Another is Richard 
Shrout's Resource Directory for the Disabled (New York, NY: Facts 
on File, 1991) . To find financial aid sources in the library 
catalog, look for the subheading directories under the subjects 
handicapped- -scholarships , fellowships, etc., assistive devices 
for the disabled, and grant s-in-aid~-United States. You may also 
wish to contact various non-profit organizations about any 
charitable assistance they may provide. 

Where else can I check? 

Look in your telephone directory in the blue pages for national, 
state and local agencies that help the aged, the disabled or 
Native Americans. You may need to scan these pages closely for 
terms such as the Department of Aging, or there may be a commis- 
sion or board that helps the handicapped in your state. Ask your 
librarian if there is a vertical file or other resource (such as 
local area rehabilitation projects or educational offices) that 
the library knows about. 

What if my library doesn't have a book I need? 

Ask your librarian about Inter-Library Service. You may be able 
to borrow the book from another library. 

If you need more help, please ASK A LIBRARIAN 

58 



6* 



REHABILITATION COUNSELORS SERVING ADULT NATIVE AMERICAN AMPUTEES: 

A PATHFINDER 
by 

Linda Parker 

Disabled persons can face obstacles such as the public's 
misunderstanding of their appearance or behavior, poor self- 
concept, and limitations of access and mobility. The amputee 
must also contend with phantom limb pains, and prothesis fit and 
maintenance. Adding to this is the suddenness of most amputee's 
situation, which creates a multitude of physical and 
psychological problems. The adult Native American amputee must 
face the problem of economic survival, since jobs on a 
reservation are limited even for those whole of body. 

This work is designed to be used by a rehabilitation 

v 

counselor to share with and help meet the information needs of 
adult Native American individuals handicapped because of an upper 
of lower body amputation. The branching method of information 
finding which was used can be applied to any type of information 
searching on any subject. 

This pathfinder provides background information on Native 
American culture, to enable the counselor to better serve clients 
of that culture. It provides information to share with the 
amputee and family to assist in providing living and recreational 
needs, and some of the agencies and organizations providing 
information and assistance to handicapped persons. Legal matters 
were not addressed since current and future legislation may 
affect situations in unforseen ways, causing the pathfinder to 
become obselete. 

59 



I began my search with background material to better 
understand the concerns of Native Americans with health issues, 
and the type of information needed by handicapped persons. The 
American Indian Culture and Research Journal / vol. 13 is devoted 
to health issues and provided much insight, as did the book, 
Ordinary Moments -The Disabled Experience . 

I started by using the online catalog system at the 
University of Texas at Austin, and the title-keyword mode under 
amputation and disabled, noting titles of interest and alternate 
subject headings used. I found information of use to amputees 
and counselors under subject headings of HANDICAPPED, WHEELCHAIR, 
and REHABILITATION. Background information on Native Americans 
was found using the search terms Indians of North America. I 
also consulted subject guides such as Health Sciences Information 
Sources and Physical Disability and talked to social workers. 

In choosing among the titles, I tried to use current and 
comprehensive sources. In some cases older material, containing 
low-energy using adaptive strategies for amputees, was preferred. 
This was because much of the newest technology is more expensive, 
and parts and repair services for them may be difficult to obtain 
in a rural area. 

These titles were compiled at The University of Texas at 
Austin, but most should be available at any large academic 
library or through inter-library loan. 



60 



Citations are according to Kate L. Turabians's A Manual for 
Writers of Term Papers » Theses, and Dissertations . 5th ed. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Accent on Info:mation. POB 700, Bloomington, IL 61702. 

Telephone: (309) 378-2961. 
A computerized retrieval system assisting disabled persons and 
therapists in obtaining information on products and how-to 
solutions for assisting disabled persons in a variety of daily 
living tasks. The data base includes references to publications 
and descriptions of equipment with addresses to obtain the 
devices. A small fee is charged and a search is made on the 
requested topic, there is also a Buyer' s Guide which lists 
equipment and manufacturers. A quarterly magazine, Accent on 
Living , contains true stories, articles, and practical 
information for disabled. 

American Amputee Foundation, Inc. POB 55218, Hillcrest Station, 

Little Rock, AR 12225. Telephone: (501) 666-2523. 
Provides supj ort and information to amputees, their families and 
friends, attorneys, physical therapists, and prosthetist by peer 
support, with educational and self-help material. "It offers 
counseling, information and referral, financial aid, 
rehabilitation coordination and hospital visitation." 
Publications include self-help guides, a quarterly newsletter, 
Ability magazine and also has videotapes, and a computerized 
referral system for amputee services nationwide. 

American Indian Culture and Research Journal . Los Angeles: 

University of California, 1974- . 
Contains scholarly articles on topics of interest to Native 
Americans, also reviews books on or by Native Americans. 
Occasionally puts out a special edition devoted to one issue of 
Native American life, such as volume 13, "Contemporary Issues in 
Native American Health", in which three of the articles discuss 
the difficulties of the American Indian amputee and suggest 
information needs to be addressed. Indexed in Sociological 
Abstracts, CUE and available through ERIC on CD-ROM and DIALOG. 

Amputee Shoe and Glove Exchange. Dr. and Mrs. R. E. Wainerdi . 

1635 Warwickshire Drive. Houston, TX. 77077. 
A free service, it maintains a list of amputees and matches up 
opposite side amputees to help them exchange shoes and gloves. 
In matching, the clients age, size, style and side needed are 
recorded/ but mailing the items is left to the amputee. This 
service enables the amputee to network with a peer and also save 
money by sharing shoe or glove costs. 



61 



Banerjee, Sikhar Nath, ed. Rehabilitation Management of 

Amputees . Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1982. 
A guide to all aspects of care, written for the rehabilitation 
counselor, subjects include prevention of amputation, prosthetic 
fitting and stump care, and reintegration into society. It is 
well illustrated with an index. The contributors come from many 
different fields, providing different viewpoints in an overview 
of some problems of amputation adjustment. 

Bishop, Duane S., ed. Behavioral Problems and the Disabled: 
Assessment and Management . Baltimore : Wi lliams and 
Wilkins, 1980. 

Essays and case studies on treating psychological and social 
problems arising from a disability. Written for counselors by 
professionals in the field and offers specific intervention 
strategies. It does have many footnotes but no bibliography. 

Brightman, Alan J., ed. Ordinary Moments-The Disabled 

Experience . Baltimore: University Park Press, 1984. 
Well written personal accounts of life as a disabled person, 
written by the disabled persons. Contains a bibliography of 
books about being disabled. Two of the chapters concern 
amputees . 

Burrus, Jere Gandolf . Wheelchair Maintenance and Repair: A 
Stitch in Time . Austin, TX : Center for Occupational 
Curriculum Development, 1982. 
Complete manual on wheelchair care, written from the disabled 
point of view. Tips on setting up a maintenance schedule, and 
stress points which may give problems are noted. Different 
models are discussed, but the newer types are not covered. 

Confederation of American Indians. Indian Reservations: A State 

and Federal Handbook . Jefferson, NC : McFarland, 1986 . 
Brief coverage of each reservations history, culture, recreation, 
economy, and government. Gives names and addresses for tribal 
leaders and councils, organized by alphabetical order within each 
state, and has an index. A good beginning point for learning 
about life on a particular reservation. 

Croucher, Norman. Outdoor Pursuits for Disabled People . London: 

Disabled Living Foundation, 1981. 
Written by a double amputee skilled at rock climbing and 
mountaineering, this guide offers instructions for adaptations of 
a variety of outdoor activities. Two which might appeal to a 
Native American are rock climbing, and horse back riding. 
Although it does have only U.K. publications listed, the 
techniques can be used in the U.S. and because the author is an 
amputee it gives this book authenticity. 



62 



ERIC 



Friedmann, Lawrence W. The Psychological Rehabilitation of the 

Amputee . Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1978. 
Contains information to better understand the amputee and their 
emotional problems. Chapters represent a broad range of topics, 
such as family acceptance, societies traditional attitudes and 
phantom limb pains. Specific methods to aid the amputee are 
given with additional bibliographies. 

Hafner, Arthur W. , ed. Medical Information Sources: A Referral 

Directory . 6th ed. American Medical Association, 1989. 
Compiled by American Medical Association, it is a compendium of 
associations, organization and agencies providing information and 
services to individuals. It is alphabetical by subject, 
providing the name, address and phone number of sources and 
service providers. It has entries for Amputee Foundation, Native 
American doctors, and a number of other useful organizations. 

Index Medicus . National Library of Medicine. Bethesda, MD: 
National Library of Medicine, 1960 -. monthly-annual 

cumulations. (available online and on CD-Rom from Dialog as 
Medline ) 

Comprehensive index to biomedical literature, current and world- 
wide coverage. Uses a specific terminology, try amputations- 
trauma, but can be accessed using natural language. 

Kernaleguen, Anne. Clothing Designs for the Handicapped . 

Edmonton, Alberta: University of Alberta Press, 1978. 
"Manual designed for the home sewer who can follow directions and 
operate a sewing machine." Shows how to modify patterns and 
clothing, and construct aids for independent living. It has many 
illustrations, a bibliography and best of all, is designed to lay 
flat so that it can be used while at the sewing machine. 

Klein, Barry, ed. Reference Encyclopedia of the American Indian. 

West Nyack, NY: Todd Publications, 1990. 
Comprehensive guide to sources of information about Native _ ' 
Americans. Organizations and associations are listed with names, 
purposes, address, activities, and publications. There is also a 
bibliography of books currently in print about or by Native 
Americans, indexed by alphabetical title and by subject, and a 
biographical section . 

Lowman, Edward W. and Judith Klinger. Aids to Independent 

Living: Self -Help for the Handicapped . New York: McGraw- 
Hill Book Company, 1969. 
A directory of self-help devices and strategies to aid disabled 
in all areas of living, most are low-cost or can be made at home. 
There are bibliographies at the end of each chapter, lists of 
agencies, periodicals, and equipment sources. The authors have 
concentrated on those equipment ( suppliers who can be contacted by 
mail order and are at the lower cost end of the price listings. 



63 

EI COPY AVAILABLE 



Monthly Catalog of United States Publications , U.S. 

Superintendent of Documents. Washington, DC: Goverment 

Printing Office, 1895- . monthly. 
A list of federal publications, from a wide range of agencies, 
and covering a multitude of subjects which are available. 
Bibliographies and guides to services offered by the federal 
goverment are listed, as are many programs. Most of the material 
is very low-cost and some is available free. 

National Easter Seal Society. 70 East Lake Street, Chicago, IL. 
60601. 

Concerned with helping children and adults with disabilities, 
they offer a wide range of services including hospital visits, 
financial aid, rehabilitation aid, and many publications for the 
disabled and rehabilitation personnel. Publications cover topics 
such as awareness, attitudes, disabling conditions, independent 
living, prevention, psychological aspects, recreation and 
camping, some of which are available in Spanish and all at the 
lowest possible cost. There are also custom software systems 
available to aid the professional in vocational, camping and 
recreation and medical rehabilitation topics. 

National Native American Co-Operative . Native American 

Directory . San Carlos, AZ, 1982. 
Although dated, this is an excellent source of addresses and 
information for national Indian organizations, with many of the 
addresses unchanged. It lists Native American run schools and 
media produced by Native Americans for Native Americans. There 
is an excellent craft directory for sales outlets and authentic 
supplies used in traditional crafts, providing potential 
employment opportunities . 

Power, Paul W. and Arthur E. Dell Orto, eds . Role of the Family 
in the Rehabilitat i c n o f t he Physically Disabled. 
Baltimore: University Pa rk Press, 1980. 
Written for counselors to show how to involve and aid the family 
in coping with a disability. Many aspects and type of 
disability, including amputation, are covered. Indexed with a 
bibliography to further readings. 

Sociological Abstracts, Inc. New York: Sociological Abstracts, 

1952- . Frequency varies (available online from DIALOG ) . 
Provides abstracts from journals in sociology and related 
disciplines. The data base does contain items on disabilities, 
as long as the article was written from a sociological aspect of 
the disability. Also indexes material about Native Americans, 
such as the American Indian Research Journal . Some relevant 
search terms are american indian, disability, rehabilitation. 



64 

70 



Strebel, Miriam Bowar and Karen Hodgeman. Adaptations and 
Techniques for the Disabled Homemaker . Rehabilitation 
Monograph No. 710. 5th ed. Minneapolis: Sister Kenny- 
Institute, 1978. 

A collection of techniques and products available to aid disabled 
persons in planning a kitchen, food preparation, and general 
house work. There are many illustrations of persons with a 
variety of handicapping conditions, showing how a disabled person 
can maintain a home. Written from a practical standpoint to aid 
in independent living . 

US Library Of Congress . National Library Service for the Blind 

and Physically Handicapped . Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1985. 
Sources of audiovisual materials about handicapping conditions, 
many free or available for a low cost rental fee. 

U.S. Veterans Administration Hospital. Sex and the Handicapped: 
A Selected Bibliography (1927-1975) . Cleveland, OH: U.S. 
Veterans Administration Hospital, 1975. VA 1.20/2 :Se9 
Mostly print sources concerning conditions which effect sexual 
activities, written for counselors and affected individuals. 
Contains information on amputee and sexuality, also discusses 
drug and alcohol abuse. Small annotated bibliography of films 
available for rent. 



65 

7i 



PATHFINDER 



REHABILITATION COUNSELORS 
SERVING 

ADULT NATIVE AMERICAN AMPUTEE'S 



A guide to locating information which will aid your client, 
and their family in adapting to their condition. 

FIRST. . . 

Find background material 

Search the catalog using subject headings or, if an online 
catalog is available, use the title-keyword search option to find 
information on Native American culture by using terms such as 
Indians of North America , and handicapped, amputee, or 
rehabilitation to obtain titles concerning amputee's. Note the 
call numbers of titles, and browse the shelves around them for 
additional titles . 

Examples of titles you may locate 

Reference Encyclopedia of the American Indian . edited by Barry 
Klein. This work is a guide to Native American organizations, 
and books. It also has biographies of American and Canadian 
Indians . 

Another excellent book, written by disabled persons and edited by 
Alan Brightman, is Ordinary Moments -The Disabled Experience. Two 
of the chapters deal specifically with amputees. 

THEN . . . 

Update your information 

Indexes will provide access to journal articles containing more 
current information . 

Some to try 

Index Medicus , in print, is also available online and on CD-Rom 
as MEDLINE . This provides coverage of periodicals, monographs 
and non-print materials devoted to medical topics, such as 
rehabilitation. Many articles can be found using the terms 
ampu tations-t r auma . 

Sociological Abstracts will provide articles on rehabilitation, 
but with a socioJ.ogist s slant. It will also index journals 
devoted to ethnic studies, such as "American Indian Culture and 
Research Journal". 

66 



EMc BEST COW AVAILABLE 72 



NEXT. . . 

Find Goverment sources — usually low cost!! 

The Monthly Catalog of United States Goverment Publications has a 
Cumulative Index which gives the documents number. Then go to a 
specific Monthly Catalog to find out more about the title and 
whether it suits your needs. If it does, and the library does 
not have it, the librarian can explain how it can be easily 
ordered . 

The bibliography Sex and the Handicapped compiled by the U.S. 
Veterans Administration Hospital is just one example of the many 
publications the goverment provides. 



LAST . . . 

BUT NOT LEAST. . 

Contact National and Local Organizations 

Organizations usually have the most current and lowest cost 
information available. 



National 

American Amputee Foundation, Inc. POB 55218, Little Rock, AR 
72225. (501) 666-2523. 

With chapters in 31 states, the organization provides peer 
support, and many publications and videos to aid the amputee. 

Amputee Shoe and Glove Exchange. Dr. and Mrs. R. E. Wainerdi. 

1635 Warwickshire Drive, Houston, TX 77077. 

Aids the amputee in exchanging unneeded shoes and gloves. 

National Easter Seal Society. 70 East Lake Street, Chicago IL 
60601 

Provides rehabilitation services and has a catalog of 
publications for both the professional and the client. Some items 
are available in Spanish and all are low cost. 

National Native American Cooperative. Native American Directory 
lists a wide range of organizations whose primary focus are 
Native Americans. 

Check the telephone book's yellow pages under rehabilitation 
services to find local chapters of the national organizations, 
along with service providers and organizations in your community. 

IF YOU NEED MORE HELP PLEASE- -ASK THE LIBRARIAN 

67 



73 



A Pathfinder on the Financial Implications 
of the 

Americans With Disabilities Act 
by 

Liisa Sjoblom 

When President Bush signed the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) on July 26, 1990, a 
chapter was completed in the long and difficult struggle for the nearly 43,000,000 Americans who 
suffer from physical or mental disabilities. Considered a landmark piece of civil rights legislation, 
the act seeks to break down the barriers to employment, transportation, public accommodations, 
public services and telecommunications for the disabled. 

A major focus of the ADA is the employment of the disabled, and with the first employment 
provisions going into effect July 26, 1992, many employers are worried about the financial effects 
of providing reasonable accommodation to all current and potential disabled employees. This was 
a concern throughout the three years the ADA was debated. When the act finally goes into effect 
this summer, questions of it's financial implications, particularly in relation to the labor market, 
have yet to be answered. 

This pathfinder is intended for students doing research at the graduate level at the University of 
Texas at Austin. While it can be applied to any number of the social science disciplines, it has 
primarily been developed for students in Rehabilitative Counselling. Students researching this 
topic will want to examine the full text of the ADA, including employer requirements and legal 
definitions, the effect of public policy on the labor market, and, finally, the impact of the ADA on 
employers, employees, and the labor market. Since the financial impact of the ADA, particularly in 
relation to the labor market, is a matter of conjecture and speculation at this point, the search for 
sources on this topic is particularly difficult since no definitive work has been written. Many 
sources were consulted; those subsequently selected were chosen using the following criteria: 

1 . The availability of sources from the General Libraries at the University of Texas at 
Austin. 

2 . The recency of the sources. 

3 . The ease of use of each source. 

4 . Whether or not the sources were pertinent to the topic. 



68 7iJ 



The search for sources began with a thorough investigation of the Monthly Catalog of U.S. 
Government Publications and the Index to Publications of the United States Congress using the 
"Americans with Disabilities Act" as a title-keyword search term. This proved very successful, 
and provided access to key documents essential to the ADA, including it's full text, House and 
Senate reports, committee hearings, and various handbooks intended for employers and the 
disabled. 

After verifying the availability of these government sources I searched UT -CAT Plus, the on- 
line catalog of the General Libraries, to locate materials of two types. I first searched using the 
term the "Americans With Disabilities Act" to determine if any monographs on the ADA were 
available. After successfully locating a few titles, I then searched for items examining the effect of 
public policy on labor markets using the subject headings "labor supply— research", "conflict of 
laws— labor laws and legislation", and "handicapped-employment— United States." I also searched 
the on-line business and academic periodical indexes of UT -CAT Plus using the term the 
"Americans with Disabilities Act." The many journal articles found in this manner, are located 
primarily in the Employee Relations Law Journal, Nations Business, and Personnel Journal. 

Finally, several indexes were chosen to provide access to recent articles appearing in journals 
and periodicals, primarily those with a legal or business slant. Using the "Americans With 
Disabilities Act" as either a title-keyword or subject heading search term, many citations were 
located in the Business Periodicals Index, the General Periodicals Index, the National Newspaper 
Index, and the Public Affairs Information Bulletin. 



69 



Bibliography 



Style Manual 

Turabian, Kate. A Manual for Writers of Term Papers. Theses, and Dissertations . 5th ed. 
Chicago: Univeristy of Chicago, 1987. 



Abraham, Katharine G., and Robert B. McKersie, eds. New Developments in the Labor Market: 
Toward a New Institutional Paradigm . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1990. 

HD5701.3 .N5 1990 (PCL) 

A collection of heavily revised conference papers presented at MIT in June of 1987. Each 
chapter represents the work of a scholar in the field of economics with an emphasis on recent 
developments in the labor market. Comments and discussion are added to each chapter as a 
result of the thoughts of others attending the conference. Reference lists following each 
chapter can be used as bibliographies. Name and subject indexes included. For this 
pathfinder, chapter 10 on government and the labor market would be particularly useful as it 
discusses governmental intervention into the operation of the labor market. 



Americans With Disabilities Act: A Practical and Legal Guide to Impact. Enforcement, and 
Compliance . Washington, D.C.: The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., 1990. 

KF480 .A453 1990 (Law Library) 

A special report giving a comprehensive account of the social, legal and legislative history of 
people with physical and mental disabilities in the United States, and the newly enacted law 
designed to guarantee their civil rights in employment and public accommodations. It acts as a 
general guide to the ADA for the lay reader. Two chapters particularly useful for this topic are 
5, Outlook, and 8, Company Profiles, as there is some discussion of the ADA's financial 
impact. Eight appendices include the text of the ADA, a directory of agencies and 
organizations that provide assistance meeting the ADA requirements, and a comprehensive 
bibliography. 



Bassi, Laurie J., and David L. Crawford, eds. Labor Economics and Public Policy . Research in 
Labor Economics: A Research Annual, ed. Ronald G. Ehrenberg, no. 11. Greenwich, 
Connecticut: Jai Press, Inc., 1990. 

HD4802 .R42 v.l 1 1990 (PCL) 

Eleventh in a series on labor economics research, this is a collection of essays on labor 
economics and public policy written by current scholars in the field. Extensive reference lists 
that follow each essay can be used as bibliographies. The essays Labor Economics and Public 
Policy and Labor Force Participation Among Disabled Persons would be useful for this topic. 
There is no index. 

Business P eriodicals Index . New York: H.W. Wilson, Co., 1958-. (Monthly with quarterly and 
annual cumulations). 

HF5001 .B883 (PCL Ref) 

Accessible by subject only, this is a cumulative index to international English language 
periodicals with all entry arranged in one alphabet. It covers such subject areas as economics 1 , 
personnel administration, and the regulation of industry. Access using the "Americans with 
Disabilities Act" as the primary subject heading. Other useful subject headings are 
"discrimination in employment" and "handicapped-employment." 



ERLC 



70 

76 



Coleman, John J., Disability Discrimination in Employment , Deerfield, Illinois: Clark Boardman 
Callaghan, 1991, 

KF3469 .C65 1991 (Law Library) 

Designed to assist employers in ascertaining potential problems resulting from adherence to the 
ADA, the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and certain specialized federal statutes. It examines 
discrimination laws in all 50 states and the District of Columbia, providing legal cases as 
examples. This is a legal text covering the obligations of employers when providing 
"reasonable accommodation". An index is included. This will provide someone with the legal 
background of anti-discrimination laws across the country. 



Congressional Quarterly Almanac . Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly, Inc., 1 945-. 
(Annual). 

JK1 .C66 (PCL Ref) 

This annual cumulation of CQ Weekly Report, provides an easy to read retrospective 
examination of Congressional legislation for any given year. Very journalistic in style with lots 
of tables. Appendices include voting studies, public laws enacted, and roll call charts. See 
volumes 45 and 46 for extensive treatments of the ADA. Access is by the "Americans with 
Disabilities Act" in the subject index. 



Employee Relations Law Journal . New York: Executive Enterprises Publications Co., 1975-. 

Current PCL 1st Floor (By title) 
Older K5 .M64 

A quarterly legal journal covering employee relations. Abstracted articles are written by 
practicing lawyers. Reference sources identify this particular title as containing frequent, 
lengthy articles on the ADA within the past few years. 



Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
1801 L Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20507 

(202) 663-4900 (Voice) 

(800) 800-3302 (TDD) 

(202) 663-4494 (TDD for 202 area code) 

The EEOC can provide additional information concerning the ADA and its effects on 
employment. By writing or calling, individuals can receive specific information about ADA 
requirements affecting employment in print, large print, Braille, audiotape, and electronic file 
on computer disk. This office will be helpful for locating depository materials not received by 
the General Libraries. They can also assist by informing individuals where to call for other 
related materials on the ADA. 



71 77 



General Periodicals Index (InfoTrac). Foster City, California: Information Access Company, 
1989-. 

CD-ROM (PCL Ref) 

The General Periodicals Index is a CD-ROM indexing source for general periodicals. Topics 
covered include education, literature and art, current events, psychology, humanities, business 
and management, finance and economics, and consumer information. With its natural 
language searching capability, this non-print source is very easy to use for locating current 
materials. Some abstracts are provided Use "Americans with Disabilities Act' 1 as a search 
term, and pay particular attention to the sub-heading of "economic aspects". 



Index to Publications of the United States Congress (CIS Index). Bethesda, Maryland: 
Congressional Information Service, 1970-. (Quarterly with annual cumulation). 

KF49 .C62 (PCL Ref) 

A commercial publication which indexes and analyzes Congressional publications including 
hearings, reports, House and Senate documents, committee prints, treaty documents, and 
special publications. It acts as a legislative history, thus providing the ability to trace a bill 
through Congress. Popular names of bills, laws and reports are given, as well as subject 
matter are included in the abstracts. Again, use the "Americans with Disabilities Act" as a 
subject or tide search term. Many additional access points are available for searching. 



Kiernan, William E. and Robert L. Schalock, eds. Economics. Industry, an t Disability . 
Baltimore, Maryland: Paul H. Brooks Publishing Co., 1989. 

HD7256 .U5E36 1989 (PCL) 

A collection of essays written by professionals in economics, vocational rehabilitation, 
rehabilitation engineering, and other disability-related fields. Written is clear prose, each essay 
ends with a reference list. Full of tables and charts, this monograph also has as extensive 
subject index. For background information on how labor markets are effected by laws and 
legislation see the first section on Economic, Demographic, and Legislative Influences on 
Employment. Scan the remainder essay tides for possible relevancy, and examine the index. 



LEXIS/NEXIS . Dayton, Ohio: Mead Data Central, 1973-. 

PCL Micro Center 

LEXIS/NEXIS is a full-text on-line service covering legal, business, political, patent and 
medical information. Newspapers, journals, wire services, and legal texts are available. 
Through the various "libraries" (i.e. databases) one can access information from hundreds of 
files using boolean search commands. For the ADA, search using the term "Americans with 
Disabilities Act" in any number of these files. Access for UT students is available through the 
PCL Microcenter upon completion of a training session or computer-based tutorial. 



72, 



7 c 



Monthly Catalog of U.S. Government Publications . Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1895-. (Monthly 
with cumulative semi-annual and annual indexes). 

Z1223 .A1S (PCLReO 

The government index for publications available from the GPO. The main section is arranged 
by classification number (SuDocs #) according to issuing agency, but with it variety of indexes 
materials can be located with relative ease. Indexes include; author, title, subject, series/report, 
contract number, stock number and title keyword. For this topic, search the title keyword 
index using the "Americans with Disabilities Act" as the search term. 



Nation's Business . Washington, D.C.: Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America, 
1912-. 

Current PCL 1st Floor 

1979-91 MCFICHE 8054 (1st Floor) 

Older HF1 .N4 (to 1982) (PCL) 

A monthly publication which covers various aspects of business on the national level. Written 
by a publication's staff, articles are easy to read, and aimed at an audience that works within 
the various levels of the business world. This title appears to be particularly useful for current 
awareness of the ADA, as it was found to be the source for a number of articles. 



National Newspaper Index (InfoTrac). Foster City, California: Information Access Company, 
1989-. 

CD-ROM (PCL ReO 

For current information on current events, lifestyle, biographies, sports, economics, consumer 
event, world affairs, public health, business trends, entertainment, and travel contained in 
major national newspapers. Same easy to search techniques as the General Periodicals Index. 
Use "Americans with Disabilities Act" as the major search term again. Many citations were to 
articles and columns concerning the ADA were from the Wall Street Journal, the New York 
Times, the Washington Post, and the Los Angeles Times. 



Personnel Journal . Santa Monica, California: Personnel Journal, Inc., 1922- . 

Current PCL 1st Floor (By title) 
1977-90 MCFICHE 8053 (1st floor) 
Older 658.05 J826 (PCL) 

A monthly publication which covers various aspects of personnel management and personnel 
issues. Written mostly by a publication's staff, each issue includes items from guest 
contributor's involved in business and industry. These easy to read articles presented in a 
pleasing format are summarized in the table of contents. Several items in the past three years 
covering the costs of employing disabled workers specifically discuss the ADA. 



ERLC 



73 

79 



Public Affairs Information Service Bulletin (PAIS) . New York: Public Affairs Information 
Service, 19 15-. (Quarterly). 

JA81 .P826 (PCLRef) 

Considered by many to be the "Readers Guide" of political and social science, this title 
indexes English language periodicals, government documents, pamphlets, reports, and some 
books. Topic coverage includes government, legislation, economics, sociology and political 
science. An alphabetical arrangement for the print version makes this source easy to use. The 
CD-ROM version is more difficult to use in that searching must be done using a controlled 
vocabulary. For the topic at hand, use the "Americans with Disabilities Act" as the search term 
in the print version. 



U.S. Code Annotated . St. Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing Co., 1927-. (General Index 
frequently updated). 

KF62 .A3 (PCL Ref) 

This multi-volume set is a listing of all laws of a general and permanent nature under the 
arrangement of the official code of the laws of the United States with annotations from both 
federal and state courts. It can provide access to the laws of the country in relation to a 
particular subject. To access particular laws, begin with the general index, and treat the 
"Americans with Disabilities Act" as a descriptive heading. This title will be useful if 
clarification of how the new act fits into the United States Code . 



U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 

Americans with Disabilities Handbook . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice and 
the U.S.Equal Opportunity Commission, 1991. 

Y3.Eq2:8Am3 (PCL Docs) 

A weighty publication written in easy to read prose for the purpose of informing and assisting 
people with disabilities, businesses and the affected public on the provisions of the Americans 
With Disabilities Act. Each title of the ADA is covered extensively, and there are 15 separate 
appendices. There are analyses, and interpretive guidance entries for each section of the new 
regulations. Dimensions of all sorts are given as guidelines for physical space requirements. 
Throughout the text are listings of various government offices to contact if questions should 
arise. This is a must read source for anyone interested in the ADA. 



U.S. Department of Justice. Civil Rights Division. Coordination and Review Section. Th? 

Americans with Disabilities Act . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights 
Division, Coordination and Review Section, 1991. 

J1.2:Am3/9(PCL Docs) 

Brief pamphlet on the ADA. This short guide on the major provisions of Public Law 101-336 
includes the address and phone number of the Coordination and Review Section for those 
interested in further information. 



74 8 0 



U.S. Department of Justice. Civil Rights Division. Office on the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
The Americans with Disabilities Act: Questions and Answers . Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, Qvil Rights Division, Office on the Americans with Disabilities Act, 
1991. 

J1.2:Am3/8 (PCL Docs) 

Short pamphlet on frequently asked questions about the ADA including short answers. 
Address and phone number of the Office on the Americans with Disabilities Act included for 
further information on the ADA. 



U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. The Americans with Disabilities Act: Your 
Responsibilities as an Employer . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission, 1991. 

Y3.Eq2:2Am3/3 (PCL Docs) 

A pamphlet explaining the part of the ADA that prohibits job discrimination. Discusses briefly 
"reasonable accommodation". Several addresses and phone numbers given for the various 
government agencies with more information about the ADA. 



U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. The Americans with Disabilities Act: Your 
Rights as an Individual with a Disability . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission, 1991. 

Y3.Eq2:2Am3/4 (PCL Docs) 

A pamphlet explaining the part of the ADA that prohibits job discrimination. Written for the 
disabled employee, it provides a brief summary of the provisions of the ADA. Several 
addresses and phone numbers given for the various government agencies with more 
information about the ADA. 



UT-CAT Plus . On-line Public Access Catalog/Index at University of Texas at Austin 

Catalogstzxch with title keyword for "Americans with Disabilities Act" for materials actually 
on the ADA. For materials about how laws and legislation affect labor markets search under 
the Library of Congress subject headings "labor supply-research", "conflict of laws-labor 
laws and legislation", and "handicapped-employment-United States". 

Academic Periodicals /^ex-search using the same subject headings as used above, as well as 
the ADA title keyword. 

Business Periodicals Index-starch with title keyword for "Americans with Disabilities Act" 
for materials on the ADA. 



81 

75 



WESTLAW. St. Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing Co., 18 80-. 

Law Library 

This is the database version of the legal publications of West Publications and selected printed 
sources of the Bureau of National Affairs and Commerce Clearing House. Access to this full- 
text database is by title, date, court or state citation, opinion, descriptive words, case summary, 
headnote, topic and key number. It provides quick access to materials on the ADA located in 
such titles as the US. Code Annotated and the Federal Register, by either "Americans with 
Disabilities Act" or "Public Law 101-336." Use of this service is limited to law students and 
faculty and librarians at the Law Library thus students not enrolled in the law school must 
speak with a reference librarian. 



«2 

76 



The Americans With Disabilities Act 
(Public Law 101-336) 



This pathfinder is designed to assist those who are interested in locating information about the 
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA). Emphasis is placed on employment and the labor market. 



What exactly is the Americans With Disabilities Act and how did it come into 
being? 

A variety of sources are available to answer these questions, but for the actual text of 
the ADA and any other legislative materials you need to search indexes to government 
publications. Search all using the term "Americans With Disabilities Act." 

Monthly Catalog of U,S. Government Publications . Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1895-. This index, 
published by the U.S. government, provides access to all types of government publications 
including Congressional materials. 

Index to Publications of the United States Congress (CIS Index). Bethesda, Maryland: 
Congressional Information Service, 1970-. A publication that indexes and analyzes 
Congressional publications including hearings, reports, House and Senate documents, 
committee prints, treaty documents, and special publications. All documents are 
summarized. 



Now that I've selected some documents how to I go about finding them? 

Each entry in the^e indexes will provide what is called a SuDocs number. Many 
libraries shelve documents by these numbers. One document found through an index 
search is: 

Americans With Disabilities Act Handbook . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice 
and the U. S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 1991. (Y3.Eq2:8Am3). This must 
read source includes the full text of the new act, extensive explanations of each point, and 
the addresses and phone numbers of primary governmental offices for those who wish to 
obtain more information regarding the ADA. 



I'm more familiar with the ADA now. Are there any books on this topic? 
For materials on the ADA in particular: 

Using your local library's on-line or card catalog, try the title keyword search 
"Americans with Disabilities Act." An example of a useful title is: 

Americans With Disabilities Act: A Practical and Legal Guide to Impact, Enforcement, 
and Compliance . Washington, D.C: The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., 1990. This 
includes a comprehensive bibliography. 




For materials on how laws and legislation affect employment: 



Try the subject headings "labor supply-research", "conflict of laws-labor laws and 
legislation", and "handicapped-employment-United States." An example of a useful 
title is: 

Kiernan, William E. and Robert L. Schalock, eds. Economics, Industry, and Disability . 
Baltimore, Maryland: Paul H. Brooks Publishing Co., 1989. A collection of essays written 
by professionals in economics and disability-related fields. 



What about recent materials? Can I find anything about my topic in periodicals? 

To find out if there have been any articles written about the ADA in the related fields 
of economics, business, and public policy try the following indexes using the subject 
search term "Americans With Disabilities Act." 

Business Periodicals Index . New York: H.W. Wilson, Co., 1958-. 

General Periodical Index (InfoTrac). Foster City, California: Information Access Co., 1989-. 
(CD-ROM). 



National Newspaper Index (InfoTrac). Foster City, California: Information Access Co., 1989-. 
(CD-ROM). 

Public Affairs Information Service Bulletin (PAIS Bulletin). New York: Public Affairs 
Information Service, 191 5-. 



Are there any periodicals in particular that contain materials useful to this topic? 

Recent issues of the following three titles contain many articles pertaining to the ADA. 
Employee Relations Law lournal . New York: Executive Enterprises Publications Co., 1975-. 
Nation's Business. Washington, D.C.: Chamber of Commerce of the United States, 1912-. 
Personnel lournal . Santa Monica, California: Personnel Journal, Inc., 1922- 



For additional information concerning employment issues and the ADA, contact: 

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (202) 663-4900 (Voice) 

1801 L Street, NW (800) 800-3302 (TDD) 

Washington, D.C. 20507 (202) 663-4494 (TDD for 202 area code) 



FOR FURTHER ASSISTANCE, ASK A LIBRARIAN 



ERLC 



78 

*4 



