. DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 395 517 



FL 023 890 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 
JOURNAL CIT 



Bouton, Lawrence F., Ed.; Kachru, Yamuna, Ed. 
Pragmatics and Language Learning, Volume 3. 

Illinois Univ. , Urbana. Div. of English as an 
Int ernat i ona 1 Language . 

92 

242p.; For individual articles or papers, see FL 023 
891-904. 

Collected Works - Serial s (022) 

Pragmatics and Language Learning; v3 1992 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC10 Plus Postage. 

Code Switching (Language); Communicative Competence 
(Languages); Comparative Analysis; Cultural Traits; 
Discourse Analysis; English (Second Language); 
English for Academic Purposes; English for Special 
Purposes; Error Patterns; Interlanguage; 
Interpersonal Communication; Language Patterns; 
Language Research; Latin American Literature; 
Learning Processes; Linguistic Theory; Native 
Speakers; Periodicals; *Pragmatics; Regional 
Dialects; Second Language Learning; *Second 
Languages; Spanish; Spanish Speaking^ Story Telling; 
Swahili; Uncommonly Taught Languages; Written 
Language 

Apologies; Mexico; *Pol i teness ; South Africa 



ABSTRACT 

Monographs on pragmatics and language learning 
include: "Do We All Apologize the Same? — An Empirical Study on the 
Act of Apologizing by Spanish Speakers Learning English" (Montserrat 
Mir); "Conversational Openings in Kiswahili: The Pragmatic 
Performance of Native and Non-Native Speakers" (Alwiya S. Omar); 
"Experimental and Observational Data in the Study of Inter language 
Pragmatics" (Beverly S. Hartford, Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig) ; "The 
Interpretation of Implicature in English by NNS: Does It Come 
Automatically — Without Being Explicitly Taught?" (Lawrence F. 

Bouton); "Linguistic and Pragmatic Competence: Their Relationship in 
the Overall Competence of the Language Learner" (Sheila 
Hof fman-Hicks) ; "Discourse Domains Revisited: Expertise and 
Investment in Conversation" (Shona Whyte); "Politeness Phenomena in 
South African Black English" (Elizabeth de Kadt) ; "Gender and 
Function of Language Use: Quantitative and Qualitative Evidence from 
Japanese" (Sachiko Ide) ; "Seeking a Pedagogical ly Useful 
Understanding of Given-New: An Analysis of Native-Speaker Errors in 
Written Discourse" (Asha Tickoo) ; "The Telling of a Tale: Discourse 
Structure and Tense Use in Learners’ Narratives" (Bardovi-Harlig); 
"Pragmatics of Elusive Languages" (Salikoko S. Mufwene) ; "The 
Pragmatics of Codeswitching in Mexican Political, Literary, and News 
Magazines" (Erica McClure); "Modality as a Strategy in Interaction: 
Epistemic Modality in the Language of Native and Non-Native Speakers 
of English" (Elise Karkainen) ; and "Pragmatics of the Use of Nominals 
in Academic and Professional Genres" (Vijay K. Bhatia). (MSE) 




U.s DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Ottico ot Educational Research and improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
n CENTER (ERIC) 

ttrrhis document has been reproduced as 
\j;eceived from the person or organization 
originating it 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy 






PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 






| TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES | 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 






1‘JWj 

/ ° 

/•v 

/$>/ 

J*Z- 






University of Illinois 



ERiC 



best copy available 




Pragmatics and Language Learning 
Monograph Series 



PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

Pragmatics and Language Learning consists of papers selected each year from those 
presented at the annual conference sponsored by the Division of English as an Inter- 
national Language and the Intensive English Institute at the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign. The general theme of this conference each year is on the inter- 
action of pragmatics (including discourse analysis and conversation analysis) with 
the teaching and/or learning of a second or foreign language (especially English) in 
either formal or informal surroundirgs. Individual papers may be focused on any of 
the following or related topics. 

1. the contribution of pragmatics to our understanding of what we mean by 
communicative competence 

2. research into specific facets of English discourse 

3. contrastive pragmatics 

4. analysis of the discourse patterns found in the language classroom 

The purpose of both the conference and this monograph series is to serve as a forum 
for research into the pragmatics of the language learning process and to encourage 
the interaction of scholars involved in pragmatics and in language pedagogy in a 
common effort to increase the level of communicative competence achieved in the 
language classroom. 



SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION 

Pragmatics and Language Learning is published once each year in the spring. Cop- 
ies can be obtained at a cost of $10.00 each by writing to: 

Editors 

Pragmatics and Language Learning 
DE1L 

University of Illinois 
3070 Foreign Languages Building 
707 South Mathews Avenue 
Urbana, Illinois 61801 
U.S.A. 




3 



Pragmatics 

and 

Language Learning 

Volume 3 
1992 



Editors 

Lawrence F. Bouton and Yamuna Kachru 




Published by 

Division of English as an International Language 
Intensive English Institute 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
Copyright ° 1992 



Pragmatics and Language Learning 

Monograph Series Volume 3 1992 



CONTENTS 

i Introduction 

1 Do We All Apologize the Same? — An Empirical Study on the Act of 
Apologizing by Spanish Speakers Learning English, Montserrat Mir 

20 Conversational Openings in Kiswahili: The Pragmatic Performance of 
Native and Non -native Speakers, Alwiya S . Omar 

33 Experimental and Observational Data in the Study of Interlanguage Prag- 
matics, Beverly S . Hartford and Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig 

53 The Interpretation of Implicature in English by NNS: Does It Come 

Automatically — Without Being Explicitly Taught? Lawrence F. Bouton 

66 Linguistic and Pragmatic Competence: Their Relationship in the Overall 
Competence of the Language Learner,. Sheila Hoffinan-Hicks 

81 Discourse Domains Revisited: Expertise and Investment in Conversation, 
Shona Whyte 

103 Politeness Phenomena in South African Black English, Elizabeth de Kadt 

117 Gender and Function of Language Use: Quantitative and Qualitative 
Evidence from Japanese, Sachiko Ide 

130 Seeking a Pedagogically Useful Understanding of Given-New An 

Analysis of Native-Speaker Errors in Written Discourse, Asha Ttckoo 

144 The Telling of a Tale: Discourse Structure and Tense Use in Learners' 
Narratives, Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig 

162 Pragmatics of Elusive Languages, Salikoko S. Mufwene 

182 The Pragmatics of Codeswitching in Mexican Political, Literary and 
News Magazines, Erica McClure 

197 Modality as a Strategy in Interaction: Epistemic Modality in the Lan- 
guage of Native and Non-native Speakers of English, Elise Kitrkliinen 

217 Pragmatics of the Use of Nominals in Academic and Professional 
Genres, Vijay K. Bhatia 





5 



INTRODUCTION 



Volume 3 of the Pragmatics and Language Learning monograph series be- 
gins with two papers comparing speech acts in English with those of others cultures. 
First, Mir, in "Do We All Apologize the Same? - an Empirical Study on the Act of 
Apologizing by Spanish Speakers Learning English," looks at apologies as they are 
performed by speakers of peninsular Spanish and American English. Citing the 
work of Owen, Blum-Kulka, Olshtain, Cohen, and Trosberg as the basis for her 
own, Mir sets out to answer two main questions: 1) whether the apology strategies 
used by the native speakers of these two languages are culture-specific or whether 
they are common to speakers of both languages and are governed instead by the situ- 
ation in which an apology might occur, and 2) whether native speakers of Spanish 
tend to intensify English apologies more than the American NS do. In the process, 
she also attempts to discover to what extent the pragmatic competence associated 
with the native language of a second language learner interferes with that person's 
developing pragmatic competence in the target language. Her conclusions: that the 
specific apology strategies that occur in different circumstances and the frequency 
with which they are used tend to be language specific, but that certain contextual 
factors such as the age of the victim and the severity of the offense tend to affect the 
apologies in the same way in both cultures, thus suggesting that some facets of 
apology are cross-cultural if not universal. All of this, she argues effectively, means 
that more attention needs to be paid to the details of the context within which com- 
munication takes place as we prepare students to communicate in a second language. 

Omar also demonstrates the impact of the language learner’s native pragmatic 
competence on his/her second language use. In her paper, "Conversational Open- 
ings in Kiswahili: The Pragmatic Performance of Native and Non-native," Omar 
notes significant differences between conversation openers in Kiswahili and in 
American English, especially in the number and types of turns devoted to the proc- 
ess, the speed with which those turns are "recycled," and how the relative age of the 
participants affects the role of each. Using various examples, Omar notes the types 
of pragmatic failure found in the attempts by American English speakers to take part 
in Kiswahili conversation openings, suggests that the skills needed to overcome 
these failures seem to develop in essentially the same order from one learner to 
another, she also notes that truly native-like proficiency was achieved only by those 
of her subjects who had had "some exposure to the target language environment." 

Hartford and Bardovi-Harlig's "Experimental and Observational Data in the 
Study of Interlanguage Pragmatics" makes an important contribution to the continu- 
ing discussion of the relative merits of various research devices employed by those 
working in pragmatics. They compare data collected from actual face-to-face inter- 
actions between advisors and advisees concerning course schedules for an upcoming 
semester with similar data collected using a discourse completion task (DCT) like 
that employed by Blum-Kulka, et al., in the well known CCSARP project. Their 
conclusions are balanced and significant: 1) for a number of reasons, the DCT elic- 



II 



Introduction 



its a narrower range of semantic formulas, with some formulas occurring in the face- 
to-face data that do not appear at all in the DCT data; 2) these differences in the data 
can be explained by differences in the tasks imposed by the different elicitation tech- 
niques and the contexts in which they are used; and 3) in spite of the deviations of 
DCT data from that found in natural conversation, when used together these two 
devices complement each other, with each providing valuable information that the 
other cannot. 

Bouton’s paper, "The Interpretation of Implicature in English by NNS: Does 
It Come Automatically - Without Being Explicitly Taught, " is a report on another 
phase of his investigation of the relative ability of NNS to interpret implicature as 
American NS do. This time, Bouton compares the ability of NNS to interpret 
implicatures when they first arrived in the United States in 1986 with the ability 
demonstrated by 30 of those same NNS 4 1/2 years later. The results show that, 
while there are still some differences between the interpretation of the NNS and 
those of American NS, those differences were no longer systematic. No specific 
type of implicature that was a problem for the NNS in 1986 was still a problem for 
those subjects in 1992. The difficulties that the NNS did experience were related to 
isolated bits of cultural information that were necessary in order for someone to 
interpret the specific implicature apj ■< "priately - information that the American NS 
understood but the NNS apparently did not. 

Hoffman-Hicks, "Linguistic and Pragmatic Competence: Their Relationship 
in the Overall Competence of the Language Learner," investigates the extent to 
which linguistic competence in a foreign language is necessary to and sufficient for 
the development of pragmatic competence in that language. The target language in 
her study is French and the subjects are advanced language learners preparing for 
study abroad. The author uses a DCT and a multiple choice questionnaire as her 
measures of pragmatic competence. The relative success of the subjects on these 
measures was compared with their success on a test of their linguistic proficiency. 
The author’s conclusions: linguistic competence is necessary but not sufficient for 
the development of pragmatic competence. However, she also notes "the crucial 
need for the development of new means of measurement and comparison of these 
disparate types of data." Only when we better understand the relationship between 
these two types of competence, the author concludes, will we "arrive at a more 
complete picture of what it means to know a language and [be able to] better prepare 
our students for this challenging task. " 

Whyte's "Domains Revisited: Expertise and Investment in Conversation" 
compares the concepts schema and discourse domain with regard to their elaborat- 
eness, stability, importance to the speaker and their use and development within a 
conversation. Her purpose is to reexamine the discourse domain through a careful 
analysis of segments of two conversations - one between an American and a French 
student and the other between a British student with that same French student. The 
result is an interesting description of factors contributing to a speaker's discourse 



Introduction 



III 



domain in any particular conversation. Furthermore, Whyte shows clearly that in 
spite of the relative strength and stability of a discourse domain over time, its ex- 
pression in any particular interaction can be affected by the speaker's assessment of 
the hearer's knowledge and the personal investment in the topic area manifested by 
the hearer. 

Politeness is the focus of the next two papers. The first of these, by deKadt, 
investigates the relative directness of requests in Zulu, South African English, and 
Zulu English, using the methodology of the CCSARP project. She finds that in 
both Zulu and Zulu English pervasively used request forms are much more direct 
than those of English. This suggests a transfer of request strategies from Zulu, but 
more important, it seems also to cast doubt on the link between indirectness and 
politeness postulated by Brown and Levinson. In this respect, she argues that "one 
cannot adequately analyze politeness in terms of a single request, abstracted from 
the context of the conversation. Rather, politeness seems to be negotiated primarily 
by means of the non-verbal dimensions of the interaction. . .which create a context of 
politeness within which a direct request may well lose the implication of low polite- 
ness it could have according to a theory of politeness based on individual utter- 
ances." 

The second article focusing on politeness is that of Ide, "Gender and Function 
of Language Use: Quantitative and Qualitative Evidence from Japanese. " The first 
part of this paper presents quantitative data that permits Ide to compare the percep- 
tions of Japanese male and female subjects concerning 1) the relative politeness of 
specific honorific forms, 2) the degree of politeness due to various interlocutors, 
and 3) the specific form that would be used by each subject in interacting with each 
of those interlocutors. From this data, she argues that the reason that Japanese 
women employ language with a higher politeness level than that of men can be 
explained as follows: "since women are more frequently engaged in interactions 
which call for higher linguistic forms, they end up using higher linguistic forms 
frequently. It is a general tendency that the frequent use of some linguistic forms 
will gradually exhaust their politeness value. Women’s lower assessment of polite- 
ness level can be considered to be such a case. " Futhermore, Ide points out, the type 
of politeness represented by the assignment of honorific forms to a particular con- 
versation "is mainly a matter of conforming to the social conventions for the choice 
of linguistic forms... a passive and automatic choice imposed on the speaker by so- 
cial norms. " Ide then turns to a second type of politeness - that involving strategies 
performed according to "the speaker’s active and intentional choice" and designed 
"to save the faces of the interactants." The strategies designed to save the speaker's 
own face, Ide calls discernment; those that save the face of the audience she labels 
deference. Both of these sets of strategies are part of the politer language of the 
Japanese woman, she argues. But that language is not, she concludes, "the language 
of a powerless class." Rather, "the function of demeanor certainly outweighs the 
function of deference, and demeanor is inevitably associated with the speaker's 
prestigious status. " 



O 




8 



iv 



Introduction 



Tickoo's paper, "Seeking a Pedagogically Useful Understanding of Given- 
New: an Analysis of Native Speaker Error in Written Discourse, " directs our atten- 
tion to a common problem of the composition instructor - how to explain to unso- 
phisticated writers why their work lacks the cohesion that is expected of it in an 
academic context. Such an explanation, she says, lies in an understanding of how 
given-new information must be organized in the autonomous, decontextualized 
context involved in academic writing. But to be useful in this respect, Tickoo ar- 
gues, our present understanding of the given-new relationship must be enriched. 
She then introduces us to two new constraints on the given-new organization and 
demonstrates that these are subtle enough to explain weaknesses in two student 
papers and yet simple and specific enough to give direction to the student writers as 
they prepare their next drafts. 

Bardovi-Harlig, in "The Telling of a Tale: Discourse Structure and Tense 
Use in Learner's Narratives, " looks at another aspect of interlanguage that seems to 
be affected by discourse structure - the choice of verb tense and aspect. Building on 
somewhat contradictory findings in the work of Kumpf (1984), Flashner (1989) and 
Givon (1982), Bardovi-Harlig expands the number of subjects and finds that ap- 
proximately half of them tend to let their choice of verb tense and aspect be affected 
by the discourse structure of their narratives and half do not: with these latter sub- 
jects the frequency with which they used the past tense appropriately was consistent 
(approximately 56% of the time) whether relating foreground or background ele- 
ments of the narrative. The other subjects used both tenses and aspect to distinguish 
foreground from background. Nor can membership in these two groups of learners 
be predicted on the basis of their native languages. 

Then Bardovi-Harlig goes on to make one more interesting point. Noting that 
Shuman (1987) finds that very lew level language learners use neither tense nor 
aspect to make semantic distinctions - and that native English speakers tend not to 
rely on either tense or aspect to distinguish foreground from background, she argues 
that the intermediate speakers who do use tense and aspect in this way have learned 
a device for making that distinction that they will have to unlearn later. Perhaps, she 
suggests, it is because of the language learners "newly developing, and therefore 
limited, linguistic resources" that some of them use tense and aspect as a discourse 
marker in this way, and that only as they approach near native competence in the 
language will they cease doing so and turn instead to those markers that are used by 
the natives themselves. 

Mufwene's "Pragmatics of Elusive Languages, " stands by itself. At the onset, 
the author raises the question of whether this paper should be in a volume focused on 
pragmatics at all, since it does not "discuss aspects of what has been commonly 
characterized as 'language use' relative either to context or to the psychological 
dispostion of the speaker. " But he quickly affirms that it should be. One can im- 
pose such a criterion as a definition of pragmatics, he argues, only if one assumes 
that the identity of the code is generally unequivocal. "And one of the points of this 



Introduction 



v 



paper is that there are several cases where the code is not clearly identifiable." 

The central question that Mufwene raises in this paper is how one determines 
when a speaker of Gullah is using English and when he is using the creole, since 
neither the structures nor the lexicon employed at any particular moment can be 
identified as belonging 100% to one or the other. "Does the fact that African 
Americans who are sterotypically associated with AAEV or Gullah communicate 
among themselves necessarily predetermine their discourse chunks as AAEV or 
Gullah? Does the fact of using forms and constructions that are English-like neces- 
sarily make one's speech acts less AAEV or Gullah?" Every speaker of Gullah 
varies the pronunciation, structures and lexicon that he uses - sometimes, perhaps, 
as an "act of identity," yet sometimes, Mufwene argues, those adjustments can be 
seen only as a means of accommodating the listeners, of making sure that they can 
understand what is being said. Furthermore, since these same kinds of adjustments 
are made by speakers of more standard varieties of English, varieties that need not 
be associated with linguistic change, there is no reason to assume that the adjust- 
ments of Gullah speakers are necessarily change oriented at any particular instance. 
Instead, Mufwene would say that the language of each of these speakers is a variety 
of English, or at least that there is no systematic method of determining exactly 
when a speaker is speaking English and when the creole. Speakers of Gullah, then, 
cannot be said to be codeswitching when they use a variety of forms because they are 
not moving between two languages; rather, like speakers of more standard dialects, 
they are taking advantage of the range of expressions available to them to use for 
identity, for clarity, or for any other purpose. And it is in this linking of choice of 
form to nonlinguistic context that this paper, like the others in this volume, contrib- 
utes to the enrichment of our understanding of pragmatics and its applications to 
language and language learning. 

McClure's "The Pragmatics of Codeswitching in Mexican Political, Liter- 
ary and News Magazines" compares codeswitching in the written medium of the 
Mexican mag azin es with that in the oral communication among Chicanos within the 
United States. The data supporting her description of the Mexican magazines was 
taken from the 1989 and 1990 issues of 5 different publications and included 535 
codeswitches altogether. The description of the Chicano oral codeswitching comes 
from earlier work by Valdes (1990). After first describing Mexican attitudes toward 
the United States that she believes contribute to the various functions of codeswitch- 
ing in the Mexican magazines, McClure goes on to describe and illustrate some 10 
of those functions and explains why they are different from those of the Chicano oral 
language when they are. Some of the factors that she sees as producing the differ- 
ences she finds are (1) the difference in the medium of expression, (2) the attitude in 
Mexico toward the type of codeswitching used by the Chicano, (3) the relative 
status of English and Spanish in the two countries. In short, McClure finds that 
"The ambivalence toward both the U.S. and its language is reflected in its use in the 
Mexican press. Not only is it employed to evoke a more precise image than a Span- 
ish word or phase, but also to create a sophisticated or erudite tone. . .and in satirical, 



vi 



Introduction 



ironic or sarcastic attacks on American politics and American values." 

The next to the last article in this volume, Karkkainen's "Modality as a Strat- 
egy in Interaction: Epistemic Modality in the Language of Native and Non-Native 
Speakers of English" demonstrates nicely the pragmatic function of different types 
of modals, the difficulty that some of these cause for Finnish NNS, and their poten- 
tial unteachability because their function is implicit and difficult to define clearly. 
The data that the author uses to arrive at these conclusions comes from a study 
conducted between 1985-88 at the University of Oulu, which had as its central focus 
the semantic system of modality from the point of view of discourse analysis and 
pragmatics. Since much of the data grew from cross cultural interactions between 
Finnish speaking and English speaking subjects, the extension of the study into the 
investigation represented by this paper was natural. The review of previous work on 
modals, the authors extension of our understanding of modals to their off-the-record 
politeness function, and the impact of what she has found on the teaching of English 
to Finns and other NNS will prove valuable to anyone involved in the teaching NNS 
to use English effectively. 

The last paper in this volume is "Pragmatics of the Use of Nominals in Aca- 
demic and Professional Genres" by Bhatia and provides an analysis of three different 
types of complex nominal expression, each of which is associated with particular 
genres of written English. Complex nominal phrases (after Quirk et al, 1982), 
Bhatia shows to be particularly common in advertising; nominal compounds , in aca- 
demic and scientific writing; and nominalizations , in legal documents. Each of 
these types of complex noun phrase has its own structure and function and it is the 
latter that makes each particularly useful in the genre of which it seems to be a de- 
finitive characteristic. Because of this melding of form and function in these (and 
one assumes other) genres of written English, Bhatia argues that those who want to 
learn to write and read one or another of them should focus on the particular genre 
in question rather than on what he has shown to be the get eral and rather amor- 
phous area of written English . "This," Bhatia says, "will make [the learner] better 
aware of the rationale of the text-genres that he is required to read and write... to 
become sensitive to the conventions in order to ensure [the text's] pragmatic success 
in the academic or the professional context in which it is likely to be used." 

LFB 



11 



0 

ERIC 



PngflNtks and Lanfutf* Lttrniaf 
Mooofnph Series, Vol. 3, 1992 

Do We All Apologize the Same? — An Empirical Study on the 
Act of Apologizing by Spanish Speakers Learning English 

Montserrat Mir 

The present study examines the production of English apology 
strategies by Spanish speakers learning English. Based on the pioneer- 
ing treatment of the remedial interchange given by Erving Goffman 
(1971), this study analyzes the nature of the remedial move in native 
and non-native social interactions. In order to restore harmony when- 
ever an offensive act has been committed, remedial interchanges are 
performed according to the rules of speaking (Wolfson, 1989) and so- 
cial norms of the speech community. Therefore, different cultural pat- 
terns in the act of apologizing will be reflected in the use of different 
apology strategies and their intensification during remedial work. 

An oral elicitation technique was employed in this study. The 
variables, i.e. , degree of severity of the offense, age of interactants, and 
degree of familiarity between interactants, were systematically varied in 
order to observe their effect on the apologies elicited. The results ob- 
tained reveal interesting cultural dissimilarities between the Peninsular 
Spanish apology system and the American English one and the subse- 
quent transfer strategies of native rules of speaking to the target lan- 
guage during the act of apologizing. Also, the data show different de- 
grees of intensification between native and non-native responses. 

INTRODUCTION 

According to Goffman (1971), negative rites occur when there is an infraction 
of a social rule. These infractions are offensive acts in which two interactants or 
more (the offender and one or more offended) are involved in a threatening situation 
which must be resolved. A remedial interchange is then required to reestablish 
social harmony. The remedial interchange consists of a dialogue in which the of- 
fender provides excuses and accounts for his offense and the offended shows some 
sign of acceptance and sonetimes appreciation for the offender’s corrective behav- 
ior. 1 

Since remedial interchanges are the result of a violation of a social rule, their 
performance will be affected by the social rules that characterize the speech commu- 
nity in question. The individual’s awareness of any given social rule is crucial in 
order to provide the appropriate interchange. Since social norms are perceived 
diversely by different groups of individuals, they are also responded to differently. 
"The situation of the offender must therefore be considered, the world he is in, and 
it is considered, implicitly if not explicitly” (Goffman, 1971: 102). There are some 
social norms that are accepted by the great majority of social groups regardless of 
cultural, educational or language background. As accepted norms, tneir violation in 



3 



l 



12 



2 



MonUerrat Mir 



any context whatsoever, implies some sort of remedial work. For example, hitting 
someone in the face is generally perceived as an offense and the victim expects some 
excuse. However, social norms also vary according to the culture to which they are 
related. For instance, in a Spanish context kissing as a greeting device between 
young acquainted people is usual and commonly expected, but, in the North Ameri- 
can context, this action may be conceived as an offense between interactants because 
of the invasion of personal territory and violation of privacy that this gesture repre- 
sents. Similarly, failure to kiss in Spain may also cause offense under specific cir- 
cumstances. Goffman observed individual differences in the perception of social 
norms depending on the context of the situation. Therefore, the same situation may 
trigger different reactions according to the individuals* perception of social norms. 
On the other hand, a whole social group may agree on the nature of a set of norms, 
although this description may vary cross-cultural ly. 

Wolfson (1989) talks about "sociolinguistic rules" or "rules of speaking" 2 
which she defines as "patterns and conventions of language behavior" (p. 14). These 
rules of speaking are understood as part of the communicative competence which 
differentiates members of one speech community 3 from members of another. Such 
rules are "culture specific" and "unconsciously held" (Wolfson, 1983, 1989) which 
means that, although native speakers are perfectly competent in the uses and inter- 
pretation of their rules, they are not aware of "the patterned nature of their own 
speech behavior" (Wolfson, 1989, p. 37). According to Wolfson, native speakers are 
always attentive to the correctness and appropriateness of the language production of 
their interlocutors in order to respond to possible deviations in the most reasonable 
way under the circumstances. However, they are unable to explain the nature of their 
own rules ot speaking which makes it extremely difficult for non-native speakers 
when they are blamed, without explanation, for their inappropriate or incorrect 
speech behavior. 

Nevertheless, native speakers are able to recognize when a sociolinguistic rule 
has been broken and what they think should be done; they are able to express the 
norms of their own speech communities. But, these norms are ideal conventions of 
human behavior, very far from actual behavior, which is based on the rules of speak- 
ing that guide a human being’s language production and interpretation. However, 
the main problem lies in the way non-native speakers are able to conform to the rules 
that guide the target language behavior: "If learners are to be able to interpret and 
conform to the rules, they will need instruction based on how people actually speak 
in their everyday interactions, not about how they think they speak" (Wolfson, 1989, 
p. 63). Therefore, a more systematic analytic study of everyday spontaneous interac- 
tions is necessary to discover the rules of speaking defining a particular speech 
community and the norms to which the speakers always refer to base their own 
behavior. 

Owen (1980) examined apologies on actually occurring speech and suggested 
that the appropriateness of strategies in the act of apologizing will depend on fea- 
tures of the offense and on cultural criteria. Owen offered the distinction between 
merely ritual moves, which she considers the most common in remedial inter- 
changes, and substantive moves (<*.g., repair ^apjage, provide compensation) and 



Do We AH Apologize the Same? 



3 



pointed out that different cultures may consider substantive or ritual apology strate- 
gies differently. Several researchers followed Owen’s suggestions and developed the 
Cross-Cultural Speech Act Realization Project (CCSRAP) which looked at apolo- 
gies and requests in eight languages (Australian English, American English, British 
English, Canadian French, Danish, German, Hebrew and Russian). For each lan- 
guage, data were collected from both' native and non-native speakers using a dis- 
course completion test as the elicitation procedure. This project concluded that 
social variables such as distance, power, and age may be considered as potential 
candidates for universality which may affect the type of speech act performed. Fur- 
thermore, the distributive comparison of realization patterns revealed rich cross- 
cultural variability (Blum-Kulka and Olshtain, 1984). 

In order to investigate how First language norms interfered with second lan- 
guage learners ability to perform appropriate speech acts in the target language, 
Cohen and Olshtain (1981), Olshtain and Cohen (1983), and Olshtain (1983) com- 
pared native and non-native apologies in Hebrew and English. Some data were col- 
lected following a carefully controlled elicitation procedure in which subjects were 
asked to role-play their reactions to a variety of situations. Each offensive action was 
graded in terms of severity of the offense and the social status of their interlocutors. 
The results showed that native speakers* choices of apology formulas were highly 
patterned and that the most common strategies used were expression of an apology 
(e.g., Tm sorry") and expression of responsibility. Other strategies such as expla- 
nation, offer of repair, and promise of forbearance were used depending on the 
degree of severity of the offense and the interlocutors* social status. Based on data 
from discourse completion questionnaires, it was found that speakers of American 
English apologized much more frequently than Hebrew- speaking Israelis. The non- 
native responses were discussed as follows. First, there were cases where non-na- 
tives used a semantic formula considerably less than native English speakers did. 
Second, the lack of non-natives* grammatical competence in the target language ex- 
plained cases where the frequency of use of semantic formulas by native English and 
Hebrew speakers seemed similar and yet non-natives tended to use these formulas 
less. Third, there were cases when non-natives responded like native English speak- 
ers even when Hebrew speakers responded quite differently in Hebrew. 

On the basis of the studies briefly outlined above, the present study examines 
the possibility that there are some cultural differences in the use of apologies by 
Spanish and American speakers, which would indicate different rules of speaking 
for both communities. Also, an examination of non-native speakers’ production of 
English apologies will tell us to what extent non-native speakers transfer their own 
rules of speaking into the target language. In order to conclude that Spanish and 
English speakers have different apology systems, one needs to investigate to what 
extent contextual factors influence the speakers* production of apology strategies, 
their use and intensity in their native and non-native languages. Therefore, two 
specific objectives of this study are to discover whether - and if so, to what extent: 

1 . the use of apology strategies is language specific and/or situation specific 

2. non-native speakers tend to intensify English apologies more than native 
speakers. 



14 



4 



Montserrat Mir 



PROCEDURE 



Subjects 

Two groups of informants participated in this study: 29 native speakers of 
English from the U.S. and 29 native Peninsular Spanish speakers learning English. 
The American speakers were all students at the University of Illinois at Urbana- 
Champaign or at Parkland College in Champaign, Illinois. Their ages were between 
18-37 (Mean. 23.5, Mode: 19). There were 22 females and 7 males. The native 
Spanish speakers were taking an intensive English course at the North American 
Language Institute in Barcelona, Spain. All of them were students at that moment, 
but they came from very different professional fields. Some of them were still in 
high school, others were in the university and others were already professionals 
(teachers, doctors, and so forth). Their ages ranged from 15 to 40 years (Mean: 
21.6, Mode: 16, 24). There were 21 females and 8 males. These 29 subjects served 
as informants for the native Spanish responses as well as for the second language re- 
sponses. All the subjects volunteered to participate in the study. 

In order to assess the subjects’ second language linguistic proficiency, the 
English Placement Test used in the University of Illinois was administered to the 
Spanish subjects. The mean score obtained was 76.3 (N: 25, Range: 64-88, Mode: 
70, 74, 76) which corresponds to an intermediate level of proficiency according to 
the standards followed in the English Institute at the University of Illinois. 4 

Elicitation Material and Elicitation Technique 

In order to ensure cross-cultural comparability, a controlled elicitation proce- 
dure was employed to obtain relevant data. The chosen instrument was a role-play 
exercise originally developed for comparing the speech act realization patterns of 
native and non-native speakers and learners (Cohen and Olshtain, 1981, Olshtain 
and Cohen, 1983). The test consisted of a set of eight situations, all of which in- 
cluded an offensive action. 5 All the situations were placed in different contexts, and 
they each presented a different type of offense characterized by the following differ- 
ent social variables: 

1. degree of severity of the offense: severe vs. non-severe 

2. degree of familiarity between interactants: familiar vs. non-familiar 

3. age of the offended: young vs. old. 

A combination of these three variables led to the configuration of the eight 
situations used in the study. Here follows a brief description of each of the situations 
and the variables represented in them: 6 

1. Severe-Familiar-Young: Your friend places his glasses on the couch and 
without noticing, you sit on his glasses bending them very badly. 

2. Severe-Familiar-Old : You are on the bus with the lady of the house where 

Vo 



Do We AU Apologize the Same? 



5 



you are staying during your stay in the U.S. You two have become very 
good friends. Your shopping bag, that was on the luggage rack in the bus, 
falls down and breaks the lady’s glasses into pieces. 

3. Severe-Unfamiliar-Young : Backing out of a parking place, you run into the 
side of another car driven by a young driver unknown to you. 

4. Severe-Unfamiliar-Old : You return a damaged book to your old professor. 

5. Non-severe-Familiar-Young: You arrive late for a casual basketball game 
with your friends. 

6. Non-severe-Familiar-Old : You are in a restaurant with your friends and 
their parents, that you also know for a long time. Without noticing, you 
take your friend’s father’s drink and you drink it. 

7. Non-severe-Unfamiliar-Young: Lost in the middle of a big city you inter- 
rupt a group of young students who are talking to ask for directions. 

8. Non-severe- Unfamiliar-Old : Walking on the street, you bump into an old 
lady shaking her up a bit without hurting her. 

The situations were typed on separate cards and were presented randomly to 
each subject. At the beginning of each interview, the subject was given a card with 
the instructions for the task. Halt cf the Spanish speakers were first interviewed in 
English and the other half in Spanish. After a week the subjects were interviewed in 
the other language. The descriptions of the situations were written in the language to 
be tested. The situations were set up to elicit an apologetic response without a reply 
from the receiver. At the end of the description of each situation, there was the fol- 
lowing question: What would you say?> to which the subjects had to respond as if 
they were placed in the context being described. The aim of the task was to obtain 
responses which were as spontaneous and natural as possible. Therefore, the role- 
plays had to present problems and characters which were familiar to those involved. 
Furthermore, the subjects being interviewed were not asked to play a role different 
from themselves; they were asked to perform a role that was part of their normal life 
or personality. Each interview lasted around 10 minutes and was tape-recorded. 

In order to compare what the subjects produced in the role-plays with their 
impressions of the English apology system, an English written questionnaire was 
administered to all the Spanish subjects who participated in the study. The question- 
naire was given after the subjects had finished with the role-playing task. 7 These are 
two of the questions included in the questionnaire and the results obtained: 8 

1. Do you feel that speakers of English apologize more or less than speakers 
of your native language? 

More: 65.2% Less: 4.3% Same: 26% Don’t know: 4.3% 

2. Do you feel that speakers of English apologize differently than speakers of 
your own language? 





Yes: 65.2% 



No: 34.7% 



6 



Montserrat Mir 



Following Olshtain’s analysis (1983) when respondents expressed the belief 
that English speakers apologize differently (whether more or less) than speakers of 
their native language, the response was interpreted in favor of language specificity - 
• difference between languages under the same social constraints. On the other hand, 
if the respondents claimed that one apologizes according to the situation (contextual 
variables) regardless of the language in question, then the answer was interpreted as 
viewing apology as a universal speech act ( situation specific ). According to these 
criteria, the responses elicited in this questionnaire support the notion of language 
specificity . 

However, the phenomenon of language specificity should also be reflected in 
the subjects responses obtained in the role-plays in order to claim language specific 
differences in the apology system. Consequently, if the tendency was to consider the 
act of apologizing as language specific , the responses elicited in this study would 
show that each language group reacted differently with respect to the use and fre- 
quency of the strategies produced regardless of the contextual variables. Further- 
more, it would be expected that subjects when interviewed in the second language 
would attempt to adjust to the non-native context and behave differently than in the 
first language situations. If, on the other hand, responses were similar between the 
native groups, this would support the situation specificity phenomenon, which 
would indicate that the context in which the offense is committed is the key factor 
for the selection and frequency of use of apology strategies regardless of the lan- 
guage in which they are produced. 

Data Categorization and Analysis 

The responses obtained were categorized according to the following apology 
strategies or semantic formulas (Trosborg, 1987); 

(1) Denial of apology: M I didn’t do it" 

(2) Minimization of the offense: "Oh, that’s nothing” 

(3) Acknowledgement of responsibility: "It was my fault" 

(4) Offer of apology: "I’m sorry" 

(5) Explanation: "Sorry, I’m late but I missed the bus" 

(6) Offer of repair: 9 "Til pay for the glasses" 

(7) Promise of forbearance: "This won’t happen again" 

The data obtained in this study were analyzed by conducting systematic com- 
parisons between native and non-native responses. The frequency of use of semantic 
formulas was examined and analyses of variance (ANOVA) were run to check for 
significant differences between groups on the total number of responses elicited in 
the entire test as well as under each contextual variable. Next the frequency of use of 
intensified apologetic responses was investigated and chi-square analyses were run 
to observe differences between groups on the total number of intensified responses 
offered in the task and under each contextual variable. 

It should be noted that informants in this study could have used more than one 
different strategy in each situation. Therefore, each response obtained for each indi- 
O 





Do We All Apologize the Seme? 



7 



vidual may be as simple as one single apology strategy but as complex as a combina- 
tion of more than one different strategy and/ or repetition of strategies. For the pur- 
pose of this study, the responses elicited have been analyzed in terms of type and 
frequency of use of strategies produced by each subject (repetition of strategies was 
ignored) regardless of the type of combination utilized in the response. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Use of Semantic Strategies Overall. 

The analyses of variance for the total number of responses obtained in the 
role-play exercise showed a significant main effect for group [NES/SLL: F (1,56) = 
14.37, p <.001; NES/NSS: F (1,56)= 8.44, p < .01]. Native English speakers 
(NES) produced more responses than native Spanish speakers (NSS) and second 
language learners (SLL). (Cell Means: NSS: 2.01, SLL: 1.88, NES: 2.45). These 
results, then, support the notion of language specificity: native language groups 
behave differently; in this case, the difference lies in the total frequency of the strate- 
gies used. 

The results displayed in Table 1 reflect the frequency of use of the semantic 
formulas. These results represent the number of subjects for each group (trans- 
formed into percentages) who used a particular strategy in the eight situations. Note 
that a subject may have used more than one different strategy, therefore, the sum of 
the percentages in each column does not result in 100%. 10 

Table 1. Use of Semantic Strategies Overall. 



Strategics 


NSS 


SLL 


NES 


DEN. 


6.5 


6.9 


3.0 


MINIM. 


8.6 


3.9 


4.3 


ACKNOW. 


28.4 


20.2 


28.4 


APOL. 


67.2 


81.9 


88.4 


EXPL. 


37.5 


35.8 


33.6 


REPA. 


39.6 


28.0 


62.0 


FORB. 


0.4 


0.4 


0.4 



We can see a tendency to decrease the frequency of use of some strategies in 
the second language. For instance, second language learners underused the strategy 
expressing acknowledgement of responsibility for the act committed (20%). A pos- 
sible explanation could be the extent to which lack of linguistic kncwledge in the 
second language may force the learner to deviate from the standard usage, which is 
shared by LI and L2. The particular nature of this strategy — acknowledgement of 



8 



Montserrat Mir 



responsibility — may give us some insights into what caused this verbal outcome. As 
Trosborg noted (1987), the speaker may perform six different sub-formulas in order 
to express acknowledgement of responsibility (e.g., expression of lack of intent, 
expression of embarrassment, self-deficiency, acceptance of blame, implicit and 
explicit acknowledgement). Although these formulas do not appear linguistically 
complex in terms of their syntactic and lexical components, second language learn- 
ers may have some difficulty in producing them as part of the remedial interchange. 
A simple routinized expression such as Tm sorry" seems to be more easily internal- 
ized and, therefore, preferred. 

Furthermore, along with the lack of linguistic knowledge in the L2 (gram- 
matical knowledge), it could also be suggested that second language learners use an 
avoidance strategy as a communicative technique to succeed in the act of apologiz- 
ing. Second language learners may be aware of all the linguistic possil ilities to 
express acknowledgement of responsibility or other apology strategies but because 
°‘ the artificial nature of the test or perhaps because of being uncomfortable when 
speaking in the L2, they avoid any complex linguistic strategies and overuse simple 
apologetic expressions (i.e., Tm sorry") as a communicative strategy. In addition, 
it could also be hypothesized that second language learners may be aware of all the 
possibilities of apologizing in English but they are unsure about the sociolinguistic 
rules of speaking that guide the production of apologies in American English. 

The cultural distance existing between peninsular Spanish and American 
English is also evidenced by the use of offers of repair and apologies. As we can see 
in Table 1, overall, NSS (67.2%) used apologies considerably less than NES 
(88.4%). However, it seems that SLL were aware of this cultural dissimilarity, and 
therefore, increased their production of apologies in order to emulate the American 
standards (SLL: 81.9%). These results seem to indicate that Spanish speakers prefer 
to produce other strategies without having to always rely on the perfor man ce of an 
apologetic expression as part of their remedial move. In fact, it would seem that ex- 
pressions of apology such as Tm sorry" or "excuse me" are routinized expressions 
in the American social rule system to be used in almost every offensive situation. In 
this sense, the production of apology expressions by Spanish md American subjects 
can also be considered language specific. 

Considering offers of repair, we observe that this strategy is not used very fre- 
quently by Spanish speakers (NSS: 39.6%, SLL: 28%, NES: 62%). Since an offer 
of repair does not seem to be an immediate apologetic expression in peninsular 
Spanish, second language learners believe that this is also the case in the American 
system and accordingly they negatively transfer its lack of usage into the target lan- 
guage setting. These results, then, suggest that an offer of repair is also a language 
specific strategy. 



Use of Semantic Strategies According to Contextual Variables 



Severity: The analysis of variance comparing SLL and NES and NSS and NES 
showed a significant main effect for severity (SLL/NES: F (1,56) = 1 12.15, p < 
.001; NSS/NES: F (1,56)= 178.10, p < .001). All groups of subjects increased 

O 10 



Do Wc All Apologize the Seme? 



9 



their number of responses under contexts where the offense was described as severe. 
Furthermore, although across groups the number of responses increased in severe 
situation, the increase was greater for NES subjects than for SLL subjects, as shown 
by the interaction found in the analysis of variance [SLL/NES: F (1, 56)= 7.80, p 
< .01] These results clearly support the notion of situation specificity , which 
claims that the groups interviewed in the study behave similarly under the same 
conditions. 

A closer examination of the type of strategies used by each group provides 
some evidence for interpreting the apology as a universal speech act (see Table, 2". 
For instance, strategies such as acknowledgment of responsibility were produced 
more under the severe condition than under the non-severe context by all the groups. 
This behavior was expected since a severe offensive action seems to require a type of 
remedial work marked by the speaker’s acceptance of responsibility in order to 
emphasize his regret for the act committed. It could also be argued that, for the same 
reason, repairs were offered more frequently in the severe condition; although, the 
nature of the events being narrated may also be responsible for this verbal behavior. 
Only two of the situations in the non-severe condition (#6, #8) elicited offers of 
repair, whereas all four situations which included a severe action elicited this strat- 
egy s. ".ce objects were damaged. 

On the other hand, language specific strategies were also discovered in the use 
of formulas such as explanations and apologies where native groups reacted differ- 
ently and second language learners possibly transferred their use from the first lan- 
guage. Whereas NES maintained the same number of explanations under both con- 
ditions, NSS increased their frequency when the offenses were non-severe. Probably 
as a result of this cultural dissimilarity between the two native languages, SLL did 
not react according to the American standards and simply negatively transferred 
from LI to L2 producing similar responses to the ones obtained in the first language 
settings. With respect to the use of apologies, NES did not vary considerably from 
one context to another. However, NSS and SLL produced more apologies in the 
severe condition. 

Finally, the results obtained in the production of denials and minimizations by 
NSS and SLL in the severe condition are surprising since this type of strategy does 
not seem to fit properly in remedial work destined to express sincere regret and 
responsibility for an action which caused some damage to the victim (e.g., breaking 
the victim’s glasses or damaging his book). A detailed analysis of the situations used 
for this study indicated that in some contexts the Spanish subjects denied their re- 
sponsibility for the act because they felt the action committed was not their fault. 
Although this belief was also expressed by the American subjects, they did not 
manifest it as part of their remedial work, contrary to NSS. The oral behavior of 
Spanish subjects seems to be characterized by a more direct form of expression, 
which seems to be illustrated by the type of responses discussed here. Spanish sub- 
jects directly expressed their lack of acceptance of responsibility by denying the act 
committed or trying to minimize it, whereas native English speakers preferred to 
obey the politeness requirement involved in the remedial work. 



10 



MonUc>*r»t Mir 



Table 2. Use of Semantic Strategies under the Severity Condition 



Conditions 


Strategies 


NSS 


SLL 


NES 


SEVERE 

(Situations 
# 1 ,2,3,4) 


DEN. 


8.6 


11.2 


4.3 


MINIM. 


12.0 


2.5 


4.3 


ACKNOW 


37.0 


26.7 


44.0 


APOL. 


75.0 


84.5 


86.2 


EXPL. 


34.4 


29.3 


33.6 


REPA. 


62.0 


44.0 


89.6 


FORB. 


0.0 


0.85 


0.0 


NON-SEVE. 

(Situations 
#5,6,7, 8) 


DEN. 


4.3 


2.6 


1.7 


MINIM. 


5.2 


5.2 


5.2 


ACKNOW 


19.8 


13,8 


13.0 


APOL. 


59.5 


79.3 


90.5 


EXPLA. 


40.5 


42.2 


33.6 


REPA. 


17.2 


12.1 


34.4 


FORB. 


0.85 


0.0 


0.85 



Familiarity: The analyses of variance showed a language by familiarity inter- 
action when comparing SLL and NES [F (1, 56)= 10.67, p < .01] and NES and 
NSS [F (1, 56)= 6.70, p < .05]. Whereas North Americans tend to use more re- 
sponses or strategies when the interlocutor is unfamiliar to them, NSS prefer to 
diminish their number of responses in the same context, and this behavior is also 
transferred into the second language (see Table 3). 

These results may be interpreted according to the native Spanish subjects’ per- 
ception of the American social norms. During the role-play exercises and some in- 
formal talks I had with the Spanish subjects, I observed that my subjects repeatedly 
commented on the polite aspect of the American social system reflected in everyday 
language use. Therefore, it was expected that these subjects would become more 
polite in their English responses by increasing the frequency of use of their re- 
sponses in unfamiliar contexts as Americans did. However, second language learn- 
ers simply transferred the type of strategies used in their Spanish responses into 
English and followed their native intuition about the behavior expected with unfa- 
miliar or familiar interlocutors. Second language learners were unaware of the spe- 
cie effect of this contextual variable on the American apology system. These re- 



Do We All Apologize the Seme? 



11 



suits seem to favor the notion of language specificity — the difference between 
groups is due to the different effect of the familiarity factor on the subjects’ verbal 
reactions. 

With relation to the production of specific apology strategies, it was observed 
that each native group produced different types and frequency of formulas under 
different conditions, which offers more evidence for the language specificity phe- 
nomenon. First of all, NES increased the production of apologies and explanations 
in the unfamiliar condition, whereas NSS and SLL used these two strategies very 
similarly in the two conditions. Also, an unequal distribution of offers of repair in 
the responses elicited from each native group was observed — NSS used this strategy 
more in the unfamiliar condition whereas NES increased their production in the 
familiar context. The Spanish speakers’ conduct with relation to the production of 
offers of repairs might be triggered by the presence of unfamiliar interactants which 
impelled them to offer more repairs. According to the statistical results, NES sig- 
nificantly increased their number of responses with unfamiliar interlocutors, as is 
illustrated by the higher frequency of use of all the strategies except an offer of re- 
pair. Since this is the only strategy that does not follow the expected pattern, it 
might also be the case that the specific conditions of the situations described were 
responsible for the production of more repairs in the familiar condition. 

Table 3. Use of Semantic Strategies under the Familiarity Condition 



Condition 


Strategics 


NSS 


SLL 


NES 


FAMILIAR 

(Situations 
#1,2, 5, 6) 


DEN. 


10.3 


10.3 


5.2 


MINIM. 


8.6 


6.8 


7.8 


ACKNOW 


32.7 


25.0 


27.6 


APOL. 


66.4 


82.0 


84.5 


EXPL. 


38.8 


36.2 


23.2 


REPA. 


35.4 


25.0 


66.4 


FORB. 


0.0 


0.85 


0.0 


UNFAMIL. 

(Situations 
# 3,4, 7, 8) 


DEN. 


2.6 


3.4 


0.85 


MINIM. 


8.6 


0.85 


1.7 


ACKNOW 


24.1 


15.5 


29.3 


APOL. 


68.1 


82.0 


92.2 


EXPL. 


36.2 


35.3 


44.0 


REPA. 


44.0 


21.5 


57.7 


FORB. 


0 


0 


0 



9 s - 



I 



12 



Montserrat Mir 



Age: The three groups of subjects reacted to the age factor described in the 
situations, as shown by the significant main effects for age obtained in the analysis 
of variance [SLL/NES: F (1,56)= 33.15, p <.001; NSS/NES: F (1,56)= 54.73, p 
< .001]. All the subjects used more responses in addressing an older person, which 
seems understandable since offenses committed against older subjects are generally 
perceived to be more severe (see Table 4). An increase in the production of expres- 
sions of acknowledgement of responsibility and offers of repairs seems to character- 
ize those situations which involved an old offended person. The similar behavior 
between the three groups supports the notion of situation specificity. 

Table 4. Use of Semantic Strategies under the Age Condition. 



Condition 


Strategic 


NSS 


SLL 


NES 


YOUNG 

(Situations 

#13.5.7) 


DEN. 


6.9 


7.8 


5.2 


MINIM. 


8.6 


2.5 


1.7 


ACKNOW 


22.4 


16.3 


24.1 


APOL. 


64.6 


83.6 


90.5 


EXPL. 


36.2 


37.0 


32.8 


REPA. 


28.4 


18.0 


44.0 


FORB. 


0.0 


0.85 


0.0 


OLD 

(Situations 
#2. 4. 6. 8) 


DEN. 


6.0 


6.0 


0.85 


MINIM. 


6.8 


5.1 


7.o 


ACKNOW 


34.5 


24.1 


32.8 


APOL. 


69.8 


80.2 


86.2 


EXPL. 


38.8 


34.5 


34.5 


REPA. 


50.8 


38.0 


80.1 


FORB. 


0.85 


0.0 


0.85 



Degree of Intensification 



In order to analyze the degree of intensification of the speakers’ responses, a 
close examination of the subjects’ use of expressions of apology (i.e., Tm sorry") 
was undertaken. These expressions were divided into two main categories: 



(1) Apologetic expressions with adverbs of intensification. For instance, 
"I’m awfully sorry", "I’m very sorry", and so forth. 

(2) Combination of expressions, such as "excuse me", "I’m sorry" or repeti- 
tion of the same expression. For inst^c^ "excuse me, excuse me." 



Do We All Apologize the Same? 



13 



According to the chi-square analyses carried out to analyze these data, native 
English speakers produced a significant higher frequency of intensified apologetic 
expressions than the other two groups (see Table 5) [SLL/NES: 2 0* N— 464) — 
21.86, p < .01; NSS/NES: 2 (1, N= 464) = 13.84, p < .01)]. A closer examina- 
tion of the results obtained for each of the three contextual variables also supports 
this thesis. When the offense was considered severe (see Table 6) all speakers across 
groups intensified their apologetic responses, although NES showed more intensifi- 
cation than NSS. The increase of intensification is comprehensible since a severe 
offense requires a deeper feeling of regret on the part of the speaker. However, SLL 
were more inclined to behave as in the first language which indicates that they did 
not respond to the demand imposed by the second language context. 12 However, the 
degree of familiarity between the interactants (see Table 7) and the age of the victim 
(see Table 8) seemed to affect the amount of intensification produced slightly. For 
instance, the contexts which involved an old victim produced more intensified 
apologies by NSS and NES but not by SLL. 

Table 5. Overall Intensification Percentages 



NSS 


SLL 


NES 


18.0 


14.6 


33.0 



Table 6. Degree of Intensification under the Severity Condition 





NSS 


SLL 


NES 


SEVERE 


28.4 


20.7 


47.7 


NON-SBVERI 


7.8 


8.6 H 


19.0 



Ifcble 7. Degree of Intensification under the Familiarity Condition 





NSS 


SLL 


NES 


FAMILIAR 


21.5 


17.2 


32.8 


unfamiliab 


14.6 


11.2 ^ 


33.6 



Table 8. Degree of Intensification under the Age Condition 





NSS 


SLL 


NES 


YOUNG 


15.5 


14.6 


28.4 


OLD 


20.7 


14.6 


37.9 



In all, the most important outcome relates to the consistent high frequency of 



14 



MonUcrrat Mir 



intensification displayed by NES across all conditions in comparison with the native 
Spanish group and the second language learners. According to the Spanish subjects’ 
impressions of the English apology system, Americans apologize more than Span- 
iards. If intensification is understood as another way of emphasizing the purpose of 
the remedial work (apart from selecting more than one apology strategies), then the 
intensified apologetic expressions found in the NES responses would be in accor- 
dance with the belief that Americans apologize more than Spaniards. Consequently, 
the results obtained in the analyses of intensified apologetic responses by the three 
groups provide more evidence for the language specificity hypothesis. 

CONCLUSIONS 

The results obtained in this study have shown that the act of apologizing is 
cross-culturally universal since all subjects in this experiment provided some sort of 
remedial work regardless of their native language. However, some differences in the 
use and intensification of apology strategies by Spanish speakers and American 
speakers appeared in the data analyzed, which seems to indicate that Peninsular 
Spanish and American English speech communities differ in their "rules of speak- 
ing", to a certain extent. First of all, the different frequency of use of apology 
semantic formulas and use of intensification of apologetic expressions obtained for 
the three groups supports the notion of language specificity — native language 
groups apologize differently in terms of frequency of responses and intensification 
of expressions of apology. In particular, native English speakers provided a higher 
number of apology strategies and intensified their apologetic expressions more than 
native Spanish speakers when tested in Spanish or in English. Further support for 
the existence of a language specificity phenomenon is provided by an examination of 
the familiarity factor, since it seems to have different effects on the frequency of use 
and type of semantic formulas for the three groups. However, the contextual vari- 
ables severity and age have similar effects on the responses of the three groups, 
which seems to support the situation specificity hypothesis. 

With respect to the type of strategies or semantic formulas used, the most 
interesting result is the use of apologies and offers of repair. Both strategies are used 
differently by the native groups, which further supports language specificity. Recall 
that NES used more apologies and offers of repairs than NSS and SLL in all con- 
texts. Furthermore, SLL only reacted to this cultural difference in the case of apolo- 
gies by increasing their frequency of use and thus, trying to emulate American stan- 
dards. Such an outcome may indicate three things. First, learners may be unaware of 
the use and importance of other apology strategies in the target language, and there- 
fore, they simply transfer native language apology patterns to the target context. 
Second, learners’ lack of linguistic knowledge in L2 may be affecting their perform- 
ance. Third, a teaching effect may be operating here — there seems to exist an em- 
phasis on teaching apologetic expressions (e.g., Tmsorry") as the only strategy for 
apologizing in English; and since SLL believe that Americans apologize more than 
they do in their native language, they tend to increase the number of such apologetic 
expressions, since they are unaware of other strategy types. 13 



Do We All Apologize the Same? 



15 



SOME TEACHING IMPLICATIONS 

The most important implication that derives from this study is the importance 
of instructing second language learners in the acquisition of pragmatic and sociolin- 
guistic competence. More specifically, the incorporation of different contextual 
variables in activities requiring apologies by the learners should be stressed in the 
classroom in order to sensitize the learner to the different sociocultural meanings of 
the speaker and to the situational context. Marcum (1986) argues that pragmatic 
competence will not necessarily develop as a consequence of exposure to L2 culture 
as Rintell (1979) seems to suggest. On the contrary, in order to enhance the acquisi- 
tion of pragmatic competence of the second language learner in the classroom a 
perception-teaching approach needs to be attempted. Such approach, according to 
Marcum, should have the following behavioral objectives: 

1. Make the learner aware of the variety of possible meanings of utterances in 
context. 

2. Encourage learners to consciously monitor the cross-cultural context and 
the given context of the social environment in which interaction takes 
place. 

3. Make learners explicitly aware of the various levels of contest operating in 
the environment during any instance of spoken discourse and relevant C2 
( = L2 culture) contextual cues. 

4. Aid learners in acquiring the ability to assess the C2 contextual cues, to 
draw appropriate inferences about speakers* intentions, and to respond 
without succumbing to (a) ’pragmalinguistic failure* (assigning C1L1 
force to utterances or inappropriately transferring speech act strategies 
from LI to L2) or (b) ’sociopragmatic failure’ (perceiving and interpreting 
L2C2 behavior through a Cl set of social conditions placed on language 
use). 

The effect of instruction on the acquisition of pragmatic elements of the target 
language has not been thoroughly investigated. One particular study conducted by 
Olshtain and Cohen (1990) is of special interest for the purpose of this paper since 
the researchers considered the effect of explicit teaching of the speech act of apolo- 
gizing to advanced EFL learners. Olshtain and Cohen based their study on the data 
elicited from previous studies on the production of apologies and requests by non- 
native speakers. Similarly to what the study presented in this paper showed, Olsh- 
tain and Cohen s data also revealed the need for teaching elements such as choice of 
semantic formulas, appropriate length of realization patterns, use of intensifies, 
judgement of appropriateness, etc. In the light of these results, Olshtain and Cohen 
(1990) developed a series of teaching materials designed to make the learners aware 
of the nature of the apology speech act and its different levels of appropriateness for 
different situational contexts. Although the quantitative results obtained in Olshtain 
and Cohen s study did not reach statistical significance, the researchers were still 
able to draw some interesting conclusions based on the observed qualitative data. 




16 



Monueiral Mir 



For instance, the data showed that fine points of speech act behavior such as (a) 
types of intensification and downgrading, (b) subtle differences between strategy 
realization, and (c) considerations of situational features, can and should be taught 
in the second and foreign language classrooms. 

In conclusion, the teaching of sociocultural and pragmatic competence is nec- 
essary in the language classroom. Furthermore, this particular aspect of the target 
language should be specifically stressed in EFL situations (such as the one from 
which the subjects in this experiment come). The incorporation of sociocultural 
aspects of L2 in the EFL classroom is particularly difficult since the learner tends to 
approach the new culture from a very unrealistic perspective, which negatively af- 
fects the acquisition of the sociocultural aspects of L2. However, an attempt to pro- 
vide authentic language activities focused on speech act performance should be car- 
ried out. The acquisition of speech acts in the target language should be more thor- 
oughly analyzed by examining the production of such communicative acts in the 
learners’ native language. A careful description of native and non-native verbal pat- 
terns will help the researcher and, consequently, the teacher, design teaching tech- 
niques directed to the acquisition of sociolinguistic rules of speaking in L2. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

I thank Lawrence Bouton and Erica McClure for their help and support in con- 
ducting this study. 

THE AUTHOR 

Montserrat Mir is a Ph.D. student in the Department of Educational Psychol- 
ogy at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Research interests are Sec- 
ond and Foreign Language Acquisition, Learning, and Teaching, Pragmatics, Dis- 
course Analysis, and Sociolinguistics. 

NOTES 

l The structure of the remedial interchange is very flexible and may change ac- 
cording to the context in which the threatening act takes place. However, the pres- 
ence of an apology strategy is relevant for the accomplishment of a remedial inter- 
change. This apology can be expressed in very different ways across languages and 
cultures but its purpose of expressing regret for the act committed is considered 
universal. 

2 Dell Hymes was the first to introduce this term and the theoretical framework 
on which Wolfson built her further work. 

3 Hymes (1972) defines a speech community as “a community sharing rules for 
the conduct and interpretation of speech, and rules for the interpretation of at least 
one linguistic variety” (p. 54). Not all speakers of a language share the same set of 
rules of speaking, and therefore, not all may belong to the same speech community. 
We must recognize that speakers of a single language may constitute different speech 
communities with their own norms and rules of speaking. 

O 



Do Wc All Apologize the Seme? 



17 



‘Moreover, the subjects in this study were enrolled in English courses at the 
North American Language Institute in Barcelona and their level was considered 
high-intermediate according to the criterion adopted in the Institute. 

5 In order to determine the degree of severity of the offense, a judgment test 
was presented to 31 native Spanish speakers and 8 native American speakers. The 
test consisted of a brief description of the situations to be used in the study. The 
subjects had to judge whether the situation described offered a severe or a non-se- 
vere offense (the judgement was designed to be dichotomous to facilitate the inter- 
pretation of responses). 

‘Different situations were used to represent each set of variables because it was 
expected that the use of situations in which only one social variable differed would 
not mairt» the subjects think carefully about the situations presented -md instead they 
would respond similarly to the previous similar situations. Therefore, the severity of 
the offense is not identical in all the severe offenses described. However, the purpose 
of the task was to differentiate between severe and non-severe offenses. 

The subjects answered this questionnaire voluntarily in the language of their 
choice, English, Spanish or Catalan. 

•Two more questions were included in the questionnaire: 

3. Do you have any problems with respect to when and how to use English 
apologies? Why? 

4. Would you like to comment on any of the responses on the ten situ- 
ations? 

The most common answers to these questions are the following. To question 
3, most of the subjects acknowledged their difficulty in apologizing in English due 
to their lack of mastery of the second language, their lack of knowledge of the 
English social rules, the type of teaching received, etc. Very few people answered 
the fourth question and the most frequent responses referred to the subjects’ lack of 
linguistic mastery of the target language, the lack of naturalness in the responses due 
to the nature of the exercise and to the absence of the interlocutor’s reaction to the 
remedy provided. 

Since the responses obtained in these two questions were not very systematic 
across subjects, the information they provided was not directly used to answer the 
objectives proposed m this study. 

Tn this particular study, this strategy aims to offer to replace or fix the object 
being damaged during the offensive action and also to express concern for the 
hearer. Some researchers, such as Trosborg (1987), have treated this last expression 
(i.e., concern for the hearer) separately to indicate intensification on the part of the 
speaker. However, because I included some situations in which the offense did not 
only include damaging a physical object but also inflicting pain on the subject, I 
decided to categorize both sub-types under the same formula. 

10 In order to maintain consistency in reporting the results obtained in the 
study, an arbitrary figure of 8 percentage has been set up. Only those results that 
differ by more than 8 points will be considered for further discussion. 

"The percentages displayed in this table and subsequent tables have been ob- 
tained by summing up the total number of responses under each strategy type of- 



18 



Montserrat Mir 



fered by each group and dividing them by the total number of possible responses 

repeirieda st" t lV ‘ dUal S Was counted onl y once . regardless of whether he 

repeated a strategy more than once, the total number of possible responses was cal- 

cu ated by multiplying the total number of subjects, i.e. 29, by the four situations 
er each contextual variable). Since each subject may have provided more than 
one s rategy (-response) as part of his remedial action, the total number of different 
strategies m each column expressed in percentages may not equal 100 %. 

Although, it could be argued that the lack of linguistic proficiency in the 

“ 8 r be 'T nSib ‘ e f ° r thC beh3vi0r of SLL > 1 wu,d “o* claim that 
this is the only reason why these subjects did not increase their intensification in the 

apologies provided. The linguistic knowledge necessary to intensify an apology 

nZde 1 1 ‘° : Cry eX,enSIVe SinCC 3 Simp ' e adverbial form > such *s ve/y could 

provide the required intensification. * 

-From an analysis of the use of "I’m sorry" and "excuse me" displayed in the 
subjects responses obtained in this study, it was concluded that non-native speakers 
are unaware of the uses of "excuse me", since an overuse of "I’m sorry" ^Ton- 

f ° Und m thC data ‘ SUCh reSUltS Were ex P lained in ‘he light of? 
hing effect that seems to overemphasize the use of "I’m sorry" as the only ary • 

ogy strategy in English. For more information on these analyses, see Mir (1991). 

REFERENCES 

BIum-Kulka, S. and Olshtain, E. (1984). Requests and Apologies: A Cross-Cultural 
(3): 196-2lT Ch ACt ReaIlZati ° n ft “ ternS < CCSARP )- Applied Linguistics, 5 

Cohen, A., & Olshtain, E. (1981). Developing a measure of Sociocultural Compe- 
tence: The Case of Apology. Language Learning, 31 ( 1 ): 113-131 
Coffman E. (1967) . Interaction Ritual. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company. 

(1971) ' Rela “°ns in Public. New York: Harper Colophon Books. 

Marcum, K.L. (Spnng 1986) Teaching to Enhance Acquisition of Pragmatic 
Competence. WiTESOL ^forking Papers 3. 

Mir, M. (1991). The Case of Apology and Its English Use by Native Spanish 

Speakers. Unpublished M.A. Thesis at the University of Illinois, Urbana- 
Champaign. 

Olshtain, E. (1983). Sociocultural Competence and Language Transfer : The Case 

of Apology S. Gass & L. Selinker.(Ed.). Language TYansfer in Language 
Learning. Mass: Rowley. 5 

Olshtain E. and Cohen, A. (March 1990) The Learning of Complex Speech Act 
Behaviour. TESL Canada Journal, 7 ( 2 ): 45-65. 

Olshtain E. & Cohen, D. (1983). Apology: A Speech-Act Set. N. Wolfson & E. 

u (Ed.). Sociolinguistics and Language Acquisition. Series on Issues in 
Second Language Research. Mass: Rowley. 

Owen M. (1983). Apologies and Remedial Interchanges. New York: Mouton Pub- 
ushers. 

RtnteM, E. (1979) Getting Your Speech Act Together: The Pragmatic Ability of 
^<3 econd Language Learners. Vibrking Papers in Bilingualism, 17: 97-106. 



ERIC 



9 q 



Do We All Apologize the Seme? 



19 



Trosborg, A. (Feb, 1987). Apology Strategies in Natives/Non-Natives. Journal of 
Pragmatics 11 (1): 147-167. 

Wolfson, N. (1989). Perspectives . New York: Newbury House Pub. 

(1983). Rules of Speaking. Language and Communication . New York: 

Longman. 

e 




30 



Pragmatics and Language Learning 
Monograph Series, Vol. 3, 1992 



Conversational Openings in Kiswahili: The Pragmatic Perform- 
ance of Native and Non-native Speakers 



Alwiya S. Omar 



Native speakers of Kiswahili usually engage in lengthy openings 
which include several Phatic Inquiries (Pis) and Phatic Responses 
(PRs). The number and manner in which the Pis and PRs are produced 
depend on the age difference between participants. Participants of the 
same age compete in the PI production. As a result there are PI/PR and 
PI/PI overlaps, and successive Pis produced by one participant. The Pis 
and PRs are produced at a relatively rapid tempo. If there is an age dif- 
ference, the younger participant initiates the opening by producing a 
respectful greeting form. Then the older person produces most of the 
Pis. 

Non-native speakers, in this case, five advanced learners who 
have been to the target language environment, are pragmatically aware 
of Kiswahili conversational openings and are native-like in the way they 
engage in lengthy greetings. Upon examination, the learners’ openings 
are produced at a slow pace resulting in a non-overlapping reciprocity 
with each participant waiting for his or her turn. The results show that 
there is variability in the learners' performance not only across individ- 
ual learners but also across situations. 



INTRODUCTION 



This study examines how native speakers (NS) and advanced non-native 
speakers (NNS) of Kiswahili open conversations. It is based on an earlier work in 
which I found variability in the performance of greetings by beg inning and interme- 
diate students. In particular, the learners performed minimal greetings (O mar , 
1991). I suggested that this area of inquiry be expanded to include learners of 
Kiswahili who have had exposure to the target language environment, since it is 
possible that the foreign language setting may have some influence on the prag matic 
performance of the learners. This paper specifically examines the effect of the set- 
ting on the performance of advanced learners of Kiswahili who had been in a Kiswa- 
hili speaking environment. The paper also elaborates native speaker openings pre- 
sented in the earlier work. 

The manner of opening conversations is such an important discourse function 
in a Kiswahili speaking community that Kiswahili children, from a very early age, 
are taught the art of greeting, and they are reprimanded if they do not perform this 
function appropriately. However, minimal research has been done on how speakers 
of Kiswahili, native and non-native, perform this important aspect of discourse. 
Most studies on pragmatics and language learning have focused on the performance 
of English language learners. It is important to examine the pragmatic knowledge of 
learners of other languages as well. 





20 



Conversational Openings in Kiswahili 



21 



PART ONE: THE PERFORMANCE OF NATIVE SPEAKERS 
Method 

Native speaker data was collected for a period of one month in Zanzibar by 
means of participant observation. People greeting at home, in the streets, and in 
offices, were observed and their conversations were tape recorded. When it was not 
possible to get recorded data, dialogues were reconstructed shortly after the conver- 
sations. Native speakers, male and female, and of different ages, participated in this 
study. The results show that ’age’ is the major sociolinguistic parameter in opening 
conversations in Kiswahili 

Results and Discussion 

Components of a conversational opening. A conversational opening in 
Kiswahili consists of several parts. One major part of a conversational opening is 
made up of Phatic Inquiries (Pis) and Phatic Responses (PRs). I am using Kasper s 
(1989) definitions of the terms PI and PR based on the work of Goffman (1972), 
Schegloff (1972), among others. Kasper defines Phatic Inquiry as a ritualized in- 
quiry after the interlocutor’s wellbeing, realized by a routine formula; it has an elic- 
iting discourse function. A Phatic Reply, he defines, as a ritualized response to 
Phatic Inquiry realized by a routine formula; it has a responding discourse function. 
For example, routine formulae for Pis in Kiswahili are Hujambo? 'How are you? , 
Habari? 'News?' etc., and the respective routine formulae for PRs are Sijambo 'I'm 
fine’, Nzuri 'Good' etc. The rapidity in which Pis and PRs are produced results in 
either PI/PR overlap, PI/PI overlap, or two Pis in a row. 

Another part of a Kiswahili conversational opening is a respectful greeting 
sequence which usually precedes the PI/PR sequence when there is an age difference 
between participants in a conversation. The younger person is expected to use the 
greeting Shikamoo' and the older person responds with a routine formula, Mara- 
haba, meaning 'alright'. 

A verbal recognition, like calling out somebody's name or an expression of 
joy at meeting another person, is another component of a conversational opening in 
Kiswahili. It may precede the PI/PR sequence or the respectful greeting sequence. 

All the above sequences are preceded by a unique opening Hodi when one 
visits the house of another person. Hodi is the equivalent of English 'knock, knock' 
and its response is Karibu — 'welcome'. 

Age as a major sociolinguistic parameter . Conversational openings are con- 
ducted variously depending on the age of the interlocutors. When there is an age 
difference, it is considered polite for the younger participant to initiate the opening 
by using a respectful greeting form. Then the older person will respond and take an 
active role in the production of Pis. The younger person has a passive role and 
produces PRs wi»> 'imited or no Pis. With participants of the same age, no respect- 
ful form is required and both participants compete for the active role of producing 



22 



Alwiy* S. Omar 



Pis. As in Wolof greetings (Irvine, 1974), the younger person in a Kiswahili conver- 
sational opening adopts a self lowering role by producing a respectful greeting form 
as X does in turn 1 of (l). 2 Unlike the Wolof greetings, however, it is the older 
person who produces the most Pis. 3 X produces only one PI, in turn 13 while Y, the 
older one produces 5 Pis. 

(1) Different age; PI domination (30 year old man, X, passes a 55 year old female ac- 
quaintance, Y) 



1. X: Shikamoo 


Shikamoo 


2. Y: Marahaba. Habari? 


OK. News? (PI) 


3. X: Nzujri. 


Good. (PR) 


4. Y: |Hujambo? 


Are you fine? 


5. X: Sijambo. 


I am fine. 


6. Y: Habari za kwenu? 


News of your home? 


7. X: Nzuri. 


Good. 


8. Y: Watu wote hawajambo? 


Is every body fine? 


9. X: Hawajambo. 


They are fine. 


10. Y: Watoto? 


The children? 


11. X: Hawajambo. 


They are fine. 


12. Y: Haya bwana. 


OK, bwana. 


13. X: Je, salama? 


Peaceful? 



(2) PI competition; PI/PR partial overlap (R and S are two women friends of same 
age, around 40 who haven’t seen each other for a long time) 



1. R: Iiii (indicating that she has seen S) 


2. S: Habari za miaka? 


News of many years? 


3. R: Nzu|ri 


Good 


4. S: | Salama, salama? 5 


Peaceful? 




(emphasized) 


5. R: Salajma. 


Peaceful. 


6. S: | Hamjambo nyote? 


Are you all fine? 


7. R: Hatujambo. 


We are fine. 


8. S: Haya... 


OK 


9. R: Habari zaidi? 


More news? 


10. S: A Salajma tu. 


Just peaceful* 


11. R: | Watoto 


Are the children 


hawajambo? 


fine? 


12. S: Hawajambo. Nyie tu? 


They are fine. 



And you? 



When the participants are of the same age, each will strive for an active role, 
and a respectful greeting fotm is not required. It is possible that one participant may 
dominate the Pis at the beginning by producing them at a rapid tempo even before 
*be PRs of the other participant are complete, causing partial overlaps between Pis 

C 33 



Conversational Openings in Kiswahili 



23 



and PRs as in turns 3 to 6 in Example (2). When the other participant gets the floor 
for the Pis, s/he will try to do the same. In (2), S asks the Pis from turns 2, 4, 6, and 
again in turn 12 while R gets the chance to ask 2 Pis only in turns 9 and 11/ 

Sometimes, PI overlaps occur because each participant wants to have the ac- 
tive role. An example of a PI overlap is seen in turns 3 and 4 of (3) in which Q 
initiated the Pis and maintained the active role until R managed to take over and 
produced her second PI in turn 13. In the attempt to maintain an active role, a par- 
ticipant may produce two Pis in a row. Q in (3), turn 10, produces two Pis in a row. 
The first PI is usually ignored and a response is given to the second PI as R did in 
turn 11. 

(3) Pl/PI total overlap, Pis in a row, and recycled Pis and PRs (R and Q, female 
acquaintances of the same age, pass each other in the street) 



1. R:*Mosi! 

2. Q: ooo, habari zako? 

3. R: Nzuri. /Hujambo?/ 

4. Q: /Mzima?/ 

5. R: Mzima. 

6. Q: Lini umekuja? 

7. R: Wiki sasa. 

8. Q: Alaa? Nini khabari 

zaidi? 6 



(A woman’s name) 

Yeah, your news? 
Good. How are you? 

Are you OK? 

OK. 

When did you come? 

It’s ?. week now. 

Yes? What news? 



9. R: Salama. Peaceful. 

10. Q: Hamjambo jambo? Are you fine? 

Jamaa wote hawajambo? Is the family fine? 

1 1 . R: Hawaja | mbo. They are fine. 

12. Q: | Mama hajambo? Is mother fine? 

13. R: Hajambo. Na wewe She’s fine. And you 

nyumbani hamjambo? at home are you fine? 




Pis and PRs are recursive in nature and they reoccur after the main topic of a 
dialogue or following a phatic remark. Turns 6 and 7 of the dialogue in (3) provide 
a break in the PI/PR sequences which are resumed in turn 8. Obviously, these 
speakers do not consider five turns of a conversational opening as complete. There- 
fore, there is a need to continue with more turns. Recycling of PI/PR sequences 
during the course of a conversation occurred in several other interactions observed, 
including telephone conversations. After the recycling of Pis and PRs, a new topic 
may be introduced, or the old one continued. 

In official settings, when participants did not know each other well, opening 
sessions were short. Pis and PRs, in these situations served the function of attention 
getters. The dialogue in (4) was conducted at a passport office in Zanzibar. 

As the data have shown, Kiswahili conversational openings are initiated dif- 
ferently depending on the age of participants. The initial opening sequence may be 
a PI followed by a PR when participants are of the same age. This PI/PR sequence 
must be preceded by a respectful greeting sequence when there is an age difference 

34 



24 



Alwiya $. Omar 



between the interlocutors. The younger participant initiates the opening by using a 
respectful greeting form. AH the above sequences may be preceded by verbal recog- 
nition like calling out an interlocutor's name or an expression of joy. And finally, 
when a person visits the house of another, regardless of age, the visitor uses a 
unique opening, Hodi before anything else, as in (5). 



(4) Pis as attention getters (Client T wants to get clerk V's attention. V is talking to 
another client (reconstructed)) 



!• T: Habari gani bwana? 

2. V: Nzuri. 

3. T: Salama? 

4. V: Salama. 

5. T: Nataka maombi ya pasi. 

6. T: Haya. Subiri kidogo. 



How are you sir? 
Good. 

Peaceful? 

Peaceful. 

I want application 
forms. 

Ok. Wait a moment. 



(5) Unique opening hodi (A is visiting his friend B; dialogue obtained from Television 
Zanzibar video play) 



1. A: Hodi, hodi. 

2. B: Karibu bwana 

Oho! Nini hali? 



Knock, knock. 
Welcome pal. 

Oho! What condition? 



PART TWO: THE PERFORMANCE OF NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS 

The second part of the paper examines how non-native speakers of Kiswahili, 
in this case advanced leamers who have had some exposure of the target language 
environment, open conversations. The results seem to show that learners produce 
elaborate Pis and PRs but tend not to recycle them. Moreover, they produce Pis and 
PRs at a slower pace than native speakers. As a result their openings rarely include 
overlaps, and they never produce successive Pis. 

Method 

Five American learners of Kiswahili participated in this study. Three learn- 
ers, LN 1 , LN2, and LN4 have been to the host environment for a period of at least 
eight weeks, LN3 for six months, and LN5 for about a week. There are three factors 
which distinguish these five learners from those who participated in the previous 
study (Omar, 1991): level of proficiency, exposure to the target language environ- 
ment, and ability to create learning environments outside of the classroom with their 
instructors and other available Kiswahili speakers. Unlike the lower proficiency 
learners from the previous study, these learners appear native-like in the way they 
initiate and elaborate on greetings. To confirm these informal findings, both elicited 
and natural data were collected. For elicited data, classroom verbal role plays we;s 
recorded. Telephone conversations between the students and their Kiswahili instruc- 



Conversational Openings in Kiswahili 



25 



tors, and between the students themselves, as well as office hour conversations be- 
tween students and their instructors were part of the natural data. 

This section compares in detail the performance of two learners, LN3 who 
was in the target environment for six months, and LN5 who was there for only a 
week. Their performance during the office hour conversation, and in the telephone 
conversation, is compared. Neither LN3 nor LN5 perform native like openings in 
the office hour conversation with instructor FT. On the phone, LN3 was more na- 
tive-like than LN5 who used English greeting style in Kiswahili. 

Results and Discussion 

Role plays . In the verbal role plays, learners were asked to present a play in 
class in which they adopted different roles in different situations. Four learners par- 
ticipated in this elicitation task. They were given about ten minutes to prepare. The 
performance was recorded. Example (6) is an opening of one scene in a play about 
’marriage’. The learners were comfortable in the roles and the subject they chose. 
Therefore, they were able to engage in lengthy openings as the dialogue in (6) illus- 
trates. 

(6) Role IMay (Two male friends; same age) 



1. LN1: Hodi. 


Knock. 


2. LN5: Karibu. 


Welcome in. 


3. LN1: Hujambo. 


How are you? 


4. LN5: Sijambo. 


I’m fine. What news? 


Habari gani? 


5. LN1: Nzuri. 


Good. 


6. LN5: Karibu. 


Welcome. 


7. LN1: Asante. 


Thanks. Your news? 


Habari yako? 


8. LN5: Salama. Na wewe? 


Peaceful. And you? 


9. LN1: Salama tu. 


Just peaceful. News 


Habari ya huku? 


of here? 


10. LN5: Nzuri sana. Wewe 


Very good. You at 


nyumbani? 


home? 


11. LN1: Salama. Wote 


Peaceful. All at home are fine? 


nyumbani hawajambo? 


12. LN5: Hawajambo. 


They are fine. 




The learners' openings in the verbal role plays have the following structure: 
initiation of the opening session by using features like 'hodi* and 'karibu', the use 
of Pis and PRs about the participants, the use of Pis and PRs about other people 
according to shared knowledge, and going to the main topic of the visit. Kiswahili 
features absent in the learners' openings are the recycling of the Pis and PRs, and 
the rapid tempo. 



36 



26 



Alwiy* S. Omir 



The learners* performance was tested further by the use of natural data which 
was obtained by recording office hour conversations (as in Bardovi-Harlig and 
Hartford, 1991; Hartford & Bardovi-Harlig, in press), and recording telephone 
conversations (as in Godard, 1977). 



Office Hour Conversations. Learners were asked to come to the instructors 
office to talk about a project they were expected to do for the class. They were told 
in advance that the sessions would be taped, and that they should regard the instruc- 
tor* s office as another place where they could use the language informally. Like a 
younger NS participant, LN2 in (7) adopted a passive role after having used the 
respectful greeting form at the beginning of the opening session. 



(7) Office hour (LN2, a female student younger than instructor FT, 7 was in the target 

environment for eight weeks) 



1 . 


FT: 


Karibu. Hujambo? 


Come in. How are you? 


2. 


LN2: 


Sijambo. Shikamoo. 


I’m fine. Shikamoo. 


3. 


FT: 


Marahaba. 


Alright 


4. 


LN2: 


Samahani, 

nimechelewa. 


Sorry, I’m late. 


5. 


FT: 


Eh. Saa ngapi? 


OK. What time is it? 


6. 


LN2: 


Saa nne na nusu. 


Ten thirty. 


7. 


FT: 


Si kitu. Habari 


It’s nothing. News of 






za nyumbani? 


home? 


8. 


LN2: 


(laughs) Salama. 
Nimekimbia. 


Peaceful. I ran. 


9. 


FT: 


Pole. Habari za 


I’m sorry. News of 






masomo? 


studies? 


10. LN2: 


Nzuri. Habari za 


Good. News of home? 






nyumbani? 




11. FT: 


Salama. 


Peaceful. 



( 8 ) 




Office hour (LN5, a male student younger than instructor FT, was in the target 



vironment for one week) 




1. FT: Karibu. Habari za 


Welcome. News of 


masomo? 


studies? 


2. LN5: Nzuri sana. 


Very good. 


3. FT: Habari za kazi? 


News of work? 


4. LNS: Kazi nyingi sana. 


A lot of work. 


5. FT: Kazi nyingi. 


A lot of work. Do you 


Unapenda kusoma? like to study? 


6. LNS: Kidogo sana. 


Very little. 


7. FT: Unasomesha pia? 


Do you teach as well? 


8. LNS: Hapana. 


No. 


9. FT: Umefikiria kitabu 


Have you thought of 


ambacho unapenda 


a book that you 


kusoma? 


would like to read? 



37 



Conversational Openings in Kiswahili 



27 



(9) 



Office hour (LN3, a male student of same age as female instructor FT, was in the 
target language environment for six months) 



1. FT: 

2. LN3: 

3. FT: 

4. LN3: 

5. FT: 



6. LN3: 

7. FT: 

8. LN3: 

9. FT: 

10. LN3: 



Habari? Kaa kitako. 

{no reply; gives 
Oh, umeleta. 

Vizuri. Asante. 

Eh. 

Ameleta yule rafiki 
yako? Vizuri. 

Habari za nyumbani? 
Salama. 

Hawajambo wote? 
Hawajambo. 

L amekwenda Fort 
Wayne? 

Amekwenda. 



News? Sit down. 

FT something} 

You brought them. 
Good. Thanks. 

Yes. 

Your friend sent 
them. Good. News 
of home? 

Peaceful. 

Is everybody fine? 
They are fine. 

L has gone to Fort 
Wayne? 

She has. 



11. FT: Habari za kazi? News of work? 

12. LN3: mm Nzuri. Good. 

13. FT: Unasomesha? Do you teach? 

1 regard the opening in (7) as more successful than those in (8) and (9). LN2 
in Example (7) is native-like. She used the respectful form shikamoo and like any 
younger NS participant, she adopted a passive PI role producing only one PI in turn 
10. LN5 and LN3, on the other hand, are not native-like. Their passive role in the 
PI production does not match their performance at the beginnng of the opening; 
they did not begin the opening with a respectful form. Even though LN3 was in the 
host environment for six months, and LN5 was there for only a week, they demon- 
strate little difference in performance in opening conversations in the office setting. 

LN3 and LN5 performed elaborate openings in role plays. So we cannot at- 
tribute their failure to produce Pis in the office as a lack of knowledge of the re- 
quired forms. The reason could be the context of conversation. Apparently, the 
learners did not regard the instructors office as a place where they could engage in 
lengthy greetings even though they were prompted by the instructor. Since the in- 
structor did not want to end the opening abruptly, in (8) and (9), by going straight 
to the main topic, she continued with the Pis and engaged the learners in small talk. 
The advanced learners have developed the capacity to prolong an opening. It is 
interesting to note that while the less advanced learners in the previous study 
adopted the strategy of going straight to the main topic, the learners in the present 
study did not adopt such a strategy. 

Telephone Conversations. Recording telephone conversations yielded more 
spontaneous data than informal office conversation. Those learners who did not 
engage in elaborate Pis in the office, did, however, elaborate to some extent on the 
telephone. In Example (10), for example, LN3 goes to the main reason for his call 
only after FT has exhausted the greetings and laughs in turn 14. 

33 



28 



Alwiya $. Omar 



LN3 was the one who called FT but he did not go straight to the main topic of 
his call indicating that he knows that typical Kiswahili openings are not abrupt. He 
is waiting for a cue from FT that she is not going to produce any more Pis so he can 
go to the reason for the call. 



(10) Telephone conversation-waiting for instructor's cue (LN3 calls FT) 



1. FT: Hello. 

2. LN3: FT! (calls out name) 

3. FT: Eh. Habari? 

4. LN3: Eh. Nzuri. Habari? 

5. FT: Hujambo? 

6. LN3: Sijambo. 

7. FT: Habari za toka 

juzi? 

8. LN3: Safi kabisa. 

9. FT: Vipi? /Hawajambo/ 

10. LN3: /Hamjambo ?/ 

1 1 . FT: wote nyumbani? 

12. LN3: Eh. 

13. FT: K na J hawajambo? 

14. LN3: Eh. 

15. FT: {laughs} 

16. LN3: Tutafanya nini 

kesho? 



Hello. 



Yes. news? 

Good. News? 

How are you? 

I’m fine. 

News since day 

before yesterday? 

Very neat. 

What’s up? How is 
Are you fine? 
everybody at home? 

Yeah. 

Are K and J fine? 

Yes. 

What are we going to 

do in class tomorrow? 



The beginning of the conversation between LN5 and FT, in (1 1) is different 
from that in ( 10). LN5 identifies himself in turn 2, and in turn 6, wants to ensure FT 
is free to talk at this time. While such behavior is expected in the English code, it is 
unusual in Kiswahili. Native speakers calling each other by telephone would not 
immediately identify themselves nor would they ask if the person they are calling is 
available to talk. LN5 is the learner who has been in the target language environ- 
ment for the shortest time and is unlikely to have had much telephone experience. 

In general, telephone conversational openings between the learners are exten- 
sive. There is some recycling of Pis and PRs as in turns 8 and 9 in Example (12) 
below, but the tempo is slow. 

Summary of Results 

Non-native speakers of Kiswahili -- in this case advanced learners who have 
had some exposure to the target language environment, are native-like in terms of 
the length of their openings in some situations. Other aspects of their openings, 
however, are not native-like. They minimally recycle Pis and PRs, and their open- 
ings do not contain overlaps due to their observation of the norms of turn-taking in 
conversations. The performance of these learners contrasts substantively with lower 
proficiency learners who did not exhibit any of these behaviors (Omar, 1991). 

erJc 33 



Coavemtiooal Openings in Kitwahili 



29 



(11) Telephone conversation-using English greeting style (LN5 calls FT; different age) 



- 1. 


FT: 


Hello. 


Hello. 


2. 


LN5: 


Hujambo mwalimu? 


How are you, teacher? 






Huyu ni MK. 


This is MK. 


3. 


FT: 


Sijambo. Habari? 


I’m fine. News? 


4. 


LN: 


Salama. Habari 


Peaceful. Your 






yako? 


news? 


5. 


FT: 


Nzuri. Habari ya 


Good. News since 






tangu jana? 


yesterday? 


6. 


LN5: 


Salama. Unakula 


Peaceful. Are you 






sasa? 


eating now? 


7. 


FT: 


A a. Nimemaliza. 


No. I’m done. 


8. 


LN5: 


Umemaliza. Sawa. 


You are done. Fine. 






Sasa unataka kujua 


Now do you want to 






kitabu gani 


know what book I want 






ninataka kusoma? 


to read? 



(12) Telephone conversation-long opening; recycling; slow tempo (LN1 calls LN4; 
same age) 



1. LN1: Hujambo? 

2. LN4: Sijambo. Habari? 

3. LN1: Nzuri. Habari 

zako? 

4. LN4: Salama. 

5. LN1: Na sasa unafanya 

nini? 

6. LN4: Nakula chakula na 

nasoma gazeti. 

7. LN1: Aha, vizuri. Sasa 

ninazungumza nawe. 

8. LN4: Habari za mtoto? 

9. LN1: Salama. 

10. LN4: Amelala? 



How are you? 

I’m fine. How are 
you? 

Good. Your news? 
Peaceful. 

And now what are you 
doing? 

I’m eating and 

reading a newspaper. 
Good. Now I’m 
talking to you. 

News of the child? 

Peaceful. 

Is he sleeping? 



The data indicates a sequencing in the learning process of Kiswahili conversa- 
tional openings. The following generalization can be made: the ability to engage in 
a lengthy conversational opening emerges first. As Table 1 illustrates, beginning 
and intermediate students sometimes engage in lengthy greetings while advanced 
learners do so most of the time; recycling of Pis and PRs emerges next - Beginning 
and Intermediate learners seldom recycle Pis and PRs while Advanced learners 
sometimes do; rapid tempo — resulting in PI/PI overlap, PI/PR overlap, and succes- 
sive Pis — is acquired late. 



30 



Alwiya S. Omar 



Table 1. Comparing the performance of native and non-native speakers in the produc- 
tion of Pis and PRs. 





NS 


ANNS ' 


B/INNS 


Length 


+ 


+ 


o 


Recycling 


+ 


o 


- 


PI overlap 


+ 


o 


- 


PI/PR 

overlap 


+ 


- 


- 


Pis in a row 


+ 


- 


- 



NS as Native speakers; ANNS = Advanced nonnative speakers; 

B/INNS as Beginning and Intermediate non-native speakers 
+ occurs most of the time; o sometimes occurs; - never or seldom occurs 



CONCLUSION 

This paper examines the performance of native speakers and advanced learn- 
ers of Kiswahili in opening conversations. Age difference plays an important part in 
the way native speakers perform conversational openings. A younger person is 
expected to initiate an opening by using a respectful greeting form. Then the older 
person responds and monopolizes the production of Pis while the younger person 
has the passive role of responding. Beginning and intermediate learners observed in 
Omar (1991), and some advanced learners in the present study, also took the passive 
role of producing PRs which matches the performance of the younger native 
speaker. These learners, however, did not produce the respectful greeting form at 
the beginning of the opening. This mismatch is shown in Table 2 below. 

Table 2. Comparing openings by younger NS and A/ B/l NNS 





Younger NS 


A/B/INNS 


Respectful form 


-h 


- 


Passive PI role 


4- 


+ 



NS = Native speaker; A/B/I NNS — Advanced, Beginning and Intermediate Non- 
native speaker; PI = Phatic Inquiry. 



Native speakers of the same age produce Pis and PRs at a rapid tempo result- 
ing in overlaps and successive production of Pis. Non-native speakers of the same 
age - in this case advanced learners (data from telephone and role plays) -- lacked 

ERIC a 



Conversational Openings in Kiswahili 



31 



this tempo in their openings. The performance of speakers of the same age, native 
and non-native, is exemplified in Table 3. 



Table 3. Comparing the performance of native and non-native speakers of the same 
age. 





Same age NS 


Same age NNS 


Respectful form 


- 


- 


PI competition 


+ 


- 



NS = Native Speaker; NNS = Non-native Speaker; PI = Phatic Inquiry. 



The advanced learners in this study have visited the target language environ- 
ment, are proficient in Kiswahili, and are able to create environments outside the 
classroom to speak the language with each other and with other Kiswahili speakers. 
When casually observed, the learners appeared native-like in the way they initiated 
openings and also in the way they produced elaborate Pis and PRs, and recycled 
them to some extent. The results show that the learners are pragmatically aware of 
Kiswahili conversational openings but they sometimes lack the host experience in 
performing certain kinds of openings. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I thank my professors Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig, Beverly Hartford, and 
Robert Botne for their valuable comments and discussions. I thank Dorothy Evans 
for her helpful review. I also wish to thank my colleague Doreen Helen Klassen for 
her suggestions, and all the speakers of Kiswahili who participated in this study. 

THE AUTHOR 

Alwiya Omar is a Ph.D. candidate in Linguistics at Indiana University. She is 
currently investigating the acquisition of Kiswahili pragmatics by American learn- 
ers. She is on study leave from the University of Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania, where 
she is employed as a full-time lecturer. 

NOTES 

'Historically, Shikamoo used to stand for Nakushika miguu - "I'm holding 
your legs". It was used by people of lower status greeting those of higher status 
while holding their legs. This particular meaning is no longer in use. 

The notations used in this and other dialogues; / / Total overlaps: | | Partial 
overlaps. The numbers on the left of the dialogues indicate conversational turns. 
Single letters such as X, Y, R, are native speakers; LN followed by a number indi- 
cate advanced learners of Kiswahili; FT is the Kiswahili instructor. 



32 



Alwiy« S. Omar 



’Irvine (1974) discusses two status strategies adopted by Wolof speakers when 
they greet each other: self lowering and self elevating. The initiator of a greeting is 
usually of a lower rank and takes the active role of asking all the questions while a 
person of a higher rank remains passive responding to only the initiator's questions. 
A person of a higher rank, however, may choose to adopt the self-lowering status as 
a strategy for the avoidance of financial or other kind of obligations linked with the 
higher status. 

4 If there is any ulterior motive for wanting to have the active role of asking 
Pis, it is not a self lowering one as in the Wolof greeting Irvine (1974). Further 
analysis of native speaker openings needs to be done to determine the motive for PI 
competition between participants of the same age in Kiswahili. 

3 Some Zanzibari speakers reduplicate {Is. S has reduplicated the PI in this 
turn — Salima, salama. More reduplication is found in Example (3) turn 10 -- 
Hamjambo jambo. In Example (5) turn 1, the unique opening is also reduplicated - 
-Hodi, hodi. 

i khabari and its variant habari — 'news' is borrowed from Arabic Ixabarl. 
Many Zanzibari speakers prefer to pronounce the velar fricative Ixl. 

?T he author participated in this study as the instructor FT in the office hour, 
and in the telephone conversations. 

REFERENCES 

Bardovi-Harlig, K. & Hartford, B.S. (1991). Saying "No" in English: Native and 
non-native rejections, in Bouton, L & Kachru, Y. (Eds.), Pragmatics and 
Language Learning volume 2. Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois, 41- 
57. 

Godard, D. (1977). Same settings, different norms: Phone call beginnings in 
France and the United States. Language in Society 6, 209-19. 

Goffman, E. (1972). Relations in Public: Macrostudies of the public order. Ham- 
mondsworth: Penguin. 

Hartford, B. S. & Bardovi-Harlig, K. (in press). Closing the conversation: Evi- 
dence from the academic advising session. Discourse Processes. 

Irvine, J. (1974). Strategies of status manipulation in the Wolof greetings. In Bau- 
man, R and Sherzer, J. (Eds.), Explorations in the ethnography of speaking. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 167-91. 

Kasper, G. (1989). Interactive procedures in interlanguage discourse. In Oleksy, 
W. (Ed.), Contrastive Pragmatics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing 
Company, 189-229. 

Omar, A. S. (1991). How learners greet in Kiswahili: A cross sectional survey. In 
Bouton, L & Kachru, Y (Eds). Pragmatics and language learning, volume 2. 
Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois, 59-73. 




e— 

43 



Pragmatics and Language Learning 
Monograph Series, Vol. 3, 1992 



Experimental and Observational Data in the 
Study of Interlanguage Pragmatics 

Beverly S. Hartford 
Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig 

This paper compares data on rejections by native and nonnative 
speakers collected from natural conversation with data collected from a 
discourse completion task (DCT). It demonstrates that although the use 
of DCTs has benefits such as availability of large samples and experi- 
mental controls, the technique also biases the data in certain ways. In 
particular, we show that participants used a narrower range of semantic 
formulas on the DCT, that they used fewer status preserving strategies, 
and that they lacked extended negotiations found in the natural data. On 
the other hand, the DCT facilitates the testing of hypotheses derived 
from instances in the natural conversations where there is insufficient 
data. We conclude that while there should be an increase in observa- 
tional data in interlanguage pragmatics research, the DCT may also be 
utilized as an important tool to complement such data. 

This paper compares natural data on rejections collected from natural conver- 
sation with data collected from a discourse completion task (DCT). The DCT has 
been a popular data-gathering instrument in much current work on the speech act, 
especially the work on interlanguage pragmatics carried out in the Cross-Cultural 
Speech Act Realization Project (CCSARP) (Blum-Kulka, House, & Kasper, 1989; 
Blum-Kulka & Olshtain, 1984), and by Beebe et al. in a series of studies on Japa- 
nese ESL pragmatics (Beebe, Takahashi, & Uliss-Weltz, 1990; Beebe & Takahashi, 
1989; Takahashi & Beebe, 1987). (For a comprehensive review of research method- 
ology in interlanguage pragmatics, see Kasper & Dahl, 1991.) 

Although some studies acknowledge the possible skewedness of results as a 
product of such a method, they also note that the use of DCTs has many benefits, 
such as availability of large samples and experimental controls. Few of the studies, 
however, actually compare DCT data with equivalent data from other methodolo- 
gies to test such suppositions. One important exception to this is an unpublished 
paper by Beebe and Cummings (1985). They compare data gathered through a DCT 
and naturally occurring speech, and find that the DCT does not reflect natural 
speech with respect to actual wording, range of formulas and strategies, length of 
response or number of turns, depth of emotion, number of repetitions and elabora- 
tions, or rate of occurrence of a speech act (p. 14). However, while their study 
provides evidence for the assumptions regarding the differences in the two kinds of 
data sets, it only examines native speaker responses. Furthermore, the natural data 
is from telephone conversations, which may have their own particular constraints. 
Thus, it does not provide evidence on the extent to which similar nonnative speaker 
data might be effected by task. Additionally, the status relations of the subjects in 



34 



Hartford and Bardovi-Harlig 



Beebe and Cummings were those of equals, so that it also offers no evidence of how 
data of status unequals might be affected. 1 Finally, the subjects performing the DCT 
were in a role-playing task which did not directly reflect a real-life situation for such 
subjects. 

In the present study we show that a collection technique such as the DCT may 
indeed bias the data, not only for native speakers, but also for nonnative speakers. 
However, we also show that the DCT is helpful in testing hypotheses which arise 
from the analysis of natural data, particularly when those hypotheses address the 
absence of features or content, as in the notable lack of rejections in the native 
speaker advising sessions. 



REJECTIONS 

In the present study we compare the data available from elicited and natural 
conditions by examining rejections of advice. Our interest in rejections comes from 
our previous work (Bardovi-Harlig and Hartford, 1990, 1991) using natural data 
from academic advising sessions. We have found that students have two ways of 
controlling their course schedules: through the use of suggestions which build the 
schedule and through the use of rejections which block courses from being added. 
Rejections become obligatory for students who do not make positive suggestions 
because they have no other way to shape their schedules if they do not agree with 
their advisors' proposals. If students want to eliminate a suggestion made by the 
advisor, they must reject the advice. 

We have further shown that nonnative speakers make proportionately more 
rejections than the native speakers (Bardovi-Harlig & Hartford, 1990, 1991). Na- 
tive speakers make suggestions more than twice as often as they reject advice (they 
make 2.36 suggestions for each rejection), whereas nonnative speakers make sug- 
gestions and rejections in almost equal numbers (1.20 suggestions for each rejec- 
tion). Thus, native speakers control the content of their schedules positively, by 
making suggestions, while nonnative speakers more frequently control their sched- 
ules by rejecting their advisor’s advice. Native and non-native speakers also differ 
in the semantic formulas which make up their rejections. Semantic formulas repre- 
sent the means by which a particular speech act is accomplished in terms of the 
primary content of an utterance, such as a reason, an explanation, or an alternative. 
Even in cases of apparent similarity, such as in the use of explanations, the content 
encoded by the formulas of each group differs. 

All of the advising sessions which we have studied to date have a single goal: 
the students and their advisors determine the student's academic schedule for the 
coming semester. The sessions generally end when the advisor gives the student a 
signed registration ticket containing the negotiated schedule. The problem with the 
natural data, of course, is that while the advising sessions were as similar to each 
other in terms of goal, content, and length as natural conversations can be, they 
were not identical. 2 More importantly, since the native English-speaking graduate 
students actively built their schedules through their own suggestions, they did not 
reject advice as frequently as the nonnative speakers; thus, we had relatively few 

O 

ERIC 



4b 



Experimental and ObaerVaUonal Data in the Study of Interianguage Piagmatic* 



35 



examples of native-speaker rejections. We were interested in discovering how na- 
tive speakers would reject advice if they were in the same situations as the nonnative 
speakers. Because native speakers did not frequently reject advice, since they used 
other strategies, they avoided many of the difficult situations in which nonnative 
speakers found themselves. Wfe thus constructed a DCT to test the generalizations 
we had made about rejections on the basis of the advising sessions. The DCT pro- 
vided valuable evidence unavailable in the natural data, but also showed strong task 
bias. Following the method section which briefly describes the participants and the 
DCT, the next two sections present the results and compare the natural data with the 
data from the DCT. 



METHOD 



Participants 

There were two groups of participants whose use of language was analyzed: 
students who responded to the DCT and students whose advising sessions were 
taped. A third group of participants was the faculty in the advising sessions. Their 
use of language is not discussed in this paper. 

The students who responded to the DCT were graduate students in linguistics 
(13 native speakers and 11 nonnative speakers) who had completed advising ses- 
sions as required of all graduate students. They were enrolled in two graduate level 
linguistics courses. The nonnative speakers represented seven languages: there were 
four speakers of Chinese, and one speaker each of Bambara, Bengali, Chichewa, 
Japanese, Spanish, Thai, and Yoruba. All normative speakers had TOEFL scores of 
577 and above. It is important to note that in response to the DCT the student par- 
ticipants always took the role of students ~ a role which they know well. We will 
therefore refer to the student participants as "students" throughout the paper. 

The natural data is taken from thirty-nine advising sessions which were audio- 
taped and analyzed in their entirety (Bardovi-Harlig & Hartford, 1991). Seven na- 
tive English speaking faculty members (four males and three females) and thirty- 
nine graduate students participated in this portion of the study. The student group 
consists of 18 native speakers and 21 nonnative speakers. Six languages were repre- 
sented: Arabic (1), Chinese (5), Japanese (5), Korean (4), Malay (1), and Spanish 
(5). All nonnative students had TOEFL scores of 577 and above. The faculty par- 
ticipants were all experienced advisors who met with approximately the same num- 
ber of students during the normal departmental advising periods. Since all faculty 
are required by the department to advise students, each has had several years of 
experience. 

Instrument Design 

We constructed a written DCT to test eight situations which commonly oc- 
curred in the nonnative speaker conversations, but which were rare in the native 
speaker conversations. The eight scenarios were designed to test three specific 
hypotheses regarding semantic formulas and specific content. 



36 



Hartford and Bardovi-Harlig 



I. Native speaker rejections will be shorter than nonnative speaker rejec- 
tions, containing fewer semantic formulas per rejection. 

II. Native speakers will prefer a smaller number of rejection strategies (i.e. t 
Explanation and Alternative) than nonnative speakers. 

III. Native speakers will not use "illegal" content in their rejections, but non- 
native speakers will. 3 

Two items tested "illegal" explanations - "too difficult" and "too easy" - 
which were frequently offered unsuccessfully by nonnative speakers in the actual 
advising sessions. Two others tested problematic and possibly "illegal" explana- 
tions - "you don't like the instructor" and "you aren’t interested the topic of your 
advisor’s elective course." These explanations were hinted at, but were not com- 
mon, in the advising sessions. The "illegal" reasons for rejecting a course suggested 
by the advisor were included to determine whether native speakers ever used such 
explanations. These types of explanations were absent in the natural data and we 
attempted to determine whether this was systematic or accidental. Three items 
tested "legal" and highly acceptable explanations - "you prefer not to take summer 
courses," "you have a schedule conflict," and "you have already taken a course." 
These explanations had also been used successfully by both native and nonnative 
speakers. Another item tested the rejection of the timing of a course where the stu- 
dent’s own action brought about the difficulty. This situation is common when a 
student drops a course which the advisor previously recommended that the student 
take at a particular time. 

The DCT was introduced by the general direction: "In the following situ- 
ations, imagine that you are a graduate student who has gone to see an advisor to 
register for courses for next semester." In each item, the suggestion by the advisor 
and the reason for the rejection is described as in Example (l). 

( 1 ) Your advisor suggests that you take a course during the summer. 

You prefer not to take classes during the summer. 

You say: 

Students were given 50 minutes to complete the DCT. All responses were 
anonymous. 



RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

An obvious advantage of the DCT is that it permits the testing of large sample 
sizes in equivalent situations. The DCT also allowed us to specifically test the three 
hypotheses which were based on observation of the natural corpus. We will present 
the results and discuss each hypothesis in turn. 



Hypothesis 1. Native speaker rejections will be shorter than nonnative speaker rejec- 
tions, containing fewer semantic formulas per rejection. 



Experiment*! and Obiervational Data in the Study of Interianguage Pragmatics 



37 



In the DCT, the nonnative speakers wrote more overall than did the native 
speakers, supporting Hypothesis I. The nonnative speakers employed a total of 206 
semantic formulas, while the native speakers produced 162, 44 fewer that the non- 
native speakers (Table 1). The mean number of semantic formulas per individual 
student was 18.7 for nonnative speakers and for native speakers, 12.5. For each 
Item on the DCT, the nonnative speakers used an average of 2.3 formulas, while the 
native speakers used only an average of 1.5. Although the DCT data lacks the fea- 
tures of negotiation and turn taking, the relative number of semantic formulas re- 
flects the trends found in the natural data where nonnative speakers tended to take 
more turns for a rejection than did native speakers. 

Hypothesis II. Native speakers will prefer a smaller number of rejection strategies 
(i.e., Explanation and Alternative) than nonnative speakers. 



Table 1. Number of Semantic Formulas Used in 
Rejections by NS and NNS on DCT 





NS (N » 13) 


NNS (N = 11) 


Total 


162 


206 


Rejections 






Individual 


123 


18.7 


Mean 






Item Mean 


13 


23 



Hypothesis II was also supported. On the DCT the native speakers used three 
major strategies, Explanation, Alternative, and Direct Rejection, in 88% of the 
cases, while the nonnative speakers used these same three in 74% (Table 2). 4 

On the DCT the semantic formula favored by both groups was Explanation, 
followed by Alternative, with Direct Rejection third. 5 The relative rankings of these 
three semantic formulas with respect to one another are the same for both groups on 
both data sets. 

On the DCT the nonnative speakers used a variety of semantic formulas which 
are seldom or never used by the native speakers, and 26% of their DCT answers are 
constituted by these other formulas. Also, nonnative speakers have a much lower 
preference for Alternatives than do native speakers, which fits the natural data. 
Since Alternatives could be interpreted as a kind of suggestion, which are used less 
often by the nonnative speakers, it is not surprising to find that the nonnative speak- 
ers use fewer of them on the DCT, employing other strategies instead, such as Re- 
questing Advice, Apologizing, and even, in two extreme cases, Accusing the advisor 
of being responsible for a problem. * ^ 




38 



Hartford and Bardovi-Harlig 



Table 2 . Relative Frequency of Semantic Formulas in 
for DCT and Conversational Data* 

DCT 

Most Common Semantic Formulas 


Rejections 
Natural Data 






NS 


NNS 


NS 


NNS 


Explanations 


41 


45 


32 


49 


Alternatives 


33 


19 


18 


7 


Rejections 


13 


10 


5 


1 


Subtotal 87 

Less Common Semantic Formulas 


74 


55 


~57 


Accept as Reject 


— 




13 


3 


Condition 


— 




8 


2 


But/Yeah But 


— 





8 


14 


Avoidance 


1 


2 


8 


15 


Empathy 


4 


4 


5 


2 


Request Adv/Help 


— 


4 






Indefinite 


... 


... 


3 


2 


Dissuade 





... 




5 


Criticize/Accuse 


1 


1 


<t m 




Agreement 


3 


5 


^. nm 




Other 


4 


10 




... 


Total 


100 


100 




~Ioo 



a AU values arc expressed in percentages 



Although the overall use of the three most common semantic formulas was 
similar for both groups on the DCT, the actual distribution of these responses across 
the DCT items differed between the native speakers and nonnative speakers. In 
addition, the content of these responses differed, such that the profiles of the native 
speakers and nonnative speakers are not as similar as the summary figures might 
indicate. Hypothesis 111 addresses the question of content. 

Hypothesis III. Native speakers will not use -illegal- content in their rejections, but 
nonnative speakers will. 

To address this hypothesis we selected reasons from the natural data that 
clearly received a negative response from the advisors during the advising session. 
We included Too difficult" and "too easy" as reasons for rejections which did not 
meet with approval in the advising sessions, and two potentially problematic reasons 
"you don't like the instructor" and "lack of interest in the advisor's course" (Items 
2, 6, 10, and 7, respectively). (See Appendix.) 

© 40 

ERIC 4 J 



Experimental and Observational Data in the Study of Interlanguage Pragmatics 



39 



Native speakers do not use these reasons in the natural data, and they do not 
tend to use these reasons in the DCT, although they were included as the reasons in 
the prompts. Instead they choose other "legal" content. In response to item 7, Your 
advisor suggests that you take an elective class that she's teaching, but you are not 
interested in the topic," 9 out of 13 native speaker responses (69%) were Alterna- 
tives as in Example (2). 

(2) Well, I'd kind of thought of taking [L541]. (NS) 

Two other students even agreed to take the courses, replying "Sure!" and "OK," and 
two others requested permission to postpone their decisions. This shows that al- 
though a difficult situation may obtain, native speakers do not use illegal content as 
an explanation. Thus we conclude that the absence of such content in the natural 
data is purposeful and not accidental. 

In contrast, no nonnative speaker used an Alternative in response to Item 7. 
Many used vague explanations in their rejections such as "I cannot" which we sus- 
pect would not satisfy an advisor in an actual session. Only one native speaker 
expressed a lack of interest in the topic (8%) whereas five (46%) of the nonnative 
speakers did. An additional two nonnative students rejected the course as "not rele- 
vant" and "not necessary." Thus a total of seven nonnative speakers (64%) rejected 
the course with a negative evaluation. The form of these particular rejections is also 
quite striking. The native speaker rejection in Example (3) exhibits the downgraders 
I'm not sure and really whereas the nonnative speaker rejection in (4) exhibits an 
upgrader, at all, and a statement of preference. 

(3) I’m not sure that I'm really interested in the topic. (NS) 

(4) 1 would rather not take this course because the topic doesn't interest me at 
all. (NNS) 

In Item 2, "Your advisor suggests that you take a course which you would 
rather not take because you think that it will be too difficult for you, the student 
has to reject a course because of its difficulty. For graduate students to reject explic- 
itly on those grounds may be problematic since this may cast doubt on their aca- 
demic ability. In the natural data native speakers never used this reason for rejecting 
a course, but the nonnative speakers sometimes did. We had specifically hypothe- 
sized that the absence of native speaker rejections which were based on the difficulty 
of the course, such as "this course is too difficult for me," were not accidental, but 
reflected cultural-academic values held by the native speaker graduate students and 
their advisors. Item 2, then, was included in order to test the generalization that the 
two groups differ in their responses to this situation. 

Figure 1 shows that both groups used Explanation frequently in response to 
Item 2, native speakers 43% and nonnative speakers 46%. However, the native 
speakers actually used Alternatives even more frequently, at 57 %. Nonnative speak- 
ers only used them in 21% of their responses, using Direct Rejections in 11%. 



40 



Hartford and Eardovi-Harlig 



Moreover, although many of the nonnative speakers used explanations similar to 
those of native speakers, some of them did reject on the grounds that the course was 
too difficult, as illustrated in Example (5). 

(5) This course may be too difficult for me now. Can I take it later on? (NNS) 

In addition, some nonnative speakers further directly rejected the course by stating 
that they did not want to take it, as in Example (6). 

(6) Actually, I don't want to take this course because I think it will be too 
difficult for me and it will effect [sic] my grade point average. Would it 
be possible that I study other courses instead of this one? (NNS) 

Native speakers, on the other hand, did not refer directly to the course difficulty, 
nor did any of the native speakers directly reject. The example most similar to a 
Direct Rejection is Example (7), in which the student mentions the risky outcome of 

enrolling in such a course, but even this student does not actually mention "diffi- 
culty." 

(7) I m really not sure I could handle that. I don't want to get in over my 
head here. (NS) 



Figure 1. Distribution of Responses for Item 2 ("too difficult") 





NS I 1 NNS 



51 



Experimental and Observational Data in the Study of Intcrlanguage Pragmatics 



41 



Most native and nonnative speaker students referred to their lack of background or 
preparation for the course, rather than to its difficulty. This was supplemented in 
the Alternatives by asking about another course or by asking about the possibility of 
postponing the course in question until a later date, thus showing responsibility for 
taking the course at some time. 

Our first goal in this study was satisfied since the DCT provided valuable 
information regarding features and content which were absent in the natural data. 
However, there are certain important differences in the rejections in the natural and 
elicited conditions. We examine the influence of the task in the next section. 

Task Influence 

Comparison of Semantic Formulas Used 

The top three strategies on the DCT differ from those most frequent in the 
natural date (Table 3). First, while both groups also favor Explanation in the natural 
data, they differ in their frequency and relative rankings of use of the other semantic 
formulas. For both groups the number of Direct Rejections is elevated on the DCT 
to third place, but is lower and differently ranked for each group in the natural date. 
The native speaker natural data shows that Alternative, as in their DCT date, is the 
second most used semantic formula, but the Accept as Reject formula* which never 
shows up at all on the DCT, is third. In fact, several other semantic formulas rank 
higher than Direct Rejection in the native speaker natural data, and it would tie for 
second from last place. For the nonnative speakers, in the natural data the semantic 
formula which ranks second is But/Yeah But 1 and the third ranked formula is Avoid- 
ance, which does not occur in the DCT. Alternatives would be ranked fourth in the 
nonnative speaker natural data, and Direct Rejections would be at the bottom. 

Second, in the two data sets there are some fairly frequent semantic formulas 
found in the advising sessions which were not used at all on the DCT: Accept as 
Reject, Condition, and But/Yeah But , as well as some less frequent formulas, with 
the result that overall, the DCT elicited a smaller range of semantic formulas than 
did the natural data. 

Third, in the natural data the range of semantic formulas is about the same for 
both groups. On the DCT, however, there was a greater difference between native 
speakers and normative speaker responses. (See Table 2.) 

Fourth, there are strategies which appear in one data set and not in the other. 
On the DCT, for example, both groups use, albeit infrequently, Criticize/ Accuse, 
Guilt Trip, and Indefinite, which never appear in the natural data. Opting Out also 
appears on the DCT where it does not appear in the natural data. Opting Out occurs 
when there is no response at all (Bardovi-Harlig and Hartford, 1991). On the DCT 
this would be represented by leaving the response line blank. The natural data strate- 
gies of Accept as Reject, Condition, and But/Yeah But do not appear on the DCT. 

Last, and less obvious from Table 2, is the status of Avoidance strategies. 
Although they appear in both data sets, responses in this category are very infre- 
quent in the DCT data, while for the nonnative speakers, at least, it is a frequently 
used category in the natural data. If we break this category down into its subcatego- 



42 



Hartford and Bardovi-Harlig 



ries, different profiles for the two data sets appear. These subcategories are Request- 
ing a Postponement, Responding with Questions, and Delaying the Rejection. The 
major Avoidance strategy found on the DCT explicitly requested putting off a deci- 
sion, as in Example (8). 



Table 3. Relative Rank of Semantic Formulas in 


Rejections 




for DCT and Conversational Data 






DCT 




Natural Data 


Most Common Semantic Formulas 










NS 


NNS 


NS 


NNS 


Explanations 


1 


1 


1 


1 


Alternatives 


2 


2 


2 


4 


Rejections 


3 


3 


5 


8 


Less Common Semantic Formulas 








Accept as Reject 


— 




3 


6 


Condition 






4 


7 


But/Yeah but 


— 


— 


4 


3 


Avoidance 


6 


7 


4 


2 


Empathy 


4 


6 


5 


7 


Request Adv/Help 


— 


5 






Indefinite 




MM* 


6 


7 


Dissuade 


... 


... 




5 


Criticize/Accuse 


6 


8 


... 




Agreement 


5 


4 


___ 


_ 


Other 


4 


3 


— 


— 



(8) Urn — can I decide if next week? (NNS) 

Responding with Questions and Delaying the Rejections were Avoidance 
strategies which the nonnative speakers used frequently in the natural data but did 
not appear on the DCT. We find students requesting information and requesting 
repetition in response to a suggestion which they do not want to accept. When stu- 
dents Request Information, they ask a question whose form is a simple information 
question, but which pragmatically allows the student to avoid committing to the 
advisor's suggestion. Example (9) is an example of this type of Avoidance. 

(9) Do you know anything about 560, uh, urn, who teaches (NNS) 

The second, Question Requesting Repetition, occurs sometimes immediately 
following an advisor's suggestion, sometimes later in the interview. It also allows 
the student to avoid immediate commitment to the suggestion. Example (10) illus- 
trates the Repetition request. 

O c : > 

ERIC 00 



ExpcriiMnUl »nd Obtcrvatiooil D«U in the Study of InlerUnguafc Prajmetki 



43 



(10) Which one was that one? (NNS) 

Both of the preceding strategies are used frequently by the nonnative speakers in the 
natural data and contribute significantly to the high percentage of Avoidance in 
those data. They differ from the Delays discussed below in that no actual rejection 
appears in the data. 

Finally, we find that in the natural data nonnative speakers frequently delayed 
their rejections. In these cases rejections occurred several turns later. No such de- 
lays were found in the DCT. Such delays may be accomplished by using a series of 
questioning strategies as illustrated in Examples (9) and (10). They may also be 
accomplished in a number of other ways, often by apparently agreeing to the sug- 
gestion, only to return to it later in the interview and initiate a rejection. In the 
natural data the high percentage for nonnatives under Avoidance may be accounted 
for, at least in part, by this strategy. Although nonnative speakers used other Avoid- 
ance strategies on the DCT they did not employ postponement, even though they 
could have written ' no response* or something similar to represent such a strategy. 
All of these avoidance strategies allow speakers to avoid immediately rejecting the 
advisor's suggestion, but not necessarily to avoid rejecting entirely. 

We suggest that the primary reason that the Avoidance subcategories differ 
across the data sets lies in the nature of the tasks themselves. Avoidance strategies 
are primarily interactive and promote negotiation over a number of turns. Their 
absence on the DCT reflects the nonnegotiative nature of the situation: unless re- 
spondents write out a long dialogue they are constrained from employing such 
strategies. Yet, as we have noted, these constitute a large part of the preferred 
strategies in the actual interviews where such negotiations are a primary aspect of 
the advising sessions. 

Comparison of Content 

Two of the items, Item 9 and Item 3, elicited very different responses on the 
DCT compared to the natural data. Item 9 "Your advisor suggests that you take a 
course that you have already taken" was based on an actual advising session with a 
native speaker in which she responded as in Example (11). 

(1 1) l've already taken that. (NS) 

Item 9 more or less forces the student to reject the advisor's advice, although 
in the natural situation the student has the option of avoiding a response. Even in this 
forced situation, however, we found that the native speakers and nonnative speakers 
used different strategies. Of the native speaker responses, 67% were Direct Rejec- 
tions of the advice, and only 6% included an Explanation. No Alternatives were 
offered, and the native speakers had an average of 1 .4 semantic formulas in their re- 
sponses. In other words, the native speakers responded directly to this situation and 
saw no need to embellish their responses with explanations or other discussion. This 
is illustrated in Figure 2. 



51 



44 



Hartford and Bardovi-Hariig 



The nonnative speakers, on the other hand, only used Direct Rejections 21 % 
of the time, and offered Explanations 58% of the time, with an average of 2.2 se- 
mantic formulas for each response. The remainder of the responses included an 
Apology, a Request for advice, a Directive to the advisor, and even an Accusation 
or Challenge. As in natural data, it would appear that, overall, nonnative speakers 
tended to avoid out-of-status moves such as Direct Rejections. However, in spite of 
the similarity across data sets of their choices of semantic formulas, in the nonnative 
speaker DCT the content was much more assertive ("illegal* 1 ), expressing out-of- 
status negative opinions and criticisms not found in the natural data. One very ex- 
treme response, a direct Challenge to the advisor, is a type which is never used in 
any of the natural data, whether native speaker or nonnative speaker. 



Figure 2. Distribution of Responses for Item 9 (course taken) 




In Example (1 1) from the natural data the student resolves the matter quickly 
and directly thus minimizing the number of turns (and consequently the amount of 
time) for which the session is out of status. Whereas many native speakers replied to 
Item 9 on the DCT with a brief Direct Rejection as in Example (12), some nonnative 
speakers used replies with questionable content and unnecessary elaboration as in 
Examples (13) and (14). 



(12) I*ve taken that already. (NS) 



Experimental and Observational Data in the Study of Interlanguage Pragmatic* 



45 



(13) I have already taken this course so I don't want to take it. I think it 
would be a waste of time. (NNS) 

(14) I suppose I have gained sufficient knowledge from the course, and I've 
passed the exam to prove it. I don't think I have to take it a second time. 
(NNS) 

In Example (15) the advisor is challenged. 

(15) I don't want to repeat a course that I have already taken. Why do you 
want me to take it again? (NNS) 

We hypothesize that the unusual content of these responses is a direct result of 
the DCT, where anonymity is maintained, and students feel the freedom to voice 
feelings that they do not care to risk in the real situation. Thus, although nonnative 
speakers utilize similar semantic formulas in both types of data, the content differs. 

It is interesting to note that the native speakers did not show the same discrepancies 
in content. 

The more difficult the situation is to negotiate in real-life the greater the dif- 
ference between natural and elicited data. Item 3, "During your advising session 
you find out that . squired course which you had dropped from your schedule the 
previous semester will not be offered until the semester after you had planned to 
graduate. This is a real financial burden for you," presents a very serious situation, 
caused by the student's own action which contradicted an agreement from a previ- 
ous advising session, placing the student in a precarious situation. This item pro- 
duced some of the most extreme responses in the DCT, and quite different profiles 
for the two groups. 

Figure 3 shows that the most common semantic formula in responses to Item 
3 for native speakers was Explanation, making up 53% of their responses, while 
attempt to gain Empathy was second most common at 29% . Alternatives were third, 
at 18%. Nonnative speakers, however, used Explanations less often at 22%, using 
AUematives and Requests for Advice somewhat more frequently: each constituted 
about 26% of the responses. Nonnative speakers also employed Empathy, but only 
at 15%. There were two extreme responses, one from each group in which the 
advisor and/or the system was accused of causing the situation. 

Most of the Explanations offered by both native speakers and nonnative speak- 
ers employ an "excuse" and sometimes an indirect criticism of the system such as in 
Examples (16) and (17). 

(16) I wasn ' t aware that this class is taught so infrequently, especially since it 
is required. (NS) 

(17) I was planning to graduate next semester and I just found out that L532 
is not offered until next summer. (NNS) 



46 



Hartford and Bardovi-Harlif 



Figure 3. Distribution of Responses for Item 3 (course dropped) 




NS CHINNS I 




The Empathy moves were also similar in content for the two groups, as in Example 

08). 



(18) ...there is simply no way I can afford to stay an extra semester. I don’t 
know how I could do it. (NS) 

The Alternatives were usually requests for a substitute course or a waiver, as in 
Example (19), while the Requests for Advice, used only by nonnative speakers, 
were more general appeals as in Example (20). 

(19) Is there a way that the department can arrange for me to take this course 
or to waive it? (NNS) 

(20) What can I do for this situation? Can you give me some suggestions? 
(NNS) 

These examples were similar to those in the natural data. The responses which 
did not appear in the natural data are, as in Item 2, Bald-on-Record statements 
which accuse or blame the institution and its representatives, as in Examples (21) 
and (22). 



Experimental and Observational Data in the Study of Interlanguage Pragmatics 



47 



(21) This really gets me! It seems to me that if these courses are required, 
they ought to be offered every semester, or we should at least be warned 
that they're not going to be offered! (NS) 

(22) You should have told me that this course will not be offered until after 
the semester I planned to graduate. (NNS) 

These responses are totally out of status, and, if used in an actual advising 
session would surely produce strong negative moves from the advisor. The fact that 
they do not so occur reflects an important difference in the effect of the methods 
used in obtaining data.' 

In addition to the difference in content between the two methods, there was a 
difference in the use of status preserving strategies. Generally there were fewer uses 
of these in the DCT. In the natural data, native speakers used more such strategies 
than did nonnative speakers, and that still holds in the DCT. However, the nonna- 
tive speakers use even fewer such strategies on the DCT than they do in the advising 
sessions. Moreover, nonnative speakers employed upgraders on the DCT which 
were absent in the natural data. Upgraders enhance the illocutionary force of the 
utterance, and their appearance here may be related to the nature of the content of 
the DCT responses. A response without downgraders is seen in Example (20) 
above, and in the Direct Rejections in (13) and (14). In Example (23) the student 
employs an upgrader by granting the advisor permission to look in the file, a power 
the student does not actually have. 

(23) Do you remember that I have already taken that course? I took it last 
summer. If you like you can check my file. (NNS) 

As with the difference in content, we suggest that the differences in status 
preserving strategies are reflexes of the data-gathering techniques employed, where 
the face-to-face session requires the students to utilize face and status saving strate- 
gies because of the on-going relationship with advisors, whereas they are not at such 
a risk in the anonymous DCT. 



CONCLUSION 

Generally we found that our three hypotheses were supported, and that there 
were differences in the data elicited by the DCT and the natural data. 9 As Beebe and 
Cummings (1985) found for their native speakers, the DCT elicits a narrower range 
of semantic formulas, and we found this true for both the native speakers and non- 
native speakers, although the nonnative speakers still use more than do the native 
speakers. Some frequently used formulas, such as Accept as Reject and delays, do 
not show up at all on the DCT. The reason, we claim, is because the DCT does not 
promote the tum-taking and negotiation strategies found in natural conversations. 
On the DCT, students have no way of knowing the success of a response, and are 
forced to choose the one which seems most likely to work. This, of course, is useful 



48 



Hartford and Bardovi-Hariif 



in that it does tell us what they probably judge to be the best strategy in such a situ- 
ation. At the same time, the DCT elevates the number of Direct Rejections for both 
groups to third most frequent, even though in the natural data Direct Rejections are 
among the most infrequently used formulas. 

We also found that the DCT allows us to test hypotheses deriving from natural 
data. By putting the native speakers in circumstances which forced rejections, we 
were able to test our generalizations about the type, number, and content of seman- 
tic formulas that they would use, compared to the no rma tive, speakers. 

We also discovered, however, that the DCT allows the students to be less 
polite (i.e. , to use fewer status preserving strategies), and to employ more Bald-on- 
Record statements than does the natural situation. Although Beebe & Cummings 
(1985) found less politeness for their native speakers on the DCT, it was not clear 
that this would be the case for the present study, since, in contrast to Beebe & 
Cummings's study, our participants were status unequals. Because of the anonymity 
of the DCT, students can say what they really think, and vent feelings that would 
result in a tremendous loss of face in the actual advising sessions. These differences 
demonstrate that both native speakers and nonnative speakers have outer boundaries 
on the form and content of the rejections which they use in natural situations. These 
boundaries differ, since the nonnative speakers do use "illegal" content more often 
and fewer status preserving strategies than do native speakers in the natural data; 
yet, even the nonnative speakers do not cross over to direct accusation or criticism 
when they are face-to-face with their advisors. 

In addition to supporting our three hypotheses, the results of this study also 
support our 1991 speculations in comparing our natural data to the findings of 
Beebe et al. (1987, 1990). In that work, we claimed that the data collecting tech- 
niques could account for many of the differences between our data and theirs. 
Moreover, we assumed that the differences in the contexts of the refusals of our 
studies would further help explain the differences found. For example, we noted 
that Beebe et al. had found Opting Out as a strategy whereas no such option existed 
for our students. The fact that we did find Opting Out in our DCT supports our 
claim that the presence of such a strategy is constrained by the context: students 
cannot easily walk out of an advising session, but they can leave a blank on ai DCT. 
This may be generalized to the overall infrequency of Avoidance strategies on our 
DCT, which matches their infrequency in the Beebe et al. study: they are less likely 
to occur in a task where turn-taking and negotiation are not promoted. The same 
may also be the reason that for both Beebe et al. and the DCT data in the present 
study, there is a noticeable lack of Accept as Reject responses. 

However, the fact that for both our DCT and natural data, Explanation was 
the most preferred response, whet .. » for Beebe et al. Alternatives were preferred, 
probably reflects the difference in the types of suggestions in the two studies rather 
than the difference in data collection. As we claimed in 1991 , the setting and status 
of participants, and the resultant types of suggestions, differ for the two studies, and 
are likely to produce different rejection preferences. Since on our DCT these para- 
meters were the same as for our natural data, we believe the consistently high pref- 
erence for Explanation is evidence that such factors make a difference in findings. 



Experimental and Obaemuional Data in the Study of Interlanguage Pragmatics 



49 



T.ie DCT, then allows us to not only test our hypotheses, but also can provide 
data which help explain and interpret the natural data. It cannot, however, show us 
the whole picture: it disallows certain common negotiation strategies, it eliminates 
certain semantic formulas, and it influences the politeness and status balancing 
profiles of the students. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This study was supported in part by a grant from the Spencer Foundation. 

THE AUTHORS 

Beverly S. Hartford is Associate Professor of Linguistics at Indiana Univer- 
sity. She has published in the areas of World English, second language acquisition, 
and pragmatics. Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig is Assistant Professor of Linguistics at 
Indiana University. She has published in the areas of second language acquisition, 
pragmatics, and teacher education. 



NOTES 

'Bardovi-Harlig & Hartford (1990) and Wolfson (1989) have shown that 
status relations affect the codings of speech acts in important ways. Wolfson’s 
Bulge Theory claims that such correlations are not linear, and that politeness formu- 
las are used more often among status equals than among nonequals. 

2 ln the present study the advising session data is referred to as "the natural 

data." 

yphe success, or the legal or illegal status of particular content, was deter- 
mined in the analysis of the spontaneous conversations by the advisor’s response 
(Bardovi-Harlig & Hartford, 1991). If the advisor accepts the rejection and with- 
draws the suggestion, the rejection has been successful. If the advisor overrides or 
dismisses the rejection out of hand, it has been unsuccessful. 

4 All values which are given in percentages have been rounded off. 

5 Direct Rejections include examples such as Hm. Not actually, I'm avoiding 
it. (NS) and Well, I've decided not to [ laughs/ take the, um... [course] (NS) (Bar- 
dovi-Harlig & Hartford, 1991). These and other types of rejections are discussed 
more fully in the following section. 

‘Accept as Reject is a case where a student seems to respond positively to a 
suggestion, but in fact does so with an obvious lack of enthusiasm. Often this is 
accompanied by a more explicit rejection strategy either offering an alternative, or a 
"But..." explanation. Thus the advisor will take the response as a rejection in this 
case rather than an acceptance of advice. An example of Accept as Reject is That 
might be a solution (NS) (Bardovi-Harlig & Hartford, 1991). 

7 An example of But/Yeah But is Yeah, but in Spain they don 't offer courses. . . 
(NNS) (Bardovi-Harlig & Hartford, 1991). 

"It is possible that these strong responses are a result of a reading of the 
prompt whereby the student assumed that the advisor had somehow agreed to the 



50 



Hartford and Bardovi-Hariig 



dropping of the course from the schedule. It was not intended that way: students 
sometimes change their schedules after advising sessions without consulting or in- 
forming the advisor and this was the intended reading of the prompt. However, 
even if such a misreading occurred, it does not change the fact that to accuse the 
advisor so directly is entirely out-of-status, and does not occur in any of the natural 
data, even though such situations arose. 

’One possible reason for this difference is that, although the DCT items repre- 
sent actual situations that occur in the natural data, not all students get themselves 
into such situations. Thus, there is a "forcing" effect by the DCT, that does not 
necessarily occur in the advising sessions. 

REFERENCES 

Bardovi-Hariig, K. & Hartford, B. S. (1990). Congruence in native and nonnative 
conversations: Status balance in the academic advising session. Language 
Learning, 40, 467-501. 

Bardovi-Hariig, K., & Hartford, B. S. (1991). Saying "No": Native and nonnative 
rejections in English. In L. Bouton & Y. Kachru (Eds.), Pragmatics and 
Language Learning, Monograph Series, Vol 2 (pp.41-57). Urbana-Cham- 
paign, IL: University of Illinois. 

Beebe, L. & Cummings, M. C. (1985). Speech act performance: A function of the 
data collection procedure? Paper presented at the Nineteenth Annual TESOL 
Conference; New York, NY. 

Beebe, L. & Takahashi, T. (1989). Do you have a bag?: Social status and patterned 
variation in second language acquisition. In S. Gass, C. Madden, D. Preston, 
& L. Selinker (eds.), Variation in second language acquisition (Discourse 
and Pragmatics, vol. 1) (pp. 103-128). Clevedon, England: Multilingual 
Matters. 

Beebe, L. M., Takahashi, T. & Uliss-Weltz, R. (1990). Pragmatic transfer in ESL 
refusals. In R. Scarcella, E. Andersen, S. D. Krashen (eds.), On the develop- 
ment of communicative competence in a second language (pp. 55-73). Cambr- 
idge, MA: Newbury House. 

Blum-Kulka, S., & Olshtain, E. (1986). Too many words; Length of utterance and 
pragmatic failure. Journal of Pragmatics, 8, 47-61. 

Blum-Kulka, S., House, J., & Kasper, G. (Eds.) (1989). Cross-cultural pragmat- 
ics: Requests and apologies. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Kasper, G. & Dahl, M. (1991). Research methods in interlanguage pragmatics. 

Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 13, 215-247. 

Takahashi, T. & Beebe, L. (1987). The development of pragmatic competence by 
Japanese learners of English. JALT, 8, 131-155. 

Wolfson, N. (1989). Perspectives: Sociolinguistics and TESOL. New York: 
Newbury House. 




61 



Experimental and Obeervational DaU in the Study oflnterlanguaje Pragmatic* 



51 



APPENDIX 

Discourse Completion Task (DCT) 

[Please note that the lines for the student responses have been removed from all but 
the first example.] 

In the following situations, imagine that you are a graduate student who has gone to 
see an advisor to register for courses for next semester. 

1 . Your advisor suggests that you take a required course. Y ou want to try to have 

the course waived because you don't think it's relevant to your career goals. 

You say: — 



2. Your advisor suggests that you take a course which you would rather not take 
because you think that it will be too difficult for you. 

3. During your advising session you find out that a required course which you 
had dropped from your schedule the previous semester will not be offered 
until the semester after you had planned to graduate. This is a real financial 
burden for you. 

4. Your advisor suggests that you take a required course. You want to try to have 
this course waived because you have already taken a course that you think is 
similar to the one that’s being suggested. 

5. Your advisor suggests that you take a course during the summer. You prefer 
not to take classes during the summer. 

6 . Your advisor suggests that you take a course which you would rather not take 
because you think that it will be a waste of your time since it will be too easy 
for you. 

7. Your advisor suggests that you take an elective class that she's teaching, but 
you are not interested in the topic. 

8 Your advisor suggests that you to take a required course (which is offered 
every semester) which conflicts with a course in another department which 
you have been wanting to take ever since you started your program. 

9. Your advisor suggests that you to take a course that you have already taken. 



52 



Hartford and Bardovi-Hariig 



10. Your advisor suggests that you take a particular required course next semester. 
You know that the timing is good, but you would prefer not to take the course 
from the professor who is teaching it. If you wait one more semester you can 
take it from someone else. 

11. Your advisor offers you the choice between two electives that he thinks that 
you should take. You do not want to commit yourself to either course at this 
time; 



e 







Pragmatics and Language Learning 
Monograph Series, VoL 3, 1992 



The Interpretation of Implicature in English by NNS: Does it 
Come Automatically - Without Being Explicitly Taught? 

Lawrence F. Bouton 

In 1986, a comparison of the ability of NS and NNS to interpret 
implicature in English found that the two groups interpreted the same 
implicature in the same context in the same way only 75% of the time 
(Bouton, 1988). Since implicature is commonplace in everyday commu- 
nication (Green, 1989), this failure of the two groups to derive the same 
message from implicatures they confronted suggested a need to include 
skills in the interpretation of implicatures in ESL/EFL courses. How- 
ever, a survey of recent ESL texts and informal conversations with ESL 
teachers indicated that little attention was paid to the development of 
such skills at the present. 

But perhaps it is not necessary to formally teach NNS how to 
interpret implicature in English. Perhaps just the experience of living in 
the United States and communicating in English on a daily basis auto- 
matically provides NNS with the knowledge and skills they need to 
interpret implicatures as NS do. The purpose of this study was to gain 
some understanding of the extent to which this does in fact happen. 

INTRODUCTION 

In 1986, a study was conducted to determine the extent to which the message 
derived from an implicature in English by NNS would be consistent with that de- 
rived by NS (Bouton, 1988). The results indicated that the two groups derived the 
same message from the same implicature in the same context only 75% of the time. 
Since implicature of one form or another is common place in everyday communica- 
tion (Green, 1989), this failure of the NS and NNS to interpret these implicatures in 
the same way suggests a potential source of miscommunication when members of 
the two groups interact. From this it seems to follow that if the purpose of our ESL/ 
EFL courses is to increase the NNS's ability to communicate effectively in English, 
then those courses should include work designed to help students handle implica- 
ture. However, a survey of recent texts and informal conversations with a number 
of ESL teachers suggests that very little attention is paid to the interpretation of 
implicature in most ESL courses (Bouton, 1990). And this led to another question: 
Would the NNS students at an American university loam to interpret implicature 
more appropriately even without formal instruction? Or, put differently, is the 
experience of living in the United States and communicating in English on a daily 
basis sufficient, largely in and of itself, to lead those students to interpret implica- 
ture as NS do? Seeking an answer to this question was the purpose of the study 
underlying this paper. 



54 



Lawrence F. Bouton 



METHOD 

To implement this study, it was necessary to find a group of students who had 
come to the University or Illinois from overseas and had lived in the United States 
long enough to have a chance to increase their skill in the interpretation of implica- 
tures in American English. It was also necessary that the subjects have been tested to 
determine what the level of that skill was when they arrived in the country, so that 
we would have a benchmark against which to measure the degree to which their 
ability to interpret implicature had improved over time. Since we first tested inter- 
national students for this ability in 1986, we decided to select the subjects for this 
study from the group that arrived in September of that year. 

However, of the 436 who were tested at that time, only 60 were still on cam- 
pus. All of these were contacted. They were told that by taking the same battery of 
tests that they had taken when they first arrived, they would help us determine the 
extent to which they had improved different facets of their English proficiency over 
the years. As compensation for the 2 1/2 hours that the battery of tests requires, the 
subjects were paid a small sum of money and promised that they would be sent their 
test scores so that they could see what progress they had made. Of the 60 contacted 
in this way, 30 agreed to take part in the study. 

The test battery used was exactly the same as the one that had been used in 
1986. It was assumed that after 4 1/2 years the fact that they had taken the test be- 
fore would have little effect on their performance this time. 

Four different types of tests were involved. Three of these, a structure test, a 
cloze test, and a dictation test were used to measure the overall proficiency of NNS 
students entering the university and to place them in ESL courses as necessary. 
These collectively comprise what will be referred to as the EPT. The fourth was the 
test specifically designed to measure the subjects ability to interpret implicatures in 
English. The reason for testing the subjects' overall proficiency after 4 1/2 years 
was that we would then be able to compare the growth in those facets of their overall 
proficiency measured by the EPT with that involving the interpretation of implica- 
ture. We wanted to know, in other words, whether the students' skill in interpreting 
implicature increased at the same rate as their overall proficiency. 

The implicature test itself was a multiple choice instrument consisting of 33 
items (Bouton, 1988, 1989). Each of these contained a brief description of a situ- 
ation with a short dialogue in which one of the utterances involved the use of impli- 
cature, followed by four possible interpretations of that implicature, from which the 
subjects were asked to choose the one that most closely approximated what the im- 
plicature meant. This format was based upon two assumptions: 1) that for each of 
the implicatures involved, there was an interpretation that most American NS would 
tend to accept as its primary meaning in the context in which it occurred, and 2) that 
test items could be developed in which there was enough contextual information to 
permit a NS to interpret any implicature found in that dialogue. Prior to actually 
composing the multiple choice instrument in 1986, these assumptions had been 
tested by giving 60 NS and 79 NNS a set of dialogues containing implicatures in an 
open-ended format and asking them to put into their own words what they thought 
O 



The Interpretation of Implicature in Engliih by NNS 



55 



those implicatures meant. When these dialogues were turned into a multiple choice 
test 1 , the dominant NS interpretation for each item became the "expected" response, 
and the more common NNS responses that differed from those of the NS were used 
as distracters (Bouton, 1988). 



RESULTS 

Returning now to the study just completed, the data from each of the 30 sub- 
jects consisted of two sets of test scores, one from August, 1986, and one from 
February, 1991, with each of these two sets consisting of the five scores already 
mentioned - those for the EPT as a whole in columns (5) and (10), those for each of 
its three components (structure, cloze, and dictation) in columns (2) through (4) and 
(7) through (9), and for the implicature test in columns (6) and (11). Sample scores 
are given in Table (1). 

Table 1: Sample Sets of Scores Like Those Assigned Each of the 30 Subjects 

1986 1991 

Subj Struct Cloze Diet EPT IMPLC Street Cloze Diet EPT IMPLC 

GHI 50 56 38 48 23 62 56 51 56 29 

The scores in each of the two sets were subjected to both correlation and re- 
gression analyses. The results of these analyses are portrayed in Tables (2) through 
(5). In addition, the scores attained on the implicature test in 1986 and 1991 were 
compared to determine whether significant growth had occurred in their interpreta- 
tion of implicature over the 4 1/2 years. At the same time, both of these implicature 
test results were compared with the scores of a control group consisting of 28 NS. 

Both the correlation and the regression analyses showed that there was only a 
rather weak relationship between the various components of the EPT and the results 
of the implicature test. In Table (2), for example, we notice that the correlation 
between the 1986 scores attained on the implicature test and those on the various 
components of the EPT range from .03085 for the dictation test to .36832 for the 
cloze test; furthermore, only one of these correlations - that between the implicature 
test and the cloze test - has a probability coefficient of less than .05. Table (3) con- 
tains the results from regression analysis of the 1986 data and shows much the same 
loose relationship between the components of the EPT and the Implicature test. For 
instance, we see that the EPT as a whole would be an effective predictor of a sub- 
ject's success in the use of implicatures only 16.91 percent of the time; nor are any 
of the subcomponents of the EPT more closely related here. 

Moving on to the analysis of the 1991 results shown in Tables (4) and (5), we 
find that, for the most part, the lack of correlation between the EPT and the impli- 
cature test persists. Again there is only one component of the EPT with which the 
implicature test correlates at all close' y, but this time that component is the structure 
test rather than the cloze test that is in that position. What's more, the statistical re- 
lationship between the cloze test and the implicature test has actually weakened con- 



56 



Lawrence F. Bouton 



siderably since 1986. And so we can see that there is little, if any, correlation be- 
tween a person's performance on the structure, cloze or dictation components of the 
EPT and the ability to interpret implicatures effectively. And from this fact, we can 
draw one definite conclusion: we cannot measure a person 's ability to interpret 
implicature by using a general proficiency test like the EPT. 



Table 2: Correlation Analysis: The EPT and the Implicature Test (1986) 



Pearson Correlation Coefficients / Prob > R under Ho: Rho=0 / N= 30 



Structure 


Struct 

1.0000 

0.0 


Cloze 

0.4344 

0.0164 


Dictation 

0.1129 

0.5525 


Composite 

0.6632 

0.0001 


Implic 

0.3159 

0.0890 


Cloze 


0.4344 

0.0164 


1.0000 

0.0 


0.2346 

0.2119 


0.74374 

0.0001 


0.36832 

0.0452 


Dictation 


0.11290 

0.5525 


0.23467 

0.2119 


1.0000 

0.0 


0.71332 

0.0001 


0.03085 

0.8714 


Composite^,- 


0.66326 

0.0001 


0.74374 

0.0001 


0.7133 

0.0001 


1.0000 

0.0 


0.31343 

0.0917 


Implicature 


0.31590 

0.0890 


0.36832 

0.0452 


0.03085 

0.8714 


0.31343 

0.0917 


1.0000 

0.0 



Table 3: Regression Analysis of Variance (Dependent Variable IMPLC 86) 







Sum of 








Source 


DF 


Squares 


Mean Square 


F Value 


Prob > F 


Model 


3 


91.98898 


30.66299 


1.764 


0.1787 


Error 


26 


451.87769 


17.37991 






C Total 


29 


543.86667 








Root MSE 


4.16892 


R> square 


0.1691 






Dep Mean 


21.93333 


Adj R-sq 


0.7333 






C. V. 


19.00724 














Parameter Estimates 












Parameter 


T for HO: 


Variable 


DF 


Estimate 


Standard Error 


Parameter 


-OProb > T 


1NTERCEP 


1 


6.666539 


7.70499105 


0.865 


0.3948 


Structure 


1 


0.129649 


0.13334918 


0.972 


0.3399 


Cloze 


I 


0.192428 


0.13065125 


1.473 


0.1528 


Dictation 


1 


-0.028832 


0.08683990 


-0.332 


0.7425 




k 



67 



The Interpretation of Implicature in English by NNS 



57 



Table 4: Correlation Analysis: The EPT and the Implicature Test (1991) 

Pearson Correlation Coefficients / Prob > R under Ho: Rho=0 / N= 30 






Struct 


Structure 


1.0000 

0.0 


Cloze 


0.4495 

0.0127 


Dictation 


0.1393 

0.4628 


Composite^ 


0.6711 

0.0001 


Implicature 


0.4616 

0.0102 



Cloze 


Dictation 


0.4495 

0.0127 


0.1393 

0.4628 


1.000 

0.0 


0.2653 

0.1565 


0.2653 

0.1565 


1.0000 

0.0 


0.7723 

0.0001 


0.7145 

0.0001 


0.2815 

0.1318 


0.0162 

0.9320 



Composite 


Implc 


0.6711 

0.0001 


0.4616 

0.0102 


0.7723 

0.000 


0.2815 

0.1318 


0.7145 

0.0001 


0.0162 

0.9320 


1.0000 

0.0 


0.3183 

0.0865 


0.3183 

0.0865 


1.0000 

0.0 



Table 5: Regression Analysis of Variance (Dependent Variable IMPLC 91) 







Sum of 








Source 


DF 


Squares 


Mean Square 


F Value 


Prob > I 


Model 


3 


80.73938 


26.91313 


2.513 


0.0806 


Error 


26 


278.46062 


10.71002 






C Total 


29 


359.20000 








Root MSE 


3.27262 


R-square 


0.2248 






Dep Mean 


25.6000 


Adj R-*q 


0.1353 






C. V. 


12.78366 














Parameter Estimates 












Parameter 


T for HO: 


Variable 


DF 


Estimate 


Standard Error 


Pirameter 


=0 Prob > T 


INTERCEP 


1 


11.754472 


6.22208191 


1.889 


0.0701 


Structure 


1 


0.220892 


0.10127005 


2.181 


0.3399 


Cloze 


1 


0.049802 


0.89089295 


0.559 


0.5809 


Dictation 


1 


.0.026945 


0.06709027 


-0.402 


0.6912 



To determine whether there had been significant growth in the ability of the 
NNS to interpret implicature over the 4 1 12 year period since they had first come to 
Illinois, a T test was used to compare their 1986 implicature test scores with those of 
1991 and both of those scores were compared with the scores of the NS control 
group. What we found was that the 1986 and the 199? test scores attained by the 
NNS were different to the .0001 degree of probability, shewing that the NNS sub- 



6 



Ci 



58 



Lawrence F. Bouton 



jects' ability to derive the expected message from implicatures had improved. But 
while the NNS interpretations of the implicatures approached those of the NS more 
closely after the former had been in this country for 4 1/2 years, the messages de- 
rived by the two groups still showed a statistically significant difference: in 1986 
the probability coefficient was .0001; in 1991, it was only .0018. 

So far, we have been able to draw two conclusions from the results of our 
study of the ability of NNS to become more native-like in their interpretation of 
English language implicatures over time: first, significant improvement does occur; 
and second, the skills necessary to derive appropriate implicatures apparently differ 
considerably from those needed to perform well on structure, cloze, or dictation 
tests. 

But we need to study this growth in ability to use implicature more closely. 
Neither the NS nor the NNS groups performed uniformly well as they attempted to 
interpret the different types of implicatures that formed the basis of this study. 
Among the NS, this variation appeared as a difference in the extent to which the 
subjects agreed as to what message a particular implicature was meant to convey. 
The NNS, for their part, differed from one implicature type to another in terms of 
how close their interpretations came to those of the NS group. Given this variation 
in the apparent difficulty of different types of implicature, two questions present 
themselves: 1) What type of implicatures proved especially difficult for the NS and 
the NNS and were they the same for both groups? And (2), did the types of implica- 
tures that were more difficult for the NNS in 1986 re main so? 

The first thing that we should notice as we look at different implicature items 
is that there are a total of 20 out of the 33 items on the test on which the 1991 per- 
formance of the NNS and the NS was essentially the same: when the scores of the 
NNS and the NS on these 20 items are compared statistically, there is no significant 
difference between the two groups (prob > 0.3056). In 1986, only 5 of these 20 
items showed so little difference between the two groups; The performance by the 
two groups, NS and NNS, on those five questions is indicated in Table (6). 



Table 6: Items on Which NS and NNS Was Essentially the Same 



1986 



Te*t 


NS 


Rel 2 


NNS 


Rel 


Item 


% 


index 


% 


Index 


4 


100 


0.00 


93 


0.40 


12 


100 


0.00 


90 


0.43 


24 


100 


0.00 


93 


0.30 


26 


100 


0.00 


93 


0.16 


27 


86 


0.21 


77 


0.26 



NS - NNS 


1991 

NNS 


Rel 


NS - NNS 


% 


% 


Index 


% 


7 


97 


0.56 


3 


10 


100 


0.00 


0 


7 


97 


0.19 


3 


7 


84 


0.08 


3 


9 


84 


0.02 


2 



A second subset of the 20 implicature test items are those on which the NNS 
did not approach the performance of the NS in 1986, but by 1991 had improved to 
the point that there was no longer any significant difference between the two 
groups. These were related to Grice's Relevance Maxim. The NS interpretation of 
the implicatures in these items was remarkably uniform, with an average of 96% of 



The Interpretation of Implicature in English by NNS 



59 



them deriving the same message in each case. But while these items were quite easy 
for the NS to interpret, they proved somewhat difficult for the NNS in 1986, with 
only an average of 77 % of them - or 19 % fewer than the NS - interpreting the items 
as expected. By 1991 , this figure had risen to 93 % - essentially the same as that of 
the NS. 



Table 7: Relevance Implicatures on Which NNS and NS Performance Was 
Similar 



Test 


NS 


Rel 


NNS 


Rel 


NS - NNS 


NNS 


Rel NS 


- NNS 


Item 


% 


Index% 


Index 


% 


% 


Index 


% 




3 


93 


0.01 


67 


0.54 


26 


84 


0.29 


9 


8 


96 


0.01 


80 


0.20 


16 


88 


0.23 


8 


15 


93 


0.28 


77 


0.37 


16 


94 


0.04 


-1 


18 


100 


0.00 


87 


0.54 


13 


100 


0.00 


0 


20 


100 


0.00 


83 


0.41 


17 


94 


0.38 


6 


21 


96 


0.01 


83 


0.03 


13 


94 


0.12 


2 


22 


96 


0.19 


80 


0.05 


16 


91 


0.27 


5 


29 


100 


0.00 


77 


0.57 


23 


97 


0.13 


3 


32 


89 


0.09 


67 


0.38 


22 


88 


0.42 


1 


33 


100 


0.00 


77 


0.41 


23 


97 


0.56 


3 



Of these 10 relevance-based implicatures, item (32) involved a sequence im- 
plicature, in which the fact that two events are described in a particular sequence 
leads the listener/reader to infer that they actually occurred in that same sequence. 
The rest of these items, however, were more generally based on the tendency of par- 
ticipants in a conversation to assume that whatever a person says is somehow related 
to what has gone before and to interpret it in that light. Two examples of these im- 
plicatures are found in (1) and (2). In (1), for example, the difference between the 
NS and the NNS responses depends on their understanding of a rather specific point 
of American culture - the attitude of most American's toward exercise and injuries 
resulting from it. 



(1) When Abe got home, he found that his wife had to use a cane in order to 
walk. 




Abe: What happened to your leg? 

Wife: 1 went jogging today. 

Another way the wife could have said the same thing is... 

a. Today I finally got some exercise jogging. 

> > b. I hurt it jogging. 

c. It’s nothing serious. Don’t worry about it. 

d. I hurt it doing something silly. 

70 



60 



Lawrence F. Bouton 



In this item, the interpretation in (a) takes the wife’s response literally and 
does not relate it to Abe's question. This interpretation of the response violates 
Grice’s Relevance Maxim, but anyone choosing it draws no implies ture from that 
violation. None of the 30 subjects in this study selected that choice either in 1986 or 
in 1991. All of them, in other words, drew some sort of inference from the wife's 
remark; whether they drew the same one as 93 % of the NS depended on whether 
they realized that Americans tend to take exercise like jogging - as well as any injury 
resulting from it - rather seriously and would not refer to it as "something silly." In 
1986, only 55% of the NNS interpreted this item effectively, with 25% choosing (c) 
and 13% choosing (d). By 1991, the percentage of NNS viewing the incident in the 
same way as the American NS control group had risen to 84%. 

In (2), the cultural orientation of the source of the implicature is perhaps not 
so obvious. 

(2) Lars: Where’s Rudy, Tom? Have you seen him lately? 

Tom: There’s a yellow VW parked over by Sarah’s house? 

What Tom is saying here is that... 

a. he just noticed that Sarah has bought a new yellow VW and is telling 
Lars about it. 

b. he has no idea where Rudy is. 

> > c. he thinks Rudy may be at Sarah’s house. 

d. none of these. He is deliberately changing the subject to avoid having 

to admit that he doesn’t know. 

As in (1), the first choice here disregards Grice's Relevance Maxim. In this 
case, however, 13% of the subjects did interpret Tom's remark that way in 1986, 
though none did in 1991 . The other three selections are all derived through Grice's 
maxim. For example, (b) assumes that providing an apparently irrelevant answer to 
a question can be interpreted as implying that the speaker does not know the answer, 
while (d) assumes that the same behavior is designed to avoid having to admit igno- 
rance. The choice in (c), on the other hand, does require knowledge of one bit of 
American culture, i.e., that men can visit women in their homes under apparently 
casual conditions. When they first took the implicature test in 1986, only 77% of 
the 30 NNS subjects in this study interpreted this item as the NS did, but by 1991, 
that percentage had risen to 97 % . In both ( 1) and (2), then, interpreting the implica- 
ture in the same way as the NS did required that the NNS understand one or more 
specific facts about American culture, though this was more obvious in (1) than in 
(2). Also, in (2), there were some NNS who seemed not to use the relevance maxim 
at all in arriving at their interpretation. But helping NNS leant to interpret implica- 
tes like these would seem to involve primarily the teaching of specific facets of 
American culture in the classroom and, perhaps, alerting them to indirect uses of 
language of this sort. At the same time, given the marked increase in the NNS ten- 



The Interpretation of Implicature in English by NNS 



61 




deucy to interpret the implicatures underlying the items in Table (6) as the NS do, 
the particular factors im Dived in these items are apparently the type that will be 
learned without formal instruction - at least over a 4 1/2 year period. 

The last 5 of the 20 items on which the 1991 NNS performance came close to 
that of the NS control group are what we have labeled understated Criticism. As a 
starting point in discussing these items, we should notice that they were more diffi- 
cult to recognize and interpret for both the American NS and the NNS. Of the 33 
items comprising the test as a whole, 7 saw the American NS choosing the expected 
interpretation only from 64 to 79% of the time. Of those 7, 5 involve understated 
criticism and are related to Grice's Maxim of Quantity. This type of implicature is 
used when we are asked what we think of something or someone that we, in fact, do 
not like, but do not want to criticize directly. Instead, we reply by commenting 
favorably on some feature of the thing or person that is not central to the requested 
evaluation. This type of answer does not, of course, provide the information that the 
question has asked for, and this forces our conversation partner to try to understand 
why the desired information was not supplied. A common inference drawn from 
such an utterance is that the speaker did not want to answer the question directly 
because that could not be done without somehow offending the conversation part- 
ner. Hence, an answer that fails to provide information requested in this way is 
more often than not interpreted as a negative evaluation. An example of this type of 
utterance as it appears in one of the test items is that in (3) (adapted from Richards, 
1980). 



(3) Two teachers are talking about a student’s term paper. 



Mr. Ranger: 
Mr. Ryan: 
Mr. Ranger: 
Mr. Ryan: 



Have you read Mark’s term paper on modem pirates? 
Yes, I read it last night. 

What did you think of it? 

I thought it was well typed. 



How did Mr. Ryan like Mark’s paper? 

(a) He liked the paper; he thought it was good. 

(b) He thought it was certainly well typed. 

(c) He thought it was a good paper; he did like the form, though not 
the content. 

> > (d) He didn’t like it. 



Of the American NS responding to this particular test item, only 79% chose 
the expected response. But if this item was difficult for the NS, it was even more so 
for the NNS in 1986, when only 53% interpreted the implicature involved as ex- 
pected. After 4 1/2 years, however, that percentage had risen to 72%, just slightly 
below that of the American NS. And, as Table 8 demonstrates, this same sharp 
increase can be found in each of the other four items containing implicatures based 

n o 

i >.j 



62 



Lawrence F. Bouton 



00 understated criticism. In fact, in the case of items #13 and #16, the percentage of 
NNS choosing the expected interpretation in 1991 was higher than that of the NS 
control group. What's more, as Table 8 also demonstrates, the test i tems bawd on 
understated criticism were highly reliable! on each administration of the implicature 
test, the reliability of four of the five items was exceptionally high, ranging well 
above the 0.30 that is considered acceptable, and this lends credibility to this set of 
items as a measure of the subjects ability to interpret this type of implicature. The 
NNS in this study have apparently learned to interpret this type of implicature rather 
well. 



Table 8: Understated Negative Evaluation/Criticism 



Ten 


NS 


Rel 


NNS Rel 


NS - NNS 


NNS 


Rel 


NS - NNS 




Item 


% 


Index 


% 


Index 


% 


% 


Index 


% 


5 


70 


0.60 


53 


0.53 


16 


72 


0.72 


1 


11 


75 


0.38 


60 


0.60 


15 


75 


0.75 


0 


13 


75 


0.22 


63 


0.63 


12 


81 


0.81 


-6 


16 


64 


0.43 


23 


0.23 


41 


63 


0.53 


1 


17 


71 


0.52 


47 


0.47 


24 


85 


0.26 


-14 



We have found, then, that there are 20 implicature items on which the NNS 
performance approached that of the NS control group after 4 1/2 years of attending 
an American university - but without any formal instruction designed to develop 
this skill in relation to their use of American English. As we noted, when a T test is 
used to compare the scores of NNS and NS on these 20 questions in 1986, they were 
different to the .0001 degree of certainty. By 1991, however, that difference had 
disappeared and the probability coefficient was a non-significant 0.3056. These 20 
items, we have noted, were largely based rather generally on Grice's Relevance 
Maxim, though 5 of them were what we have termed Understated Criticism. 

There was, however, a set of 8 items on which at least 16% fewer NNS than 



O 



NS chose the expected response in 1991, and on 4 of these, the similarity between 
the interpretations derived by the two groups actually declined over the 4 1/2 years. 
It is this set of eight items that is responsible for the statistically significant differ- 
ence between the performance of the NNS on the implicature test as a whole in 1991 
and that of the NS. However, there does not seem to be any obvious rationale that 
would explain why these particular items proved particularly difficult. No one type 
of implicature occurs in that set of items more often than any other. Like many of 
the items that we have already discussed, each of these requires a certain knowledge 
of the American culture and language that is independent of what is required by the 
others; sometimes there is also a linguistic pattern associated with the implicature 
and sometimes there is not. For example, one of the utterances in this set from 
which an implicature was to be drawn was "just like Mama used to make.'' Only 
66% of the NNS recognized that comment as being positive and a compliment in 
1991, while 93% of the NS interpreted it that way. Thirty-one percent of the NNS 
thought that the remark meant that the pie was "nothing special; just everyday 
food. * This difference in interpretation undoubtedly stems to some extent from the 



The Interpretation of Implicatura in EngUA by NNS 



63 



fact that the phrase is almost a cliche in American English, but it also has at least 
some basis in the fact that in many of the cultures represented in this study (e.g., 
Chinese, Korean, and Japanese), one does not brag about members of one's own 
family or the skills they have, since to do so is to brag about oneself and such behav- 
ior is unacceptable. 

Another implicature that remained difficult for NNS is that in (4). 

(4) Bill and Peter have been good friends since they were children. They roomed 
together in college and travelled Europe together after graduation. Now 
friends have told Bill that they saw Peter dancing with Bill’s wife while Bill 
was away. 

Bill: Peter knows how to be a really good friend. 

Which of the following best says what Bill means? 

Peter is not acting the way a good friend should. 

Peter and Bill’s wife are becoming really good friends while Bill is 

away. 

Peter is a good friend and so Bill can trust him. 

Nothing should be allowed to interfere with their friendship. 



Only half of the NNS put down the expected answer here in 199 1 , but that is 
up from 37 % in 1986. In fact, it is interesting to note that of the entire group of 436 
subjects who responded to this item in 1986, a majority of every group except the 
Spanish speakers took Bill's remark literally and selected (c) as the best interpreta- 
tion of what he said. It’s irony escaped them. 

But it is not sufficient to note that Bill's remark was ironic; we must also note 
those cultural understandings that lead 86% NS to recognize it as such, while only 
37% of the NNS were able to do so in 1986 and only 50% in 1991. And then, 
having identified those elements of American culture that lead Americans to under- 
stand Bill's remark one way while the NNS interpret it another, we would have to 
decide how important it is for NNS to become familiar with those elements of 
American culture and, based on that decision, whether we should teach those ele- 
ments in the ESL/EFL classroom. And this same process would have to be repeated 
for each of the other items in this set of 8 that the subjects in this study have not 
learned to interpret correctly, even after 4 1/2 years of living in the United States. 

CONCLUSION 

Several things are clear with regard to the interpretation of implicatures in 
English by NNS. For one thing, even NNS who have achieved a proficiency in 
English that can be represented by a score in the mid-500's on the TOEFL differed 
from NS in their interpretation of English implicatures for some 25 % of the items 



> > a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 



64 



Lawrence F. Bouton 



used in this study. Furthermore, a comparison of the interpretations assigned to 
these implicatures by the American NS with those of British and n s 

turned up no significant differences in the messages these three groups derived, but 
all three groups of NS differed significantly from the NNS (Bouton, 1991). There- 
fore, ir. the interest of facilitating better communication between these NNS and the 
NS with whom they will be interacting, classes should help the NNS de- 

velop the knowledge and skills that they need to interpret the implicatures appropri- 
ate^. At the present, however, these skills are not dealt with systematically by the 
texts available. 

On the other hand, we have also seen that over a period of 4 1/2 years of liv- 
ing in the United States, NNS do become able to interpret most (though not all) of 
the implicatures covered in this study as American NS do; only 7 of the original 
items remained problematic for them. 

It is obvious that further research is necessary on at least two different fronts. 
First, we need to broaden our understanding of the different types of implicatures 
that exist and to learn which are particularly troublesome to learners of English as a 
second language and why. Until that information is obtained, the decision as to 
which implicatures to teach and which to ignore will be made on a rather arbitrary 
basis. Second, we need to discover how quickly the NNS develop the skills that we 
found they had acquired sometime before the end of their 4 1/2 years here. If NNS 
develop these skills quickly, then dealing with them in the ESL classroom becomes 
much less important; to the extent that their development is relatively slow, then 
anything that we can do to help the NNS to master them more quickly becomes 
desirable. One of the goals of pragmatics should be to provide ESL teachers with an 
empirically based, carefully reasoned set of guidelines as to what course, if any, 

should be followed in the development the NNS ability to interpret implicatures 
effectively. 



THE AUTHOR 

Lawrence F. Bouton is an associate professor of English as an International 
Language and Linguistics at the University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana. His 
areas of interest are pragmatics and English grammar and their role in the teaching 
of English to NNS. 



NOTES 

'For the reasons for choosing a multiple choice format over that of the open 
ended question, see Bouton (1988, 1989). 

The figures in this column represent the reliability index asf<ociated with a 
particular question. Questions with indices ranging between .20 and .29 are mar- 
ginal; those between .30 and .39 are solid; and those above .40 are especially reli- 
able test items. Items that are easy for everyone usually have low reliability coeffi- 
cients. 



The Interpretation oflmpltcature in Engliih by NNS 



65 



references 

Bouton, Lawrence F. (1988) A cross-cultural study of the ability to interpret impli- 
cates in English, World Englishes, vol. 7 , no. 2. pp. 183-97. 

Bouton, Lawrence F. (1989) So they got the message, but how did they get it? 
IDEAL, vol. 4. pp. 119-49. 

Green, Georgia M. (1989) Pragmatics and Natural Language Understanding. 
Hillsdale, N.J.:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers. 



Pragmatic I and Language Learning 
Monograph Seriea, Vol. 3, 1992 



Linguistic and Pragmatic Competence: Their Relationship in the 
Overall Competence of the Language Learner 

Sheila Hoffman-Hicks 

While linguistic competence has long been the focus of analyses 
investigating learners' developing language abilities, research on the 
acquisition of the socio-cultural aspects of language use has emp hasized 
the crucial role pragmatic competence plays in successful communica- 
tion. This study examines both types of competence - ling uistic and 
pragmatic — and aims to shed light on the largely unexamined issue of 
their relationship within the larger domain of the learner's overall com- 
petence. 

Fourteen students of French at an American university and a 
control group of nine native speakers of French participated in the 
study. Three tests instruments - a standardized multiple-choice test of 
French, a role play questionnaire, and a discourse completion test — 
were administered in an effort to tease out learners' linguistic and prag- 
matic abilities. Results strongly suggest that linguistic competence is a 
necessary prerequisite to pragmatic competence but that it does not it- 
self guarantee pragmatic competence. It appears that a certain level of 
linguistic ability must be attained before learners are able to convey 
their message with socio-cultural appropriateness. Nevertheless, the 
level of linguistic competence needed for adequate communication in 
given language-use situations does not necessarily assure learners of 
socio-cultural appropriateness in these contexts. 



INTRODUCTION 



An abundance of research has addressed the limitations of the Chomskyan 
concept of knowing language by asserting the importance of the socio-cultural as- 
pects of language use (Gumperz, 1971; Hymes, 1972b; Schmidt & Richards, 1980; 
Fraser et al., 1980). Such research has shown that in addition to linguistic or gram- 
matical competence (a knowledge of the syntax, phonology, and vocabulary of a 
language), language users must also possess pragmatic competence (a knowledge of 
how to use the language appropriately) to communicate effectively. The need to 
attain both types of competence makes the second or foreign language learner's task 
particularly challenging. 

While research in pragmatics such as Varonis & Gass (1985), Beebe & Taka- 
hashi (1989a), and Wolfson (1989b) has brought to light the critical role pragmatic 
competence plays in the overall competence of the language learner, other studies 
(Eisenstein & Bodman, 1986; Hartford & Bardovi-Harlig, 1989; Bardovi-Harlig & 
Hartford, 1990; Wieland, 1990) have emphasized the difficulty in attaining such 
competence. Bardovi-Harlig's and Hartford's studies in ESL, for example, have 





66 



Linguistic ami Pragmatic Competence 



67 



shown that at the advanced level, linguistic competence is not sufficient for prag- 
matic competence. These studies have shown that even highly proficient learners of 
English, graduate students enrolled at an American university, are often unable to 
use the language appropriately in given contexts. Likewise, Wieland's research on 
the pragmatic skills of women who had been living in France for a period of two to 
twenty-six years, provided startling evidence suggesting that nonnative speakers 
may never attain both native-like linguistic and native-like pragmatic competence. 

These studies, however, examine only the skills of very advanced learners 
and, therefore, leave open the development-related question of whether grammati- 
cal competence is a necessary prerequisite for pragmatic competence. Moreover, 
since the subjects who participated in these studies were living in the host environ- 
ment at the time of data collection, these studies do not focus on the situation of 
foreign language learning in a formal setting. This study considers these two aspects 
by investigating the relationship of the linguistic and pragmatic competence of 
intermediate-level learners in the foreign language setting. 

The results of the studies mentioned above provide interesting insights for 
language acquisition research since they suggest that the acquisition of linguistic 
and pragmatic competence in the target language setting does not necessarily occur 
at the same rate, that pragmatic competence appears to lag somehow in the course of 
development. One might assume that this would also be the case for foreign lan- 
guage learners. In fact, it seems likely that the difference in the development of the 
two types of competence may be even more apparent for this latter group since, as 
classroom learners, their exposure to the socio-cultural aspects of language use 
would be significantly more limited. These are the issues addressed in the present 
study. More formally, the research questions posed are: 

1) Is linguistic competence necessary for pragmatic competence? 

2) Is linguistic competence sufficient for pragmatic competence? 

Learners’ performance on both linguistic and pragmatic tasks will be compared and 
analyzed in an effort to answer these questions. 

METHOD 

Subjects 

Subjects for this study included fourteen students of French at Indiana Uni- 
versity. Twelve of the subjects were female and two were male. All subjects were 
pursuing majors or minors in French and were enrolled in third- or fourth- year 
level courses at the time of the date collection. A control group of nine native speak- 
ers of French also participated in the study. 

All of the subjects were preparing for participation in an overseas study pro- 
gram in France during the 1990-91 academic year. This particular group was se- 
lected for motivational reasons. It was assumed that students who would eventually 



68 



Sheila Hoffman-Hick* 



be living in the target culture would be more concerned with not only their linguis- 
tic abilities but also their pragmatic skills than students who did not plan to study 
abroad. That is to say, they would likely be more attentive to or perhaps more sen- 
sitive to learning about all facets of meeting and maintaining relationships with 
native speakers. 

Test Instruments 

The research questions posed in this study investigate the relation of linguistic 
and pragmatic competence within the larger domain of the learner's overall compe- 
tence 1 . Such a statement implies that these two areas of competence are somehow 
separable entities, i: is clear, however, that competence in a language is not a con- 
crete whole which can be neatly divided into separate linguistic and pragmatic com- 
ponents, and no such claim is made here. Nevertheless, in an effort to gain insight 
into the intriguing, though slippery, issue of what it means to know a language, an 
attempt was made in this study to isolate these areas of competence. By drawing on 
the capabilities of various data collection techniques to elicit different types of data, 
linguistic and pragmatic competence were tapped independently of each other. The 
data obtained from each task thus offer a relatively distinct focus. 

To measure linguistic competence in the target language, a standardized mul- 
tiple-choice test of French was administered which included grammar, reading 
comprehension, and listening comprehension components. This test is routinely 
administered as part of the requirements for application to the overseas study pro- 
gram. Students' scores on the test are generally taken into consideration when deter- 
mining acceptance into the program. 

Two tasks were administered for the measurement of pragmatic competence. 
The first task, a role play questionnaire, was issued to evaluate the subjects' recep- 
tive pragmatic knowledge. This questionnaire is a modified version of one devel- 
oped by Raffaldini (1987) in a related study. The subjects were instructed to imag- 
ine that they were in France and were interacting with native speakers (NSs) of 
French in various situations. For each of the ten items on this multiple-choice ques- 
tionnaire, the subjects were provided the tone and the stimulus for the interaction. 
The tone was described as an explanation of the subject's attitude toward the other 
speaker, e.g. polite, reproving, worried, persuasive. The stimulus described the 
situation and stated where the interaction was taking place (in a cafe, at the subject's 
apartment, etc.) and with whom the subject was speaking (a classmate, neighbor, 
professor, etc.). The tone and the stimulus were given in English so that the subjects 
would fully understand each situation. 

Only scenarios in which the subjects might realistically find themselves were 
included. Moreover, since the subjects were instructed to imagine themselves in 
each situation, they were not required to play the role of another person who might 
be of a different age, sex, or social status. 

Consider a sample item from this questionnaire in (1) below: 




(1) TONE: courteous STIMULUS: The older woman in whose house you 
are living is out of town and a friend of hers calls you to invite you to 

79 



Linguistic and Pragmatic Competence 



69 



dinner. You don’t want to offend her, but you have no desire to go, so you 
decline the invitation politely. You say: 



a) Merci Madame, e'est trfes gentil, raais je vous prie de m'excuser. II 
faudrait que je finisse un devoir pour demain. 

Thank you, ma 'am. That 's very kind, but I must ask you to excuse me . 

It 's necessary for me to finish an assignment for tomorrow . 

b) C'est tvbs gentil de votre part de m'inviter, Madame, maisje ne peux pas 
y aller ce soir. J'ai beaucoup de boulot a faire pour demain, et je dois tra- 
vailler. 

It's really nice of you to invite me, ma'am, but I can't come tonight . / 
have tons of stuff to do for tomorrow, and I have to work . 

c) Merci beaucoup, Madame. Maisje ne peux vraiment pas ce soir. J ai un 
devoir k finir pour demain, et je crois qu'il serait plus sage que je travaille 

ce soir. 

Thank you very much , ma'am , but I really can't tonight. I have an 
assignment to finish for tomorrow, and I think it would be wiser if I 
worked tonight . 

d) Pardon, Madame, j'ai trop de choses a faire pour demain. Je vais tra- 
vailler toute la nuit. 

I'm sorry, ma'am , I have too many things to do for tomorrow . / m 
going to work all night . 

In this refusal scenario, several clues were prov.ded to help determine the 
most appropriate way of declining the dinner invitation. For example, the fact that 
the person with whom the subject is living is an older woman and a friend of the 
caller suggests something about the status relationship involved. Furthermore, the 
tone is marked as "courteous", which is supported by the word "politely" in the 
stimulus. Finally, the phrase "You don't want to offend her" emphasizes the impor- 
tance of choosing an appropriate response. All items on the questionnaire included 

clues of this type. 

The four responses following each item were in French and were derived from 
two sources. A native speaker response was created by a team of native French 
speakers who, in Raffaldini's pilot study, judged it as most appropriate for the 
given situation. The three distractors were selected from responses provided by the 
pilot study subjects on an open-ended version of the task. In the present study, the 
subjects were asked to simply mark the most appropriate response for each situ- 
ation. The native speaker control group, on the other hand, was instructed to rank 
the distractors in terms of the most to least appropriate, or native-like. 

The second instrument for examining pragmatic competence was a discourse 
completion test (DCT). The format of the test was identical to that of the question- 
naire except that, instead of multiple-choice responses, the items were left open- 

so 



70 



Sheila Hoffman- Hick* 



ended. Subjects and control group participants were asked to write in the most 
appropriate response to each situation. Although research has shown that speech 
acts usually are not accomplished in a single utterance or turn (Schegloff & Sacks, 
1973; Searle, 1976; Schmidt & Richards, 1980), the subjects were intentionally not 
asked to produce a complete dialogue for this task in order to be consistent with the 
responses elicited by the role play questionnaire. The stimuli presented in these 
items were different from those found in the role plr-y questionnaire so that subjects 
would not be influenced by related responses. 

DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
Task 1: Linguistic Competence Test 

Table 1. Linguistic competence test scores and rank. 



RANK 


NNS 


RAW SCORE 


1 


A 


65 


1 


B 


65 


3 


C 


62 


4 


D 


60 


4 


E 


60 


6 


F 


57 


7 


G 


52 


8 


H 


49 


8 


I 


49 


10 


J 


48 


11 


K 


47 


12 


L 


45 


13 


M 


40 


14 


N 


37 



% CORRECT 
65 
65 
62 
60 
60 
57 
52 
49 
49 
48 
47 
45 
40 
37 



n*14 



Table 1 presents the fourteen subjects' scores from the test measuring linguis- 
tic competence, which had one hundred possible points. The subjects (nonnative 
speakers (NNS)) are ranked from highest to lowest according to their percentage 
correct. Note that some of the subjects earned identical scores. The fact that no 
subjects performed higher than 65% and none performed below 37% on this test 
reflects the intermediate level of these learners and suggests that the test was of an 
appropriate level of difficulty for capturing their linguistic competence. 

Task 2: Pragmatic Competence Role Play Questionnaire 



Several steps were taken to analyze the data from the role play questionnaire 
used to evaluate pragmatic competence. First, the results provided by the NSs were 
'abulated. Recall that the NSs were instructed to rank the responses for each item 

ERIC 8l 



Linguistic and Pragmatic Competence 



71 



and not to simply mark the single most appropriate response. A mark of one sig- 
naled the best response, a four indicated the least appropriate, so that when the 
marks for each response were totaled, the lowest total score was considered to be the 
overall best response provided by NSs. The second lowest total score was consid- 
ered to be second best, and so on. 

The results revealed that the NSs were not in agreement on these rankings, 
particularly in the case of second and third best responses. For all but one item, 
however, it was clear which single response was overwhelmingly considered the 
best. That is, there was always one response which clearly received the fewest total 
points. Similarly, for each item, there was always at least one response which no NS 
marked as the best choice. Thus it could be safely claimed that one response was 
clearly the best and another clearly not the best choice 2 . 

Table 2. Role play questionnaire scores and rank. 



RANK 

1 

1 

3 

4 

5 

6 
6 
8 
8 
8 

11 

11 

13 

14 

n=14 



NNS 

C 

D 

K 

G 

J 

A 

B 

H 

I 

M 

E 

F 

N 

L 



RAW SCORE 
16 
16 
14 
13 
12 
11 
11 
10 
10 
10 
9 
9 
7 
6 



% CORRECT 
80 
80 
70 
65 
60 
55 
55 
50 
50 
50 
45 
45 
35 
30 



To determine the subjects' score on this task, their responses were compared 
to these two rankings: best and not best. Scoring for each item was carried out ac- 
cording to the following distribution. Subjects were given two points for marking 
the response judged as best by the NSs. They were given zero points for marking the 
response judged as not best \ For marking either of the other two possible re- 
sponses, subjects were given one point since, although they were clearly not the 
best response, they were also not judged to be not best and therefore were at east 

somewhat acceptable to some native speaker judges. 

Since there were ten items, the highest possible score on this task was 20 and 
the lowest possible score was 0, although no subject scored either of these extremes. 



72 



SheiU Hoftman-Hicks 



These scores are provided in Table 2. Again, the subjects are ranked according to 
percentage correct. 

Comparing the Results 



In order to answer the two research questions posed in this study - that is, 
whether linguistic competence is (a) necessary and (b) sufficient for pragmatic 
competence ~ subjects' performance in both areas of competence, linguistic and 
pragmatic, had to be compared. The difficulty of comparing subjects' scores on the 
linguistic component of the study with their scores on the pragmatic component, 
however, is illustrated in the cliched expression of comparing apples with oranges. 
For although we can arrive at numbers and statistics representing the results of each 
task, these numbers cannot necessarily be compared. They are not absolutes. Quan- 
tifying pragmatic abilities is a challenging task in and of itself; and when an attempt 
is made to correlate these figures with grammatical scores, for example, the diffi- 
culties are compounded. 

To deal with this problem of comparing two types of data, an attempt was 
made to discover a possible link or variable common to the two sets of scores. The 
subjects' rank based on their performance on the two tasks was chosen as the means 
of comparison. These figures were provided in Tables 1 and 2. The rankings were 
analyzed as shown in Table 3 in order to gain insights into how subjects ranked 
relative to each other on the two tasks. 

Addressing the Research Questions 

Research question 1 : Is linguistic competence necessary for pragmatic competence? 

In response to the first research question, the results suggest that linguistic 
competence generally is a necessary prerequisite for pragmatic competence. Eleven 
of the fourteen subjects - A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, L, and N - performed simi- 
larly (within three rank positions) or worse on the pragmatic competence task than 
they did on the linguistic competence task. Or, to approach it from another direc- 
tion, for only three subjects — J, K, and M -- did linguistic competence not appear 
to be necessary for pragmatic competence. These subjects were able to perform 
relatively well on the pragmatic task despite fairly low scores on the linguistic task. 

Some possible explanations for the individual variation exhibited by J, K, and 
M should be considered. To account for the performance of these subjects, two 
other variables were investigated: level of coursework and amount of time spent 
speaking French outside of the classroom. Level of coursework refers to the level of 
the course(s) in French in which the subject was enrolled at the time of data collec- 
tion. Subjects who scored higher on the linguistic test (those ranked sixth or better, 
namely A through F) were all enrolled in fourth-year and upper third-year level 
courses, while those who scored lower were generally enrolled in lower third-year 
level courses. Also taken into consideration here was whether the subjects had 
^“' , ;un their study of French at the university or prior to it. 



Linguistic and Pragmatic Competence 



73 



Table 3. Comparison of rank 4 



Linguistic Task 
RANK NNS 



Pragmatic Task 
RANK NNS 




C 

D 

K 

G 

J 

A 

B 

H 

I 

M 

E 

F 

N 

L 



n=14 




A separate questionnaire was administered to discover how much time sub- 
jects spent speaking French outside the classroom with, for example, other partici- 
pants in the overseas study program, native speakers, and professors. It was assumed 
that those students who conversed more in French, particularly with native speakers 
or very advanced speakers such as professors and tutors, might have an advantage 
over those who rarely or never spoke French outside the classroom. The results of 
the questionnaire indicated that all of the subjects spoke little to no French in these 
out-of-class contexts. These results are somewhat surprising in light of the fact that 

84 



74 



Sheila Hoffman-Hick* 



this group of subjects — students preparing for study abroad — hat’, been selected on 
the assumption that they would be more motivated to learn and use French than 
other learners. 

Return now to the three subjects who performed well on the pragmatic tacfr 
despite relatively low scores on the linguistic task. Information derived from the 
additional variables discussed above strongly suggests that for both subjects J and K, 
the score they earned on the linguistic test may not be representative of their actual 
linguistic ability. That is, these subjects were probably more advanced linguistically 
than their score on that task indicates. One basis for this assumption is the fact tha t, 
like all of the subjects who ranked highest on this section (those ranked sixth or 
better), both of these subjects were enrolled in fourth-year level courses. In &ct, J 
was enrolled in two advanced French courses that semester and K was enrolled in 
four. This information is provided on Table 4. 

Table 4 . Level of French courses) enrolled in at time of data collection 5 



RANK 


NNS 


COURSE(S) 


1 


A 


F473 


1 


B 


F474.F425 


3 


C 


F362 


4 


D 


F401 


4 


E 


F401 


6 


F 


F425 


7 


G 


* 


8 


H 


F313 


8 


I 


F314 


10 


J 


F450, F401 


11 


K 


F473, F401, F362, F316 


12 


L 


F313 


13 


M 


* 


14 


N 


F313 



'Course enrollment information unavailable 



Furthermore, while most of the subjects began studying French at the high 
school level, K began learning French at the junior high or middle school level, 
giving him more years of exposure to the language. Finally, although the results 
from the questionnaire did not prove to be as useful as anticipated, they did indicate 
that J and K were two of only four subjects in the group who spent time speaking 
French with other participants in the program. Interestingly, the other two subjects 
were B and C, who also scored well on the linguistic task. 

It does appear, then, that J and K may have been incorrectly ranked for lin- 
guistic ability and that they may not in fact present counter-evidence to the claim 
linguistic competence is necessary for pragmatic competence; the discrepancy 

85 



LinguUlic »nd Piagmatic Competence 



75 



tween their linguistic and pragmatic scores may be artificial. Since the additional 
information about course enrollment and time spent speaking French was not avail- 
able for subject M. a more complete picture of her language abilities cannot be 
determined. Nevertheless, it is possible to claim that for thirteen out of fourteen, 
and possibly even fourteen out of fourteen subjects, a certain linguistic competence 
was necessary for pragmatic competence. The results obtained here provide con- 
vincing support for this claim. 

Research question 2: Is linguistic competence sufficient for pragmatic competence? 

According to the results illustrated in Table 3, it does not appear to be the case 
that linguistic competence is sufficient for pragmatic competence. This is clear from 
the results of subjects A, B, E, and F who performed considerably more poorly, 
relatively speaking, on the pragmatic task than on the linguistic task. If linguistic 
competence were sufficient for pragmatic competence, these subjects should have 
performed as well or better on the pragmatic task. This conclusion corresponds with 
Bardovi-Harlig & Hartford’s (1990) and Hartford & Bardovi-Harlig's (1989) find- 
ings on advanced learners of ESL and with Wieland's (1990) advanced nonnative 
speakers of French. Linguistic competence does not guarantee pragmatic compe- 
tence. The following section will present further evidence for this claim. 



Task 3: Discourse Completion Test 



The third task administered in this study was the DCT . Recall that the format 
of this test was identical to that of the role play questionnaire, except that the items 
were left open-ended. On the DCT, subjects were provided a tone and stimulus in 
English, and each item concluded with the phrase "You say:". In this paper, one 
speech act situation, complimenting, was selected for discussion; it will be dis- 
cussed in light of its implications for the two research questions posed. 

In her analysis of American complimenting behavior, Wolfson (1989b, 1983) 
noted that at the syntactic level, compliments were of a highly patterned nature. She 
found, for example, that 50% of all compliments given by middle-class speakers of 
American English were characterized by the formula in (2) below: 



(2) NP (is/looks) (really) ADJ 
Your house is really beautiful. 



Two other common patterns made up another 29% of all compliments. These were: 



(3) I really (like/love) NP 
I really like your shirt. 

(4) PRO is (really) (a) ADJ NP 
That was really a great paper. 



76 



Sheila Hoffman-Hick* 



Wolfson discovered these syntactic patterns in her analysis of over twelve 
hundred compliments. The corpus of compliments analyzed in the present study was 
significantly more limited than Wolfson’s since the control group included only nine 
NSs of French. The fact that the number of native speaker subjects was so small, 
however, made it particularly interesting to observe that a common syntactic pattern 
had revealed itself among the compliments provided by this group. On the DCT 
portion of this study, six out of nine NSs wrote a compliment which had the follow- 
ing structure*: 



(5) PROl est (trfes) ADJ, NP1 

II est trfes joli, ton pull-over. 

(it is very pretty your sweater) 

The surface form of this sentence is straightforward, and the pattern should 
not be difficult for NNSs. A subject pronoun is followed by a form of the verb be, 
which is followed by an adjective optionally intensified by the equivalent of the 
English very, and the structure ends with a postposed noun phrase co-referenced 
with the subject pronoun. Postposing or preposing an element of the sentence in this 
way is a common way to express emphasis in French, a language which generally 
does not allow individual word stress. 

Since the pattern of this compliment is relatively simple, one would expect 
that these intermediate-level subjects would have little trouble producing a native- 
like compliment. This was not the case, however, since, surprisingly, not one of the 
fourteen subjects produced this form on the DCT. 

The compliment structure favored by eleven of the fourteen subjects mirrored 
the American English pattern in (3) above discovered by Wolfson 7 : 

(6) J'aime (beaucoup/bien) NP J'adore NP 
J’aime bien ton pull-over. 

(I like really your sweater) 



Although (3) was not the most common structure in English according to 
Wolfson's study, the high occurrence of (6), its French counteipart, in the nonna- 
tive responses may be due to learning effects. The structure in (6) is generally pre- 
sented early to students as the simplest way to express likes and dislikes in French. 
While it is probably not explicitly taught that this structure also pertains to compli- 
menting in French, learners may generalize it to this situation as well. 

What is particularly striking about these results is that they have clear implica- 
tions for the second research question addressed in this study. They lend support to 
the conclusion reached above that linguistic competence is not sufficient for prag- 
matic competence. There is virtually no doubt that any of these intermediate-level 
subjects could have produced the relatively simple, native-like complimenting pat- 
tern in (5); that is, the subjects had the linguistic competence to produce it. Yet, 
none of them did. Even if learners have the linguistic ability to produce the prag- 
matically appropriate structures employed by NSs in a given context, other factors 



0 



ist come into 



play. 



Linguistic and Pragmatic Competence 



77 



The results of the complimenting data also had implications for the first re- 
search question addressed in the study, since they also support the conclusion that 
linguistic competence is necessary for pragmatic competence. An analysis of the 
nonnative speaker responses revealed several linguistic problems which could have 
an effect on the way in which the compliments would be received by NSs. For ex- 
ample, five of the subjects employed inappropriate vocabulary items, including, for 

example: 

(7) J'aime bien ta sweater. 

J'aime bien ton pulli. 

While gestures or other non-verbal cues may clarify for the NS that his or her pull- 
over (or pull, for short) is being commented on, the improper word choice may 
cause some initial awkwardness. It is interesting to find that four of the fourteen 
subjects would have difficulty remembering this particular vocabulary item which is 
not only a fairly basic term but also a cognate. Difficulties arising from this kind of 
gap in vocabulary would likely be even more apparent when subjects are actually 
speaking to NSs as opposed to writing, when real time constraints and perhaps 
anxiety come into play. 

Purely grammatical errors also appeared in the data, such as. 

(8) C'est un pull fantastique. Oil V achetez-vousl 
That 's a fantastic sweater. Where do you buy it? 

Again, the NS would probably understand the message, since the appropriate "erb 
tense can easily be inferred from the context. However, an error of this type may 
bother the NS. This may result in some discomfort for both interlocutors, particu- 
larly if the NS is unaccustomed to speaking with NNSs of the language. 

Although it cannot be stated in absolute terms, it seems likely that the kinds of 
linguistic errors found in these examples would hinder in some way the NNS’s in- 
tended message, thereby having an effect on the NS's perception of the compliment. 
Thus, despite the appropriateness of the intended compliment, linguistic limitations 
may affect the overall success of the exchange*. 

In sum, the analysis of the complimenting data obtained from the DCT has 
had interesting implications for this study in that it has provided su. port for the 
conclusions reached for both of the research questions addressed. Although the 
examples presented to illustrate these arguments may appear somewhat oversimpli- 
fied. they nevertheless provide very clear evidence in support of these conclusions. 

CONCLUSION 

This paper has investigated the relation between linguistic and pragmatic 
competence in the overall competence of the intermediate-level foreign language 
learner. Results from the study have strongly suggested that linguistic competence 
is necessary for pragmatic competence, but that it is not sufficient for it. That leam- 

88 



78 



Sheilt Hoffman-Hicki 



ers need to have a basic control of grammatical structures and vocabulary to make 
their message understood makes sense intuitively. Furthermore, existing research 
has already shown that linguistic ability alone does not guarantee the appropriate 
use of language in real language contexts. Thus, the conclusions reached here may 
not be surprising. 

The obvious difficulty which arises with research of this type lies in the 
comparison of the two kinds of competence. In order to make hard claims about the 
relation between a learner's linguistic and pragmatic competence, reliable means of 
comparing real data must be employed. Comparing learners' rank according to their 
scores on different types of tasks, the method employed in this study, provided 
useful insights to the research questions addressed, based on real data. Neverthe- 
less, the results obtained still are not entirely satisfactory since they are highly rela- 
tive and, as such, cannot represent the learner's system in absolute terms. This 
study has contributed to the investigation of the role of linguistic and pragmatic 
competence in the learner's overall competence; in so doing, it has also emphasized 
the crucial need for the development of new means of measurement and comparison 
of these disparate types of data. Understanding the complex roles played by both 
types of competence will enable us to arrive at a more complete picture of what it 
means to know a language and to better prepare students for this challenging task. 



I would like to thank the Pragmatics and Language Learning reviev* 3 ..\ who 
gave useful comments and suggestions for the final draft of the paper. I wouiu also 
like to thank Harry Gradman for statistical analysis and Beverly Hartford, Debci*h 
Piston-Hatlen, and the participants in the 1991 SLA and Discouise Analysis semi- 
nars for much valuable feedback and discussion. Special appreciation goes to Kath- 
leen Bardovi-Harlig for guidance and encouragement throughout the process. 



Sheila Hoffman-Hicks is a Ph.D. candidate in French Linguistics at Indiana 
University. She is currently teaching English in France as a lecturer at the Univer- 
sity de Strasbourg and is conducting research for her dissertation, a longitudinal 
study of the development of pragmatic competence of American learners of French. 



‘While it is clear that there is a great deal of overlap of the notion of overall 
competence with that of communicative competence , the term overall competence 
was preferred here since the theoretical framework of this study, Speech Act theory, 
examines discreet acts. Any conclusions reached, therefore, are restricted to spe- 
cific speech act situations. 

2 Remember that the word best here always refers to the most appropriate, or 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 



THE AUTHOR 



NOTES 



O ? most native-like , response. 




Linguistic and Pragmatic Competence 



79 



3 As mentioned above, there was one item which did not result in a clear single 
best response. That is, two of the responses were nearly equally ranked by NSs. For 
this item only, the subjects were given two points for marking either of these two 
choices. Likewise, for several items, there were two responses which no NS marked 
as the best choice. Subjects earned zero points for marking either of these. 

•The Spearman Rank Order Correlation is .43. 

’Courses numbered in the 300s are third-year level courses and those in the 
400s are fourth-year level courses. F313 and F314 are both advanced grammar 
courses. Oral practice is the focus of F3 16 and F475. F362 is a civilization course, 
F425 and F450 literature courses, F401 a course in the structure and development 
of French, and 473 an advanced writing course. 

The tone for this item was "friendly" and the stimulus was the following: 
"You are sitting with some French friends in a cafe. One of them is wearing a great 
sweater that you really like, and you want to compliment her on it. You say: . 

Two NSs produced this pattern; it is, therefore, an acceptable structure in 

French. 

This phenomenon has been termed pragma-linguistic failure by Thomas 
(1983) and contrasts with socio-pragmatic failure, which refers to a learner error 
resulting from either not knowing or not saying the appropriate response to a given 
social context. 



REFERENCES 

Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Hartford, B.S. (1990). Congruence in native and nonnative 
conversations: Status balance in the academic advising session. Language 
Learning, 40, 467-501. 

Beebe, L.M. & Takahashi, T. (1989a). Do you have a bag?: Social status and pat- 
terned variation in second language acquisition. In S. Gass, C. Madden, D. 
Preston, & L. Selinker (Eds.), Variation in second language acquisition: 
Discourse and pragmatics (pp. 103-125). Clevedon, U.K.: Multilingual 
Matters. 

Eisenstein, M„ & Bodman, J.W. (1986). "1 very appreciate": Expressions of grati- 
tude by native and non-native speakers of American English. Applied Linguis- 
tics, 7, 167-85. 

Fraser, B., Rintell, E., & Walters, J. (1980). An approach to conducting research 
on the acquisition of pragmatic competence in a second language. In D. 
Larsen-Freeman (Ed.), Discourse analysis in second language research (pp. 
75-91). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 

Gumperz, J. (1971). Linguistic repertoires, grammars, and second language in- 
struction. In Dil (Ed.), Language in social groups: Essays by John Gumperz. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 

Hartford, B.S., & Bardovi-Harlig, K. (1989). Structuring the interview: An exami- 
nation of native ami normative participation. Paper presented at the ThirdAn- 
nual Conference on Pragmatics and Language Learning, Urbana, 1L. 

Hymes D. (1972b). On communicative competence. In J.B. Pride & J. Holmes 

90 



Linguittic and Pragmatic Competence 



80 



(Eds.), Sociolinguistics. Harmondsworth, U.K.: Penguin. 

Raffaldini, T. (1987). Attrition of communicative ability among former year abroad 
students of French. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN. 

Schegloff, E., & Sacks, H. (1973). Opening up closings. Semiotics, 8, 289-327. 
Schmidt, R., & Richards, J. (1980). Speech acts and second language learning. 
Applied Linguistics, 1, 129-157. 

Searle, J. (1976). The classification of illocutionary acts. Language in Society, 5, 1- 
24. 

Thomas, J. (1983). Cross-cultural pragmatic failure. Applied Linguistics, 4, 91- 



in native/nonnative 



Varonis, E., & Gass, S. (1985). Miscommunication 
conversation. Language and Society, 14, 327-344. 

Wieland, M. (1990). Politeness-based misunderstandings in conversations between 
native speakers of French and American advanced learners of French. Un- 
published doctoral dissertation, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN. 

Wolfson, N. (1983). An empirically based analysis of compliments. In N. Wolfson 
& E. Judd (Eds.), Sociolinguistics and language acquisition (pp. 82-95). 
Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 



Wolfson, N. (1989b). The social dynamics of native and nonnative variation in 
complimenting behavior. InM. Eisensfein (Ed.), The dynamic interlanguage 
(pp. 219-236). New York: Plenum. 



o 




91 



Pragmatics and Language Learning 
Monograph Series, Vol. 3, 1992 



Discourse Domains Revisited: 

Expertise and Investment in Conversation 

Shona Whyte 

Selinker and Douglas’ discourse domain hypothesis holds that 
second language acquisition takes place within domains of discourse 
which are created by and important to the learner. This paper aims to 
refine the definition of the discourse domain construct by examining the 
discourse domains developed by one nonnative speaker in conversations 
with two native interlocutors. 

The discourse domain is viewed as an extension of an established 
model for background knowledge, the schema, and is shown to exhibit 
greater development than the schema on three parameters: 1) Content 
elaboration: a discourse domain incorporates more information and is 
more complex than a schema; 2) Stability: although domains differ 
from learned routines in their openness to interlocutor input, they are 
less likely to undergo radical alteration during a single encounter than 
schemata; and 3) Personal importance: unlike a schema, which may be 
a temporary expedient for one conversation, a domain is developed over 
time because of its importance in the speaker's life. 

This study highlights the role played by interlocutors in the for- 
mation, development, and presentation of a speaker’s discourse do- 
main, and suggests that the properties of elaboration, stability, and 
importance are key variables for a discourse domain model in second 
language research. 

This paper investigates the discourse domain hypothesis advanced by Selinker 
and Douglas (1985), which holds that a second language is acquired with reference 
to speaker-specific topic areas rather than as a general, context-independent compe- 
tence: 

the important SLA processes, such as language transfer, fossilization, 
and backsliding, as well as avoidance, do not occur globally across ILs, 
but rather differentially within discourse domains (Selinker and 
Douglas, 1985, p. 0190). 

Although the authors do not provide a precise definition of the discourse 
domain, they describe domains as "various 'slices of life* that are important and/or 
necessary for ... learners to talk and/or write about" (Selinker and Douglas, 1985, 
p. 190), and suggest the topic areas of 'major field,’ 'own life,' and 'own culture* as 
examples of domains created by international students in the US. In later work, they 
propose the following criteria for domain identificat:on: 



O 




92 



Shoot Whyte 



82 



importance to the learner, interactional salience, discontinuous-ness, 
control of content (in that the learner knows about the topic, but not 
necessarily the language to express it), and the fact that such domains 
are highly personal (Selinker and Douglas, 1987, p. 469). 



This paper seeks to examine some of these features with a view to refining the 
definition of the discourse domain. 

Given the important claims advanced by Selinker and Douglas in their dis- 
course domain hypothesis, for example the assertion that acquisition processes are 
triggered by specific contexts, and that performance, including grammatical accu- 
racy, varies according to context, such a clarification of the domain construct is 
clearly necessary. Very little other work in context-based second language acquisi- 
tion, however, has investigated the domain hypothesis perse, although a number of 
investigators have used the domain construct indirectly. Woken and Swales (1989) 
examined the effect of content expertise on non-native performance by having three 
nonnative computer science majors instruct American peers in the use of a word 
processing program. The patterns of language behavior they observed contrast 
sharply with learner performance in typical NS-NNS research situations. Zuengler 
(1989) also focused on the effect of topic knowledge on speaker performance in a 
study which compared native-nonnative dyads conversing on 'major field' and 
'neutral' topics. A closer investigation of the different variables involved in the de- 
velopment of a discourse domain can shed new light on research findings such as 
these. 



However, since discourse domain research is still at an embryonic stage, with 
no well-developed definitions to build on, it seems logical to look to existing mod- 
els of a speaker's background knowledge for a starting point. One model of particu- 
lar relevance is the schema. Schemata have been described variously by cognitive 
psychologists as "active, developing patterns" and the "active organization of past 
reactions, or of past experiences (Bartlett, 1932/67, p. 201); by sociolinguists as 
"structures of expectation* (Tannen, 1979, p.138); and by discourse analysts as 
"information from the encountered discourse, together with knowledge from past 
experience" (Brown and Yule, 1983, p. 249). Clearly a schema is a knowledge 
framework which influences the processing of new information, and is in turn af- 
fected by that new information. 



It seems plausible to view the discourse domain as a similar dynamic structure 
which shapes and is shaped by the speaker's perception of incoming material. Of 
course domain and schema differ, since schemata are general-purpose structures 
created to deal with everyday experiences, while domains have special properties 
such as personal importance to the speaker, interactional salience, and an elaborated 
content. However, it is also obvious that no domain can suddenly emerge in all its 
complexity as a fait accompli ; a discourse domain is created over time, as a result of 
the speaker s investment in a topic, which in turn increases its interactional sali- 



ence, leading perhaps to greater content elaboration and thus investing the topic 
with even more importance for the speaker. A domain must develop, therefore, like 
:hema, and indeed must develop from a schema. 



Ditcourse Domains Revisited: Expertise and Investment in Conversation 



83 



The present study will take the approach that there is a close connection be- 
tween schemata and discourse domains; namely, that they are part of a continuum 
representing the level of development of a speaker’s background knowledge for a 
given topic. This notion is represented in Figure 1. Analysis of the data in this paper 
will show the discourse domain to be a particularly well-developed, stable, and 
personally important schema. In so doing, the paper therefore establishes the fea- 
tures of content elaboration, stability, and personal importance as relevant to a defi- 
nition of the discourse domain and hence important parameters for research within 
the discourse domain framework. 

Figure 1. The Schema-Domain Continuum. 



less elaborate 


more elaborate 


DISCOURSE 


SCHEMA 




less stable 
less important 


more stable 
more important 


DOMAIN 



METHODOLOGY 




The data for this paper were taken from a larger data set involving 2 native 
speakers and 8 nonnatives in native-nonnative dyads. The present study involved 3 
male graduate students in their twenties at Indiana University, unfamiliar with one 
another: F, a French mathematics student, with a 2 year-old TOEFL score of 500, 
who had spent 12 months in the US; B, a British geography student, who had been 
in the US for 2 months; and A, an American music student. The natives interviewed 
the nonnative in turn, immediately after one another, and the resulting 25 minute 
conversations were audiotaped and transcribed. 1 

Table 1 shows the domains activated in each conversation, subdivided into 
episodes. Although subjects were left free as to the content of their conversations 
(with the researcher suggesting the NNS* experiences in the States, their studies, 
and own country as fall-back topics) the range of topics was remarkably similar 
across conversations, and reflected for the most part the NNS* discourse domains. 
For this reason, F’s knowledge frameworks are referred to as domains and his inter- 
locutors* as schemata in much of the discussion to follow. As far as participation is 
concerned, A and B tended to play a dominant role in initiating and pursuing topics; 
domains or episodes initiated by F, the nonnative speaker, are marked with an aster- 
isk. The numbers in brackets indicate the time to the nearest minute. 

From this breakdown, three sections were selected for analysis: the domains 
'F's life history* and *F*s major field* allow comparison of the same domain on 
different occasions; while the dot ain ’Europe versus the US* allows comparison of 

94 



84 



Shoot Whyte 



behavior in a domain which is common to B and F as European students in the 
United States with other episodes in the conversation where content expertise is less 
evenly distributed. 



Table 1. Conversation Episodes 



CONVERSATION 1 


B&F 


CONVERSATION 2 


A&F 


1 F’S LIFE HISTORY [0-5] 


1 French people 


[0-2] 


F's birth place 


0-1 


Common ground 


0-2 


Education 


1-2 






MILITARY SERVICE 


3-5 






2 F’S STUDIES 


15-11] 


2 F’S STUDIES 


[2-14] 


WHY MATH? 


5-6 


(Common acquaintances) 


2-3 


APPLICATIONS OF MATH 6-9 


Chaos 


3-8 


Indiana University 


9-11 


APPLICATIONS OF MATH 8-11 






WHY MATH? 


11-14 


3 F’s plans/reasons 


for 


3 F’s plans/reasons for 


coming to th> US 


[11-13] 


coming to the US 


[14-17] 


Why the US? 


11-12 


Job prospects 


14-15 


Graduation 


12-13 


Why the US? 


15-16 






Graduation 


16-17 


4 Europe vs the US 


[13-21] 


4 A’s studies* 


[17-22] 


Adjusting to the US 


13-17 


IU Music School 


17-18 


Students 


17-19 


French bass players 


18-19 


Living in the US 


19-20 


French students at IU 




(Experiences in England 




Music School 


19-21 


/Ireland) 


20-21 


(French stereotypes) 


21-22 


5 Bloomington 


[21-26] 


5 F’S LIFE HISTORY [22-25] 


Friends 


21-23 


Education 


22-23 


International Center 


23-24 


MILITARY SERVICE 


23-25 


Travel in the US 


24-25 






Geography* 


25-26 







9i> 



Discourse Domains Revisited: Expertise and Investment in Conversation 



85 



ANALYSIS 

To make a case for a theory of discourse domains, it must be shown that the 
notion can account for similarities and differences in language behavior on separate 
occasions. It must also be shown that the domain construct differs from the inter- 
locutor's schema in some impoi ^nse, since this framework holds that a dis- 
course domain is more fully dev., jd, more fixed, and more personal than a 
schema. This analysis treats each of these properties in turn. 

Content Elaboration 

Beginning with the most obvious defining feature of a discourse domain, the 
speaker's content expertise, there is clear evidence in the opening of the domain 
'F's studies' in each conversation that the creator of the domain has much greater 
content competence than his interlocutor. We would expect F to have much greater 
knowledge of his major field than his interlocutors (a geograpf major and a music 
major) but there is a particular problem associated with the study of mathematics: it 
is difficult to talk about in layman's terms and, conversely, to find an informed non- 
mathematician is rare. This phenomenon surfaces in the data in a certain reluctance 
on the part of F to engage the topic, and in consequent efforts by A and B to show 
credentials as worthy interlocutors on the subject, which both do by citing informa- 
tion gleaned from other students of mathematics. A engages the topic as follows: 2 



(1) Conversation 2 



[AF: F’s studies 2-14; 3] 



A So are you in the same, d’you study the same kind, are you in the 
same uh area as Ivan? 

F Yeah we’re in the same in the same field, yeah, same sort of thing 
A Chaos, are you studying chaos? 

F Oh, if you wanna, if you like high-tech names, maybe 
A [laughs] He just kind of /explain/ 

F /there/ isl 

A I was trvin’ to explain something 

to me. some math theory of chaos . 

F This is, this isl 

A II have actually no idea what he was talking aboutl 

p IThere, there there is a 

connection with mathematical theory of chaos 
[4 min lecture on the theory of chaos]2 



O 

ERIC 



A has nominated the topic of F's studies by asking whether F is 'in the same area' as 
a common acquaintance, but admits he has 'no idea' what the area might be. In 
response, F launches into a 4 minute lecture on the mathematical theory of chaos. F 
is thus clearly the knower in this topic area; his domain is more fully developed than 
the schema of his interlocutor. 

However, when we look at the second example, taken from F's conversation 
with B, we can see that the same domain opens in a very different way. B asks about 
F’s choice of major, and receives a description of F's school career in reply: 



96 



86 



Shon* Whyte 



(2) Conversation 1 [BF: F’s studies 5-11; 5] 

B Yeah. So when did you first think [laugh] when did you first 
think about ever being a mathematician ? I mean you must be 
pretty good to be at IU and to be a mathematician or pretty good 
compared to most people as far as maths are concerned. So were 
you a were vou a child prodigy /at math/ ? 

F /No/ no no never anything like this 

uhl 

B IWeie your parents very pushy or? 

F Not that much actually /the thing is/ 

B /Was/ your dad a mathematician? 

F Well maybe that has some influence. My father has nothing to do 
with mathematics but one of my brothers I mean my brother, I 
have only one, he is um he is a mathematician, he’s doing 
research. I don’t know if that maybe that has an influence. The 
thing is after high school I did two years you know the French 
system is like you have to do two years preparation before getting 
in the School of Engineers and these two years are only 
mathematics and physics. So that’s the first time I’ve been 

B /mhm/ 

F doing mathematics earnestly and I sort of realized I liked it. And 
then I got into the School of Engineers, uh. where I didn’t do 
much and where I staved for a couple of years and then after that 
school I realized that after all, vou know mavbe engineering stuff 
wasn’t that interesting and I 



O 



How can we account for this difference in F's presentation of his major field 
to different interlocutors? Clearly the difference lies with the interlocutor. In the 
second example, B has taken the role of interviewer, asking a very straightforward, 
task-oriented question: "when did you first think about ever being a mathemati- 
cian?" Crucially, B has demonstrated no schema for the topic of mathematics. F's 
answer is therefore a general, non-technical one, falling back on the only shared 
knowledge they have at this point in the conversation - his life history. In the first 
example, on the other hand, A does demonstrate some schema, albeit very sketchy. 
He cites another mathematician, "Ivan," and the name of an area of math, "the the- 
ory of chaos." In return, he gets a very different picture of F's major field. 

These examples show the greater content elaboration involved in a discourse 
domain, as well as the role of the interlocutor's schemata in determining the presen- 
tation of that domain on a particular occasion. A second pair of extracts, this time 
from the 'F's life history' domain, show similar contrast and, in particular, high- 
light the importance of timing within a conversation in shaping the way a domain is 
presented. 

In the 'military service' episode, both native interlocutors demonstrate that 
they are aware that France has compulsory military service and that most French 
students find the experience unpleasant. Both have also recently interviewed an- 



*Tj> 



Discourse Domain! Revisited: Expertise and Investment in Conversation 



87 



other French student who is planning to avoid army service by working in the 
French overseas development network, as a ’coopdrant’ in a developing country, so 
they are aware that it is possible to avoid the army. It appears, however, that A has a 
more fully developed schema than B for the topic of military service in France, since 
he has a number of French acquaintances who have substituted ’cooperation’ or 
overseas study for army service. In addition, this schema has very recently been 
activated, since immediately previous to his conversation with F, he interviewed a 
third French subject who was studying at Indiana University instead of doing army 
service. 

The salience of this schema to A manifests itself in the conversation in the 
form of insistent questions about what exactly F was required to do during his serv- 
ice. These questions continue in spite of a certain reluctance on the part of F to 
engage this topic, which seems to have unpleasant memories for him: 



(3) Conversation 2 [AF: F’s life history 22-25; 23] 

F I graduated from that school and then I went to the military for one 
year 

What did vou do /in the military?/ 

/in Nancy/ 1 was uh you see where is Nancy it’s close 

to Germany 
A No I /don’t/ 

F /it’s in/ the /north east / 

A /yeah/ in Alsace or something? 

F Close /to it./ Very close to Alsace. So I spent a year there 
A /yeah/ 

A What did you have to do ? 

F Well they put me for the first five month they put me they put me 
in a in a officer division officer training camp uh I didn’t wanna 
but uh that’s where they put me, so after I graduated from this 
thing after five month I was a sub-lieutenant and they put me in a 
regiment in Lorraine and I spent seven month there, as a sub- 
lieutenant 

A But what so vou were an officer ? 

F Yeah so uh well basically I was teaching some sort of military 
science 

A Yeah military sci- what really ? 

F Well it was more like my regiment was doing uh constructions so 
A Oh so vour engineering was it engineering-related ? 

F No it was military like explosives and how /to blow/ a building 
A /oh/ 

A Oh structural? 

F Mm military 

A So do you know about do you know about explosives? 

F Yeah that was the thing I was doing I was teaching how to use 
explosives how to blow a bridge how to blow a house where to 
put explosives 




98 



88 



Shorn WhyU 



One explanation for this interest on the part of A is that he has a well-devel- 
oped schema for the topic, which has recently been activated and indeed updated, 
and that the topic is therefore at least temporarily salient for him. In addition, a 
closer examination of the schema outlined above will reveal that there is an obvious 
gap in A's knowledge: he has no experience talking to Frenchmen who actually did 
army service. This may account for the rather general nature of his questions, which 
provide no ’hook' on which F can frame an answer and thus may partially explain 
the latter's failure to engage the topic immediately. 

This episode contrasts with what occurred in Conversation 1, where the 'life 
history* domain was invoked at the very beginning of the conversation. Timing is 
important hem. It is typically at the beginning of a conversation with an unfamiliar 
partner that the greatest topic negotiation takes place, since the interlocutors have 
no way of knowing which schemata, or indeed domains, they share. The situation is 
further complicated in this case by difficulties F was having in understanding B‘s 
British accent. Before the military service topic is initiated, there have been two 
requests by F for repetition of questions, one false start where B fails to recall a 
piece of information and has to change topic, and one refusal to engage a topic by F. 
These considerations, together with the somewhat sketchy background knowledge 
B has of the topic, lead me to claim that B‘s interest in engaging the topic of military 
service is very different from A's in the conversation above. In his role of inter- 
viewer, B is quite simply interested in getting his subject talking - the topic itself is 
of secondary concern. 

B's intention is made clear in the conversation by his provision of an easy 
hook for F to latch onto: "Did you enjoy it?" 

(4) Conversation I [BF: F’s life history 0-5: 3] 

F Then I went to the military for one year, I went to Nancy. 

B What was that like? 

F Mm? 

B The military, what was the military like? 

F The military like What was it like? 

B /mm/ 

F Uhuhnl 

B I Did vou cniov it ? 

F No noone enjoys noone enjoys it 

B They make sure you don’t enjoy it? 

F Yeah they really made sure I didn’t enjoy it Yeah I 

B /Really? [laugh]/ 

F mean the first five month were like they put me in a some sort of 
you know what they call ROTC here? Reserve 

B /Yeah/ 

F Officer Training Corps, they put me in something like this for five 
month it was like hell I had to get up at, five thirty every 
morning and stuff like this uh play at war with the ugly Russians 

O 

ERIC 



9i) 



Dixoune Domains Revisited: Expertise and Investment in Conversation 



89 



These examples indicate that even a presumably well-developed and practiced 
domain like the speaker's life history is not routinized in the least: the information 
F provides on two occasions in the space of one hour varies. Since the only variable 
manipulated is that of the interlocutor, it seems logical to conclude that this inter- 
locutor has an effect on the way a domain is activated and developed. This inference 
is supported at a very superficial level by F's question: "you know what they call 
ROTC here?", clear evidence that he is checking on his interlocutor s background 
knowledge of the topic. 

Stability 



The next examples illustrate another dimension of knowledge organization, 
stability in the structure of background knowledge. From the definitions given, we 
would expect a domain to be more fixed and a schema more open to change. This 
hypothesis is supported by data from the episode 'applications of math, ' a subcom- 
ponent of F's major field domain, where we find that in both conversations, there is 
discussion of the relationship between F's major - applied mathematics - and the 
real world. 

In Conversation 2, the 'applications of math' episode is initiated after five 
minutes' conversation on the mathematical theory of chaos, which A has asked F to 
explain. A attempts to relate this discussion to F's own research: 

(5a) Conversation 2 [AF: F’s studies 2-24; 8] 

A So are these kind of things I mean I’m just fascinated by studying 
something math this kind of thing it’s not applied math ematics at 
all right you’re just studying something that’s 

F This isl j 

A I Tt’s more like an art . Is anything is the kind of thing you do 

used by industry or 



The connection A makes between pure mathematics and art seems to indicate 
that he views the world of research in a manner that could be represented as below, 
and that he would place both himself (a musician) and F (a mathematician) on the 
same side of the scale, as shown in Figure2: 



Figure 2. A's Math Schema. 





A F 



90 



Shoot Whyte 



This evidence leads F first to check that this is indeed A's view and then to 
attempt to alter A's schema: 



(5b) Conversation 2 



[AF: F’s studies 2-24; 8] 



Uh ... because what do von mf»a n 



F (continuing from above) No. 
bv applied 

A /l don’t/ know uh well like this Marc is he’s working 

SeS C3SmgS y ° U kn ° W f ° r Dup ° nt that ’ S 1 l ’ m not « 

F /yeah/ 

A obviouslyl 

F lYeah OK he’s working on something that some dav 

some mdustiy can use for an industrial process that can make you 
money uh, I don t think that’s my case and I don’t * 



A 

F 



_ . . /right, right/ 

Uh ’.?’ S Vely mUCh ( ?? ) some SOrt Of 

fundamental (??) Now in in, so it’s not applied mathematics in this 
sense you understand the expression applied, but in the sense, 

a . 'Am I right by using the word applied is that applied 
meaning /that someone would/ 

F • ,u / T eah * h ? s is / exa ctly what I’m saying. The 
dung is that mathematicians say applied mathematics to say to 
define something that you would not call applied mathematics. I 

Iwk T Sa j apP Iied mathematics you mean mathematics 
which can be used by some industryl 

c c .i , , Hike a computer? 

Exactly uh when mathematicia.is sav appl ied mathematics it’s it*< 
l ess restrictive it means mathematics that is con nected to studying a 
problem wh ich exists in th* real world iimmz n 

c . . /ohOK/ 

So m that sense what Ivan is doing and what I’m doing is applied 
mathematics because you can find examples in fluid mechanics in 
meteorology in whatever so in that sense it’s applied 
mathematics But as far as using this in some industrial process 
or anything like predieting the weather or, no, 

No that’s it’s you guys that’s not what you’re doing? 

I wouldn’t say it’s applied 



A 

F 



A 

F 



Thus the schema A presents with "it's not applied mathematics at all right . .. 
It's more like an art" is the hook which allows F to develop his contribution. Note 
that, once again, a third person (Marc, an organic chemist, thus very much an ap- 
plied scientist) is invoked by A to support his case. This, together with his question 
"Am I right by using the word applied?" testifies to A's awareness that his schema 
for this topic area is somewhat sketchy. 

In Conversation 1 , the 'applications of mathematics' episode begins after only 
one minute of discussion of the topic of mathematics, a discussion which involved 
no detailed theory of mathematics but simply concerned F's decision to study 
mathematics. Thus B has provided no evidence of his competence in the topic, and 
P's answer differs greatly from the information he gave A: 

10 




►ms m co v aava 



Discourse Donuins Revisitede Expertise md Investment in Conversation 



91 



(6) Conversation 1 [BF: F’s studies 5-11; 6] 

B ... I mean I said why are you doing maths PhD I mean it hasn’l 
really pot much application for the real world , urn 
F Mm? The real world? 

B The real world, yeah 

F Mm 1 mean doing mathematics is just so vague. Some things 
have applications, some don’t 

F Like the equations I’m working are somehow related to the 
migration of petroleum in in petroleum deposits so it it is pretty 
much uh related to a physical situation that exists. Now whether 
the things I do are relevant about these equations or not 

/OK yeah/ 

well that’s another story, I mean the motivation 

/yeah/ 

Well no no no I think I think that’s uh relevant I think it’s very, 
very important if you’re going to spend a lot of time energy and 
money on. I think academia for academia’s sake is, uh is dubio us 
to sav the least. 

... Oh well I mean this is a matter of taste I guess, but 
I wouldn’t sav so l 

II don’t, well, OK all right 

The thing is the following I happen to be working this problem 
because I was introduced to these problems first as an engineer and 
then I tried to study them as a mathematician which is 

/mm / 

slightly different but I wouldn’t mind I would eniov I think 
working on something which has absolutely no connection 
with the real world. Like what I used to call 

/mm / 

intellectual masturbation 




Once again, F has derived a clue to B’s schema for mathematics from his 
comment "it hasn’t really got much application for the real world", and takes this as 
the hook on which to develop an answer. B appears to have a similar division of 
disciplines as A, but he positions himself (as a geography student) on the opposite 
end of the spectrum to F, as can be seen in Figure 3: 



Figure 3. B's Math Schema. 




102 



92 



Shon* Whyte 



As in the first conversation, F finds himself in a position where he wants to 
alter his interlocutor’s views on his subject, but this time he is moving in the oppo- 
site direction, emphasizing the 'purer' aspect of mathematics over its applications, 
in response to the implication that only applied science has merit. 

This episode provides evidence that the native interlocutor’s demonstration of 
background knowledge (as distinct from simple possession of that knowledge, 
which we examined in the ’life’ domain) influences the speaker’s presentation of his 
domain. In the 'applications of math’ episode, it appeared that F reacted to his inter- 
locutor's schema as it developed within the activation of the domain. In Conversa- 
tion 1, there was little or no chance for F to test his interlocutor's schema, and his 
contribution was very closely tied to the hook in B's opening question. In Conver- 
sation 2, however, the participants spent five minutes developing A's math schema, 
and as a result, A received a more detailed answer to the same underlying question 
concerning F's views on the position of math in the overall scheme of things. The 
crucial point is that not only did A have a more elaborate schema for math, but F 
was aware of this, having been closely involved in its creation. 

It is clear from these examples that the domain F has developed for what he is 
doing in mathematics, while not routinized, is fairly solid. When presented with 
one interlocutor who is "fascinated*’ by the connection he sees between math and 
art, and another who denounces "academia for academia’s sake" in favor of the 
applied sciences, ) own standpoint does not waver. The same cannot be said for 
B’s schema, since B backs down immediately from his position when F disagrees. 
Thus a domain may be less open to local alteration than a schema. 

However, although F does not alter his own standpoint, he does tailor his 
contribution very clearly to the positions established by his interlocutors, as is 
shown in Figure 4. He argues in Conversation 1 for the virtues of pure science and 
in Conversation 2 for some connection between mathematics and "the real world" 
(with the fact that he carries this term across from the first conversation indicating 
that he is taking his interlocutors’ views into account). In each case, he is bringing 
his interlocutor from a different point on the scale towards his own position in the 
center by invoking the opposite extreme. On both occasions, he is careful to situate 
his own studies somewhere between the two extremes of pure and applied science, 
which in itself indicates a more elaborate schema than either A or B demonstrate. 

From these two episodes, a composite picture of F's mathematics domain 
might be arrived at as represented in the central portion of Figure 4. If this post hoc 
reconstruction of F’s math discourse domain from the evidence of two conversa- 
tions seems to account for certain features of these conversations, then it may also 
provide a model for how this discourse domain really was created by the speaker. In 
other words, domains may simply be created by repeated activation of a salient topic 
area in interaction with different interlocutors. So much is in line with Selinker and 
Douglas* claims. Yet such a reconstruction also implies a decisive role played by 
these interlocutors - after all, it seems that the above representation is at least as 
much a product of their schema as of F's organization of knowledge. 

All this points to a hypothesis where a speaker's discourse domain is distin- 
guished from the schema built by his interlocutor in its stability - it is open to clabo- 



Discount Domains Revisited: Expertise and Investment in Convenation 



93 



Figure 4. F’s Math Domain Presentation 



A’S SCHEMA (5) 




A it’s not applied math at all right, (...) 
it’s more like an art 

(...) 

F when mathematicians say applied 

mathematics (...) it means mathematics 
that is connected to studying a problem 
which exists in the real world 

[AF: F’s studies 2-14; 11] 




F’S DOMAIN 




«$miep1 

APPLffiP'MATH \ SCIENCE 

f ✓ 

B why are you doing math PhD I mean it 

hasn’t really got too much application for the 
real world 

(...) 

F I would enjoy I think working on something 
which has absolutely no connection with the 
real world 

[BF: F’s studies 5-11; 5] 



B’S SCHEMA (6) 





94 



Shoot Whyte 



ration though not to radical alteration; its degree of elaboration - it is much more 
detailed than the interlocutors' schemata; and — as a consequence of these properties 
— its incorporation of elements of the schemata of different interlocutors encoun- 
tered by the speaker during the creation of his domain. 

Moving on to the next episode, concerning F's choice of major, we can see 
further evidence of the development of background knowledge within the course of 
an encounter. In Conversation 2, the discussion of the domain F's studies takes up 
the whole of the first half of the conversation: A introduces the topic, F exp lains the 
theory of chaos, they discuss the applications of math, then proceed to F's reasons 
for choosing to study math, as shown in (7). 

(7) Conversation 2 [AF: F's studies 2-14; 1 1] 

A What kind of people end up as mathematicians I mean were you 
always just math was just very easy for you or why why 

F /no/ 

A because you would think if you’re very good I mean the people I 
knew that were good in math in high school or even in college they 
they would go and become engineers or something hut who, von 
really have to lo ve math to stay in math as an academic discipline 
right ? 

F Yeah, I guess it’s a matter of taste yeah. Uh, I guess the main 
problem with math is that uh, noone makes a lot of money from 
doing applied mathematics, but anyone that is able to do 
mathematics is also able to do) 

A IMake a lot of /money/ /yeah/ 

F /be an engineer/ therefore to 

make a lot of money so maybe it requires both being able, but, not 
being too concerned about making money 

In A's formulation of his question, we can see he includes material which 
must have already been in his schema before the conversation. Yet I would also 
argue that the question reflects the ten minutes of conversation immediately preced- 
ing, since it is during that time that A's schema has been developing, largely due to 
input from F. The question imputes a certain altruism - or at least lack of material- 
ism - to the decision to study math as an academic discipline, and F's answer con- 
firms this suggestion. 

This contrasts quite sharply with the same episode in Conversation 1, shown 
in (2), which is framed "Were you a child prodigy at maths?" Here, the question is 
similar, asking about F's decision to study math, but its form, and F's response are 
quite different. One reason for this difference could be the timing, which reflects 
the participants awareness of each others domains and schemata. In (2), the ques- 
tion opens discussion of the domain 'F's studies,' and comes only 5 minute* into the 
conversation as a whole. Thus no schema-building has occurred as in (7). It seems, 
therefore, that a schema can be developed throughout an interaction, and that this 
development can affect the way in which the creator of a domain will present his 
views. 



Discourse Domains Revisited: Expertise and Investment in Conversation 



95 



Personal Importance 

So far we have seen differences between domains and schemata in terms of 
level of development and stability, and have looked at the interaction of the two 
types of knowledge organization in discourse. A third element in the framework is 
personal importance, and this is of particular interest since Selinker and Douglas 
consider it a defining feature of the discourse domain. The importance of a particu- 
lar topic to a speaker is not always easy to see in a conversation, for although we 
have already seen one case of a clash between one speaker's domain and his inter- 
locutor's schema in (6), the rules of normal interaction usually forestall such overt 
disagreement between participants. Thus the interaction of domain and schema is 
not a particularly fruitful area for the investigation of domain importance. A better 
opportunity is afforded in an episode where both interlocutors have a domain for the 
topic, since their behavior in this instance can be compared with the rest of the inter- 
action to examine the effect of personal importance on interaction. 

Extracts (8) through (11) are taken from the second half of Conversation 1 
where B and F share a domain for 'Europe versus the US.' This was the longest 
topic engaged, taking 8 out of 26 minutes. It showed other features, too, which lead 
me to claim that the domain holds greater personal importance for both speakers 

than has been evident in the rest of the conversation. 

One such feature concerns tum-taking patterns: in this domain, turns are more 
evenly shared and less frequently interrupted than in other parts of the conversation. 
This suggests a departure from the interviewer-interviewee role relationship seen 
elsewhere, with the topic taking precedence over other situational considerations. 
B's style in particular changes from the fairly standard interview-type question we 
have seen so far, to a less neutral form, and F immediately picks up on the implica- 
tions: 

(8) • Conversation 1 [BF: Europe vs the US 13-21; 13] 

B You’ve just been to Corsica? Did you when you came back here 
did you I mean what did you think of the States I mean for me if I 
went back to England I mean having just being in the middle of 
adjusting now uh to the American wav of life which is very 
distinctly different from the European wav of lif e uh I would I 
don’t know I think it would cause some, some major changes in 
my my attitude towards the States 

F Well I guess, uh, the first thing I could say is maybe it’s different 
because I’ve been here for a year and you’ve been here like a 
month or what? I’ll tell you what 
B /yeah/ 

F when I first came here I stayed for something like nine months 
without going home and then I went back to France and that was a 
sufficiently long period of time so that I could have two 
different modes of feeling, thinking, speaking working whatever, 
the French mode and the American or the semi- American 



106 



96 



Shoo* Whyte 



B /mm/ 

F mode so it’s it’s kind of funny because the first time I went to 
France I thought jeez what a difference and blah blah blah and, and 
now the second time I went to France I came back here I thought 
well it’s like I have really two different modes of thinking not of 
thinking I would sav of behaving there’s the French nnr. and th? 
American and I feel quite OK in both 



Thus instead of the interviewer using a schema to get the interviewee to dis- 
cuss his domain, we have the participants establishing a common domain. There is 
no information gap as between schema and domain, hence no need for clarification 
and verification of each others' contributions and knowledge. The resultant pattern 
of contributions is smoother than in episodes from F's discourse domains. 

A second point concerns the difference in maturity of the domains « a ^ h 
speaker has developed. B has only been in the country for two months, and his 
discourse domain appears to be in the process of developing, as he admits in a later 
episode in this domain: 

(9) Conversation 1 [BF: Europe vs the US 13-21; 17] 

F I still think there is some sort of common culture common to all 
Europeans. Uh 
/mm/ 

B Yeah I mean I probably would have disagreed had you said that to 
me in England. I mean having seen the difference having seen the 
alternative I think you’re probably right 

He is also experiencing unanticipated culture shock. A recurring feature of his 
conversations with other international students has been his concern about assimila- 
tion and acculturation, for which he uses the term 'naturalization.' Perhaps because 
of the very novelty of this domain to him, he tends to forget that this may also be a 
sensitive issue for his interlocutor. The following example is not unique in the data: 



(10) Conversation 2 [BF: Europe vs the US 13-21; 14] 



B I mean would you consider yourself fairly naturalized American I 
mean I can I can notice from some the way you say some things 

B like ‘excuse me’ that sort of thing sort of American rising 
intonation 

F Yes but you know I mean I’m not a native speaker and so 
whatever I say of course it has to sound American and 

B /sure/ 

F not English because I didn't stay much in England I spent six 
weeks in my entire life so you know so I guess this 

B /mm/ Anm/ 

F thing that I am doing in terms of taking American intonations of 
course the British guy wouldn’t do that 




10V 



Di§cou/*e Domatna Revisited: Expertise end Investment in Conversation 



97 



B No sure but what I’m saying my point is that do you consider 
yourself that you are fairly nat- that you are fairly accustomed mid 
naturalized to America? You say you have two ways of thinking, 
two ways of feeling uh 



F is clearly resistant to the implication that he may be becoming American- 
ized, particularly an implication based on his speech patterns, over which he feels 
he has little control. B is obliged to defend his position by quoting F's own words 
back to him. 

It may be that the process of domain-building is associated with a particularly 
high level of involvement with the topic, rather than with the conversational proc- 
ess. B's- behavior in this segment contrasts sharply with his contribution at the be- 
ginning of the conversation, when he initiated talk about F s life domain purely in 
order to get the conversation going, as shown in (4). 

It seems that this episode where two domains meet is characterized by a higher 
level of involvement on the part of both interlocutors. From the opening question 
and answer in (8), there appears to be a large amount of overlap between their 
domains, with both speakers viewing themselves primarily as Europeans who hap- 
pen to be living in the US. When B suggests, in extract (10), that F might be becom- 
ing Americanized, F immediately perceives a mismatch between their domains, and 
therefore sets about correcting this impression by making his views of the 'Ameri- 
can way of life* more explicit: 



(11) Conversation 2 [BF: Europe vs the US 13-21; 14] 

F No I think two ways of thinking is exaggerating because there are 
some kind of basic philosophies in America in the American 
situation whatever which I don’t think I will ever you know 
totally accept 

B Like? 

F Oh like uh what is the first thing in life, of course it’s money and 
you know things like this 

B And what what would a Frenchman say? Sex? 

F Yeah I guess so 

B [laugh] And then? [laugh] 

F /oh/ 

F I don’t know, food or, any kind of, nice things you 
know? This kind of obsession about efficiency and 

B /yeah, yeah/ 

F production you know, I feel quite quite different about these 
things 



108 



98 



Shorn Whyte 



The speakers have once more reached a point of agreement, and in doing so 
have crucially elaborated their domains by making value judgements about the rela- 
tive desirability of American and European ways of life. 

This discussion of Europe vs the United States' is easily the most expansive 
and least guarded in either of the two conversations investigated. The participants* 
behavior may well be influenced by the emotive nature of the topic itself and its 
peculiar relevance to both of their lives, and both of these factors play a part in the 
creation of a domain. It would seem that when both speakers have a domain for a 
particular topic area, they have greater motivation to engage and develop the topic, 
and to reacn some kind of agreement in their views of that topic. This interest is 
consistent with the domain hypothesis, which holds that domains are created in 
areas of personal importance to the learner - personal importance implying perhaps 
a need to gain outside approval for strongly-held beliefs. 

Examination of this episode has indicated, however, that it is not only the 
learner s domain, but the interaction of two domains which produces particularly 
lively conversation. There seems no reason to distinguish the background knowl- 
edge accumulated by the native speaker from that of the nonnative by the labels 
‘schema* and 'domain*, since in this episode at least, there is no transfer of knowl- 
edge from NNS to NS in the way we observed in discussion of *F*s life* and 'F’s 
major field* domains. Instead, the conversation revolves around the presentation 
and comparison of the speakers domains, with the main concern being to reach 
some form of agreement which will allow each partner to continue discussion of the 
topic fairly freely. As this episode unfolds, both participants agree on differences 
between Europe and the US, and situate themselves firmly on the European side of 
the Atlantic. The discussion shows greater emotional involvement and correspond- 
ingly less neutral opinions than are evident in the rest of the interaction. 

CONCLUSION 

What, then, has been revealed about the nature of discourse domains from this 
investigation? This paper set out to examine some of the implications of the domain 
hypothesis, looking in particular at the level of elaboration of the discourse domain, 
in comparison with the less developed schema model; its stability or resistance to 
new knowledge arising in an encounter, with the discourse domain appearing less 
open to change than the schema; and its personal importance, again : n comparison 
with the more general schema. While the conclusions that may be drawn from the 
findings reported in this case study are necessarily limited, key questions and point- 
ers to further research have been highlighted. 

It was hypothesized that a domain would differ from a schema in terms of the 
content expertise of the speaker. Though possibly discontinuous, a domain would 
be developed over a period of time and would therefore be both more elaborate and 
more deeply rooted that a schema. Schemata seem to be more sketchy and tempo- 
rary in nature, since they may be created on the spot as a local expedient to facilitate 
interaction. This investigation seems to support this hypothesis, although it indi- 
cates that there may be differences both between speakers' domains and their sche- 

109 



Discourse Domains Revisited: Expertise and Investment in Conversation 



99 



mata in terms of longevity. It was shown that a schema could contain r.o uiore than 
the most basic general world knowledge (e.g. B's math schema), or might be devel- 
oped over time (A's French military schema) or in the course of one interaction (A’s 
math schema). A difference was also found in the level of maturity of domains, with 
F's 12 month experience as a European student in the US resulting in a more devel- 
oped domain than B's, a product of some 2 months. It was suggested that the level 
of development of a domain might be manifested in the level of involvement with 
content shown by the speaker, with new domains proving more absorbing than 
older ones. 

The level of stability shown in participants’ domains and schemata seems 
more a function of the level of development of the speaker’s knowledge rather than 
a property of either domains or schemata. A new domain seemed to be open to al- 
teration in the same way as a tentative schema, while a well-developed schema, 
though less common than an elaborate domain, seemed to share with the domain a 
certain solidity. This finding fits with the continuum model of background knowl- 
edge shown in Figure 1 , where the domain and the schema are seen as similar struc- 
tures which differ only in the degree to which certain features are exhibited. 

As far as the personal nature of the domain is concerned, this paper has shown 
that one consequence of Selinker and Douglas' hypothesis that domains have "inter- 
actional salience" is that the interaction and the interlocutors must be taken into 
consideration. The nonnative speaker in this study had not developed routines for 
his domains, but rather adapted the form of his presentation to his perception of his 
interlocutor's schema for this topic area. The more personal nature of a domain as 
compared to a schema was illustrated by the higher level of involvement and more 
emotive nature of the ’Europe vs United States' episode, where both interlocutors 
had domains. In contrast, even highly developed schemata, such as A's 'French 
military' one, which was developed over several years and reactivated shortly be- 
fore the conversation in question, cannot produce the same level of intensity. It 
would seem, therefore, that the personal experience element of a domain is crucial 

to its creation and subsequent activation. 

One way of relating the three parameters examined in this paper to the notions 

of domain and schema is shown in Figure 5 on the following page. 

In this representation, the schema is shown as a broad, loose structure. The 
outer ring represents the most sketchy schema, where knowledge is severely lim- 
ited, tentatively controlled, and of little import to the speaker. However, as the 
schema-domain continuum shown in Figure 1 implies, any schema can, with appli- 
cation, become a domain; any topic is a potential domain topic. The concentric 
rings in Figure 5 represent increasingly developed schemata, and the domain is 
shown as a more tightly constructed, complex, and important core of information. 
This representation also captures the individual features discussed in this paper as 
factors which are involved in domain creation and which continue to characterize 
the fully-developed structure: elaboration, stability, and importance. 

This study has revealed important differences in terms of the activation of the 
same domains for the same speaker across different conversations. It has shown that 
these differences are related to the interlocutor's knowledge, to the speaker's assess- 



100 



Shorn Whyte 



Figure 5. Domain Formation. 




i 

ment of that knowledge, and to the level of personal investment the interlocutor 
manifests in the topic area. And it has demonstrated that there are a number of vari- 
ables involved in the notion of discourse domain — three features were investigated 
in this paper, but other parameters may well be relevant to a useful definition of the 
domain construct. Clarification of the different factors involved in this complex 
area of discourse is therefore necessary before progress in the area of discourse 
domain theory can be made. 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

Thanks are due to Professors Beverly Hartford and Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig, 
and to the students of the Fall 1990 L700 seminar on Discourse Analysis in the 
Department of Linguistics at Indiana University. 

THE AUTHOR 



The author is a graduate student in linguistics at Indiana University with re- 
search interests within second language acquisition in interlanguage pragmatics and 
discourse analysis. 




in 



Discourse Domains Revisited: Expertise and Investment in Conversation 



101 



NOTES 



'The burden of carrying the conversation was placed on the NSs. Since the 
original research focus was interlanguage modification (following Pica, 1988), A 
and B were further instructed to provide opportunities for the NNSs to adjust their 
English towards more target-like production. They were urged not to be uncoopera- 
tive, but to interject when they did not understand what their interlocutor was say- 
ing. Both A and B reported that they had little opportunity for this kind of interven- 
tion with the subject of this study . 

transcription conventions: 

| latching: no break between utterances 

/ / backchanneling without attempting to take turn 
/ / overlapping speech 

II 

# phrase final intonation (pause) 

sentence final falling intonation 
longer pause 

(6 secs) anything above 5 secs' pause timed 
[laugh] any action or gesture in square brackets 
(??) unintelligible speech 

(based on Bardovi-Harlig and Hartford 1990,Tannen 1979) 
REFERENCES 

Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Hartford, B. (1990). Congruence in native and normative 
conversations: Status balance in the academic advising session. Language 

Learning, 40, 467-501 . tut 

Bartlett, F.C. (1967). Remembering : A study in experimental and social psychol- 
ogy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Original work published in 

1932) 

Brown, G., & Yule, G. (1983). Discourse analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni- 



versity Press 

Pica, T. (1988). Interlanguage adjustments as an outcome of NS-NNS negotiated 

interaction. Language Learning, 38, 45-73. 

Selinker, L., & Douglas, D. (1985). Wrestling with context in interlanguage 

theory. Applied Linguistics, 6, 190-204. . 

Selinker, L., & Douglas, D. (1987). The Problem of comparing episodes in dis- 
course domains in interlanguage studies. In F. Marshall (Ed.), Third Eastern 
States Conference on Linguistics, (pp. 467-478) Ohio: Ohio State University . 
Tannen, D. (1979). What's in a frame? Surface evidence for underlying expecta- 
tions! In R. Freedle (Ed.), New Directions in discourse processing, (pp. 137- 
181) Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Woken, M„ & Swales, J. (1989). Expertise and authority in native/noimative con- 
versations: the need for a variable account. In S. Gass, C. Madden, 




112 



102 



Shorn Whytt 



Preston & L. Selinker (Etls.)» Variation in second language acquisition (pp. 
211-22) Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 

Zuengler, J. (1989). Performance variation in NS-NNS interaction: ethnolinguistic 
difference or discourse domain? In S. Gass, C. Madden, D. Preston & L. 
Selinker (Eds.), Variation in second language acquisition (pp. 37-59) Cleve- 
don: Multilingual Matters. 

e 




113 



Pragmatic* and Language Learning 
Monograph Scries, Vol. 3, 1992 



POLITENESS PHENOMENA 
IN SOUTH AFRICAN BLACK ENGLISH 

Elizabeth de Kadt 



This paper investigates requests as speech acts in "Zulu English", 
the English of Zulu first language speakers. In the context of recent 
discussions in the field of cross-cultural pragmatics, it seeks to contrib- 
ute to the explanation of miscommunication in interactions between 
Zulu-and English-speakers by pointing to pragmatic transfer as one 
possible cause of such miscommunication. Data collected by means of a 
series of discourse completion tests in Zulu, Zulu English and South 
African English are analysed according to the methodology of the 
CCSARP project, which allows the Head Acts of requests to be graded 
on a scale of indirectness; requests in Zulu and Zulu English are shown 
to be significantly more direct in formulation than requests in SAE. 
Possible implications of these findings for Brown and Levinson s the- 
ory of politeness are discussed; and it is suggested that the — often 
unsuccessful -- strategies of politeness used in Zulu English result in 
part from the cross-cultural nature and positioning of this language, 
being influenced in their verbal dimensions largely by Zulu strategies, 
and in their non-verbal dimensions largely by those of SAE. 

Politeness phenomena have to date been scarcely researched in South Africa. 
Hence, rather than give answers, I will here be attempting to raise a series of ques- 
tions for future investigation. 

South Africa is a multilingual country. Official documents such as the 1980 
census list the following languages as spoken by the population of some 40 million: 
the two official languages, English and Afrikaans, 10 indigenous (Black) lan- 
guages, 5 Indian languages and at least six immigrant languages (Lanham/Prinsloo, 
1978, p. 30). But the actual situation is much more diverse, in that the indigenous 
languages in particular tend to lack the degree of uniformity suggested by such a list 
and rather form a dialect continuum. Given this situation, a high degree of multilin- 
gualism is to be expected. In the urban areas, Whites tend to be bilingual in English 
and Afrikaans; Blacks tend to be multilingual, in that they will often speak two or 
even three Black languages, and in many cases, also have some command of English 
or Afrikaans; whereas Whites who have a working knowledge of a Black language 
are still unusual enough to raise comment. During the last 15 years, the former 
dominance of Afrikaans as the language of officialdom has clearly shifted in favour 
of English as dominant lingua franca; 1 and this tendency is being further strength- 
ened during the present democratization of the country. 

Yet in spite of the frequent interaction between speakers of different lan- 
guages and from different cultural backgrounds, there has to date been relatively 




104 



Elizabeth dc Kadt 



little investigation of these communicative processes in South Africa. The main 
exception are various papers by Chick, who has raised a number of important issues 
concerning interaction between speakers of indigenous languages and "European" 
languages from the viewpoint of interactional sociolinguistics (Chick, 1985; Chick, 
1986). However, the problems inherent to this interaction have in recent years been 
forced upon the attention of academics by the reintegration of the previously segre- 
gated "White" universities. The English-medium liberal universities now register a 
large number of students with English as a second or third language. For the large 
majority of these students, entering one of these universities brings them for the 
first time into an environment where they are expected to negotiate large portions of 
their life in English. It is not surprising that attempts at communication often result 
in miscommunication or communicative failure. This paper will discuss insights 
gained during a first attempt to investigate some aspects of the pragmatics of inter- 
cultural communication among students at the University of Natal in Durban. 

Encounters between native- and non-native speakers of English should clearly 
be viewed in the context of the discussion around cross-cultural communication. As 
Thomas (1983) has pointed out, this concept applies generally to "communication 
between two people who, in any particular domain, do not share a common linguis- 
tic or cultural background" (Thomas, 1983, p. 91). It is now widely recognized that 
pragmatic interference is a significant source of cross-cultural miscommunication, 
for, as Thomas continues, "Regional, ethnic, political, and class differences are 
undoubtedly reflected as much by a diversity of pragmatic norms as they are by 
linguistic variations" (ebd.). This will be even more the case when speakers from 
two completely different linguistic and cultural backgrounds are involved. The 
multiplicity of pragmatic factors involved has been summarised by Tannen (1984), 
who distinguishes "eight levels of differences in signalling how speakers mean what 
they say" (p. 189): "when to talk; what to say; pacing and pausing; listenership; 
intonation and prosody; formulaicity; indirectness; and cohesion and coherence" 
(p. 194). Fluency in a second language ideally includes a sensitivity to the prag- 
matic habits of that language; but, as Blum-Kulka (1989) points out, a number of 
case studies have demonstrated that "even fairly advanced language learners' com- 
municative acts regularly contain pragmatic errors, or deficits, in that they fail to 
convey or comprehend the intended illocutionary force or politeness value" (Blum- 
Kulka et al, 1989, p. 10). Thomas sees pragmatic failure as a "very important and 
much neglected source of cross-cultural miscommunication. 'Important', because 
unlike linguistic error, which tends at worst to reflect upon the speaker as a less than 
adequate user of the language, pragmatic failure may reflect badly upon the speaker 
as a person. 'Neglected', because, again unlike linguistic error, pragmatic failure is 
rarely apparent in the surface structure of an utterance and even when it is diag- 
nosed, it is not simple to treat" (Thomas, 1984, p. 227). Hence the two main types 
of pragmatic failure, as distinguished by Thomas: " sociopragmatic failure in which 
learners assess the relevant situational factors on the basis of their native socioprag- 
matic norms, and pragmalinguistic transfer y in which native procedures and lin- 
guistic means of speech act performance are transferred to interlanguage communi- 
cation" (Blum-Kulka et al, 1989, p. 10). 

115 




Politeness Phenomena in South Afticsn BUclc English 



105 



These two types of pragmatic failure doubtless underpin much of the unease 
experienced in cross-cultural communication in South Africa; but it is the long-term 
consequences of such failed interactions which are cause for particular concern. As 
Gumperz points out when discussing British-English and Indian-English interaction 
in England: "Rather than being understood as clashes between cultural styles, the 
frustrating encounters were usually interpreted in light of racial prejudices or attrib- 
uted to personality traits" (Blum-Kulka et al, 1989, p. 6); and this is doubtless still 
more the case where cross-cultural communication takes place largely m the context 
of a society formed and informed by 40 years of apartheid. In the South African 
context, Chick (1985) too speaks of the "negative cultural stereotypes generated by 
repeated intercultural communication failures" and concludes: "Once generated, 
these stereotypes are passed on from generation to generation without the need for 
the reinforcement of repeated communicative failure. Moreover, by providing a 
justification or rationalization for discrimination, they contribute to forces which 
maintain the social barriers and power differential among the different groups.. 
(Chick, 1985, p. 317). These factors are spelled out in greater detail in Chick, 
1986, where it is argued that "the consequences of asynchronous intercultural en- 
counters... combine with larger, historically-given and structural forces to create 
and sustain a negative cycle of socially created discrimination* (Chick, 1986, p. 
34). Clearly, the analysis of cross-cultural communication is by no means solely of 
academic interest to South Africans. 

The title of my paper reads "Politeness Phenomena in South African Black 
English"; but, in reporting on data obtained from native Zulu-speakers, I will be 
dealing with one large segment of South African Black English (SABE) which I wi 
term Zulu English. These two terms, SABE and Zulu English, require some com- 
ment. It is a matter of some debate as to whether one can legitimately speak of 
SABE as one recognizable variety of South African English (SAE). On the basis of 
research into typical features of accent and stress, lexicon and syntax which are 
found to persist even with fluent speakers, Buthelezi (1989) concludes that such a 
dialect is emerging, at least among the students she has studied; her data is drawn 
from students at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg with a wide 
variety of indigenous languages as first languages. She attributes the emergence of 
such a dialect to the following factors: a cultural lifestyle which encourages code- 
mixing; high enclosure which leads to group cohesiveness; religious affiliations; 
overall political experience in South Africa; and a highly disadvantaged educational 
experience, in that the racially segregated "Black" schools generally lack basic fa- 
cilities such as text-books, and language teachers are almost never native speakers 
of English (Buthelezi, 1989, p. 39-44). Although competence in English is a pre- 
condition for registration at the University of Natal, first-year students tend to 
experience serious problems with comprehension, note-taking, etc. Even with those 
who succeed in overcoming such difficulties, however, problems of communication 
persist although Black students make a conscious effort to adapt to the norms of 
SAE speakers. Given this situation, Buthelezi is doubtless correct in pointing to 
variability as the main constraint affecting any definition of SABE (and equally 
Zulu English) (Buthelezi, 1989, p. 57). pur tgm Zulu English, if interpreted as 



106 



Elizabeth 4e Kadi 



"the English spoken by Zulu-speakers", will firstly cover the whole continuum of 
language ranging from learners' early attempts at communication to close approxi- 
mations to SAE; and secondly for the individual speaker it may well not be a fixed 
variety but an interlanguage which will be subject to modification over time. 

There are, of course, substantial differences between the cultural background 
of English- and Zulu-speakers. The traditional Zulu social system has been well 
documented by Krige (1936) (compiling mainly from the older sources available); 
there is a major study by Raum (1973) of the hlonipha or avoidance customs of the 
Zulus; and a study of Zulu symbols and thought patterns by Berglund (1976). Krige 
notes the "strictly patrilineal tendency" and the "hierarchy of age" (Krige, 1936, p. 
27). According to Raum, "Hlonipha conduct reveals that Zulu society is built upon 
a complex hierarchy of authority positions" (Raum, 1973, p. 509). He further con- 
cludes: "Hlonipha ... are the pyramid of respect upon which the Zulu ethos is 
raised. They link in each instance an inferior to superior status in traditional forms 
of expressing deference, the link not being without some reciprocity" (ebd., p. 1.) 
The words "respect" and "deference" are of course central to any study of polite- 
ness; Raum details the multitude of hlonipha of action which express this respect: 
the social variables involved are principally kinship, sex, age and power. This re- 
spect is also reflected through language, in which context we may properly refer to 
it as politeness; and here too a whole series of phenomena is involved. To my knowl- 
edge no systematic investigation of this field has been conducted; but at least the 
following aspects seem to be involved: posture (subordinates should be seated), the 
avoidance of eye contact by subordinates, gesture (especially nibbing one's hands 
together when asking for something), pauses, the order of speaking, address terms, 
conversational strategies (the role of hints, to which we will refer later), and vocabu- 
lary ( hlonipha of language). Hence it would seem, that in investigating politeness in 
Zulu, only an ethnographic approach would be truly appropriate. 

Yet the situation is still further complicated by the now far advanced processes 
of industnalisation and urbanisation, which have seen an ever-increasing destruc- 
tion of traditional Zulu society, to the extent that the work of Krige, Raum and 
Berglund is rapidly becoming more of historical validity. There has been little sys- 
tematic research of the new norms and ethos which are in the process of developing. 
My research assistants are able to detail the non-verbal and verbal means by which 
politeness is traditionally indicated in Zulu; but constantly differentiate between 
"deep Zululand", where they are still more or less valid, and life in the townships 
around Durban, where they are rapidly disappearing. Clearly, it will be impossible 
to generalise research results obtained in one particular location. 

Let us conclude this introductory section by attempting to draw together the 
factors which will impinge upon politeness in Zulu English. Speakers of Zulu 
English are by definition Blacks who will most likely be speaking English to 
Whites. 2 Blacks will be speaking a second (or third) language, and one acquired 
under considerable disadvantages; given their powerlessness it will be very much in 
their interests to appear polite, and yet their traditional modes of expressing polite- 
ness are almost certain to be misunderstood. 

It was against this background that it was decided to investigate aspects of 




Politene** Phenomena in South African Black English 



107 



cross-cultural communication in English between speakers of Zulu and speakers of 
S AE. This paper will report on the pilot study of our first investigation into requests 
in Zulu, Zulu English and SAE. After consideration of the various models available 
in the literature for the analysis of requests, it was decided to use the theoretical 
framework of the Cross-Cultural Speech Act Realization Patterns (CCSARP) proj- 
ect initiated by Blum-Kulka et al. (1989), seeing that this was devised specifically to 
compare requests across a number of languages and, also, interlanguages. How- 
ever, given the specifities of the South African situation and the complete lack of 
previous research in the field of Zulu speech acts, it was felt that rather than adopt 
the elicitation instrument of this project piecemeal, we should first identify situ- 
ations which were considered by native speakers to be typical for Zulu -- and for the 
South African situation. On the other hand, the detailed coding scheme of this proj- 
ect would facilitate the further testing of the claim that primary features of requests 
are universal, and the identification of culture-specific interactional features in a 
language of a type not previously considered. 

Preliminary data was obtained for all three languages by means of discourse 
completion tests: The starting point was the Zulu test, compiled with two native- 
speakers on the basis of requests as they occurred in spontaneous settings; this 
contained 12 scripted dialogues. On the basis of the results obtained here, the other 
two tests were set up in somewhat shorter form. The primary intention at this stage 
was to collect data located in situations in which each language would naturally be 
spoken and which involved a wide range of social variables. Clearly, comparability 
across the three languages would be desirable, but as the Zulu-speaker's use of 
English tends to be restricted to certain domains, involving certain interlocutors, it 
was found difficult to achieve comparability across all three tests: limiting t e 
choice to situations which were directly comparable would for example have meant 
excluding the whole domestic domain, in which it is assumed that Zulu English is 
spoken only under very specific circumstances. Hence, for the data thus far ob- 
tained the Zulu English and English tests cover much the same situations and are to 
a large extent directly comparable; but half the Zulu test reflects the domestic 

domain which has no pendant in the other two tests. 

The Zulu English and English tests contained the following scripted dia- 
logues: 

A. "Lecture notes" : a student has missed a lecture and wants to borrow lecture 
notes from a friend. 

B. "Extension": a student is late^th an assignment and has to approach his 
professor for an extension. 

C. "Raise": an employee approaches his employer to ask for a raise. 

D. "Staff meeting": a headmistress wants a colleague to notify school staff of 

a staff meeting. 

E. "Policeman": a policeman wants an illegally parked car removed. 

F "Lift": a student would like a ride to a party from another student. 

G. "Early submission": a professor would like a student to submit an assign- 
ment earlier than scheduled. 

lid 



108 



Elizabeth dc Kadt 



H. "Doctor": a doctor wants a patient with an infected throat to open his 
mouth. 

Certainly, before proceeding with this research on a large scale, a refinement 
of these elicitation techniques will be necessary: it was found that in part they are 
still not sufficiently delimited as to reliably elicit requests; and an attempt must be 
made, perhaps through the social variables involved, to increase their overall com- 
parability. 

Respondents (20 for Zulu, 25 for Zulu English) and 10 for English) were 
chosen largely, but not exclusively from the student population at the University of 
Natal; for the Zulu and Zulu English tests, some data were also obtained from 
domestic and other workers in the vicinity. In each case the test was administered on 
an individual basis by a native-speaker of the language of the participant. 

Further data were obtained from in-depth interviews with two Zulu-speaking 
student assistants, who identified very closely with the project and provided many 
valuable insights. These two assistants are also responsible for the ongoing collec- 
tion of further data from naturally occurring conversations; however, it was not 
possible to utilise these data at this stage of the project. 

It will be clear that my present data will be subject to the limitations of any 
data obtained through discourse completion tests. As Wolfson has pointed out, this 
method may allow a considerable quantity of data to be collected speedily, but it 
does have serious drawbacks: "It must always be recognized that responses elicited 
within a written frame are, by their very nature, not the same as spontaneous 
speech" (Wolfson, 1989, p. 70). This will be all the more important in the present 
case, in that although Zulu has been written for over a hundred years, it is still 
located in a primarily oral culture, and discourse patterns still seem to point 
strongly to former orally-based habits. This will render data obtained by means of 
writing of necessity somewhat suspect. Wolfson makes a further point: through this 
method it is also "impossible to collect the kind of elaborated (and often negotiated) 
behaviour which we typically find in naturally occurring interactions" (Wolfson, 
1989, p. 70). We will return to this problem in due course. 

The data collected were analysed by means of the CCSARP project coding 
scheme, as detailed in Blum-Kulka et al (1989, p. 273-294). This scheme pays 
particular attention to the Head Act of the request, "the minimal unit which can 
realize a request (ebd., p. 275), and identifies nine possible Request Strategies; 
these are listed according to decreasing level or directness of "degree to which the 
speaker's illocutionary intent is apparent from the locution" (ebd., p. 278). They 
are the following: 



1 . mood derivable "Open the door" 

2. performatives "I'm asking you to open the door" 

3'. hedged performatives "I would like to ask you to..." 

4. obligation statements "You'll have to ..." 

5. want statements "1 want you to ... " 

6. suggestory formulae "How about ...?" 




Politeness Phenomena in South African Black English 



109 



7. query preparatory "Can you/Could you/Would you mind .. 

8. strong hints "Why is the door closed?" 

9. mild hints "It's very hot in here." (ebd., p. 278-281). 

Blum-Kulka subsequently groups these nine strategies into three major levels of 
directness: the most direct, explicit level (1-5). the conventionally indirect level (6- 
7) and the nonconventionally indirect level or hints (7-8) (ebd., p. 46-47). Further 
sources of variation of these Head Acts are possible through changes in perspective, 

Table 1. Request strategies in Zulu English and South African English. 



Dial. 
Set t . s : 


Lee t . 
nts . 


Ext.- 

sion 


Raise 


Staff 
meet . 


Pol. 


Lift 


Early 

Subm. 


Doc . 








Z U I 


U 


E N 


G L 


. I 


S H 




Total 


% 


Total 
resp . 


24 


20 


2 5 


18 


22 


24 


21 


17 


171 


100 


R i 
e 


6 




2 


13 


13 


1 


7 


13 


55 


32. 1 


2 2 










1 








1 




e 

s 3 




2 














2 




1 4 














4 




4 




f s 


1 


1 


6 




; i 


4 






13 


















3 




3 




* 7 


16 


8 


6 


4 


3 


13 


7 


4 


61 


35.6 \ 


f 8 




9 


8 




4 


5 






26 


15.2 
1 


e 9 
s 


1 




3 


1 




1 






6 






S < 


) U T ^ 


A F 


R I C 


A N 


E N 


G L I 


S H 


Total 


\ 


Total 
resp . 


7 


10 


9 


8 


10 


10 


10 


8 


72 


100 


R 1 ' 
e 








1 


6 






6 


13 


18.0 


q I ? 

u 1 ** 






















u 1 
e J 

s 






2 












2 




* 4 










1 








1 




s s 

t 






2 












2 


— 


r 6 
a 




















. 


1 7 ' 

f! 


6 


7 


4 


7 




8 


10 


2 


47 


65.3 


2 8 


1 


7 


1 






2 






7 


9 .7 

. — 


lL° 




















_ 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



120 



no 



Elizabeth de Kadt 



and through internal modifications (downgraders and upgraders); however, in a 
paper of this limited scope, not much attention will be paid to these. 

Table 1 shows the distribution of requests over the nine request strategies in 
Zulu English and English. (Given the limitations of my data, I would, of course, by 
no means wish to claim the validity of this distribution for each language by itself; 
but a comparison of the two languages does enable certain interesting differences in 
distribution to be pinpointed.) 

Table 2 shows the results of the comparable investigation into Zulu request 
strategies, based, as explained above, to a certain extent on different conversational 
situations. In my discussion 1 will, however, concentrate on the English and Zulu 
English data, only referring on occasion to the Zulu data. 

Table 2. Request strategies in Zulu 



Using Blum-Kulka’s three major levels of directness, English-speakers favour 



Dial. 

Se 1 1 . s : 


Lee t . 
nt s . 


Ex t . 


Raise 


Staff 


Pol . 


Toy 


Tidy 

U P 


Elec. 


Black 

board 


Gran 


Church 




























Total 


v 


To 

re 


1 1 a 1 
Sp. 


19 




19 


1 2 


19 


20 


20 


18 


16 


18 


19 


180 


100 


R 

e 

q 

u 

e 

s 

t 

S 

t 

r 

a 

t 

e 

g 

i 

e 

s 


1 


S 






3 


8 




8 


1 


9 


18 


3 


SS 


■ 

30.5 


2 


10 




4 


6 


1 


16 


1 


8 


4 




8 


58 


32.2 


3 
























_ 


_ 


4 








1 


1 




1 








4 


7 


3.8 


5 

6 










1 








2 




1 


4 


... 


























I 

) 


7 


3 




2 


2 




1 


1 


1 


1 




1 


12 


6.6 | 


8 


1 




7 




7 


3 


9 


S 






2 


34 


18.8 j 


9 






6 




1 






3 








10 


y 

5.5 j 



68.71 



6.61 



.24.31 



request s . 



not reliably produce 



the conventionally indirect forms (65%), with direct requests lagging considerably 
(25%) and hints coming in a poor third (10%). Speakers of Zulu English, on the 
other hand, favour direct forms (44% -- the bulk of these being imperatives 32%), 
followed closely by conventionally indirect requests (37 %), with hints considerably 
more in evidence than in English (19%). This marked tendency in Zulu English to 
greater directness is further underlined by the very frequent use of "can" rather than 
"could" in conventi onally indirect requests, as opposed to the almost standard 
"could" of the English-speakers. When comparing request strategies for particular 
situations, Zulu English uses a larger number of imperatives for "Lecture notes", 
"Early submission' and "Staff meeting". Could this perhaps point to a somewhat 
differing view of role relationships? In both "Early submission" and "Staff meeting" 
there is a combination of social distance and power on the part of the speaker. As 

ERIC 




Polite nets Phenomena in South African Black Engliah 



111 



regards "Early submission", the speaker is asking a considerable favour of a subor- 
dinate, and it is noticeable that English-speakers go to great lengths to mitigate the 
imposition on the student; this feature is almost completely lacking in the Zulu 
English date. Is this a reflex of the authoritarian nature of traditional Zulu society, 
which seems to be persisting even today? Or is it simply a lack of linguistic subtlety 
available in Zulu English as a perhaps somewhat reduced version of the target lan- 
guage? "Staff meeting", too, seems to point to a rather more authoritarian view of 
the role-relationship headmistress - teacher, although in many cases the straight im- 
perative is mitigated by the upgrader "please". 

On the one hand Zulu English requests are noticeably more direct than those 
of English-speakers; but on the other hand, hints, which must rank as the most 
indirect of requests, are nearly twice as frequent as in English. This is a point 
stressed time and time again in discussion with my research assistants: traditionally, 
the deference due to interlocutors of greater age and higher social status, is largely 
expressed by a very indirect approach to a request, via a number of other topics; and 
even when the required topic has been reached, it is "rough" to put the request 
onesslf: rather one should describe the problem and wait for one's partner to pro- 
pose the hoped-for solution. This is noticeable in "Extension on essay" and particu- 
larly in "Raise", where the typical conversational structure seems to be that one 
details the circumstances of one's poor financial situation and hopes that an offer 
will be forthcoming; if not, one finally puts in the request oneself. 

What reasons can be proffered for this marked tendency towards the use of 
direct forms in Zulu English? Firstly there is the possibility that the relatively high 
rating for imperatives both in Zulu English and English is in part a function of the 
artificial nature of the discourse completion test. Our English data, for example, are 
somewhat higher than the results obtained for other varieties of English by the 
CCSARP project. (Compare the date for Australian English elicited by Blum-Kulka 
et al, 1989, p. 47.) On the other hand, Hodge, when comparing requests in Tasma- 
nian and (White) South African English, notes that South Africans use more im- 
peratives overall than Tasmanians (Hodge, 1990, p. 125). 

Secondly, there is the likelihood of pragmalinguistic transfer from Zulu into 
Zulu English, in that the data for Zulu show an even higher percentage of direct 
requests in Zulu, 62%, with 30% being imperatives and 32% performatives. This 
last surprising figure is explained by the fact that it is a performative which is the 
standard polite form in our local Zulu: ngicela uvale umnyango - 1 request that you 
close the door. However, in a total of 224 requests collected in Zulu English, only 
once was this form translated directly,: "I am asking you...'; and after considerable 
thought, my assistant gave as the English equivalent of "Ngicela" "Can you..." -- a 
conventionally indirect form. The "ngicela" form raises an important question: does 
the usual link between politeness and indirectness not hold for Zulu (and Zulu 
English)? 

Since Brown and Levinson's analysis of politeness in terms of face, an analy- 
sis which postulated a link between degree of politeness and degree of indirectness 
as a linguistic universal, a considerable quantity of evidence concerning cross-cul- 
tural realization of face-threatening acts such as requests has become available, some 







1 




112 



Elizabeth de Kidt 



of which is intended to test various aspects of this theory of politeness critically. In 
the reissue of their book, Brown and Levinson review recent work and mention 
some research which shows "the relative absence of mitigating or face-redressive 
features associated with... requests in some communities" (Brown/Levinson, 1985, 
p. 27); however, they contend that "the exceptions are the kind allowed for by the 
specific socio-cultural variables" introduced by their theory (ebd.). The Zulu (and 
Zulu English) data obtained from the discourse completion tests seem to point in a 
similar direction, especially when one considers the standard polite request in Zulu 
mentioned above. In Blum-Kulka's terms this is a performative, level 2, and hence 
with a high directness rating — which native-speakers are in agreement with. I have 
great difficulties in dealing with this form according to Brown and Levinson's crite- 
ria: closest would appear to be "negative politeness", strategy 10, "go on record as 
incurring a debt" - but the Zulu completely lacks the deference inherent to "I'd be 
eternally grateful if you would...*, and can furthermore be used towards both social 
superiors and inferiors. On the other hand, there would be major problems in group- 
ing this form together with the other Zulu "bald on record" forms such as the im- 
perative or even the subjunctive, all of which rate very low as far as politeness is 
concerned. Even though "ngicela" seems to be becoming to a certain extent con- 
ventionalised, we do seem here to have frequently used direct requests with a high 
politeness rating. 

In our data for Zulu English we have also noted a large number of direct 
requests; yet a number of considerations point against an interpretation in terms of 
low politeness . Quite apart from the general considerations of face as developed 
by Brown and Levinson, it is clearly in the interests of these disadvantaged speakers 
to be polite; a generally deferential attitude towards superiors can be observed; and 
there seems to be a Black perception of Whites as "not very polite". The tentative 
conclusion I would wish to draw is that for Zulu - and hence also for Zulu English 
- one cannot adequately analyse politeness in terms of single requests, abstracted 
from the context of the conversation. Rather politeness seems to be negotiated pri- 
marily by means of the non-verbal dimensions of the interaction, as detailed earlier 
in my paper, which create a context of politeness within which a direct request may 
well lose the implication of low politeness it could have according to a theory of 
politeness based on individual utterances. 

This would then allow an explanation of some aspects of the miscommunica- 
tion between Blacks and Whites on campus. Speakers of Zulu English seem to be- 
come aware, during their first six months or so on campus, of the differing interac- 
tional styles between Zulu and English and make a conscious effort to modify their 
discourse style accordingly. Frequently mentioned are non-verbal factors: one must 
meet superiors' gaze, one should not sit down until requested, one should avoid 
rubbing one s hands; and students also become aware of the need to "come straight 
to the point". However, in avoiding the main non-verbal politeness mechanisms of 
Zulu, there seems to be a tendency to transfer the verbal dimensions of Zulu re- 
quests, and hence to fail to adopt adequately the verbal politeness markers of Eng- 
lish; with resulting miscommunication of the politeness intended. 

Could these conclusions be seen to invalidate Brown and Levinson's general 



ERLC 




Politeness Phenomena in South African Black English 



113 



theory of politeness, were they to be substantiated by a fuller investigation? I would 
rather see them as pointing to the necessity of expanding the theory in two direc- 
tions. Firstly, non-verbal components of communication need to be included. 
Brown and Levinson do, in fact, mention that this would ideally be necessary, but 
point to the lack of suitable data (Brown/Levinson, 1987, p. 91-92). I would argue 
that it is necessary to include non-verbal components not only for "exotic** lan- 
guages such as Zulu, but equally so for the standard languages of the linguistic 
repertoire like English, where non-verbal components are so familiar as to pass 
unnoticed. I would further point to the necessity of expanding the data to include a 
larger number of complete conversations, in order to facilitate the demonstration of 
how politeness is mutually negotiated throughout an interaction. These two exten- 
sions of the present theory would be necessary to construct an adequate theory of 
politeness for Zulu English. On such a basis, it would then be possible to ask to 
what extent the strategies identified can be accommodated within the considerations 
of face postulated by Brown and Levinson, or whether these would need modifica- 
tion. 

One further point is raised by Brown and Levinson's differentiation between 
the (more direct) positive politeness and the (less direct) negative politeness, both of 
which can be used to compensate any threat to face. Wolfson draws out the possible 
social implications of this distinction as follows: "Negative politeness is seen as a 
strategy of those who are in some way less powerful than the addressee, while posi- 
tive politeness is a sign of social closeness" (Wolfson, 1989, p. 68). (Such an inter- 
pretation could, of course, tie in closely with the situation of Blacks in contact with 
Whites under apartheid.) Brown and Levinson suggest the possibility of extending 
their work beyond the level of the speech act, and this suggestion is taken up by 
Scollon and Scollon (1983), who first encompass all of Brown and Levinson’s five 
politeness strategies in the basic distinction between deference and solidarity, and 
subsequently attempt to characterize overall systems of interaction as solidarity or 
deference politeness systems. They describe these two postulated systems in the 
following way: "A solidarity politeness system ... would favour low numbered 
strategies (bald on record and positive politeness) while a deference politeness sys- 
tem would favour higher numbered strategies (negative politeness, off record, or 
•voiding the face-threatening act). The internal dynamics of a solidarity politeness 
system would favour the emphasis on sameness, on group membership, and the 
general good of the group. Deference politeness systems would favour deference, 
indirectness or even avoidance in making impositions on others at all" (Scollon/ 
Scollon, 1983, p. 175). They agree with Brown and Levinson as to the three basic 
ways in which these two possibilities can be realized in society, depending on the 
variables Power and Distance. The first possibility is an asymmetrical system, due 
to high Power differentials between members of the society: the more powerful 
interlocutors will tend to use lower numbered strategies, and the less powerful 
higher numbered strategies; i.e. both solidarity and deference politeness will be 
represented. On the other hand, if the power differential is generally low, then the 
variable Distance, "the social distance between S and H" (Brown/Levinson, 1987, 
p. 76), becomes decisive. If there is a high Distance rating in the given society, it 

124 



114 



Elizabeth dc Kadt 



will tend to a deference politeness system; low Distance will tend to a solidarity 
politeness system. In suggesting these categories, however, Scollon and Scollon 
caution against the dangers of oversimplification. They point out that "even at the 
level of the speech act a single act may incorporate multiple strategies ... Our 
emphasis in this discussion is on the discourse and even the whole communicative 
system. We assume any communication at that level to consist of a complex struc- 
ture of many different interactional strategies encoded as speech acts" (Scollon/ 
Scollon, 1983, p. 171). 

It would be of great interest to be able to apply these categories to the three 
languages under consideration here. Do our data suggest any possible preliminary 
conclusions? We should, however, note that any discourse completion test will 
tend, through its structure, to reflect mainly instances of negative politeness; for, as 
Scollon has pointed out, "negative politeness... is specific for the particular FTA 
(Face Threatening Act) in hand”, whereas "positive politeness ... is relevant to all 
aspects of a person's positive face." (Brown/Levinson, 1987, p. 18). Questions of 
this type, even more than a consideration of the politeness level of individual speech 
acts, presuppose a body of naturally occurring data. 

It is unclear whether SAE tends more to positive politeness (as does American 
English) or to negative politeness (as, seemingly, does Britis! English); possibly 
the British English tradition is, on the whole, somewhat stronger. This question 
could only be decided on the basis of an extended empirical study. As regards Zulu, 
however, the evidence seems somewhat contradictory. The enormous role of defer- 
ence in traditional Zulu society, and especially towards older people, suggests a 
deference politeness system. On the other hand, several factors in Brown and Lev- 
inson's list of positive politeness strategies suggest a tendency towards positive 
politeness: the frequent use of names, attending to H's wants and needs before a 
request may be broached, jokes, the tendency to include both S and H in the activ- 
ity in hand, giving reasons for requests, etc. 

The data for two of the situations examined here has some bearing on this 
question: the particularly face-threatening "Extension' and "Raise". It is interesting 
that, for "Extension", 25 responses in Zulu English produced a total of 9 reasons 
and 4 promises; whereas English produced 3 reasons but no promises out of 10 
responses. Reasons and Offers/Promises are both listed as positive politeness strate- 
gies. This tendency is even more marked in "Raise": English produced one reason 
out of 10 responses, Zulu English 1 1 out of 25, and Zulu 13 out of 20. It may well 
be that in particularly face-threatening situations, transfer of pragmatic habits takes 
place more readily; and it is interesting that here positive politeness strategies are 
transferred from Zulu to Zulu English. But as a general tendency, the high Power 
differentials of Zulu English (being almost exclusively interaction between Blacks 
and Whites) would seem to point very strongly in the direction of the asymmetrical 
politeness system outlined above. Clearly the question as to the interactional styles 
of these languages cannot be decided here; but it would be of great interest for fu- 
ture research. 

The pilot study discussed here has provided few firm answers, but has raised a 
number of issues which would well bear further investigation. Most importantly it 

.if 125 



Politeness Phenomena in South African Black English 



115 



underlines the urgent need for research in pragmatics based on the languages of 
Africa, and the contribution these languages still have to make to linguistic theory. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I would like to thank my two Zulu-speaking student assistants, Andy Madon- 
sela and Fidel Xaba, without whose enthusiastic help this research could not have 
been undertaken. 



THE AUTHOR 

Elizabeth de Kadt is Senior Lecturer in the German Section of the Department 
of Europe Studies, University of Natal, Durban, South Africa. Her special interest 
is the comparison of African and European languages. 

NOTES 

'Dirven (1990, p. 26) stresses that both English and Afrikaans, in spite of the 
present dominance of the former, are still only relative lingua francas, with only 
44% (in 1980) claiming to be able to speak English. 

*We will disregard cases in which English is used as lingua franca between 
speakers of different indigenous languages, for which no reliable data are available. 

REFERENCES 

Berglund, A. -I. (1976). Zulu Thought -Pat terns and Symbolism. Bloomington, 
Ind.: Indiana University Press. 

Blum-Kulka, S., House, J., & Kasper, G. (1989). Cross-Cultural Pragmatics: 
Requests and Apologies. Norwood: Ablex. 

Brown, P., & Levinson, S.C. (1987). Politeness : Some Universal in Language Us- 
age. Cambridge: C.U.P. 

Buthelezi, Q. (1989). South African Black English: a myth or reality? In J. van der 
Walt (Ed.), South African Studies in Applied Linguistics (pp. 38-61). 
Potchefstroom: SAALA. 

Chick, J.K. (1985). The interactional accomplishment of discrimination in South 
Africa. Language in Society, 14/3, 299-326. 

Chick, J.K. (1986). Intercultural M ^communication as a Source of Friction in the 
Workplace and in Educational Settings. In 
G. Kendall (Ed.), Education and the Diversity of Cultures (pp. 25-36). Pietermar- 
itzburg: University of Natal Press. 

Dirven, R. (1990). Contact and Conflict Linguistics in Southern Africa. In K. Chick 
(Ed.), Searching for Relevance {pp. 16-51). Durban: SAALA. 

Hodge, F.K. (1990). Cross-cultural study of request realization patterns across two 
groups of native speakers of English. South African Journal of Linguistics, 8/ 
3, 121-128. 



116 



Elizabeth de Kadi 



Krige, E. (1936). The Social System of the Zulus . Pietermaritzburg: Shuter Sc 
Shooter. 

Lanham, L.W., Sc Prinsloo, K.P. (Eds.) (1978). Language and Communication 
Studies in South Africa . Cape Townro.U.P. 

Raum, O.F. (1973). The social functions of avoidance and taboos among the Zulu . 
Berlin: de Gruyter. 

Scollon, R., Sc Scollon, S.B.K. (1983). Narrative, Literacy and Face in Interethnic 
Communication . Norwood: Ablex. 

Wolfson, N. (1989). Perspectives: Sociolinguistics and TESOL . Cambridge etc.: 
Newbury House. 




ERIC 




Pragmatics and Language Learning 
Monograph Series, Vol. 3, 1992 



Gender and Function of Language Use: 

Quantitative and Qualitative Evidence from Japanese 

Sachiko Ide 

INTRODUCTION 

One of the general characteristics of gender differences in language use is, as is 
well known, women's politer speech. In this paper 1 will first substantiate and argue 
the reasons for this phenomenon with quantitative and qualitative data in Japanese. 
In the process of investigating gender differences in politeness in language use I will 
attempt to show how the same linguistic signs perform duplex functions of polite- 
ness: i.e. deference and demeanor. 

BACKGROUND 

In discussing politeness in language use one is obliged to review what is cur- 
rently at issue in the field of linguistic politeness. The theories of linguistic polite- 
ness proposed in the field of pragmatics in the last fifteen years by Lakoff, Brown 
and Levinson, and Leech are assumed to have universal application. If any of these 
theories were applicable to the use of honorifics, the kernel notion of linguistic po- 
liteness in Japanese, we could use it as the framework for the explanation of 
women's politer speech. However, none of those theories in fact agree with the in- 
trinsic use of honorifics for politeness. 

Linguistic politeness for Japanese, and perhaps for speakers of other honorific 
languages, is mainly a matter of conforming to the social conventions for the choice 
of linguistic forms. Hill et al. (1986:348) call this wakimae, ('discernment'). It 
should be categorized as one of two general strategies of linguistic politeness, the 
other dealt with by Lakoff and Brown and Levinson being called 'volition'. 
Wakimae is observed according to the speaker's reading of socially agreed-upon 
relative social distance toward the referent and the addressee, which is performed as 
linguistic etiquette, while 'volition' is the speaker's strategy to save the faces of the 
interactants, which is performed according to the speaker's intention. The former is 
a passive and automatic choice imposed on the speaker by social norms while the 
latter is the speaker's active and intentional choice. 

The linguistic etiquette called wakimae can be achieved by keeping proper 
distance with interactants according to prescribed social norms of behavior. The 
determining factors of distance between interactants are differences of social status, 
age, power, familiarity or solidarity, and the formality of occasion and topic (Ide 
1982:366-77). In verbal behavior this distance is expressed by the choice of higher/ 
formal linguistic forms. The choice of formal linguistic forms in pronouns, address 
terms, honorifics and other lexical items according to these interactional and situa- 
tional factors is essential for achieving the wakimae kind of linguistic politeness in 
Japanese and other honorific languages. 

O 

ERJC 



117 



128 



118 



Sachiko Ide 



A survey was conducted that focused on this specific type of linguistic polite- 
ness, and quantitative data on gender difference of language use were obtained. It is 
with these quantitative data concerning gender differences of language use that I will 
discuss duplex variables and duplex indexical functions. 

In explaining the nature of these duplex variables and duplex functions in- 
volved in women's politer speech, Goffman's idea on rules of conduct will be intro- 
duced, i.e. complementary concept of deference and demeanor (Goffman 1968). 

The following discussion of the phenomenon of women's politer speech will 
follow quantitative as well as qualitative approaches: the first based on the survey 
and the second on observation and introspection. 

QUANTITATIVE EVIDENCE 



The survey results 



The survey was conducted by asking 256 men and 271 women (parents of the 
students of a college in Tokyo) about their use of polite linguistic forms. The sub- 
jects represent the typical middle-class middle-aged population in contemporary 
Japanese society, the men being mostly businessmen and the women mostly house- 
wives, a situation where sex differences are particularly prominent. 

Three questions were asked of the subjects. 



Question 1: 



Question 2: 



Question 3: 



The subjects' assessment of the politeness level of linguis- 
tic forms. 1 The linguistic form in question were variants of 
'go' in the context of 'when do you go?' 

The subjects' assessment of appropriate politeness level 
due to types of addressee. The types of addressee were 
such people as the subjects interact with in their every day 
lives. 

The choice of linguistic form subjects would use for types 
of addressees mentioned in Q2. 



The data obtained in the form of numbers jhowing politeness levels and fre- 
quencies were analyzed according to gender. 

First, let us read Table I which shows the degree of politeness level of linguis- 
tic forms used for types of addressees. This is the result of Q3. The scores were ob- 
tained as follows: for each linguistic form obtained in Q3, we apply the scores of 
average level of linguistic politeness of individual linguistic form obtained from the 
results of QI. Thus, the scores of politeness level of linguistic form used for each 
type of addressee were obtained. In this table the average politeness levels of the 
linguistic forms which subjects reported that they would use for each type of ad- 
dressee are shown according to the gender of the subject responding. When compar- 
ing them, we find that for 9 types of addressees out of 12, women would use politer 
truistic forms than men. This is numerical evidence to show that women tend to 

ERIC 12U 



Gender and Function of Language Use 



119 



Table 1. Degree of politeness level of linguistic forms used for different types of ad- 
dressee (Numbers represent average scores of politeness, 1 being least polite and 
5 being most polite.) 



Type* of addressee 


Men 


Women 


a. 


Child 


1.39 


1.15 


b. 


Spouse 


1.41 


1.85 


c. 


Delivery person 


2.19 


2.39 


d. 


Friend 


2.15 


2.55 


e. 


Workplace inferior 


1.91 


2.39 


f. 


Same status colleague 


2.41 


2.45 


g- 


Neighbor 


3.72 


3.25 


h. 


Spouse's friend 


3.53 


3.99 


i. 


Parent at P.T.A. meeting 


3.83 


3.50 


j- 


Instructor of hobby group 


3.99 


4.31 


k. 


Daughter's or son's professor 


4.19 


4.40 


1 . 


Workplace superior 


4.31 


4.39 



use politer linguistic forms is greater than men. 

Now, let us seek the reasons for women's politer speech. First, Women’s 
lower assessment of the politeness level of the linguistic form. We often hear He 
speaks politely, for a man." "She should have talked more politely because she is a 
woman." The folk linguistics suggests that there is a belief in different norms of 
politeness for men and women. 

Table 2. Degree of politeness level of linguistic forms. 



Linguistic forms 


Men 


Women 


Linguistic forms 


Men 


Women 


iku( ) 


1.23 


1.03 


irassyaru n desu ka 


4.06 


4.20 


iku no ( ) 


1.37 


1.13 


irassyai masu ka ( ) 


4.49 


4.41 


irassyaru 


2.70 


2.64 


o-\dt-ni-nari-masu-k*( ) 


4.50 


4.29 


iki masu ( ) 


2.86 


2.33 


o-dekak e-ni-nari masu 


4.78 


4.64 


iku n desu ka 


2.95 


2.53 


ka 






iki masu ka 


3.08 


2.78 


o-dekake-m-nar-are masu 


4.95 


4.89 


ik-are-m n dcsu ka 


3.94 


3.72 


ka 






ik -are masu ka 


3.94 


3.51 


o-dekake de irassyai masu 


4.98 


4.96 


irassyaru no ( ) 


3.34 


2.85 


ka 







Table 2 is the result of Q 1 showing the average scores for the politeness levels 
of linguistic forms as assessed by men and .women. Comparing the numbers of po- 
liteness levels we find that women have a lower assessment of politeness levels for 
14 out of 15 linguistic forms. Thus, toexpress the same level of politeness, a woman 
has to use a politer linguistic form than a man would. Conversely, if a woman and a 
man use identical linguistic forms the women will sound less polite. Where does 
this difference of politeness level come from? It will be clarified along with the data 
in Table 4. 

The second reason for women's speech being more polite can be found in their 
higher assessment of the politeness level appropriate for a particular addressee . 



no 



Sachiko Me 



Table 3. Degree of politeness level of types of addressee. 



Types of people 


Men 


Women 


a. 


Child 


1.08 


1.06 


b. 


Spouse 


1.11 


1.37 


c. 


Delivery person 


1.89 


1.96 


d. 


Friend 


2.00 


2.12 


e. 


workplace inferior 


2.15 


3.07 


f. 


Same-status colleague 


2.41 


2.73 


g- 


Neighbor 


3.03 


2.54 


h. 


Spouse’s friend 


3.38 


3.44 


i. 


Parent at P.T. A. meeting 


3.58 


2.84 


j< 


Instructor of hobby group 


3.89 


3.84 


k. 


Daughter's or son’s professor 


4.14 


4.35 


j. 


Workplace superior 


4.66 


4.74 



Table 3 is the result of Q2, showing the men’s and women’s average assess- 
ments of politeness levels to be used toward the types of addressee they deal with in 
their everyday lives. Comparing the differences in numbers, we find that, for 8 types 
of addressee out of 12, women assign a higher level of politeness than do men. This 
tells us that the reason that women are perceived to deal with interactants more po- 
litely than men do can be ascribed to two factors: (1) women assess individual ex- 
pressions as being lower on the politeness scale than do men, and must therefore 
choose an expression higher up in the scale in order to achieve the same politeness 
effect. And (2) women assign a higher politeness due level to the same interactants: 
therefore they must go still further up the scale to be perceived as sufficiently polite 
users of the language. 

The third reason for the relative politeness of women’s speech is the greater 
frequency with which they take part in the kinds of interactional pattern which calls 
for higher linguistic forms. This reason for women’s politer speech is not as straight- 
forward as the previous two and was revealed in the process of examining a discrep- 
ancy between the politeness levels of Q2 and Q3XQ1. 

Previous studies of the use of linguistic politeness (Kokurito Kokugo 
Kenkyuujo 1982, 1983, Ogino 1981, 1983) have not attempted to view the polite- 
ness level assigned to the addressees’s status separately from the politeness level of 
language actually used toward the addressee. Therefore, the politeness level used 
toward the addressee was taken to be identical with the politeness level assigned to 
the addressee. However, this survey obtained not only politeness levels assigned to 
the addressee’s status (Q2) but also the politeness levels of language actually used 
toward the addressee (Q3XQ 1 ) . This was done based on the working hypothesis that 
the choice of linguistic forms according to politeness is based on the two autonomous 
rules of politeness: linguistic and social rules of politeness. As a result we found an 
unexpected lack of parallelism of the two politeness levels. At this point, we began 
to wonder about the mechanism for this lack of parallelism. To investigate this 

ERjt 




Gender and Function of Language Uae 



121 



mechanism, we should compare the result of Q2 and Q3XQ1 more closely. We have 
therefore drawn Figure 1 . 



Figure 1. Comparison of politeness level associated with addressees and of linguistic 
forms used toward addressees. 



MEN 

pot i tent si 
levtl issigned 
to addressee 
(02) 

politeness 
level ot *orm 
used toward 
addressee 





h 



-v — v 



\ \ \ 
r-V-^ V- 

k 



•M 



i 



• I 




a. Child 

b. Spouic 

c. Delivery person 

d. Friend . 

e. Workplace inferior 

f. Same*status. colleague 



g. Neighbor 

h. Spouse’s friend 

i. Parent at P.T. A. meeting 

j. Instructor of hobby group 

lc. Daughter’s or son’s professor 
1. Workplace superior 



Figure 2. Grouping of types of addressee according to patterns of language use. 



Group 1 . More polite 
Men and women: b. 

c. 

d. 

g- 

h. 

i. 

j* 

k. 

Men only: a. 



spouse, 

delivery person, 

friend, 

neighbor, 

spouse’s friend, 

parent at P.T.A. meeting, 



roup 2. Less (or equally) polite 
Men and women: e. workplace Inferior, 
f. same status colleague 
1. workplace superior, 
Women only: a* child 



instructor of hobby group, 
daughter’s or son’s professor, 
child 



The horizontal lines represent scales $f politeness, with politeness increasing 
toward the right. On the upper lines politeness levels assigned to types of addressee 
are plotted and on the lower lines politeness levels of linguistic forms used for types 
of addressee are plotted. Since the types of addressees are the same it was useful to 
combine and compare the two politeness levels to observe the patterns of language 
use. We group this right-angled pattern of language use as group 1. In this group 
(indicated by dotted lines) we find the types of addressee in the domain of neighbor- 
hood, hobbies and home with whom it is required to be sociable/civil. The rest, i.e. 
the left-angled or vertical lines show the use of linguistic forms with politeness level 
equal to or lower than the associated politeness level of the types of addressee. We 
group this pattern of language use as group 2. In group 2 (indicated by solid lines) we 



132 



122 



Sachiko Ide 



Table 4. Frequencies of interaction with types of addressee. 



Types of addressee 


Men 


Women 


a. Child 


13.5 


14.5 


b. Spouse 


9.4 


8.1 


c. Delivery person 


1.6 


4.1 


d. Friend 


7.2 


9.2 


e. Workplace inferior 


11.7 


0.6 


f. Same-status colleague 


7.7 


1.1 


g. Neighbor 


3.4 


6.5 


h. Spouse's friend 


2.6 


2.8 


i. Parent at P.T.A 


0.8 


5.4 


j . Instructor of hobby group 


0.9 


5.7 


k. Daughter's or son’s professor 


3.6 


9.0 


h Workplace superior 


14.0 


1.4 



find types of people in the domain of the workplace with whom rapport/solidarity are 
sought. 

Figure 2 shows the grouping of the pattern of language use. What strikes one in 
this grouping is the amazing similarity between men and women. With the exception 
of language use toward a child, both men and women use language according to the 
same pattern. How does this difference in the pattern of language use arise? With 
Figure 1 we may hypothesize on the mechanism of the choice of linguistic forms as 
follows: when interaction takes place, the speaker first assesses the politeness level 
associated with the specific type of the addressee, and secondly, he chooses a lin- 
guistic form appropriate for the politeness level for the kinds of interaction with the 
addressee. As is shown in the diagram, the appropriate forms are not chosen to ex- 
actly match the assessed politeness level of the addressee. It is the kinds of interac- 
tion, i.e. sociable/civil or rapport/solidarity seeking interaction, that decide the 
second stage politeness level. Thus, the quantitative analysis of the survey results led 
us to find two levels of variables as controlling factors for the choice of politeness 
level of linguistic forms: (1) politeness level associated to the addressee (2) kinds of 
interactional patterns. How does this phenomenon lead to women's politer speech? 
To discuss this, let us notice the frequencies of interaction in Table 4. 

We find higher frequencies of men's interaction with those people in group 1 
where rapport/solidarity is required (i.e. workplace inferior, same status colleague 
and workplace superior. Women in our study have higher frequencies of interaction 
with people in group 1 . In other words, women are more frequently engaged in inter- 
action which calls for linguistic forms higher than the politeness level toward inter- 
actants. Therefore, women end up using politer linguistic forms even though the 
kind of interactional pattern, the second level variable, is the same between men and 
women. This is another reason why women appear to speak more politely in Japa- 
nese. 2 

This result can be accounted as the reason for the difference of degree of polite- 

ERfC 133 



Gender and Function of Language U»c 



123 



ness level of linguistic forms that we saw in Table 2. Since women are more fre- 
quently engaged in interactions which call for higher linguistic forms, they end up 
using higher linguistic forms frequently. It is a general tendency that the frequent use 
of some linguistic forms will gradually exhaust their politeness value. Women’s 
lower assessment of politeness level can be considered to be such a case. 

Two variables and two functions, i.e., deference and demeanor 

We may explain the differences in the functions of two variables, using 
Goffman’s idea concerning rules of conduct which bind the speaker and the ad- 
dressee together. In his essay "The nature of deference and demeanor" he used these 
two terms, deference and demeanor, to label two complimentary behaviors in ex- 
plaining the rule of conduct which are the kernel elements of politeness. 

According to Goffman (Goffman 1968: 56-77), the ceremonial component of 
concrete behavior has two basic elements: deference and demeanor. Deference is de- 
fined as the appreciation a person shows of the recipient through avoidance rituals or 
presentational rituals. Avoidance rituals refer to forms of deference which lead the 
actor to keep distance from the recipient, and presentational rituals take forms such 
as salutations, invitations, compliments and such minor services. Demeanor, on the 
other hand, is the element of a person’s ceremonial behavior typically conveyed 
through deportment, dress and bearing which serves to express his/her personal 
quality of desirability. Deference shows the speaker’s regard for the rec/nent, while 
demeanor involves the speaker’s desire to present himself/herself in a way that 

shows how well-demeaned a person he/she is. 

The first stage variable, determined by the distance between the speaker and 
the type of addressee, is regulated according to the degree of deference. The second 
stage variable, determined by the speaker' s choice of linguistic forms which treat the 
addressee as higher or lower or equal to the speaker himself/herself, is regulated not 
according to the regard associated with the addressee, but for the display of the 
speaker’s good demeanor. In the former, the sentiment of regard is directed toward 
the addressee and in the latter it is directed toward the speaker. 

As was mentioned in the previous part of this paper, politeness in Japanese is 
a matter of using high/formal linguistic forms according to the relative status of type 
of addressee and situation. For this reason, we may wonder why higher/more formal 
linguistic forms function as deference and demeanor. 

Two interpretations are possible for that deference which a person shows 
toward a recipient through avoidance or presentational rituals. The more formal the 
linguistic forms, the more elaborated they are. First, the use of elaborated forms can 
be assumed to obscure the core part of the meaning of words. Besides this, the ety- 
mological function of honorifics is circumlocution one way or other. By obscuring 
the core meaning of words, we can express things indirectly. Indirect expressions 
function to be the speaker create distance toward the addressee. Thus, the speaker s 
deference toward the addressee is expressed by keeping distance, which works as an 
avoidance ritual. This is in accord with negative politeness in B&L' framework. 
Second, the use of formal forms requires carefulness and attention more than when 

134 



124 



Sachiko Me 



the speaker uses informal or casual forms. The cost to the speaker paid to the ad- 
dressee by speaking elaborated forms is an expression of second type of deference, 
because it makes the speaker do the service to the addressee, which functions as 
representational ritual. This is in accord with positive politeness in B&L framework. 

As for demeanor, we may recall the association of formal and correct forms 
with speakers of higher social class, the subtlety of formal and elaborated forms in 
verbal and nonverbal behavior creates an atmosphere where paradoxical feeling of 
distance and empathy is hared by interactants. Formal forms function to maintain 
distance and at the same time function to create empathy because of the formality 
shared by interactants. This paradoxically complex feeling is often observed on 
occasions of ceremony and interactions of people of high or prestigious class that 
reinforces the use of formal forms as the expression of demeanor. 

Let's look at the case of the delivery person in Figure 1 for example. We ob- 
serve the use of higher linguistic forms than the assessed politeness levels toward 
delivery person. We see that low levels of politeness are assigned toward delivery 
persons, but the second level variable calls for linguistic forms higher than those 
levels. This strategy should be interpreted not as deference expressed toward the 
addressee but as a display of the speaker's demeanor to express the speaker's identity 
as a demeaned person. 



QUALITATIVE EVIDENCE 

Women s politer speech is also characterized by some features of a categorical 
nature. We will examine four of these features in terms of Goffman's deference and 
demeanor: 

Personal pronouns 

Personal pronouns, the avoidance of vulgar expressions, beautification (or 
hypercorrected honorifics), and sentence final particles. The repertoires of personal 
pronouns of men and women differ as follows: 



Speech Level 


Men's Speech 


Women's Speech 


First person 


formal 


watakusi 


watakusi 




watasi 


atakusi* 


plain 


boku 


watasi 


deprecatory 


ore 


atasi* 

O 


Second person 


formal 


anata 


anata 


plain 


kimi 


anata 




anta * 


anta* 


deprecatory 


ornae 






kisama 


O 


(* marks variants of a social dialect.) 



Two kinds of differences can be noted here. First, a difference in levels of for- 
mality can be observed. The level of formality of watasi is formal for men but plain 
for women and that of anata is formal for men but plain or formal for women. This 



ERIC 135 



Gender and Function of Language Use 



125 



means that women are required to use more formal forms. This reminds us of one of 
the three reasons for women’s politer speech shown in the quantitative daU, i.e., 
women's lower assessment of the politeness levels of individual linguistic for ms. As 
a second kind of difference between the language of women and men, we notice that 
there are the deprecatory level pronouns of ore, omae and kisama, in men's speech 
but none in women’s speech. 

The use of more formal forms functions as the display of a deferent attitude, as 
mentioned above. The avoidance of the deprecatory level functions as the display of 
good demeanor. Thus, categorical differences in the repertoire of personal pronouns 
lead to women’s automatic expression of deference and demeanor. This makes 
women’s speech sound politer. 

Avoidance of vulgar expressions 

Women’s speech lacks expressions of profanity/obscenity. The deprecatory 
suffix yagaru (e.g. utai-yagaru 'sing') is used only by men. Sentence final particles, 
zo and ze and phonological reduction forms, such as dekee ( < dekai 'big') having a 
derogatory connotation, are also men's vocabulary. They have t!'e value of covert 
prestige' (Trudgill 1975: 102) among male speakers, as these vulgar forms are the 
display of masculinity because of their uninhibited quality. It is with this positive 
value that these vulgar expressions are favorably used by men. On the other hand, 
vulgar expressions are not allowed in women's repertoire of morphemes and lexical 
items. Therefore, women, having no access to those vulgar expressions automati- 
cally sound like persons with better demeanor. We suggest that this display of the 
desirable quality, demeanor, makes women's speech sound politer. 

Beautification/Hypercorrected honorifics 

Beside ordinary honorifics, women tend to use honorifics illegitimately; that 
is, they are used beyond the appropriate level. This practice takes two forms: one is 
what may be called beautification honorifics, and the other is the hypercorrected use 
of honorifics. 

The honorific prefix o- is used for goods or actions of referents that are to be 
treated with deference. But when it is used indiscriminately, for example o-biiru 
'beer' and o-yasai 'vegetable', it only functions to beautify them: thus, we call such 
usages beautification honorifics. Women's speech is characterized by an abundance 
of such beautification honorifics. 

Honorifics, which are to be used for the addressee and the referent where the 
expected deference is to be expressed, are sometimes used indiscriminately. For 
example, we find Haha ga o-kaeri-ni narimasita. ('My mother returned.' Bold let- 
ters mark honorifics.) In this sentence the deference is expressed for the speaker's 
mother against the rule of use of honorifics in Japanese society, as it is incorrect to 
use referent honorifics to one's own mother who is one's in-group member. There- 
fore, this use is considered as a hypercorrect use of honorifics. Women tend to use it 
in order to achieve a high level of formality of linguistic forms. 

136 



126 



Sachiko Ide 



Both beautification and hypercorrect honorifics used by women must be in- 
tended to be a display of demeanor because of the formal quality of these forms. 
Thus, women’s speech appears to sound polite. 

How can we explain this phenomenon of women’s display of demeanor? 
Women, especially housewives, whose activities are mainly in the domain of home 
and sociable settings, live outside the stratified structure of institutionalized human 
relationships. In institutions, which are men’s society, speakers are expected to 
make distinctions of status as well as of in-group/out-group. Thus, it is in women’s 
society, where less distinction of status and in-group/out-group is required, that in- 
discriminate use of hypercorrected honorifics is likely to be observed. Besides, 
women have no label to mark their social position. High and prestigious linguistic 
forms are generally associated with high social class. Thus, women tend to be inter- 
ested in the expression of demeanor, a sentiment of regard toward the speaker herself 
by the use of higher forms, in order to show a higher social class than that to which 
they actually belong. 3 

Sentence final particles 

There are sentence final particles exclusively used by women. Let us consider- 
how these make women’s speech polite. Ide (1982) discusses wa and kasira , and 
McGloin (1986) discusses wa and no . The former argues that they make women’s 
speech polite because of a ’softening* function of these particles, resulting from the 
tone of uncertainty created by them. The latter argues "By using wa and no, the 
speaker — women — seek to establish an atmosphere of sharedness. . . . The strategy 
of creating an empathic atmosphere/space of conversation, which wa and no cer- 
tainly contribute, is a very important aspect of women’s language in Japanese." 
(McGloin, 1986) 

To make the argument clear, let us focus on wa and discuss the seemingly 
contradictory arguments. Ide’s interpretation of wa is ’option giving* or ’don’t 
impose* strategy which functions to create distance or deference . 4 In Lakoffs frame- 
work of rules of politeness, it would fall in the ’rule of optionality' and in Brown/ 
Levinson’s framework it would fall into the don V presume /assume strategy of nega- 
tive politeness. McGloin, on the other hand, interprets wa as an 'empathy creating 
strategy,' which functions to shorten distance between interactants by engendering 
common ground. It is close to Lakoffs 'rule of equality showing camaraderie/rap- 
port* and it is a strategy of ’claiming common ground* of positive politeness, in 
Brown/Levinson's framework. 

How can the sentence particle wa be a strategy of both negative and positive 
politeness? 

The solution to these seemingly opposed interpretations of wa should be found 
in the duplex nature of the function of the single non-referential sign wa . We may 
look at it as follows: it is the softening function of the particle wa (the effect of 
negative politeness strategy) that makes it possible to create an atmosphere of relaxa- 
tion because of its function of non-imposition and respect for the other, which in turn 
create an atmosphere of the sharedness (the effect of positive politeness strategy). 
Thus, these opposing strategies can be interpreted as two sides of the same coin. 5 





Gender and Function of Language Use 



127 



CONCLUDING REMARKS 

In conclusion, I shall summarize the features of quantitative and qualitative 
evidence of women's politer speech in terms of functions of politeness: deference 
and demeanor. 

Features of women's politer speech 

Deference (1) Use of higher linguistic forms owing to higher assess- 
ment of politeness level toward the adur^ jsee (first stage 
variable) 

(2) . More formal forms of second person pronouns 

(3) Use of sentence final particle wa, no> and kasira 

Demeanor (1) Use of linguistic forms of higher politeness level than the 

associated politeness level of the addressee in the interac- 
tional domain of sociable/civil activity (second stage 
variable) 

(2) Women's lower assessment politeness level 

(3) More formal forms of first person pronouns 

(4) Absence of deprecatory level of first and second person 
pronouns 

(5) Avoidance of vulgar expressions 

(6) Beautification/Hypercorrect honorifics 

The above discussion and summary should have made it clear that gender dif- 
ferences in language use are the result of the duplex indexing functions of deference 
and demeanor. It should be emphasized that there is no straightforward correlation 
between linguistic features and gender per se of the speakers involved, as has been 
assumed in much of the previous literature on this subject. There has been substan- 
tial work which interprets women's language as the language of a powerless class. In 
this respect we have seen that, as far as we have examined Japanese women's politer 
speech, the function of demeanor certainly outweighs the function of deference, and 
demeanor is inevitably associated with the speaker's prestigious status. 

*This is a slightly revised version of the paper titled "How and why do women 
speak more politely in Japanese?" in Aspects of Japanese Vbmen's Language. S. Ide 
and N. McGloin (eds.) Kurosio Publishers 1990. 

THE AUTHOR 

Sachiko Ide is a professor of linguistics at English Department, Japan 
Women's University, Tokyo, Japan. Her field is sociolinguistics and pragmatics, 
and has been working on the topics of linguistic politeness and women’s language. 

NOTES 

‘In Japanese we can easily list a few dozens of variants of a word, say go , which 
show some difference of politeness level. 

138 



128 



Sachiko Idc 



*In Table 2 we have seen women’s lower assessment of the politeness level of 
linguistic forms. We may speculate a cause for this discrepancy in the frequencies of 
interaction. Women’s more frequent engagement with people which call for high 
linguistic forms (with the exception of workplace superiors) lowered their relative 
assessment of the politeness level of linguistic forms. 

We find a similar phenomenon in the use of phonological variants in urban 
British English. Trudgill (1975:91) speculates and explains women's preference for 
high, prestigious phonological variants as the results of (1) women's status con- 
sciousness owing to their insecure status and lack of occupation, and (2) women's 
preference for refinement and sophistication. 

^Kitagawa (1977) also argues that wa with rising intonation is an 'option-giv- 
ing strategy' like English tag-question. 

5 Full discussion of the interpretation of wa should account for the varieties of 
wa used by various speakers in various contexts. We will have to have empirical data 
of the use of wa.. 



REFERENCES 

Brown, P. (1980). How and why are women more polite: some evidence from a 
Mayan community. In S. 

McConnell-Ginet, R. Boker, and N. Furman (Eds.), Women and Language in Lit- 
erature and Society (pp. 1 1 1-139). New York:Praeger. 

and Levinson, S. (1978). Universal in language usage: politeness phenom- 
ena. In E. Goody (Ed.), Questions and Politeness (pp. 56-324). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Goffman, E. (1968). Interaction Ritual. New York: Doubleday and Company. 
Hill, B., Ide, S., Ikuta, S., Kawasaki, A., andOgino, T. (1986). Universal of lin- 
guistic poiiteness: quantitative evidence from Japanese and American English. 
Journal of Pragmatics, 10 , 347-37 1 . 

Ide, S. (1982). Japanese sociolinguistics: politeness and women's language. Lingua 

57, 357-385. 

Ide, S., Hori, M., Kawasaki, A., Ikuta, S., and Haga, H. (1986). Sex difference and 
politeness in Japanese. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 

58, 25-36. 

Kokuritu Kokugo Kenkyuujo. (1982). Kigyoo no Naka no Keigo. (Linguistic polite- 
ness in Cooperation.) Tokyo;Sanseidou. 

. (1983) Keigo to Keigoisiki: Okazaki ni okeru 20 nen Mae to:io Hikaku. 

(Linguistic Politeness and Politeness Attitude: A Comparison Study with the 
Survey of 20 Years Ago. ) Tokyo: Sanseidou. 

Lakoff, R. (1974). What you can do with words; politeness, pragmatics and perfor- 
matives. BS 3, XVI-l-XVI-55. 

• (1975). Language and Woman's Place. New York: Harper and Row. 

Leech, G. (1983). Principles of Pragmatics. London: Longman. 

McGIoin, N. (1986). Feminine sentence particles: why do women use them? ms. 
Ogino, T. (1981). Keigo ni okeru tukaiwake no taikei to sono kouzouteki kankei. 

O 

ERIC 



130 



Gender and Function of Language Use 



129 



(system of the use of linguistic politeness and its structural relationship.) 
Kokugogaku, 125 , 28-38. 

. (1984). Yamanote to sitamati ni okeru keigosiyou no tigai. (Differences of 

the use of linguistic politeness in uptown and downtown.) Gengokenkyuu, 84. 
45-76. 

Trudgill, P. (1975). Sex, covert prestige and linguistic change in the urban British 
English of Norwich. In B. 

Thome and N. Henley (Eds.) Language and Sex: difference and dominance (pp. 88- 
104). Rowley: Newbury House. 



o 



Pragmatics and Language Learning 
Monograph Series, Vol. 3, 1992 



Seeking a Pedagogically Useful Understanding of Given-New: 
An Analysis of Native-Speaker Errors in Written Discourse 

Asha Tickoo 

This paper will demonstrate that at a micro-level of analysis the 
inexperienced writer’s failure to achieve the 'decontextualization' and 
'autonomy* (cf.Kay 1977) characteristic of literate prose manifests it- 
self as clearly identifiable violations of the principles of information 
organization into given and new. To properly explain these violations, 
however, it is necessary to add to and amend the existing theory of 
given-new. 



INTRODUCTION 



Studies that have sought to identify the differences in information organiza- 
tion between spoken and written discourse 1 have referred to such broad distinctions 
as the context dependence and ' nonautonomy’ of speech versus the ' decontextuali- 
zation’ and 'autonomy’ of writing (Kay 1977). Writing is said to be decontextual- 
ized and autonomous because whatever is needed for its comprehension is included 
in the words of the text; speech, on the other hand, relies on a ' simultaneous trans- 
mission over other channels, such as paralinguistic, postural and gestural’. Because 
of its heavy dependence on interlocutor feedback, speech has also been described as 
'involved’ and often 'fragmented*, whereas writing is typically both 'detached* 
from audience and context and 'integrated* rather than fragmented (Chafe 1982). 
This means that writers must "leant to initiate, sustain, and develop a written ' utter- 
ance* without depending on signals of agreement, disagreement, or confusion from 
an addressee. And, since they cannot see the addressee to judge if they share a 
common background... they try to make the premises of their reasoning and the 
logical connections explicit so they can communicate with those who do not share 
their basic assumptions." (Rader, 1982:187) Referring to approximately the same 
typical features, Scollon & Scollon (1984) coin the term ' focal situation* "for any 
communicative situation in which there are strong limitations on negotiation be- 
tween participants" (p. 183), not merely writing per se, to contrast with an unfo- 
cused situation, which depends on active participant negotiation. And Michaels & 
Collins (1984), describing teacher expectations of students' in-class interaction, 
identify a literate prose style, as something quite distinct from "conversationally 
embedded narrative accounts that depend upon context and nonverbal cues for much 
of their cohesion.": 




1. objects were to be named and described, even when they were in plain 
sight; 

2. talk was to be explicitly grounded temporally and spatially; 

3. minimal shared knowledge or context was to be assumed on the part of the 
audience; 




Seeking a Pedagogically Useful Understanding of Given-New 



131 



4. thematic ties needed to be lexicalized if topic shifts were to be seen as mo- 
tivated and relevant" (pp. 234-224) 

In this study, I want to carry out a fine grained analysis of two student at- 
tempts at literate prose, paragraphs 1 and 2, both of which fail to achieve the decon- 
textualization and autonomy, and hence the focused situation typical of a literate 
prose style. They are the opening paragraphs of two freshman essays commenting 
on the central idea of passage A, given below. Both students are white, middle class 
males. 

A. The new sciences of sociology, psychology and psychiatry have cast aside 
such concepts as will, willpower, badness and laziness and replaced them with 
political and psychological repression, poor conditioning, diseased family 
interaction and bad genes. One by one, human failings have been redesignated 
as diseases. Remember when drugs or alcohol abuse was a product of some 
combination of hedonism and foolishness? Now you’re an addict. You have 
no will, so you are not to blame; the disease got you. The fusion of capitalism 
and science has resulted in thousands of new experts setting up treatment 
programs certifying each other, publishing books and flitting from talk show 
to talk show. It is time to rehabilitate the concept of will and restore it to its 
proper place in our lives. Ultimately, we must assume responsibility for our 
action, and stop the promotion and exploitation of human frailties and imper- 
fections. (Adapted from an essay by Rex Julian Beaber) 

Paragraph 1 . Rex Julian Beaber makes many key points 2 in his essay. Beaber 
states that people in today’s society believe that almost all the human race’s 
imperfections (1) are due to disease. He suggests that the concept of will and 
willpower have disappeared. These concepts have been replaced by excuses 
that are thought up by an expert (2) in the new 'sciences’ of sociology, psy- 
chology and psychiatry. These experts devise ways (3) such as treatments 
programs designed to make money and also try to persuade society to accept 
the faulty fact that people should not be held accountable for their own 
actions. This, of course, is not true as Beaber agrees (4). (From an essay by 
Sean F.) 

Paragraph 2. Rex Julian Beaber claimed in an essay (1) that the concepts of 
willpower and responsibility for one’s actions have disappeared from our 
society. Instead of being blamed for our faults, Beaber feels that these 
faults, including drug and alcohol abuse, have been transformed into a 
long list of fake diseases by the mental health field. (2) The mental health 
field then treats these so-called diseases to gain money and fame. (From an 
essay by Keith R.) 

Each of the errors in paragraphs 1 and 2 is the result of a failure to treat the 
written utterance as an autonomous and decontextualized unit. But to properly 
understand the nature of these individual violations, it is necessary to appreciate the 
consequences of autonomy and decontextualization on the coherence constraints on 

142 



132 



A*ha Tickoo 



sub-units of a piece of discourse. I will demonstrate that at the micro-level of dis- 
course analysis the failure to decontextualize is apparent as clearly identifiable vio- 
lations of the constraints on the organization of given-new information. The current 
conception of the organization of given-new, however, is not adequate to a proper 
identification and explanation of these violations. Therefore, before carrying out 
this analysis, I will first add two basic constructs to the existing theory of given- 
new. 

TWO UNRECOGNIZED DISCOURSE ORGANIZING PRINCIPLES 

The most fundamental information organizing principle states that given in- 
formation precedes new information. I will show that information is constrained by 
two additional organizing principles: 

3a: All new information must be to some extent given, 

3b: and the more 3 given information is the more felicitous information. 

4. All discourse constituents, however, are not constrained by equally 
stringent givenness conditions: Certain types of constructions and NPs 
are required to be more given than others. 

These three constraints — the given precedes new constraint together with 3 
and 4 defined above — are necessary though perhaps not sufficient for a proper 
explanation of the types of errors in 1 and 2. 

The givenness of the new 

Principle 3 is not recognized by traditional conceptions of information struc- 
ture. Traditionally, constituents of discourse, at every level, were gauged for their 
informational status by using the dichotomous concept of given versus new. (cf. 
Chafe 1976, Clark 1977, Halliday 1974 & 1976, Horn 1978, Kuno 1972, 1974, 
1978, 1979). This perception of constituents as either given or new is a simplifica- 
tion that is both inaccurate and misleading. Careful analysis shows that discourse 
internally both entities and propositions must be to some degree shared knowledge 
between speaker and interlocutor. 4 The examples of 5 illustrate the shared knowl- 
edge constraints on discourse entities. 

5a: There was once an old man who lived deep inside a wood. 

5b: His wife lived with him. 

5c: A woman lived with him. 

He lived with a woman. 

5d: A man lived with him. 

In the context of 5a, b is the most felicitous of b, c, and d, because ' his wife* 
relates back to ' an old man* with the shared knowledge that men may have wives. 
In order for the utterance of c to be felicitous in the context of 5a, one would have 

143 



Seeking a Pedagogicatly Useful Understanding of Given-New 



133 



to assume that the speaker was attempting to create suspense. People generally live 
together when they are in some way related and it is the speaker's failure to explic- 
itly refer to this relationship that is responsible for creating suspense. 

This suspense, however, only arises when the two referents are ordered so 
that one appears in the discourse after the other. If both the woman and the old man 
were introduced into the discourse in the same initial utterance, as in An old man 
and a woman lived inside the woods.’, there would be no suspense, which implies 
that the suspense is not in fact the result of the simple fact that cohabiting men and 
women are related by some shared knowledge relationship which has not been ex- 
plicitly stated. 

When the referents are both new and their appearance in the discourse is or- 
dered, a concomitant of this ordering is that there must be a shared knowledge rela- 
tionship between them such that the second referent becomes to some degree given 
in the discourse as a result of the relationship it bears to the preceding one. The 
motivation for placing one new entity after another new entity, as opposed to intro- 
ducing them in the discourse in the same initial utterance, is that the speaker is able 
to make the second less new by defining it in terms of its shared knowledge relation- 
ship to the preceding entity. The interlocutor, therefore, interprets ordering of new 
entities as being indicative of a shared knowledge relationship between them, and if 
this relationship is neither self-evident, nor explicitly referred to. he assumes that it 
is forthcoming at some later point in the discourse. 

It is necessary, however, to determine when it is feasible to assume that the 
shared knowledge relationship is being intentionally withheld, as in 5c, with respect 
to 5a, rather than assuming that the ordering is, in the absence of the shared knowl- 
edge relationship, simply infelicitous, as is the case in d with respect to 5a. Example 
6 is useful in arriving at an understanding of this: 

6a: There was once a dog who lived deep inside a wood. 

6b: A dog lived with him. 

The oddness of 6b in the context of 6a shows that women living with men, 
which is the case in 5a and 5c, differentiating it from men living with men of 5a and 
5d, is not responsible for the difference in acceptability of 5c and 5d with respect to 
5a. What is relevant is whether it is entities belonging to the same set or entities 
belonging to different sets that are ordered ip the discourse. When they are members 
of the same set, as in 5a and 5d, they ought to be introduced together in the same 
initial utterance, because there is no possibility of the existence of a relationship of 
dependence between them through which one entity can become less new by being 
defined in terms of a shared knowledge relationship to the other. So that the most 
natural expression of 6a and b is * Two dogs lived inside the woods. ' , and that of 5a 
and 5d ' Two men lived inside the woods.’ When the referents are not members of 
the same set, but are related through shared knowledge, their appearance in the 
discourse can be ordered such that the dependent referent - one which is defined in 
terms of its shared knowledge relationship to, the other - appears after the defining 
referent - the one to which the shared knowledge relationhip is made. 



144 



134 



Aaha Tickoo 



The shared knowledge conditions on new entities are further exemplified in 
the clauses of 7: 

7a: I am going to Philip's wedding tomorrow. 

7b: Tom is coming with me. 

7c: My date/boy friend is coming with me. 

7d: A man is coming with me. 

7e: A man I know is coming with me. 

7b after 7a is felicitous if the referent of the subject noun is known to both speaker 
and interlocutor. Here the ordering is not a concomitant of a shared knowledge 
relationship of dependence of ' Tom' of 7b to the ' I # of 7a. ' Tom* is known to both 
speaker and interlocutor but is newly introduced into the discourse. The new entity 
of 7c, however, bears a relationship of dependence to the known entity of 7a, since 
it is shared knowledge that women may have boy friends/dates. 7d after 7a is less 
natural than 7c after 7a because there is no shared knowledge about the referent of 
the subject noun: It is not definable in terms of a relationship of dependence to the 
known entity of 7a, nor is it shared knowledge but newly introduced into the dis- 
course. But 7e, in which the same indefinite reference is what Prince refers to as 
anchored' (Prince 1981:236), is by this means, made felicitous. Anchoring makes 
explicit the relationship of dependence to the preceding, already given entity. This 
is done in 7e by the speaker relating 'the man' to the preceding known entity, the 
speaker herself. 

Like discourse internal NPs, all discourse internal propositions are also re- 
quired to be to some degree given, and as with NPs the more given proposition is 
also the more felicitous proposition. This is demonstrated by the clauses in 8: 

8a: We got home at five. 

8b: Then we took the children to the moon. 

8c: Then we took the children to the pub. 

8d: Then we took the children to the park. 

The less shared knowledge there is to support the sequencing of each of the 
acts of 8b, 8c, and 8d, individually, to the act of 8a, the less felicitous this sequenc- 
ing is. Therefore, while b is bizarre, and c unlikely, d is perfectly felicitous, simply 
because it is shared knowledge that after coming home one may take the children to 
the park, would not take therrl to the pub, and could not take them to the moon. 

The shared knowledge constraints on new propositions are illustrated in 9: 

9a: She was fine until then. 

9b: She had a splitting head ache. 

9c: She was eating heartily and chatting away. 

It is the failure to match our shared knowledge of the state of people in good 
health that makes b infelicitous as a statement in support of 9a; while c, which 
conforms to these shared assumptions is, for this reason, felicitous. 




145 



Seeking « Pedagogically Useful Understanding of Given-New 



135 



Canonical order, marked order and coherent propositions 

Thus far, we have shown that principle 3 holds both for NPs and clausal 
propositions: Discourse internally both NPs and clausal propositions must be to 
some extent given and the more given NP or proposition is the more felicitous NP 
or proposition. While it is 

clear, therefore, that there is a restriction on how new new information can 
be; it is also possible to show that there is an upper limit on how given it can be, and 
it is within the constraints set by this upper limit that more given information is 
more felicitous information. Violation of this maximal level of givenness will make 
a proposition that is highly given, relative to its preceding discourse, nevertheless 
incoherent in the context of this discourse. There is therefore what amounts to a bi- 
directional control on the givenness of new information, constraining it to be nei- 
ther too given nor too new, and ruling out clauses such as 10b and 10c as incoherent 
in the context of 10a; 10b because all propositions must be somewhat given, and 
10c because they must not be so given as to repeat from the preceding discourse or 
state what is presupposed by it: 

10a: 1 like all nuts 

10b: # and I’m going around the world. 

10c: # and I like cashews. 

There is, that is, a condition of coherent givenness, constraining new information to 
be more rather than less given, but at the same time not so given as to repeat the 
preceding discourse or state what is presupposed by it. 

Governed by this broad constraint to be coherently given, the propositions of 
canonically ordered clauses can add to the preceding discourse in any of a number of 
ways, but any marked construction is constrained to code a proper subset of the total 
set of given relationships. In what follows, 1 will briefly describe four clausal rela- 
tionships that canonical order can bear to its preceding discourse, and also demon- 
strate that unlike canonical order, a marked construction which can bear any one of 
these four relationships is constrained to bearing just that one and no other. 

To assess the nature of these four clausal relationships, it is necessary to rec- 
ognize that a significant part of the information that clauses convey about the event 
or state they denote is communicated through the clausal propositional content and 
the clausal aspect. The different clausal relationships to the preceding discourse are 
then determined by gauging at one and the same time both the givenness of the pro- 
positional content and the givenness of the aspect of the clause, at the time of its 
utterance and in the context of its preceding discourse. 

Prince (1981) defines three levels of givenness, namely, 

1 . predictable/recoverable given: "The speaker assumes that the hearer can 
predict or could have predicted that a particular item will or would have 
occurred in a particular position within a sentence" (Prince 1981:226), 

2. salient given (I have sometimes used the term 'presupposed' with meaning 
equivalent to salient given): "The speaker assumes that the hearer has or 

146 



136 



A4u Tickoo 



could appropriately have some particular thing/entity ... in his/her con- 
sciousness at the time of hearing the utterance" (Prince 1981:228), and 

3. shared knowledge given: "The speaker assumes, or can infer a particular 
thing (but is not necessarily thinking about it)." (Prince 1981:230) 

Using these levels of givenness to evaluate clausal propositional and aspectual gi- 
venness, I have identified the following four types of clausal relationship to the 
preceding discourse: 

Category l, exemplified by lib, is a relationship in which both the proposi- 
tional content and the aspect of the clause are shared knowledge given at the time of 
the utterance of the clause. 

11a: Until about five o'clock Mary was fine. 

1 lb: She had eaten heartily. 

He: Shared knowledge to 11a: Mary had been doing things that people do 
when they are in good health. 

It is shared knowledge at the time of the utterance of 1 lb that Mary had been doing 
things that people do when they are in good health. 1 lb is an instance of this shared 
knowledge, and is constrained both by its propositional content and its aspect. The 
aspectual constraint is concomitant with the constraint on the proposition, and this 
is evident in the fact that, ' She will eat heartily' , for example, cannot be an instance 
of lie. 

A second clausal relationship is exemplified in 12b, in which the aspect is 
shared knowledge, while the propositional content is new. 

12a: Mary got home at five(.) 

12b: (Then/At 5:30 she took the children to the park.)/ 

She took the children to the park at 5:30. 

12c: and took the children to the park. 

In the third clausal relationship, exemplified in 13b, both the aspect and the 
propositional content are salient given. 

13a: The Johnsons had a baby. 

13b: (Tom they called him.)/ They called him Tom. 

13c: # Then they called him Tom. 

13d: # They gave him a name. 

It is salient given at the time of the utterance of 13b both that people name their new 
bom infants and that the naming follows the event of having the baby, 13b is, there- 
fore, salient given both for propositional content and for aspect. 

And finally in the last clausal relationship, exemplified in 14b, the aspect is 
salient given, while the propositional content is new. 



Seeking a Pedagog ically Useful Undemanding of Given-New 



137 



14a: 1 left for class at 9:30(.) 

14b: (and arrived in the nick of time.)/ 1 arrived in the nick of time. 

14c: # and then I arrived in the nick of time. 

At the time of the utterance of 14b it is salient given that one of a set of actions that 
can occur after 14a will do so. That is, the aspect of 14b is salient given. 

We have demonstrated in the above discussion that clauses in canonical order 
can relate to the preceding discourse in any one of the above-described four ways. 
By doing this we have also shown that canonical order does not code any of these 
relationships. 5 

The propositions of marked constructions while they are, of course, also 
constrained to be coherently given, differ from clauses in canonical order in two 
ways: 1) They select a proper subset of the total number of coherent ways to be 
given. And 2) they formally code this selection so that the construction cannot be 
used to felicitously make any other type of relationship to the preceding discourse. 
For example, the clause with an initial temporal adverb in 12b marks the relation- 
ship which has shared knowledge aspect and new propositional content, the direct 
object preposing of 13b codes the relationship with salient propositional content and 
salient aspect, and the VP conjunction of 14b codes the relationship with salient 
aspect and new propositional content. Because these constructions code the relation- 
ships they bear to their preceding discourse, it is not possible to replace any one of 
them with any other of comparable meaning. For example, one cannot replace the 
clause of 12b, with initial adverb, with a clause of comparable meaning that is VP 
conjoined as in 12c and retain the pragmatic force of 12b. The temporal relationship 
of 12b implies that it was possible at the time of the utterance of 12b that Mary 
would do something after she got home and that this possible following act was 
felicitously instanced by her taking the children to the park. If we remove the initial 
temporal adverb from 12b, however, it is suggested not that it was possible that she 
would do something after she got home, but that it was inevitable. And ' taking the 
children to the park* rather than being a felicitous instance of a plausible following 
act, becomes a felicitous instance of an act that inevitably follows. 

The constraints on the givenness on all constructions are therefore not the 
same. Neither are the constraints on the givenness on all NPs the same. For ex- 
ample, objects of prepositions are required to be more given than other discourse 
internal NPs. This is demonstrated by the clauses of 15 and 16: 

15a: There is a table against the door. 

15b: 1 pushed a table up against the door. 

15c: 1 put a bottle of wine on a table. 

15d: 1 put a bottle of wine on a table against the door. 

15e: 1 put a bottle of wine on her table. 

16a: Aunt Sally has a dog. 

16b: 1 saw aunt Sally with a dog. 

16c: 1 saw aunt Sally with a dog I sometimes walk in the park. 

16d: 1 saw aunt Sally with her dog. 




148 



13S 



ArfuTickoo 






15a and b and 16a demonstrate that NPs can be new when they are not objects of 

~" S - 15C 't md C ’ “ d 16b ’ C ’ and d demons,ra,e ‘^t NPs which ca n other- 
7 s , anchored ' When *■“* » Ejects of a preposition, and further 
that objects of prepositions become more felicitous the more anchored they are 



VIOLATING THE PRINCIPLES OF GIVEN-NEW ORGANIZATION 



fundamental^ USS, °" “ “ “ ttempt to shoW th »‘> *■ » dd i‘ion to the 

fundamental information organizing constraint that given precedes new, there exist 

two oUier organizing principles: 3a) All new information is to some extent given 

and 3b) more given information is more felicitous as long as it does not repeat, or 

tions ^d Vp PreSUPPOSed 7 thC PrCCeding discourse - P^her, 4) certain construc- 
tions and NPs are required to be both more given than others and given in highly 

speci ways. I will now attempt to explain the errors in paragraphs 1 and 2 in 
terms of violations of these principles. 

Teachers usually suggest that the denotations! ability of a referential phrase 
as ahnost all the human race's imperfections' in 1, in paragraph 1 can be 
unproved by making ,t more descriptively specific. The question for most students 
then ,s how does one arrive at a more specific form of reference. My suggestion is 
thatl is a v, elation of principle 1. The NP the human race's imperfections' is not a 
sufficiently given form of reference to problems such as drug and alcohol abuse, 
discussed m passage A, to effectively denote them. The more given it is made, the 
more successful it is as denotation. This is demonstrated in la. 



U ' f' J ' Beaber sUtes tha ‘ P®°P ,e in today's society believe that all moral 
failings and character flaws are due to disease. 



Sean intend, r f ^ J ‘° * partlCU,ar Pereas it is clear that 

Sean intends ,ts reference to be generic. Its inability to denote the generic class of 

experts is, of course, not because indefinite reference has to be nongeneric, as is 

CVI >2 m ’ Wh ? rC thC NP “ CXpert need ** no Particular expert, but can repre- 
sent the generic class. It is as NP of a by phrase, in 2, that it is constrained to refer 

to a specific expert. As NP of a by phrase, the referent is interpreted as given infor- 
mation, and as such points to a particular expert. The requirement that NPs of a by 
phrase, and more generally of any prepositional phrase, are constrained to be more 
™ T ‘ h « le “*‘ ven 1S » consequence of principle 2, and is illustrated in 2b, 2c and 
2d. In 2b the clause is felicitous when Mary is shared knowledge between speaker 

“■Si 20 iSOdd b — ,he NP ° f ' <» by pbrasfi is mrtgiven »“ 

The same NP becomes more felicitous when it is anchored as in 2d. As a result of 
the constraint that ,t be interpreted as given information after a by phrase, indefinite 
reference can only be interpreted nongenerically. To avoid this happening, it is 
necessary to use the plural form of the noun s experts’ as in 2e. 



O 

ERIC 



2a. An expert in the new sciences of sociology, psychology and psychiatry 
says addiction is not a consequence of irresponsible behaviour but of 



liJ 



Seeking * Pcd*gogic*Hy Useful Understanding of Given-New 



139 



disease, and people no longer feel that they need to exercise will power, 
discipline and self control to overcome their problems. 

2b. The cake was baked by Mary. 

2c. The cake was baked by a woman. 

2d. The cake was baked by a woman I know and admire. 

2e. These concepts have been replaced by excuses that are thought up by ex- 
perts in the new sciences of Sociology, Psychology and Psychiatry. 

In 3, the use of the word ' ways’ is infelicitous because it is used as though it 
has definite reference, whereas words like 'way’, 'method’ and 'strategy’ cannot 
have definite reference. As a consequence, they cannot stand on their own when 
they are newly introduced into the discourse, i.e. , it is necessary to make the refer- 
ent explicit in phrases such as ' a way to do x’, or 'a method by which x is done . 
The word ' strategy’ can stand on its own when it refers to something given in the 
preceding discourse, as in 3a: 

3a: Sean thought up the perfect way of handling the problem and adopted 
this strategy/# way whenever occasion called for it. 

But ' way* doesn't seem to be able to do this. (This is also demonstrated in 3a). Sean 
is unfamiliar with the constraints on the referentiality of the word 'way'. This is a 
word which cannot have definite reference and also cannot refer to something given 
in the preceding discourse. 

Finally in 4, egocentric Sean is assuming that his own views rather than Bea- 
ber's are given information between Sean and the reader, and he therefore refers to 
Beaber as being in agreement with him, whereas it is Beaber’s views that are in fact 
given information, and it would be appropriate for Sean to indicate that he agrees 
with Beaber. Again, there is a failure, at a very basic level, to properly gauge given- 
ness and conform to accepted principles of given-new organization. 

There are several problems with 1 of paragraph 2. First the indefinite refer- 
ence implies that, contrary to fact, the reader is not familiar with the essay in ques- 
tion. If we assume that this is a deliberate stylistic tactic that Keith has chosen to 
adopt, we are still left with two problems both of which are addressed by rephrasing 
this first sentence as in la: 

la: In an essay written by R. J. Beaber, the author ... 

In 1, the object of the preposition is anchored by the accompanying participial 
phrase and is therefore more given than its counterpart in 1 . By principle 4, objects 
of prepositions are required to be more given than other types of NPs. 

lb: He read an essay. /He wrote an essay. 

lc: He read an essay by Rex Julian Beaber. 

Id: I read in an essay by some 18 novelists that ... 

le: ? 1 read in an essay that .... 




150 



140 



Aiha Tickoo 



As we have already shown more than once, NPs which can otherwise be new (lb) 
must be anchored when they are objects of a preposition, as is demonstrated by the 
felicity of Id and the infelicity of le. So it is the anchoring by the participial phrase 
that accounts for the greater felicity of the object of preposition in la. la is also an 
improvement on Keith's first sentence because it has appropriate left to right distri- 
bution of given and new information, while Keith's sentence fails to conform to the 
given precedes new constraint. 

The adverbial clause in 2, sets two constraints on the following matrix clause: 

1) the arguments (of the verb of the adverbial clause) must be maintained in the 
matrix clause with the same semantic roles that they possess in the adverbial clause. 

2) The proposition of the matrix clause must bear a salient relationship of alterna- 
tion to the proposition of the adverb clause. Because of these two constraints the 
reader anticipates a matrix clause which is informationally packaged as in 2a and 
2b, in which the arguments of the adverbial construction are in fact maintained in 
the matrix construction with the semantic role they possess in the adverb clause and 
the proposition bears a salient relationship of alternation to the proposition of the 
adverbial clause. 

2. Instead of being blamed for our faults, 

2a. we are praised for them. 

2b. we are encouraged to cultivate them. 

To represent the information that Keith intends to communicate in the matrix clause 
of 2 so that it conforms to constraints 1) and 2) set by the preceding adverbial 
clause, it would have to take the form of 2c or 2d, in which, as in 2a and 2b, the 
arguments (of the verb) of the adverbial clause are maintained in the matrix clause 
with the semantic role they possess in the adverbial clause, and the proposition 
bears a salient relationship of alternation to the proposition of the adverbial clause: 

2c. we have been told that these faults (- our addiction to drugs and alcohol) 
are the result of disease. 

2d. doctors have told us that these faults (- our addiction to drugs and alco- 
hol) are the result of disease. 

The matrix clause of 2 violates constraints 1) and 2) and therefore reader expecta- 
tions by changing the semantic roles of the arguments relative to those they possess 
in the adverbial clause. In Keith’s passive construction ' drugs' becomes subject of 
the passive. In addition, although one can, as we have done above, construct a sali- 
ent relationship of alternation from the propositional content of the matrix clause of 
2, given our knowledge of passage A, the proposition of 2, namely, " transforming 
our faults into a list of diseases' does not as it stands readily lend itself to interpre- 
tation as a relationship of alternation to the proposition of the adverbial construc- 
tion, namely 'blaming us for our faults'. 

In the context of the adverbial clause of 2, the matrix clause is required to be 
both highly given and given in a very specific way. And this context is appropriate 

1C 151 



Seeking a Pedagogically Uieful Undcrjunding of Given-New 



141 



for the use of the passive construction. As we have demonstrated m our discussion 
of principle 4, the contexts in which it is appropriate to use marked constructions 
call for information that is highly given and set strict constants on the manner in 
which this information must be given. It is in contexts where a marked construction 
could felicitously occur that students most often violate the informational con- 
straints on whole constructions, very likely because the givenness constraints are so 
highly specific in such contexts. 

CONCLUSION 

1 have tried to show that student errors in discursive prose, which previous 
scholars have referred to in such broad terms as a failure to decontextualize, can be 
identified as violations of specific principles of given-new organization, and have 
attempted to add to the descriptive adequacy of the existing theory of given-new to 
better account for these violations. 

THE AUTHOR 

A recent graduate of the Department of Linguistics, University of Pennsylva- 
nia Research interests: functional study o f word order, written and spoken dis- 
course, the applications of pragmatics to language teaching. Currently teaching 
English for academic purposes at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. 

NOTES 

'This is a differentiation which has recently been reinterpreted as more rightly 
distinguishing formal from informal discourse, rather than speech and writing per 

se(cf. Beaman 1984). , . MD 

sphere seems to be a collocation problem with 'many and key in the NP 
'many key points', which becomes more apparent if we substitute central or 
main' for 'key', as in 'many central points' and 'many main points'. This is 
because the words 'key', 'central' and ' main' refer to a unique referent or set of 
referents, whereas ' many' appears to imply nonuniqueness. The problem is solved 
by substituting, for example, 'the following' for 'many', as in 'the following key 
points’, since this preserves the uniqueness implicit in 'key'. This particular error 
is not insightfully explained in terms of th? organization of given-new information. 

3 3b is an extension of Prince's 1981 claim that discourse internally the more 
given NP is the more felicitous NP. She sees this as a condition on NPs alone, 
whereas there is reason to believe that it is a general constraint applying to all units 

of discourse. . 

<Only in discourse initial utterances is the constraint on new discourse less 

apparent, though there are constraints on the type of new that can be discourse ini- 
tial One is unlikely to start a conversation with something which, while it may be 
the crux of what one wishes to say, is nevertheless startlingly new when unprefaced 
with some more anticipated and conventional opening. For example, one is unlikely 
to open a conversation with the utterance ' A man got run over by a bus.’ 

1 



o 



142 



Aiha Tick* © 



’Further evidence for this is independently provided by the feet that a clause 
internal temporal adverb cannot be deictic, although it can be interpreted as being 
deictic in the discourse context in which it occurs when it is not inherently deictic. 
This is because an inherently deictic temporal adverb, as in lb below, codes a 
clausal relationship to die preceding clause, while canonical order does not do this: 

la. We got home at five. 

lb. # We took the children to the zoo then. 

lc. Then we took the children to the zoo. 

l d. We took the children to the zoo at five thirty. 

le. At five thirty we took the children to the zoo. 

In clause initial position in c, the deictic temporal adverb is felicitous in correlation 
with the fact that preposing word order-wise marks the structure as bonded to/look- 
ing back to the preceding discourse. In Id, the clause final adverb is felicitous be- 
cause it is not inherently deictic, but can be interpreted as being deictic in an appro- 
priate context; and this correlates with the fact that canonical order, though it does 

not code any coherent relationship to the preceding discourse, can be interpreted as 
relating back. 



REFERENCES 



Beaman, Karen. 1984. Coordination and subordination revisited: Syntactic com- 
plexity in spoken and written discourse. In Deborah Tannen (E.d.), Coher- 
ence in spoken and written discourse (pp. 45-80). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Chafe, W. 1976. Givenness, contrastiveness, definiteness, subjects and topics, and 
points of view. In Charles Li (Ed.), Subjects and topics (pp. 25-55). New 
York: Academic Press. 

Chafe, W. 1982. Integration and involvement in speaking, writing, and oral litera- 
ture. In Deborah Tannen (Ed.), Spoken and written language: Exploring oral- 
ity and literacy (pp. 35-53). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 



Clark, H. and Haviland, S. 1977. Comprehension and the given-new contract. In 
R. Freedle (Ed.), Discourse production and comprehension (pp. 1-40). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Halliday, M.A.K. 1974. What's new? Acquiring new information as a process in 
comprehension. Journal of Verbal Behaviour 13 (pp. 512-21). 

Halliday, M.A.K. 1976. Notes on transitivity and theme in English. Part 2. Journal 
of Linguistics 3 (pp. 199-244). 

Horn, L. 1978. Presupposition, theme et variations, (ms.) 

Kay, Paul. 1977. Language evolution and speech style. In Ben G. Blount and Mary 
Sanches (Eds.), Sociolinguistic dimension of language change (pp. 21-33). 
New York: Academic Press. 



Kuno, S. 1972. Functional sentence perspective: A case study. Linguistic Inquiry 
3:3 (pp. 269-320). 

Kuno, S. 1974. Lexical and contextual meaning. Linguistic Inquiry 5 (pp 469- 
477). 




15 3 



Seeking a Pedagogic ally Useful Understanding of Given-New 



143 



Kuno, S. 1978. Generative discourse analysis in America. In W. Dressier (Ed.), 
Current Trends in Text Linguistics (pp. 275-294). Berlin and New York: De 
Gruyter. 

Kuno, S. 1979. On the interaction between syntactic rules and discourse principles 
(ms.). 

Michaels, Sarah, and James Collins. 1984. Oral discourse styles: Classroom inter- 
action and the acquisition of literacy. In Deborah Tannen (Ed.) Coherence in 
spoken and written discourse (pp. 219-243). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Prince, E. F. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of given-new information. In P. Cole 
(Ed.), Radical pragmatics (pp.223-255). New York: Academic Press. 

Rader, Margaret. 1982. Context in written language: The case of imaginative fic- 
tion. In Deborah Tannen (pd.), Exploring orality and literacy (pp. 189-98). 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Scollon, Ron, and Suzanne B. K. Scollon. 1984. Cooking it up and boiling it down: 
Abstracts in Athabaskan children’s story retellings. In Deborah Tannen (Ed.), 
Coherence in spoken and written discourse (pp. 173-197). Norwood, NJ: 
Ablex. 



o 




154 



Pragmatics and Language Learning 
Monograph Series, Vol. 3, 1992 



The Telling of a Tale: 

Discourse Structure and Tense Use in Learners' Narratives 

Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig 



This paper demonstrates that the use of tense by learners of Eng- 
lish as a second language can best be understood from the perspective of 
narrative structure. Sixteen intermediate learners produced an oral and a 
written narrative by means of a story-retell task. Tense use in each nar- 
rative was evaluated by means of the occurrence in obligatory contexts 
in the narrative as a whole and separately for the background and the 
foreground of the narrative. The analysis of tense use and discourse 
structure showed that the majority of the learners used tense to distin- 
guish the foreground from the background, employing simple past tense 
in the foreground and present and base forms in the background. This 
study suggests that learners use their somewhat limited linguistic re- 
sources to construct narratives to their best advantage by marking the 
main story line. 

Narratives have been used in second language acquisition research as vehicles 
for the study of tense and aspect. In a narrative discourse "the speaker relates a 
series of real or Active events in the order in which they took place" (Dahl, 1984, p. 
116). The temporal point of reference of any one event in a narrative context is 
understood as following the event preceding it. So important is the concept of se- 
quentiality that narrative clauses may be defined by the interpretation of their order: 
"If a change in the order of the two clauses results in a change in the interpretation 
of what actually happened, then those two clauses are narrative clauses” (Schiffrin, 
1981, p. 47; see also Labov, 1972 and Labov & Valetzky, 1967). The sequential 
character of narratives provides a context in which it is possible to observe how 
second language learners use verbal morphology to report chains of events. This 
paper argues that tbe narrative is more than a carrier for tense. Understanding the 
structure of the narrative itself is the key to understanding the use of tense by lan- 
guage learners. 

The time reference of every clause in a narrative discourse is not always se- 
quentially ordered, as many linguists have observed. Narrative discourse is com- 
prised of two parts: the foreground and the background. The foreground relates 
events belonging to the skeletal structure of the discourse (Hopper, 1979) and con- 
sists of clauses which move time forward (Dry, 1983). The background does not 
itself narrate main events, but provides supportive material which elaborates on or 
evaluates the events in the foreground (Hopper, 1979). The purpose of this paper is 
to show that the development of tense use in interlanguage cannot be understood 
apart from the structure of the narrative. Moreover, this study suggests that learners 
their somewhat limited linguistic resources to construct their narratives to their 

ERIC 




Ditcoune Structure and Tenae Use in Learners' Narratives 



145 



best advantage in the same way that Hopper observes that competent (native) users 
of a language "mark out a main route through the narrative and divert in some way 
those parts of the narrative which are not strictly relevant to this route (1979, 
p.239). For some learners in this study, this is accomplished by marking the major- 
ity of the foreground actions with past tense and the majority of the background 
clauses in nonpast as in the following example from the narrative of an adult inter- 
mediate learner of English as a second language. 1 

(1) Foreground Background 

Punia shouted again. 

"If you take me to the rock, 

1 can live, and If you take 
me the sandy beach, I’ll die 
forever. " 

He isn't king, he was stupid 

He took Punia to the beech, 
so Punia was saved. 

After all, that Hawaiian people can 
eat every fish food they want. (LI 
Korean, Written Narrative) 

After a brief review of previous work, we will return to a detailed analysis of 
tense marking in narratives told by adult learners of English. 



PREVIOUS WORK 



Crosslinguistic investigations suggest that the distinction between back- 
ground and foreground may be a universal of narrative discourse (Hopper, 1979). 
Events reported in foreground clauses are understood to be sequential, but back- 
ground events are often out of sequence with respect to the foreground and to other 
background events. For example, a background clause may provide information 
necessary to the interpretation of an event by revealing a prior event (located before 
the narrated event on the time line), make a prediction about the outcome of an 
event (located after the event on the time line), or evaluate an action reported in the 
foreground (not located on the time line). Hopper observes that "one typically finds 
an aspect marker specialized for foregrounding, or one specialized for back- 
grounding, or both functions indicated" (1979, p.239). Tense markers may occur 
with aspectual markers. Because of its function, the background may exhibit a vari- 
ety of tenses such as pluperfect, remote past, future-perfect, and future which do not 
occur in the foreground, in the foreground, Hopper observes, successive events 
may be marked in the preterite or simple past (1979, p.239). Dahl observes that 
verbs in the foreground may also carry no marking: "it appears fairly natural that a 



156 



146 



Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig 



large number of languages. ..[Eskimo, Indonesian, Javanese, Sudanese, Kammu, 
Thai, Wolof, and Yoruba] use completely unmarked forms in narrative contexts" 
(1984, p. 117). 

In her examination of foreground and background in contemporary English 
literary narratives, Dry (1981, 1983) reported that foreground clauses are usually in 
the simple past or historical present. As in the foreground, the simple past is also the 
most prevalent verb form in the background clauses. Tokens of past perfect and 
progressive aspect also occur in the background. English does not rely primarily on 
tense or aspect markers to distinguish foreground from background. 

Wolfson (1979) and Schiffrin (1981) describe the use of the conversational 
historical present in spontaneous oral narratives. Schiffirin's detailed analysis of the 
use of conversational historical present in narratives indicates that native speakers 
of English switch tense only in the foreground, where Dahl (1984) and Hopper 
(1979) agree time reference is determined more by the narrative context than by 
tense itself. Schiffrin’s analysis shows that even when tense switching occurs, the 
simple past seems to be the dominant form (69 % of the verbs in the foreground were 
in the past). 

Studies in second language acquisition have also begun to investigate tense- 
aspect marking in the narratives of adult learners of English, although they are 
limited by the number of learners and offer apparently contradictory results 
(Kumpf, 1984; Flashner, 1989). Kumpf and Flashner found the division of narra- 
tive discourse into background and foreground revealing for an analysis of tense 
usage in interlanguage. Kumpf found that a Japanese learner of English used the 
base form of the verb to express completed action in the foreground. None of the 
foreground verbs carried tense marking. In the background, many morphologically 
marked verbs occurred. Stative verbs showed tense while active verbs were marked 
for habitual and continuous aspect, but were marked irregularly for tense. Kumpf s 
findings are similar to what Givdn (1982) reports for Hawaiian Creole. In contrast, 
Flashner found that three Russian learners of English marked foreground actions 
and left background portions unmarked. The foreground verbs occurred predomi- 
nantly in simple past with the background verbs being in predominantly base forms. 

The contradictory findings of these two studies concerning second language 
acquisition cannot be reconciled on the basis of narratives from four learners. This 
study builds on the previous studies by increasing the number of learners, including 
written as well as oral narratives, having the learners tell the same story to ensure 
comparability of content, and examining the narratives of classroom learners. 

METHOD 

Sixteen adult learners of English as a second language and twenty-four native 
speakers participated in this study. The learners were all intermediate level learners 
(eight low and eight high intermediate) as determined by the placement examination 
of the Intensive English Program at Indiana University. In each of the low and high 
intermediate groups there were four speakers of Arabic and one speaker of Spanish. 
The remaining six were native speakers of Korean, Chinese, and Japanese. 2 
O 



Discount Structure and Tense Use in Learners' Narratives 



t47 



The participants attended an oral telling of "Puma and the King of the 
Sharks,” a Hawaiian trickster tale from Twenty Tellable Tales by Margaret 
MacDonald. Learners were given a brief introduction to the story with pictures for 
the key words shark, lobster, and bay. Proper names and place names were written 
on the blackboard. The presentation was taped for playback. Participants heard the 
story twice: once live and once on tape. Learners retold the story individually to one 
member of the interview team and then wrote the stories later in their writing classes 
thereby producing both an oral and a written narrative. This same procedure was 
followed for the native speakers, but they produced only written narratives. 

In the story the hero, a boy named Punia, rids the bay of Kohala of the King 
of the Sharks and his followers by tricking them. As a result, he restores the use of 
the bay to the villagers. The tele has two major episodes: the elimination of the 
sharks from the bay and the final killing of the King of the Sharks. In the first part 
of the story, Punia tricks the sharks into eliminating one of their group. The story of 
this trick is told three times in detail and then a summary is given to cover the elimi- 
nation of the other six sharks. In the second half of the story, Punia takes on, and 
ultimately kills, the King of the Sharks. Learners were instructed to listen to the 
story carefully in order to discover how Punia tricked the sharks and saved his vil- 
lage. 

The foreground of the narrative was told exclusively in past tense with the 
exception of the direct speech used to announce the tricks. The background of the 
story was also told in past tense with three instances of past perfect. 

ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 

This section describes the use of tense in the narratives in two ways: first by 
describing the distribution of tense and second, by examining tense use in context. 

Tense Use: Overview 

In order to determine whether the categories of foreground and background 
are relevant to interlanguage narratives with respect to tense use, it is necessary to 
first have a profile of the learners’ overall tense use. Then tense use in the fore- 
ground and background can be analyzed to determine whether the profiles of the 
learners change when discourse organization is taken into account. 

Each verb in the narratives was coded for its verbal morphology and its con- 
text. Only verbs in past -time contexts were included in this analysis. This elimi- 
nated comments such as "Now, I’ll write this story," and infinitive clauses which 
carry no tense. Many learners included direct speech in their narratives following 
the original telling of the story, but only the verbs which introduce the speech such 
as say, told, and shouted, were considered to be in a past context. (See also Schiffrin 
1981 which codes the tense of the verbs of saying, but not the quotations them- 
selves.) 

Verbal morphology was divided into two broad categories, "past" and "non- 
past." Tokens of "past" forms consist essentially of simple past forms, but also 

158 



148 



Kathleen Bardovi-Hariig 



include a few instances of past progressive, past perfect, and the "past" modal could 
+ verb. 3 The nonpast forms waich are represented include base forms such as go 
and come , present tense form',, the "present" modal can + verb, and present per- 
fect. We may interpret the use of past morphology in the context of the narrative to 
be appropriate because both the performed narrative and the native-speaker written 
versions were exclusively in past tense. 4 * 5 

Rates of appropriate use 

The use of past tense by intermediate learners shows different levels of devel- 
opment in tense use among the individual learners. The use of past tense by the low 
intermediate group ranges from 31.8% to 60.6% of the finite verbs in oral produc- 
tion and from 30.4% to 89.5% in written production. The range of the past tense 
use for the high intermediate group is from 15.0% to 90.7% in the oral narratives 
and from 63.6% to 97.8 % in the written narratives. We see the most consistent use 
of past tense in the written narratives of the high intermediate group. A general 
profile of tense use for each learner is given in Table 1 for the oral and written 
narratives. 

In Table 1 the learners are arranged by their rates of appropriate use in the oral 
narratives. The low intermediate learners are identified by subject numbers 1-8. The 
letter following the subject number indicates the learner's first language, A(rabic), 
C(hinese), J(apanese), K(orean), and S(panish). Subject IS in the low intermediate 
group shows the highest rate of appropriate use in her group for the oral narratives 
and Subject 8K shows the lowest. The high intermediate learners are identified by 
subject numbers 9-16 with Subject 9S showing the highest rate of appropriate use in 
the oral narratives in her level and 16C the lowest. 



Table 1. Appropriate Use of Past Morphology In Past 
Time Contexts (in Percentages) 



Low Intermediate 




Learner 


Oral 


Written 


IS 


60.6 


89.5 


2C 


55.6 


87.1 


3K 


54.6 


45.8 


4A 


52.1 


30.4 


5A 


46.9 


88.9 


6A 


42.1 


44.8 


7A 


32.7 


80.0 


8K 


31.8 


533 



High Intermediate 
Learner Oral 


Written 


9S 


90.7 


963 


1QJ 


66.7 


3.6 


11A 


62.4 


97.8 


12A 


53.6 


74.4 


13A 


52.1 


87.2 


14A 


44.8 


79.4 


15K 


22.6 


86.7 


16C 


15.0 


87.; 




Discourse Structure sod Tense Use in Learners 1 Narratives 



149 



The main purpose for collecting oral and written versions of the narrative was 
to provide two means to test the learners' developing knowledge of tense use. We 
see from Table 1 that many learners showed improved rates of appropriate use of 
past tense in the written mode. Some learners, like 7 A, 15K, and 16C show very 
low rates of appropriate use (below 35 % accuracy) in the oral mode and rates at or 
above 8056 accuracy in the written mode.* Other learners show very similar rates in 
both conditions, and two learners, 3K and 4A, show somewhat lower rates of ap- 
propriate use in the written narratives compared to their oral ones. 

Discourse-sensitive and discourse-neutral tense use 

The collected narratives were next divided into foreground, the actual story 
line, and background, the supportive material which does not itself narrate the main 
events. Rates of use of past and nonpast forms were calculated separately for the 
background and foreground of each learner narrative. Recall the nonpast forms 
include base as well as present forms. Verbs were coded using the procedure out- 
lined above. When tense use in the foreground and background is examined sepa- 
rately, an interesting pattern of tense use for more than half of the learners is re- 
vealed: nine of the learners appear to be particularly sensitive to discourse organiza- 
tion in their use of tense. To simplify the description in this and the remaining sec- 
tions, the low and high intermediate learners will be treated as a single group. An 
effort will be made to note differences between the groups where they exist. 

Table 2 presents the percentage of the use of past and nonpast forms in the 
background and foreground of the narratives. Ora! and written versions are pre- 
sented separately. The learners have been divided into two groups according to the 
distribution of tense marking in the narratives. 7 The group whose tense usage seems 
to be sensitive to the background-foreground distinction is found under the heading 
"Discourse-Sensitive Tense Use" and the group whose tense use does not is found 
under the heading -Discourse-Neutral Tense Use." The division is made on the 
basis of the oral narrative because the other comparable learner narratives in previ- 
ous second language studies have been oral (Kumpf 1984; Flashner 1989). The 
numbers in parentheses give the number of finite verbs used by the learners in the 
foreground and the background. 

There are seven learners for whom discourse organization seems to make little 
difference in tense use in oral narratives. They are learners 2C, 4A, 7A, 9S, 14A, 
15K, and 16C, i.e, three Arabic learners, one Chinese, one Korean, and one Span- 
ish speaking learner. These learners show relatively consistent rates of appropriate 
use of past tense across foreground and background. Learner 2C, for example, 
shows 57. 1 % appropriate use of past in the foreground and 54.5% appropriate use 
in the background. This discourse-neutral use of tense seems to be possible at all 
levels of development. 9S shows consistent control of the past tense with an overall 
oral use of 90.7% and written use of 96.3%.’ Learner 15K shows relatively little 
control of tense in the oral narrative with 22.6% appropriate use overall. Learners 

like 2C and 4A show mid-level development. 

Nine learners show sensitivity to discourse organization in their use of tense. 
Learners in this group show a dramatic increase in the use of past or decrease in the 

160 



Kathleen Bardovi-Hariig 



Table 2. Orientation of Tease Use 
ORAL 

Foreground Background 
Past Non-past Past Non-past 



Discourse-Sensitive Use of Tense 


6A 77.8 223 (9) 


10.0 90.0 (10) 


IS 72.7 273 (22) 


36.4 63.6 (11) 


12A683 31.7 (41) 


133 86.7 (15) 


10J 66.7 333 (6) 


333 66.7 (3) 


3K 66.7 333 (9) 


463 53.8 (13) 


11A65.7 343 (70) 


46.7 533 (15) 


13A60.0 40.0 (40) 


20.0 80.0 (10) 


5A 56.4 43.6 (39) 


10.0 90.0 (10) 


8K 46.7 533 (15) 


— 100.0 (7) 


Discourse-Neutral Use of Tense 


9S 90.9 9.1 (33) 


90.0 10.0 (10) 


2C 57.1 42.9 (7) 


543 453 (11) 


4A 48.4 51.6 (31) 


52.9 47.1 (17) 


14A 44.4 55.6 (18) 


453 543 (11) 


7A 343 65.1 (43) 


223 77.8 (9) 


15K 28.6 71.4 (21) 


11.1 88.9 (10) 


16C273 72.7 (11) 


6.7 933 (15) 



WRITTEN 

Foreground Background 



Past 


Not* 


■past 


Past 


Non 


■past 


373 


623 


(14) 


50.0 


50.0 


(14) 


*92.6 


7.4 


(27) 


813 


18.2 


(11) 


*833 


16.7 


(36) 


28.6 


71.4 


( 7 ) 


*100.0 


-- 


(4) 


42.9 


57.1 


( 7 ) 


*773 


22.2 


(9) 


26.7 


733 


(15) 


100.0 


— 


(39) 


85.7 


143 


( 7 ) 


*91.4 


8.6 


(35) 


50.0 


50.0 


(4) 


00 

rH 

00 

* 


18.2 


(22) 


— 100.0 


(14) 


*623 


373 


(16) 


42.9 


57.1 


(14) 


100.0 


... 


(42) 


833 


16.7 


(12) 


78.9 


21.1 


(19) 


100.0 


... 


(12) 


28.6 


71.4 


(14) 


33 3 


66.7 


(9) 


90.9 


9.1 


(22) 


583 


41.7 


(12) 


90.9 


9.1 


(22) 


613 


383 


(13) 


*933 


63 


(32) 


53.8 


463 


(13) 


82.4 


17.6 


(17) 


100.0 


— 


( 7 ) 



16 1 



Discourse Structure ind Tense Use in Learners Narratives 



151 



use of nonpast in the «oreground compared to the background. A 50% increase or 
decrease was chosen arbitrarily as the cut off point for inclusion in the discourse- 
sensitive group. As an illustration, consider the distribution of tense forms in the 
oral narrative of learner 1 S . In this narrative, the past tense is used in 72.7 % of the 
foreground clauses, but in only 36.4% of the background clauses, a drop of one- 
half. Nonpast is used in 27.3 % of all foreground clauses, but increases to 63.6% m 
the background, an increase of over 50%. Four of the learners in this group, 6A, 
10J, 12A, and 13A, show near mirror-image rates of usage in tense across fore- 
ground and background in the oral narratives. By ’mirror image’ I mean that the 
rates of use for the past tense in the foreground are nearly the same as the rates of 
nonpast in the background and the rates of use of nonpast in the foreground is simi- 
lar to the rate of use of past in the background. In these narratives the dominance of 
one verb form is reversed in the foreground and background: past is the dominant 
form in the foreground and nor^ast is the dominant form in the background. Learn- 
ers 5A and 1 1A show the same pattern, but less dramatically. The oral narrative of 
learner 8K shows higher use of past in the foreground (46.7%) thru in the back- 
ground (no occurrence at all), but despite the increase in appropriate use, both fore- 
ground and background exhibit higher use of nonpast than past. All of these learners 
show discourse-sensitive use of tense, but the variation among learners suggests that 
a continuum of discourse sensitivity rather than a dichotomy might better describe 
learner tense use. 

Learners whose tense use seems to be sensitive to discourse organization in 
their oral narratives do not necessarily show the same distribution in the written nar- 
ratives. There were nine learners who showed discourse-sensitive use of tense in the 
oral narratives. Seven of these learners, IS, 3K, 5A, 8K, 10J, 12A, and 13A, show 
the same organization in the written mode. The remaining two learners are less 
sensitive to discourse organization in the written mode than in the oral mode. An 
additional learner (15K) who used past tense in only 28.6% of the foreground 
clauses in the oral narrative shows a strong preference for marking foreground verbs 
with past in the written narratives, with 93 .8 % of the foreground but only 53.8% of 
the background verbs in the past tense. The written narratives which show dis- 
course-sensitive use of tense are indicated with an asterisk in Table 2. 

To summarize, seven learners show discourse-sensitive use of tense in both 
oral and written modes, two learners are sensitive to discourse in only the oral 
mode, and another learner only in the written mode. Six learners show discourse- 
neutral use of tense in both modes. 

Distribution of tenses 

While the foreground can be characterized by higher rates of appropriate use 
of past tense as was shown in the previous section, the background is characterized 
by greater diversity of forms. This section examines the distribution of tense and 
aspect forms for all learners across foreground and background. Each verb in a past 
time context was coded for tense-nspect forms. In both oral and written conditions, 
verb forms in the foreground are essentially limited to past and base forms. In con- 



152 



Kathleen Bardovi-Hariig 



Table 3. Distribution of Verbal Morphology in Foreground and Background 
ORAL 



Foreground 






Background 






Total Finite Verbs 




415 


Total Finite Verbs 




177 


Past 


243 


58.6% 


Past 


59 


333% 


Simple 


232 


55.9% 


Simple 


44 


24.9% 


could + verb 


5 


12 % 


could + Verb 


6 


3.4% 


Past Prog 


1 


2 % 


Passive 


6 


3.4% 


was + Verb 


4 


1.0% 


Past Prog 


1 


.6% 


was be kill 


1 


.2% 


war + Verb 


2 


1.1% 


Base 


150 


36.1% 


Base 


48 


27.1% 


Present 


22 


53% 


Present 


67 


373% 


Simple 


17 


4.1% 


Simple 


49 


27.7% 


can + Verb 


4 


1.0% 


can + verb 


16 


9.0% 


Pres Prog 


1 


2 % 


Passive 


2 


1.1% 








Present Perfect 


3 


1.7% 


WRITTEN 












Total Finite Verbs 




372 


Total Finite Verbs 




171 


Past 


317 


853% 


Past 


108 


633% 


Simple 


295 


793% 


Simple 


84 


49.1% 


could + Verb 


7 


1.9% 


could + Verb 


8 


4.7% 


Past Prog 


8 


2.2% 


Past Prog 


6 


3.5% 


Passive 


4 


1.1% 


Passive 


7 


4.1% 


Past Perfect 


2 


3% 


Past Perfect 


1 


.6% 


war + Verb 


1 


3% 


Perfect Prog 


1 


.6% 








war + Verb 


1 


.6% 


Base 


50 


13.4% 


Base 


17 


9.9% 


Present 


5 


1.4% 


Present 


46 


26.9% 


Simple 


4 


1.1% 


Simple 


39 


22.8% 


can + Verb 


1 


3% 


can + Verb 


7 


4.1% 




163 



Discourse Structure and Tense Use in Learners' Narratives 



153 



trast, the background exhibits the use of present tense in addition to past and base 
forms. In fact, the use of present tense exceeds the use of the base form. In the oral 
narratives the present tense is used as frequently as the past. 

Each major category is listed in bold face with the number of verbs in each 
category and the percentage of use of the form relative to the total number of verbs. 
Included under the heading of "Past" are simple past forms which constitute the 
majority of verbs in this category, the use of could + verb, past passive, past pro- 
gressive, past perfect, and misformations which are interpretable as carrying past 
morphology such as was kill or was do . Base forms show no alternation. Present 
forms are generally suaple present, but also include the use of can + verb, and 
present passive. The verbs put> which occurred five times, and cut which occurred 
once, were eliminated from the corpus since they are ambiguous between base and 
past forms. A second ambiguity arose with nonpast verbs with third person plural 
subjects. Because only the third person singular in the present tense is overtly 
marked in English, all occurrences of third person plural forms are ambiguous be- 
tween base forms and present forms. Of the 1,153 verbs in the corpus, 16 or 1.4% 
fell into this category. They were all coded as base forms. 

Background clauses include active and stative verbs. Stative verbs make up 
34.9% of the verbs in the background. Of the 122 stative verbs, 44.3% appear in 
the past and 55.7 % in the present. Although statives are not predominantly present, 
present verbs are predominantly stative, with 73.9% of the 88 present tense verbs 
being stative. 

In summary, the foreground is characterized by the relative higher rates of ap- 
propriate use of the past tense while the background shows lower rates of appropri- 
ate use of past and greater diversity of forms. The present tense, which is virtually 
absent in the foreground, appears in the background clauses of both the oral and 
written narratives. The previous sections have examined the distribution of tenses in 
the narratives and have shown that tense distribution is best understood in terms of 
discourse structure. The following section examines how tense is employed in the 
context of the unfolding narrative. 

Tease Use in the Narrative Context 

The effect of marking the foreground in past and the background in nonpast 
seems to be a heightened distinction of the narrative line. This section illustrate how 
learners use tense to structure their narratives. 

Background 

To better illustrate how tense is used at various points in the texts we adopt the 
five background categories used by Schiffrin (1981): orientation, embedded orien- 
tation, abstract, external evaluation, and coda. 

Orientation: setting the scene . The introduction is the one background device 
that all learners employed in the oral and written narratives. The first orientation of 
the narrative sets the scene for the story. Among the nine learners who show dis- 

164 



154 



Kathleen Bardovi-Hartig 



course-sensitive use of tense in their oral narratives, four (5A, 6A, 8K, and 10J) 
show exclusive use of nonpast forms in the introductory orientation as shown in 
Examples (2) and (3). In the passages below, the learners employ the present perfect 
to provide background in the background itself. 

(2) Uh there are uh, a boy, uh, living uh with uh his mother. His father have 
been killed, uh, by uh the King of the Sharks. And uh villager, villagers 
in uh his uh village cannot uh take uh lobster from the bay because there 
is, there are sharks living in the in the bay. And uh, the boy this boy he 
wants to, he get uh borink from the sweet potato and I???] to eat because 
he wants to [ti] to eat uh lobster, 

And he decided to take a lobster from the bay [first foreground event] 

(Learner 5A; oral) 

(3) Punias live live in [llvl], mother? Uh, uh [hi] his father has been killed 
by sharks because uh, they, Punia's country country is in the bays, in 
their ocean has many ten sharks, 

One day his mother wanted to eat lobster [first foreground event] 

(Learner 8K; oral) 

These introductions are immediately followed by a past tense verb in the first com- 
plicating action clause as seen in the examples. The remaining five learners showed 
mixed use of tense in the introductions of the oral narratives as shown in Example 

(4). Four out of five of these orientations are immediately followed by a past tense 
verb in the first complicating action clause. 

(4) OK. In Kohala there were ten, ah, ten, ah, ten arks? Sharks. And then 

nobody can go to the beach. So they just, uh, eat potato and uh, some, 
uh, some food. But, uh, the the lobster the lobster uh, lobsters were in 
the water and nobody can reach it. (Learner 13A; oral) 

In the nine written narratives which show discourse-sensitive use of tense, seven 
show mixed tense use and two show exclusive use of past. 

Embedded orientation . A second type of scene setting is the embedded orien- 
tation which occurs in the body of the narrative. Six of the oral narratives exhibit 
embedded orientation clauses. Embedded orientation clauses are predominately 
nonpast with 83.3% (10/12 verbs) occurring in nonpast forms. 



(S) And he told him. . . 
he has a bag with him 
when he dived in the sea. . 




complicating action 
embedded orientation 
complicating action 

(Learner 11 A; oral) 




Diicounc Structure and Tense 



Use in Learners* Narratives 



155 



(6) And uh, every day he did complicating action 
that. The, uh, last day, King 
of the Shark, 

his name is Qualaiku embedded orientation 

uh, he uh, Punia's, uh Punia's complicating action 

uh tell him uh... (Learner 8K; oral) 

Six of the written narratives employ embedded orientation clauses, and they are 

evenly split between past forms and nonpast forms. 

Abstracts. Abstracts, clauses which announce and summarize upcoming 
events, seem to have no particular tense preference. Four learners employed ab- 
stracts in their oral narratives. Of the five verbs used, three were in nonpast, one m 
past, and one, put in Example (7), was ambiguous. Four learners used abstracts in 
their written narrative. (Only two learners used abstracts in both oral and written 
modes.) Of the four verbs used, three were in past tense. All abstracts were added 
by the learners; the original narrative had no examples of abstracts. 

(7) and he, he pul a trick for the sarks. 

He get a big he got a big rock and . . . (Learner IS; oral) 

(8) The boy used two decives for the king of the shark 

(Learner 5A; written) 



(9) Punia had a good idea. 
He tricks for sharks 



(Learner 15K; written) 



External evaluation. An external evaluation "comments on and interprets 
events for the audience from a perspective outside the narrative action" (Schiffnn, 
1981 , p. 49). Like abstracts, external evaluations show no tense preference. Of the 
eight verbs used in all the evaluations, four were nonpast and four were P**- Ab- 
stracts were not common in the oral narratives with only one token shown in (10) 
where the narrator indicates that what Punia has said is not true. 



(10) Then he said, ah, complicating action 

"Karara. 1 trapped you. Eh, one of your, 
ah sharks told me that was the ninth one. .. 
but but no is, ah, no is. external evaluation 

(Learner 13 A; oral) 



There were five external evaluations in three of the eight written narratives which 
showed discourse-sensitive use of tense. Like Example (), Example () comments on 
the tricks which are a particularly difficult part of the narrative. In order to tnck the 
sharks, the boy says one thing and does another. The storytellers have marked some 

of the tricks explicitly. 



186 



156 



Kathleen Bardovi-Hariig 



(11) He was liaer (Learner 5 A; written) 

(12) He isn t king, he was stupid. (Learner 8K; written) 

The evaluation in (12) also refers to a trick, but this time to the king's reaction to it. 
The storyteller tells us that the king is stupid, and perhaps that he is not worthy to be 
king. As in the case of the abstracts, outside evaluations were added by the learners. 

Codas. Narratives are "optionally closed with a coda which ends the story and 
returns the listener to the present" (Schiffrin 1981, p. 49). Codas end the majority 
of the discourse-sensitive oral narratives (eight of the nine retellings have codas) 
and almost half of the written narratives (four of the nine). As shown in Examples 

(13) - (15), nonpast forms appear to dominate the codas. In the codas of oral narra- 
tives, 75% of the verbs are nonpast and 71.4% of the coda verbs in the written 
narratives are in nonpast. 

(13) then after, then uh their countries uh his countries people uh can make 

fishfood. (Learner 8K; oral) 

(14) The people go back to the beach and do anything 

(Learner 6A; oral) 

(15) so all sharks are gone and all animals and people thank for Puriia. Hawaii 

was very peaceful place. (Learner 15K; written) 

Among the background sections, the opening segments (the introductory ori- 
entation) and the closing segments (the codas) are frequently in nonpast. Embedded 
orientations, external evaluations, and abstracts occur about evenly in past and 
non past verb forms. 

Foreground . 

The foreground appears to be more homogeneous than the background with 
respect to tense use. There is one point where there is expected tense change, how- 
ever, and that is in the reports of direct speech. 

Direct speech . Direct speech occurs frequently throughout the original Punia 
narrative and the learners' narratives. The use of direct speech is quite common in 
narratives in general (Schiffrin, 1981; Wolfson, 1978; Tannen, 1990). In the Punia 
narrative, direct speech is the device by which the tricks are announced and much of 
the speech is in the nonpast. "Direct thought* is included with direct speech because 
it serves the same function of announcing the tricks. The report of direct speech 
presents a potential challenge to the learners because it necessitates a purposeful 
tense change from the past tense which dominates the narrative line to nonpast 
forms as in the following examples. 







167 



Discourse Structure end Tense Use in Lesmers 1 Narratives 



157 



(16) and he told the king of the sark, "If you bite me, my mother come to see, 
and come to save, but if you, em, swallow me whole, I'm gonna die for 
forever. " And the King of the the Sarks, swallow, mm the boy. 

(Learner IS; oral) 

(17) Punia said, "I will go to bring some [blta] to my mother's dinner." He 

went there he swim the beach. . . (Learner 1 1 A; oral) 

(18) Punia called Ka-ale-ale and he told the shark, "I go to the sea and I get a 
lobster. If you swallow me and you bite me, I will die. Ka-ale-ale 
thought and the shark decide didn't bite him but swallowed him 

(Learner 15K; written) 

The use of past tense in the clauses before direct speech is higher than the total 
use of past tense throughout the oral narratives. This holds true for all learners, not 
just those who show discourse-sensitive use of tense. The use of past tense follow- 
ing direct speech is higher than the use of past overall in the oral narratives, and 
about the same in the written narratives. In the oral narratives, 91.8% of the direct 
speech is introduced by a past tense verb. The overall use of past in the oral narra- 
tives is 5 1 .0% . Direct speech is followed by a past tense verb in 78. 1 % of all cases. 

In the texts which show discourse-sensitive use of tense, the same pattern emerges: 
past tense is used to set off direct speech. A comparison of the use of past tense 
preceding and following direct speech to the learners' use of past tense in the fore- 
ground shows that the use of past tense introducing direct speech is 93.8%, follow- 
ing direct speech is 78.1 %, and in the foreground overall is 58.3%. In the written 
narratives, the use of past tense is higher so there is no difference in the overall rate 
of use between the narrative or narrative foreground and the use of past following 
direct speech. The use of the past to introduce direct speech is still higher than the 
use of past in general. For the entire group in the written narratives, 88.4% of the 
instances of direct speech are introduced by past tense compared to 78.3% of the 
clauses in past time contexts in the narrative overall. For the discourse-sensitive 
group, 100% of the instances of direct speech were introduced by the use of past 
tense, and 86.2% of the foreground clauses exhibited past tense. 

Summary 

Within the background, nonpast is particularly common in the introductions 
and in the codas, the portions of the narrative which form the boundaries of the 
story . The scene of the story is set in nonpast, base or present, seemingly apart from 
the time of the action of the narrative. The codas, whose purpose it is to bring the 
audience back to the present, do so by using nonpast forms. Native speakers seem to 
do this by using the past with adverbial., such as forever and from that time on. Just 
as the use of past and nonpast forms distinguishes the foreground from the back- 
ground, the high concentration of past forms before direct speech functions to mark 
ti change in voice from the narrator to one of the characters. 

168 




158 



Kathleen Bardovi-Hariig 



DISCUSSION 



In his crosslinguistic study. Hopper claimed that "from a discourse viewpoint 
tense-aspect becomes intelligible" (1979, p.239). It is no surprise that the use of 
verbal morphology by learners of English can also best be understood from the 
perspective of discourse structure. The rates of appropriate use of past tense in past 
time contexts in the foreground are often higher than the rates of appropriate use in 
the narrative overall, and in the background. The use of tense to distinguish the 
narrative line from the background is more pronounced for some learners than oth- 
ers. But all learners showed a greater variety of tenses in the background than in the 
foreground, with the notable addition of the present in the background. Although 
the original story was told with only past tense forms and all but one of the native- 
speaker narratives used exclusively past forms, learners may respond to the non- 
sequential nature of the background by using non-past forms. 

Discourse-sensitive use of tense seems to be common to classroom learners 
examined here and the non-classroom learners reported on in previous studies. Such 
use of tense is also common to both the oral and written mode. The eleven learners 
in this study who showed discourse-sensitive use of tense seem to show similar use 
to the three Russian speakers reported on in Flashner (1989): the use of past forms 
in the foreground, and nonpast in the background. Flashner concluded that the pat- 
tern of usage in the native speakers of Russian represented an instance of transfer 
from the Russian aspectual system to the developing interlanguage. Although trans- 
fer may be a contributing factor in the case of the Russian learners of English, in 
this study we see that speakers of a particular language do not necessarily pattern 
alike with respect to discourse-sensitive tense use: no single language group was ex- 
clusively discourse-sensitive or discourse-neutral. 

These learners' use of past tense to mark foreground clauses and nonpast to 
mark background clauses contrasts with the use of verbal morphology found by 
Kumpf for one Japanese learner of English and by Giv6n for Hawaiian Creole in 
which speakers morphologically marked verbs in the background, but did not mark 
verbs in the foreground. Both systems seem to be consistent with Hopper's observa- 
tion that languages may have specialized markers for either foreground or back- 
ground or both. 

The use of tense to mark foreground and background may reflect a learner's 
level of development. The learners in this study are all intermediate learners, but we 
may extrapolate to beginning and advanced levels. Schumann (1987) reported that 
basilang learners (very low level learners) do not use tense forms systematically to 
make semantic distinctions in tense or aspect. Schumann rejects the possibility that 
foreground or background information is distinguished in the narratives he exam- 
ined. On the other end of development is native-speaker English, which does not 
rely primarily on tense or aspect markers to distinguish foreground from back- 
ground. This means that intermediate learners of English will have to abandon an 
apparently functional and systematic use of tense in order to achieve native-like 
competence in the language. Consider the most advanced learner in the study, 9S, 
who shows consistently high use of past tense in foreground and background (at 
O 




Discourse Structure and Tense Use in Learners' Narratives 



159 



least 90% in foreground and background of the oral narrative, and 100% in the 
foreground and 83.3% in background of the written narrative). This high rate of 
usage of past tense in foreground and background is necessary to achieve target-like 
use of tense in English narratives of the type in this study. We may hypothesize that 
after a period of unsystematic use of verbal morphology, discourse-sensitive learn- 
ers may first use past tense in foreground clauses and subsequently generalize it to 
background clauses. Cross-sectional or longitudinal data are necessary to test this 
hypothesis. 

An additional question for future research is whether the verbal morphology 
which ostensibly appears to be tense marking is in fact tense, or aspect, or a transi- 
tional form. Andersen (1991), Robison (1990), Kumpf (1984), and Flashner (1989) 
argue that early use of what is tense morphology in the target language may be an 
aspectual marker in interlanguage. Analysis of the aspectual class of the verbs in the 
foreground and background would help to determine whether the learners use target 
tense morphology to mark aspectual classes. Cross-sectional or longitudinal narra- 
tive data would help to determine whether learners are in a transitional stage from 
using tense as an aspectual marker to using tense as a tense marker in a target-like 
manner. 

In summary, we have shown that the use of tense by adult intermediate-level 
learners of English can be best understood through the discourse structure of the 
narrative. Although the interlanguage narratives examined do not exhibit elaborate 
tense systems, some learners do seem to use verbal morphology systematically. 
Learners employ newly developing, and thus limited, linguistic resources to delimit 
the main story line and the background information, guiding the listener or reader 
through the narrative as they tell their tales. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

1 thank Dudley Reynolds for his assistance in collecting and transcribing the 
data, and for his helpful discussion; Laurie Knox and Dan Reed for their help with 
collecting the narratives; and Maik Garton and Kate Ivester for transcribing the oral 
narratives. This study was supported by National Science Foundation Grant BNS- 
8919616. 

THE AUTHOR 

Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig is Assistant Professor of Linguistics at Indiana Uni- 
versity. She has published in the areas of second language acquisition, pragmatics, 
and teacher education. She investigates the acquisition of grammatical systems by 
adult second language learners and the development of pragmatic competence. 

NOTES 



O 




'The original spelling and punctuation 
the examples. 

170 



from the learner texts are presented in 



160 



Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig 



*D ,ere is some evidence that the retelling of the story may have been difficult 
for some learners. Twenty-two learners, thirteen low intermediate and nine high 
intermediate, heard the story. Of those, 16 completed the oral re-t*!l. Five low in- 
termediate students (four native speakers of Japanese and one native speaker of 
Chinese) and one high intermediate native speaker of Chinese did not produce an 
oral narrative when interviewed. This changed the balance of the Lis represented in 
the sample. 

’There were no conditional uses of could. These were strictly instances of 
could meaning 'was/were able to.’ 

The one exception was one NS narrative written almost entirely in historical 
present: 82.6% (29/35 verbs) were in the present. Schiffrin observes that narratives 
entirely in historical present are relatively rare (1981, p. 51). 

’Native speaker narratives were collected to determine what tense native 
speakers would use in this task. Further comparisons between native-speaker and 
learner narratives are beyond the scope of this paper. 

‘It is unlikely that the pronunciation of the past tense alone causes the differ- 
ence in past tense use in the oral and written narratives of these three learners be- 
cause 72.0% of the foreground verbs have irregular past tense target forms which 
do not have word-final consonant clusters. 

Ht is likely that two groups is a simplification. Future work may show that 
there is a continuum of sensitivity to discourse organization with respect to tense. 

‘Based on the written narratives of the 24 native speakers which show consis- 
tent se of past forms throughout, we may say that learner 9S, with the lowest use of 
nonpast forms of any learner in the study, exhibits the most target-like production. 

REFERENCES 

Andersen, R. (1991). Developmental sequences: The emergence of aspect marking 
in second language acquisition. In C. A. Ferguson & T. Huebner (eds.) Sec- 
ond Language Acquisition and Linguistic Theories (pp. 305-324). Amster- 
dam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 

Dahl, O. (1984). Temporal distance: Remoteness distinctions in tense-aspect sys- 
tems. In B. Butterworth, B. 

Comrie, & O. Dahl (Eds.), Explanations for language universal (pp. 105-22). 
Berlin: Mouton. 

Dry, H. (1981). Sentence aspect and the movement of narrative time. Text, 1, 233- 
40. 

Dry, H. (1983). The movement of narrative time. Journal of Literary Semantics, 
12, 19-53. 

Flashner, V. E. (1989). Transfer of Aspect in the English oral narratives of native 
Russian Speakers. In H. Dechert & M. Raupauch (Eds.), Transfer in lan- 
guage production (pp. 71-97). Norwood, MJ: Ablex 
Giv6n, T. (1982). Tense-aspect-modality: The Creole prototype and beyond. In P. 
J. Hopper (Ed.), Tense and aspect: Between semantics and pragmatics (pp. 

1 15-63). Typological studies in languages 1. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 

ERIC 




Discourse Structure and Tense Use in Learners’ Narratives 



161 



Hopper, P. J. (1979). Aspect and foregrounding in discourse. In T. Givdn (Ed.), 
Discourse and syntax (pp. 213-41). Syntax and Semantics, 12. New York: 
Academic Press. 

Kumpf, L. (1984). Temporal systems and universality in interlanguage: A case 
study. In F. Eckman, L. Bell, & D. Nelson (Eds.), Universab of second 
language acquisition (pp. 132-43). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 

Labov, W. (1972). The transformation of experience in narrative syntax. In W. 
Labov (Ed.), Language in the inner city (pp. 354-96). Philadelphia: Univer- 
sity of Pennsylvania Press. 

Labov, W., & Waletzky, J. (1967). Narrative analysis: Oral versions of personal 
experience. In J. Helm (Ed.), Essays on the verbal and visual arts (pp. 12- 
44). Seattle: University of Washington Press. 

Robison, R. E. (1990). The primacy of aspect: Aspectual marking in English 
Interlanguage. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 12, 315-30. 

Schiffrin, D. (1981). Tense variation in narrative. Language, 57, 45-62. 

Schumann, J. (1987). The expression of temporality in basilang speech. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 9, 21-41. 

Tannen, D. (1989). Talking voices: Repetition, dialogue, and imagery in conversa- 
tional discourse. Studies in interactional sociolinguistics 6. Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press. 

Wolfson, N. (1979). The conversational historical present alternation. Language, 
55. 168-82. 



Pragmatic* and Language Laarmag 
Monograph Sanaa, Vo*. 3, 1992 



Pragmatics of Elusive Languages 

Salikoko S. Mufwene 



The term "pragmatics" is used in this paper insofar as it may subsume the eth- 
nography of communication, especially in discussing factors such as identity of the 
code qua language variety 1 and of the speakers. This position is suggested particu- 
larly by the characterization of the field's subject matter as the "relation of signs to 
(their) interpreters" and "the psychological, biological, and sociological phenom- 
ena which occur in the functioning of signs" (Morris 1938: 6 & 108, cited by, e.g., 
Levinson 1983: 1-2 and Horn 1988: 1 16). I am concerned primarily with the socio- 
logical aspect of the discipline, focusing on the identity of the "code. " 

Since I do not discuss aspects of what has been commonly characterized as 
"language use" relative either to context 2 or to the psychological disposition of the 
speaker (e.g., Levinson 1983, Green 1989), this paper may be perceived as dealing 
with the periphery of pragmatics. 3 Such a position is justified only if it is assumed 
that the identity of the code is generally unequivocal. One of the points of this paper 
is that there are several cases where the code is not clearly identifiable. Unless some 
assumptions about language are abandoned, for instance, that it is a monolithic 
system (cf. Mufwene 1991a), pragmatics as the study of signs relative to their inter- 
preters is hard to apply to such cases. 

My discussion focuses on the African American English vernacular (AAEV) 
and Gullah (the American creole spoken on the coast of Georgia and South Caro- 
lina). Attempting sometimes to generalize, I refer in passing to particularly Jamai- 
can and Guyanese Creoles. All these language varieties have been defined typically 
by their basilects, i.e. , those varieties projected by creolists to contain the maximum 
number of morphosyntactic and semantic features that distinguish them from their 
lexifiers. However, the reality that the field investigator is usually confronted with 
is that of variable, nonmonolithic systems safely characterized by creolists as "mes- 
olectal." 4 They show variable morphosyntactic and semantic kinship to the lexifier 
and display a lot of structural heterogeneity and formal alternatives for the same 
functions, with some of the alternatives being like those found in the lexifier and 
others the same as in the putative basilect. For the investigator who assumes the 
basilect to have ever existed and associates the mesolectal reality with decreolization 
(as claimed by, e.g., DeCamp 1971 and Bickerton 1973 but disputed by, e.g., 
Mufwene 1987, 1991b, 1991d and Lalla and D'Costa 1990), there are definitely 
cases where it cannot be decided whether or not AAEV or Gullah, as opposed to 
English, is being spoken. It is on account of such uncertainties, too numerous to be 
ignored, that the adjective "elusive" is predicated of these language varieties in this 
paper. I argue at the end that the adjective can also be predicated of other language 
varieties. 

The question addressed here does not boil down to a simple matter of bound- 
ary indeterminacy. It is not really that of where AAEV or Gullah ends and its lexi- 

162 



Pragmatics of Eiusivc Language j 



163 



fier or acrolect begins. 5 It is rather that of whether the absence of some basilectal 
features, or their alternation with some features of the lexifier suggests code-mixing 
(i.e. , discourse-contained dilution of the creole or AAEV with the acrolect or lexi- 
fier) or simply decreolization (i.e., an ongoing systematic departure from the 
basilect toward the acrolect). This question dates back from the time DeCamp 
(1971) presented the Jamaican Creole variation data in Table 1, explained below m 

his own words: 



As a demonstration, Table 1 presents a 'continuum’ consisting of seven 
speakers, each of which differs from the other six by one or more of six 
features. This mini-continuum is not hypothetical. The seven infor- 
mants are selected from those interviewed in my survey of 142 Jamaican 
i mmuni ties, and the six features are among the many which define the 
continuum of Jamaican English. The feature [ + A] indicates habitual 
use of the word child ; [-A] indicates use of pikni or pikini in equivalent 
contexts. [+D] indicates a phonological contrast in such pairs as den/ 
then ; [-D] indicates a lack of this contrast. [+F] indicates the use of 
didn't in negative past-tense constructions, [-F] the use of various alter- 
natives such as no ben, ho did (DeCamp 1973: 355). 



TABLE 1 



Features 

+A child -A pikni 
+B eat -B nyam 
+C /0 ~ t/ -C /t/ 

+D /5 ' d/ -D /d/ 

+E granny -E nana 
+F didn’t -F no ben 



Speakers 
1. +A +B 


+C -D 


+E 


+F 


2. -A 


+B 


-C -D 


+E 


+F 


3. -A 


+B 


-C -D 


-E 


-F 


4. -A 


-B 


-C -D 


-E 


-F 


5. +A 


+B 


+C +D 


+E 


+F 7 


6. +A 


+B 


-C -D 


+E 


+F 


7. -A 


+B 


-C -D 


+E 


-F 




DeCamp interpreted this continuum as suggesting decreolization. This ap- 
roach was later on applied to Guyanese Creole by Bickerton (1973), focusing on 
ie complementizer, on the copula and copula-like items, and on the third person 
ngular pronominal forms as grammatical variables. He reached the same conclu- 
ion as DeCamp, proposing an implicational scale that has been questioned y 
Lomaine (1982), Le Page and Tabouret-Keller (1985), and recently by in or 
1990).* Applied to Gullah’s variation data such as below, one might also assume 
mistakenly as far as 1 am concerned - see below) that this language is decreolizing: 



(l)a. ha« yi/yu da du? ’How are you doing?’ 
how you CURATIVE do 

b. ha v yi/yu da duxn? 

c. ha: yi dum 



174 



164 



S»likoko Mufveoe 



(2) a. we yu doz wok? 'Where do you work?' 

where you HABIT work 

b. we yu do wok? [extension of the durative for habits] 

c. we yu wakm? [sane as (2b)] 

d. we yu wok? 

(3) a. a tel Am ( fo ) d& k/m 'I told him/her not to come.' 

b. a tel Si (fo) dd kAa 'I told her not to come. 

Since DeCamp (1971) it has generally been assumed that decreolization has 
been facilitated by the coexistence of the creole with its lexifier and by socioeco- 
nomic mobility (due in part to mass education), which has given creole speakers 
more and more exposure to the acrolect and more and more motivation and oppor- 
tunity to acquire it in an apparently replacive manner. However, while the hypothe- 
sis has found support in inter-individual variation (one interpretation of the contin- 
uum), its weakest part, based on the mistaken assumption of a monolithic system, 
has lain in intra-individual variation. The same speaker may alternate freely be- 
tween iwo or more forms or constructions in the same speech event, talking to the 
same addressee and about the same topic. For instance, the subjective pronoun Si 
may be coindexed in the same utterance with the possessive hi, as in Si gen fo 

si hibAbo 'she went/has gone to see her brother'. 

To further illustrate intra-individual variation, two examples from my early 
field work may be cited here. In the first, an informant identified here only as MI 
reacted to somebody's comment with fieri fiel ' ve ry well. '* About a minute later 
MI was saying /veri wtl/ , suggesting either that both productions are free 
variants or that the former alternative is a salient feature (as used by Trudgill 1986) 
that she may not have wanted to be stigmatized with in my presence. However, re- 
garding the second interpretation, one must ask why she did not try to conceal so 
many other features in her speech that are equally salient. 10 

The second example is that of a ninety-year-old man who was recounting to 
me his frustration about getting his paycheck from one of his foremen when he used 
to work and his persistence in waiting for his pay. In the same speech event he said 
(4a) first and later (4b), which suggests that he was not trying to sound more Eng- 
lish-like. I have added alternative (4c) also because it is a common construction 
problem, even though he did not use it. 

(4)a. a w3n Am fo pe f mi mi oahi (MB) 

I want him to pay me my money. 

b. a w3 fo hi p& mi mi mAni (MB) 

c. a w 3 hi p& mi mi mnni 



There is in fact another alternative, presented separately in (5) simply because 
it is less common; I obtained it only by elicitation: 



3 

ERIC 



(5) a w3 fo hi fo pc' mi mi mAnx 

175 



The Pragmatics of Elusive Languages 



165 



It is disputable whether some of the alternatives in examples (1*4) suggest de- 
creolization at all. Nonetheless, these instances of intra-individual variation have 
been interpreted in the same way as inter-individual variation, i.e., as reflecting 
change in progress. The hypothesis remains questionable in the absence of dia- 
chronic evidence. It is more questionable when one realizes that even standard va- 
rieties of languages such as English offer a certain amount of stable variation that 
suggests no change in progress. A case in point is relative clauses, which, since the 
Old English days, have been introduced alternatively with relative pronouns or a 
complementizer. Although it might be argued that relative clauses starting with 
relative pronouns are somewhat restricted to written style, there is in this style a 
certain amount of inter-individual variation regarding restrictive relative clauses 
with which and alternatives with that . There are speakers who use that only in those 
cases where which may be used and there others for whom such a constraint does not 
apply; they use it even when the head noun refers to a human, as in the lady that we 
just met. 11 

Another example may be cited from delimiting nouns in number and counta- 
bility. Some American traffic signs vary in this respect from state to state. For in- 
stance, it is more typical to read Watch for falling rock in West Virginia than in 
Pennsylvania, where the typical sign is Watch for falling rocks. Truck crossing is 
how the sign reads in South Carolina, whereas in Georgia it is Trucks entering high- 
way. Georgia is somewhat inconsistent because it also has a sign that says Car enter- 
ing road. Louisiana and Mississippi have a sign that reads Bridge may ice in cold 
weather (more or less like Georgia with one that reads Bridge may ice in winter ) , 
while North Carolina's sign says Bridges may be icy. 

The alternation between individuated indefinite plural delimitation for ge- 
neric reference and nonindividuated delimitation for reference to mass may also be 
observed in colloquial English in constructions such as Jane likes Jruit/fruits and 
she eats cake/cakes and admission/admissions office , with the slight semantic dis- 
tinctions between the alternates often overlooked by the relevant speakers. 

The point of invoking these English examples is primarily to show that free 
variation exists everywhere which need not be associated with change. The hasty as- 
sociation of variation with decreolization in creole studies simply begs the question 
most of the time. Few creolists have seen in such creole variation something other 
than change. Particularly worth citing in connection with this are Le Page and 
Tabouret-Keller (1985). Capitalizing on individual speakers, they interpret their 
variable linguistic choices as "a series of acts of identity in which people reveal both 
their personal identity and their search for social roles'* (14). They argue that 

To the extent that it does not derive from factors inherent in the linguis- 
tic. systems — such as the assimilation of sounds to one another in certain 
environments — such variability may be ascribed to us fluctuating in 
imitating the usage of the group or groups with which we wish to iden- 
tify; it is not necessarily a symptom of change in the ' language’ (199). 



0 




178 



166 



Stlikoko MufWene 



Language itself is presented in the book as an elusive, a not "clearly-definable 
external object" (247). To the extent that speakers command a range of variable 
features, the selections are indicative of the identities they wish to assume based on 
presumably their stereotypes of linguistic behavior in the community. 

For those that had done field research on stigmatized language varieties, Le 
Page and Tabouret-Keller's interpretation has some appeal, especially since some 
will not speak AAEV or Gullah (naturally) before outsiders to their communities. I 
can testify to this with one of my guides on Johns and Wadmalaw Islands in South 
Carolina. The longer we worked tog< (her (over several months) the more comfort- 
able she felt about speaking Gullah and the more basilectal forms she used in her 
speech not with me but with the informants. 

In a way, my guide's linguistic adjustment is true even of informants who 
have not learned much English and may be characterized as speaking only creole: 
talking to the outsider, either they talk less or their speech becomes somewhat dis- 
tant from the putative basilect. In the case of speech modification, the following 
question must certainly be addressed: is the speech adjustment simply a matter of 
"acts of identity" or is it rather, or also, a matter of accommodating the outsider, 
making sure that they can understand? 

Here too, analogies are not lacking in English. In comparison to my guide and 
other Gullah or AAEV speakers, one might cite, for instance, educated Southerners 
in the USA who conceal their salient southern features when interacting with non- 
Southemers (especially outside the South). One might also invoke cases where na- 
tive speakers of any language naturally accommodate foreigners in omitting from 
their speech some forms and idioms not necessarily because they are not standard 
but simply because they want conversation to be more successful. In the latter case, 
it is implausible to invoke "act of identity," rather than simple accommodation to 
the addressee, to account for speech variation. That is, though "act of identity" is 
undoubtedly a valid explanation in many cases where speakers adjust their speech, it 
does not apply universally and probably not to all instances where the language 
varieties claimed to be elusive here vary in the direction of the acrolect. 

Given that most native speakers vary their speech, the following questions 
arise: Does the fact that African Americans who are stereotypically associated with 
AAEV or Gullah communicate among themselves necessarily predetermine their 
discourse chunks as AAEV or Gullah? Does the fact of using forms and construc- 
tions that are English-like necessarily make one's speech acts less AAEV or Gullah? 
When are linguists justified in ruling out some texts as non- AAEV or non-Gullah? 

Theoretically the answer to the first question is negative, as a variety of cir- 
cumstances may preclude the option of using the native variety. However, if we 
focus on AAEV or Gullah in the American ethnographic setting, it may become 
clear why the answer to the other two questions is not clearcut. The lexical sources 
of both language varieties, which are held in low status, are overwhelmingly Eng- 
lish. The vast majority of their native speakers think they speak English, except that 
they sound different from other Americans. 13 To fully grasp the significance of 
these observations, one must break with the tradition (shared by many creolists) in 
which AAEV and Gullah have been compared typically and misguidedly with stan- 




177 



The Pragmatics of Elusive Languages 



167 



dard English, instead of their nonstandard counterparts. A close comparison of 
grammatical features will reveal that several and possibly the majority of them can 
be traced at least in form to some nonstandard variety of English under conditions of 
selection discussed in Mufwene (1989, 1990a, 1990b, 1991c) against Bickerton 
(1981 , 1984, 1989) and in partial support of proponents of both the superstate and 
substrate hypotheses. 13 

Given what native speakers think of their language varieties in relation to 
their lexifier, or more accurately, the American varieties that AAEV and Gullah 
developed concomitantly with, what particular proportion of the features will make 
a discourse chunk by an African American Gullah or AAEV? Or should we go by 
the intention of the speaker, especially in dealing with the educated speakers, m 
order to determine whether or not Gullah or AAEV is being spoken? For instance, 
take the case of my guide EL in the texts below, which varies from setting to set- 
ting. 14 The reader should keep in mind that the norm, and probably what AAEV, 
Gullah, and their Caribbean kin really consist of, is what creolists have character- 
ized as mesolectal. 15 

Text A 03 July 1986) 

EL Sali? 

SM Yeah! 

EL I know you gonna have a little bit with me, aren t you, or you aint? 

SM Well, actually, I ate before coming, and... 

EL You did? 

SM and I'm afraid that if I eat some more. I’m going to sleep. 

EL You gonna fall asleep? 

SM Yeah. 

EL What time you got? 

SM It’s two forty-five. 

EL Oh God, I got to go pick up my little girl instead of bring her over here. 
My mother-in-law got them. 

GB Oh, you have to go git dem chirrin? 

EL And bring um over here, cause she suppose to be, we suppose to be 
going back to church at four, but I need to go on and git urn. 

GB Well, you ga go on en bring urn back over here? 

EL I’m gonna bing [' bring’] uffi over here. 

GB When? 

EL Bight now. I going nick urn up right now. 

GB Well, wha’ time you going to church? 

EL At four-thirty. 

GB Oh, you ga bring them here now. 

EL Huhn [hX]! 1 gwine getum . my mother-in-law might got suppm [’some- 
thing’] to do. 

GB You don’t wear out e patient. 

EL Then I’m coming back. Yeah, then I’m coming back. 

178 



Salikoko Mufwcn* 



GB Dc macaroni tint done yet? 

EL No, uhn uhn [ X?X]! The macaroni aint done. So by d' time I come back, 
it should be done, I got it on real low. Man, it whs too hot, I would a 
done been finish, but it's iust too hot 

GB You go ahead if dem other things bumin, den I'll chat with you. I can't 
talk da [d e ] name now, uhn, because dese things here bother me. 

EL Why not? You scared dat thing [' tape recorder']? 

GB E in my name, but dem people might LAUGHTER! 

EL Huhn? 

GB Hold it, I say cause you bring one dem thing back fuh [f a ] me in a 
minute en I'll chat with you. 

EL One a wha? Wha? Bring one back fuh you? 

GB Yeah. 

EL You done drink dat one I gee [' gave'] you? 

GB Dat soda, I done drink dat soda so long till e aint funny. I been a. 

EL LAUGHTER! 

GB You laugh right dey, I aint laughin with you 

Text B 120 December 1986^ 

FR ...sixteen head now... en everyone livin... 

PR yeah 
EL Sixteen! 

FR Sixteen... 

EL En all livin!? 

FR Yes, ma'am. 

PR Das da secon' one deh. 

EL I know some of your sister... one o' your sister en me went to college 
together... You got a sister name uhn [ X ]... J M ? 

PR Yes-sir. . . nuff of em 

GUEST: SPEECH OVERLAP/CANNOT TELL 

FR Yeah... das righ'... 

EL We went to Tennessee. . . to college together. . . 

FR Ohoh, OK, yeah 

PR SPEECH OVERLAP 

GUEST: think she home now, Uh think . 

EL She home now? 

PR She nice... she ha' nine in school one time... 

EL Waay! Hear da' Salikoko! He mama en HaHHy had nine head o’children 
in school one time! 

FR Margaret mus' ha' more chi run en da' in school one time, aini? 

EL Greaaat Gosh! 

PR Had nine in school one time... yeah... 

EL How you x member all d em children name? ... I got three... en I can 
hardly remember deh name sometime LAUGHTER 

17a 



The Prtgmelici of Elueive languages 



169 



FR Bu... de mother might but de daddy say he can't remember... he kehn 
[ k? : ]keep with de names, either [aila] 

PR He kehn... he kehn keep up people's names... say, Shu'! I kehn 'mem- 
ber all dem drat chillen name. 

EL Is your mother still alive? 

FR Yeah, e mother is Sarah sister. . . Patty mother-in-law sister. . . 

EL For real? 

FR Yes, ma'am. 

EL I didn know deh were da' close. . . 

PR Yeah, yeah, see, ain but two o'dem: S en Margaret [ma:gri]... 

FR That' s righ' . . . S en Margaret. 

PR da’s raigh'... dat...da's Margaret daughter deh... en Sandy... Sandy 
mama is de nex' sister to her... 

EL Well, sir! 

FR & GUEST: Dat’s right. 

PR Da's righ', yes, ma'am. 

EL I did not know... I sure learn somet'n ere, didn I ? But I know all your 
sister en brother. . . 

FR Hmmhm 

PR Yes, SPEECH OVERLAP 

EL not all, but you know... at 1... some o'dem... I know at least'... L 

Mack is your brother, too, aini'? 

FR Yeah. 

PR Hmhm, yeah. 

EL enO ?... 

GUEST: Hm 

PR Huhnuhn [ hXhX: ] 

EL enH ?... 

PR Yeah 

GUEST: All o' dem 

EL en we all... see deh?... 

PR all o’ dem... all o' dem, yeah. 

EL we ain no stranger... we ain no stranger. 

FR Small world! 

PR Sixteen head o’ dem. . . honey. ., Reveren J M he been apreachin 

when he sixteen years ol'... 'fore he finish school... yeah... 'fore he 
finish high school he been a preach 
GUEST: Ten sisters en six bon l bX ] ... six oroders. . . 

EL Six... 

PR Hmhm, six broders en ten sister.., 

EL Greaaat Gosh! 

FR Yes, ma’am. 

PR Hmhm, only one dead. . . yes-sir. . . growin strong. . . 

EL en all living! . 

PR Yeah, huhnhuhn... yeah. 1 0 U 



170 



Sdikoko Mufweoe 




FR everyone... 

EL That's a blessin... 
FR so far so good... 



Text C (28 November 1Q87) 



O 

ERLC 



JR And I been deh tell e two ['they both'], come talk bout water, huh... 
dem berry ['bury'] da boy in water. 

EL Deh bury ['buried’] him in water? I surprise [Tm surprised’] deh do 
['did’] that because deh ain suppose to do that you know! If that thing 
can come right back up, up of the water... out the ground. 

JR INAUDIBLE but a vault [ wolt ] don’ rise. 

EL Oh. 

JR But a ordinary box e rise. 

EL Oh, e had a vault. . . had um in a vault. 

JR Richard body berry in a vault. 

EL For real? 

JR Ah huhn. 

EL Well Dillon put gnj down good then, inni? 

JR Yeah. 

EL Cause Lilly bury ['was buried’] in a vault too. 

JR Yeah, e berry long side um. 

EL Oh. 

JR INAUDIBLE in the yahd deday ['today'] was over right by da pump 
and da [ do ] damn bucket. 

EL Uhn huhn. 

JR Now da... now da... ching ['thing'] weh I see... the ching duh 
[ do ] change. 

EL Uhn huhn. 

JR They like if you belong to the church, then I don't belong to the church 
and I die, the preacher put you right in the church too. 

EL That's right. Long time ago e ain did dat. 

JR No. 

EL E ain... e ain couldn't do dat. 

JR E wouldn do it. 

EL But now e put you right in the church too. 

JR Right. 

EL Right in the church too, so now you ain cot to belong, long as your 
family go and your family pay... 

JR that's it 
EL ...go in right deh. 

JR Well, I pay my duty. 

E T . I know dat. 

JR Buster duh tnah leader. 

EL Hm hm 181 



The Pragmatic • of Eluaivc Languages 



171 



JR You know im. inni? 

EL Oh yeah... Buster ? 

JR Yeah. 

EL I know Buster good... I ain know ['didn't know'] Buster bin [ was ] 
your leader, you know... I thought Neen bin your leader. 

JR Mm mm. Laura en. . . en. . en Lilly was Neen leader. 

EL Hm hm. 

JR But... Buster duh mah leader. 

EL Oh, oh, 1 didn't know dat. I always... cause uhn... Lilly always.. 

Neen always come and check on you and see bout you. . . bring you thing 
['things'] 

JR Yeah, I bin ou’ deh yestehdeh. 

EL Hm hm 

JR 1 all time care bou' Neen. 

EL Hm hm 

JR En den when my cousin dead... bury deh... deh... but Uh co'uldn t duh 
deh... 

EL Who? 

HR ...in Walterboro. 

EL Oh! in Walterboro? 

JR Yeah. You ain know Harry, inni? 

EL No, no. 

JR Harry , dat duh Neen cousin. 

EL Hat'g right cause all dem NAME is Neen cousin. 

In these recordings EL adjusts her phonology only slightly , making it little 
different from that of the informants. The question of what role phonological evi- 
dence plays in the distinction of language varieties that are closely related mor- 
phosyn tactically remains open. EL’s adjustment seems more evident in the selection 
of grammatical constructions than in the phonology. Based on the above texts, 
should speech such as hers whose quality varies in a gradient be treated sometimes 
as English and at other times as Gullah? Should the identity of the code be cased on 
the speaker's intention and/or the identity of the addressee? 

Labov (1980: 379) makes an important distinction between the linguistic and 
symbolic definitions of language variety. The former corresponds to the academic 
stereotype of the variety whereas the latter amounts to what some readers might take 
EL's speech to be, i.e., the attempt to speak a particular variety without really 
meeting the linguistic definition of the variety. Note that according to this distinc- 
tion a great deal of (semi-)creole speech would be symbolic, since it is mesolectal 
and thus diverges from the basilect that constitutes the stereotype (assuming that the 
basilect allows horizontal variation). The point is that, while it may be useful, the 
proposed distinction does not preempt the question of whether or not the linguistic 

definition of a language variety is an accurate one. 

I have dwelt on the question of code identity because "act of identity or any 
macro-pragmatic aspects of Gullah, of AAEV, or of any other creole cannot be 

182 



172 



Salikoko Mufreoe 



discussed without first of all being able to tell one code from the other, particularly 
in those ethnographic settings where a (semi-)creole coexists with its lexifier and 
shares several formal features with it. 

The question of code identity is relevant also for a number of reasons and 
from a variety of perspectives. To begin with, if standard English is primarily a 
written variety, very few people communicate in it. Implicit comparison for deter- 
mining whether or not a speaker is using AAEV, Gullah, or any creole must thus be 
with some variety of spoken English. If these (semi-)creole varieties have been 
lexified by nonstandard varieties, rather than with standard or educated colloquial 
varieties, as done in a great deal of the literature. If, as these observations suggest, 
there must be a gradient of relatedness from educated spoken English, through 
nonstandard English, to AAEV and Gullah, the question of boundary or critical 
features is a serious one, especially if mesolectal speech is the norm rather than the 
exception. 

It must be recalled in connection with the above that the basilect is a theoreti- 
cal construct projected on the basis of the maximum number of features not attested 
in the lexifier; no pure basilectal text has ever been cited to date in the literature 
(Mufwene 1987). According to the state of the art of creole genesis, the first diverg- 
ing speech patterns to develop were those characterized to date as mesolectal; the 
(near-)basilectal ones developed later (Chaudenson 1979, 1988, Bickerton 1988, 
Baker 1990). As the colonial communities in which the (semi-) creoles developed 
were highly stratified and it seems to have been rewarding since the beginning of the 
colonial societies to be able to communicate in a lect close to the lexifier, speakers 
of the mesolect had no reason to abandon it in favor of the putative basilect. This is 
not to suggest that they could not learn (near-) basilectal speech. The best dia- 
chronic studies available (Bickford 1987, Lallaand D' Costa 1990) show that vari- 
ation has always been characteristic of the speech communities using AAEV, Gul- 
lah, and other creoles. Given what has been observed about the putative basilect and 
given these other considerations, one of the questions that may be raised is whether 
it is not too arbitrary to base the identity of AAEV, Gullah, or any other creole on 
(almost) only those features that are not attested in the lexifier. 

It has been suggested, recently by DeBose (1991), that code-switching or 
mixing may be involved in what is otherwise called mesolect. Speaking of AAEV 
and what he characterizes as "standard English," DeBose argues that "when marked 
features of the both systems co-occur in the same chunk of speech, it is usually 
possible to make a plausible case for one system being the matrix system with ele- 
ments of the other system embedded in it" (2). 16 Determining which system func- 
tions as the matrix is presumably determined by whether features of English or 
AAEV predominate in the discourse. 17 

However, the question is whether or not any similarities obtain between Afri- 
can-American mesolectal speech and code-mixing. It is perhaps justified to assume 
that the analogy between the two kinds of speech is a tenuous one. There are indeed 
some differences. To begin with, the distinction between the codes involved is 
generally clearcut in the cases of code-mixing commonly discussed in the literature. 
Regarding both Zaire and Tanzania, for instance, the distinction is clear between, 





The Pragmitics of Elusive Languages 



173 



on the one hand, French and Lingala (Bokamba 1989; Bokamba and Kamwanga- 
malu 1987) and, on the other, English and Swahili (Myers-Scotton 1989a, 1989b, 
1990). The languages have different lexical stocks and there are significant gram- 
matical and phonological differences in their formal systems. The identification of 
the "matrix language” is consequently obvious. Such is not the case with Gullah and 
AAEV compared not with standard English but with the nonstandard varieties of 
English that they developed concomitantly with, especially in the southern part of 
the USA. 

In both the cases of English/Swahili and French/Lingala code-mixing, the 
process usually presupposes a certain amount of command of English or French, as 
may be determined by the segment of the population that is more prone to the acrol- 
ect or High variety. Usually, the educated are the ones who code-mix the most. 
However, the "depth" of one‘s Gullah or AAEV (i.e., its closeness to the putative 
basilect) is not necessarily a correlate of one’s level of education (despite DeCamp’s 
1971 conjecture for Jamaican Creole). 18 

As noted above, language in (semi-)creole settings has always been variable 
since the beginning. The new colonial speech varieties that developed first were 
close to the non-standard varieties of the lexifiers brought by the Europeans. For- 
mal education is only one of the factors affecting variation in creole speech continua 
and its significance relative to other factors such as (ideological) pride in, or lack of 
shame with, the variety as well as the nature of the variety normally spoken at 
home. Lalla and D’Costa (1990) observe that even some people in higher strata of 
Jamaican plantation communities of the eighteenth century spoke varieties close to 
the putative basilect. To date, we may still notice near-basilectal varieties spoken by 
members of the Gullah community considered relatively affluent and by some 
youth, and upper mesolectal varieties (i.e., close to othei varieties of English) spo- 
ken by the less educated. Similar sociolinguistic variation may be observed among 
speakers of AAEV. A case in point may be cited here: A week before the Confer- 
ence at which this paper was presented, listening to a Baptist minister in Athens, 
Georgia, at an informal gathering with his congregation, 1 was surprised by his 
profuse use of multiple negation and constructions ^ach as many people that doedn ' 
know... Before this event, I had hardly heard such nonstandard features in his ser- 
mons, though several African American ministers often slip back to less standard 
speech when they get deeply involved in their sermons. 

A third reason for not analogizing variation in African American speech with 
code-mixing lies in one of the pragmatic reasons for code-mixing. Very often 
speakers will code-mix only because they cannot retrieve the right terms or phrases 
in the "matrix language," due either to poor command or infrequent use of it. 
However, speech variation in Gullah or AAEV (with the range varying from 
speaker to speaker) is generally free and part of the norm, though in several cases it 
may also be interpreted as part of the process of accommodation to the outsider, as 
an attempt to prove one’s dexterity in the stereotypical variety, or as an attempt to 
conceal the salient features. 

On the other hand, these differences between speech variation in Gullah and 
AAEV and code-mixing in African are c ‘ of the story. We might learn a few 




174 



Sftlikoko Mufwtnt 



things by considering other pragmatic reasons for code-mixing. Based on my expe- 
rience with code-mixing in Zaire* languages are mixed sometimes by people who 
are not fluent in the "embedded language/ when this is French* but resort to it only 
to pass as educated persons and thus impress the intended audience. There is a cer- 
tain similarity between this ethnographic behavior and the attempts by some Gullah 
and AAEV speakers to conceal salient features of their varieties, even though it is 
debatable whether or not code-mixing in involved in the latter case. 

There are also some ethnographic reasons why some people will use a "matrix 
language" that they may not command well: they may simply wish to express soli- 
darity or be integrated. A similar reason may be attributed to those who speak 
Gullah or AAEV in public* even though they do not use it (regularly) at home. The 
depth of Gullah or AAEV may be compared with the amount of code-mixing in the 
African situations mentioned above. In both those cases where the proportion of 
items from the "embedded language" exceeds that of the items from the "matrix lan- 
guage" 19 and those where the intended Gullah, AAEV* or creole variety is hard to 
distinguish from varieties of its lexifier, the intention of the speaker appears to be an 
important factor. What Labov (1980: 379) calls "social construct" of a language 
variety may be an appropriate way of defining AAEV* Gullah* or any creole used 
like them. So we may conclude this part of the paper by observing that although 
code-mixing does not seem to be an adequate analogy to the variable mesolectal 
speech typical of Gullah and AAEV* the exercise of comparing the phenomena 
suggests a less stereotypical definition of these language varieties. This conclusion 
certainly applies also to Caribbean creoles that coexis v'ith their lexifiers and have 
been claimed to be decreolizing. 

If the above observations and conclusions are correct, we .aust treat the mes- 
olect as the normal case and* following Fa^old (1969: 773), reject the analogy to 
code-mixing* at least as involving separate codes. That is* rather than assuming 
cpmpeting systems* we may assume just one non-monolithic system with several 
competing rules and lexical items such that acts of identity may be determined by 
whether the selections made by a speaker on a particular occasion suggests of them 
a competence close to* or distant from* the lexifier. In other words* instead of defin- 
ing Gullah* AAEV* and related creoles by their basilects* we may consider the alter- 
native that their systems are so mixed, perhaps with more alternatives than is nor- 
mally the case in non-creole situations, that it is misguided to define them mostly by 
features not attested in their lexifiers. The elusiveness of these varieties consists in 
determining with precision where they end and the next related variety starts. 

I will conclude the paper by addressing two questions: 1) Why is identifying 
the code(s) in a speech relevant to pragmatics qua study of use of language? And* 2) 
Does what was discussed above apply to other languages? In response to the first 
question, the vast majority of pragmatic studies focus on specific construction types 
or forms in individual languages* regarding especially interpretations which they 
invite* implicate, or suggest. It is taken for granted that the constructions or items 
discussed belong to a well-defined language variety. In this paper* I have wished to 
show that the identity of the code is not always clear. In speech communities where 
"•riation is the norm, notions such as language variety X or Y are elusive. 





The Pragmatics of Elusive Languages 



175 



The notion of "elusive code" discussed here might also apply to non-creole 
languages if linguists decided to make more specific the particular varieties which 
they discuss. For instance, the notion of standard English does not seem to be 
clearly defined. In studies of AAEV in particular, the notion is generally difficult to 
distinguish from the variety spoken by the white middle class. Sometimes, it has 
also been equated with network English, another elusive term. If we take it to be the 
kind of English used in the network news, we will be inaccurate in not admitting 
that we hear in the news several features that English 101 teachers discourage their 
students from using. In any case, the reality is that standard English does not 
amount just to written English and the boundary between it and educated colloquial 
English is not clearcut. 

Another example is notions such as American Southern English, which may 
be an easy stereotype until one lives in the American South and is confronted with 
the heterogeneity of the dialect. The question is just compounded once notions such 
as British and American English are considered. Ultimately all language varieties 
are elusive if we consider them in relation to other varieties that are akin to them, es- 
pecially those with which '''ey coexist. 

As stated at the outset, the relevance of this paper to a volume on pragmatics 
and language learning depends on whether or not the ethnography of communica- 
tion is considered part of the field. I am wearing my creolist hat in this paper and I 
thought that my contribution to this volume should highlight what creole studies 
ought to be doing more of: exposing those neglected aspects of the study of lan- 
guage that deserve (more) attention. The elusiveness of the notion ' language variety 
X' is just one such aspect. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I am grateful to Lawrence Bouton and Yamuna Kachru for inviting me to 
present this paper at the Fifth Annual International Conference on Pragamtics and 
Language Learning and to Charles DeBose for feedback on the Conference version. 
I am solely responsible for all the shortcomings. 

THE AUTHOR 

Salikoko S. Mufwene has just moved from the University of Georgia to the 
University of Chicago as Professor of linguistics. His recent work has been mostly 
on the semantics and morphosyntax of Gullah and Black English and on creole 

genesis. 



NOTES 

'Like "code," the term "language variety" is used in this paper to avoid taking 
a position about whether the African American English vernacular (also known as 
"Black English"), Gullah, and other "Atlantic creoles"discussed below are new 
languages or new dialects of their lexifiers. The term "code" is used here as neu- 
trally as in the phrases "code-switching" and "code-mixing" rather than in the other 

186 



176 



Salikoko Mufwenc 



more restrictive sense proposed, rather inconsistently, by Hymes (1974: 59) for 
cases where ’mutual intelligibility is in question. * 

2 "Context" remains a vague term used to refer either to the non-linguistic 
setting of a speech event, or to what McCawley (1979) identifies as "contextual 
domain" (i.e., the context is being built by the discourse itself as it develops), or to 
the overall system of a language in terms of the options it makes available to a 
speaker (e.g., the choice between the verb kill and its paraphrase cause to die in 
English). For explicit discussions of context, see, e.g., Levinson (1983: x, 5, 10, 
23, etc.). 

Considering the topics of several papers presented at the Conference (April 
1991) and probably published in these proceedings, my uneasiness about whether or 
not this paper is suitable for a volume on pragmatics may seem unjustified to some 
readers. However, pragmatics was originally concerned with the interpretation of 
utterances regarding, e.g., their presuppositions and implicatures, and with the 
appropriateness of forms relative to their context of use. As a complement of seman- 
tics (see one of the alternative and apparently preferred definitions in Levinson 
1983, e.g., p. 12), pragmatics may be assumed to exclude topics such as sexism in 
some languages and discourse structure, except where appropriateness is the pri- 
mary concern. It is certainly safe to assert that there is no consensus among students 
of pragmatics regarding its subject matter(s). There are several surveys of pragmat- 
ics that do not cover much of what was discussed at the Conference. I am unable to 
cite a single reference book on pragmatics that addresses the question of code, even 
though Levinson (1983: 23) suggests that this may be a legitimiate concern of prag- 
matics. These considerations justify the caveat with which this paper begins. 1 as- 
sume that prior to associating code with some intended speaker-messages, it is nec- 
essary to address the question of code identity. 

4 A similar observation was made earlier by Beryl Bailey ( 1966) and endorsed 
by DeCamp (1971: 351). Rickford (1990: 160) rightly characterizes it as the norm 
rather than the exception. 

5 ln creole studies, the term "acrolect" is nonmlly used for the local standard 
variety of the lexifier. However, over the last two decades, the French creolist 
school, represented particularly by Chaudenson (1973, 1979, 1988), and defenders 
of the English-dialect origin of AAEV, e.g., D'Eloia ;1973) and Schneider (1982, 
1983, to appear), have argued more and more convincingly that the lexifiers of 
these new language varieties were metropolitan and colonial non-standard varieties 
a«.d are not the acrolect. For some reason, it has usually been assumed that AAEV 
and its creole kin have been moving toward the acrolect, even when studies such as 
Labov (1972), Wolfram and Fasold (1974), and more recently Bailey and Maynor 
(1985) show similarities with White non-standard varieties, instead. 

‘DeCamp was mistaken in equating didn 7 with no ben and no did. The first is 
part of PAST/NONPAST absolute-relative tense system, whereas the basilectal 
ones are part of an ANTERIOR/NONANTERIOR relative tense system in which a 
NONANTERIOR form, the unmarked verb form, may also refer to the past. See, 
e.g., Bickerton (1975) and Mufwene (1983) for accounts of time reference in Guya- 
nese and Jamaican Creoles. 

187 




The Pragmatics of Elusive Languages 



177 



7 Mufwene (1987: 99) contends that "no pure basilectal speaker has yet been 
produced, [and] the pure basilect may never be shown to have existed" at any time 
in the history of the relevant creoles. This position is not necessariliy invalidated by 
DeCamp's analysis since it does not include a total inventory of the basilectal fea- 
tures of Jamaican Creole. As a matter of fact, Rickford (1930: 169-72) and Romaine 
(1988: 186-7) observe that actual creole speech data are not perfectly scalable. 
Rickford notes that, according to Bickerson (1973), "there was not any significant 
correlation between his [i.e. , Bickerton's] scales for the copula and the pronominal 
subsystems of the Guyanese continuum" (169). 

*Bickerson (1988) has now reversed his position, assuming like Chaudsenson 
(1979, 1988), that creolization did not start with basilectal varieties, but rather with 
mesolectal ones. 

’Some creolists such as Jones-Jackson (1978, 1984) have given the impression 
that in basilectal Gullah / P / has substituted for /w/ and l\l. From what I have been 
able to determine to date, / p / has often alternated rather randomly with the other 
two, but it has never replaced them as a phoneme. 

10 Rickford (1980: 173) observes about one of his informants. Reefer, that his 
competence extended to almost the entire spectrum of singular pronoun variants. So 
much so, in fact, that the discontinuities in production on which implicational scal- 
ing depends were seriously called into question. He observes later that "with respect 
to ["the appropriate conditions for the use of these varieties in everyday life"], 
virtually all the respondents zeroed in on nature of the addressee ... " 

"One may also wish to mention, in connection with the alternation in relative 
clauses, variation between subordinate clauses introduced by that and those intro- 
duced by the null complementizer. Although their distribution may not be identical, 
it is hard to see any pattern of change or, I may add, any correlation with any prag- 
matic difference in the alternation. 

"In the case of Gullah, some of its speakers are even shocked when one refers 
to their language variety as Gullah, suggesting it is not considered English. Several 
African American students are offended to hear the variety they grew up speaking 
called "Black English." 

"Mufwene’s alternative reduces the role of Universal Gra mm a r to a body of 
constraints guaranteeing that this outcome of language contact does not violate any 
of its parametric specifications. It also determines which of the competing formal 
alternatives will find their way into the nqw language. 

"For typographical convenience and easy reading for most readers, the text is 
presented in "eye dialect," following a common practice among American dialec- 
tologists. Only forms that are clearly different from mainstream varieties of English 
are written with typical distortions of the normal spelling. Forms between square 
brackets indicate the pronunciations of some of the distortions, unless they are also 
enclosed between single quotes, which indicate meaning. A side effect of this par- 
ticular presentation is that it does not exaggerate the morphosyntactic distance be- 
tween Gullah and English, though one must deplore the absence of prosodic fea- 
tures of all phonological ones. In the texts, the underlinings identify morphosyntac- 
tic peculiarities that I particulwiy wish to draw attention to. 

188 



17S 



Salikoko Mufwene 



,5 The stratification of speech in (semi)-creole communities into basilect, mes- 
olect, and acroiect is indeed a concomitant of the decreolization hypothesis, with the 
term "mesolect" typically suggesting change toward the acroiect. However, I use 
the term here without reference to decreolization. 

l6 In the oral version of the paper, DeBose attributes thf model to Myers-Scot- 
ton, who also uses the terms "matrix" and "embedded language" (1989a, 1989b, 
1990). Myers-Scotton has taken them from Joshi (1985). Competing with these 
terms are the alternatives "host" and "guest language" used by, e.g., Sridhar and 
Sridhar (1980), Bokamba (1989), and Bokamba and Kawangamalu (1987). 1 use 
"matrix* and "embedded" simply to remain consistent with DeBose. 

17 Fasold (1969: 773, n. 13) dismisses the alternative of code-switching, argu- 
ing that speakers of varieties similar to those discussed by DeBose use "language on 
the basis of a single grammar which shares many rules with Standard English, lacks 
others, and has still others which the standard dialect lacks." 

‘•Interestingly, Lalla and D'Costa (1990) observe that even in the early days 
of Jamaican Creole, the linguistic continuum was not necessarily paralleled by the 
social stratification. What may be characterized for convenience as basilectal speech 
was heard among both the plantation aristocracy and the field slaves. The situation 
must have hardly been different for Gullah and AAEV. 

<9 Bokamba (1989) observes that there are really no syntactic constraints on 
code-mixing. 



REFERENCES 

Bailey, Beryl Loftman (1966) Jamaican Creole Syntax: A Transformational Ap- 
proach . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Bailey, Guy and Nathalie Maynor (1985) The present tense of be in Southern Black 
folk speech. American Speech , 60, 195-213. 

Baker, Philip ( 1990) Off target? Column. Journal of Pidgin and Creole Languages, 
5, 107-19. 

Bickerton, Derek (1973) On the nature of a creole continuum. Language , 49, 640- 
69. 

Bickerton, Derek (1975) Dynamics of a Creole System . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Bickerton, Derek (1981) Roots of Language. Ann Arbor: Karoma. 

Bickerton, Derek (1984) The language bioprogram hypothesis. The Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences , 7, 173-221. 

Bickerton, Derek (1988) Creole languages and the bioprogram. In Linguistics: The 
Cambridge Survey . Volume II. Linguistic Theory: Extensions and Implica- 
tions. Edited by Frederick J. Newmeyer. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, pp.268-84. 

Bickerton, Derek (1989) The lexical learning hypotheis and the pidgin-creole cycle. 
In Wheels within Wheels: Papers of the Duisburg Symposium on Pidgin and 
Creole Languages. Edited by Martin Pfltz & Rend Dirven. Fmakfurt am 
© Main: Verlag Peter Lang. pp. 1 1-31. 



18 U 



The Pragmatic* of Elusive Languages 



179 



Bokamba, Eyamba G. (1989) Are there syntactic constraints on code-mixing? Vforld 
Englishes, 8, 277-92. 

Bokamba, Eyamba G. and Nkonko M. Kamwangamalu (1987) The significance of 
code-mixing to linguistic theory: Evidence from Bantu languages. Studies in 
the Linguistic Sciences, 17, 21-43. 

Chaudenson, Robert (1973) Pour une dtude comparte des creoles et parlers francais 
d’outre-mer: survivance et innovation. Revue de Linguistique Romane, 37, 
342-371. 

Chaudenson, Robert (1979) Les creoles francais. Fernand Nathan. 

Chaudenson, Robert (1988) Creoles et enseignement du francais. Paris: L'Harmat- 
tan. 

DeBose, Charles (1991) Systemic convergence in the African-American linguistic 
repertoire. Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for Pidgin and Lin- 
guistics, Chicago. 

DeCamp, David (1971) Toward a generative analysis of a post-creole speech con- 
tinuum. In Pidginization and Creolization of Languages. Edited by Dell 
Hymes. Cambridge University Press, pp. 349-70. 

D’Eloia, Sarah G. (1973) Issues in the analysis of Negro nonstandard English: A 
review of J.L. Dillard's Black English: Its History and Usage in the United 
States. Journal of English Linguistics, 1, 87-106. 

Fasold, Ralph (1969) Tense and the form be in Black English. Language, 45, 763- 
76. 

Green, Georgia (1989) Pragmatics and Natural Language Understanding. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Horn, Lawrence (1988) Pragmatic theory. In Linguistics: The Cambridge Survey. 
Vol. 1: Linguistic Theory: Foundations. Edited by Frederick J. Newmeyer. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 113-45. 

Hymes, Dell (1974) Foundations in Sociolinguistics: An Ethnographic Approach. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 

Jones-Jackson, Patricia (1978) The Status of Gullah: An Investigation of Conver- 
gent Processes. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan. 

Jones-Jackson, Patricia (1984) On decreolization and language death in Gullah. 
Language in Society 13.351-62. 

Joshi, Aravind (1985) Processing of sentences with intra-sentential code-switching. 
In Natural Language Parsing. Edited by David Dowty, Lauri Karttunen, and 
Arnold Zwicky. New York: Academic Press, pp. 190-205. 

Labov, William (1972) Language in the Inner City: Studies in Black English Ver- 
nacular. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 

Labov, William (1980) Is there a creole speech community? In Theoretical Orienta- 
tions in Creole Studies, ed. by Albert Valdman and Arnold Highfield, 369- 
88. New York: Academic Press. 

Lalla, Barbara and Jean D'Costa (1990) Language in Exile: Three Hundred Years of 
Jamaican Creole. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press. 

Le Page, Robert B. and AndnJe Tabouret-Keller (1985) Acts of identity: Creole- 
Based Approaches to Language and Ethnicity. Cambridge University Press. 

190 



ISO 



Salikoko Mufwene 



Levinson, Stephen (1983) Pragmatics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

McCawley, James D. (1979) Presupposition and discourse. In Pragmatics (Syntax 
and Semantics 11 ). Edited by C.K. Oh & D. Dinneen. New York: Academic 
Press, pp. 371-88. 

Morris, Charles (1938) Foundations of the theory of signs. In International Ency- 
clopedia of Unified Science . Edited by O. Neurath, R. Carnap, and C. Mor- 
ris. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 77-138. 

Mufwene, Salikoko S. (1982) Review of Pieter Muysken’s Generative studies on 
creole languages . The American Anthropologist, 84, 186-8. 

Mufwene, Salikoko S. (1983) Observations on time reference in Jamaican and 
Guyanese creoles. English World-Wide, 4, 199-229. 

Mufwene, Salikoko S. (1987) Review article on Michael Montgomery and Guy 
Bailey's Language Variety in the South: Perspectives in Black and White . 
Journal of Pidgin and Creole Languages , 2, 93-1 10. 

Mufwene, Salikoko S. (1989) Some explanations that strike me as incomplete. 
Coiunui. Journal of Pidgin and Creole Languages, 4, 117-28. 

Mufwene, Salikoko S. (1990a) Transfer and the substrate hypothesis in creolistics. 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition , 12, 1-23. 

Mufwene, Salikoko S. (1990b) Creoles and Universal Grammar. In Issues in Creole 
Linguistics . Linguistics 28 . Edited by Pieter Seuren and Salikoko Mufwene. 
Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 783-807. 

Mufwene, Salikoko S. (1991a) Why grammars are monolithic. In The Joy of Gram- 
mar: A Festschrift for James D . McCawley . Edited by Gary Larson, Diane 
Brentari, and Lynn MacLeod. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 

Mufwene, Salikoko S. (1991b) Is Gullah decreolizing? A comparison of a speech 
sample of the 1930's with a speech sample of the 1980's. In The Emergence of 
Black English: Texts and Commentaries. Edited by Guy Bailey, Nathalie 
Maynor, and Patricia Cukor-Avila. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 213- 
30. 



Mufwene, Salikoko S. (1991c) Pidgins, creoles, typology, and markedness. In 
Development and Structures of Creole Languages: Essays in Honor of Derek 
Bickerton . Edited by Francis Byrne & Thom Huebner. Amsterdam: John Ben- 
jamins. pp. 123-43. 

Mufwene, Salikoko S. (1991d) Some reasons why Gullah is not dying yet. English 
World-Wide , 12. 

Myers-Scotton, Carol (1989a) Code-switching with English: Types of switching , 
types of communities. World Englishes, 8, 333-46. 

Myers-Scotton, Carol (1989b) A look at processing: Code-switching and borrow- 
ings. Paper presented at 20th Annual Conference on African Linguistics. 
Urbana. University of Illinois. 

Myers-Scotton, Carol (1990) Building the frame in code-switching. Paper pre- 
sented at 21st Annual Conference on African Linguistics. Athens, University 
of Georgia. 

Rickford, John R. (1980) Analyzing variation in creole languages. In Theoretical 
Q Orientations in Creole Studies. Edited by Albert Valdman and Arnold 



The Pragmatics of Elusive Languages 



181 



Highfield. New York: Academic Press, pp. 165-84. 

Rickford John R. (1987) Dimensions of a Creole Continuum: History, Texts, & 
Linguistic Analysis of Guyanese Creole. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Rickford, John R. (1990) Number delimitation in Gullah: A response to Mufwene. 
American Speech, 65, 148-63. 

Romaine. Suz^e ( 1982) Socio-Historical Linguistics: Its status and Methodology. 

Cambru ~ unbridge University Press. 

Romaine, Suzarn: (1988) Pidgin and Creole Languages. London: Longman- 
Schneider, Edgar Werner (1982) On the history of Black English in the USA: Some 
new evidence. English World-Wide, 3, 18-46. 

Schneider, Edgar Werner (1983) The diachronic development of the Black English 
in the USA: Some new evidence. Journal of English Linguistics , 16, 55-64. 
Schneider, Edgar Werner (to appear) Africanisms in the grammar of Af ™* A ™ e "* 
can English. In Africanisms in Afro-American Language Varieties. Edited, by 

Salikoko S. Mufwene. 

Sridhar, S.N. and Kamal K. Sridhar (1980) The syntax and psycholinguistics of 
bilingual code-mixing. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 34, 407-16. 
Trudgill, Peter (1986) Dialects in Contact. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 

Winford, Donald (1990) The copula variability, accountability and the concept of 
"polylectal" grammars. Journal of Pidgin and Creole Languages, 5, 223-52. 
Wolfram, Walter and Ralph Fasold (1974) The Study of Social Dialects in American 
English. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall. 



o 



ERIC 



192 



(7 



Pragmatics and Language Learning 
Monograph Series, Vol. 3, 1992 



The Pragmatics of Codeswitching in Mexican Political, 
Literary and News Magazines 



Erica McClure 



Since the 1970's numerous articles have been published on Eng- 
lish-Spanish oral code-switching in Chicano communities. However 
little attention has been paid to the use of English in Mexico except at 
the level of borrowings. The present study offers a brief discussion of 
some of the syntactic properties of codeswitching in Mexican political, 
literary and news magazines, as well as a more extensive analysis of its 
functions. Differences between oral codeswitching in Chicano commu- 
nities and written codeswitching in the Mexican press are noted and an 
explanation of these dissimilarities is proposed based both on factors 
associated with the channel difference — oral versus written — and on 
the difference in the relationship that the Chicano and Mexican speech 
communities have with the American anglophone speech community. 

Since the 1970's numerous studies have been published on codeswitching in 
Chicano communities in the United States, most focussing on oral codeswitching. 
In contrast, the present study focuses on codeswitching in Mexico, about which 
little has been written. Furthermore, the present study examines codeswitching in 
the press, specifically in political and literary magazines, rather than oral code- 
switching. Although the focus of the present study is the pragmatics of codeswitch- 
ing; in order to establish what linguistic expressions will be considered, it is neces- 
sary to address first a recurrent problem in research on codeswitching: identification 
of codeswitches. 



What constitutes a minimal codeswitch is an issue which continues to create 
dissention. At one extreme there is the position of Schaffer who states: 

... it has been argued that the language of elements surrounding a head 
word, including proper concord and agreement as marked by structure 
words and affixes within the phrase is a more accurate indicator of 
switching as opposed to borrowing. Switching would therefore seem to 
involve entire phrases rather than single words. It is not without good 
reason that Clyne (1967, p. 19) referred to switching as "multiple trans- 
ference." (Schaffer, 1978, p. 268) 



CODESWITCHING DEFINED 





The Pragmatics of Codeswitching 



1S3 



At the other extreme, Pfaff (1975, p. 17) concludes that rather than segregat- 
ing language contact phenomena, it may be advantageous to study their interplay. 
Thus in her tri-partite classification of styles of codeswitching, she notes that in the 
third type, ‘Spanish street talk,* ‘switching to English is mainly for single nouns, 
verbs, adjectives and set phrases.* Somewhere in the middle is a position which 
does not exclude the possibility of single word switches, but which seeks to distin- 
guish them from borrowings. Generally the distinction rests on two grounds: bor- 
rowings are phonologically and morphologically integrated into the borrowing lan- 
guage and within the speech community they are accepted as bona fide elements of 
and are in general use in the borrowing language. Both of these criteria are, how- 
ever, slippery. With respect to phonology, Schaffer points out that 

As noted by Diebold (1963) and Hasselmo (1970) among others, the 
phonology of switches may spill across lexemes, especially where the 
switches are in close proximity rather than having been separated by a 
pause. Thus, some instances which researchers still wanted to classify 
as switches exhibited some measure of overlap. Phonology was not a to- 
tally consistent guide to identifying switches. (1978, p. 268) 

In the case of written text, phonology is obviously no guide at all, but print 
offers a different means of marking codeswitches. Authors can indicate what they 
believe to be the status of lexical items by setting off codeswitches with italics, bold 
face type, quotation marks or underlining. However this means of identifying code- 
switches may be somewhat dubious. In the corpus considered here, seme words 
were set off in print; although they appear in monolingual Spanish dictionaries. 
Examples are: beatnik, cash flow, dumping, hobby, jeans, mass media and strip- 
tease. Conversely others such as cash, closet, hit, hot, shopping and script appeared 
with no graphic marker indicating that they were not accepted Spanish words, al- 
though, they do not appear in monolingual Spanish dictionaries. 

However, the attempt to ascertain the status of a word as borrowing or code- 
switch by investigating norms of usage is also hazardous. One may in questioning 
members of the same speech community about the status of a lexeme receive re- 
sponses ranging from an indication of no awareness that it was ever not part of the 
language, through claims that it is a well integrated borrowing, to statements that it 
is not part of the language at all, the response depending on the linguistic sophisti- 
cation and attitude of the informant. (See McClure 1972 and McClure and McClure 
1977). 

Clearly there is no neat -1 ;orithm for determining the status of a word or even 
occasionally a phrase as codeswitch or borrowing. Indeed it seems quite possible 
that for different people the same form has a different status. In this paper I have 
included as codeswitches all forms set off by the authors with italics, boldface type, 
underlining or quotation marks as well as all forms found neither in the large La- 
rousse or Porrua dictionaries. The data analyzed are derived from the 1989 and 
1990 issues of the political, literary and news magazines Proceso, Vuelta, Nexos, 
Siempre and Contenido. ; q a 



O 



1S4 



Eric* McClure 



SYNTACTIC STRUCTURE OF MEXICAN 
JOURNALISTIC CODESWITCHES 

Let us now take a brief look at the syntactic structure of the codeswitches in 
this corpus. Excluding names and titles, a total of 535 codeswitches were found. Of 
these, as can be seen by looking at table I, the vast majority were single nouns 
(69%), , finding in accord with other codeswitching studies where such switches 
were not excluded by definition. The next most frequent category consisted of ad- 
jective plus noun, but it accounted for only 13% of the switches. Full sentence 
switches accounted for 7 % of the data, while adjectives and prepositional phrases 
accounted for 5 % and 2% respectively. Collectively the above mentioned categories 
accounted for 95 % of all switches. These data differ from those reported in studies 
of codeswitching in Chicano communities in the U.S. in the lack of major constitu- 
ent switches. There are no VP or full clause switches and very few full NP switches. 
Perhaps this paucity is due to the fact that Spanish is clearly the language of general 
discourse in this corpus, whereas in Chicano communities in the U.S., English 
plays a much larger role. 



Table 1. 



1 . 


Noun 


370 


(69%) 


2. 


Adjective + Noun 


69 


(13%) 


3. 


Sentence 


37 


(7%) 


4. 


Adjective 


24 


(5%) 


5. 


Prepositional Phrase 


11 


(2%) 


6. 


other 


24 


(5%) 




^percentages do not add to 100 % because of rounding 



As Vald6s (1990) has noted, in the U.S. Chicano environment, bilingualism 
is a community phenomenon in which English, the language of the majority, is the 
prestige language, Spanish, the language of a subordinated minority. To participate 
in the world outside the barrio, to succeed academically, to get ahead, a Chicano 
must speak English. However in Mexico, Spanish-English bilingualism is not a 
community phenomenon geographically delimited. Instead we find individual bilin- 
gualism. Furthermore, the bilingualism of Mexico is not minority bilingualism. 
Spanish is both the language of the majority and the language of prestige. There is 
no context other than tourism in which English is necessary. Indeed, Vald<s points 
out that on occasions Mexicans may take pride in not having learned English. But, 
on the other hand, being bilingual may also be a source of pride. However, the 
Mexican tends to avoid mixing the two languages, stigmatizing such usage as char- 
acteristic of the "Pocho" or Mexican-American. In fact, in 1981 a National Com- 
mission for the Defense of the Spanish Language was established in Mexico to stan- 
dardize the Spanish spoken there and to protect it, particularly in border regions. 
Such a defense was seen as important in maintaining the culture of Mexico, "a par- 
ticular manner of understanding reality and a characteristic form of thinking and of 
being" (Valdds, 1990 p. 43). Despite such attitudes, however, English loan words 
continue to penetrate Mexican Spanish and limited codeswitching exists. 



The Pragmatics of Codeswilching 



its 



MEXICAN ATTITUDES TOWARDS THE UNITED STATES 



The ambivalence that exists in Mexican attitudes to the use of English reflects 
their ambivalent feelings towards the U.S. in general. These feelings are a logical 
outcome of the political, economic, and cultural hegemony that the U.S. has exer- 
cised with respect to Latin America as a whole and nowhere more strongly than m 
Mexico. In his book Ttempo Nublado, the Mexican Nobel laureate Octavio Paz 

states that: 

The idea that the people of Mexico have of the United States is contra- 
dictory, passionate and impervious to criticism, more than an idea it is a 
mythic image. The same thing can be said of the vision held by our 
intellectuals and writers (1985, p. 140, my translation). 



Alan Riding, a correspondent who has worked in Latin America since 1971 
and who was the head of the Mexico City office of The New York Times for six 
years, explains this attitude in his book, Distant Neighbors. A Portrait of the Mat- 
cans (1985). In a chapter whose title is taken from a statement often attributed to 
Porfirio Diaz (Pobre Mexico, tan lejos de Di6s y tan cerca de los Estados Umdos 
"Poor Mexico, so far from God and so close to the United States"), Riding states: 



The asymmetry of power determines how Mexico and the United States 
view each other. Differences of history, religion, race and language 
serve to complicate their relationship, to contrast their ways of doing 
things, to widen the gulf of understanding that separates them. But all 
these variables are overshadowed by the inescapable and unique fact 
that a vulnerable developing country shares a 2,000-mile border with 
the world’s richest and strongest power. When confronting its northern 
neighbor, history has taught Mexico that it has few defenses. 

Contiguity with the United States has proved a permanent psychological 
trauma. Mexico cannot come to terms with having lost half of its terri- 
tory to the United States, with Washington’s frequent meddling in its 
political affairs, with the U.S. hold on its economy and with growing 
cultural penetration by the American way of life. It is also powerless to 
prevent these interventions from taking place, and is even occasionally 
hurt by measures adopted in Washington that did not have Mexico in 
mind. And it has failed to persuade Washington to give it special atten- 
tion. Intentionally or not, Mexico has been the target of American dis- 
dain and neglect and, above all, a victim of the pervasive inequality of 
the relationship. 



The emotional prism of defeat and resentment through which Mexico views 
every bilateral problem is not simply the legacy of unpardoned injustices from he 
past. Contemporary problems -- migr^i^.^ade, energy and cr its - a so invo ve 



1S6 



Eric* McClure 



° I fCOnflicting Mtional interests - with Mexico approaching the bargaining 

deeply sensitive to its enormous dependence on American credit, American 
investment, American tourists and even American food. Good faith alone could not 
eliminate these contradictions, but underlying tensions are kept alive by Mexico's 
expectation that it will be treated unfairly. Its worst fears are confirmed with suffi- 
cient regularity for relations to remain clouded by suspicion and distrust As the 
local saying goes: ‘What would we do without the gringos? But we must never give 
3 ^*s- ’ Mex,co must de P end ~ but cannot rely - on its neighbor (1985, pp. 

However, despite resentment of America, as Riding points out, few Mexicans 
express resentment of Americans as individuals (although in jest one hears "Que 
vengan las gringas y que se queden los gringos.' 'Let the American women come 
and the American men stay home.') Many express admiration of Americans for 
qualities they attribute to them: honesty in government, democracy, efficiency, 
i igence, technological superiority. American consumer patterns have also had a 
major influence on Mexican consumption patterns, but that in turn has provoked 
attacks on these patterns. As Riding notes "There is no consensus: no single image 
captures hew Mexicans see the United States. ' This fact is reflected in the range of 
ways English is used in the Mexican practf. 

THE FUNCTIONS OF MEXICAN JOURNALISTIC CODESWITCHES 

Researchers (see for example Elfas Olivares, 1976; Gumperz and Hemindez- 
Chavez, 1972; McClure, 1977 and 1981; Vald6s-Fai: s, 1976 and Valdes, 1981) 
examining oral codeswitching in Chicano communities in the U.S. have noted that 
it is used for a wide variety of purposes. Among them are the following: quotation, 
repetition, interjection, addressee specification, emphasis, clarification, elabora- 
ion, focus, attention attraction or retention, personalization versus objectivization 
topic shift, and role shift. While the functions of the written codeswitching exam- 
ined here overlap with those mentioned above, there are differences. Some are 
simply the result of a difference in channel - written rather than oral. Addressee 
specification, role shift and attention attraction are irrelevant in the written mode. 
Others however, relate to the difference between the social and political contexts in 
which Chicanes in the U.S. and Mexican journalists codeswitch. An examination of 
the Mexican corpus reveals the following reasons for switching: (A) lack of a good 
Spanish translation, (B) lack of a set Spanish word or phrase, (C) greater explicit- 
ness of the English form, (D) desire to play with well-known English phrases, (E) 
emphasis through repetition, (F) simple quotation, (G) quotation to reproduce a 
style of speech, (H) creation of a sarcastic, satirical or ironic tone, (1) creation of a 

sophisticated tone, and (J) creation of an erudite tone. Each of these uses is illus- 
trited below. 



A. Lack of a good Spanish translation 



1 . 




No me precipitar* en el famoso name-dropping, el bombardeo de 
nombres que, se supone, construyen por aluvidn personalidades y famas 
(Nexos. April, 1989. C. Monsivtfis] 

197 



The Pragmatic* of Codeswitching 



187 



I will not throw myself headlong into the famous practice of name-drop- 
ping, the bombardment of names that, it is supposed, construct person- 
alities and reputations by flood. 

2. No fue eso lo que sucedid en los pafses asiaticos que empezaron como 
sweat shops. IContenido. July, 1990. J. Acosta] 

It was not that which took place in the Asian countries which began like 

sweatshops. 

Lack of a set Spanish word or phrase 

3. Una grieta se abrid entre ambos, como si el dirigente negro convocara a 
los odiados demonios que el american way of life repudia porque repre- 
sentan la mis dura carga de la consciencia. [Siempre. July 11, 1990. S. 
Del Rio] 

A crack opened between both, as if the Black director convoked the 
hated demons that the American way of life repudiates because they 
represent the hardest burden of conscience. 

4. La operacidn, ..., constituye la primera "persecucidn en caliente" (hot 
pursuit), que desde hace tiempo habfan exigido las agencias antidrogas 
norteamericanas. (Proceso. April 16, 1990. Carlos Puig] 

The operation, ..., constitutes the first "pursuit while hot" (hot pursuit) 
that the North American antidrug agencies had demanded in a long 
time. 

Greater explicitness of the English form. 

5. Casi nadie habla del encuentro sexual fugaz (one night stand). [Nexos. 
June, 1990. Mexico City. A. Romin] 

Almost no one speaks of the fleeting sexual encounter (one night stand). 

6. Documentar ese optimismo equivale a enumerar a los protagonistas se- 
cretos de la historia, equivale a recuperar para la historia las fiestas 
efimeras de una sociedad en nacimiento: la prosa como happening del 
happening. [Vuelta. June, 1990. C. Monsiviis] 

Documenting that optimism is equivalent to enumerating the secret pro- 
tagonists of history, is equivalent to recovering for history the ephem- 
eral festivities of a society in birth: prose as happening of the happen- 
ing. 

Play with well-known English phrases 

7. Tambidn a la modema civilizacidn porfiriana debemos el american way 
of drinking', "las cantinas o bares a la manera americana", escribid Ar- 
temio de Valle-Arizpe, "no proceden en Mexico sino en la era en que 



198 



188 



Erica McClure 



goberaaba cl general Porfirio Dfaz, antes de esos pacfficos anos, no eran 
conocidos tales esUblecimientos para la bebienda, ..." [Nexos. June, 
1990. Joaqufn Blanco] 

We also owe to the modem Porfirian civilization the American way of 
drinking : "the taverns or bars of American type," wrote Artemio de 
Valle- Arizpe, "only originate in Mexico in the era in which general 
Porfirio Dfaz governed; before those peaceful years such establishments 
for drinking were unknown. 

8. ... y todo pea ce-and -love, vimonos [Nexos. June, 1990. Joaqufn 
Blanco] 

... and all peace-and-love, let's go. 

9. Traje cltfsico, corbata cldsica, ademanes sobrios, Pedro Aspe sube a la 
tribuna con un cierto 'Touch of class.’ [Proceso. February 27, 1989. 
A. M. Mergier] 

Classic suit, classic tie, sober gestures, Pedro Aspe climbs to the ros- 
trum with a certain '"Touch of class . " 

10. (Entonces a quiln se le va a quitar...? ~ That is the question. — i,A los 
canadienses? [Proceso. March 27, 1989. A. M. Mergier] 

Then from whom is it going to be taken...? - That is the question. ~ 
From the Canadians? 

1 1 . Pero prevalece la tradicidn adulta del baile como noche reventada, y el 
verdadero bailongo - the real thing. [Nexos. June, 1990. Joaqufn 
Blanco] 

But the adult tradition of the dance as a blow-out night and the true 
bailongo [poor but entertaining dance] — the real thing - prevails. 

12. A1 final de la jomada, frente a un interminable cafe, pensamos que la 
onda, que la meta de ir de shopping a Perisur es una experiencia que 
tiene poco que ver con las compras y mucho con el sentimiento cuasirre- 
ligioso de la preposmodemidad mexicana: el chiste es estar ahf, being 
there. [Nexos. June, 1990. F. Btfez Rodriguez] 

At the end of the day, facing an unending coffee, we think that the 
point, that the purpose of going shopping at Perisur is an experience 
that has little to do with purchase* and much to do with the quasire- 
ligious sentiment of the Mexican prepostmodemity: the point is to be 
there, being there. 




193 



The Pragmatics of Codeswitching 



189 



13. Los amos del espectfculo ~ pues the show must go on siempre, pase lo 
que pase -- han dado la pauta desde hace tiempo. [Proceso. March 27, 
1989. F. Ponce) 

The directors of the show - since the show must go on always, whatever 
happens - have set the standard already. 

Emphasis through repetition 

14. Ya no es escoger entre un mundo o varios -- one world or several - sino 
por "un mundo o ninguno" — one world or none. [Nexos. June, 1990. 

L. Arizpe] 

Already it is not a question of choosing between one world or several - 

- one world or several - but rather for "one world or none" - one world 
or none. 

Simple quotation 

15. - Nada. No pasa nada. Estin filmando una pelicula ... It's a picture ! - 

- intentaban tranquilizarlos los encargados del Princess [hotel]. 
[Proceso. April 9, 1990. A. Campuzanol 

- Nothing. Nothing is happening. They are filming a movie ... It's a 
picture'. — the people in charge of the Princess were trying to calm 
them. 

16. En ese momento crefmos que la agitacidn pronto pasarfa, pero no, al 
contrario, cada vez son mis los norteamericanos que los viemes por las 
noches se reunen en la lfnea divisoria entre San Isidro y Tijuana, es- 
tacionan sus automdviles con las luces encendidas a lo largo de la fron- 
tera y con pancartas en mano que dicen "esta es nuestra frontera y no 
esti suficientemente vigilada" o "mexicanos go home ," gritan slogans 
como "iste es nuestro pafs," "mexicano, no te necesitamos mis," etc. 
[Siempre. July 1 1 , 1990. L. Singerlln that moment we believed that the 
agitation would soon pass, but no, to the contrary , each Hme there are 
more North Americans who on Friday nights get together on the divid- 
ing line between San Isidro and Tijuana, park their cars with their lights 
turned on along the border and with placards in hand which say , This 
is our border and it is not watched closely enough" or "Mexicans go 
home ," shout slogans like "This is our country, Mexican, we don t 
need you anymore," etc. 

17. Se pregunta el embajador mexicano ante la OEA, Antonio de Icaza" 
^Varnos a admitir que los extranjeros vengan a decimos c6mo mod- 

200 



Erica McClure 



emizar nuestros procesos electorales? Y se responde: "Over my death 
[their error] body" (sobre mi cadaver). [Proceso. April 9, 1990. C. 
Puig] 

The Mexican ambassador to the OAS, Antonio de Icaza, asks himself 
"Are we going to allow foreigners to come and tell us how to modernize 
our electoral processes?" And he answers himself: " Over my death 
(their error] body " (over my cadaver). 

Quotation to reproduce a style of speech 

18. La senora la contempld con frialdad, le espetd un "Don't be silty," que 
todavfa le duele, y le explicd: "Mira, con mi shopping no te metas, si 
quiero enterarme de Dallas me compro un video. And that's it." 
[Nexos. June, 1990. C. Monsiviis] 

The lady contemplated her coldly, spit out a "Don t be silly," that still 
hurts her, and explained to her: "Look, don't mix into my shopping, if 
I want to find out about Dallas I'll buy myself a video. And that's it. 

19. Encuentro a un mesero que vio perder en medio minuto un milldn de 
ddlares a "dot gordo gai, di petrolero Baragin, gut gordo, gud old 
taims. en toda noche, gerif! en toda noche mis of ten milions\ Di 
gordo... (Proceso. September 15, 1989. R. Garibay] 

I find a waiter who saw a million dollars lost in half a minute by that fat 
guy, the oilman Baragin, good fat guy, good old times. The whole 
night, hear it7 In the whole night more often millions'. The fat guy... 

Creation of a sarcastic, satirical or ironic tone 

20. Just crowned like miss Universe 1989, Angela Visser, 22, from Hol- 
land, was congratuleted by Tourism former secretary, teacher Carlos 
Hank Gonzilez, given her a cheek kiss. The representative of mexican 
government, formal gown dress, seemingly very pleasure enjoing the 
show. [The orthographic and grammatical errors are those of the article] 

Asf file — mis o menos — el happy end del certamen mundial de la 
belleza. Asf: en inglis y con el entusiasta aval del teacher Hank 
Gonzilez, diligente promotor de "la industria de la paz y la amistad." 



So it went - more or less - the happy end of the world beauty contest. 
So: in English and with the enthusiastic backing of the teacher Hank 
Gonzilez, diligent promoter of "the industry of peace and friendship. " 



The Pragmatic* of Codetwitching 



191 



Ni modo. The dream is over . [Proceso. June 1, 1989. F. Ortiz] 

That’s how it is. The dream is over . 

21. La transmisi6n del show, of course , serf en ingl6s. [Proceso. May 22, 
1989. F. Ortiz] 

The transmission of the show will, of course, be in English. 

22. La hipocresfa norteamericana no estriba tanto en los lamentos exagera- 
dos por la muerte de un agente de la DEA, y en la indiferencia o incluso 
el desprecio ante la muerte de decenas de agentes mexicanos (o, by the 
way, de miles de civiles panamenos). [Proceso. January 15, 1990. J. 
Castaneda] 

The North American hypocrisy does not rest so much in the exaggerated 
laments over the death of an agent of the DEA and in the indifference or 
even the scorn with respect to the death of tens of Mexican agents (or, 
by the way, of thousands of Panamanian civilians). 

23. Cuando lef mi ponencia, el Doctor Lightbridge me hizo el siguiente 
honroso comentario: "you don't understand Mexicol" ... 

When I read my paper, Doctor Lightbridge made the following honor- 
able comment to me: "You don't understand Mexicol" ... 

Pero uno se resigna a estas cosas a cambio del paseo. Y hasta se halla 
patSticamente dispuesto a inventar una abuela que platicaba con una 
iguana, haefa sopa de palmeras o tocaba el harpsicordio en un palafito 
en los manglares de Nayarit. Esto con tal de que el mexicanista que 
platica con uno (romintico, izquierdista, morbosamente nacionalista) se 
sienU reconfortado y declare a Mexico a land of fascinating contrasts . 
[Vuelta. June, 1990. G. Sheridan] 

But one resigns oneself to these things in exchange for the trip. And one 
even finds himself pathetically willing to invent a grandmother who 
talked with an iguana, made soup from palm trees or played the harpsi- 
chord in a lake dwelling in the mangrove swamps of Nayarit. This is so 
that the Mexicanist who talks with one (romantic, leftist, pathologically 
nationalistic) feels comforted and declares Mexico to be a land of fasci- 
nating contrasts . 

Creation of a sophisticated tone 

24. (ya se sabe: refacciones para electrodom£sticos en Artfculo 123, apara- 
tos para audio y video en Republica de El Salvador, materiales ortop&li- 
cosen Motolinfa, and so on) ... [Nexos. June, 1990. F. B£ez Rodriguez] 

202 



192 



Erica McClure 



(it's already known: parts for home appliances in Artfculo 123, audio 
and video players in Reptfblica de E! Salvador, orthopedic materials in 
Motolinfa, and so on). 

25. Orientado por los dudosos consejos de un lejano familiar hipocondri- 
aco, Hegui un jueves por la manana al Hospital General Dr. Manuel 
Gea Gonzilez, de la Secretarfa de Salud, a las puertas del deep south de 
la capital. [Nexos. June, 1990. M. Ortiz] 

Oriented by the doubtful councils of a hypochondriacal distant relative, 
1 arrived one Thursday in the morning at the general hospital Dr. Man- 
uel Gea Gonzilez, of the Department of Health, at the doors of the deep 
south of the capital. 

J. Creation of an erudite tone 



26. For native Spanish she had no great care, 

At least her conversation was obscure. 

Lord Byron, Don Juan [introduction to article] 

[Vuelta. June, 1990. Carlos Monsivafs] 

27. No creo que haya quien pueda decirle Here and here did Mixico help 
me. [Nexos. June, 1990. A. Ruiz Abreu) 

1 do not believe that there is anyone who can tell him Here and here did 
Mexico help me. 



Examples 1 through 13 all involve the use of English to express ideas associ- 
ated more commonly with an Anglo rather than a Hispa.iic context. In examples 1 
and 2, the English words name-dropping and sweatshops have been used. Neither 
has a short Spanish translation. In examples 3 and 4, the phrases American way of 
life and hot pursuit appear. Although all can be translated easily, the translations are 
not set phrases in Spanish as they are in English. In examples 5 and 6, we find the 
expressions one night stand and happening. In these cases, although there are short 
Spanish equivalents for the English forms, the English expressions are more ex- 
plicit. A happening is a particular type of event while an acontecimiento is any type 
of event. A one night stand is a particular type of encuentro sexual fugaz (fleeting 
sexual encounter). Thus the English forms evoke much richer images than would 



their Spanish translations. In examples 7 through 13, the journalists play with well- 
known English phrases which carry strong cultural overtones. In 7 the phrase 
American way of life is changed to American way of drinking, perhaps with sarcastic 
overtones. In 8 the writer turns a well-known hippie phrase, peace and love , into a 
single word with hyphens. In 9, by using the phrase touch of class , the writer paints 
a graphic picture of Mexico's finance secretary and perhaps also refers with light 
^hrony to Aspe's U.S. academic training and to his social backg /und. In 10 the same 



ERIC 



203 



The Pragmatics of Codetwitchinf 



193 



writer evokes one of the English classics, Hamlet, with the sentence That is the 
question. In 1 1 we find the use of a phrase, the real thing, from American advertis- 
ing, while 12 evokes images from American popular psychology. In 13 we find a 
clichl from American show business. 

In example 14 the repetition in English of a preceding Spanish phrase empha- 
sizes a point in a manner quite similar to that of a paraphrase in a monolingual text. 
Exact repetition is inappropriate in written text, but a monolingual author may 
underline a point by restating it in different words. A bilingual author has an addi- 
tional resource. Instead of paraphrasing he may switch languages to underscore his 
point. 

In examples 15 through 17 we see a use of codeswitching that is quite com- 
mon in bilingual communities, exact quotation. In 15 the journalist is reproducing 
the speech of hotel personnel trying to calm foreign guests during a civil distur- 
bance. In 16 the exact words on a sign are reproduced and in 17 the strong language 
of a diplomat. 

In examples 18 and 19 we see a different use of quotation, the reproduction of 
a style of speech to evoke a clearer picture of the individuals discussed. In 18 both 
the content of the conversation and the type of codeswitching used create the image 
of a certain type of woman from upper or upper middle class Mexican society. In 19 
we see a Mexican intellectual's stereotype of the language and culture of the Chi- 
cano. The article from which these passages are taken is a broad parody not only of 
the manner in which Chicanos codeswitch [note the use of Spanish orthography in 
English utterances and highly unlikely codeswitches such as en toda noche mds of 
ten milions "In the whole night more than ten million"] but also of the celebration of 
one of the most important events in Mexican history in the tasteless atmosphere of 
Las Vegas. 

In examples 20 through 23 we again see the use of codeswitching to create a 
sarcastic or ironic tone. Here we see the reflection of three tendencies in the Mexi- 
can press, leftist criticism of the U.S., resentment of perceived US ascription of 
subordinate status to Mexico and Mexicans, and resentment of the stereotyping of 
Mexico as an exotic third world country. All are often associated with the satirical 
use of English. Examples 20 and 21 contain excerpts from articles on the 1989 Miss 
Universe Contest held in Cancdn, Mexico. By beginning one of his articles with the 
long fractured English introduction reproduced in 20 and interspersing English 
throughout both articles, the journalist Ortiz reinforces the sarcastic tone in which 
he criticizes not only the teacher Hank Gonzalez's decision to promote tourism 
through subsidizing the Miss Universe contest but also the arrogance of the Ameri- 
can organizers of the contest who excluded Mexican journalists from many of the 
events of a contest being held in their own country. Resentment of their casual as- 
sumption that broadcasting would be in English is shown in 21 . "La transmisidn del 
show, of course, seri en inglds. " [The broadcast of the show... will be in English.] In 
20 the use of the phrase happy end contributes to the satirical tone established by the 
phrase "diligent promoter of the industry of peace and friendship" and the juxtapo- 
sition of the Mexican cliche Ni modo (that's how it is, nothing can be done) with the 
English cliche, The dream is over . 4 p - 



194 



Erica McClure 



In example 22 the journalist Castaneda complains about American hypocrisy 
in the Camarena case. It is only the American dead who count. The use of the 
English phrase by the way which suggests an afterthought to refer to the thousands 
of civilian dead in Panama is strongly ironic. In 23 Guillermo Sheridan highlights 
the irony of an Anglo criticizing a Mexican for not understanding Mexico by indi- 
cating that he did so in English not in Spanish thereby suggesting that the critic's 
Spanish was not fluent. Additionally, Sheridan complains of the "necessity" felt by 
the Mexican scholar to invent a colorful background so that an Anglo specialist in 
Mexico can satisfy his de-ire to find in Mexico "a land of fascinating contrasts." . 

In examples 24 and 25, we sue the use of codeswitching simply to create a 
tone of sophistication. In these passages, which specific words are in English does 
not seem to be important. What is important is that English is used. On the other 
hand, in examples 26 and 27, literary quotations in English appear to have been 
used to create an erudite tone. 



CONCLUSION 

Codeswitching in Mexican political, literary and news magazines differs from 
oral codeswitching in Chicano communities in the U.S. both syntactically and prag- 
matically. Codeswitching in the Mexican press is far more syntactically restricted 
than is Chicano oral codeswitching. Although nouns constitute the largest category 
of switches in both types of codeswitching, phrasal, clausal and sentential code- 
switching is much more common in oral Chicano codeswitching than in codeswitch- 
ing in the Mexican press. Spanish is always clearly the matrix language in code- 
switching in the Mexican press. In fact it often seems that English sentences and 
phrases are simply treated as if they were words. On the other hand, in Chicano 
codeswitching in the U.S. , it is often difficult to decide what the matrix language is. 
In fact, some sentences seem not to have a matrix language. Several factors may 
account for these syntactic differences. In the first place, there is a channel differ- 
ence. Oral codeswitching in the Chicano community is generally a relatively unmo- 
nitored process whereas codeswitching in the Mexican press is highly monitored. 
Second, in Mexico the type of oral codeswitching which exists in Chicano commu- 
nities is negatively stereotyped. Often it is considered to be the result of imperfect 
mastery of both languages. Third, English in Mexico has an ambivalent status. On 
the one hand it is a language of prestige. However, on the other, it is the language 
of an intrusive neighbor, a language against which Spanish should be defended. 
Fourth, bilingual Chicanos in the U.S. in general constitute a subordinated minority 
in a society whose mainstream speaks English. As a result they may in fact use 
English in many contexts: in school, in the workplace, in stores, in healthcare cen- 
ters, even at home and with friends. But Spanish may also be used in these contexts, 
the result being frequent codeswitching. In contrast, in Mexico there are few con- 
texts in which the use of English occurs naturally. As a result codeswitching may be 
inhibited. 



The Pragmatic* of Codetwitching 



195 



The above mentioned factors also affect the pragmatics of codeswitching in 
the two contexts. The feet that codeswitching in the Mexican press involves a writ- 
ten channel and is addressed to an anonymous audience limits its functions. Unlike 
oral codeswitching in the Chicano community, it cannot be used to mark a shift in 
addressee nor to indicate the activation of a particular role relationship between 
interlocutors. 

The functions of codeswitching in the Mexican press are also constrained by 
the negative Mexican attitude towards the type of frequent codeswitching found in 
the Chicano community in the U.S. Thus although oral codeswitching in the Chi- 
cano community may sometimes simply signal membership in the Chicano speech 
community, being devoid of other pragmatic significance, such usage does not 
occur in the Mexican press. Indeed, although Spanish-English bilingualism is a 
community phenomenon in many parts of the U.S; in Mexico it exists only at the 
level of the individual. 

A final factor circumscribing the functions of codeswitching in the Mexican 
press is the status of the two languages in question. In Mexico, Spanish is the major- 
ity language and a symbol of national identity. English, like the United States, has 
an ambivalent status. It is at the same time a language of prestige and a language 
against which Spanish needs to be defended. This ambivalence towards both the 
U.S. and its language is reflected in its use in the Mexican press. Not only is it 
employed to evoke a more precise image than a Spanish word or phrase, but also to 
create a sophisticated or erudite tone. However it is also used in satirical, ironic or 
sarcastic attacks on American politics and American values, whether found in the 
U.S. or in Mexico. 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

A previous version of this paper was presented at the Fifth Annual Interna- 
tional Conference on Pragmatics and Language Learning. 

THE AUTHOR 

Dr. Erica McClure is Associate Professor of Sociolinguistics and Education at 
the University of Illinois. She obtained her Ph.D. from the University of California 
at Berkeley in Linguistic Anthropology. Her research interests include discourse 
analysis, codeswitching and second language acquisition. 

REFERENCES 

Clyne, M. (1967). Transference and Triggering. The Hague; Martinus 
Nijhoff.Diebold, A. R. (1963). Code-switching in Greek-English bilingual 
speech. Georgetown Monograph Series on Languages and Linguistics, 15, 
53-62. 

Elfas Olivares, L. (1976). Ways of Speaking in a Mexican American Community; A 
Sociolinguistic Approach. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of 
Texas. 



O 



206 



196 



Eric* McClure 



Garcfa-Pelayo y Gross, R. (1972). Fequeflo Larousse en Color . Mexico, D. F.: 
Ediciones Larousse. 

Gumperz, J. and Hernindez-Chavez, E. (1972). Bilingualism, bidialectalism and 
classroom interaction. In C. Cazden, V. John and D. Hymes (Eds.), Func- 
tions of Language in the Classroom. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Hasseltno, N. (1970). Code-switching and modes of speaking. In G. G. Gilbert 
(Ed.) Texas Studies in Bilingualism. Berlin: De Gruyter. 

McClure, E. (1972). Ethnoanatomy in a Multilingual Community. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, University of California at Berkeley. 

McClure, E. (1977). Aspects of code-switching in the discourse of bilingual Mexi- 
can-American children. In M. Saville-Troike (td.) Linguistics and Anthropol- 
°gy- (Georgetown University Round Table on Languages and Linguistics). 
Washington, D. C.: Georgetown University. 

McClure, E. (1981). Formal and functional aspects of the code switched discourse 
of bilingual children. In R. Durin (Ed.), Latino Language and Communica- 
tive Behavior. Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex. 

McClure, E. and McClure, M. (1977). Ethnoreconstruction. Anthropological Lin- 
guistics, 19, 104-110. 

Paz, O. (1985). Ttempo Nublado. Mexico, D. F.: Editorial Artemisa. 

Pfaff, C. (1975). Syntactic constraints on code-switching: a quantitative study of 
Spanish/English. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Linguistic 
Society of America, 1975. 

Raluy, Poudevida, A. and Monterde, F. (1982). Diccionario Porrua de la Lengua 
Espaflola. Mexico, D. F.: Editorial Pomia. 

Riding, A. (1985). Distant Neighbors, A Portrait of the Mexicans. New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf. 

Schaffer, D. (1978). The place of code-switching in linguistic contacts. In M. Para- 
dis (Ed.), Aspects of Bilingualism, Columbia, S. C.: Hornbeam Press dd 
265-274. FF ' 

ValdSs, G. (1981). Code-switching as a deliberate verbal strategy: a microanalysis 
of direct and indirect requests. In R. Durtto (Ed.), Latino Language and 
Communicative Behavior. Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex. 

Valdls, G. (1990). Consideraciones tedrico-metodoldgicas para el estudio del bil- 
ingualismo inglls-espanol en el lado mexicano de la firontera. Mexican 
Studies. Estudios Mexicanos 6( 1 ):43-66. 

Valdls-Fallis, G. (1976). Social interaction and code-switching patterns: a case 
study of Spanish/English alternation. In G. Keller, R. Teschner and S. Viera 
(Eds.), Bilingualism in the Bicentennial and Beyond. New York: The Bilin- 
glial Press. 



o 




207 



Pragmatic* and Language Learning 
Monograph Series, Vol. 3, 1992 



Modality as a Strategy in Interaction: Epistemic Modality in the 
Language of Native and Non-Native Speakers of English 

Eiise Karkkainen 



This paper forms part of a larger study (Karkkainen 1991) which 
focused not so much on second-language learners and language learning 
but, rather, on examining the semantic system of modality from the 
point of view of discourse analysis and pragmatics, and for the most 
part in a cross-cultural body of data. I outlined the functions of primar- 
ily epistemic modality in conversational interaction between native 
speakers of English and advanced Finnish university students of Eng- 
lish. Thus, the inspiration for the study came from linguistics, "if only 
from difficulties within linguistics", as Stubbs (1983, p. 67) puts it, as 
it seems very obvious that modality is an aspect of language that has not 
been adequately captured by syntactic or semantic theories. However, 
due to the nature of the corpus data, I also acquired a great deal of infor- 
mation on the problems that Finnish learners of English encounter in 
this area of language use, and I will here concentrate on that aspect of 
my study. 



THE DATA 

I analyzed epistemic modality in a body of data collected in the Department of 
English, University of Oulu, during 1985-1988 in the Contrastive (Finnish/ Eng- 
lish) Discourse Analysis Project carried out under the guidance of Professor Heikki 
Nyyssonen. 

The empirical design followed in broad outline the approach by Edmondson 
et al (1984). Our corpus consisted of 48 simulated task-oriented conversations be- 
tween a Finnish student of English (NNS) and a native speaker of English (NS) 
(approx. 7 hours and some 75,000 words). The conversations involved a problem or 
a delicate issue that had to be brought up by one of the participants, and it was hoped 
that some kind of agreement would be reached on it in the course of the interaction. 
A number of Finnish-Finnish and English-English recordings were also made for 
comparison. 

Despite the fact that they were simulations, we were very happy with the 
resulting conversations, since the participants themselves rated them as fairly natu- 
ral or natural in almost all cases. This may have been mainly due to the fact that, 
besides carefully preparing the participants and trying to make the situation as re- 
laxed as possible, the test persons were left on their own in the room during the 
actual recording (Karkkainen and Raudaskoski 1988). 

i9 £0b 



19 * 



Elbe Kirkkiinen 



EPISTEMIC MODALITY -- FROM SEMANTICS TO PRAGMATICS 

Epistemic modality refers to modal expressions that convey the speaker's 
commitment to the truth of the proposition expressed by him/her. This may refer to 
how certain the speaker feels about the content of his/her utterance or how likely he/ 
she thinks it is, but also in some cases to a process of inference made by the speaker 
(Palmer 1986, p. 51, Lyons 1977, p. 797, Westney 1986, p. 311 etc.). In spoken 
interaction linguistic categories expressing epistemic modality include modal aux- 
iliaries, modal adverbs, modal lexical verbs, parenthetical clauses and, to a lesser 
extent, modal adjectives and nouns. 

When it comes to semantic accounts of the linguistic items that serve to ex- 
press modality in English, it has been surprisingly common to concentrate on 
modality only as it is signalled by the English modal verbs or modals (this has been 
done by Twaddell 1965, Ehrman 1966, Boyd and Thome 1969, Bouma 1975, 
Hermer6n 1978, Palmer 1979, and Coates 1983, for example). This is understand- 
able in view of the fact that, because the modals are more integrated within the 
structure of the clause than other modal expressions, they are considered to be more 
central in the system (Perkins 1983, p. 104). 

The ambiguity of modal expressions has become apparent in many of the 
semantic studies named above: modal items, especially modal verbs, may express a 
multitude of meanings. In addition to being capable of expressing both subjective 
and objective types of meaning, a single modal verb may have both an epistemic 
meaning and a non-epistemic (or root) meaning, or even several non-epistemic 
meanings. What is more, it may have these meanings simultaneously, inside one and 
the same utterance, that is, it may be indeterminate between two meanings. The 
latter phenomenon has not usually been accounted for in semantic analyses, even 
though Palmer draws attention briefly to the difficulty of distinguishing discrete and 
clear categories (Palmer 1979, pp. 172-178). Coates (1983), however, proposes a 
fuzzy set theory to account for the indeterminacy of modal verb meanings. (Hers, 
incidentally, is one of the few semantic approaches that is actually based on corpus 
data, including also spoken English.) She claims that a modal verb may, for one 
thing, be ambiguous, that is, it may not be possible to decide which of two meanings 
is intended; a modal may be ambiguous even between an epistemic and a non-epis- 
temic meaning, as in the following: 

He must understand that we mean business. (= (Epistemic) 'Surely he 

understands that we mean business' or (Root) 'It is essential -that he 

understand that we mean business') (p. 16) 

It is, however, very likely that in many (if by no means all) cases the exami- 
nation of an utterance in context would enable the hearer to exclude one of the inter- 
pretations. But what is more significant in Coates's model is that it allows a modal 
also to be indeterminate (in Coates's terms, a merger), so that even the context may 
fail to exclude one of two possible meanings. Yet, it is not necessary to decide 
which meaning is intended before the example can be understood, as follows: 
rt o 



Modality as a Strategy in Interaction 



199 



A: Newcastle Brown is a jolly good beer. 

B: Is it? 

A: Well it ought to be at that price. 

("Here it is not clear whether the speaker is referring to the 
maker’s obligation to provide good beer (Root OUGHT), or whether he 
is making a logical assumption -- 'it costs a lot, therefore it is good 
(Epistemic OUGHT)." (p. 17) 

Preisler (1986) claims along similar lines that examples with modal verbs are 
often ambiguous and that "if the ambiguity is not resolved by the context, the reason 
is perhaps that it is not intended to" (p. 91). Here, then, we are taking the step from 
semantic to pragmatic. Thomas (1988) draws attention to so-called complex illocu- 
tionary acts and the communicative advantages that speakers may obtain from ex- 
ploiting these. She distinguishes between ambiguity and ambivalence: with ambi- 
guity, which is (indeed) a semantic/ grammatical term, it is normally the case that 
only one meaning is intended by the speaker, while with ambivalence, which oper- 
ates at the pragmatic level, both speaker and addressee understand that more than 
one interpretation is possible. We may conclude, then, that Coates s term indeter- 
minacy and Thomas’s term ambivalence refer to the same phenomenon, which can 
be considered at least to some extent intentional on the part of the speaker (whereas 
ambiguity is unintentional). 

Preisler (1986) further observes that the basic meanings of modal forms are in 
themselves extremely general or context-indifferent (emphasis added). He states 
that the modal verbs, for example, are semantically inexplicit and are "prone to take 
on overtones of interpersonal meaning which derive from the particular context in 

which they are used" (pp. 91, 96). . 

Perkins (1983) is among the first to relate modality to the functions ot the 
utterances that are being modalized. He points out that the unified conceptual sys- 
tem of semantic modality interacts with contextual and pragmatic factors, so that of 
the utterance functions or illocutionary acts distinguished by Searle (1976), asser- 
tives appear to have a close relationship to epistemic modality and directives to 
deontic modality (Perkins 1983, p. 14, cf. also Palmer 1986, p. 13). However, he 
emphasizes that this is not a one-to-one relationship and that it is not the (semantics 
of a) modal auxiliary, for example, that determines the illocutionary force of an 
utterance. The force is entirely due to the context of utterance, as in the following 
example: 

You may go. - can be uttered as a command 

You may smoke. - can be uttered as the giving of permission 

and yet in both cases the modal verb may would in most semantic treatments be 
analyzed as deontic ’permissive’ may. Implicitly, Perkins thus draws attention to 
the fact that the modal verbs, for example, comparatively seldom act as illocution- 
ary force indicating devices (or lFIDs, such as performative verbs). It is only in the 

2i0 



200 



Elbe Kirkkiinen 



case of deontic (root) meaning that this kind of fairly straightforward form-function 
relationship is at all common. In most other cases, and certainly in the case of epis- 
temic modality, this relationship is of a more complex kind. 

Perkins (1983) claims that few linguists have an adequate working definition 
of modality at the semantic level. So far, there is also no unified definition of what 
might constitute modality at the level of interaction. In general terms, at the prag- 
matic level we are dealing with illocutionary commitment, i.e. with various ways 
of subscribing to a speech act (Lyons 1981). Notions such as commitment/detach- 
ment (Stubbs 1986), modification of illocutionary force (Holmes 1984) and 
hedging (Hubler 1983) have been used to account for the functions of a large 
number of surface structure categories in language, including and often focusing on 
expressions of epistemic modality. 

In my study, I hypothesized that epistemic modality has a bearing on what 
Leech (1983) calls the rhetorical force of the utterance, "i.e. the meaning it conveys 
regarding s s adherence to rhetorical principles (e.g. how far s is being truthful, 
polite, ironic)" (p. 17). Epistemic modality was thus examined as a strategic device 
in the Interpersonal and the Textual Rhetoric of Leech (1983). It became appar- 
ent that rather than completely determining the illocutionary force of utterances, 
epistemic modality is more likely to first of all modify it in various ways, and sec- 
ondly to completely ambiguate it. In this way, epistemic items may have a strategic 
function in discourse. 

A systematic description of the functions of epistemic items in connected dis- 
course is both a difficult and a time-consuming task. First of all, the very identifica- 
tion of epistemic items is not unproblematic, because, as we have seen, an item may 
be ambivalent or indeterminate even in its context of use. Furthermore, to tackle the 
actual functions of epistemic items, there is no suitable model of spoken discourse 
that could be applied on the huge number of occurrences of epistemic modality in 
the data. Therefore, a modified speech act approach was used as a starting-point for 
analysis, i.e. Searle's five basic speech act categories were applied to the data 
(Searle 1976). This was done in order to,see whether there are any restrictions on 
the occurrence of epistemic modality in Searle's five act types, but also to find out 
whether the act categories of speech act theory are at all applicable to the analysis of 
epistemic expressions in continuing discourse. As will be seen, these questions are 
interconnected: even though when trying to decide on the speech act status of a 
given utterance I looked at both what preceded in the discourse and how the hearer 
interpreted it; that is, I looked at the utterance as part of connected discourse, it was 
frequently impossible to say whether I was dealing with an assertive or a directive, 
for example. Very often the utterance could have been eithe or, or in fact both. 
This is not very surprising if we take into account that speech act theory did not de- 
velop these act categories for the purpose of analyzing connected discourse (cf. 
Stubbs 1983a; 1986, pp. 8, 12 and his criticism on speech act theory). It is even less 
surprising in view of the fact that natural language by its very nature is often vague 
and indeterminate; speech acts can be deliberately or genuinely vague, and speakers 
cannot "really" be held accountable for what they said (Stubbs 1983a, pp. 485-486, 
Edmondson and House 1981, pp. 95-97). 

O 9 i i 



Modality at a Strategy in Interaction 



201 



It therefore became obvious that the speech act approach could only act as a 
negative frame of reference: the division into assertives> directives and commissives 
(these being the main types of speech acts that involved epistemic modality) was 
relatively unilluminating in itself and also difficult to carry out in practice. But, 
when going deeper into the reason why a speech act taxonomy was difficult to 
apply, two important functions of epistemic modality emerged that have not been 
commented on in earlier studies: the use of epistemic modality for saving one's own 
face in interaction, and, further, for manipulating and persuading one's addressee. 

In a subsequent closer analysis of the data, the unit of analysis was extended 
into a longer stretch or sequence of discourse where a particularly threatening issue, 
a face-threatening act (following Brown and Levinson 1978), was brought up and 
discussed, and where at least a preliminary agreement was reached. I examined the 
occurrences and co-occurrence patterns of epistemic items in these sequences, as 
speakers appeared to use them in a very systematic and purposeful way to achieve 
various conversational goals and to produce a particular effect in the minds of their 
addressees. Thus, more evidence was obtained for the different types of strategic 
functions that epistemic modality appeared to have in interaction. 

However, there are several things worth noting here. In the same way as it 
we« difficult to assign one single speech act label to an utterance containing one or 
more epistemic items, it was by no means possible to assign one single function to 
a given occurrence of epistemic modality. Often more than one thing was achieved 
simultaneously. It is also a commonplace in pragmatics and discourse analysis that 
making judgments about the speaker's intentions can be both impossible and futile, 
and yet one cannot altogether avoid that when describing the functions of epistemic 
modality. One can make distinctions at a theoretical level into epistemic modality 
used to indicate genuine uncertainty and epistemic modality used as a conversation- 
interactional strategy, but in a given instance of use it is only possible to distinguish 
varying degrees to which one function is more prominent than the other. And fi- 
nally, in so far as epistemic devices are used as a conversational strategy, they often 
function together with other strategic elements in interaction (cf. other modality 
markers below) and are only one strategic device among many. 

EPISTEMIC MODALITY AS A STRATEGY IN INTERACTION 



O 

ERLC 



It is possible to distinguish three types of strategic functions that epistemic 
modality may have in spoken interaction: a politeness strategy, a face-saving strat- 
egy and a persuasion and manipulation strategy. Before going into these functions, 
however, some quantitative results from the corpus study are presented. 

The first immediately obvious finding was that Finnish students used fewer 
tokens of epistemic modality than did native speakers of English (507 vs. 899). 
With both groups of subjects, epistemic items were clearly most common in asser- 
tive speech acts, the total numbers being 767 for native speakers and 45 1 for stu- 
dents. It is therefore understandable that earlier pragmatic research has concentrated 
almost exclusively on the use of epistemic modality in assertions (cf. HQbler 1983 
for example). Correspondingly, the total numbers of epistemic devices in directives 



202 



Elii* KiricUinen 



were 132 for native speakers and 56 for students. By contrast, epistemic expressions 
were rare in commissive and expressive speech acts; deontic modality is indeed 
more typical in commissives and evaluative modality in expressives (Palmer 1986 
pp. 13-14). 

The most common type of epistemic devices used by native speakers of Eng- 
lish in assertives were (in absolute numbers) the sentential adverbs, while modal 
auxiliaries and parentheticals/ lexical verbs were somewhat less common, but 
equally often used compared to each other (see Table 1). 

A comparison of the findings across the two subject groups yielded certain 
interesting results that pointed towards epistemic modality as a truly pragmatic 
device, whose semantic content has perhaps been overemphasized. Table 1 shows 
the frequencies of representatives of epistemic modality in both subject groups, as 
related to the total amount of speech in each group (NSs 44,053 words, NNSs 
30,961 words) to make comparison possible: 

Table 1. The most frequent types of epistemic modality in NS and NNS 
speech (number of tokens per words spoken by subjects in each group). 



Native sneakers 
of English : 

adverbs 0.71 % 
parentheticals 0.45 % 
modal verbs 0.45 % 
adjectives 0.13 % 



Finnish students 




of English: 




parentheticals 


0.60 


adverbs 


0.46 


modal verbs 


0.28 


adjectives 


0.13 



% 

% 

% 

% 



As can be seen in the table, the order of the two most frequent types of expres- 
sions is reversed for students, and also the relative frequencies of modal adverbs and 
modal verbs are smaller than those for native speakers. It is striking that the students 
as a whole tended to use speaker-oriented parenthetical expressions of the type / 
think and / know more often (relatively speaking) than native speakers. To find even 
clearer tendencies in the students' interlanguage, the 48 students were divided into 
three groups according to their linguistic competence. Table 2 shows the differences 
between the linguistically most competent students (Group A) and the least compe- 
tent students in the corpus (Group C) as to their use of different types of epistemic 
devices. 

Table 3 shows the relative frequencies of epistemic devices in the speech of 
three groups (again in relation to the total amount of speech in each group): among 
native speakers of English, in Group A and in Group C. 

It is clear that the Finnish students of English use fewer epistemic expres- 
sions in their speech than do native speakers of English. They also seem to favour 
different types of epistemic devices from those used by native speakers. Even 
Group A uses relatively fewer modal auxiliaries than native speakers (0.38% vs. 
0.45%), and resorts to parentheticals instead. Also, the students in this group use 
relatively fewer adverbs than native speakers (0.59% vs. 0.71 %). Group C appears 



Modality a» a Strategy in Interaction 



203 



Table 2. Use of epistemic devices in two student subject groups: Group A 
(linguistically most competent) and Group C (linguistically least competent). 



Parentheticals 


Adverbs 




Modals 




Adjectives 




+ lexical verbs 














GROUP A 


(14 students): 












I think 


36 


really 


25 


might 


15 


sure 


6 


I know 


11 


of course 


18 


could 


7 


I’m sure 


5 


I suppose 


4 


maybe 


11 


’ll 


7 


possible 


3 


seems 


4 


probably 


6 


won’t 


5 


I’m not sure 


1 


sounds 


4 


perhaps 


4 


may 


2 


sure thing 


1 


I don’t 




definitely 


1 


wouldn’t 


2 






think 


3 


surely 


1 


going to 


1 






I guess 


1 


certainly 


1 


gonna 


1 






tend 


1 


possibly 


1 


will 


1 






it seems 








must 


1 






to be 


1 






should 


1 














would 


1 






total 


65 




68 




44 




16 



GROUP C (10 students): 










I think 


21 


of course 


3 


’ll 


3 sure 


7 


I don’t 




maybe 


3 


must 


2 I’m sure 


2 


think 


3 


really 


2 


wouldn’t 


2 




I suppose 


3 


probably 


2 


going to 


1 




I guess 


2 


surely 


2 


might 


1 




seem 


1 


perhaps 


1 


should 


1 




I know 


1 


possibly 


1 












definitely 


1 








total 


31 




15 




10 


9 



to use parentheticals as a kind of compensatory strategy for both modal verbs and 
adverbs (0.74% vs. native speaker 0.45%). It is indeed a common observation in 
linguistic research that the English modal auxiliaries are difficult for foreign stu- 
dents to learn (Holmes (1982) makes this observation about French and Dutch stu- 
dents). That the Finnish students had difficulties with epistemic adverbs as well 
seems significant. 



214 



204 



Elite KirUciinen 



Table 3. Relative frequency of epistemic devices in NS, Group A and Group 
C speech. 



NSs: 



adverbs 0.71% 


parenth. 0.45% 


modals 0.45 % 


adj. 0.13% 


Group A: 








adverbs 0.59% 


parenth. 0.56% 


modals 0.38% 


adj. 0.14% 


Group C: 








pare nth. 0.74% 


adverbs 0.36% 


modals 0.24 % 


adj. 0.22% 



On-the-Record and Conventionalized Modality: A Politeness Strategy 

In recent pragmatic research, several scholars have offered frameworks of 
politeness to account for violations of the Cooperative Principle and for indirection 
in language (cf. Leech 1983, Brown & Levinson 1978, Scollon & Scollon 1983, 
R.Lakoff 1975, Tannen 1984, Arndt & Janney 1985 and Ostman 1986). What is 
common to these is that they deal with the modification, i.e. strengthening or weak- 
ening, of the illocutionary force of utterances. Th« role of epistemic modality as a 
politeness strategy is already fairly Well established (cf. Holmes 1982, Coates 1983, 
Hubler 1983, Markkanen 1985, Westney 1986). My use of the term politeness 
comprises the positive and negative types of politeness in Brown and Levinson's 
taxonomy only. 

In the present study, eight conversations were chosen for closer examination, 
involving complaints and possibly offers or suggestions for further measures by 
both native (four situations) and Finnish speakers (four situations). In the data, 
epistemic modality appeared to be employed by native speakers of English mainly 
to express on-the-record negative (or deference) politeness, or concern that the 
speaker shows for the hearer's right to be free from imposition. This can be seen in 
Example 1 , where NS protests against NNS's behaviour; the Finn has again forgot- 
ten that they had had an appointment to play tennis the day before. 

Possibly because NNS already hastened to apologize, NS presents not a direct 
but a very elaborately qualified complaint (lines 3-18) and an even more qualified 
suggestion (lines 18-22) to deal with the situation. There are a number of modality 
markers or softeners: gambits like actually and you know, vague hedges like or 
something, and fumbles like / don't know and I'm just wondering. These items are 
in most contexts considered to be expressive of negative or deference politeness. In 
addition, NS uses the epistemic expressions might, really and maybe. By virtue of 
the fact that these are low-intensity modal items, they serve to mitigate the effect of 

2 Id 




Modality at a Strategy in Interaction 



205 




Example 1: 

(NNS has himself brought up the issue first) 

1 NNS: (...) This is again the second time ■ er ■ already a 
second time er I [forgot, I’m really - I'm really sorry. 

NS: Yes ■ yes that’s what] I was thinking actually, [erm... 

NNS: Ahh...] 

5 NS: ... ■ I - I waited you know, half an hour or something 

and ■ I thought you might turn up. ■ [Of course I -... 

NNS: And maybe...] 

NS: ... I paid anyway the sixty marks for actually getting 

in there... 

10 NNS: Yeah. 

NS: ... so I thought I might as well wait for you and I - 

I spent half an hour and just ■ doing nothing really, 
erm ■ ((clicks tongue)) I don’t [know er ■ ... 

NNS: Er] ■■ you - you should be angry. 

15 NS: Well, yes, [well... 

NNS: Er...] 

NS: ... I be- ((creaky voice)) ((clicks tongue)), it was 

irritating obviously at the time. I’m just wondering ■ 
maybe, you know, we should drop the idea of actually 

20 playing tennis, erm ■ if you’re particularly busy er at 

this time and, I don’t know, maybe start [again in 
a few months’ time, or something. 

NNS: Well these few weeks I am] but otherwise I - I like 
tennis and I like to pay it er - play it, I don’t know 

25 how regularly but er I’m not sure ■ er. (...) 

■ = pause 

[ ] = overlapping speech 

underlining = contrastive stress or emphasis 



216 



206 



Elite Kirkttinen 



the complaint and the suggestion, and in this context indicate negative politeness. 
Later in the conversation NS repeats the suggestion in a slightly different form, but 
again qualified by a number of low-intensity epistemic items: 



Example 2: 

NS: Well, this is what I mean,] I think we should probably, 

you know, sort of give it a rest until you’ve finished 
whatever project you’re [working on... 

NNS: Oh...] 

NS: ... ander... 

NNS: Erm... 

NS: ... maybe pick it up again... 



/ think, probably and maybe in this context are on-the-record and fairly con- 
ventionalized indications of politeness behaviour. These, as well as might , perhaps 
and of course are among the high-frequency items in native-speaker talk. 

As for Finnish students, the numbers of types and tokens of epistemic expres- 
sions that they used for making complaints and suggestions were much lower. It is 
significant, however, that there were no great differences in frequencies between 
students and native speakers in our project corpus as regards the use of other than 
epistemic markers or hedges, namely those forms that are directed only at some part 
of the proposition, i.e. some lexical item in it. These include expressions like a 
Hale > sort of just, and things like that, etc., which were used extensively by the 
students. The students were also able to use items that we labelled gambits relatively 
well : these refer to conversational lubricants such as well, I mean, you know, as a 
matter of fact etc. (The term gambit is understood as defined by Edmondson and 
House 1981: 61-65). Since these two strategic devices of conversation also have a 
clear politeness function, the fact that students were fairly good at using them would 
seem to indicate that they were aware of the politeness aspects of interaction. 

Finnish students were also able to use certain types of epistemic expressions 
to achieve a politeness effect. Firstly, they made extensive use of the parentheticals 
I think and I know . 1 In the whole corpus, the former parenthetical was used more, 
even in absolute terms, by the students than by native speakers (NNS 101 vs. NS 
91). It can be argued that the predominance of / think may be due to interference 
from the Finnish musta (tuntuu) ’in my opinion’ or luulenf luulisin T think/ 1 would 
think , which in turn may explain why f think is often used slightly unidiomatically. 
The Finnish equivalents are a much weightier means for expressing opinion than / 
think seems to be; / think seldom has full semantic content in conversational dis- 
course (those instances where it clearly indicated thinking were left outside consid- 
eration completely). However, students may be making use of the fact that it is quite 
transparent semantically, i.e. it expresses an explicitly subjective view of the 
speaker. The link between the semantic content and the function of mitigation is 
thus not difficult even for a non-native speaker to infer. Also the fact that it is 
clause-external rather than clause-internal can perhaps make it easier to use; it does 



Modality as a Strategy in Interaction 



207 



not have to be integrated into the sentence structure and it may therefore be easier to 
process and give the non-native speaker more thinking time. This may be one of the 
reasons why students use as many as 12 different types of explicitly subjective par- 
enthetical clauses, whereas native speakers only use 9. Secondly, the students also 
know how to make use of nuiybe and perhaps for the politeness function. These 
adverbs are already a very conventionalized, on-the-record strategy for attenuating 
the force of indirect requests and suggestions, to the point that they have been called 
modal particles by Lyons (1981, p. 238). It might even be argued that there is no 
longer anything truly strategic about them. This is then reflected in their frequency 
of occurrence, so that they are also part of the students active competence. 

The conclusion can perhaps be made, then, that the students are able to use 
epistemic items, along with other types of hedging devices, for the affective or inter- 
personal function when these items are either very explicit in semantic content or 
when they are of a relatively conventionalized or routinized kind. In any case, it 
appears that epistemic modality is perhaps primarily used, by native and non-native 
speakers alike, for the function of paying respect to the hearer’s negative or personal 
face, or his/her need for autonomy, rather than for taking notice of the hearer’s 
positive or interpersonal face, or his/her need for acceptance. 

Off-the-Record (or On-the-Record) Modality: A Face-Saving Strategy 

By face-saving , more narrowly than Brown and Levinson, I refer solely to the 
concern that the speaker feels for himself/herself and the extent to which he/she is 
preoccupied with and wants to pursue his/her own interests in conversation, rather 
than acting in a more hearer-supportive way. Another way of naming this function 
might be to call it something like a leeway strategy. It largely involves ambiguating 
utterances, so that it becomes very difficult to work out what their illocutionary 
forces are. Speakers choose to be evasive and to beat about the bush, in order to 
leave themselves an 'out'. They may want to go off record, or resort to hints of 
various types, so that the illocutionary status of the utterance remains vague and 
indeterminate. According to Brown and Levinson, it is not possible to attribute only 
one clear communicative intention to the act, but the speaker provides himself with 
a number of defensible interpretations (1978, p. 216). Thus, the speaker leaves it up 
to the addressee how to interpret the message, and the addressee must make some 
inference to be able to do this. In a lot of cases the link between the literal force and 
the illocutionary force of an utterance that contains a number of modal items can be 
almost impossible to retrieve. At the same time there may be cases where off-record 
strategies are used in contexts where they are unambiguously on record, i.e. the 
context contains so many clues that only one interpretation is in fact viable (cf. 
Brown and Levinson 1978, pp. 139, 217 and Leech 1983, pp. 97-99). Thus, it is the 
context that determines whether we are dealing with on-the-record or off-the-record 
language. 

The occurrences of epistemic items were studied in admissions of guilt and 
responsibility, again in eight conversations, where speakers were likely to pay a 
certain amount of attention to preserving their own faces. Not surprisingly, it was 

2ib 



208 



Elite Kirkkiincn 



Example 3: 

1 NS: So ■ about - about the car, about the scratch. It’s - [it’s very bad. 

NNS: ((inaudible))] Well ... 

NS: It needs to be rep - it does need to be repaired, I don’t know. 

[I looked at it ... 

5 NNS: Yeah ((inaudible)).] 

NS: ... and it didn’t seem to be too serious, I mean maybe (well) ... 

NNS: Yeah, well, that's the thing about cars. You make a 

little scratch and you have to paint the whole car ha ha. 

NS: Aah no, [not really. 

10 NNS: Of course] we can er ... Perhaps we could arrange it 
so that just a smaller portion of the car is painted. 

NS: Small (what)? [Noo, you can only do ... 

NNS: Some parts.] 

NS: ... er ■ in my experience uhm (you have scratches on 

15 cars) maybe it goes to a garage and then they ■ they 

er ((inhales)) - they make the surface smooth again 
and then they paint it and it's - it's not such a 
big job, I don’t think. 

NNS: Yeah, [yeah ... 

20 NS: It] shouldn’t be so [expensive. 

NNS: ... yeah], yeah. ■ But perhaps you - perhaps we 
could find some - some small ■ small little place 
where they - they [do these cheaply, you know. 

NS: Uhuh.] ■ Well I think - (I was about) to say before 

25 we go on that I will have to er - er pay for the 

damage maybe. It was my fault. 

NNS: Mhm. 



the native speakers of English who had mastered this kind of linguistic behaviour. 2 
In their speech, epistemic items tended to cluster into utterances and utterance se- 
quences in ways that were not in line with their actual semantic content. In the fol- 
lowing FTA sequence, the NS is putting out a great number of feelers to explore the 
situation. 

In a very roundabout way, the NS tries to establish what the NNS's views are 
on the seriousness of the scratch that he has caused to his car (lines 1, 3-4, 6). This 
is a seemingly illogical sequence that does not really make sense if we give each (not 
necessarily epistemic) item its full meaning: see e.g. It does need to be repaired , I 
don 7 know. NS maybe expects NNS to say that he does not regard the scratch as too 
serious, but NNS is not very compliant. There is an even clearer example at the end 
of the extract (lines 24-26): NS apparently admits that he is responsible for scratch- 
ing the car, and offers to pay for the damage. But the offer, I will have to pay for the 

2 





Modality u a Strategy in Interaction 



209 



damage maybe , is expressed in such a qualified way in which it is difficult to say 
whether it is in fact an offer (and a commissive speech act) or just a speculation 
about future arrangements (in which case it is an assertive), even though we take 
into account the preceding discourse. Will have to and maybe ambiguate the illocu- 
tionary force of the utterance, so that the illocutionary point becomes vague and 
indeterminate. 

This kind of strategic play is intentional to some extent, inviting the hearer to 
validate or at least to react in some way before a commitment is made. It also makes 
it possible for the NS later to actually withdraw his offer without losing face. 

Here epistemic expressions are truly pragmatic in that their exact semantic 
meaning does not seem to carry all that much weight: it is possible to use two epis- 
temic expressions with meanings directly opposite to each other inside one and the 
same utterance, such as will have to and maybe (one expressing certainty and the 
other lack of certainty). This is actually a long-established phenomenon at sentence 
level semantics, where, it seems to me, it has not been possible to give a good 
enough explanation for this phenomenon. Such co-occurrence patterns were not 
found in the on-the-record politeness use in my data. 

Compare how a NNS, a Finnish student of English, admits that she has bro- 
ken the TV set in the lounge of a student dormitory: 

Example 4: 

1 NS: [...] well, I’m kind of er in charge of it now and 

I found out that it’s broken. 

NNS: Yes, and I think I’m responsible for that. 

5 NS: [...] I’m in a funny position, because I don’t 

wanna have to pay for it myself to have it repaired. 

NNS: Yes, yes. Well, it’s quite clear that I have to pay, 
but... 

NS: Uhum. 

10 NNS: ... will it be a very big...? 




There is no doubt about it: she admits straight away that she has broken the TV. The 
student, admittedly, uses I think, but this parenthetical is not a very efficient way of 
saving face, especially if the very next word, I (in I'm responsible for that), is 
stressed and conveys unconditional surrender. When accepting that she has to pay 
for the damage, the student even stresses her commitment by it 's quite clear, which 
is rather more explicit in content than, for example, of course and does not leave 
much room for the NNS to move (apparently she is only worried whether it will be 
a very big bill). 

Other admissions of guilt or responsibility by the students included the fol- 
lowing (the student did not actually offer to pay for the damage in any of the cases, 
but only agreed to what the NS suggested): 

220 



210 



Elite Kirkkiinen 



Example 5: 

NNS2: Well, yeah, oh dear ■ I actually -II tried to be 
a bit too mechanically and so I broke it 
I th - I’m afraid. 

NNS3. And er I I was wondering er H have you grown any 
familiar with the er television set here because I 
seem to have broken it or something? 

NNS4: And so I came down here last night and I putted the 

telly on and ■ all of a sudden it - it got stuck ■ and only the channel 
number one is - is ■ playing. 



With NNS2, there is again no doubt about it: he is guilty, even though he uses a few 
modality markers or gambits to play down the effect a little (such as actually , a bit 
and well). It is striking that the student chooses a marker of emotional attitude, I'm 
afraid, which presupposes that what it refers to is true and is therefore sHctly 
speaking not epistemic - he clearly intended to say I think, which would ,,deed 
have left a little more room for him. NNS3, rarely enough, uses an epistemic de- 
vice, seem, which together with the non-epistemic hedge or something takes back 
some of the force of the actual admission (which is nevertheless there). With NNS4, 
finally, we have a clever example of an off-the-record admission of guilt, where the 
illocutionary point of the utterance is left ambiguous — but even here there are no 
epistemic devices used to achieve this effect. 

The implicitness of epistemic modality becomes obvious in contexts like the 
above, where speakers are stalling with the help of these expressions. Epistemic 
items are capable of expressing the speaker's views and ideas implicitly and unob- 
trusively, so that speakers cannot be held to have committed to just one communica- 
tive intent. In line with Ostman (1986), implicitness could indeed be considered an 
essential criterion for pragmatics (as opposed to semantics): "An implicit choice is 
defined as a linguistic choice that the speaker in principle can deny that s/he has 
made" (pp. 23-26). 

The numbers of epistemic expressions used for face-saving by the students are 
much smaller than those used by native speakers, and the types of expressions cho- 
sen follow the same pattern as was established for the politeness use. I think again 
figures highest in the students' speech, whereas modal auxiliaries do not appear to 
be used much: in admissions of guilt and responsibility, a total of 9 modals was used 
by the students as opposed to the 66 modals used by native speakers! Similarly, there 
is a great gap in the frequencies of epistemic adverbs in these situations: 23 NNS 
instances vs. 114 NS instances. 

On the basis of some recent studies on modality, it seems that it is especially 
epistemic modal verbs and adverbs that may convey implicit attitudes of the speaker, 
either subjective or objective ones (Halliday 1985, p. 333, Preisler 1986, p. 95). 



Modality u a Strategy in Interaction 



211 



Their implicitness seems to be based on the following properties. Firstly, they are 
quite integrated into the sentence/ utterance structure. Epistemic adverbs are more 
integrated into the sentence structure than are parenthetical clauses, while the modal 
verbs are the most highly integrated items of all. Secondly, as we have seen, espe- 
cially the modal auxiliaries are frequently ambiguous at the semantic level between 
an epistemic and a non-epistemic (root) meaning, so that it is almost impossible to 
say even in context whether a certain occurrence is epistemic or not. 

A conclusion may thus be drawn from the above examples that Finnish stu- 
dents do not seem to master the more implicit use of epistemic modality in their less 
conventionalized context of use. It appears that something that is conveyed as extra 
information, that is deniable and vague, can indeed be difficult for a learner to per- 
ceive, let alone use actively. It is not surprising, then, that students resort to a device 
that is explicit (in this case explicitly subjective) in nature, namely to parentheticals 
and especially to I think . 

Off-the-Record Modality: A Persuasion and Manipulation Strategy 

In the following, a tentative account of the use of epistemic modality to 
manipulate one’s addressee, in order to achieve one's own conversational goals, 
will be presented. This type of use, already quite. clearly off-the-record, relates 
directly to the rhetorical as opposed to the illocutionary force of an utterance. It cuts 
across the Textual Rhetoric and the Interpersonal Rhetoric of Leech: to some extent 
the rhetorical devices of written language, such as the maxims of End-weight and 
End-focus, or different ways of giving prominence to an item, can be used in spoken 
language, too. In addition, irony is a powerful device used in the service of this 

strategy. 

Not even the very fluent students of English, or Group A in our corpus, 
seemed capable of using epistemic devices for the expression of irony , and what is 
more they had difficulty in recognizing ironic meaning. An instance of this can 
perhaps be seen in the following example, where NS and NNS have just had a fairly 
heated discussion about the tennis appointment and have decided to change their 
regular day for tennis: 

Example 6: 

NS: You’re quite sure you are free ((inaudible))? 

There’s nothing ■ that you might have forgotten, 
that’s happening next Friday, the week after it? 

NNS: Right. 

NS: Uhm... 

The NNS, who is linguistically highly competent, does not appear to recognize that 
the NS is being ironic, by way of being overpolite (cf. the Irony Principle, Leech 
1983, p.82), when he is checking that the NNS has not forgotten any previous ar- 
rangements for Friday. It is of course also possible that the student did not miss the 
irony but chose to ignore it deliberately. In the case of non-native speakers it is 

22Z 



212 



Elisc Kirfckiinen 



sometimes quite difficult to judge what is going on because of the slight unidio- 
maticity of their English. Here the linguistic device that the student uses to reply, 
right, would seem to indicate that he treats the NS’s question as an assertion that 
does not require an answer but rather an acknowledgement or an indication of agree- 
ment. Where no would in fact be required to show agreement with a negative state- 
ment, Finnish students commonly used yes, and moreover they tended to overuse 
right as a kind of generalized backchannel and responding gambit. Even though it is 
not quite clear how the student interpreted the NS’s directive, it is nevertheless 
obvious that directives ’’disguised” in the form of declarative sentences and contain- 
ing one or more epistemic elements (in this case might) can make their force or 
speech act status more difficult to recognize. They are thus directives done off-the- 

record, and may be, lent themselves, for manipulative as well as politeness and 
face-saving purposes. 

IMPLICATIONS FOR SECOND LANGUAGE TEACHING 

Why are epistemic devices so difficult for Finnish (and possibly also for 
other) foreign language learners to use? 

It is indeed a wide-spread view that the use of the English modal verbs pro- 
vides difficulties for learners. The acquisition of some of their meanings is difficult 
even for native speakers: Gibbs (1990, p. 297), among others, claims that ’Hypo- 
thetical and Epistemic Possibility' of the modals can, could, may and might is ac- 
quired much later than other meanings of these modals. It has been argued that a 
'modality reduction’ in language learners’ use of English is to some extent ’teaching 
induced (Holntes 1988, p. 40 quoting Kasper); most textbooks cover epistemic 
modality only very sporadically, if at all (Holmes 1988, p. 38). Indeed, one impor- 
tant reason for the lack of these expressions in the Finnish students* speech is lack of 
explicit teaching, which in turn is due to lack of research on their functions. 

Several other reasons have been suggested. Holmes (1982) suggests that the 
distinction between epistemic and non-epistemic modality (at the semantic level) is 
difficult to make in practice. Secondly, according to her, it is difficult to define the 
precise point on the scale of certainty expressed by a particular item. Thirdly, these 
linguistic forms may simultaneously convey a variety of meanings — Holmes is here 
referring to the intrapersonal meaning, i.e. when the speaker is genuinely uncertain 
about something, and the more interpersonal meaning, i.e. of taking your hearer 
into consideration. 

My counter-arguments to Holmes’s claims are as follows. As is actually re- 
flected by her first two comments, the teaching of epistemic modality has so far 
been restricted to the level of semantic meaning. It seems obvious that the interac- 
tive use of epistemic modality is in fact not so tightly connected with the semantic 
meaning of these items as Holmes seems to imply, and that these items can be scat- 
tered throughout an utterance and over a longer stretch of discourse according to 
some other principle than on the basis of their exact semantic meaning. Further- 
more, it may not even be necessary, or indeed possible, to tell an epistemic use from 
a non-epistemic one; this distinction is an arbitrary and a theoretical one anvway, 

223 




Modality as a Strategy in Interaction 



213 



and it is more important to learn to exploit these devices strategically. It may also 
not be necessary to know their exact degree of certainty, but, by contrast, students 
should learn that the degree of certainty that a given item may express m theory 
should not be taken too literally in actual interaction (cf. will have to an may 
next to each other in one and the same utterance in Example 3). Finally, it is perhaps 
worthwhile to point out, while teaching the use of these devices, that even though 
they may operate at both intrapersonal and interpersonal levels, in practice they 
often do so simultaneously and that these uses cannot be separated m any rigid way. 

In the light of the present study it may in fact be that some types of epistemic 
devices are difficult to acquire because they are more implicit markers of speaker- 
attitude, which may i.ake their pragmatic functions more difficult to define. ey 
can be used effectively to modify, and, as we have seen above, especially to ambig- 
uate, any speech act, and it is here that their truly strategic nature comes out. It is 
especially these properties, implicitness and their potential for off-therecordmss, 
that are difficult to pin down and describe, or that have not been adequately de- 

Also, these functions have not been introduced into second language teaching 
in any systematic way. Unless being pointed out specifically, something that is 
conveyed as extra information and that is deniable and vague is likely to be missed 
by a language learner completely. The student may then not be able to r^gmze 
that more than one interpretation is possible in the case of an ut eran^loaded^A 
epistemic expressions. When speaking the language, the student may find it best to 
play safe and resort to devices that are quite explicit and predictable as to their in r- 
active effect: explicitly subjective parentheticals, such as 1 think, and also other 

types of modality markers than epistemic ones. 

How, then, could the various functions of epistemic modality m English be 

integrated into second language teaching? 

It is perhaps inevitable that we should begin at the level of the sentence, and 

teach the semantics of these items first, because of the fairly distinct cor ® 
that they may have. We should also teach the syntactic patterns related to these 
meanings. But once we come to the level of discourse, and to the discourse strate- 
gies available to speakers, we should no longer aim at an atomistic description of the 
possible uses of one individual item, but, as Stubbs (1986) puts it: 

1 think it is possible to show that many features of surface syntax 
have the function of presenting speakers' attitudes to propositions, illo- 
cutions, and words. Individual cases are, of course, widely discussed, 
but they are seldom if ever brought together into a unified description, 
in what could be called a modal grammar of English, (p. 20; emphasis 

added) 

We should therefore see the manifestations of epistemic modality as one Itinc- 
ttonal device among many, and as pan of a large apparatus fo, genendly ntaktng 



o 

ERIC 



224 



214 



Elite Karkkiinen 



adjustments to what we are about to say, for intrapersonal as well as interpersonal 
purposes. Thus, the idea of a modal grammar is certainly very plausible, as long as 
we do not expand the range of possible items endlessly. Stubbs himself tends to 
include almost every conceivable linguistic device in his treatment. However, cer- 
tain devices are more centra! than others, depending on the type of discourse that 
we are talking about; it became evident in my study that epistemic devices are 

among the most common in spoken discourse, and, moreover, among the most stra- 
tegic. 

Once the students, at university level at the latest, are made aware of the 
whole range of functions that epistemic devices may have, they can, if they choose, 
express themselves more 'fully* and subtly, at the same time allowing themselves 
more room to manoeuvre. But it is debatable whether these functions can actually be 
taught, since by definition they are so implicit and off-the-record (and context-de- 
pendent) that they almost escape description, let alone explicit teaching. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

Parts of this paper were first presented in the Second Finnish Seminar on 
Discourse Analysis, September 1988. Since a lot of my research has actually been 
done since, the present is a much larger version and contains my research frame- 
work in its entirety. 



THE AUTHOR 

Elise Karkkiinen is currently a Research Associate of the Finnish Academy 
and a Ph.D. student in the Department of Linguistics, University of California, 
Santa Barbara. Her research interests include pragmatics, discourse analysis, sec- 
ond-language acquisition and semantics. 

NOTES 

‘Besides mitigation, / think is used quite extensively as a turn-taking gambit at 
the beginning of utterances, but these occurrences were not included in the present 
study. 

nt might actually be argued that this strategy is more necessary in the simu- 
lated conversations of the present corpus than they would bj in real conversations, 
because the participants have to establish some kind of common ground in a not too 
obvious way. This does not, however, invalidate the claim that a face-saving strat- 
egy exists and is made use of by (at least) native speakers, as long as 1 do not make 
claims about its relative frequency in a certain type of discourse. 



REFERENCES 



Arndt, H. and Janney, R.W. (1985). Politeness revisited: cross-modal supportive 
strategies, IRAL XX111, 4. 281-300. 



Bouma, L. (1975). On contrasting the semantics of the modal auxiliaries of German 




and English. Lingua 37, 4, 313-339. 




Modality at a Strategy in Interaction 



215 



Boyd, J and Thome, J.P. (1969). The semantics of modal verbs, Journal of Linguis- 
tics V. 57-74. 

Brown, P. and Levinson, S. (1978). Universal in Language Usage: Politeness 
Phenomena. In: Goody, E. (ed.), Questions and Politeness. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 56-289. 

Coates, J. (1983). The Semantics of the Modal Auxiliaries. London: Croom Helm. 

Edmondson, W. and House, J. (1981). Let's Talkand Talkabout it. Munchen-Wien- 
Baltimore: Urban and Schwarzenberg. 

Edmondson, W., House, J., Kasper, G. and Stemmer, B. (1984). Learning the 
pragmatics of discourse: a project report. Applied Linguistics 5:2, 113-127. 

Ehrman, M. (1966). The meanings of the modals in present-day American English. 
The Hague & Paris: Mouton. 

Gibbs, D. (1990). Second language acquisition of the English modal auxiliaries 
can, can hi. may, and might. In Applied Linguistics 11:3, 297-314. 

Hakulinen, A. (ed.,1989). Suomalaisen keskustelun keinoja I. Kieli 4. Department 
of Finnish, University of Helsinki. Helsinki: Yliopistopaino. 

Halliday, M.A.K. 1985. An Introduction to Functional Grammar. London: Ed- 
ward Arnold. 

Hermerfcn, L. (1978). On Modality in English: A Study of the Semantics of the Mo- 
dals. Lund: Gleerup. 

Holmes, J. (1982). Expressing doubt and certainty in English. RELC Journal 13:2, 
9-28. 

Holmes, J. (1984). Modifying illocutionary force. Journal of Pragmatics 8, 345- 
365. 

Holmes, J . ( 1 9S8). Doubt and certainty in ESL textbooks. Applied Linguistics 9:1, 
21-44. 

Hiibler, A. (1983). Understatements and Hedges in English. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins Publishing Company. 

Kangasniemi, H. (1987). Suomen kielen modaaliasteikot. Unpublished licentiate 
thesis, Department of Finnish and Lappish, University of Oulu. 

Karkkainen, E. (1991). Modality as a Strategy in Spoken Interaction. A Discourse 
Analytical and Pragmatic Approach with a Particular Focus on the English 
Language. Unpublished licentiate thesis, Department of English, University 
of Oulu. 

Karkkainen, E. and Raudaskoski, P. (1988). Social language skills of Finnish 
speakers of English. In Laurinen, L. and Kauppinen, A. (eds.) Problems in 
language use and comprehension. AFinLA Yearbook 1988. Helsinki 1988 
105-124. 

Lakoff, R. (1975). Language and woman's place. New York: Harper Colophon. 

Leech, G. (1983). Principles of Pragmatics. London: Longman. 

Lyons, J. (1977). Semantics. Volume 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Lyons, J. (1981). Language, meaning, and context. London: Fontana. 

Markkanen, R. (1985). Cross-Language Studies in Pragmatics. Jyvaskyla Cross- 
Language Studies No 11. Department of English, University of Jyvaskyla. 

Palmer, F.R. (1979). Modality and the English modals. London: Longman. 

226 



216 



Elite Kirfckiinea 



Primer, F.R. (1986). Mood and modality . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Perkins, M.R. (1983). Modal expressions in English. London: Frances Pinter. 

Preisler, Bent (1986). Linguistic Sex Roles in Conversation : Social Variation in the 
Expression of Tentativeness in English . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 

Ostman, J. (1986). Pragmatics as implicitness. An analysis of question particles in 
Solf Swedish, with implications for the study of passive clauses and the lan- 
guage of persuasion. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Cali- 
fornia, Berkeley. 

Scollon, R. and Scollon, S.B.K. (1983). Face in Interethnic Communication. In 
Richards, J. and Schmidt, R. (eds.) Language and Communication . London: 
Longman, 156-188. 

Searle, J. (1976). A classification of illocutionary acts. Language in Society 5, 1- 
23. 

Stubbs, M. (1983a). Can I have that in writing, please? Some neglected topics in 
speech act theory. Journal of Pragmatics 7:5, 479-494. 

Stubbs, M. (1983b). Discourse Analysis: The Sociolinguistic Analysis of Natural 
Language . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 

Stubbs, M. (1986). A matter of prolonged field work: notes towards a modal gram- 
mar of English. Applied Linguistics 7:1, 1-25. 

Tannen, D. (1984). Conversational style: analysing talk among friends. Norwood: 
Ablex Publishing Corporation. 

Thomas, J. (1988). Complex Illocutionary Acts and the Analysis of Discourse . 
Paper given at the Second Finnish Seminar on Discourse Analysis, Oulu 
September 1988. 

Twaddell, W.E. (1965). The English verb auxiliaries . Providence: Brown Univer- 
sity Press. 

Westney, P. (1986). How to be more or less certain in English: scalarity in epis- 
temic modality. IRAL XXIV, 4, 311-320. 

o 







Pragmatic* and Language Learning 
Monograph Series, Vol. 3, 1992 



Pragmatics of the Use of Nominate 
in Academic and Professional Genres 

Vijay K. Bhatia 



The use of complex noun phrases, (complex) nominate and other 
nominalized expressions has been known to be one of the most contro- 
versial characteristics of academic and professional writing. To the 
specialist community this is an indispensable linguistic device which 
brings in precision, clarity and unambiguity by promoting text cohe- 
sion, facilitating reference to (associated) technical concepts already 
mentioned and so on; however, to the non-specialist outsider this is a 
mere ploy to promote solidarity between the members of the specialist 
community and to keep non-specialists at a respectable distance and is 
hence regarded by them as nothing more than pure linguistic non-sense 
bringing in pomposity, verbosity, flabbiness and circumlocution in 
academic and professional writing, particularly in public documents. 

The truth, however, lies somewhere in between. This paper examines a 
number of texts from a wide range of academic and professional dis- 
course in an attempt to unravel the importance of ' motive' as a clue to 
the use of complex nominate and nominalizations in specialist dis- 
course. The paper also discusses some of the tactics specialists use to 
create (complex) nominate and nominalizations in order to make acces- 
sible complex technical concepts in specialist genres. 

INTRODUCTION 

Complex nominal expressions of various kinds are typically associated with 
academic and professional genres and have gained a certain degree of notoriety in 
recent years To the specialist community this is an indispensable linguistic device 
which brings in precision, clarity and unambiguity by promoting text cohesion, 
facilitating reference to (associated) technical concepts already mentioned and so 
on- however, to the non-specialist outsider this is nothing but one of the common 
strategies to promote solidarity between the members of the specialist community 
and to keep non-specialists at a respectable distance and is hence regarded bythem 
as nothing more than pure linguistic non-sense bringing in pomposity and verbosity 
in academic and professional writing, particularly in public documents. In this 
paper I wish to consider three areas of academic and professional writing and look at 
the use of various types of nominal expressions in them in order to study why the 
academic and professional writers use nominal expressions the way they do. The 
areas of professional activities I would like to concentrate on are advertisements, 
scientific and more generally academic and research writing, and legislative provi- 



O 



sions. 






21S 



Vijay K. BhtUt 



I would like to look at three major types of nominal expressions. The first 
type are the complex nominal phrases (Quirk et al., 1982), which are significantly 
used m advertisements of a particular type. The second type are variously known 
either as nominal compounds (Williams, 1984) or compound nominal phrases 
(Salager, 1984), and are typically associated with scientific writing. The third one 
are conventionally called nominalizations, which are overwhelmingly used in legis- 
lative provisions (Bhatia, 1983). Although all three types of nominals are generally 
grouped together under the broad category of complex noun phrases (see Quirk et 
al. , 1982), it is more appropriate to consider them as distinct for two reasons. First 
although they perform more or less similar grammatical functions in the language! 
Uiey •“ve different grammatical realizations, and secondly, they seem to textualize 
different aspects of the three genres they have traditionally been associated with. In 
other words, they have different grammatical as well as discoursal functions in the 
three genres. Let me give examples from the three genres, first from advertising. 



The world’s first packless, cordless, 
lightweight, compact, integrated video light. 

The CV-300 from Sunpak. 

Sunpak's advanced video light technology combines the 
halogen dichronic light and a ni-cad power all in one styl- 
ized, compact unit. The CV-300 gives you brilliant light 
and natural color while shooting remains easy and maneu- 
verable. It tilts down 15 degrees for close-up lighting and 
up to 45 degrees for soft bounce-lighting effects. All with 
no separate battery pack to carry or cords to get in your way 
or come loose. 

The CV-300's special 20 minute Battery Cluster Module 
can be changed in seconds, so you can continue to shoot 
during long scenes. Charging time is almost twice as fast as 
conventional units -just 8 hours. And, additional Battery 
Cluster Modules are available. 

The Sunpak CV-300 Integrated Video Light. It lets there 
be light... anywhere. (From Popular Photography . July 
1988, p.41] 



The headlines illustrate precisely the true character of the noun phrase in 
advertising. 



The world's first packless, cordless, lightweight, compact, integrated 
video light 



The most striking characteristic of this type of complex nominal phrase is the 
degree and to a lesser extent the complexity of modification of the noun head. A 




Pragmatic* of the U*e of Nominal* in Academic and Professional Genre* 



219 



series of adjectives, linearly arranged in the pre-modifying position in such complex 
nominal phrases is rarely matched elsewhere in English. In the body of the text we 
have many more examples of this kind: 

Sunpak's advanced video light technology, brilliant light and natural 
color. The CV-300's special 20 minute Battery Cluster Module 

and a number of others of lesser complexity abound in the text. The typical syntactic 
structure of such a complex nominal phrase is 

(M)H(Q) 

where (M) is realized primarily in terms of a series of linearly arranged attributes as 
follows: 

(Det) (adj) (adj) (adj) (adj)... H (Q) 

Although scientific English displays a wide range of nominals, we shall take 
up only one of them here. Williams (1984) calls them nominal compounds and we 
shall call them compound nominal phrases. Typical examples include: 

pulmonary artery mean pressure electrocardiogram VI lead, airport 
building roof truss failures, nozzle gas ejection space ship attitude con- 
trol, etc. 

The common structure underlying these compound nominal phrases is the 
following : 

(M) (M) (M) (M) (M)... H (Q) 

where (M) is realized primarily in terms of a series of linearly arranged 
nouns, occasionally incorporating adjectives as well: 

(N) (N) (N) (N) (N) (N) ... 

The final example comes from legislative provisions, which are notorious for 
being nominal in character and display an above-average use of nominalization. 

2 The power to make regulations under this section shall be 

exercisable by statutory instrument which shall be subject to 
i annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of 
j Parliament. ICh. 25/78: Nuclear Safeguards and Electricity 
| (Finance Act) 1978, U.K.l 

In any other genre, as Swales and Bhatia (1983) point out, it will probably be 
in its more typical verbal version. 

3 a statutory instrument can be used to make regulations 

under this section and such a statutory instrument can be 
annulled if either House of Parliament passes a resolution to 
I that effect. 




k)30 



220 



Vijay K. Bhatia 



Nominalizations of this kind are also very common in all kinds of academic, 
particularly scientific research writing but we shall look at that later on. For the time 
being, we will focus on these three types of nominals and consider why they are 
typically associated with the three genres referred to above. The questions we would 
like to ask ourselves would be of the following kind: 

Why do the specialist writers of these genres use nominal compounds 
the way they do? 

To what extent do these nominals serve genre-specific functions? 

What aspects of generic meaning do they textualize in individual gen- 
res? 

In order to answer some or all of these questions, we need to look at these 
texts, taking a genre-perspective as defined in Swales (1981, 1986, 1990) and 
Bhatia (1988, in preparation). 

Taking genre after Swales (1981 , 1986, 1990) as a recognizable communica- 
tive event characterized by a set of communicative purpose(s), it is identified and 
mutually understood by the members of the professional or academic community in 
which it regularly occurs. Generally, it is highly structured and conventionalized 
with constraints on allowable contributions in terms of heir intent, positioning, 
form and functional value. These constraints are often exploited by the expert 
members of the discourse community to achieve private intentions within the frame 
work of socially recognized purpose(s). [Bhatia, forthcoming] 

Each genre thus is an instance of a successful achievement of a specific com- 
municative purpose using conventionalized knowledge of linguistic and discoursal 
resources. Since each genre in certain important respects is a typical way of struc- 
turing the narrow world of experience or reality, it implies that the same experience 
or reality will require a different way of structuring, if one were to operate in a 
different genre. Although it is true that many professional writers do manage to 
exploit genre constraints to achieve effectiveness and originality in their writing, 
most of them still operate well within a broad range of generic rules and conven- 
tions. In the context of this definition of a genre, let us consider examples of the 
three genres in question and see what sort of answers we get to the questions we 
addressed ourselves to in the preceding sections. 

THE ADVERTISING GENRE 

First, the case of advertising. The main communicative purpose of advertising 
is to promote a particular product or service to a specific group of potential users of 
the product or service. In one of the major types of advertisement, this is done by an 
adequately attractive description of the product or service, which is positive and 
convincing (see Bhatia and Tay, 1987). Some form of product detailing is necessary 
if the consumer is to be persuaded to buy the product or use the service. The follow- 
ing is a good example of such a product description. In fact, the most striking lin- 
guistic feature of the text is its use of complex nominal phrases. 



Pragmatics of the Uss of Nocmnais in Academic snd Professional Genres 



Mitsubishi Introduces the Shape of Things to Come 
THE CORDIA 

Shaped by the Wind : Bom for the Road 

Mitsubishi's Cordia space coupe is the 
FWD hatchback for the 80s. For two reasons: 
superb aerodynamics and sophisticated road 
mechanics. 

The Cordia's 0.34 CD aerodynamic effi- 
ciency rating, the best in its class and one of the 
best on the road, helps give the Cordia superb 
fuel economy. 

The Cordia's slippery body shape also 
works with front-wheel drive to create an ex- 
ceptionally spacious, comfortable cabin. The 
Cordia's length, the best in its class, provides 
room for five. 

A 1597 cc engine mated with super shift - 
Mitsubishi's exclusive set of eight gear ratios - 
four for fast, hard driving, four for economical 
cruising - further boosts the Cordia's excellent 
fuel economy. 

The Cordia's stylish cockpit and lively 
road manners confirm its sporting character. 
There's a Macpherson strut front, trailing links 
with Mitsubishi's U-arm rear, rack and pinion 
steering with negative offset, separate anti-roll 
bars, vacuum-boosted front disc brakes and 
steel-belted radial tyres. 

Beautiful flowing body lines show the 
Cordia’s breeding. Sophisticated braking, han- 
dling and road holding show the Cordia's ad- 
vanced automotive technology. Together they 
show two reasons behind the generation of fuel- 
efficient performance cars to come. 

Built by Mitsubishi for You. For the 80s. 

MITSUBISHI 



222 



Vijay K. Bhatu 



Mitsubishi's Cordia space coupe 

two reasons ; superb aerodynamics and sophisticated road mechanics. 

The Cordia 's 0.34 CD aerodynamic efficiency rating 
superb fuel economy. 

The Cordia 's slippery body shape 

an exceptionally spacious , comfortable cabin 

the Cordia 's excellent fuel economy 

The Cordia's stylish cockpit and lively road manners 

Beautiful flowing body lines 

Sophisticated braking , handling and road holding 

the Cordia 's advanced automotive technology 

the generation of fuel-efficient performance cars to come. 

Even without taking into account many of the ordinarily less complex nomi- 
nals like, the FWD haichbackfor the 80s , superb fuel economy, the Cordia 's stylish 
cockpit , its sporting character , the text displays an overwhelming use of long and 
complex nominal compounds full of adjectival attributes positively evaluating the 
detailed descriptive account of the car. Obviously, the use of complex nominal 
compounds makes available to the copywriter a number of possible syntactic slots to 
insert suitable modifiers to accomplish the right kind of product-detailing. 

THE ACADEMIC AND SCIENTIFIC GENRE 



Let us now turn our attention to academic scientific genres. As mentioned in 
the first section, we find a range of nominal expressions variously used in scientific 
writing for a variety of purposes. In fact, the nominal phrase is the main carrier of 
information in academic scientific writing. Compound nominal phrases, nominali- 
zation and, to a lesser extent, complex nominals phrases, all are used in academic 
scientific writing. Let me take the following two examples. 



The discrete donor-acceptor pair (DAP) emission bands in 
ZnSe, which are recognized as the P, Q and R series, have 
been extensively investigated by means of time-resolved 
photoluminescence (PL) and selective PL excitation meas- 
urements. [Yamada, Kidoguchi, Thguchi and Hiraki, 1989, 
p. L837J 



One of the major concerns of scientific research writing, as we all know, is to 
communicate very specific, specialized and precise knowledge to an audience who, 
in a number of ways, seem to share the required level of specialized knowledge of 
the subject-discipline. It is also well-known that scientists, as part of their specialist 
expression, constantly not only need to refer to technical concepts like the follow- 
ing: 




233 



Pragmatic i of the Use of Nominal* in Academic and Profeaeioaal Genre* 



223 



The discrete donor-acceptor pair (DAP) emission bands in ZnSe, which 
are recognized as the P, Q and R series 



and 



time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) and selective PL excitation 
measurements 



in example (9), but also to create new ones as they go on writing, as in the following 
extracts of a research article. 



6 . 



Laser Glazing of Sprayed Metal Coatings 



1. Introduction 

The high power density of lasers permits the surface melting of 
many materials in a time during which negligible heat conduction oc- 
I curs to the substrate. The resulting sharp temperature gradients cause 
1 rapid quench rates which have been utilized for the production of novel 
| and useftil metallurgical microstructures. 

We have employed for another purpose the ability of laser melting 
to maintain low substrate temperatures while fusing a thin surface layer. 
It is often desirable to impart certain physical or chemical properties of 
one relatively expensive material to a less expensive substrate by apply- 
ing a thin coating of the former to the latter. In particular, we wished to 
apply a thin layer of titanium to a graphite substrate. 

Scanning the surface with a laser effectively cauterized the micro- 
j porosity in the upper half of the titanium coating without causing tita- 
i nium carbide formation at the titanium/graphite interface... 



II. Surface 

The preglazed surface consisted of a graphite substrate onto which 
had been plasma sprayed a titanium coating 50 um thick... 

III. Laser Treatment 

The microporosity apparent in Fig. 1 renders the titanium coating 
permeable. If the material is to exhibit the corrosion resistant properties 
of solid titanium the film must be made impervious by sealing the mi- 

| croporosity endemic to plasma-deposited coatings... 

Determination of the optimum conditions for sealing the micropo- 
rosity involved varying the energy per unit area, as well as the power 
per unit area, delivered by the laser... 



IV. Analysis of Treated Surface 

The effect of laser treating the plasma sprayed surface is graphi- 
cally depicted in Fig.2, a cross-sectional hotomicrograph of the tita- 



234 



224 



Vijay K. Bbatia 



nium layer. Figure 3 is an enlargement of a laser treated surface. Com- 
parison with Fig.l shows that laser treatment produces a fused skin on 
the plasma-deposited titanium layer which is smooth and sound. The 
absence of cracking during the severe thermal cycling caused by the 
rapid quench rates characteristic of laser melting indicates that the tita- 
nium is ductile... 

V. Conclusions 

The rapid quench rates characteristic of laser melting have been 
successfully exploited to seal the porosity of titanium coatings, plasma 
sprayed atop graphite substrates, without the formation of titanium car- 
bide.. [Pangbom, R.J. and Beaman, D.R., 1980] 



The extract not only illustrates how a scientific writer uses nominal expres- 
sions to refer to specialized technical terms but also demonstrates how new knowl- 
edge is converted into known technical concepts for further reference. In the intro- 
ductory paragraph of the article the writers refer to the use of lasers for the surface 
melting of materials and this very knowledge is referred to again in the second para- 
graph as a new compound nominal phrase laser melting. Similarly, the knowledge 
that there is negligible heat conduction occurring to the substrate is again converted 
into another compound nominal phrase low substrate temperatures. This process of 
creating new compound nominal phrases continues as and when the authors need to 
refer to the knowledge of the subject-discipline they have already mentioned earlier. 
In the article, this process of creating new compound as well as complex nominal 
phrases continues with the need to create new knowledge or to refer to already 
mentioned concepts, like the following: 

titanium carbide formation at the titanium/graphite interface... 
the titanium coating 

the corrosion resistant properties of solid titanium 

the microporosity endemic to plasma-deposited coatings 

The effect of laser treating the plasma sprayed surface 

a cross-sectional photomicrograph of the titanium layer 

enlargement of a laser treated surface 

the plasma-deposited titanium layer which is smooth and sound 

the rapid quench rates characteristic of laser melting 

In the concluding section of the article, the process is taken to its logical ex- 
tremes when the authors summarize almost the entire article in terms of a few very 
complex as well as compound nominal phrases. 

The rapid quench rates characteristic of laser melting have been suc- 
cessfully exploited to seal the porosity of titanium coatings, plasma 
sprayed atop graphite substrates, without the formation of titanium car- 
bide... 




236 



Pragmatics of the Use of Nominals in Academic and Professional Genres 



225 



In academic scientific writing, therefore, the need to create compound nomi- 
nal phrases arises from the feet that the scientific writer frequently needs to refer to 
very precise and complex concepts again and again and to facilitate that concise 
reference, he invariably creates compound nominal phrases, which not only promote 
discourse coherence but also spare him tedious repetitions of long descriptions. 

Of course, good scientific writers are well aware of the difficulties that such 
compound nominal phrases might cause to their readership, particularly if they do 
not share the same background knowledge of the subject-discipline at a particular 
moment. That’s why Dubois (1981) rightly argues that example (7) cited below is 
more likely to appear in the beginning of the article than the one in (8) which con- 
tains a relatively more difficult compound nominal phrase at the introductory part of 
the sentence. (8) is more likely to be suitable for the later parts of the article, where, 
it is assumed that the reader has acquired the relevant knowledge. 




THE LEGISLATIVE GENRE 



Finally, we shall turn our attention to legislative writing, which is notoriously 
rich in the use of nominals of a third kind, which we have earlier on referred to as 
nominalizations. Legislative writing is highly impersonal and decontextualized, in 
the sense that its illocutionary force holds independently of whoever is the 
' speaker’ (originator) or the ' hearer* (reader) of the document. The general func- 
tion of this writing is directive. Legislative writing, as Bhatia (1987, p.l) indicates 



attempts to create a unique and model world of rights and obligations, 
permissions and prohibitions in which we live as members of civilized 
society. However, legal draftsmen are well aware of the age-old human 
capacity to wriggle out of obligations and to stretch rights to unexpected 
limits, so, in order to guard against such eventualities, they attempt to 
define their model world of obligations and rights, permissions and 
prohibitions as precisely, clearly and unambiguously as linguistic re- 
sources permit. They are also aware of the fact that they deal with a 
universe of human behaviour, which is unrestricted, in the sense that it 
is impossible to predict exactly what may happen within it. Therefore, 
they attempt to refer to every conceivable contingency within their 
model world and this gives their writing its second key characteristic of 
being all-inclusive. 



236 



226 



Vijty Bhatu 



Reconciling the two is not always an easy task. The writer’s predicament is 
well described by Caldwell (1980), an experienced practitioner in the field. 

••.there s always the problem that at the end of the day there's a system 
of courts and judges who interpret what the draftsman has done. It is 
very difficult to box the judge firmly into a corner from which he cannot 
escape... given enough time and given enough length and complexity 
you can end up with precision but in practice there comes a point when 
you can’t go on cramming detail after detail into a bin... you’ve got to 
rely on the courts getting the message and deducing from what you have 
said or it may be often from what you haven’t said, what implications 
they are to draw in such and such a case... [Reported in Bhatia 
(1982:25)] 



So, in spite of the seeming impossibility of the task no effort is spared in 
legislative provisions to to box* the reader ' firmly into a corner' . This is generally 
achieved by making the provision not only clear, precise and unambiguous but all- 
inclusive too. And it is this seemingly impossible task of achieving the dual charac- 
teristic of clarity, precision and unambiguity on the one hand, and all-inclusiveness 
on the other hand, that makes legislative provisions what they are. One of the many 
linguistic devices which make this possible is the use of nominalizations, others 
being the use of qualificational insertions, complex-prepositions, syntactic disconti- 
nuities, binomial and multi-nomial expressions etc. (for more details see Bhatia, 
1882, 1983, 1984, 1987 and Swales & Bhatia, 1983). 

To illustrate how nominalization is used in legislative provisions, let us look 
at an example from Singapore's Wills Act (1970). 



9. 



No obliteration, interlineation or other alteration made in 
any will after the execution thereof shall be valid or have 
effect except so far as the words or effect of the will before 
such alteration shall not be apparent, unless such alteration 
shall be executed in like manner as hereinbefore is required 
for the execution of the will; but the will, with such altera- 
tion as part thereof, shall be deemed to be duly executed if 
the signature of the testator and the subscription of the wit- 
nesses be made in the margin or on some other part of the 
will opposite or near to such alteration or at the foot or end 
of or opposite to a memorandum referring to such alteration 
and written at the end or some other part of the will. [Sec- 
tion 16 of the Wills Act, 1970, Republic of Singapore] 



The most striking characteristic of this type of writing is the way the verbal 
expressions are turned into nominals. If we count the number of nominalized ex- 
pressions in the above sentence we find 1 1 of them in a sentence which, by legal 
standards, is not exceptionally long, a mere 132-words. In these 1 1 instances we 
find 5 different verbs being nominalized. Of these 11, there are only 2 which have 

ER° 



Pragmatic! of die U»e of Nonamb in Academic and Profeeriooal Oenm 



227 



been repeatedly used, execution twice, and alteration, which is the topic of the 
section, six times. This means that the legislative draftsman uses nominalization for 
two reasons. Firstly, of course, to refer to the same concept or idea repeatedly and, 
as in academic and scientific discourse, this promotes coherence and saves the writer 
from repeating lengthy descriptions. Secondly, and perhaps more typically, it is a 
convenient device to refer to as many aspects of human behaviour as required and at 
the same time to be able to incorporate as many qualificational insertions as neces- 
sary at various syntactic points in the legislative sentence. The use of nominal rather 
than verbal elements is likely to provide ' more mileage’ as it were to the legislative 
writer when one of his main concerns is to be able to cram detail after detail and 
qualification after qualification in his legislative sentence. It is an entirely different 
matter that such a highly-nominal style is bound to create processing difficulties for 
the un-initiated readership in what Halliday calls the 'unpacking* of such expres- 
sions. Sometimes, even a seemingly simple and innocent-looking provision, like the 
one in (10) below, can make one wonder whether it is the best and the only way of 
putting it, when one finds that, of the three nominals, at least two are rarely, if ever, 
used in everyday normal discourse. 

10. No will shall be revoked by any presumption of an intention 

on the ground of an alteration in circumstances. [Section 14 
of the Wills Act, Republic of Singapore] 



CONCLUSION 

Although nominals have traditionally been treated as a single entity, particu- 
larly for various applied linguistic purposes, and there are good reasons for treating 
them so for some language teaching purposes, especially at lower levels, there are 
equally compelling reasons for treating them as distinct linguistic devices, particu- 
larly for more advanced and specialized language teaching purposes. Firstly, they 
display not only distinct linguistic forms but also seem to have a very different dis- 
tribution in academic and professional genres. Secondly, and more importantly, 
they also realize somewhat different aspects of the genres in which they are often 
used. The writers of these genres are often led to the use of one or the other of these 
different nominal forms for very different genre-specific considerations. In order to 
understand and appreciate the full potential of these linguistic forms one essentially 

needs to adopt a generic perspective. . 

In advertising, nominals are more often in the form of complex nominals 
because the copywriter’s main concern is to find as many syntactic slots as possible 
for adjectival insertions. This facilitates suitably precise, desirably positive and 
effective description of the product or service being advertised. Scientific research 
writing predominantly uses compound nominal phrases to refer to concepts w c 
are either created as the discourse proceeds or to refer to further refined and often 
repeated scientific concepts. In this case, the use of compound nominal phrases is a 
convenient linguistic device to create and refer to technical terms. In legislative 

236 



O 



228 



Vijty K. Bhatu 



rules and regulations, we find an overwhelming use of nominalizations, simply be- 
cause the parliamentary draftsman needs to condense his often longish provisions 
mto somewhat more precise, unambiguous and all-inclusive statements by incorpo- 
rating all types of possible conditions and contingencies that may arise during the 
course of the interpretation of a particular legislative provision. Nominalization has 
been a very ancient and trusted linguistic device used by the legal expert to achieve 
condensation and all-inclusiveness in his writing. 

The analysis of nominal use presented here has strong implications for many 
applied linguistic purposes, particularly for ESL, ESP and the teaching of profes- 
sional and academic writing. Grammar has long been an integral part of our lan- 
guage teaching programmes. In earlier days our approach was invariably prescrip- 
tive. With the availability of various linguistic descriptions of language, we brought 
m an important element of description in our language teaching programmes and 
then language teaching became more descriptive. Now, with the advent of discourse 
and genre analysis in recent years, our language teaching programmes need to be 
made more effective by making them explanatory so that the learner consciously 
knows why he is writing a particular essay, an academic or professional text the way 
he has been asked to. This will make him better aware of the rationale of the text- 
genres that he is required to read and write. After all, the most important function of 
learning is not simply to be able to read and produce a piece of text as a computer 
does, but to become sensitive to the conventions in order to ensure its pragmatic 
success in the academic or the professional context in which it is likely to be used. 

This can be effectively achieved in language teaching by using a genre-based 
approach to syllabus specification and materials development. Instead of selecting 
and specifying texts and tasks on the basis of grammar, content, subject-matter, 
topic or theme, one could select syllabus content in terms of genres and specify text- 
task relationships (Swales, 1990, p.77) based on the findings of genre analysis of 
the selected text-types. Once this has been achieved, the choice of specific examples 
of text-genres in the classrooms can be left to individual teachers and even to learn- 
ers themselves. This will give enough freedom to the teacher and the learner in the 
selection of texts, thereby ensuring their participation in the decision making proc- 
ess. This kind of genre-based approach to syllabus design and materials develop- 
ment will not only ensure greater flexibility in syllabus specification and learner 
participation in the learning process but also sensitize the learner to the value of 
linguistic expressions that they carry in specific generic contexts. 

THE AUTHOR 

Dr. V.K. Bhatia is a Senior Lecturer in the Department of English Language 
and Literature at the University of Singapore. He is best known for his extensive 
research into the language of the law, though he has also written a number of ar- 
ticles on genre analysis of other professional and academic texts, the teaching of 
ESP and curriculum design. 



O 

ERIC 



233 



Pragmatic i of the Uae of Nominal* in Academic and Profeuionil Genre* 



229 



REFERENCES 

Bhatia, V.K. (1982). An Investigation into Formal and Functional Characteristics of 
Qualifications in Legislative Writing and its Application to English for Aca- 
demic Legal Purposes. A Ph.D thesis submitted to the University of Aston in 
Birmingham, U.K. 

Bhatia, V.K. (1983). Simplification v. Easification : the case of legal texts. Applied 
Linguistics, 4, 1, 42-54. 

Bhatia, V.K. (1984). Syntactic discontinuity in Legislative writing and its implica- 
tions for academic legal purposes. In A.K. Pugh and J.M. Ulijn (Eds.), Read- 
ing for Professional Purposes - Studies and Practices in Native and Foreign 
Languages, (pp. 90-96). London: Heinemann Educational Books. 

Bhatia, V.K. (1987). Textual-Mapping in British Legislative Writing. World 
Englishes 6, 1, 1-10. 

Bhatia, V.K. (1988). A Genre-Based Approach to the Analysis and Teaching of 
Business Communication. Paper presented at the XIV International Associa- 
tion of Language and Business, Reutlingen, West Germany. 

Bhatia, V.K. (forthcoming). Genre Analysis - Theory, Practice and Applications. 
To be published by London, Longman under Applied Linguistics and Lan- 
guage Study Series. 

Bhatia, V.K. and Mary T»y (Eds.) (1987). The Teaching of English in Meeting the 
Needs of Business and Technology, Volume 1 and 2. Report of the UNDP- 
Govemment of Singapore Project, Department of English Language and Lit- 
erature, National University of Singapore. 

Dubois, B.L. (1981). The Construction of Noun Phrases in Biomedical Journal 
Articles. Paper presented at LSP Conference at Copenhagen, August 1981. 

Pangbom, R.J. and Beaman, D.R. (1980). Laser glazing of sprayed metal coatings. 
Journal of Applied Physics, 51, 11, 5992-3. 

Quirk, R., Sidney Greenbaum, G. Leech and J. Svartvik,. (1982). A Grammar of 
Contemporary English. London: Longman. 

Salager, F. (1984). Compound nominals phrases in scientific-technical literature : 
proportion and rationale. In A.K.Pugh and J.M. Ulijn (Eds.), Reading for 
Professional 

Purposes - Studies and Practices in Native and Foreign Languages (pp. 136-145). 
London: Heinemann Educational Books. 

Swales, J.M. (1981). Aspects of Article Introductions. Aston ESP Research Report 
No. 1 , University of Aston in Birmingham. 

Swales, J.M. (1986). A genre-based Approach to Language Across the Curriculum. 
Paper presented at the 1985 RELC Seminar in 

Singapore. Also published in M.L. Tickoo (Ed.), Language Across the Curriculum 
(pp. 10-22). Singapore: RELC. 

Swales, J.M. (1990). Genre Analysis - English in Academic and Research Settings. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Swales, J.M. and V.K.Bhatia (1983). An Approach to the Linguistic Study of Legal 
Documents. Fachsprache, 5, 3, 98-108. 

<i4U 



230 



Vijay K. Bhatia 



Williams, R. (1984). A cognitive approach to English nominal compounds. In 
A.K.Pugh and J.M.Ulijn (Eds.), Reading for Professional Purposes - Studies 
and Practices in Native and Foreign Languages (pp. 146-153. London: 
Heinemann Educational Books. 

Yamada, Y„ Kidoguchi, I., Taguchi, T., and Hiraki, A. (1989). Bound-Exciton 
and Edge-Emisson Spectra Associated with Li and Na Acceptors in ZnSe. 
Japanese Journal of Applied Physics , 28, 5, L837-1840. 

0 




241 



* ’ ;■ • . - ’.-.it ; 7 



• ;v , v.V ; :>■ -V- •• • v-k *• 

v.p. Pragmatics and Language Learning ; M f/' 

Monograph Series Volume 3 .1992 . : / 9 8 l 



CONTENTS 



. i Introduction '/: 



>r * >v - A' *t*w 

v' 'V 



?; . • , 



■ i'/v 

•Z y y/ ■ 



'• j Do We All: Apologize; the Same?, - v An Enipiri^al Stuay on ■ thje-Act of 
Apologizing by Spanish Speakers /Learning English, Montserrat Mir 

V 20 ; ./ Cori vexsatidnaL Openings : in Kiswatyl j : The Pragmatic . - 
. J- . ‘ Native *u%L$ on -nati ve Speakers,; Alwiya S/Omdr ^ ; . ' ; 



■ ;- v - matics,- Beverly, Hartford; and Kathleen Bardoyi-Hcirlig 

- 53. The 1 n terp re ta t i ono f- Imp hca ture in Enghsh by .NNS: Does It Come * - . 

: . 'Autoiriatically V Without Being. Explicitly Taught? Lawrence F. BqiUo'h 

66 ' Li ngiii s.t i c. : and P. rag mat i c - Co rripeten ce Thei r...Rel ationshipin the Overall 
. * /■L -,CQnipetence^pf the. Language burner,. Sheila Hoffi 

81 1 Discourse Domains Revisited:. Lxpertise aud iftyestmerit in Conversation, 

r ; .. : Shona Wliyte : : / , ■; ; • . ;‘ V ' , ■ ■; .\V L * 

' . 1Q3 ! • " Politeness Phenomena in South African Black English-, Elizabeth de Kadi 

\ T17 Gender and. Function oLDanguage Use: Quantitative and- Qualitative 
V v Evidence, from, Japanese, Sachikolde ' . , 



.130 Seeking a Pedagogically -Useful Understanding of Given-New: An 

Analysis Of Native-Speaker Errors -in Writteh; : piscourse, Asha Ticko.o.. 

/, J144. The Telling . of a Tale: Discourse Structure and Tense Use in- Learners' 

. Narratives, KaihleenBardoyi-Htirlig ; ; ■ ' 

.162 Pragmatics-of Elusive Languages, *. ■ ; 

182 Th,e Pragmatic^ of Codes\yitchirig in Mexican Political, Literary arid - 

! -^New,s Magazines, Eri‘crtM£Clure . ■ ■ 

* , 197" ■/ - Modality as a Strategy ip Jritcractio^ Modality imthe Lan- 

: :■ . • .; . guage of Native and; Non-nati v,e. Speakers of English, Elise KiirkQhhi/Z 

* - 217 Pragmatics of the U.se.of Nomihais in Academic and Professional 

V Qenres : , Vi jay K . Bhatia 






BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



