Silenced Fighters: Identity, Language and Thought 
of the Nasa People in Bilingual Contexts of Colombia 

Voces silenciadas: identidad, lengua y pensamiento 
de la comunidad nasa en contextos bilingues colombianos 


Wilder Yesid Escobar Almeciga* * 

July Carolina Gomez Lobaton * 

Universidad Distrital Francisco Jose de Caldas, Colombia 


This article is the result of a theoretical investigation and a reflection guided by a revision of literature 
and a set of interviews conducted of two members of the Nasa community: Adonias and Sindy 
Perdomo, father and daughter who belong to a Nasa sub-community located in Tierradentro, Cauca, 
southwestern Colombia. The article addresses three major factors. Firstly, it depicts identity processes 
that are constructed and constituted through language. Secondly, it explores the power structures 
perceived by two Nasa people, one of Colombia’s minority groups. Finally, it identifies and connects 
correlating dots between the literature, the testimonies of Adonias and Sindy Perdomo and the teaching 
practices, approaches and beliefs in the area of ELT (English Language Teaching) in Colombia. 

Key words: Identity construction, bilingual education, minority groups, power structures 

Este articulo es el resultado de una investigation teorica y una reflexion cimentada en una revision 
literaria y en entrevistas aplicadas a dos personas de la comunidad nasa: Adonias y Sindy Perdomo, 
padre e hija, pertenecientes a la poblacion ubicada en Tierradentro, Cauca, en el suroccidente 
colombiano. El articulo trata tres aspectos principales. Primero, describe procesos identitarios 
construidos y constituidos por medio del lenguaje. Segundo, explora la distribution de poder tal como 
es percibida por dos personas de la comunidad nasa, uno de los grupos minoritarios de Colombia. En 
ultimo lugar, traza las correlaciones entre la literatura, los testimonios de Adonias y Syndi Perdomo, y 
las practicas y creencias existentes y predominantes en el area de la enseiianza del ingles en Colombia. 

Palabras clave: constitution de identidad, education bilingiie, grupos minoritarios, estructuras de 
poder 


* E-mail: escobar.w@gmail.com 

* E-mail: carolinagoin@hotmail.com 

This article was received on July 8, 2009 and accepted on December 27, 2009. 


PROFILE Vol. 12, No. 2, 2010. ISSN 1657-0790. Bogota, Colombia. Pages 125-140 


125 



Escobar Almeciga & Gomez Lobaton 


Introduction 

This article is not merely about knitting stories 
of the Nasa people and their language mediated 
struggles, but rather, it attempts to observe other 
forms of bilingualism and bilingual education to 
make connections between languages and socio¬ 
cultural aspects in order to further understand 
bilingualism as a concept. It is also an attempt to 
unveil identity issues which are assaulting our 
current collective and individual reality as a mul¬ 
tilingual country and as second language learners 
and educators. In addition, this reflection aims at 
finding relationships between language and many 
other aspects of culture; for example, meaning, im¬ 
portance, work, land, prestige, religion, and power. 

This theoretical investigation took place as part 
of a bilingualism and bilingual education class of 
the M.A. program in Applied Linguistics to the 
Teaching of English at Universidad Distrital Fran¬ 
cisco Jose de Caldas, in Bogota. It had the purpose 
of discovering relationships among language, socio¬ 
cultural dynamics and geographical locations of 
minority groups in Colombia to, subsequently, find 
correlations with ELT. 

Methodology 

The class theorization and conceptualiza¬ 
tion involved a study of bilingualism and bilin¬ 
gual education in those socio-culturally diverse 
and complex contexts of the Colombian territory. 
Herein, many minority languages and cultures in 
Colombia came under scrutiny; for example, Tu- 
kano, Guambiano and, of course, Nasa. Then, we 
chose to focus our study on the Nasa community 
and their lived experiences. Due to limited time 
and resources we were unable to conduct the re¬ 
search project in Tierradentro, Cauca, with a big¬ 
ger sample of the population. Thus, we contacted 


two Nasa members, Sindy and Adonias Perdomo, 
who were within geographical reach for the finan¬ 
cial feasibility of the project. They gladly accepted 
to participate and requested that their real names 
should be used for this purpose. 

Data were gathered by using videotaped inter¬ 
views of the participants in the form of biographical 
oral histories as depicted by Creswell (1998). The 
interview questions pursued information about 
the educational system, home life, and literacy 
experiences. These data were mostly collected in 
Spanish due to the fact that the participants are 
proficient speakers of Spanish and the researchers 
did not have any knowledge of Nasayuwe. This was 
followed by attempts of identifying bilingualism 
and bilingual education issues and the study 
of possible connections with English language 
teaching and learning. Finally, we interpreted and 
critically presented the information based on the 
theoretical study and conceptualization about the 
subject. What we have next is the product pre¬ 
sented in narratives, which account for the new 
considerations and understandings we have come 
to and we only hope that this will also serve to 
shape your own understanding on the matter. 

Silenced Fighters: 

Theory-Based Analysis 

Perhaps you love the briefcase which holds 
your documents or the sweater you wear on 
special occasions, but have you ever thought about 
the significance they have for you or for the people 
who made them? Every single piece of work of the 
Nasa people has been crafted with deep cultural 
consideration: their work represents who they are, 
what they have, what they believe in, and where 
they come from. For example, knitting carries life 
stories which are passed down through time and 
space not only through the making of the items, 


126 


Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 


Silenced Fighters: Identity, Language and Thought of the Nasa People... 


but through the items themselves. According to 
our participants, the skillful hands of Nasa women 
weave the wool, cotton, and all the other fibers to 
provide clothing and shelter for their community 
as well as to register and pass on the changes of 
their ever-evolving culture and identity from 
family to family and generation to generation. The 
responsibility of maintaining the history of the 
Nasa people and conveying cultural significance 
to their children rests heavily on their shoulders. 
This duty is incessant, given that neither identity 
nor culture is static, but rather, as Cummins 
(2001) suggests, is constantly being negotiated and 
transformed under socio-cognitive conditions. 

This is the kwetad ya 'ja (cuetandyaja). It is composed of colors 
and figures that are closely associated with the Nasa cosmogony. 
In it, we can appreciate the unza yafx; that is, the mouses eye. 
The ideology behind it is to be able to raise our children with the 
cleverness of a mouse, which is a very important animal for the 
Nasa community. (Sindy Perdomo) 

In addition, cultural significance is not divorced 
from language and language, in term, permeates 
most, if not all, aspects of any given civilization. 
Thus, Nasayuwe, the language of the Nasa com¬ 
munity, is not the exception. Nasayuwe is the means 
by which the Nasa community structures life, 
understands their world and conveys knowledge 
amongst themselves and outward into other so¬ 
cieties. Speaking Nasayuwe, for the Nasa popu¬ 
lation, means possessing one of the most vital 
sources of cultural identity, which Arber (2005) 
considers to be the right to express and share 
individual cultural heritage including, but not 
limited to, language and religion. Language por¬ 
trays them as a cultural group setting them apart 
from any other (Bernal & Gonzalez, 2007). Sindy 
Perdomo comments: 

When we lived in the Indian reservation, I had a very close 
relationship with my grandmother, who was a very important 


person at the time... my mother is a Spanish speaker; Spanish 
is her mother tongue, and my father is a balanced bilingual, 
but I had a closer relationship with my grandmother, Rosenda. 
She was a traditional medical doctor, and that is how I got 
acquainted with the Nasayuwe language. (Sindy Perdomo) 

Tierradentro, Cauca, for example, is depicted 
by Sindy Perdomo as the land of the Nasa people; 
only citizens of the Nasa nation live there, and the 
restricting factors for awarding membership in this 
society are determined by language and language 
alone. In one of her narratives, Sindy recounts 
below the encounter that her people had with 
white missionaries: the influence they had with one 
another and the history they shared together, which, 
she declares half joking, could never be denied 
because there is living proof embodied in the white 
European-looking portion of this population: 

Something very special about Tierradentro, is the people who 
live there because they are blond, green eyed, they have curly 
hair... I don’t know why! Maybe because of the missionaries or 
maybe because of the colonialism. (Sindy Perdomo) 

These white skinned, blond haired and green 
eyed individuals from Tierradentro are often 
monolinguals in Nasayuwe and despite their as¬ 
tonishing ethnical differences when compared 
with the rest of the members, they seem to have no 
socially assigned restrictions due to their language 
proficiency in Nasayuwe and to the common his¬ 
tory they have with the rest of the Nasa people. As 
a result, we could say that meaning pierces through 
the thickest layers of biological racial features and 
it is found at the core of who people are. As Hymes 
(1974) explains, this is often determined through 
language under conditions and parameters exclu¬ 
sive to a specific community. 

Nevertheless, the issue at hand entails far more 
than just speaking. Nasayuwe, for the Nasa people, 
represents a matter of pride in their historical 


PROFILE Vol. 12, No. 1, 2010. ISSN 1657-0790. Bogota, Colombia. Pages 125-140 


127 


Escobar Almeciga & Gomez Lobaton 


roots, respect for their culture and reverence 
for their belief system. This issue, consequently, 
sets off an identity-related matter affirmed by 
affiliations established through a common lan¬ 
guage, a common history and, in general, socio¬ 
cultural aspects (Foucault, 1988). Knowing and 
identifying themselves as part of a given social 
group which has its own vision of the world allows 
them to recognize their possibilities in the present 
and project them towards the future based on their 
experiences from the past. That is, as Ching Man 
(2008) puts it, identity concerns not only who we 
are but also what we might become. Language is 
the medium through which individuals are socially 
constructed and through which they construct 
the identity they are assigned. According to Luke 
(1996), it is also through language that they define 
themselves and their subjectivities. For instance, 
grandparents tell their grandchildren stories about 
their life experiences and their origins as one of 
the many ways of reinforcing and revitalizing lan¬ 
guage which, in turn, is the foundation for identity 
constitution. This is done not merely by the use of 
words but also by the unlimited nature of conven¬ 
tions and significations that this tradition holds, as 
reflected in the quote below: 

This is the “Chumbe”, this object is special because it is the 
last and the only symbolic representation of womens thought, 
because it is the women who make it. They are the ones who 
transmit cultural values such as language, roles and the like... 
(Sindy Perdomo) 

The pieces of work crafted by Nasa women such 
as “chumbe”, a strap-like baby carrier, is language 
in and of itself. The pictures, drawings and symbols 
decorating these items depict their cosmogony, 
tell their stories, and define their roles as their 
childrens educators who transmit linguistic and 
cultural values. 


Language, then, is wrongly delineated if it is 
merely associated with grammatical structures or 
terms that are exclusively related to accuracy and 
appropriateness. According to Freire & Macedo 
(1987), these components, however, are closely 
linked with conceived economical interests, or 
to an ideology designed to initiate the poor, the 
underprivileged and minorities into the logic of 
a unitary, dominant cultural tradition. In order to 
come to deeper and better understandings about 
language and, more specifically, about Nasayuwe, it 
is imperative to refer to Hymes (1974), who suggests 
that the creation of language is contingent to the 
conditions and parameters of the context. That is, 
context shapes language by allocating meaning 
according to the characteristics of the participants. 

Imagine English language education in Colom¬ 
bia focused on reconstructing who students are as 
individuals, how they understand their world, how 
they comprehend their connections to their larger 
groups to have better access to possibilities within 
their world. That is what one participant refers to in 
the next statement: 

The best way to recover the language is by recovering the 
land...because... Where is language constructed? Where is 
communication constructed? Where is our own thought being 
constructed? (Adonias Perdomo) 

Swain (2000) mentions that physical and se¬ 
miotic tools mediate our interaction with the 
physical and social environment. According to 
Adonias, Nasa people create language in and about 
their land: their lives in it, their dreams about it 
and their sorrows for it. They do not see themselves 
outside their natural environment but rather, they 
identify themselves as a part of the whole natural 
system and they see this system as a part of them. 
Therefore, they create language to relate to their 
environment, to position themselves within it and 


128 


Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 


Silenced Fighters: Identity, Language and Thought of the Nasa People... 


to protect it. They also claim the right to preserve 
it as suggested below: 

[For Nasa people] Spanish became the in-fashion language; it 
was a privilege to be able to speak Spanish... just like speaking 
English today, speaking the language of the dominating nation 
represented an asset for us as well. (Sindy Perdomo) 

As a result of the coalition of these many aspects 
in the Nasa environment, the struggles of the Nasa 
nation arise from the biggest and most important 
of the arenas which is language. Certainly it set 
off several changes in Nasa life. In relation to 
the prior idea, Schumann (1990) illustrates the 
acculturation phenomenon: how the perception 
held about their own language is altered upon 
the arrival of one with more “prestige”, which is 
Spanish. Therefore, the “need” of Nasa people to 
speak the majority language besides their first, 
generated a bilingual phenomenon that entailed 
new dynamics for identity constructions in this 
society. The Nasa nation endured from the most 
subtle discriminatory acts to the cruelest punitive 
procedures for speaking what they speak, thus 
being what they are. 

If language is understood not only as a code 
system but also as a process of construction and 
negotiation of meaning and significance in which 
factors like ideologies and histories come into play, 
then we can associate the dynamics of the languages 
above with the dynamics that Spanish and English 
have. Symbolic occupation does not only happen in 
“El Cauca” to the Colombian mestizo community 
or by the pressing force of Spanish; we can also see 
that same effect in other countries and nations. 
Colombia, for instance, loses more and more ground 
to foreign enterprises and governments. Therefore, 
English language teaching should include some 
of the socio-political issues and explorations of 
individual and collective identities in its practice to 
avoid problems like the following: 


It was not easy for me to do my homework when I had neither 
the resources nor a good command of the language. It was 
even harder for my dad because he was punished for speaking 
Nasayuwe... (Sindy Perdomo) 

For Sindy, this learning experience was painful 
at times, but remarkable, nonetheless. What she 
lived could be taken as a sample of what Nasa 
youth had experienced through the learning of 
Spanish. This trend is explained by Thompson, 
Mahoney, & MacSwan (2004) and can be 
debriefed by accounting for two different aspects 
that round out to form an approach to bilingual 
education that, certainly, has never suited a 
community with such peculiar characteristics. 
Firstly, the impact of Spanish on Nasa students 
was reflected in the never-ending and complicated 
set of rules that entailed diction in grammar, 
phonetics and syntax. Tudor (2001) calls this a 
structural and instrumental view to language 
and it is something they were not familiar with. 
Sindy points out that while, in Nasayuwe, the Nasa 
people achieved meaning to the degree to which 
their speech was related to their current reality, 
in Spanish meaning was forcefully appointed in 
substitution to their language and to every other 
aspect attached to it in order to subdue them and 
transform them into what the mestizo and the 
international community consider to be acceptable 
human beings. Once more, it is possible to say 
that these practices relate directly to ELT when 
significance leaves the classroom and grammar is 
the main focus of English classes as well as when 
students’ background, current context and future 
possibilities are not invited into the construction 
of the class dynamic (curricula). The next excerpt 
reflects this point: 

So then, they [the missionaries] tried to communicate the gospel 
through the usage of Spanish and it was very interesting what 


PROFILE Vol. 12, No. 1, 2010. ISSN 1657-0790. Bogota, Colombia. Pages 125-140 


129 


Escobar Almeciga & Gomez Lobaton 


happened in the churches: they would sing “Alabare, Alabare” 
[...] And how can you translate that into Nasayuwe? Well, it 
is possible to translate banana, pineapple... but what about 
Alabare? It is similar to the Oh Gloria in the national anthem. 
They are sentimental words, thus their translation was difficult 
and so they were learned mechanically. (Sindy Perdomo) 

As any other episode of force in human history, 
this one also implies rules, regulations, oppressions, 
and restrictions that are, as Adonias and Sindy 
Perdomo describe it, reflected in the way they 
perceived their language and language learning 
in general. Subsequently, their first approach to 
Spanish employed imitations and repetitions of 
linguistic patterns from their mestizo Spanish¬ 
speaking classmates and teachers. As the Nasa 
citizens started to find relevance in learning 
Spanish, they also found strategies to improve their 
performance. By associating words with images, 
they began to support the constructions of new 
concepts. This aided understanding and provided 
meaning when the words from the new language 
by themselves were unable to do so. In other 
words, language learners need not only to find 
relevance in the concepts presented, but they also 
have to be allowed to construct their own coping 
mechanisms in their learning process. Secondly, 
Hornberger & Skilton-Silvester (as cited in Reyes, 
2009) state that “Bilingualism and biliteracy often 
occur in a sociopolitical context of asymmetric 
power relationships, in which one language has a 
higher status than the other” (p. 2). 

Clearly, the previous accounts exemplify the 
quote above, but we could further support it by 
exploring the literacy processes that Sindy Perdomo 
makes reference to. She mentions Nasa individuals 
who, for one reason or another, attend high school 
on mestizo grounds or experience western literacy 
who, thereby, place themselves or are placed by 
others in what McKay & Wong (1996), explain 


as academically marginalized social ranks. To 
represent this idea, we refer to the next account: 

When I was eight, I had to go to school and it was there where 
I started to identify the difficulties of learning many things 
in Spanish. There was a time in which all was only learned 
mechanically. (Sindy Perdomo) 

Coming from a society that relied mainly on the 
oral tradition, not only were Nasas academically 
required to learn to read and to write in Spanish 
at the speed and in the same way mestizos did 
by adhering to standardized “westerner ways” 
(Weber-Pillwax, 2001), but they were also socially 
stained through belittling, name calling, and other 
humiliating deeds for conceiving their literacy 
practices as different from everybody else’s. Pardo 
(2007) also touches on the subject and reminds us 
that there are sixty-five indigenous languages, two 
Creole languages, English and other languages 
of diverse origins spoken in Colombia and the 
speakers of these languages have been forced, 
in many ways, to assimilate Spanish. They face 
discrimination fostered by the circumstances 
that privileged the so called “language of power”, 
justifying the importance of writing or endorsing 
the learning of a given second language by 
presenting deceiving possibilities and practices that 
empower languages and individuals placing some 
in privileged and others in marginalized social 
ranks. In the same light, some ELT practices involve 
the restriction of the use of Li in the classroom. 
This needs to be reconsidered given that, as it is 
supported in this work, Li engrosses identity and 
cognitive aspects. 

The school environment banned the speaking 
of Nasayuwe; it was not suitable to speak it in 
common places where Nasa and mestizo children 
met obligatorily and shared spaces as Sindy 
declares in the next statement: 


130 


Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 


Silenced Fighters: Identity, Language and Thought of the Nasa People... 


Interaction in the school took place in Spanish, but inside doors, 
in the house, it would be in Nasayuwe; one would play outside 
and even curse at others in Spanish but once in the house and 
with the doors shut, everybody would speak Nasayuwe. (Sindy 
Perdomo) 

Sindy and Adonias tell us that most teachers 
in their school contexts were mestizo and from 
their testimonies about school language policies, 
it could perhaps be inferred that these teachers 
viewed the students’ use of their first language as 
an interference in their collective and individual 
academic objectives. This concept is also de¬ 
scribed by Krashen & Terrel (1993). Perhaps 
this is one of the explanations for the reasons 
behind enforcing the exclusive use of Spanish in 
school. For Skutnabb-Kangas & McCarty (2008), 
this restriction causes language attrition in our 
indigenous communities. That is encouraging, in 
one way or another. Nasa and indigenous students 
prefer Spanish as the language to be used in public 
and tend to leave the use of Nasayuwe and other 
native languages exclusively for “behind closed 
doors” of one’s house. It is important to remember 
what Cameron (1995, as cited in Pennycook, 
2001) mentions about language which is not only 
an expression of identity but also the source by 
which individuals construct it. In other words, 
these teachers were not only forbidding students 
to speak Nasayuwe but were also inhibiting their 
right to exist, thereby inflicting shame through 
the symbolic power enclosed in social dynamics 
as Guerrero (2008) depicts it. This explains the 
difference from learning Spanish with the only 
purpose of creating relations with the Spanish 
speaking world as opposed to assimilating the 
Spanish speaking world in substitution to one’s 
own. Perhaps all of this could correspond to a 
subtractive vision of bilingualism (Baker, 2006) 


if we observe that the use of Nasayuwe is being 
confined to certain contexts, causing speakers of 
this language to partially forget it by the restriction 
of its use. We could relate this to Reyes’ (2009) ideas 
of power, as an element that exerts an effect on the 
way students develop their literacy processes in 
two languages and the reality that having a similar 
practice in ELT would lead to the recurrence of our 
repetitive history. 

Conversely, the symbolic power of language 
transcends the boundaries of the school grounds. 
For instance, Wycliffe Bible Translators, better 
known in Spanish as Instituto Lingiiistico de 
Verano, had a profound influence in the political 
and spiritual fields of Nasa history. On the one 
hand, Wycliffe introduced the Protestant faith 
in this society through language; persuasion, 
confusion and justification of acts were at the 
heart of these practices. This is similar to what 
Frykenberg (2009) depicts of what happened from 
Christianity’s early spread from the Middle East to 
the furthest corners of Europe as a metamorphosis 
of the gospel where each expansion of the gospel 
had its unique changes in the different aspects of 
social life and language. 

There were also mutations of the gospel and 
resistance towards it in Tierradentro. Sindy and 
Adonias say that those who believed in different 
gods from that of the Christian movement or walked 
an appropriation process of keeping some of their 
heritage traditions were labeled as heretics. 

On the other hand, the Wycliffe Bible Translators 
“identified” a need in the Nasa nation for a writing 
form of Nasayuwe and they launched a program 
to fulfill it. It is obvious to state that this intention 
pretended to give Nasayuwe an outlook similar 
to Spanish and English. The initiative of creating 
Nasayuwe in writing did not come from the 


PROFILE Vol. 12, No. 1, 2010. ISSN 1657-0790. Bogota, Colombia. Pages 125-140 


131 


Escobar Almeciga & Gomez Lobaton 


community itself but from a foreign entity which 
was Wycliffe Bible Translators 1 . As a consequence, 
this would lead us to associate the term “identifying 
needs” with the marketing concept in capitalism 
whereby we do not really identify a need but 
rather, we create it since a need is neither mine nor 
real when I have not identified it myself. However, 
they carried out their task, worked in conjunction 
with the Nasa people and fulfilled remarkable 
linguistic achievements. However, Sindy Perdomo 
declares that these accomplishments did not 
serve the interests of the Nasa people because 
the findings rest to date, in their vast majority, in 
libraries in the United States and have remained 
out of the reach for the Nasa nation. In the same 
way, many indigenous groups have been hostilely 
removed from their land, from their language and 
life. In response to it, we condemn solely the illegal 
terrorist groups. What is being concealed by the 
mass media and other entities is that many other 
parties share great responsibility for such savage 
acts: the banking system, the Government itself, 
and social, religious, political, and educational 
institutions that perpetrated inequalities. Here 
language is being used to exercise power over 
those whose histories were created, written and 
spoken in a specific geographical location that 
now it is to be seized; language is being used to 
misinform, deceive, justify and submit individuals 
and groups of people. Therefore, Sindy Perdomo 
makes reference to the television set, in a mocking 
sort of way, as la caja del diablo (the devil’s box), 
attributing the authorship of this creative label to 
the Wycliffe missionaries. Nevertheless, she now 
realizes how close this label actually is to reality. 
Sindy exhibits her feelings towards the media 
describing them as weapons of mass destruction 

i Wycliffe Bible Translators was founded in the 1930 by Richard 
Legster and William Cameron Townsend. As a main objective, Wycliffe 
sent young people to indigenous communities where oracy prevailed to 
create and introduce a written form of their language. 


that have been used against her people. It is obvious 
to state that the media without language would lose 
their impact; thus, not only language encompasses 
the very essence of who individuals are or traces 
the path they came along, but language also has 
a destructive power capable of breaking through 
the most solid socio-cultural structures eroding 
human essence away as shown in the next quote: 

The Government has its own vision about the main com¬ 
munication processes that the indigenous peoples have; there 
are organizations that provide laws for language conservation 
for native communities. However, all of these procedures are 
done with the only purpose of appeasing us. (Adonias Perdomo) 

As James Clifford (cited in Canagarajah, 2005) 
states, “Perhaps there is not return for anyone to a 
native land- only field notes for its reinvention”. 

Nasa people hold different views about land 
from the ones held by mestizos. Nasas cannot 
conceive themselves outside their territories because 
their significance entail different conditions and 
whole lifestyles. The relationship between language 
and land is so closely linked that when indigenous 
peoples lose their land, they are hopelessly exposed 
to the pressures and abuses of the outside world by 
being forced to forsake and forget their language 
and customs. However, the mestizo community 
appears to invade the lands of these indigenous 
groups more and more and that seems to be 
justified through discourse. Accordingly, Adonias 
Perdomo comes to the conclusion that regaining, 
reviving and revitalizing their “heritage language”, 
as defined by Kramsch, is only possible to the 
extent to which they get back for their community 
the lands that have been taken away from them 
(Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008). Adonias expresses 
it as follows: 

Today as well as yesterday, reviving the mother tongue has its 
bases on the fighting for the land; because, it is our territory, it 
is our autonomy; it is our right for self-government... If we win 


132 


Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 



Silenced Fighters: Identity, Language and Thought of the Nasa People... 


this battle, there will be resources to teach the language in the 
schools, there will be freedom; there will be an equilibrium, or 
at least, an acknowledgement for the right to use the language. 
(Adonias Perdomo) 

As we have seen, territorial incursions, political 
decisions, and social restrictions have permeated 
the life of the Nasa people in a way that hinders 
their attempt for constructing their civilization. As 
any other community, they must also be aided by 
physical as well as symbolic borders and frontiers to 
protect their subsistence. Here is where a pressing 
need for a deeper understanding of social aspects 
needs to come in to place. 

Raising Socio-Cultural 
Awareness towards 
Bilingualism and Bilingual 
Education and Their 
Relationship to Identity 
Reconstruction 

The analysis of the previously presented struggles 
and their corresponding implications seeks to be¬ 
come stepping stones towards ongoing processes of 
reflection, which may contribute to arriving at new 
understandings about our bilingual and sometimes 
multilingual contexts in Colombia and the subsequent 
approaches language educators and policymakers 
should pursue. The chronicles that Sindy and Adonias 
Perdomo shared are directly or indirectly related to 
language and its relationships to other languages. 
Therefore, language, meaning, and bilingualism are 
concepts that echo in the midst of these lines. 

On the one hand, Medina (2005) makes us aware 
of the importance of creating new conditions in 
order to allow differences to “visit” our classrooms 
and feel accepted, valued and welcomed enough 
so as to remain to enrich our society. On the other 
hand, Reyes (2009) defines a matching term - 


ecological perspective- as language practices that 
underlie not only linguistic components, but also 
a vast set of socio-cultural factors surrounding 
language learning processes which, together with 
the prior, evoke principals of respect and tolerance. 
In short, far from being a problem, ethnic, cultural 
and language diversity in the classroom represents 
a powerful learning asset to society. 

In the case of Nasa communities, a view under 
these characteristics has not yet been undertaken; 
on the contrary, some common misconceptions 
motivate efforts to work in opposite directions. 
To illustrate, bilingualism has been limited to 
Spanish and English alone leaving Nasayuwe as 
well as hundreds of other languages marginalized 
from the concept (De Mejia, 2006). Additionally, 
according to Grojean, it has been assigned 
standard definitions that diminish the complexity 
of the cognitive and socio-cultural processes that 
take place in it (as cited in Cenoz & Genesee, 
1998) when, indeed, Colombian bilingualisms are 
rich in shades, colors and forms (Edwards, 2003). 
The socio political conditions that, in one way or 
another, foster these erroneous conceptions are, on 
the one hand, the fact that the United States, with 
all the support from Latin America, has developed 
a concept of Language Imperialism (Skutnabb- 
Kangas & McCarty, 2008), that places English as 
the privileged source of quiet domination in the 
“Latin American colonies” thus, being the only one 
recognized as a valid second language. Spreading 
the use of English without cultural considerations 
means spreading English ideologies, policies and 
interests that could and will, sooner than later, 
perhaps backfire on us. Spreading the use of one 
global language could also be attributed to the fact 
that we want to homogenize the population so as 
to have more control. Differences present a threat 
that, according to Baker (2006), “maylie not only in 
personal insecurity and intolerance to differences 


PROFILE Vol. 12, No. 1, 2010. ISSN 1657-0790. Bogota, Colombia. Pages 125-140 


133 


Escobar Almeciga & Gomez Lobaton 


but also in perceived threats of power, position 
and privilege, plus a fear for what is different and 
competition for perceived fear resources” (p. 394). 

As Berstein (2000) implies, who one is, 
then, and who one might become as a learner 
is definitively inherent to what is learned and 
constructed within a social environment. 

Wess (1992, as cited in Norton, 1997) states that 
“those who have access to material recourses have 
access to power and privilege, which will in turn, 
influence how they understand their relationship 
to the world” (p. 410). 

As we have learned from Sindy and Adonias’ 
accounts and from our experience as teachers, 
students do not learn all at the same pace nor 
do they have the same resources. Their processes 
differ greatly from each other; however, the 
same results are required and measured through 
standardized testing. Here comes the issue of 
educational policies and the first aspect one should 
ponder is its role in society. Educational policies 
should aim at the construction of conditions under 
which cultural pluralism is protected. In addition, 
it should take into account who people are as a 
country or nation and what their contexts require 
of them and provide them with. Basic standards for 
competences in a foreign language such as English 
tells us that in Colombia today, foreign principles 
and standards are being implemented across the 
nation and these principles and standards belong 
to places of different contexts and people with 
different resources. Here, it is important to evoke 
the concept of collective or national identity 
depicted by Block (2007), where it is explained 
as the ability to imagine oneself as part of a larger 
social group. One crucial aspect when speaking 
about constructing a groups collective identity is 
that all its members must understand what larger 
group they actually belong to. This is Colombia 
with its own micro and macro contexts and its own 


interests and resources and it should be Colombia 
the point of reference for measuring and testing 
educational objectives. The issue at hand here is 
when people imagine themselves as a part of a 
larger society to which they can never be a part of; 
for example, Europe or the USA. 

In addition, through the many experiences 
and what is witnessed in the academic arena 
and in society in general, we could probably say 
that it is difficult to understand injustice when 
someone else is treated unjustly. It has to be our 
own personal and individual grievance to shake 
off our apathy and take action. That, as mentioned 
before, is one of the shortcomings of society today, 
the impossibility to see oneself as part of the larger 
group. For example, Nasa struggles are our own 
and yet we perceive them so far from our reality. 
The policies that rule the Nasa ethnic community 
were written by the same people who wrote the 
policies that rule the mestizo community. It would 
also be important to understand that the identity 
of a nation and its members is connected in many 
different ways; for example, by the communalities 
of their belief system, shared history, and common 
interests. As a system, a nation should operate 
together in search for its own interests. Moreover, 
as a system, a nation should be able to understand 
that what is done to other members of a larger group 
may have a butterfly effect on other members. 
What we allow to happen to them may later occur 
to us or hurt us. In other words, Colombia has 
standardized testing practices such as Instituto 
Colombiano para el Fomento de la Educacion 
Superior (ICFES) in general education and Test of 
English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) in English 
language teaching that do not take into account the 
specific context, the historical background, or the 
resources of the students and that have a reference 
point in foreign and unfamiliar contexts. As 
writers of this article, we want to make evident the 


134 


Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 


Silenced Fighters: Identity, Language and Thought of the Nasa People... 


need for a critical and informed stance on issues 
of this nature and advocate for a more responsible 
work of the media, of the different institutions and 
of those people whose voices are heard. Helping 
the Nasa nation and other native nations in our 
country regain their territory means helping 
them regain their identity, culture, language, and 
knowledge: their Territorial identity (Bernal & 
Gonzalez, 2007). 

Applicability in ELT: 

From Current Trends 
towards New Prospectives 
on Teachers' Development 

It is evident that neither listening nor knowing 
is a prevailing characteristic of human nature; it is 
easier to reap the “benefits” without considering 
possible repercussions. Perhaps some prefer the 
easy way out by choosing the surgery over doing 
exercise or following a diet because it is too painful 
a process to lose weight. People often numb them¬ 
selves with work overloads and the busyness of life 
just to be oblivious to the world around them. They 
love those diamonds in rings and necklaces, but 
they really do not want to hear how in the world 
they got them. They also love the briefcase even 
when the only thing they know about it is that it 
serves the purpose of carrying paperwork. They 
want to “learn English while sleeping” or “in four 
weeks” as is commonly advertised. They reduce life 
to the littlest and simplest of expressions. However, 
through their narratives, the Nasa participants have 
taught us, among numerous others, the concept 
of meaningfulness. As we have seen in this article, 
meaningfulness for the Nasa does not derive from 
the concept of entertainment or recreation and much 
less from effortless rewards, but rather, it stems from 
the ethical notions of historical relevance, common 
well-being and usefulness. Making the “kwetadya’ja 


(cuetandyaja)” was probably a task that required 
effort, concentration and hard work; however, it had 
purposes that went beyond its instrumental use and 
into depicting them and their place in this world 
and it was precisely that which made the job and the 
item significant. In other words, it is the possibility 
of identifying the usefulness of its specific utility as 
well as the recognition of its general historical and 
social cultural contributions and representations 
that assign meaning and significance. 

Singing Aleluya didnothave areligious, historical 
or emotional background for the Nasas and thus, 
it seemed to them as though it was full of empty 
words. For Brookfield (1986), personal, meaningful 
learning does not always seek a specific goal such as 
the acquisition of immediately applicable skills. He 
defines it as “learning in which adults come to reflect 
on their self-images, change their self-concepts, 
question their previously uncritically internalized 
norms (behavioral and moral), and reinterpret their 
current and past behaviors from a new perspective” 
(p. 213). He argues that the self-directed mode of 
learning is crucial for a meaningful learning to 
occur because he sees self-directed learning as 
one in which learners are aware of and understand 
alternative possibilities to interpret and create their 
personal and social worlds. 

Another aspect worth mentioning is the 
connection between language and culture. Sindy 
and Adonias recognize that language is not just 
the code standing alone in its attempt to make 
meaning by itself, but rather, that in order for the 
code to be able to make any sense, it needs to rely 
on contextual factors (e.g. history, ideologies and 
identity). They, more than everybody else, have 
realized that everyone is different and that we 
all have different histories and stories. We come 
from and go to different places. Consequently, we 
learn different things and in different ways. As a 
result of this reflection, language teachers must 


PROFILE Vol. 12, No. 1, 2010. ISSN 1657-0790. Bogota, Colombia. Pages 125-140 


135 


Escobar Almeciga & Gomez Lobaton 


certainly go beyond the linguistic perspective and, 
as Cruz (2007) suggests, try to figure out strategies 
that aim at helping students attain understanding 
of different ways of behaving, doing things and 
perceiving their reality. 

Camps (1997) elaborates on and supports 
the fact that we have the right to be different and 
that right is not being respected. Taking a close 
look at what our participants commented on in 
the narratives, we see that this idea seemed to 
be relevant in their context. Throughout their 
narratives the participants describe the way in 
which restrictions on the use of a different language 
in school and on being different were inflicted 
and enforced. Nevertheless, it is also important to 
acknowledge that Roberts, Byram, Barro, Jordan, 
& Street (2001) make mention that in a social 
context, not only its participants have the right to 
be different, but they also have the responsibility of 
learning about the other in order to achieve some 
degree of social tolerance. We must understand that 
all these processes depend on socio-cultural factors 
because learning comes as the result of a need. 
Perhaps not everyone needs the same things. Meek 
& Messing (2007) challenge educators to strive for 
a more cautious approach to educational practice 
bringing to bear the importance of dimensions of 
power contextualized within minority-language 
and ethnic groups. We urge them to attend to 
problems such as matrix-language framing and 
working with communities and publishers to ensure 
decisions favoring minority language use, rather 
than undercutting efforts to empower minority 
communities and reverse language shift. 

According to Sapir (1970), “language is felt to be 
a perfect symbolic system in a perfect homogeneous 
medium” (p. 540). Nevertheless, in English alone, 
we can see that language has evolved differently 
from country to country and from region to region. 
English speakers from Jamaica do not share exactly 


the same codes as English speakers from Africa. 
They do not even share the same codes with people 
from their own region or country. 

Bustamante (2002) emphasizes the importance 
of accents and non-standard forms of language. 
Barnard & Glynn (2003) emphasize the importance 
of promoting diversity in the classroom. And 
yet, there is a marked preference in the field for 
employing “native speakers” in some institutions. 
It has also been our experience that in the midst 
of Colombians critical unemployment rate, there 
are numerous qualified and over qualified English 
teachers. We conclude that even when there are 
human resources available and when there is a 
high unemployment rate, it is sometimes preferred 
to go the extra mile to hire foreign teachers. 

Our next example in the matter concerns the 
standards and parameters by which English lan¬ 
guage teaching is governed in Colombia. Herein, 
English education is required to be taught, meas¬ 
ured and evaluated according to methods and 
procedures that were designed for other contexts 
as such as the Common European Framework of 
Reference (CEFR) and the employment of stan¬ 
dardized testing techniques such as the TOEFL 
and other standardized language examinations. 
In Barenfanger’s words (2008), frequently, respon¬ 
sibilities and accountabilities for the objectives 
and procedures to be implemented are unclear; at 
other times, they are beyond our control. 

Fairclough (1992) suggests that knowledge, 
social relations, and social identities construct one 
another in their interactions. He says that this is 
done through discourse. 

Learning English is not important for every¬ 
body because there are needs that have priority 
over the desire or requirement to speak English. 
Sindy Perdomo mentioned, for instance, that 
in order for her to go to school, she had to walk 
for about two hours. By the time she got there, 


136 


Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 


Silenced Fighters: Identity, Language and Thought of the Nasa People... 


she was already tired and hungry and could not 
concentrate on academic matters. We can assure 
you that in our EFL classrooms there are conditions 
and situations that undermine the importance of 
learning English because there may be other more 
immediate circumstances that prevail. Attaining 
meaningfulness from learning English does not lie 
solely with the speech of English teachers, but rather, 
students need to understand their relationship to 
the English language. Teachers should strive for the 
provision of the necessary conditions for that to 
take place. Learning English as a foreign language 
should, then, become important when students are 
able to construct a personal and, maybe, collective 
purpose for learning it. Many people learn similar 
things for different purposes. There have been 
countries and individuals who learn English to 
appropriate it in order to be able to retaliate and 
gain emancipation. Hall (1959, as cited in Vaid, 
2006) says that an appropriation of the language 
can be exerted as a powerful form of resistance 
against the dominant discourse. There exist others 
who do it to join in, others to be able to function 
behind enemy lines and others just out of desire 
to understand the other. As teachers, we need to 
create the environment to explore and indentify the 
reasons for learning English under the scope of a 
deep cultural consideration. We need to find socio¬ 
cultural relevance instead of being worried about 
the games we will entertain our students with. We 
need to get to know the individual and collective 
realities of our EFL students and practices. We 
need to be aware of our political and economical 
world to make decisions for the right purposes. 
As Spolsky (1999) has pointed out, “Foreign-and 
second-language teachers have been challenged to 
recognize the political effects of their customary 
work. Whereas they had thought they were neutral 
and academically objective, they found their pro¬ 
fessional occupation supporting the spread of 


imperial and world languages and contributing 
to the demise of powerless languages” (p. 182). 
Cardenas (2006) endorses this claim by reflecting 
on the standards proposed by the Ministry of 
Education and concluding that they might have 
not taken into consideration cultural pluralism in 
Colombia. 

The creation of policies and documents such as 
“The basic standards for foreign language teaching: 
English” (Ministerio de Education Nacional [MEN], 
2006b), which is the basis for the development of 
others like the “Bilingual Colombia Program: Edu¬ 
cation Vision for 2019”, have not stopped despite an 
outcry of the people (MEN, 2006). 

Steps towards the development of educational 
strategies that enable teacher-researchers and stu¬ 
dents to start exploring the path between culture 
and language teaching and learning could involve a 
search for understanding on deeper levels of the 
complex human beings and their multifaceted 
interrelations as well as involve seeking collaborative 
work amongst teachers in order to achieve common 
goals towards a better way to teach the language 
(Davies, 1999). 

We might think that we are delivering 
culturally oriented curricula when we tell students 
that “Thanksgiving is one of the most important 
celebrations in the United States and that it is 
all about eating turkey and sharing in order to 
give thanks”. That is certainly showing only one 
side of the story; however, it is important to 
establish connections between what thanksgiving 
represents for all actors involved; it is important 
to give an account according to the native North 
Americans to see if they had the same opinion, 
for example. In addition, the value and the power 
of the English culture are often spoken about but 
how about the incursion into an exploration of the 
self value in English? Many times we speak about 
the language exchanges in terms of the English 


PROFILE Vol. 12, No. 1, 2010. ISSN 1657-0790. Bogota, Colombia. Pages 125-140 


137 


Escobar Almeciga & Gomez Lobaton 


contributions to the Spanish language; however, it 
is also important to study the contributions of the 
Spanish language to English. 

In conclusion, we should start, then, by thinking 
about the concept of multicultural education, under¬ 
stood as the plurality of races, costumes, traditions 
and therefore language that have to be recognized and 
accepted (Solomon, 1988), just as in the case of minor¬ 
ity languages, that claim for the right to be heard and 
respected without sacrificing their essence and iden¬ 
tity. In the case of our EFL contexts, the concept of in- 
tercultural education arises in the field of teachers’ 
development and language education. According 
to Rivilla & Dominguez (2005), for the develop¬ 
ment of intercultural education, culture has to be 
taken beyond the presentation of cultural items in 
the classroom: culture has to be embraced as a live 
entity that lets students go through the processes of 
understanding, synthesis and analysis, about cul¬ 
tural aspects that could be different from and yet, 
similar to one’s own. 

References 

Arber, R. (2005). Exploring multicultural curricula: 
Speaking of race and ethnic identities. Journal of 
curriculum studies, 37(6), 633-652. 

Baker, C. (2006). Foundations of bilingual education and 
bilingualism. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 

Barnard, R., & Glynn, T. (2003). Bilingual childrens lan-guage 
and literacy development. Clevedon, England: Mul¬ 
tilingual Matters LTD. 

Barenfanger, O. (2008). Language educational policy and 
language learning quality management: The Common 
European Framework of Reference. Foreign Language 
Annals, 41(1), 81-101. 

Barnard, R., & Glynn, T. (2003). Bilingual childrens lan¬ 
guage and literacy development. Clevedon, England: 
Multilingual Matters LTD. 


Bernal, I., & Gonzalez, M. E. (2007, November, 27). El 
canto del origen. Tierra de Todos. Podcast. Re¬ 
trieved on fune 15 th from http://www.youtube.com/ 
watch?v=yV6W70t4ZcQ 

Bernstein, M. M. (2000). “Pedagogy”, symbolic control and 
identity: Theory, research, critique. Oxford: Roman 
and Littlefield Publishers. 

Block, D. (2007). Second language identities. London: Kings 
Lynn. 

Brookfield, S. D. (1986). Adult learning: A comprehensive 
analysis of principles and effective practice. England: 
Open University Press. 

Bustamente, G. (2002). Una mirada, desde Bourdieu, al 
lenguaje y a las competencias. Enunciacion, 7, 51-56. 

Camps, V. (1997). Etica y diversidad cultural: Derecho a la 
diferencia. Mexico, D. F.: Fondo de Cultura Economica. 

Canagarajah, S. (2005). Reclaiming the local in language policy 
and planning: Reconstructing local knowledge. New fersey: 
ESL & Applied Linguistics Professional Series. 

Cardenas, M. L. (2006). Bilingual Colombia: Are we ready 
for it? What is needed? 19th Annual EA Education 
Conference. Retrieved on fune 26, 2009 from http:// 
www.elicos.edu.au/index.cgi?E=hcatfuncs&PT=sl&X 
=getdoc&Levi=pub_co7_07&Lev2=co6_carde 

Cenoz, J., & Genesee, F. (1998). Beyond bilingualism: 
Multilingualism and multilingual education. Clevedon, 
England: Multilingual Matters LTD. 

Colombia. Ministerio de Education National [MEN]. 
(2006b). Estandares basicos de competencias en len- 
gua extranjera: ingles. Formar en lenguas extranjeras: 
el reto. Retrieved May 08, 2008 from http://www. 
colombiaaprende.edu.co/html/mediateca/1607/ar- 
ticles -1153 75_archivo.p df 

Colombia. Ministerio de Education National [MEN]. 
(2006). Educacion: vision 2019. Bogota: Autor. 

Creswell, J. (1998). Qualitative inquiry & research design: 
Choosing among the five traditions. London: SAGE 
Publications. 


138 


Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 


Silenced Fighters: Identity, Language and Thought of the Nasa People... 


Cruz, F. (2007). Broadening minds: Exploring intercultural 
understanding in adult EFL learners. Colombian Applied 
Linguistics Journal, 9,144-174. 

Cummins, J. (2001). Negotiating identities: Education for 
empowerment in a diverse society. Los Angeles: California 
Association for Bilingual Education. 

Ching Man, L. (2008). Classroom discourse and the 
construction of learner and teacher identities. In 
Encyclopedia of Language and Education (Vol. 4). 
University of Pennsylvania. 

Davies, A. (1999). An introduction to applied linguistics: from 
practice to theory. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press. 

De Mejia, A. (2006). Bilingual education in Colombia: 
Towards recognition of languages, cultures and identities. 
Colombian Applied Linguistics Journal, 9,152-168. 

Edwards, J. (2003). Bilingualism: Beyond basic principles. 
Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters LTD. 

Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and text: Linguistic 
and intertextual analysis within discourse analysis. 
Discourse and Society, 3(2), 193-217. 

Foucault, M. (1988). Technologies of the self. Massachusetts: 
University of Massachusetts Press. 

Freire, P., & Macedo, D. (1987). Literacy: Reading the word 
& world. Critical studies in education series. London: 
Routledge. 

Frykenberg, E. (2009). Translating the message: The 
missionary impact on culture. International Bulletin 
of Missionary Research, 33(1), 42-50. 

Garland, E. (2006). Can minority languages be saved? The 
Futurist, 40(4), 31-36. 

Guerrero, H. (2008). Bilingual Colombia: What does it mean 
to be bilingual within the framework of the National 
Plan of Bilingualism? profile. Issues in Teachers’ 
Professional Development, 10(1), 27-45. 

Hymes, D. (1974). Foundations in sociolinguistics: An 
ethnographic approach. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press. 


Kramsch, C., & Whiteside, A. (2008). Language ecology 
in multilingual settings: Towards a theory of symbolic 
competence. Applied Linguistics, 29(4), 645-671. 

Krashen, S., &Terrell, T. (1993). The natural approach: Language 
acquisition in the classroom. London: Pergamon. 

Luke, A. (1996). Text and discourse in education: An 
introduction to critical discourse analysis. Retrieved 
on June 26, 2009 from: http://www.gseis.ucla.edu/ 
faculty/kellner/ed27o/Luke/SAHA6.html 

McKay, S., & Wong, S. (1996). Multiple discourses, multiples 
identities: Investment and agency in second-language 
learning among Chinese adolescent immigrant 
students. Harvard Educational Review, 66(3), 577-590. 

Medina, E. (2005). Presentaciones y politicas de la education 
sobre los sordos y la sordera en Colombia. Revista 
Education y Pedagogta, 17(41), 71-81. 

Meek, A.,&Messing,J. (2007). Framing indigenous langu ages 
as secondary to matrix. Languages Anthropology and 
Education Quarterly, 38(2), 99-112. 

Norton, B. (Autumn, 1997). Language, identity, and the 
ownership of English. TESOL Quarterly, 31(f), 409-429. 

Pardo, N. (2007). Diversidad lingiiistica y tolerancia en 
Colombia. Colombian Journal of Bilingual Education, 1, 
11-23. 

Pennycook, A. (2001). Critical applied linguistics: A critical 
introduction. Laurence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

Reyes, I. (2009). An ecological perspective on minority 
and majority language and literacy communities in 
the Americas. Colombian Applied Linguistics Journal, 
11, 106-114. 

Rivilla, A., & Dominguez, C. (2005). La formation del profe- 
sorado ante los nuevos retos de la interculturalidad. Inter- 
culturalidad, formation del profesorado y education. 
Madrid: Penron Educacion S.A. 

Roberts, C., Byram, M., Barro, A., Jordan, S., & Street, B. 
(2001). Language learners as ethnographers. Clevedon, 
UK: Multilingual Matters, Ltd. 

Sapir, E. (1970). The collected works of Edward Sapir. Berlin: 
GmbH & Co. 


PROFILE Vol. 12, No. 1, 2010. ISSN 1657-0790. Bogota, Colombia. Pages 125-140 


139 


Escobar Almeciga & Gomez Lobaton 


Schumann, J. (1990). Extending the scope of the accultur- 
ation/pidginization model to include cognition, tbsol 
Quarterly, 24(4), 667-683. 

Skutnabb-Kangas, T., & McCarty, T. (2008). Key concepts in 
bilingual education: Ideological, historical, epistemological 
and empirical foundations. In Encyclopedia of Language 
and Education. (Vol. 5. Bilingual Education). New York: 
Springer. 

Solomon, I. D. (1998). Strategies for implementing a 
pluralistic curriculum in the social studies. Social 
Studies, 79(6), 256-259. 

Spolsky, B. (1999). Second language learning. In Fishman, 
J. (Ed.), Handbook of Language and Ethnic Identity 
(pp. 181-192). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: 
Mediating acquisition through collaborative dialogue. 


In Lantolf, J. (Ed.), Socio-cultural theory and second 
language learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Thompson, M., Mahoney, K., & MacSwan, J. (2004). The 
condition of English language learners in Arizona: 
2004. In A. Molnar et al. (Eds.), The condition of Pre- 
K-12 Education in Arizona: 2004. Tempe: Arizona State 
University, Education Policy Studies Laboratory. 
Tudor, J. (2001). The dynamics of the language classroom. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Weber-Pillax, C. (2001). Orality in northern Cree indigenous 
worlds. Canadian Journal of Native Education, 25(2), 

149-167- 

Vaid, I. (2006). Joking across languages: Perspectives on 
humor, emotion, and bilingualism. Clevedon, England: 
Multilingual Matters LTD. 


About the Authors 

Wilder Yesid Escobar Almeciga is a candidate for the Master’s of Applied Linguistics in the 
Teaching of English at Universidad Distrital Francisco Jose de Caldas. His research interests 
include constitution of identity through the analysis of discourse. He is currently a teacher of the 
Administration and Language Faculty at Universidad de la Salle. 

July Carolina Gomez Lobaton is a candidate for the Master’s of Applied Linguistics in the 
Teaching of English at Universidad Distrital Francisco Jose de Caldas. Her research interests include 
Discourse Analysis in EFL settings and Bilingual Education. She is currently part of the Languages 
Department at Universidad Central and Universidad de La Salle. 


140 


Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 


