DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 369 703 



SO 023 893 



TITLE 



INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Influsing Multicultural Education into Today ! s 
Schools. An Annotated Bibliography To Accompany a 
Special Topical Collection of ERIC Microfiche 
Intended for Teachers, Administrators, and 
Librarians . 

ERIC Document Reproduction Service, Springfield, 

VA. 

93 

65p,; Contains 181 citations, extending from ED 318 
584 to ED 351 354. 

ERIC Document Reproduction Service, 7420 Fullerton 
Rd., Suite 110, Springfield, VA 22153-2852 
(Bibliography: free. Microfiche collection: $195). 
Reference Materials ~ Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; Asian Americans; Black 
Culture; *Cul tural Pluralism; *Curr iculum 
Development; Elementary Secondary Education; 
Instructional Materials; Latin American Culture; 
Learning Activities; ^Multicultural Education; Social 
Studies; Teacher Education 



ABSTRACT 

This annotated bibliography on the topic of 
multicultural education is intended to accompany a special collection 
of documents on microfiche selected from the Educational Resources 
Information Center (ERIC) bibliographic database. Evaluation reports 
of state and district efforts to implement multicultural curricula, 
and step by step instruction on addressing the needs of a diverse 
student body though multicultural programming are included. Specific 
topics covered in this collection include infusing multiculturalism 
into the arts, literature, history, and other subject areas including 
physical education; appreciating African American, Native American, 
Asian, and Hispanic cultures. Additionally, the collection includes 
items offering a theoretical rationale for including multicultural 
education in school programming. Each entry includes the ERIC 
identification number, author, title, publication year, notes, price, 
and an abstract. Resources include those designed for use in teacher 
education, instructional materials such as folktales from foreign 
countries, and works suggesting specific teaching methods for 
introducing multiculturalism at a particular grade level, cr within a 
particular subject. Conference proceedings and papers on the 
introduction o£ multicultural education, literacy, and literature are 
included. Surveys and reports of research work also are included. 
Resources that describe programs in multicultural education at 
schools across the country are listed. (DK) 



is itisisis itisisisis itis is }r)rvorft?c?c?cxK ^cxscsocxsc;:;:^ ;cx;c}c;r;c;csc:c;c;cx;c;cx w5C5C5?xx??3C"«5C5?5?5r5?W5r5?*C5C5: 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. * 

is is is it it it it is it it it it it it it it it it it is it it it it i: it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 



INFUSING MULTICULTURAL 
EDUCATION 
INTO TODAY'S SCHOOLS 



An Annotated Bibliography 
to Accompany a Special Topical Collection 
of ERIC Microfiche 
Intended for Teachers, Administrators, and Librarians 



181 Citations Extending from 



ED 318 584 to ED 351 354 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



U.3. DC^'.flTMENTOr EDUCATION 



OHtce ol Educational Research and Improvement 



Spring 1993 



EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 



CENTER (ERIC) 



□ This documeni has been reproduced at 
received I'om ihe person or ozonation 
Originating il 



□ Minor changes have been made lo improve 
reproduction quality 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



e Points ot view or opinions staled mthi* docu- 
ment do noi necessarily represent oHiciai 
OERI oosition o« poitcy 



ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) 
7420 Fullerton Road, Suite 110 
Springfield, Virginia 22153-2852 



Infusing Multicultural 
Education Into Today's 
Schools 

Throughout die United States, 
school districts and Sate Depart- 
ments of Education have been 
ujalang a commitment to inula- 
oikuial education. This new 
special collection from the ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service 
(EDRS) offers teachers and 
administrators the most recent 
and relevant information on the 
topic The collection includes _ 
specific resources, bibliographies, • 
and acavirics on mddculrnral 
topics; evaluation reports of 
efforts of states and districts to 
irnplemenrimilnculn^cnr- 

ricola; and, step-by-step instruc- 
aon on addressing mc needs of 
a diverse student body through 
nioldcultural programming. 
Topic covered in this special 

■ Infusiiigmulticulturalism^ 
the arts, literature history, 
and other subject areas, 
m^ n^ g physical cdn c at in n ; 

■ ApprcdatmgAfricm-Ameri- 
can,Natf7e American, Asian, 
and Hispanic cultures; and 

■ A meorcrical rationale fiir 
jn^n^ngmnldciLltaraledur 
cation in school pragraimmng. 

jfomicwjkhecollaimisotfatdon 
an annual subscription basis for a cost 
of$195.Thcjulsubsmption 
package includes the base collection, 
quarterly updates oj 'newly released 
documents, a. microfiche storagebox, 
and hardcopy index (also updated 
quarttrty). 



ERIC 



3 



Infusing Multicultural 

Education into Today 9 s 

Schools 
Spring 1993 



ED351354 

Author: Schlessman-Frost,-Amy 

Title: A Democratic Model and Some Policy 
Recommendations: Multicultural Educational Evaluation. 
Publication Year/ [1991] 

Notes: 10 p.; In: Orteza y Miranda, Evelina, Ed. 
Philosophy of Education Proceedings. Alberta, Canada, 
1991. p87~94. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: A democratic model of educational 
evaluation and some policy recommendations to develop 
culturally appropriate evaluation are presented. The 
traditional hard science paradigm in research must be 
replaced with evaluation designed to feed back to 
communities of varying cultural backgrounds. The most 
fundamental assumption of the new model is democracy, or 
the democratic principle, meaning participation by people 
in decisions that affect them. The value-aesthetic focus is 
to identify shared and cherished ideas from multiple 
cultures. The shared value system of a multicultural 
democracy will be operationalized into new forms of 
educational evaluation through participatory design 
development that involves representation of each 
participating culture in the selection of evaluation 
methodology. Culture must be incorporated into the 
discourse categories of evaluation to make evaluation a 
contributing part of the democratic process of education. 
The bottom line for the new model of evaluation is not the 
use of usual descriptive information gathered from 
standardized and normed instruments; rather, the intent is 
to prescriptively reinform the participants of their wn 
perceptions of their children's school environmt *, 
instruction, and the values transmitted. One figure presents 
the evaluation model. (SLD) 



ED351299 

Author: Sherritt r Caroline; Bosom, -Margaret 
Title: Reflecting Community Diversity in the School 
Publication Year/ 1992 
Notes: 14 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 



ABSTRACT: Although American students have always 
been somewhat diverse, newly identified groups with 
special needs appear on community horizons every year. 
Education is one arena from which response to diversity is 
necessary. Ethnic, socioeconomic, disability, and gender 
status differ from one region to another makLig 
communities the ideal nexus for change. Some communities 
have taken a pro-active approach to cultural pluralism, and 
several model programs are described. Successful 
approaches reflect community exigencies, but all emphasize 
the following components: (1) collaborative development of 
a clear belief system which respects the nature of and 
demands excellence for ail students; (2) use of an inclusive 
belief system as a guiding focus for school and community; 
(3) intervention strategies for at-risk students involving 
community agencies, businesses, and constituents in 
cooperative ventures; (4) a globalized curriculum which 
acknowledges the value of differences and teaches students 
to live in a heterogeneous, interdependent world; and (4) a 
holistic approach to instruction where whole children are 
educated in whole classrooms and are never labeled. 
Responding to cultural differences means restructuring 
public schools and supporting new practices to address the 
reality of plurality in the schools. (Contains 12 references.) 
(LL) 



ED351290 

Author: Finch, -Mary-Ellen; Rasck,-Kathe 

Title: Preparing Preservice Students for Diverse 

Populations. 

Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 20 p.; Paper presented at the National Forum of the 
Association of Independent Liberal Arts Colleges for 
Teacher Education (5th, Louisville, KY, June 5-8, 1992). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The Education Division of Maryville 
University (Missouri) believes in preparing teachers for 
student diversity. It encourages teachers to be reflective 
practitioners and suggests that the quality of a teacher's 
reflections and actions depends on a developmental ability 
to integrate concrete teaching experiences, models and 
strategies of others, and principles of research in teaching 
into an integrated whole. Maryville's teacher education 
program has four conceptual strands: (developmental, 
curriculum and instruction, sociological, and research). The 
paper describes the Roblee Project, which builds upon the 
experiences and curriculum permeating Maryville' s 
preservice teacher education program. The project began in 
1991 with several activities: faculty and focus group 
meetings on cultural diversity designed to critique 
preservice teacher education; data collection from new 
students, student teachers, and first-year teachers; and 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools paec 2 



resource list collection. Data analysis showed that: (1) 
students were uncomfortable with children unlike 
themselves; (2) racism exbted in most students; (3) 
students needed to believe that all children could learn; (4) 
many students did not want to work in schools with diverse 
populations; and (5) most students were ignorant of the 
civil rights movement and related historical issues. One 
crucial finding is that providing dissonance in terms of both 
knowledge and experience is crucial. (SM) 



ED351278 

Author: Risinger,-C.-Frederick 

Title: Trends in K-12 Social Studies. ERIC Digest. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse for Social Studies/Social 

Science Education, Bloomington, IN. 

Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 4 p. 

EDRS Price - MFV1/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Drawing on contemporary research 
literature, recently developed curriculum guides, and 
blue-ribbon reports, this digest reviews 10 contemporary 
trends in K-12 social studies in the United States. Trends 
are as follows: (1) History, history, and more history; (2) 
More geography, too; (3) Using literature to teach social 
studies; (4) Focus on the multicultural nature of American 
society; (5) Renewed attention to western civilization; (6) 
Renewed attention to ethics and values; (7) Increased 
attention to the role of religion; (8) Attention to 
contemporary and controversial issues; (9) Covering issues 
in depth; and (10) Writing, writing, and more writing. 
(DB) 



ED351236 

Title: The Rabbit in the Moon: Folktales from China and 
Japan. 

Source: Stanford Univ., CA. Stanford Program on 
International and Cross Cultural Education. 
Publication Year: 1979 
Notes: 82 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 



ABSTRACT: This teaching unit consists of eight 
folktales from China and Japan, skill-development 
exercises, and follow-up activities. It is designed for the 
upper elementary grades (3-6), and is easily adaptable to a 



broad range of age levels and abilities. It can be used in 
several curriculum areas, including: (1) social studies on 
China, Japan or Asia; (2) multi-cultural studies; and (3) 
language arts and literature. An introduction to folklore and 
a bibliography are included for teacher reference. (DB) 



ED351225 

Title: Vforld Cultures: A Theme Guide to K-12 Curricular 

Resources, Activities, and Processes. 

Source: Stanford Univ., CA. Stanford Program on 

International and Cross Cultural Education. 

Publication Year: 1984 

Notes: 109 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This guide is for educators who wish to 
improve existing curricular frameworks for teaching about 
world cultures. The guide is anchored by six goal 
statements for student learning: (1) to begin to understand 
that cultures are complex and are made up of many 
components (values, behavior, habitat, aesthetics, etc.); (2) 
to recognize the part geographic setting and history play in 
shaping a culture; (3) to understand that change is natural 
and ongoing and that people are affected in different ways 
because of their value systems; (4) to understand the 
interdependence of people, groups, and nations; (5) to 
develop an awareness of how perspectives differ among 
individuals and between groups; and (6) to recognize the 
importance of individual and cultural differences within the 
context of certain cultural universals. Sample activities, 
separated by grade level, arc organized to correspond to 
each of the six goals. Resources that teachers might use in 
conducting the activities also arc suggested. Twelve sample 
lessons and a list of supplemental resources are included. 
Among the 12 lesson plans are the following: Introducing 
the Fiction of Other Countries through Folktales: Grades 
5-12; Education in Africa; A Simple Chocolate Bar; How 
Do Others See Us? The Latin American Perspective; and 
People Are Just People. (DB) 

ED351164 

Author: Bold-Warrior, -Sherman 

Title: For the Administrator: Realities for the Native 
American and Education. 
Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 14 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (San 
Francisco, CA, April 20-24, 1992). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 



To Order Call 1-8G0-443-ERIC 



ERIC 



5 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 16 



the role of the teacher trainer in a multicultural education 
workshop. The bulk or the guide outlines the 1 1 workshop 
sessions. Sessions cover: (1) introductory material; 
(2) a definition of multicultural education; (3) teachers' 
racial awareness; (4) actions to take and avoid in the 
implementation of a multicultural curriculum; (5) 
classrooms that support cultural diversity; (6) development 
of a multicultural curriculum; (7) activities for teaching 
multicultural awareness; (8) the holidays and celebrations 
of people of various cultures and ethnicities; (9) children's 
perspectives of race; (10) culturally responsive child care; 
and (11) discussions with children on the topic of cultural 
differences. Workshop sessions typically follow a format of 
presentation of a problem and its social context; critical 
reflection; practical application; journal writing; the use of 
affirmative statements relating to the problem; and 
additional activities. A total of 47 handouts are included 
throughout the individual lessons. A 42-item bibliography 
is appended. (BC) 



ED347606 

Author: Sperrazza t -Susan~S. 

Title: Increasing Global Awareness in the First Grade 
Classroom by Advocating the Awareness of Second the 
Cultural Differences of Others. 
Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 60 p.; Ed.D. Practicum, Nova University. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: A practicum aimed to increase global 
awareness in the first grade classroom, The problem was 
that the students were very " American ized," predominantly 
white, and rarely exposed to other cultures. Therefore, the 
students could not recognize commonalities among people 
and could not understand the cultural differences in others. 
The major goal was to increase global awareness in all five 
first grade classrooms by advocating the similarities of self 
and the cultural differences of others using a thematic, 
integrated approach. Language-experience charts, 
portfolios, charts, and student journals were used during 
the implementation phase to document student growth. The 
results of the practicum were very positive. All four 
objectives were successfully reached and surpassed the 
original expectations. The outcome of the project was 
demonstrated through improved student attitudes, new 
friendships, and positive behaviors toward other students 
and among the five first grade teachers. The students are 
now more aware of their own needs, and the similarities 
and differences of others. (Three appendixes-teacher 
interview questions and personal observation/sample 
statcments-and 17 references are attached.) (Author/PRA) 



ED347503 

Author: Koebler,Saundra, Comp.; And-Others 

Title: Literacy through Literature. Proceedings of the 

Annual Conference and Course on Literacy (38th, 

Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, June 1991). 

Source: Pittsburgh Univ., Pa. School of Education. 

Publication Yefcr: 1991 

Notes: 102 p.; For the 1990 proceedings, see ED 329 900. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC0 K Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This conference proceedings is the result 
of a week-long conference and course focusing on the use 
of literature programs in the development of literacy skills 
and the attainment of broader educational outcomes. The 
proceedings includes speeches by keynote speakers , session 
presentations, graduate student papers, and middle school 
student papers. Keynote papers are: "Acting Meaning: The 
Play of Reading" (Shirley Brice Heath and Shelby Anne 
Wolf); "Remembering Pennsylvania" (Lois Lowry); 
"Families and Literacy: Building Social and Cultural 
Continuity" (Vivian L. Gadsden); "The Secret of the 
Lifetime Reader or the Clue in the Classroom" (Elizabeth 
Segel); and "The Secret of the Life-Long Reader or the 
Clue in the Classroom" (Margaret Mary Kimmel). Session 
presentations arc: "Helping Parents and Teachers Develop 
Positive Dispositions toward Reading in Preschool 
Children" (Donna DiPrima Bickel); "Rights without Labels: 
A Mainstreaming Project" (Nicolette Armstrong and 
others); "Literacy through Experimental Verse: Selected 
Works of e. e. Cummings" (Albert C. Labriola); 
"Enriching Early Literacy with Long-Term Projects" 
(Jcancttc Allison Hartman); "The Heartwood Project: An 
Ethics Curriculum for Children" (Eleanor Gettleman and 
others); "Liberty, Learning, and Literacy: Promoting 
Higher Order Thinking in the Social Studies Classroom" 
(Caryn M. King and William E. McDonald); "Teaching 
after the Summer Institute: Where I've Been and Where 
I'm Going" (Mimi Botkin); "Reaching back, Moving 
Forward: An Intergenerational Approach to Literacy and 
Literature" (George R. Skornickel, Jr.); "Promoting 
Literacy through Bibliotherapy" (Lelia Allen); "The Ethnic 
Mosaic: Multicultural Books for All Our Children" (Joan 
Brest Fricdberg); and "Writing Workshops for Children" 
(Karen Waggoner). The :hree graduate student papers are: 
"Whole Language Makes Learning Fun, Even in High 
School" (Shandel Gilbert); "Ownership" (Marion E, 
Gosson); and "World War II: Through the Eyes of 
Literature" (Elizabeth Tihey Harbist and Edith P. Jones). 
The five middle school papers, briefly introduced by 
Patricia Thomas, arc: "Being Black In America" (Sahara 
Bey); "Untitled" (Edward Caldwell); "When I Grow Up" 
(Brandy Fleming); "My Scariest Experience" (Maurice 
Harvey); and "Untitled" (Erica Hatcher). (RS) 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



G 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 4 



World of Diversity and Understanding. A Mosaic of 
Multicultural Achievement. 

Source: Massachusetts Slate Board of Education, Boston. 
Publication Year. 1991 
Notes: 42 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This publication describes programs in 
education in Massachusetts that foster multiculturalism. 
Many of these programs are recipients of the Multicultural 
Recognition Award for their effectiveness in this field. The 
programs are described under the following 8 categoric,",: 
(1) bilingual education (5 programs); (2) community 
participation programs (5 programs); (3) connections 
abroad (8 programs); (4) conflict resolution and anti-racist 
programs (7 programs); (5) cultural awareness programs (4 
programs); (6) English as a Second Language (6 
programs); (7) integration of new students (3 programs); 
and (8) multicultural education (8 programs). As all 
categories have relationships among each other, the 
descriptions are cross-referenced. In addition, because staff 
development is a critical part of advancing 
multiculturalism, programs that offer a strong staff 
development component are noted. In addition to each 
paragraph-long description is the name of a person whom 
readers may contact for more information or for 
recommendations. Programs that received the Multicultural 
Recognition Award arc noted with an asterisk. Throughout 
the publication, excerpts from the writings of students 
participating in the programs are included. (JB) 



ED350286 

Author: Gray r Loretta-S. ; Richards ,-Judith-J. 

Title: In Front of and Behind the Camera: Two 

Perspectives on "Morning Meeting." 

Pubiication Year: 1992 

Notes: 23 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (San 
Francisco, CA, April 20-24, 1992). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: In Judith Richards' ethnically diverse third 
and fourth grade classroom, the morning meeting is a time 
for discussion. The functions these discussions serve range 
from sharing personal news to talking about 
problem-solving strategies. During these meetings, the 
teacher has a polyphonic role. She participates, moderates, 
and sometimes writes students' contributions on a 
chalkboard. She thus creates an orchestration of voices in 
which children respond both to other children and to what 
is written on the board. In this paper, the teacher gives the 



in-front-of-the-camera perspective, describing how she 
brings diverse voices into contact and what effects her 
organization of discussion has on children's discourse 
skills. The bchind-thc-camera perspective focuses on turn 
taking behavior that takes place during morning meeting. 
Specifically, the observer draws on methods from 
conversational analysis to show the placement of one 
instance of classroom discussion on a continuum with other 
speech-exchange systems. The paper concludes with an 
analysis of the conventions employed by the teacher which 
appear to influence classroom turn-taking organization 
according to the "cognitive apprenticeship" model of 
teaching. (Author/LL) 



ED350275 

Author: DanarNancy-Fichtman 

Title: Developing an Understanding of die Multicultural 
Classroom: Experiences for the Monocultural Preservice 
Teacher. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 14 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Association of Teacher Educators (71st, New Orleans, LA, 
February 16-20, 1991). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTFACT: Demographic projections indicate that the 
classrooms of the future will be quite different from those 
of the past because of the increasing language and ethnic 
diversity found among the American student population. As 
a result, there has been increasing concern about preparing 
monocultural teachers for multicultural classrooms. Teacher 
education literature provides a limited framework for 
designing courses to prepare teachers for a classroom 
student culture different from their own. One of the most 
valuable avenues available to the preservice teacher who 
attempts to enter and understand a different culture is the 
avenue of reading literature. Exposure to children's 
literature that includes an array of cultural settings can help 
preservice teachers develop an understanding and 
appreciation of the diversity of cultures both within and 
outside the United States. Exposure to this literature will 
also help them develop a repertoire of readings which they 
can incorporate into their teaching practices. In a 
preservice course at Florida State University, children's 
literature was used to prepare White preservice student 
teachers to work with African American students in Leon 
County, Florida. This paper discusses selection of 
appropriate literature and gives specific examples of 
children's books and their use in the college course. Two 
categories of books are discussed: socially conscious books, 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



7 



which arc written by White or African American authors 
for White audiences to acquaint readers with the African 
American condition; and culturally conscious books, which 
arc written by African American authors who portray the 
uniqueness of being African American from the author's 
own perspective. (1AH) 



ED350272 

Author: Dana , -Nancy-Fichtrnan 

Title: Towards Preparing the Monocultural Teacher for 

the Multicultural Classroom, 

Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 16 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Association of Teacher Educators (72nd, Orlando, FL, 
February 15-19, 1992). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: An ethnographic study was conducted to 
determine what happens when teachers are placed in 
schools in which the students' cultural background differs 
dramatically from their own. Participants were five student 
teachers completing their internship in a low socioeconomic 
school in Tallahassee, Florida. Three methods were used to 
collect data: journals reflecting student teachers' thoughts 
and ideas about the teaching experience; participant 
observation; and qualitative ethnographic interviewing. 
Data analysis indicated that each student teacher 
experienced culture shock when beginning the internship, 
basing value judgments and expectations on norms 
established by their personal prior experience, and judging 
different experiences to be abnormal. Four of the five 
student teachers experienced difficulties with classroom 
management and control, attributing their difficulties to the 
background of the students being taught; and efforts to 
control students using the prepackaged technique of 
assertive discipline were unsuccessful. The five student 
teachers in this study indicated that their college experience 
had not prepared them for student teaching. The results of 
this study indicate the need for teacher educators to develop 
culturally literate teachers and to challenge prior personal 
experiences and attitudes of prospective teachers. (LL) 

ED350267 

Author: Reijf f -Judith-C; Cannella,-Gaile-S. 

Title: Preparing Teachers for Cultural Diversity: Rhetoric 

or Reality. 

Publication Year. 1992 

Notes: Up.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Association of Teacher Educators (72nd, Orlando, FL, 
February 15-19, 1992). 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 5 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Teachcrcducatorsmustconsidcrtwo major 
issues in their efforts to incorporate multicultural education 
into preservice teacher preparation programs: (1) the 
background and previous experiences of preicrvice 
teachers; and (2) schooling as an institution that cither 
inhibits or promotes the strengths of citizens in a 
democratic society. In both schools and colleges, few role 
models exist for racial- or language-minority students. In 
addition, the curriculums at all educational levels tend to be 
strongly monocultural, reflecting little ethnic or cultural 
diversity. Recent philosophical and theoretical perspectives 
in education have provided insights into alternatives for 
multicultural teacher education. Constructivist orientations 
would lead programs to create experiences in which diverse 
realities are explored. Developmental psychology 
perspectives would cause teacher education to be based on 
the recognition that an individual's cognitive development 
cannot be separated from the surrounding social context. 
The rcconstructionist perspective focuses on the conditions 
of schooling within a democracy. Preservice teachers must 
construct understandings of the effect of values on reality, 
the dominant forces in society, the political and economic 
context in which decisions are made, and the impact of 
culture on the individual. The teacher education program 
must be grounded in these issues which arc philosophical, 
social, political, economic, and psychological. (Contains 41 
references.) (IAH) 



ED350259 

Author: Rcnyi,-Judith, Comp. 
Title: Multicultural Survey. 

Source: Alliance for Curriculum Reform, Alexandria, VA. 
Publication Year: 1992 
Notes: 202 p.; Some pages contain small print. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC09 Plus Postage. 



ABSTRACT: In May of 1992, the Alliance for 
Curriculum Reform (ACR) surveyed member organizations 
and others who had participated in ACR activities 
concerning their printed policies on issues relating to 
multicultural education. The areas of interest for the survey 
were: printed policy(ies) on multicultural 
content/curriculum; printed policy(ies) on student diversity 
as it affects the member organization's field; and 
policy(ies) on multicultural diversity as these policies affect 
staffing, organizational, structural, and/or membership 
issues. The purpose of the survey was to provide data on 
curriculum-centered associations' official policies as 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERIC 



8 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools pace 6 



background for development of a general ACR statement 
on multiculturalism in curriculum. Thiity-threc associations 
responded to the survey. Of these, 13 had printed policies 
in all 3 areas and 4 reported policies in development at the 
time of the survey. The document is organized in the 
following way: (1) a checklist of responses from all 
organizations; (2) an organizational list showing responses 
to all categories alphabetically by organization; and (3) a 
list by category within which organizational responses arc 
repeated alphabetically. (LL) 



ED350250 

Author: Zimmerman, -Enid; Clark,-Gilbert 

Title: Resources for Teaching Art from a Multicultural 

Point of View. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse for Social Studies /Social 
Science Education, Bloomington, IN 
Publication Year; 1992 
Notes: 6 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Teaching art from a multicultural point of 
view can enhance art curricula by celebrating diversity and 
promoting social equity for all students. This bulletin is 
written in two parts. In part 1, ideas are presented to help 
art teachers use resources that reflect a multicultural point 
of view. In part 2, a bibliography of instructional resources 
is annotated to help teachers make selections and extend 
their curricula with multicultural concepts. (Author) 



ED350222 

Author: Wood r Robert-W.; And-Others 
Title: A Cultural Experience: Japan. 
Publication Year: 1992 
Notes: 179 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC08 Plus Postage. 



ABSTRACT: This activities unit for teaching about Japan 
is designed for use with elementary students. The activities 
reflect the growing importance of Japan in today's world, 
and the belief that the social studies curriculum should 
reflect principles of global education. The unit is intended 
to explore seven major goals included in the social studies 
curriculum: citizenship, multi-ethnicity, economic 
understanding, effective decision making, sensitivity to time 
and space, examination and use of information, and 
analysis and adaptation to a changing world. The activities 



focus on four major areas: geography, government, 
culture, and education. The activities are designed for 
grade levels one through six; they may be adapted to meet 
other grade level requirements, however. Each activity 
includes a title, introduction, objectives, grade level, time, 
materials, procedure, follow-up, evaluation, and further 
suggestions. A 36-item list of references is included. (DB) 



ED3502I6 

Title: Chinese American Experience: San Francisco. 
Source: Stanford Univ., CA. Stanford Program on 
International and Cross Cultural Education, 
Publication Year; 1985 
Notes: 80 p.; Vie China Project. 

EDRS Price - MFOl Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This unit encourages students to explore 
the history and current situation of Chinese Americans. 
Organized arouiid five lesson plans, the unit's first lesson 
begins with the students' own perceptions of Chinese 
Americans, followed by a quiz that provides relevant 
background information. The second lesson examines the 
general history of Chinese Americans, while the third looks 
at the history of San Francisco's Chinatown. The fourth 
lesson offers one of two alternatives: a slide presentation or 
an actual walking tour of San Francisco's Chinatown. (The 
slides are not included with this document). The last lesson 
is reserved for debriefing and concluding the unit. A 
minimum of one class is needed for each lesson; lessons 
two and three require more time. A number of student 
handouts and a bibliography that lists materials concerning 
Chinese Americans are included. Eight teacher's 
appendices also arc included: (1) "Racism in the Comics" 
by Michio Kaku; (2) Key to quiz; (3) Key to population 
graphs; (4) Discussion questions on San Francisco 
Chinatown; (5) Geographic distribution of Chinese 
Americans; (6) Occupations and earnings of Chinese 
Americans; (7) Script for slide presentation; and (8) 
Teacher materials for walking tour. (DB) 



ED350210 

Title: Compendium of Curriculum Projects for 1991 
Fulbright-flays Seminars Abroad Program: Ancient and 
Modern Egypt and Israel, June 20-22, 1991. 
Source: Institute of International Education, New York, 
N.Y. 

Publication Year." 1992 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



S 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page^L 



Notes: 318 p.; Some materials may not reproduce clearly. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC13 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: These curriculum projects were produced 
by teachers who traveled to Egypl and Israel as part of the 
Fulbright-Hays Seminars Abroad Program. The materials 
developed by the educators were: Activities and 
Bibliography of Resources to Promote Student Involvement 
in a Class Study of Egypt and Egyptian Culture (Edith 
Baxter); Egypt at the Crossroads of Civilization: The Old 
Ways Change (Charlotte Nasser Byrd); A Comprehensive 
Unit on Israel for Sixth Graders Using the Five Themes of 
Geography (Joy Campbell; Janet Rinehart); Jerusalem: City 
of Peace (Frances S. Dubner; Bella Frankel); Eight- Year 
Old Mohammed Travels the Nile-Primary Grades 
Curriculum on Egypt (Monty Hawks); Taking Many Steps 
through Ancient and Modem Israel and Egypt (Tonya 
Houscr); Lesson Plan: The Rise of Nazism and World War 
H-Stercotyping and the Holocaust (Jim Kelly); Promote 
International Understanding (Cynthia Kinstlcr); The 
Israeli-Palestinian Resolution: Homeland or Occupied 
Territory? (Bruce E. MaClean; Kelly A. Smith); 
Curriculum Project-Egypt (Kristinc K. McCormick); 
Israel: A Land of Intensity (Linda Mager); Materials for 
Teaching Ethical Monotheism (Simmie Plummer); and 
Israel and Egypt (Mary E. Snethcn). (DB) 



ED3S0198 

Author: Keyser r Catherine-H., Ed.; Mar tin, -Roberta, Ed. 

Title: China: A Teaching Workbook. 

Source: Columbia Univ. , New York, N. Y. East Asian Inst. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 725 p. 

EDRS Price - MF04 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This workbook is divided into 17 topical 
sections containing student readings and classroom 
activities designed to supplement standard textbook 
presentations and to bring China "alive" for students. The 
organization of the materials and the background notes for 
teachers stress central themes that are distinctive and 
recurrent in Chinese history and culture. The workbook's 
17 sections include: (1) Introduction; (2) Geography and 
Population; (3) Language; (4) Philosophy and Religion; (5) 
Traditional History; (6) Modern History; (7) Society; (8) 
What It Means to be Chinese; (9) Government and Politics; 
(10) Economics; (11) Taiwan and Hong Kong; (12) Art; 
(13) Culture; (14) Literature; (15) Foreign Policy; (16) 
Chinese Americans; and (17) Overseas Chinese. 
Section 18 contains three readings: "A Film Guide to The 
Heart of the Dragon'"; "China's Gifts to the West"; and 



"Chinese Ideas in the West." (DB) 



ED350206 

Author: Poindexter Betty; Korra,-Htrb 

Title: Practicing Democracy through Equity Education: 

Social Studies Curriculum Grades K-12, 1991-1997. 

Source: Warren Township Independent School District, 

Indianapolis, Ind. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 1,437 p. 

EDRS Price - MF11/PC58 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This social studies curriculum guide for 
grades K-12 contains 10 sections: (1) School board policy 
and philosophy; (2) Philosophy implementation guidelines; 
(3) Program level objectives; (4) Responsibility for social 
studies curriculum; (5) Multicultural/multiethnic graphic; 
(6) General exit outcomes; (7) Social studies skills; (8) 
Seven essential learnings; (9) Strategies for classroom use; 
and (10) Course of study-skills chart-time frame. Most of 
the guide is devoted to the last two sections. Strategics for 
classroom use are outlined and discussed under the 
following categories; multicultural/multiethnic, religion, 
active civic responsibility, economics, globalization, critical 
thinking, and assessment. The last section of the guide 
features materials describing the content of the K-12 social 
studies curriculum in depth. Skills charts feature the subject 
area, the name of the textbook used, the unit or topic, the 
skills used, support materials used, and the approximate 
amount of class time. A course of study time frame is 
included that describes, in sequence for each social studies 
course, the major topics covered, the course objectives, and 
learner oucomc statements. (DB) 



ED350125 

Title: A Bibliography for the Themes: Multicultural, 
Se\f-Concept/Family, Health and Fitness, and Careers. 
Summer Program Academic Resources Coordination 
Center. 

Source: State Univ. of New York, Cortland. Coll. at 
Cortland. 

Publication Year: [19921 

Notes: 20 p.; For related documents, see RC 018 731-732. 
EDRS Price - MF01IPC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This bibliography, which lists over 100 
children's books, was compiled by the Summer Program 
Academic Resources Coordination Center (SPARCC) in 
Loudonvillc, New York. SPARCC was a migrant education 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



10 



Infu sing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 8 



grant that developed and helped implement model summer 
migrant education programs in New York, Virginia, and 
Florida. The bibliography is divided into sections according 
to the themes of the books, including multiculturalism, 
health and fitness, family and self-concept, and careers. 
The listings in each thematic category arc further divided 
by age level, including sections for primary, intermediate, 
and junior/senior high. Each listing includes the complete 
title of the book, author, publisher, and a brief annotation. 
Also included arc lists of 3 resources books and 14 
periodicals that help select children's books. (LP) 



ED349812 

Author: Walters, -Joseph 

Title: Application m Multiple Intelligences: Research in 
Alternative Assessment. 
Publication Year; 1992 

Notes: 30 p.; In: Focus on Evaluation and Measurement. 
Volumes 1 and 2. Proceedings of the National Research 
Symposium on Lbnited English Proficient Student Issues 
(2nd, Washington, DC, September 4-6, 1991). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper introduces a theoretical 
treatment of the concept of intelligence that provides for 
intellectual diversity and contrasts this view with the more 
traditional notion of intelligence. Next, the paper draws 
from this theory several implications for education, paying 
particular attention to the question of assessment. It is 
shown why this view of intelligence forces the rethinking 
of some of the fundamental assumptic * held about the 
assessment of learning. To conclude, a consideration of 
several specific implications for bilingual and multicultural 
learning arc drawn from a discussion of multiple 
intelligences. Responses to the paper by Vera John-Stcincr 
and Sue Teele are appended. (VWL) 



ED349703 

Author: Mack,-Carl, Jr. 

Title: Mistaken Identity and Issues in Multicultural 
Education. 

Source: National Association of Secondary School 
Principals, Reston, Va. 
Publication Year.* 1992 
Notes: 6 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: Working through a group approach with 



the community will help school districts reach a 
multicultural, multiracial consensus to ensure an excellent 
and equitable education for every child. There is a valid 
role for Afroccntric and Eurocentric concepts in a pluralist 
context which includes Hispanic, Native American, and 
Asian perspectives as well. School boards should continue 
to expand their efforts to meet the needs of our increasingly 
diverse student population in three areas: (1) development 
and implementation of board policy that improves the 
district's multicultural perspective; (2) assurance of 
affirmative hiring practices; and (3) review and refinement 
of the multicultural aspects of the district's curriculum. 
These actions should be driven by the single objective of 
improving student performance. A process referred to as 
the "three sets of three questions" strategy can help board 
members check on the soundness of any major proposal by 
dealing with three levels—personal, ramifications, and 
contingencies. (MLF) 



ED349604 

Author: BaliingerrJane-R.; King,-Pu-Tsung 

Title: Alternative Media Use and Support for 

Multicultural Education. 

Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 35 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Assocmtion for Education in Journalism and Mass 
Communication (75th, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, August 
5-8, 19<r2). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: American education has been soundly 
criticized in recent years for allegedly teaching only a 
western, Anglo culture and values system, to the exclusion 
of minority and ethnic groups. Explorations of the role of 
the mass media in the processes of assimilation and 
pluralism, especially in shaping the relationship of ethnic 
groups to American society, have generally been 
undertaken from the assimilation perspective. However, 
there are currently no studies examining the effects of 
ethnic media on both dominant and minority groups. A 
study explored the effects of exposure to minority cultures 
by examining the relationship between exposure to 
alternative media and support for multicultural education. 
Also studied was the relationship between contact with 
minority groups and support for multicultural education. 
The sample included members of four distinct strata of the 
student population at the University of Texas at Austin in 
March 1991: Anglos, Blacks, Hispanics and international 
students. Information was collected via phone interviews. 
Results demonstrated a partially positive correlation 
between exposure to alternative media and support for 
multicultural education. The relationship between contact 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



11 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools pace 9 



with minority groups and support for multicultural 
education was seen for Anglos, but was not seen for 
minorities. Political ideology was determined to have the 
strongest correlation with support for multicultural 
education. (Sixteen tables containing the collected data are 
attached.) (HE) 



ED349582 

Author: Miller, -Suzanne-M. 

Tide: Creating Change: Towards a Dialogic Pedagogy. 
Report Series 2.18* 

Source: National Research Center on Literature Teaching 
and Learning, Albany, NY. 
Publication Year; 1992 

Notes: 22 p.; Based on a paper presented at tht 
International Conference of the Association for 
Collaborative Contributors to Language Learning (3rd, 
Moscow, Russia, December J 991). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Internationally, educators arc calling for 
teachers to help students learn to respect and value social 
and cultural difference. Literature teachers can also 
contribute to such a revolution in consciousness through 
literature study. It is crucial to education in a multicultural 
society that students are taught ways of reading and talking 
about literature which create respect for multiple 
perspectives. One means of doing this is through a 
"dialogic pedagogy," a conversational teaching approach in 
which the teacher and students engage in purposeful 
collaboration, guiding and inviting each other in talk and 
activity. Since readers construct different meanings from 
identical texts, text discussion can be particularly suited to 
provoke an interplay of differences. However, research 
indicates that such reflection about different perspectives 
rarely occurs in American schools, including literature 
classes, in which many teachers still rely on closed 
questioning. After observing teachers who successfully 
created conditions that produced motivated discussions 
about texts, four princip'es emerged: (1) inducing a new 
stance towards texts; (2) provoking collaborative reflection 
about alternatives; (3) scaffolding dialogic heuristics; and 
(4) encouraging student-initiated and sustained dialogic 
inquiry. !f multicultural education is limited to new book 
lists or curricular add-ons, it may fail to become an integral 
part of student and citizen consciousness. (A list of 59 
references is attached.) (HB) 



ED349526 

Author: Mattson r Dona\d-L. ; Richardson, -Maurine 
Title: Salad Bowl-All Together, All Unique, All Special 



Publication Year/ [1992] 
Notes: 8 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Pluralism has become the word for this 
decade. America is no longer a melting pot, but a salad 
bowl where each person can retain his/her own uniqueness 
culturally. In a truly inclusive community, no one is 
exclusive or excluded. The legislature of South Dakota has 
mandated that all future teachers, as well as those teachers 
wishing to remain certified, must complete a human 
relations course. The purpose of this course is to make 
future and present teachers aware of various cultures, 
races, and ethnic backgrounds, without being judgmental. 
It has been found that people are less threatened by other 
cultures if they truly understand something about their own 
culture. Rather than viewing cultural differences as hurdles, 
educators should accept the richness that diversity offers. 
With this in mind a bazaar was organized that would help 
make the majority culture in the southeastern part of the 
state understand themselves and therefore be less threatened 
by the minority culture when a similar bazaar was held that 
stresses that culture. This bazaar was designed to stress the 
culture of Sweden. Displays were arranged around various 
aspects of Swedish culture. The literature of Sweden was 
displayed using faculty and library resources. Artifacts 
from Sweden were displayed. Another display included 
posters that listed pertinent facts about Sweden. Food 
booths offered Swedish delights. The art from Sweden was 
highlighted ir. another display. Music, videos, and travel 
posters were used. Students were excited about learning 
and sampling different cultures when presented in a 
non-threatening format. (ABL) 



ED349370 

Author: Diaz,-Carlos, Ed. 

Title: Multicultural Education for the 21st Century, NEA 
School Restructurvtg Series. 

Source: National Education Association, Washington, D. C. 
Publication Year; 1992 
Notes: 223 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This book presents a selection of readings 
that address multiculturalism and school restructuring as a 
reference for schools working to enrich their 
school-improvement agendas. The readings treat many 
areas within curriculum and student achievement. The 13 
chapters are as follows: (1) "The Next Millennium: A 
Multicultural Imperative for Education" (C. F. Diaz); 
(2) "Multicultural Education: Nature, Challenges, and 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



12 



Opportunities" (J. A. Banks); (3) "Effective Teaching 
Practices for Multicultural Classrooms" (G. Gay); (4) 
"Institutional Climate: Developing an Effective 
Multicultural School Community" (V. O. Pang); (5) 
"Learning Styles: Implications for Teachers" (K. Swisher); 
(6) "Rethinking the Role of Gender and Achievement in 
Schooling" (J. Bernard-Powers); (7) "Evaluation Practices 
for the Multicultural Classroom" (R. J. Samuda and J. 
Lewis); (8) "We Speak in Many Tongues: Language 
Diversity and Multicultural Education" (S. Nieto); (9) 
"Reducing Prejudice in Society: The Role of Schools" (G. 
S. Pate); (10) "Involving Special Educators in Challenging 
Injustice in Education" (C. E. Slccter and C. Hartney); 
(11) "Educating for Human Rights: A Curricular Blueprint" 
(R. L. Garcia); (12) "Institutionalizing Multicultural 
Education in Teacher Education Programs" (N. F. Daly 
and D. J. O'Dowd); and (13) "Resistance to Multicultural 
Education: Concerns and Responses" (C. F. Diaz). An 
Afterword entitled "The Leadership Challenge in 
Multicultural Education" (C. A. M. Banks) concludes the 
volume. An annotated bibliography of 18 items and 
information on the 16 contributors are also provided. (JB) 



ED349361 

Title: Multicultural Education. A Policy for the 1990s = 
^education multiculturelk. Une politique pour les annees 
1990. 

Source: Manitoba Dept. of Education and Training, 
Winnipeg. 

Publication Year.- 1992 
Notes: 25 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This publication presents the official 
multicultural education policy statement for Manitoba 
(Canada) institutions of education and training. The policy 
is guided by the following three principles: (1) education 
for full participation in society; (2) education for cultural 
and linguistic development; and (3) education for 
intercullural understanding. An introduction describes the 
adoption of the policy for a multicultural society by the 
Government of Manitoba in 1990 and the implications for 
all branches of government and education. A section on the 
policy statement describes the three main thrusts of the 
policy. Another section outlines objectives that will 
transmit the general policy statement for implementation. 
A section on multicultural education lists initiatives of 
Manitoba Education and Training that assist the 
implementation of the policy. Also listed are tasks for 
school division, initiatives for postsecondary institutions, 
and initiatives for ethno cultural communities. A conclusion 
lists four companion documents to support implementation 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 10 
of the policy. (JB) 

ED349356 

Title: Wichita High School West: Multicultural Education 
Plan 1991-92. 

Source: Wichita Public Schools, Kans. 
Publication Year: 1991 
Notes: 22 p. 

EDRS Price - MFO1/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This document is the Wichita (Kansas) 
High School West multicultural education plan for 1991-92. 
Wichita High School West is part of the Wichita Public 
School system. The plan was developed by a committee of 
1 administrator and 12 teachers. The plan opens with 
definitions of the mission of the plan and the meaning of 
multicultural education for the purposes of the plan. Five 
areas of emphasis are offered: (1) administrative and 
counseling efforts; (2) teaching faculty and curriculum 
efforts; (3) clubs and extracurricular activity efforts; (4) 
schoolwide efforts; and (5) inservicc efforts. The bulk of 
the document presents descriptions of activities planned for 
each of the above areas. The teaching and curriculum 
section offers plans for each academic area. The 
schoolwide efforts area sets out a year long "Culture of the 
Month" program beginning with a September emphasis on 
human relations and interactions and followed each month 
by programs highlighting particular cultures. Attached is 
the agenda for an inservice workshop. Also appended is a 
selection of ideas for celebrating German culture and 
heritage planned for October in the first year of 
implementing the plan. Included are 14 resources, with 
addresses and telephone numbers provided. (JB) 



ED349306 

Author: Shubnan, -Judith 

Title: Tender Feelings, Hidden Thoughts: Confronting 
Bias, Innocence, and Racism through Case Discussions. 
Source: Far West Lab. for Educational Research and 
Development, San Francisco, Calif 
Publication Year; 1992 
Notes: 30 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper describes a case study approach 
10 multicultural education and examines what was learned 
from a project utilizing teacher-written cases in a seminar 
for new teachers. A case is described and analyzed. Data 
were gathered by reflecting on what had been taught about 
teaching in diverse classrooms and discussing potential 



To Order Call 1-800443-ERIC 



13 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 11 



implications for teacher education a/d professional 
development. Findings* suggest that case-based teaching 
provides opportunities for teachers to accomplish many 
things: make explicit their beliefs about teaching and 
learning; test assumptions about practice; confront personal 
biases; achieve a deeper understanding of issues related to 
race, gender and culture; and transform what is learned 
into instructional practices tailored to students. The 
publication is organized into five sections: (1) Case 
Methods in Multicultural Education: Background; (2) 
Confronting Bias, Innocence and Racism: A Casein Point; 
(3) Findings: Impact cn Participants, Changes in Behavior, 
and Response to the Case-Based Approach; (4) The 
Challenges of Case-Based Teaching: Provide a Safe 
Environment, Monitor Participants' Emotions, Balance 
Personal and Participants Agendas, and Limitations of 
Case-Based Teaching; and (5) Implications. (Author/LL) 



ED349244 

Author: Wong r Wendy-L. 

Title: Traditional Chinese Celebrations: Continuity and 
Change in Taiwan. 

Source: Stanford Univ., CA. Stanford Program on 
International and Cross Cultural Education. 
Publication Year.- 1985 
Notes: 39 p. The China Project. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This teaching unit is designed to .ntroduce 
elementary school students to traditional Chinese 
celebrations in Taiwan. An introductory activity asks 
students to distinguish between various kinds of 
celebrations (traditional or modern; religious or secular), 
and to identify U.S. and Chinese examples of each kind. 
The body of the unit concerns four well-known traditional 
Chinese celebrations: Lantern Festival, Tomb Sweeping 
Day, Dragon Boat Festival, and Moon Festival. The 
material on each celebration contains an introduction, 
historical background, information on present-day activities 
pertaining to the celebration, discussion questions, and a 
student activity. The unit also provides background 
information on Taiwan, the script for a slide presentation 
on the celebrations, and suggestions for further reading. 
(OB) 



ED349229 

Title: Demystifying the Chinese Language. Revised. 
Source: Stanford Univ., CA. Stanford Program on 
International and Cross Cultural Education. 



Publication Year: 1988 

Notes: 106 p.; For the 1980 edition, see ED 201 175. The 
China Project. 

EDRS Price - MFOl Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This document is a revised version of a 
teaching unit originally published in 1980 and designed to 
familiarize both elementary and secondary students with the 
Chinese language and thus lessen the strangeness often 
attached to it. The goal is not that students "learn Chinese;" 
rather the hope is that, through a scries of exercises that 
actively involve students with written Chinese, students will 
engage in a process of demystifying the Chinese language 
so that they can begin to view it simply as a system of 
written communication different from, but equally plausible 
as, those of Indo-European origin. No prior knowledge 
about Chinese is required of either the teacher or students 
to use this unit. The unit is appropriate for many areas of 
the curriculum; for example, social studies courses in 
which China is studied, multicultural studies courses, 
specialized coursework on communication, sociology , or 
linguistics, or in conjunction with the language arts 
curriculum. It is particularly appropriate for use as a 
comparative study in courses in world history/cultures or 
in U.S. history /culture. The unit is organized into a six-day 
format. All necessary instructional materials to teach the 
unit are provided, including 13 handouts, the first of which 
consists of a set of "flashcards" showing selected 
characters. The following appendices also are included: (1) 
a paper on "The Chinese Language"; (2) a paper on 
"Language Reform in the People's Republic of China"; (3) 
a reprint of simplified Chinese characters; and (4) a chart 
showing Pinyin pronunciation. (DB) 

ED349224 

Author: Clay r Phyllis-L. 

Title: The Northeast Global Studies Magnet Middle 
School, 1990-1991. Formative Evaluation. 
Source: Kansas City School District, Mo. 
Publication Year: 1991 
Notes: 53 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This report addresses the results of an 
evaluation made of the first year of the implementation of 
a global studies theme at the Northeast Global Studies 
Middle Magnet School (Kansas City, Missouri). It is 
reported that ample evidence of the theme was seen 
throughout most of the school facilities, and observed in all 
of the social studies classes. However, no evidence of 
infusion of the theme was seen during observation periods 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



14 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 12 



in mathematics and physical education classes. Data from 
questionnaires issued to parents revealed that the global 
studies theme was not clear to a third of the parents. A 
recommendation was made to provide additional, perhaps 
related, information to parents regarding the nature of the 
global studies theme. Of the 22 program objectives relating 
to the first implementation year, most were being 
implemented effectively. Several figures and tables appear 
throughout the report. Five appendices also are included: 
(1) global studies course topics; (2) infusion of global 
studies; (3) exhibits in the world cultural festival; (4) 
theme-related activities; and (5) theme-related field trips. 
(DB) 



ED349214 

Title: Practicing Democracy through Equity Education: 
Social Studies Curriculum Guide Grade 2, 1991-1997. 
Source: Warren Township Independent School District, 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
Publication Year: 1991 
Notes: 275 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC11 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This social studies curriculum guide for 
grade 2 in the Metropolitan School District of Warren 
Township, Indiana, contains 10 sections: (1) School board 
policy and philosophy; (2) Philosophy implementation 
guidelines; (3) Program level objectives; (4) Responsibility 
for social studies curriculum; (5) Multicultural/multiethnic 
graphic; (6) General exit outcomes; (7) Social studies 
skills; (8) Seven essential learnings; (9) Strategies for 
classroom use; and (10) Course of study-skills chart-time 
frame. Much of the guide is devoted to section nine, the 
strategies for classroom use. Seven strategies are outlined 
and discussed: multicultural/ multiethnic, religion, active 
civic responsibility, economics, globalization, critical 
thinking, and assessment. The last section of the guide 
features materials describing the content of the grade 2 
social studies curriculum in depth. Skills charts feature the 
subject area, the name of the textbook used, the unit or 
topic, the skills used, support materials used, and the 
approximate amount of class time required. A course of 
study time frame describes, in sequence for the social 
studies course, the major topics covered, the course 
objectives, and learner outcome statements. (DB) 



Source: Warren Township Independent School District, 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
Publication Year. 1991 
Notes: 100 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This guide features materials concerning 
ethnic and religious groups and the annual dates important 
to those groups. Specifically, the guide contains an index 
of religious holidays; a list of the historical dates important 
to Buddhism, Confucianism, Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, 
and Judaism; and a calendar that lists, by month, cultural 
and religious holidays and events that are important to 
various ethnic groups. Activities tor utilizing these 
materials in the classroom also are suggested. (DB) 



ED349069 

Author: Borg,-Myra-Kitchens 

Title: Multicultural Resources of Sacramento City College 
Library: A Guide for Students in All Classes. 
Source: Sacramento City Coll., CA. Learning Resources 
Div. 

Publication Year; 1992 
Notes: 77 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Designed to serve as a guide for instructors 
and students who would like to introduce a multicultural 
perspective into their area of study, this bibliography lists 
books and periodicals that are part of the library collection 
at Sacramento City College (SCC) in California. Materials 
are listed that focus on the contributions, experiences, and 
challenges of African Americans, Asian Americans, 
Hispanic Americans, and Native Americans. Bibliographic 
records are displayed alphabetically by title within the 
following categories: (1) general reference sources; (2) 
allied health; (3) behavioral and social sciences; (4) 
business; (5) humanities and fine arts; (6) languages and 
literature; (7) learning resources; (8) occupational 
technology; (9) physical education/health/athlctics; (10) 
science/math/en gincering; and (1 1) journals and magazines. 
Within behavioral and social sciences, humanities and fine 
arts, and languages and literature, subdivisions are 
provided for each of the four ethnic groups. Each 
bibliographic record includes the work's title and author, 
as well as its SCC call number. (MAB) 



ED349212 

Author: Korra,-Herb, Comp. 

Title: Multireligious, Multicultural, and Multiethnic 
Calendar. 



ED348985 

Author: Vest,-Bette-J. 

Title: Free Classroom Resources: Conducting a Successful 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



15 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 13 



Search. 

Publication Year. {1991} 
Notes: 77 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Compiled to assist teachers in their quest 
for free and inexpensive educational materials, this report 
provides both a practical guide to aid in planning a research 
strategy and a compilation of resources available free or at 
low cost to teachers. Teachers in four Virginia elementary 
schools were surveyed to determine: (1) whether their 
schoo system provides all the resources they use in the 
classroom; (2) whether teachers themselves provide 
classroom resources either from their personal funds or 
through their efforts to obtain such resources; (3) whether 
teachers arc comfortable conducting resource searches; and 
(4) the types of resources teachers provide for their 
classrooms. Numerous, comprehensive listings of free 
classroom resources were located, but there were few 
sources outlining research strategies and tools. To test the 
usefulness of this compilation of free resources, it was 
cross-matched with an integrated mini-unit on pollution/the 
environment to create a unit "enhanced" by related 
thematic material available free to teachers. Appended 
materials include the teacher questionnaire; a sample 
research/reference card; a resource directory card; a 
comprehensive listing of free classroom resources by 
subject matter; the integrated mini-unit plan on 
pollution/environment; tips for an organized, successful 
search; and 9 figures displaying the survey findings. 
(Contains 32 references.) (Author/ ALF) 



ED348932 

Author: Rhem, -James, Ed. 

Title: The National Teaching & Learning Forum, Volume 
i, 1991-92. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education, 
Washington, D.C.; George Washington Univ., Washington, 
DC. School of Education and Human Development.; Rhem 
(James) & Associates, Inc., Washington, DC. 
Publication Year: 1992 
Notes: 74 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Volume One of this 12 page newsletter 
includes six issues. Typical features include: a lead article; 
Research Watch; ERIC Tracks; Case Studies; Case Study 
Responses; Curriculum; Teaching Assistants (TA) Forum; 
and Profile (personal and Programmatic). Major articles 
included in volume one arc: "Faculty and Students: 
Different Ways of Understanding" (John Stephens 
Crawford); "Cognitive Apprenticeship: Teaching Inside 



• Out" (Allan Collins et al.); "Time Travel: Personalizing 
the Eighteenth Century through a Personal Computer"; 
"ERIC Tracks: Learning Styles: Theory and Practice" (Judi 
Conrad); "Handbooks for TAs: An Overview and Some 
Suggestions for Using and Improving Them" (Mary Bort); 
"The Courage to Teach" (Parker J. Palmer); "Scholarly 
Teaching: From Image to Pitfalls" (Chris Nash); "Effective 
Teaching for Dyslexics (and Everyone Else)"; "Forming a 
Center for Teachers"; "Cognitive Apprenticeship II: 
MoUelingMcUcognition"; "Visual Literacy"; "An Anatomy 
of Boredom" (George E. Savage); "Laying the Groundwork 
for Class Discussions" (Forest Hansen); "ERIC Tracks: 
Cooperative Learning: Theory and Practice" (Karl Smith 
and Judi Conrad); "Sitting in on AAHE's (American 
Association of Higher Education) Forum on Exemplary 
Teaching"; "The Enriched Syllabus: To Convey a Larger 
Vision" (Howard Gabennesch); "Thinking All Over the 
Brain"; "A Paradigm Shift in Instructional Development?" 
"The Library and the Classroom: Old Neighbors-New 
Friends"; "Diversity and Learning Theory"; "Tests: 
Scratching for Grades"; "ERIC Tracks: Multicultural 
Education: Theory and Practice" (Judi Conrad); "Case 
Studies: The Case of the Miss Spellings (?)" (Kay Herr); 
"Case Study Responses" (Timothy Riordan and Kim 
Landon); "Classroom Assessment/Classroom Research: 
Four Years Into a Hands-On Movement"; "Research 
Watch: The Learning Cycle: Has Its Time Come Again?"; 
"Steps in the Learning Cycle"; "How to Improve Teaching 
with Learning-Centered Evaluation" (William Cerbin); 
"Programs: "Who's Teaching the Teachers?"; and 
Viewpoint: "Reflections on The Teaching Art" (William 
Vitek). (DB) 

ED348693 

Author: Keessen r Jan; White ,-Marjorie-Ann 
Title: Writing Across the Curriculum. "Wanted: 
Guidelines for Teaching Writing in Non-Writing 
Courses/ 1 and "WAC-Ai Answer to Multicultural 
Diversity. " 

Publication Year. 1991 

Notes: 8 p. ; Papers presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Conference on College Composition and Communication 
(43rd, Cincinnati, OH, March 19-21, 1992) and the Annual 
Minority Student Today Conference (San Antonio, TX, 
October 1991). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Two papers presented at two different 
conferences and both discussing issues related to writing 
across the curriculum, arc presented in this document. The 
first paper, "Wanted: Guidelines for Teaching Writing in 
Non-Writing Courses," (Jan Kcesscn\ presented at the 
1992 "four CV conference, discusses the need to gather 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 

1C> 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools paec 14 



data on problems in students' written communication 
encountered by professors in many disciplines, and then to 
create interdisciplinary guidelines for more effective 
teaching of writing. The second paper, "WAC-An Answer 
to Multicultural Diversity," (Marjorie Ann White), 
presented at the 1991 Minority Student Today conference, 
points out the utility of writing across the curriculum in the 
chemistry classroom, and offers several practical writing 
ideas. (SR) 



ED348644 

Author: Buttram,-Joan-L.; And-Others 

Title: Evaluation of Heartwood Program. 

Source: Research for Better Schools, Inc., Philadelphia, 

Pa. 

Publication Year. 1992 
Notes: 10 p. 

EDRS Price - MFOl/PCOi Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This study examined and assessed teachers 1 
and students' use of and reactions to the Heartwood 
Program, a multicultural, literature-based curriculum 
designed to promote elementary students' ethical 
understanding of courage, loyalty, justice, respect, hope, 
honesty, and love. The Pennsylvania Department of 
Education Division of Federal Programs (Chapter 1) 
supported a field test and evaluation of the Heartwood 
Program in 16 school districts across the state. In 15 of the 
districts, typically a Chapter I pull-out teacher was selected 
to participate in the field test; in the remaining district, the 
program was offered to all teachers in an elementary 
school. Information on teacher training, program materials, 
classroom use of the program, and program outcomes was 
collected. Results indicated that: (1) almost all teachers 
emphasized the importance and need for this type of 
program in their schools; (2) the program was 
teacher-friendly; (3) program materials should be reviewed 
to strengthen the sequencing of stories and activities, the 
coverage and portrayal of some minority cultures, and the 
level of difficulty of story lines for primary grade students; 
and (4) the appropriate placement of the program in a 
school's instructional program needs additional thought. (A 
list of interview questions is attached.) (RS) 



ED348340 

Author: Kiernan, -Henry 

Title: Teaching Civic Identity and Civic Writing in tlie 
Information Age. 
Publication Year: [1990] 
Notes: 14 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 



ABSTRACT: Given the increasingly multi-ethnic school 
population and the lack of democratic political traditions in 
many students' cultural backgrounds, new ways to educate 
for citizenship are ecscntial. The paper recommends 
developing multidisciplinary approaches to teaching civic 
identity and civic writing. It describes how a New Jersey 
school district introduced civic writing activities directly 
linked to local history and community issues, combining 
public and individual experiences with high school student 
commitment. The planning team agreed that the English, 
social studies, and science departments would work 
cooperatively to assess student research writing. They 
considered: topics that would address ways to build a sense 
of community within the student body; ways to develop 
participatory and responsible civic behavior; and methods 
of teaching skills, values, and attitudes to prepare students 
for the future. The multidisciplinary themes they chose 
were environmental issues, local history, and multicultural 
studies and global issues. Besides completing 
question-driven research projects, students were encouraged 
to participate in local community service projects. The 
article offers nine recommendations to help transform the 
current research process that relies on thesis writing into a 
viable question-driven design. It suggests that combining 
academic discourse with community service provides the 
social and political glue to enhance students' personal 
development with civic responsibility. (SM) 

ED348201 

Author: Grans, -Agnes; Gillespie, -LaVina 

Title: Using Literature by American Indians and Alaska 

Natives in Secondary Schools. ERIC Digest. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small 

Schools, Charleston, WV. 

Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 3 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Literature is a powerful vehicle for the 
transmission and interpretation of culture. Reading a 
variety of literature helps students to understand the 
principles underpinning values and traditions of their own 
culture and the cultures of others. Studying the myths, 
legends, and songs of traditional Native literature helps 
readers understand contemporary Native literature and 
appreciate its differences from the mainstream. However, 
the accepted canons of literature exclude works by 
American Indians and Alaska Natives. Furthermore, the 
few literary works about Native Americans that have 
secured a place in the secondary school curriculum were 
written by non-Natives, -re unauthentic, portray cultural 
information inaccurately, and perpetuate negative 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



17 



InfasingMulticultural Education into Today's Schools page 15 



stereotypes. Over the centuries, the stereotypical Native 
American in literature- has shifted from simple, 
superstitious child of God to blood-thirsty savage to noble 
savage to victimized dispossessed nomad. Non-Native 
writers today continue to portray Native people as the 
"other" when they acknowledge their existence at all. It is 
only by creating and widely circulating their own literature 
that Native peoples can become a part of the American 
"ourness" and take their rightful place in the American 
literary canon. It is time for secondary schools to introduce 
their students to the growing body of Native literature. This 
digest contains 17 references and suggested readings for 
secondary students. (SV) 



ED348200 

Author: Escamilla.-Katky 

Title: Integrating Mexican-American History and Culture 
into the Social Studies Classroom. ERIC Digest. 
Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rurai Education and Stnall 
Schools, Charleston, WV. 
Publication Year. 1992 
Notes: 3 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This digest discusses the integration of 
Mexican- American history and culture into social studies 
curriculum. Teaching Mexican- American history and 
culture is a means of improving educational attainment 
among Mexican- Americans, of developing "ethnic literacy" 
among all students, and helping them understand their 
uniqueness while improving their self-esteem. It is 
important to select texts and other curriculum materials that 
accurately and realistically represent the Mexican- American 
experience. Many such classroom materials present 
information that is of superficial value or that portrays 
Mexican- Americans in unrealistic "hero" or "victim" roles. 
Aside from good curriculum materials, it is recommended 
that teachers and other educators have effective preservice 
and inservice training for teaching Mexican-American 
history and culture. Also important is a favorable school 
environment, fostered by extracurricular activities and 
other cultural events reflecting values of ethnic diversity, 
in conclusion, integrating Mexican-American history and 
culture into social studies is an important goal that requires 
effective staff development, a healthy school environment, 
and accurate materials that represent the diversity of the 
Mexican-American experience. This digest includes an 
examplar bibliography. (TES) 

ED348196 

Author: Oliver ,-Jenny-Penney; Howley,-Craig 

Title: Charting New Maps: Multicultural Education in 



Rural Schools. ERJC Digest. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small 
Schools, Charleston, WV. 
Publication Year; 1992 
Notes: 3 p. 

EDRS Price - MFV1/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This digest reviews the concepts of 
"culture" and "multicultural education" and advocates 
multicultural education for rural schools. Culture applies to 
any group with coherent norms and traditions that help 
members engage the world around them. Multicultural 
education seeks to create an environment in which students 
can understand, respect, and ultimately value cultural 
diversity. Multicultural education in rural schools merits 
attention for several reasons, including the changing 
character of rural life and educational needs and the 
increasing ethnic and cultural diversity of American 
society. Three considerations bear on making multicultural 
education work in rural schools: (1) to reduce cultural 
isolation and to gain a multicultural perspective, students 
should first learn about their own culture in order for them 
to understand and respect other cultures; (2) school 
practices to address cultural diversity are varied, but 
attention to the following areas are critical for 
success— mission, staffing, curriculum and instruction, 
home and community linkages, extracurricular activities, 
and student characteristics; and (3) evidence exists that 
multicultural education is important in making schooling 
more relevant, decreasing racial stereotyping, and 
increasing the self-confidence of ethnic minority students. 
Multicultural education can help individuals and 
communities value and preserve their own cultural 
uniqueness and can also serve the same function more 
generally so that the American multicultural society values 
and preserves itself. (LP) 

ED348157 
Author: York r Stacey 

Title: Developing Roots & Wings: A Trainer's Guide to 
Affirmmg Culture in Early Childhood Programs. 
Publication Year: 1992 
Notes: 207 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC09 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This trainer's guide describes a workshop 
that helps teachers implement the multicultural curriculum 
described in a companion text "Roots & Wings: Affirming 
Culture in Early Childhood Programs." Introductory 
sections of the guide discuss the importance o f multicultural 
education, the use of an active learning approach in 
training teachers to implement multicultural education, and 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



18 



the role of the teacher trainer in a multicultural education 
workshop. The bulk of the guide outline* the 11 workshop 
sessions. Sessions cover: (1) introductory material; 
(2) a definition of multicultural education; (3) teachers* 
racial awareness; (4) actions to take and avoid in the 
implementation of a multicultural curriculum; (5) 
classrooms that support cultural diversity; (6) development 
of a multicultural curriculum; (7) activities for teaching 
multicultural awareness; (8) the holidays and celebrations 
of people of various cultures and ethnicities; (9) children's 
perspectives of race; (10) culturally responsive child care; 
and (11) discussions with children on the topic of cultural 
differences. Workshop sessions typically follow a format of 
presentation of a problem and its social context; critical 
reflection; practical application; journal writing; the use of 
affirmative statements relating to the problem; and 
additional activities. A total of 47 handouts are included 
throughout the individual lessons. A 42-item bibliography 
is appended. (BC) 



ED347606 

Author: Sperrazza r Susan-S. 

Title: Increasing Global Awareness in the Fust Grade 
Classroom by Advocating the Awareness of Self and tiie 
Cultural Differences of Others. 
Publication Year/ 1992 

Notes: 60 p.; Ed.D. Practicum, Nova University. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Pius Postage. 

ABSTRACT: A practicum aimed to increase global 
awareness in the first grade classroom. The problem was 
thac the students were very "Americanized/ predominantly 
white, and rarely exposed to other cultures. Therefore t the 
students could not recognize commonalities among people 
and could not understand the cultural differences in others. 
The major goal was to increase global awareness in all five 
first grade classrooms by advocating the similarities of self 
and the cultural differences of others using a thematic, 
integrated approach. Language-experience charts, 
portfolios, charts, and student journals were used during 
the implementation phase to document student growth. The 
results of the practicum were very positive. All four 
objectives were successfully reached and surpassed the 
original expectations. The outcome of the project was 
demonstrated through improved student attitudes, new 
friendships, and positive behaviors toward other students 
and among the five first grade teachers. The students are 
now more aware of their own needs, and the similarities 
and differences of others. (Three appendixes-teacher 
interview questions and personal observation/sample 
statcmcnts-and 17 references arc attached.) (Author/PRA) 



I nfusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 16 



ED347503 

Author: Koebler,-Saundra, Comp.; And-Gthers 

Title: Literacy through Literature. Proceedings of the 

Annual Conference and Course on Literacy (38th, 

Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, June 1991). 

Source: Pinsburgh Univ., Pa. School of Education. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 102 p.; For the 1990 proceedings, see ED 329 900. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This conference proceedings is the result 
of a week-long conference and course focusing on the use 
of literature programs in the development of literacy skills 
and the attainment of broader educational outcomes. The 
proceedings includes speeches by keynote speakers, session 
presentations, graduate student papers, and middle school 
student papers. Keynote papers arc: " Acting Meaning: The 
Play of Reading" (Shirley Brice Heath and Shelby Anne 
Wolf); "Remembering Pennsylvania" (Lob Lowry); 
"Families and Literacy: Building Social and Cultural 
Continuity" (Vivian L. Gadsden); M The Secret of the 
Lifetime Reader or the Clue in the Classroom" (Elizabeth 
Segcl); and "The Secret of the Life-Long Reader or the 
Clue in the Classroom" (Margaret Mary Kimmcl). Session 
presentations are: "Helping Parents and Teachers Develop 
Positive Dispositions toward Reading in Preschool 
Children" (Donna DiPrima Bickcl); "Rights without Labels: 
A Mainstrcaming Project" (Nicolettc Armstrong and 
others): "Literacy through Experimental Verse: Selected 
Works of e. e. Cummings" (Albert C. Labriola); 
"Enriching Early Literacy with Long-Term Projects" 
(Jeanette Allison Hartman); "The Heartwood Project: An 
Ethics Curriculum for Children" (Eleanor Gettleman and 
others); "Liberty, Learning, and Literacy: Promoting 
Higher Order Thinking in the Social Studies Classroom" 
(Caryn M. King and William E. McDonald); "Teaching 
after the Summer Institute: Where I've Been and Where 
I'm Going" (Mimi Botkin); "Reaching back t Moving 
Forward: An Intergenerational Approach to Literacy and 
Literature" (George R. Skornickel, Jr.); "Promoting 
Literacy through Bibliothcrapy" (Lelia Allen); "The Ethnic 
Mosaic: Multicultural Books for All Our Children" (Joan 
Brest Friedbcrg); and "Writing Workshops for Children" 
(Karen Waggoner). The three graduate student papers arc: 
"Whole Language Makes Learning Fun t Even in High 
School" (Shandel Gilbert); "Ownership" (Marion E. 
Gosson); and "World Wa/ 11: Through the Eyes of 
Literature" (Elizabeth Tihcy Harbist and Edith P. Jones). 
The five middle school papers, briefly introduced by 
Patricia Thomas, are: "Being Black In America" (Sahara 
Bey); "Untitled" (Edward Caldwell); "When I Grow Up" 
(Brandy Fleming); "My Scariest Experience" (Maurice 
Harvey); and "Untitled" (Erica Hatcher). (RS) 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 17 



ED347494 

Author: England r J oan-T. 

Tide: Pluralism and Education: Its Meaning and Method. 
ERIC Digest. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Counseling and Personnel 
Services, Ann Arbor, Mich. 
Publication Year/ 1992 
Notes: 3 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Pluralism can be defined as a society in 
which members of diverse ethnic, racial, religious, and 
social groups maintain participation in and development of 
their traditions and special interests while cooperatively 
working toward the interdependence needed for a nation's 
unity. Pluralism is being practiced, taught, and expanded 
in community, preschool, elementary, high school, and 
college campus programs. (ABL) 



ED347126 

Author: Duhon-Sells r Rose 

Title: Multicultural Education Is Essential for the 
Academic Success of Schools in the 21st Century, 
Publication Year. 1991 
Notes: 12 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: A multicultural thrust should be the key 
clement in restructuring American education in preparation 
for the 21st century. Demographic trends indicate that 
European Americans will be outnumbered by other racial 
and ethnic groups in the next century. Consequently, new 
educational techniques and content need to be developed 
and infused into school curriculums to ensure that children 
from diverse racial, ethnic, and cultural backgrounds 
receive an equal and adequate education that prepares them 
to take a productive and meaningliil place in the 21st 
century. The National Education Goals are an attempt to 
address the need for major improvements in how children 
are educated. However, the National Goals do not 
adequately address the issues of equity that affect whether 
academic success is assured for all students. Among a more 
ideal set of national goals for education that is multicultural 
and equitable are the following components: (1) children 
will start school with a positive sense of self based on 
living in decent housing and having received adequate 
attention to their health care and other physical needs; (2) 
the high school graduation rate will increase to 90 percent; 
and (3) racism will be eliminated from American 
classrooms, and school curriculums will project all people 



of all Cultures in a positive vein. (I AH) 

ED346545 

Author: Randall.-Ruih-E.; And~Others 

Title: Interface between Global Education and 

Multicultural Education. 

Publication Year. 1991 

Notes: 54 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Today global education and multicultural 
education are vital as all countries in the world face 
complex issues in economic, political, and social 
interdependence. This paper examines the interface between 
global education and multicultural education as a potential 
answer of how to prepare students for effective 
participation in a culturally diverse society within the 
context of a interdependent world. This interface is 
explored through anthropological, historical, economic, and 
geographical perspectives, with attention to junctures and 
disjunctures between the two approaches. The 
anthropological perspective particularly offers strength to 
both multicultural and global education because it 
emphasizes holistic study of people and cultures, 
comparative study, and cross-cultural approaches and 
methods. Both multicultural and global education value 
multidisciplinary approaches and increased understanding 
of tolerance and diversity. Educators at all levels involved 
in both teaching and learning must have appropriate 
knowledge bases, instructional approaches, and assessment 
strategies grounded in both multicultural and global 
education. (69 references) (RR) 

ED346517 

Author: Metzger ,-Janet-G.; And-Others 

Title: Just Say Coyote: Hie Use of (Ethnic) Narrative in 

Drug Abuse Prevention. 

Publication Year. 1992 

Notes: 26 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Western States Communication Association (63rd, Boise, 
ID, February 21-25, 1992). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper investigates the role of 
storytelling and other live performances in changing young 
people's attitudes toward drugs. In particular, it describes 
a program in Lubbock, Texas which brings anti-drug 
performances to classrooms and uses narrative forms 
derived from the folk culture of the audience (Anglo, 
Spanish, Hispanic, and Navajo). Tnc paper describes a 
typical session for each type of training the program offers 
(drug education and multicultural drug education). It then 
analyzes the sessions in terms of health care issues: cultural 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



Q 20 
ERLC 



conceptions of health, perceptions and beliefs about health 
concerns, and culturally, appropriate strategies for 
preventive health. It is suggested that these narratives can 
create viable alternative frames of reference that can 
redirect behaviors when participants sense themselves 
acting heroically and when this heroic action is linked to 
traditional community values and themes. It is observed 
that even though it is difficult to describe exactly how, 
compelling reasons for saying "yes" to health and "no" to 
drugs are evoked and that performances of drug abuse 
refusal skills affirm the potency °f and narr ative in 
the form of new stories that arc healing rather than 
destructive. Twenty-five references are attached. (SG) 



ED346486 

Author: Slotsky , -Sandra 

Title: Acaiemic Criteria for Conceptualizing Multiethnic 
and Multicultural Literature Programs in American 
Schools. 

Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 20 p. ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (San 
Francisco, CA, April 20-24, 1992). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The major purposes of multiethnic and 
multicultural literature programs in United States' schools 
arc to develop students' knowledge of and respect for the 
rel^ious, racial, and ethnic diversity of U.S. citizens; and 
to enhance students' familiarity with and appreciation of the 
literary traditions of other peoples of the world. The 
selection of literary texts for programs designed to 
introduce American students to other ethnic groups, 
cultures, or peoples should reflect the principles of 
inclusiveness and avoidance of stereotype formation. Such 
goals can be achieved through techniques such as offering 
works by or about members of other ethnic groups, 
showing how indigenous cultures differed in relating to 
their neighbors and environments, featuring varied aspects 
of the immigrant experience, etc. In integrating 
multicultural and multiethnic literature into the curriculum, 
it is necessary to ask at the local level: (1) who decides 
what ethnic groups and cultures to present? (2) what 
criteria should determine what should be eliminated? (3) 
what local considerations should be kept in mind? and (4) 
how can the civic mission of the schools be achieved? It is 
important to keep in mind, however, that in selecting 
particular works, others are automatically excluded. It may 
be useful to have communities decide through the political 
process whether they support a multiethnic literature course 
or a curricular strand distinct from mainstream literature. 
(One appendix containing a sampling of works about the 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 18 

American ethnic experience and a list of 22 references are 
attached.) (SG) 

ED346454 

Title: Breakthrough: A Multi-Cultural Guide to High 
School Journalism. 

Source: Iowa Univ., Iowa City. School of Journalisms- 
Youth Communication, Washington, DC. 
Publication Year: [1992] 

Notes: 52 p.; Some photographs and color graphics may 
not reproduce clearly. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: The result of a symposium that brought 
together high school and university journalism teachers and 
professional journalists to examine multicultural issues and 
high school journalism, this lavishly illustrated guide 
presents ideas, inductive exercises, and models that have 
worked in classrooms and workshops across the United 
States. The guide focuses on strategies for recruiting, 
training, and retaining students from diverse ethnic and 
cultural backgrounds, with the goal of creating 
opportunities for greater minority participation in scholastic 
journalism and encouraging minority students to pursue 
careers in journalism. The guide also includes methods of 
stressing plurality within the journalism classroom, 
curriculum, and publication content— noting that students 
who can see themselves reflected in the publication can see 
themselves on the publication staff. The guide's four 
sections are: (1) Recruiting Strategies; (2) Training 
Strategies; (3) Retaining Strategies; and (4) Breaking 
Through. (SR) 

ED34620G 

Author: Gottfredson,-Gary-D.; And-Others 
Title: Meeting the Challenges of Multicultural Education: 
A Report from the Evaluation of Pittsburgh's Prospect 
Multicultural Education Center. 

Source: Center for Research on Effective Schooling for 
Disadvantaged Students, Baltimore, MD. 
Publication Year: 1992 
Notes: 126 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This report presents an evaluation of the 
Multicultural Education Demonstration Program in 
Pittsburgh (Pennsylvania), an effort to address racial and 
ethnic diversity in a middle school. The report covers the 
implementation of the program since its inception in May 
1989 through the beginning of the 1991-92 school year. It 
describes the program's status and the status of six 
challenges it addresses: (1) respect and understanding for 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



o 21 
ERLC 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools paec 19 



all groups; (2) community confidence in the school; (3) 
ownership of the multicultural ideal among staff, students, 
parents, and the community; (4) student psychosocial 
development; (5) enhanced student career and educational 
aspirations; and (6) improvement in the academic 
achievement of all groups. Section I provides background 
in the multicultural education movement and then presents 
the aims of the program. Section II describes the current 
status of the program's six challenges and presents data on 
implementation of the program and on challenges that the 
program faces. It includes information from the perspective 
of students, staff, and parents who are participants in the 
model program. Section III describes current levels of 
program implementation and the implications of 
development to date for meeting the six challenges and for 
replication of the multicultural program in other schools. 
Appended are two study questionnaires and a comment 
form. (JB) 



ED346182 

Title: Crossing the Bridge to Equality and Excellence: A 
Vision of Quality and Integrated Education for 
Connecticut, 

Source: Connecticut Governor's Commission on Quality 
and Integrated Education, Hartford. 
Publication Year.* 1990 
Notes: 68 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This report is the product of L7 months of 
research, consultation, and discussions; and it presents the 
views of the Connecticut Governor's Commission on 
Quality and Integrated Education. Connecticut has long 
acknowledged an affirmative responsibility to desegregate 
the public schools and guarantee educational quality for all 
students. The Commission found that the goal of "quality 
and intergratcd education" currently is blocked by 
increasing racial isolation (i.e., the majority of 
Connecticut's students remain isolated from daily 
educational contact with students of other races and ethnic 
groups). Following its research into the dimensions of 
racial isolation in education in Connecticut and nationally, 
the Commission developed the following six findings: (1) 
educational opportunity cannot be addressed in isolation 
and public policy should be linked in the cooperative 
enterprise of removing barriers to achievement and of 
promoting the common ground that strengthens all in 
society; (2) a quality education requires an integrated 
student body and faculty and a curriculum reflecting the 
heritage of many cultures; (3) every student can ?.i«m at 
high levels from a quality and integrated education; (4) a 
need exists for communities to appreciate and support 



public education, and for families and the community to 
involve themselves in the education of Connecticut's youth; 
(5) every educator must be trained to teach a diverse 
student population and use a curriculum that incorporates 
and honors diverse cultural and racial heritages; and (6) 
Connecticut needs to attract and employ minority 
educators. For each finding, the Commission established a 
goal, indicators of success, and recommendations for 
achieving the goal. The report discusses each finding 
separately. Appendix A reports on commission activities 
from September 20, 1989, through December 31, 1990. 
Appendix B summarizes a public opinion survey of 750 
citizens. Appendix C presents a 38-item list of sources. 
(SLD) 



ED346096 

Author: Davidson ,-Ann-Locke 

Title: Border Curricula and the Construction of Identity: 

Implications for Multicultural Theorists, 

Source: Center for Research on the Context of Secondary 

School Teaching. 

Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 39 p. ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (San 
Francisco, CA, April 20-24, 19921 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The question of what constitutes a 
multicultural curriculum was addressed by examining the 
experiences of three Latina students, each attending a 
different urban high school, who were followed through 
freshman and sophomore years. Two questions guided the 
inquiry: (1) where is curriculum relevant to ethnicity? and 
(2) how do students evaluate and respond to ethically 
relevant curriculum when it is encountered. The emphasis 
was on students' perceptions and evaluation of three 
potential sources of ethnically relevant curricula-the 
explicit (encountered in texts and assignments) and the 
hidden. The hidden curriculum includes the "relational" 
(lessons learned about intercultural communication from 
relationships with peers and teachers) and the 
"differentiating" (lessons about finding a place in th' social 
structure learned through observations of teacher 
expectations and students' educational choices). Data were 
gathered based on interviews; school and classroom 
observations; student records; students' conceptions of their 
ethnicity; and family and peer relationships. Findings 
suggest that only in environments where youth can openly 
display their ethnicity does curriculum foster an 
appreciation of diversity; only in environments where 
disenfranchised youth are enabled to empower themselves 
do youth have the opportunity to acquire the skills 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



9 

ERLC 



22 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools pa2c20 



necessary to take effective action against oppression and 
inequality. (LL) 

ED346066 

Author: Hollingsworth, -Sandra; And~Others 
Title: By Chart and Chance and Passion: Two Women's 
Stories of Learning To Teach Literacy in Urban Settings 
through Relational Knowing. 

Source: Center for the Learning and Teaching of 
Elementary Subjects, East Lansing, ML 
Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 59 p.; Examples of students' work in appendix are 
handwritten and may not reproduce well. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper is a narrative drawn from a 
6-year study of two female elementary school teachers as 
they arc learning to teach literacy. The teachers were part 
of a larger longitudinal investigation on learning to teach 
which began with their preservice teacher programs at a 
research university on the west coast. This report 
summarizes data collected in both classrooms during a fifth 
year study. The stories which emerge from the data suggest 
that program emphasis— a cognitive understanding of both 
popular and research-based approaches to literacy 
instruction-was insufficient for teaching multi-ethnic 
children in urban classrooms. Rather, teachers' relational 
knowing stands out in the narrative, Factors which 
supported these teachers* knowing through relationship 
included opportunities for ongoing conversation while 
learning to teach, a passionate belief in themselves and 
their children as knowledge creators and evaluate rs, a 
willingness to create eclectic approaches to literacy 
characterized by relational integrity, and a propensity to 
look critically at both their children and themselves in 
relationship to evaluate the results. Several examples of 
children's work are appended. (Author) 

ED346022 

Author: Vincent r Nelson-C. 

Title: The Philosophy and Politics of Multicultural 
Education and Anti-Racist Education: An Analysis of 
Current Literature. 
Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 39 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
National Association for Multicultural Education (Orlando, 
FL, February 1992). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Multicultural education emerged as a 
curriculum and pedagogical movement in the late 1960s but 



it has yet to be clearly understood. Several distinct 
approaches to multicultural education constitute a range of 
curricular, pedagogical, and social justice perspectives each 
with significantly different political, social, and economic 
goals. A healthy discourse between theorist and practioner 
is necessary for the continued growth of the field. 
Anti-racist education is a parallel approach that focuses on 
the issues of social justice and inequality. Anti-racist 
theorists argue that multicultural approaches to schooling 
have focused on the curriculum and the classroom at the 
expense of examining the wider social, political, and 
economic influences on inequality and racism, and that 
multiculturalisU misunderstand the causes of social 
inequality when they understand it exclusively in terms of 
culture. At present, however, there is a very limited 
amount of research available on functioning multicultural 
programs and their outcomes. It is clear that multicultural 
education and anti-racist education are firmly connected in 
their commitment to work for reform, equity, and justice. 
It is time for multiculturalists to respond to the concerns of 
anti-racist educators. An alliance between both groups is 
essential to the continuing growth of the field, (KM) 

ED346002 

Author: Stotsky ,-Saruira 

Title: Restoring Quality History Teaching and Civic 
Education in BrookUne: The Educational Context for the 
Recent Parent Movement. 
Publication Year. 1991 

Notes: 13 p.; Paper presented at the U.S. Department of 
Education Conference on Improving the Teaching of 
History and Civic Education (Washington, DC, October 9, 
1991). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: BrookUne High School in the suburban 
Boston, Massachusetts area has been long recognized as 
having a reputation for academic excellence; its social 
studies department, for example, has been highly praised 
for the diverse range of courses it has offered. This paper 
recounts what happened to Brookline High school's social 
studies department in the 1980s when a series of events 
undermined the quality and integrity of the social studies 
curriculum. In the early 1980s, a number of educators at 
Brookline High began to take steps to revise the social 
studies curriculum. This revision, culminating in the 
elimination of the Advanced Placement European History 
course from the curriculum and done in the name of 
multiculturalism, in fact stemmed from an anti-Western 
orientation. The paper describes efforts made by a group of 
concerned citizens and parents to reinstate the A, P. 
European History course and to give a new direction to the 
social studies curriculum. (DB) 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



23 



Infusinp Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 21 



ED345920 

Author: SatZrRonald-N.; Arid-Others 

Title: Chippewa Treaty Rigltts. Classroom Activities. 

Bulletin No. 92150. 

Source: Wisconsin State Dept. of Public Instruction* 
Madison. 

Publication Year: 1991 
Notes: 228 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC10 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: In 1989 Wisconsin legislation mandated the 
integration of American Indian history, culture, and tribal 
sovereignty into the K-12 social studies curriculum as a 
component of multicultural education. This document 
assists teachers to fulfill that mandate, as well as to meet 
statutory requirements of instruction on the Chippewa 
Indians* treaty-based, off-reservation rights to hunt, fish, 
and gather. This guide is divided into seif-contained 
teaching sections: elementary, middle school, and high 
school. Each section contains nine specific activities. The 
elementary level builds concepts and competencies for the 
middle school level, which does the same for the high 
school level. Each section: (1) presents a brief overview of 
the Chippewa (Anishinabc) culture, political structure, and 
relationship to the environment; (2) discusses the nature of 
the federal-Indian relationship through the treaty-making 
era; (3) examines the reservations established for 
Wisconsin's Chippewas in the mid-19th century; (4) 
discusses infringements on Chippewa treaty rights and 
acculturation efforts during the late 19th and into the 20th 
century; (5) outlines federal court decisions upholding 
reserved rights; and (6) examines the roles played by the 
six Chippewa bands and the state in protecting northern 
Wisconsin's natural resources. Each activity contains 
necessary background information, objectives, concepts, 
" fundamentals" (chiefly references to primary sources), and 
procedures. The 35 fundamentals arc the basic elemental 
materials for the activities. These materials have been 
carefully transcribed from original documents and include 
letters, drawings and photographs, charts and figures, texts 
of treaties, and records of court litigation. Also included 
arc a glossary and a selected bibliography of 87 entries. 
(SV) 



ED345898 

Author: Morse .-John-B. 

Title: The Historical Development of a Curriculum for 
Teaching Multicultural Studies in a Senior High School. 
Source: Omaha Public Schools, Nebr. 
Publication Year: 11991] 



Notes: 43 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This document consists of a paper and 
related booklet describing the development of a 
multicultural studies program in Omaha (Nebraska) high 
schools. A high school teacher describes how he came to 
develop Omaha's multicultural education program. In the 
early 1960s, the realization that history textbooks contained 
LiUle of the Black experience, coupled with a 35% Black 
enrollment in his school, led him to incorporate Black 
history into his American history course and to develop a 
separate African American history course. Ethnic studies 
and Chicano studies courses were added by the late 1970s. 
A 1982- needs assessment showing poor self-image among 
American Indian students and misconceptions about Indians 
among non-Indian students led to the development of an 
American Indian studies course. This process was 
supported by a committee of Indian parents and students. 
Recently the school added an Asian American studies 
course, which aims to improve student understanding of the 
history and culture of Pacific Rim countries. The booklet 
contains: (1) procedures for a high school teacher to 
develop a multicultural curriculum; (2) lists of concepts or 
topics covered in Benson High School's courses in 
introductory multicultural studies, African American 
history, and Hispanic Amcricai. studies; (3) brief 
descriptions of the objectives and modules of courses in 
American Indian studies and Asian American studies; (4) 
examples of activities and teaching methods; and (5) a list 
of Asian American studies resources. Not included here arc 
a "module book" and a "study guide" of 276 pages. (SV) 

ED345865 

Author: Vold,-Edwina-Battle t Ed. 

Title: Multicultural Education in Early Childhood 

Classrooms. NEA Early Childhood Education Series. 

Sou rce: National Education Association, Washington, D. C. 

Publication Year; 1992 

Notes: 80 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This monograph is intended to provide a 
rationale for multicultural education and to serve as a 
manual for teachers. It includes activities and strategics for 
teaching preschool and primary-age children from a 
multicultural perspective. The document is organized into 
six chapters, four of which include sample lessons. Chapter 
1 provides the basis for inquiry into what a multicultural 
curriculum is and the way in which it responds to the needs 
of a population of increasing cultural diversity. Chapter 2 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



CM 

ERIC 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schooto page 22 



offers a rationale for the present social studies structure in 
the primary grades ana" discusses ways to modify lessons 
within that structure to embody a multicultural perspective. 
A historical picture of changing perspectives in science and 
mathematics in early childhood education is provided in 
Chapter 3. This chapter describes ways to help all children 
succeed in science and mathematics through the use of a 
multicultural perspective. Chapter 4 focuses on teacher 
characteristics that enhance the teaching of a curriculum 
with a multicultural perspective. In Chapter 5, discussion 
concerns the ways in which play supports the goals of 
multicultural education. Chapter 6 extends the process of 
creating a multicultural climate to aspects of the classroom 
that do not fall within the established subject areas. A list 
of 86 references, a list of 20 children's books, and a list of 
teacher resources are provided. (GLR) 



ED34541S 

Author: G limps , - Blanche- Elois e- J acks on; 
Ashson , -Be verety-C. 

Title: Learning about Minority Cultures and Improving 
Reading Skills through the Use of Good Literature. 
Publication Year; 1992 

Notes: 10 p. ; Paper presented at the Annual Convention of 
the Council for Exceptional Children (70th, Baltimore, MD, 
April 13-17, 1992). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper describes the development and 
implementation of a culture-based literature program to 
improve the reading skills and understanding of minority 
cultures in students with mild disabilities. Steps in 
developing such a whole language approach program 
include: (1) identifying the cultural groups to be studied; 
(2) choosing both action and non-fiction books which 
reflect the groups in a realistic manner; (3) self education 
by the teacher on the cultures of the groups to be studied; 
(4) and application of appropriate reading activities 
involving assessing students' prior knowledge, guiding 
student reading, and evaluating attitude changes. (Seven 
references) (DB) 

ED345330 

Author: Lanke,- Barbara- A.; And-Others 

Title: The Ethics Crisis-is It the School's Responsibility? 

Publication Year; 1991 

Notes: 29 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: A groundswell of interest in values 
education is calling educators to return to the direct and 



indirect teaching of positive values. Prompted by scandals 
in the public domain and breakdown in families, character 
education is gaining ground in public education. Adhering 
to the "bag of values" approach to moral education and 
drawing upon the cognitive-developmental approach to 
moral education, a model using metaphorical tools has been 
developed and Held tested. This model, the Hcartwood 
Program (pilot tested in Pittsburgh), uses folk literature and 
hero stories representative of countries from around the 
world (tales that illustrate the attractiveness and validity of 
ethical virtuous choices). The stories address human 
problems with solutions based on ethical judgments that 
touch the head and the heart. Seven attributes were 
identified: courage, loyalty, justice, respect, honesty, hope, 
and love. These attributes were then used as the focus of 
program activities that incorporated literature from around 
the world. The field testing and subsequent evaluation of 
the project by superintendents and elementary curriculum 
coordinators yielded qualitative and quantitative data that 
arc summarized in a results section. Included in the 
appendices arc questionnaire and data sheet results, a 
Heartwood design flowchart, and a summary of evaluation 
results. (RR) 

ED345309 

Author: Ostermeier ,-Terry-H. 

Title: The Intercuitural Interview: An Experience in 
Interculturai Listening. 
Publication Year; 1992 

Notes: 15 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
International Listening Association (13th t Seattle, WA t 
March 4 8, 1992). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: An experiential student project in an 
intercuitural communication course promotes active cross 
cultural understanding through an intercuitural interview 
with listening as a primary focus. Students in this 
senior-level course may choose to conduct an intercuitural 
interview as a field study project, meeting for two or more 
separate interview sessions with someone from a foreign 
country or from an American cultural group other than 
Caucasian. In the interviews, information is sought 
regarding the interviewee's culture and communication in 
that culture, and the interviewer assesses the impact of 
observed nonverbal factors (facial expressions, eye 
behavior, use of space, hand gestures, and voice) on the 
listening process. Students present short oral presentations 
in the final weeks of the semester, highlighting major 
findings pertaining to the culture and communication, and 
presenting a discussion and analysis of the impact of 
nonverbal behaviors on the process of listening in the 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



25 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 23 



interview. Since 1990-91 , one out of three students enrolled 
has conducted intercultural interviews, interviewing 
students representing 32 different cultures. Feedback from 
students engaging in the interviews appears to be 
overwhelmingly positive. Several statements from students 
demonstrate that interviewers perceived they: (1) gained 
more insight into a culture through the person-to-person 
interview experience than through library or even class 
materials; (2) reduced prejudices and inaccurate views of 
differences between cultures; (3) developed personal 
friendships with someone from another culture; and (4) 
achieved a greater appreciation of listening skills and of the 
need to examine and adapt one's listening skills in 
intercultural interactions. (SR) 



ED345229 
Author: Swilky r Joay 

Title: Resisting Difference: Student Response in a 
Multicultural Writing Classroom. 
Publication Year/ 1992 

Notes: 14 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Conference on College Composition and Communication 
(43rd, Cincinnati, OH, March 19-21, 1992). 
EBRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: In the past few years, a number of theorists 
who advocate the study of difference have been debating 
the purposes and priorities of this approach to educational 
practice. Investigating values and ethics, particularly issues 
of race, gender and class, should do more than encourage 
students to deconstruct dominant ideologies. Tensions 
inherent in teacher-student dialogue complicate any 
attempts to promote cultural critique or to effect ideological 
transformation. Teachers must understand how students 
resist transformation, and thus how to respond to student 
resistance. A freshman writing course was designed that 
asked students to read and write about difference, 
specifically multicultural perspectives on identity. Students, 
rather than displaying a resistance to dominant ideologies, 
tended to see mainstream values and beliefs reflected in the 
readings. This phenomenon was most evident with regard 
to the responses to Michelle Cliffs writings. Students 
chose to ignore the representation of a fragmented self in 
Cliffs "A Journey into Speech," instead finding a unified 
world-traveler, one with whom they could identify. 
Surprisingly, the texts verified what the students already 
believed, instead of raising doubts, as several student 
excerpts demonstrate. Students must be provided with 
critical alternatives to the dominant ideologies, and it may 
be a good strategy to have students investigate their own 
resistance to ideological change. By aiming to promote 



resistance and ideological transformation, the study of 
difference asks students to participate in the social struggle 
over meaning. (HB) 



ED345199 

Author: OpitZrMichael-F. 

Title: The Cut-Apart: A Strategy Thai Enables Children 
To Construct Meaning as Readers of MuUkulutural 
Literature [and] Bibliographies of Multicultural Books. 
Publication Year/ 1992 

Notes: 6 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
International Reading Association (37th, Orlando, FL, May 
3-7, 1992). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This concise document is in two parts. The 
first part discusses the "cut-apart" (a story that has been cut 
apart in enough sections so that every person in the class 
has a part to read), dealing with reasons for using 
cut-aparts, guidelines for their construction, when to use 
them, and ways to use them. The second part is a 15-itcm 
listing of bibliographies of multicultural books. (SR) 



ED344857 

Author: Santo ,-Beverty 

Title: Bkultural Education among Indian Americans. 
Publication Year; 1990 

Notes: 9 p.; In; Proceedings of the National Forum of the 
Association of Independent Liberal Arts Colleges for 
Teacher Education (4th, Milwaukee, WI, November 9-11, 
1990); see SP 033 711. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Phis Postage. 

ABSTRACT: For many people in the United States it is 
necessary and valuable to learn to live biculturally. This is 
specifically true of Native Americans, because they are one 
large group of peoples who desire to maintain their own 
identity, values, and cultural norms rather than be 
assimilated into the melting pot of America. In order to 
understand the complexity of bicultural education as seen 
from the perspective of American Indians, it is necessary 
to look at how education in America works and does not 
work for Indian students. This paper reviews the cultural 
differences between Indians and non-Indians, presents a 
brief summary of the history and political interaction 
between the Indian and non-Indian worlds, and reports on 
the development of various approaches to and trends in 
Indian education. It examines the Indian world view, 
spiritual views, sociological world view, economic system, 
and political world view. A discussion of Indian education 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



?6 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 24 



explains the relationship of the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
with Indian peoples. Current trends in Indian education 
indicate that educators are demonstrating an increased 
awareness of the needs of children from other cultures. 
There are many programs designed specifically to educate 
Indian adults to become teachers of their own children. The 
paper concludes with a case study of a successful Indian 
teacher education program on the Navajo reservation in 
Arizona. (SM) 



ED344835 

Title: Michigan Global/ International Education 
Guidelines. 

Source: Michigan State Dept. of Education, Lansing. 
Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 34 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This document is designed to provide 
Michigan school districts with suggestions on how to 
develop and enhance educational programs to meet the 
needs of students in an interrelated world. Beyond 
presenting a definition of globa International education and 
accompanying concerns, the paper suggests resources and 
procedures for fostering programs that reflect 
global/international matters-socio logical, technological, 
environmental, economic, and political. The suggestions 
are directed at educators concerned with all phases of the 
curriculum, including social studies, arts education, foreign 
language, language arts, and science. The guide has four 
main sections: (1) Definition; (2) Goals; (3) 
Implementation; and (4) Self-Assessment. Threeappendices 
provide: (1) sugested topics for study; (2) examples of 
global/international themes for various grade levels; and (3) 
goals of global/multilingual/ multicultural education. A 
13-item bibliography is included. (DB) 



ED344832 

Author: Powell ,-Frances-J. 

Title: African Centered Education: What Is It and Why 
Do We Need It? 
Publication Year; [1991] 
Notes: 12 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: An African centered curriculum has two 
parts. It is both a process that centers around the cultural 
heritage of African Americans, and the infusion of content 
that will stimulate and/or reinforce the growth and 
development of African and African-American mental and 
ethical traits. The scholars who are the main proponents of 



an African centered curriculum argue that the existing 
curriculum is overwhelmingly white and European in 
outlook and content, and reinforces insensitivity among 
whites leaving black children feeling inferior and 
disconnected from their studies. The proponents also point 
out several specific omissions and distortions in the 
curriculum as it is currently taught in most school systems 
and universities. These deficiencies include the contention 
that there is no significant history of African people in 
most academic disciplines before the slave trade. Critics of 
African centered education argue that the scholarship 
behind this movement is historically inaccurate, that the 
rhetoric of the advocates of an African centered curriculum 
is racially divisive and that, in some instances, the 
advocates represent a new form of racial intolerance. In 
addition to surveying the debate over an African centered 
curriculum, this paper also briefly summarizes the 
movement for multicultural education and the efforts of the 
District of Columbia Public School System to develop a 
multicultural curriculum. (DB) 



ED344818 

Author: Nelson, -Cathy; And-Others 

Title: Navigating the Quincentenniah A Question of 

Balance. Project. 

Source: Minnesota Council of Social Studies, St. Paul. 
Publication Year; 1991 
Notes: 131 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The 1992 quincentenary* marking the 500th 
anniversary of the Columbus voyage to the present-day 
Americas provides an opportunity for teachers to employ 
materials and methods that reflect inclusive educational 
principles. Inclusive education involves helping students 
and staff to gain an understanding and appreciation of all 
groups present in the local, national, and global 
communities. It offers students and staff learning and 
teaching opportunities that reflect the wide range of 
contributions by and roles open to people similar to and 
different from themselves. The goals of this project were 
to identify (1) issues the Quincentennial presents classroom 
teachers; (2) opportunities to use this event to embrace 
"teachable moments, " particularly to model inclusive 
education; (3) curriculum and resources, including sample 
lessons ; and (4) teachers interested in engaging in 
conversations about the teaching of social studies. The 
document is divided into the following sections: project 
description, goals of the project, framing the issues, did 
you know, classroom opportunities, conversations among 
teachers of the social studies, lesson plans (17 are 
included), teacher to teacher, history day in Minnesota, 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



9 

ERLC 



27 



Infusing Multicultural Education inio Today's Schools page 25 



suggested activities , annotated bibliography, resources, 
watch for these, "The History of 1492: Textbook 
Checklist"; "Checklist: 1492-1992 Curricular Materials"; 
"Celebrating Columbus' Voyage: A Case of Historical 
Amnesia" (W. R. Buffalohead); "A Note of Tainos: 
Whither Progress?'' (J. Barreiro); and "Discovering 
Columbus: Rereading the Past" (W. Bigelow). (DB) 



ED344817 

Author: Patrick,- John-J. 

Title: The Civic Culture of the United States and Its 
Challenges to Civic Educators. 
Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 23 p.; Paper presented at an international 
conference on "Western Democracy and Eastern Europe" 
(Berlin, Germany, October 13-18, 1991). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PCO1 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The core civic ideas that helped form a 
consensus around a United States Constitution in 1787 arc 
the seeds that produce the civic culture of the United States 
today. Constitutionalism, republicanism, 
communitarianism, and classical liberalism were related 
ideas at the center of U.S. civic culture in the 1780s. Two 
hundred years later, with some modifications, these ideas 
continue to be the fundamentals of the contemporary civic 
culture in the United States. In general, people in the 
United States remain committed to the civic culture 
embodied by these principles. However, there are serious 
deficiencies, such as persistent intolerance of unpopular 
minorities, great indifference to responsibilities of 
participation for the common good, gross ignorance of 
constitutional principles combined with thoughtless 
reverence for the "American Creed," and finally, a 
declining interest in and sense of concern for the 
commonwealth, the national, and local communities that 
citizens share as members of a civil society. In order to 
contend with these deficiencies, civic education should be 
emphasized in all nationwide programs for improvement of 
teaching and learning in elementary and secondary schools. 
A number of recommendations in this regard are made, 
including the establishment of national standards for the 
teaching and learning of civics, which emphasize the 
origins and development of core ideas of the civic culture. 
Current efforts by some educators, made in the name of 
multicultural education, to separate and promote ethnic and 
racial group identities, place in jeopardy a common U.S. 
identity based on core civic ideas, A list of references is 
included. (DB) 



ED344724 

Author: Sanders ,-Jessie-R., Comp. 

Title: One State: Many Nations. A Multi-Cultural 

Resource Guide with Native American Highlights. 

Source: Pennsylvania State Dept. of Education, 

Harrisburg. 

Publication Year: 1991 
Notes: 60 p. 

EDRS Price - MFQ1/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This curriculum guide was developed to 
assist Pennsylvania educators in developing a multicultural 
awareness and education program for children in preschool 
through grade three. The first section provides guidelines 
for creating a multicultural environment to include the use 
of classroom materials that emphasize individual and 
cultural differences to eliminate stereotypic and inaccurate 
materials. The second section offers background 
information about the history of Native Americans in 
Pennsylvania and the value and traits of contemporary 
Native American culture. It also makes suggestions about 
how to portray Native Americans. Curriculum development 
is integrated into present school curriculum through an 
interdisciplinary approach. Suggestions for selecting 
appropriate stories and books by and about Native 
Americans are included. The third section is a list of 
references. The fourth section is a bibliography consisting 
of 65 publications relevant to multicultural education. The 
appendices include: (1) sample lesson plans for 
multicultural education; (2) an example of the thematic or 
interdisciplinary approach to integrating multicultural 
themes into core content areas; (3) a checklist for 
curriculum and materials on Native Americans; (4) 
suggested classroom activities; (5) a list of American Indian 
resource persons and resource centers; and (6) a description 
of Native American programs presented to schools by the 
Lenni Lenape Historical Society. (LP) 



ED344716 

Author: Flores,-Juan-M., Ed.; Merino r Rene-A. , Ed. 
Title; Educational Research and Hie Mexican American 
Child. 

Source: Association of Mexican-American Educators, Inc. , 

Redwood City, Calif 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 78 p.; Published annually. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This annual theme issue is devoted to 
articles on educational research pertaining to the Mexican 
American child. In addition, there is an article proposing 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



28 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 26 



strategics for recruiting Hispanics in teacher education, and 
a poem recalling a childhood experience. Titles and authors 
are: (1) "Motivation for Learning English; Differences 
Between Non- and Limited-English Proficient Students 
From Spanish Speaking Backgrounds" (Jose Salvador 
Hernandez); (2) "Literacy and the Adult Mexican-Origin 
Population: What a Biliteracy Analysis Can Tell Us" 
(Terrcnce G. Wiley); (3) "Staying in School! Effective 
High Schools for Hispanic Students" (J. Alex Pulido); 
(4) M Educacion Multicultural: Dcfinitivas Perspectivas y 
Viables Opciones" (Atilano A. Valencia); (5) "The Role of 
Teacher Education in Recruiting Hispanics: Cross-Cultural 
Strategies" (Gene Gallegos); and (6) "A Singer's Song" 
(Olivia Castellano). (KS) 



ED344712 

Author: Steiger ,~Neil; Kleinf eld, -Judith, Ed. 

Title: On a White Horse. Teaching Cases in 

Cross-Cultural Education No. 8. 

Source: Alaska Univ., Fairbanks. Center for 

Cross-Cultural Studies. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 41 p.; "Neil Steiger" is a pseudonym. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This teaching case was written by "Neil," 
a student teacher who tried to teach brilliantly, who put 
himself to the test, and concluded he failed. Neil uprooted 
his family to move to Alaska to reenter school in order to 
obtain a teaching certificate. He also wanted to escape the 
fast-paced life of California and a stagnant job. Neil 
believed teaching would allow him to spend more time with 
his family, to pursue personal interests, and enable him to 
be creative. Neil's student teaching experience at the 
Vonnegut Bay School in rural Alaska did not meet these 
expectations. First, the same social and economic problems 
he had encountered in California were also prevalent in 
rural Alaska. Secondly, his experience as a teacher was not 
what he expected. Neil confronted conflicts between sports 
and academics and issues of teacher responsibilities besides 
instruction. He was overwhelmed by trying to meet the 
needs and expectations of students, other teachers, his 
family, and himself. Near the end of his student teaching 
experience he lost his enthusiasm and resigned himself to 
the fact that he could not meet his expectations for a career 
in teaching. Although Neil viewed himself as a failure, his 
cooperating teacher saw him as an asset to the classroom. 
This story was selected as a case study for teacher 
education, not because it is typical of what happens to 
student teachers, but because it portrays problems of 
teaching that students will benefit from reflecting upon. 
Discussion questions for this particular teaching case are 



r Wded. (LP) 
ED344311 

Author: First r Joan; And-Others 

Title: The Good Common School: Making the Vision 

Work for All Children. A Comprehensive Guide to 

Elementary School Restructuring. 

Source: National Coalition of Advocates for Students, 

Boston, MA. 

Publication Year; 1991 

Notes: 329 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: In order for children to have access to 
quality educational experiences, all members of the school 
community must participate in school restructuring 
(parents, advocates, educators, community leaders, and 
policymakers). Researchers and teacher training institutions 
also play a vital role. This book provides easy access to 
information of particular interest to different groups and 
individuals who support advocacy-driven school reform. It 
is organized around 10 vital student entitlements discussed 
within 8 chapters that focus on the following topics: parent 
participation, student admission and placement, student 
instruction, enhancing individual potential, student support 
services, school climate, teacher empowerment, and school 
finance. A fictional vignette is presented at the beginning 
of each chapter, representing an imaginary elementary 
school on its way to becoming the Good Common School 
(a school with the primary goal of providing educational 
excellence for all of its students). Following these vignettes 
are step-by-step instructions or standards for achieving 
advocacy-driven reform. The second section of each 
chapter supports the need for fundamental change by 
documenting the problems found within most public 
elementary schools. Following the vignettes and problem 
statements, advocacy strategies in each chapter show how 
advocates work to reform schools in their own 
communities. These arc followed by descriptions of 
promising school-based practices successfully implemented 
in real elementary schools. Each chapter ends with a 
summary of education research relating to the chapter's 
topics. (561 references) (LAP) 

ED343889 

Author: Mesa-Bains Mmalia; Shulman,-Judith-H. 

Title: Teaching Diverse Students: Cases and 

Commentaries. Instructor's Guide. 

Source: Far West Lab. for Educational Research and 

Development, San Francisco, Calif. 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERIC 



29 



Infusin£ Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 27 



Publication Year. 1991 

Notes: 101 p.; For casebook, see ED 328 552. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This instructor's guide has been developed 
to help teacher educators and staff developers use the cases 
in "Teaching Diverse Students: Cases and Commentaries" 
in preserviccand inservice seminars. It promotes the use of 
discussion methods as a vehicle for engaging teachers and 
students in analysis of real-life situations. These 
teacher-written cases describe problems that all inner-city 
teachers face and bring to the surface many of the 
challenges of multiculturalism in the classroom. Often the 
narratives deal with culturally sensitive issues that are taboo 
to discuss in public. This volume provides an analysis of 
these issues and offers a structure for groups to discuss 
i hem in a safe and constructive environment. The guide is 
organized to help instructors facilitate case discussions. It 
begins with an introduction that offers general suggestions 
for preparing case analysis and examines effective group 
processes. The main section, "Teaching Notes," provides 
an in-depth analysis of each case and a suggested discussion 
outline. The teaching notes are designed to help facilitators 
prepare each case discussion and serves as a basis for 
narrative interpretation. Two tables are appended: the first 
compares background information of case contributors, and 
the second compares critical features across cases. 
(Author/LL) 



ED343768 

Author: Harvey \ -Karen 

Title: History and Social Studies Curricula in Elementary 
and Secondary Schools. 
Publication Year: (19911 

Notes: 30 p.; In: Indian Nations At Risk Task Force 

Commissioned Papers. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Although the social studies curriculum is 
ambiguous, controversial, and value-laden, the goal of 
self-determination demands that Native students acquire 
certain knowledge and skills in this curriculum area. Of 
particular interest to Native education are social studies 
encompassing global education, multicultural education, 
ethnic studies, and cultural studies. Challenges faced by 
social studies curricula include inaccurate and biased 
textbooks, development of active and relevant teaching 
methods, and development of curriculum for and about all 
students. Social studies may be taught to satisfy a variety 
of purposes: transmission of traditional American 
citizenship values; personal development; development of 
critical and reflective thinking skills; social science 



education; and development of skills needed for rational 
decision-making and social action. This last objective has 
great significance for Native education since such skills 
would prepare students to deal effectively and responsibly 
with Native issues. Recommendations relate to curriculum 
content, national commissions on social studies and Native 
studies, a national Native curriculum clearinghouse, 
finding, and coordination among professional 
organizations. An outline is presented of specific desired 
objectives for mastery of social studies knowledge and 
skills, experience outcomes, values outcomes, and 
attitudinal outcomes. The development of these outcomes 
into course content and a K-12 scope and sequence for 
units of study is discussed. Also discussed are classroom 
environment, Native learning styles, teaching methods, 
student grouping, instructional materials, alternative 
methods of evaluation, and exemplary programs. This 
paper contains 38 references. (SV) 

ED343341 

Author: Ramirez, -Bruce-A. 

Title: Preparing Special Education and Related Services 
Personnel To Serve Culturally and Linguistically Diverse 
Children with Handicaps: Needs and Future Directions. 
Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 6 p.; In: Bullock, Lyndal M., Ed. and SUnpson, 
Richard L., Ed. Critical Issues in Special Education: 
Implications for Personnel Preparation. Monograph; see 
EC 301 016. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper outlines the need to diversify 
the education profession at practitioner, administrative, and 
personnel preparation levels in order to better serve 
culturally and linguistically diverse children with 
disabilities. Needs identified include developing effective 
recruitment and retention programs for members of ethnic 
minority groups; ensuring that competencies related to 
culturally and linguistically diverse children with handicaps 
are an integral component of special education and related 
services preparation programs; strengthening training and 
leadership programs preparing ethnic minority special 
education and related services personnel as well as 
personnel serving culturally and linguistically diverse 
children with handicaps; and initiating research and 
demonstration projects to improve curriculum, 
competencies, and training. (JDD) 

ED343128 

Author: Reuner ,-Kathryn-Meyer 

Title: Multiethnic Literature: Holduip. Fast to Dreams. 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



30 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 28 



Technical Report No. SSI. 

Source: Reading Research and Education Center, 
Champaign, EL. 
Publication Year. 1992 
Notes: 16 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Despite the importance of children's 
literature written by and about people of color, little 
multiethnic literature is available. However, the situation 
has improved somewhat. In recent years there has been a 
greater focus in African-American literature upon folk 
tales, family stories, family histories, and biographies. 
Still, books about the Hispanic, Asian, or Native American 
experience mostly have tended to be written about, not by, 
members of those groups. An examination of stories from 
trade books and basal reading programs presented on the 
third-grade level found no non-white main characters. No 
other ethnic groups were represented. A similar scarcity of 
multicultural content was found in former U.S. Secretary 
of Education William Bennett's suggested reading list and 
Jim Trelcase's 1989 reading list. Readers from commercial 
publishers reflected greater diversity. The examination of 
multiethnic literature raises such questions as: who is 
writing the works; how ethnic groups are portrayed in 
illustrations; whether stereotypes are employed; whether 
separate cultures are grouped together under such labels as 
"Hispanic" or "Asian"; how broad an ethnic selection of 
reading material is presented to children; and how long 
multiethnic literature remains in publication. As multiethnic 
literature is made more available, demand for it will 
increase. (A list of 44 references is attached.) (SG) 



ED342830 

Author: Nakagawa,-Mako 

Title: A Call for Cooperative Pluralism from Me to We. 
Source: Washington Office of the State Superintendent of 
Public Instruction, Otympia. 
Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 26 p.; One chart comains small, blurred print. 

Cover title varies slightly. 

EDRS Price - MF01IPC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This collection of training materials 
describes an educational philosophy for elementary level 
instruction called cooperative pluralism. This approach 
complements and strengthens traditional multicultural 
educational approaches while blending them with 
cooperative learning and democratic education. The 
following materials are included: (1) brief comments on 
cooperative pluralism by distinguished experts; (2) a 
glossary; (3) a definition of cooperative pluralism; (4) a 



description of the approach and practical strategies for 
implementation for teachers; (5) an essay on the meaning 
of culture; (6) the text of a letter written by an American 
Indian upon learning that the United States wished to 
purchase tribal lands; (7) a one page comparison of 
Western and Asian culture; and (8) a letter from a principal 
to teachers on the aims of education. The following 
materials are appended: (1) a diagram of Lake Washington 
School District Curriculum Model; (2) a "Core Skills 
Continuum"; (3) definitions of five key terms; (4) a 
diagram of the Bainbridgc Island School District's 
cooperative pluralism curriculum; (5) a letter from a 
non-Anglo mother to an Anglo teacher; (6) an order form 
for a poetry book; (7) a training evaluation form; and (8) 
an advertisement for multicultural teaching aids. (JB) 



ED342829 

Title: Educating African American Males: A Dream 
Deferred. 

Source: Milwaukee Public Schools, Wis. 
Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 65 p. ; Prepared by the African American Male Task 
Force. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This document presents recommendations 
of the Milwaukee (Wisconsin) African American Male 
Task Force (MAAMTF), which reviewed from January 
through April of 1990 current educational efforts and 
recommended strategies by which schools could better 
address African American males' needs. The MAAMTF 
recommendations are to be implemented in two phases. 
Phase I focuses on district policy, staff development, and 
structural variation based on the notion that all students can 
learn at increasingly higher levels. The following are Phase 

I recommendations: (1) multicultural curricula; (2) flexible 
structuring for academic areas; (3) quality after-school, 
summer, and Saturday programs; (4) enhanced homework 
policies; (5) staff training an J assistance for working with 
diverse populations; (6) increasing the number of African 
American teachers, especially males; (7) parent 
involvement; (8) inservice courses for all staff members on 
African American history and culture and racism in 
America; (9) designation of some schools as professional 
development centers; (10) gender socialization courses; and 
(11) African American male immersion academics. Phase 

II recommendations focus on long-range goals for 
system-wide revisions in terms of restructuring schools, 
developing strong self-concepts among African American 
boys, developing alternate discipline programs, revising 
curriculum, providing family support, involving the 
community, and allocating resources. Included are 9 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERiC 31 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 29 



graphs, 1 tabic, and 71 references. Appendices contain 
correlates of effective schooling, proposed time lines, a 
budgetary data table, seven other data tables, and outlines 
of student nondiscrimination and affirmative action 
policies. (JB) 

ED342759 

Author: Ploumis-Devick,-Evetyn 

Title: Appreciating Differences: Teaching and Learning 
in a Culturally Diverse Classroom, Hot Topics: Usable 
Research. 

Source: SERVE: SouthEastern Regional Vision for 
Education. 

PublicatioD Year: 1992 
Notes: 121 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This publication is designed to provide 
educators with useful information and examples on how 
teachers and students can better communicate and learn in 
today's culturally diverse classroom. Educators are given 
background information and resources for becoming more 
sensitive and responsive to the needs of students of 
different cultures and enriching the curiculum by infusing 
it with a multicultural perspective. Section 1 provides 
general background on cultural diversity and its impact on 
U.S. schools. Section 2 features programs and projects that 
teachers have successfully used to address the needs of 
culturally diverse school populations. Section 3 presents a 
compilation of structured strategies for developing 
cross-cultural awareness and sensitivity, and it suggests 
thematic activities, with related resources, that can be used 
in the classroom. Section 4 supplies a selection of 
multicultural resources; section 5 offers four appendices 
containing additional resources and information. The 
appendices include: "Helpful Hints for Working with New 
LEP Students"; "74 Instant Ideas for Classroom Teachers 
with ESL Students"; "Sample Culturgram"; and 
"Chronology of Key Historical Events by U.S. Ethnic 
Groups." A 31-itcm bibliography completes the volume. 
(IAH) 



ED342758 

Title: Promoting Harmony. A Compilation of Sample 
Lessons. Grades K-12. 

Source: New York City Board of Education, N. Y. 
Publication Year; 1992 
Notes: 55 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 



ABSTRACT: The New York City Public Schools 
provides this series of strategies for teachers to use during 
Kids Week (February 17-21, 1992), These strategies, 
which seek to promote harmony among students, are 
designed to: give students opportunities to become aware 
of and appreciate the city's diversity; instill sensitivity and 
understanding among all students; and help students 
appreciate the contributions of the many ethnic, linguistic, 
and cultural groups of New York City. This collection 
includes strategies for eariy childhood, elementary, middle 
school, and high school grades. Lesson plans are given for 
the following topics: "Making Friends"; "Families"; 
"Getting to Know One Another"; "Respect for Others"; 
"What Am I Proud Of?"; "How Do I Feel?"; "Me and 
Somebody Else"; "Children Have the Right To Have Their 
Cultures Understood and Respected: An Interdisciplinary 
Unit"; "The Promise of America"; "Understanding 
Prejudice"; "Looking beyond Labels To Combat 
Prejudice"; "Discrimination"; and "Reducing Prejudice." 
(IAH) 



ED342717 

Author: Marschalek,-Douglas, Ed. 

Title: (Multicultural Education and the Arts.] 

Source: Wisconsin Art Education Association, Madison. 

Publication Year; 1990 

Notes: 41 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This issue os Spectrum contains six articles 
devoted to the theme of helping teachers develop 
multicultural teaching methods by examining the 
relationship of art, culture, and art education. In 
"Multi-cultural Art: A Learning Process," Linda Kreft 
addresses the problem of cultural biases that children 
acquire over time. Patricia Stuhr in "Wisconsin's Native 
American Visual Art" presents a rationale for studying the 
art of other cultures, in particular the art of Wisconsin 
Native Americans. The third article, "Chicano Murals: A 
Continuing Cultural Tradition" by Ronald Neperud and 
Rochelle Robkin outlines the communication function of 
murals in Chicano society. In "An American Art Teacher 
in India: Educational Travel as a Cultural Resource/' Vicki 
Samulyk describes India's educational system and the 
events and philosophies that shape art education in another 
country. Richard March's paper, "Close to Home and 
Close to the Heart: Exploring Folk Arts in Education," 
profiles three Wisconsin folk artists. The final paper, "Art, 
Culture, and Vital Issues: A Middle School Art Program" 
by Rae Prescott, describes a middle school art program that 
fosters team teaching, student peer-teaching, and an 
interdisciplinary approach to cultural learning. (KM) 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERIC 



32 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 30 



ED342715 

Title: United States and New York State History, Grade 7. 

A Multicultural Perspective. Volume III. 

Source: New York City Board of Education, Brooklyn, N Y. 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 531 p. 

EDRS Price - MF02 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This resource guide, designed for use by 
New York City teachers, provides a wide range of 
suggested approaches and materials from which teachers 
can select as they teach the grade 7 and grade 8 course 
"United States and New York State History." The resource 
guide strives to include the histories, perspectives, and 
contributions of all people (women, African-Americans, 
American Indians, and ethnic minorities) and thus is in 
keeping with the social history approach prescribed by the 
State Syllabus for grades 7 and 8. The materials presented 
in this volume of the overall guide represent suggested 
approaches for teaching the fifth and sixth units of the six 
unit syllabus. Unit 5 is titled "Life in the New Nation"; 
unit 6 is titled "Division and Reunion." Each unit is 
comprehensive and has been divided into several learning 
activities, each of which relates to a particular topic within 
the unit and contains a focus question, teacher background, 
major ideas, concepts, performance objectives, 
development and worksheets. When a learning activity 
incorporates specific multicultural content, it is headed by 
one or more of the following themes: culture/diversity, 
movements of people, contributions, and struggle for 
equality. Examples of activities contained in Unit 5 include 
"How did Thomas Jefferson's election mark a step forward 
toward increasing participation in American government?" 
and "Why did large numbers of Irish, Germans, and 
Chinese immigrate to the United States in the 1840s and 
1850s?" Examples of activities contained in Unit 6 include 
"How did the United States justify its policy of territorial 
expansion prior to the Civil War?" and "How did the 
presidential reconstruction policy attempt to reunite the 
American people?" A lengthy bibliography is included at 
the end of each unit. (DB) 



ED342714 

Title: United States and New York State History: Grade 7. 

A Multicultural Perspective. Volume 11. 

Source: New York City Board of Education, Brooklyn, N. Y. 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 327 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 



ABSTRACT: This resource guide, designed for use by 
New York City teachers, provides a wide range of 
suggested approaches and materials from which teachers 
can select as they teach the grade 7 and grade 8 course 
"United States and New York State History." The resource 
guide strives to include the histories, perspectives, and 
contributions of all people (women, African- Americans, 
American Indians, and ethnic minorities) and thus is in 
keeping with the social history approach prescribed by the 
State Syllabus for grades 7 and 8. The materials presented 
in this volume of the overall guide represent suggested 
approaches for teaching the third and fourth units of the six 
unit syllabus. Unit 3 is titled "A Nation is Created"; and 
Unit 4 is titled "Experiments in Government/ Each unit is 
comprehensive and has been divided into several learning 
activities, each of which relates to a particular topic within 
the unit and contains a focus question, teacher background, 
major ideas, concepts, performance objectives, 
development and worksheets. When a learning activity 
incorporates specific multicultural content, it is headed by 
one or more of the following themes: culture/diversity, 
movements of people, contributions, and struggle for 
equality. Examples of activities contained in unit 3 include: 
"To what extent were the American colonists ready for 
self-government by the 1750s?: and ""Why were the 
American Colonists victorious in the revolutionary war?" 
Examples of activities contained in Unit 4 include, "Why 
was the Constitution called 'a bundle of compromises'?" 
and "Is the Constitution flexible enough to meet the 
challenges of changing times?" A lengthy bibliography is 
included at the end of each unit. (DB) 



ED342713 

Title: United Suites and New York State History, Grade 7. 

A Multicultural Perspective. Volume I. 

Source: New York City Board of Education, Brooklyn, N Y. 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 358 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This resource guide, designed for use by 
New York City teachers, provides a wide range of 
suggested approaches and materials from which teachers 
can select as they teach the grade 7 and grade 8 course 
"United States and New York State History." The resource 
guide strives to include the histories, perspectives, and 
contributions of all people (women, African-Americans, 
American Indians, and ethnic minorities) and thus is in 
keeping with the social history approach prescribed by the 
State Syllabus for grades 7 and 8. The materials presented 
in this volume of the overall guide represent suggested 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



33 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 31 



approaches for teaching the first two units of the six unit 
syllabus. Unit 1 is titled "The Global Heritage of the 
American People"; Unit 2 is titled "European Exploration 
and Colonization of the Americas." Each unit is 
comprehensive and has been divided into several learning 
activities, each of which relates to a particular topic within 
the unit and contains a focus question, background, major 
ideas, concepts, performance objectives, development, and 
worksheets. When a learning activity objectives, 
development and worksheets. When a learning activity 
incorporates specific multicultural content, it is headed by 
one or more of the following themes: culture/diversity, 
movements of people, contributions, and struggle for 
equality. Examples of activities contained in Unit 1 include 
"What are the origins of the first Americans?" and "How 
did the Incas attempt to solve their social and economic 
problems?" Examples of activities featured in Unit 2 
include "How did Columbus's voyage pave the way for the 
European settlement of the Americas?" and "To what 
degree were democratic ideals advanced in the American 
Colonies?" A lengthy bibliography is included at the end of 
each unit. (DB) 



ED342711 
Author: DiSiena t -Julie 

Title: Selecting Stories for Multicultural Art Lessons 
(Xindergarten-2nd Grade Emphasis). 
Publication Year: 1991 
Notes: 7 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Storytelling has cultural roots and this can 
be employed to teach a culturally pluralistic curriculum. 
Stories can be selected from a variety of sources and used 
to match lesson objectives. Criteria for selecting stories 
should include the authenticity of cultural representation, 
the amount of cultural information, appropriateness, and 
the estimated interest of the child. In art education, these 
stories can be used as a basis for lessons on mask-making, 
drawing, toy-making, kite-making, origami, oriental brush 
painting, puppets, patterned quilts, and art history. 
Examples of stories include "Lord of the Dance" by 
Veronique Tadjo which explains the intended use of masks 
in African ceremonies, and "Arrow to the Sun" by Gerald 
McDermott, a story about American Indians. The most 
important aspect of verbal and visual storytelling is that 
students are given opportunities to express their own 
feelings about the world around them. (KM) 



ED342442 

Author: Jaros,-Bonita-Nahoum 

Title: E Pluribus Unum: The Possible Dream. 

Source: Rancho Santiago Community Coll., Santa Ana, 

Calif. 

Publication Year. 1991 

Notes: 29 p.; Rancho Santiago College Fifth Distinguished 
Faculty Award. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The United States has, since its inception, 
epitomized the themes of peace, freedom, and the pursuit 
of dignity in concept. Founded as a multicultural nation, 
the United States adopted the motto "E Pluribus Unum" 
(out of many, one) to affirm its inclusivity. Throughout its 
history, the United States has been a haven for peoples 
fleeing war, poverty, or oppression. With a population 
representing so many cultures, there is a great chance for 
misunderstand ing, b ut also , a greater potential for 
intellectual and creative contribution than is possible for 
most nations. At Rancho Santiago College, a concerted 
effort has been made to celebrate multiculturalism. Culture 
is that which binds people together— a collective memory 
that may be used as a contextual clue for present or future 
interpretation, evaluation, behavior, and beliefs. In the 
United States, a problem arises because of the dominance 
of the original immigrant group of White Anglo-Saxon 
Protestants. But even those who adopt this dominant culture 
also keep their roots based in the community from which 
they came. This results in the tendency to hyphenate 
nationalities, e.g., Vietnamese-American. Schools and 
colleges need to appreciate the tension that students caught 
between two cultures must face in trying to meet 
expectations for cultural assimilation in an American 
context, while meeting the expectations of cultural and 
language maintenance at home. Just as educators should 
work to include the learning styles of others into their 
programs, all students must take responsibility for 
becoming literate in the "currency" of America. Thus, 
cultural literacy must mean polycultural literacy. (DJD) 



ED341949 

Author: Fauvei r Moniqus 

Title: Utilizing Multicultural Reading Resource Materials 
To Improve Reading Motivation and Performance among 
High School Students. 
Publication Year; 1991 

Notes: 108 p.; Ed.D. Practicum, Nova University. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper reports on a practicum designed 
to increase reading motivation among senior high school 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



9 

ERLC 



34 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 32 



students (as reflected by the number of books checked out 
from the school library) and to promote a better 
understanding of cultural sub-groups in the school, of 
which Blacks constituted the largest group (41%) and 
Hispanics, the second largest (29%). Students were guided 
toward literature from the Caribbean Islands and Africa in 
an attempt to instill a sense of pride in the students' 
cultural heritage. Students were grouped by affinity and 
interest. A reading corner offered a multitude of books as 
a classroom resource. Students shared orally, with their 
peers, the fruits of their weekly readings, which led to 
animated discussions. Audiotapes were sometimes used to 
introduce the oral readings and set the tone. Slides, 
photographs, videos, and films were viewed. Field trips to 
local book stores were organized as well as food fairs 
which allowed students to taste foods from different 
countries. Results showed that by the end of the 8-month 
implementation period, there was an increase of 80% in the 
number of books checked out from the school library. 
Students participated in a "Book Drive" so that they would 
have the necessary materials for the Sustained Silent 
Reading (SSR) activity; at the end of implementation, 90% 
of the students admitted enjoying SSR. (Nine figures and 
six tables of data are included. Twenty-nine references and 
a questionnaire on attitudes towards reading, reading 
interest checklist, cultural awareness survey, teacher 
observation checklist, and a sample "book card" are 
attached.) (Author/SR) 



ED341877 

Author: Locke r Don-C; Parker r Larry-D. 

Title: A Multicultural Focus on Career Education. 

Information Series No. 348, 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Adult, Career, and 
Vocational Education, Columbus, Ohio. 
Publication Year; 1991 
Notes: 45 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The purpose of this literature review is to 
illustrate the implications of cultural diversity for career 
education and development. Discussed first are census data 
demonstrating the rapid increases in population of such 
groups as Asians/Pacific Islanders, African Americans, 
Native Americans, and Hispanics. Differences in world 
view are explored next, with an explanation of how 
differences in Locus of Control and Locus of Responsibility 
are influenced by cultural heritage and life experiences. 
The relevance for diverse populations of career 
development theories based on a white male, middle-class 
population is questioned. Appropriate intervention methods 
for specific groups, the unique challenges facing culturally 



diverse women, and communication issues are discussed. 
The cross-cultural awareness continuum is presented as a 
tool career personnel can use to gauge their growth in 
intercultural competence. The levels of the continuum are 
as follows: (1) self-awareness; (2) awareness of one's own 
culture; (3) awareness of racism, sexism, and poverty; (4) 
awareness of individual differences; (5) awareness of other 
cultures; (6) awareness of diversity; and (7) career 
education skills/techniques. A system focus on cultural 
diversity involves two sets of strategies for improving 
career education/development programming: 
recommendations for multicultural program content and 
process strategies to improve multicultural competence. 
(SK) 

ED341656 

Author: Parscal t -Jeannie-N. 

Title: "Katherine WUh-a-K and Little Nato": A Case 
Study of Culturally Responsible Pedagogy. 
Publication Year/ 1991 

Notes: 23 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Midwestern Educational Research Association (Chicago, 
ZL, October 16-19, 1991). 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This case study, one of four, is part of a 
larger study, "Ethnographic Case Studies of Culturally 
Responsive Pedagogy (CRP) of At-Risk Students in Middle 
School Classrooms." The study provides relevant case 
literature regarding CRP for the enhancement of preservice 
teacher education and describes the characteristics of a 
multicultural classroom in "Little Nato," a transitional, 
urban area, where the teacher, Katherine, practices the 
philosophy, theory, development, and application of holistic 
education and CRP. CRP is defined as the incorporation of 
diverse content and approaches into the process of teaching 
while attending to the cultural norms that affect learning. 
Ethnographic methodology was utilized to collect data 
through classroom observation and through interviews with 
Katherine and her students. Findings suggest that Katherine 
created a successful atmosphere of learning by fostering a 
positive, creative learning environment and by 
implementing instructional content and modalities relevant 
to her students, thus facilitating their personal growth as 
well as their academic achievement. (LL) 



ED341655 
Author: Huber,-Tonya 

Title: Restructuring To Reclaim Youth at Risk: Culturally 
Responsible Pedagogy. 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



er|c 35 



Infusine Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 33 



Publication Year. 1991 

Notes: 23 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 

Midwestern Educational Research Association (13th, 

Chicago, EL, October 16-19, 1991). 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 

EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This paper addresses the issue of 
multiculturalism in public schools and the role teacher 
education programs play in preparing teachers to create, 
implement, and evaluate curriculum and instruction 
responsive to the educational needs of diverse learners. 
Ethnographic interviews and observations were utilized to 
present a case study which investigates how teachers can 
restructure and develop a classroom where, regardless of 
a learner's background, the student's social, academic, and 
personal development are maximized. The case of Josefina 
Guzman, a teacher whose sixth grade classroom reflects 
culturally responsive pedagogy, describes Josefina' s 
background and her conceptions of self/other, 
teacher/student social relations, knowledge, teaching 
methods, and interpretation of culturally responsible 
pedagogy which asserts the importance of students' 
individual identities. Ms. Guzman's model is supported by 
findings of the success of similar programs targeting 
excellence for minority and underachieving youth. (LL) 



ED341648 

Author: Coballes-Vega, -Carmen 

Title: Considerations in Teaching Culturally Diverse 

Children. ERIC Digest 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Teacher Education., 
Washington, D.C. 
Publication Year: 1992 
Notes: 4 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Recent projections estimate that minorities , 
including African Americans, Hispanics, Native 
Americans, and Asians, will comprise one-third of the U.S. 
population. Currently, the majority of prospective teachers 
are White females, a situation which stands in sharp 
contrast to the backgrounds of the students they will teach. 
This digest examines considerations within preservice 
teacher education programs to address this challenge. 
Researchers have recommended that the following be 
included in the teacher education curriculum: (1) at least 
one course in multicultural education that takes into 
consideration the needs of all students; (2) information 
about the history and culture of students from a wide range 
of ethnic, racial, linguistic, and cultural backgrounds; (3) 
integration of content about the contributions made by 



various groups; (4) information about first and second 
language acquisition and effective teaching practices for 
working with students from limited English proficient 
backgrounds; and (5) field experiences and student teaching 
opportunities with students from varying backgrounds. (LL) 



ED341633 
Author: Smith,-Peter 

Title: The Case against Multiculturalism, or What about 
Cultural Relativism? 
Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 8 p.; Paper presented at the United States Society 
for Education through Art (Columbus, OH, September 
1991). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Although multiculturalism is praiseworthy, 
there are various foundational, conceptual issues that art 
educators need to think about with care and caution. In 
order to address these issues, this paper describes some 
personal experiences that impact on the implementation of 
multiculturalism in the schools. The paper begins with an 
analysis by T. Bridges (1991) that traces multicultural 
beliefs to middle class enlightenment notions. The second 
part of the paper focuses on how religious convictions 
present obstacles to multiculturalism. (Author/KM) 



ED341612 

Author: Staub, -Shalom, Ed. 

Title: Governor's Conference on Ethnicity. A Conference 
To Explore the Impact of Pennsylvania's Cultural 
Diversity on Public Policy. (Harrisburg f Pennsylvania, 
June 8-9, 1990). 

Source: Pennsylvania Heritage Affairs Commission, 
Harrisburg. 

Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 117 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This proceedings of a conference convened 
by the Governor of Pennsylvania explores the impact of 
Pennsylvania's cultural diversity upon public policy. The 
following five panel discussions were held: "Conservation 
of Cultural Heritage Resources: Values and Strategies"; 
"Culturally Sensitive Delivery of Health Care and Human 
Services"; "Inter-Ethnic Relations"; "Multi-cultural 
Education"; and "Ethnicity in Pennsylvania: Looking 
Ahead." The policy recommendations that are made on 
each of these topics are included. The texts of the 
welcoming remarks by Mark S. Singel and keynote 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



36 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 34 



addresses by Michael Novak and Niara Sudarkasa also are 
provided. (DB) • ... 

ED341079 

Author: Akers r Belle 

Title: Folktales from around the World. 

Publication Year: 1992 

Notes: 13 p.; Workshop presented through the auspices of 
the California Kindergarten Association. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Using folktales from around the world, this 
workshop paper presents a multicultural curriculum for 
kindergarten and first grades. A statement of purpose, the 
curriculum presents lists of recommended teaching 
resources, publishers and distributors of multicultural 
materials, organizations; a 12-item multicultural 
bibliography; and activities for creative expression and 
language extensions. The curriculum alSo includes lists of 
reading and instructional materials based on the cultures of 
Africa, Asia, North America, Central America, and South 
America. (RS) 



ED340817 

Title: Ninos del Arco Iris: Primar Grado = Children of 
the Rainbow: First Grade. 
Source: New York City Board of Education, N. Y. 
Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 399 p.; For the English language version, see UD 
028 492. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This manual for first grade teachers 
provides suggestions and teaching materials that reflect the 
multicultural composition of New York City's (New York) 
public schools. It is organized into two sections: the first is 
in English, and the second is in Spanish. The English 
section contains the following six sections: (i) "Planning 
for the First Grade," which offers strategies to assist 
teachers in beginning the school year successfully; (2) "The 
Multicultural Learning Environment," which offers 
guidance in organizing and implementing instructional 
approaches; (3) "Instructional Approaches and Strategies," 
which suggests approaches for implementing multicultural 
and basic education; (4) "Working Together," which 
describes shared responsibilities and activities for parents, 
teachers, and administrators; (5) "Societal Concerns," 
which discusses current societal pressures and concerns 
affecting young children; and (6) "Assessment," which 



outlines the procedures and strategies used to assess a 
child's progress. The Spanish section contains the following 
sections: (1) a description of the Chancellor's educational 
standards for language and mathematics; (2) a discussion of 
the role of first or native languages; and (3) teaching units 
in the context of five themes appropriate for the first grade, 
i.e., "so like us" (plants and animals); M my own little 
world" (school, community, environment); "our families", 
"our friends," and "numbers around us". Also included is 
a 64-item bibliography of Spanish- and English-language 
resources for teachers, children, and parents. (JB) 

ED340816 

Title: Children of the Rainbow: First Grade. 
Source: New York City Board of Education, N.Y. 
Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 455 p.; For a Spanish language version, see UD 
028 493. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This manual for first grade teachers 
provides suggestions and teaching materials that reflect the 
multicultural composition of New York City's (New York) 
public schools. An introduction describes the philosophy 
that supports a high-quality, devclopmentaliy appropriate 
program through a multicultural perspective. The manual 
is organized into the following eight sections: (1) "Planning 
for the First Grade," which provides strategies to assist 
teachers in beginning the school year successfully; (2) "The 
Multicultural Learning Environment," which offers 
guidance in organizing and implementing a variety of 
instructional approaches; (3) "Instructional Approaches and 
Strategies," which suggests approaches for implementing 
multicultural education as well as basic skills; (4) 
"Developing Themes of Study," which illustrates the 
thematic approach through five themes appropriate for first 
grade; (5) "Working Together," which describes shared 
responsibilities and activities for parents, teachers, and 
administrators; (6) "Societal Concerns-Children With 
Special Needs," which discusses current societal pressures 
and concerns affecting young children; (7) "Assessment," 
which outlines the procedures and strategies used to assess 
a child's progress; and (8) "Current Research," which 
contains information on contemporary research to support 
developmentally appropriate practices. Two bibliographies 
arc appended. The first, containing over 600 citations, is 
divided into various categories, e.g., "Native Americans," 
"Asian Americans," "African Americans," and others. The 
second bibliography contains about 150 titles and is 
presented in matrix form, with checkmarks for salient 
characteristics (such as faily, gender, people of color, 
work, prejudice) opposite each item. (JB) 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



37 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools pa£c35 



ED340815 

Title; Children of the Rainbow: Implementing A 
Multicultural Kindergarten Curriculum. 
Source: New York City Board of Education, N. Y. 
Publication Year: 1990 

Note: 366 p.; For related guides, see UD 028 492-494. 
EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This document is a comprehensive guide to 
planning and implementing a multicultural kindergarten 
curriculum in New York City's (New York) public schools 
via planned, dcvciopmcntally appropriate learning 
experience*. The guide contains the following 15 sections: 
(1) "Introduction," which outlines the program and its 
philosophy; (2) "First Days," which offers strategics for a 
smooth start to the school year; (3) "Parent Involvement," 
which discusses the vital home/school partnership and 
specific recommendations ; (4) " Bilingual Education /English 
as a Second Language," which offers data on the limited 
English child and strategies for teaching English as a 
Second Language; (5) "Creating a Learning Environment," 
which offers guidance in organizing the learning center 
approach; (6) "Enriching the Curriculum," which describes 
the whole language methodology, trip experiences, and 
effective use of computers in the classroom; (7) "A 
Multicultural Sampler," which offers culturally and 
linguistically diverse musical and literary materials; (8) 
"The Interactive Teacher," which explores the teacher's 
role; (9) "The Thematic Approach," which provides 
guidelines and a comprehensive flow chart; (10) "Partners 
in Learning," which provides appropriate shared 
responsibilities and an administrator guide; (11) "Looking 
at Today's Children," which describes current societal 
pressures and problems and suggests appropriate action; 
(12) "Assessment," which outlines informal and formal 
assessment procedures and includes sample checklists; (13) 
"Current Issues," which considers contemporary 
educational thinking; (14) "Developmental Skills in the 
Curriculum Areas," which outlines expected skills and 
understandings appropriate to curriculum content on the 
kindergarten level; and (15) "Bibliography/Teacher 
Reources," which offers a 466-item bibliography. (JB) 



ED340695 

Author: Overby r Lynette-Young, Ed.; And-Others 
Title: Early Childhood Creative Arts. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Early Childhood Creative 
Arts (Los Angeles, California, December 6-9, 1990). 
Source: American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, 
Recreation and Dance, Reston, VA. National Dance 



Association. 

Publication Year: 1991 
Notes: 281 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This conference focused on the central role 
of play and arts throughout the early childhood years, the 
unique learning styles of young children (ages 3-8), and 
children's developmental needs. Special emphasis was 
placed on curriculum, assessment, the essential role of the 
arts in learning, multicultural awareness, needs of special 
populations, and the interreiatedness of the arts in the 
learning process. The participants were early childhood and 
arts educators who have responsibility for designing and 
implementing quality educational experiences for young 
children. The book is organized into four major sections. 
Section 1, "General Sessions," provides theoretical material 
in the areas of curriculum development, arts assessment, 
and child development. The second section, "Specific Arts 
Instruction," contains many practical activities as well as 
theoretical discourses in music, art, dance, and drama. 
Section 3, "Model Programs," describes three 
well-developed arts programs. The final section, 
"Multicultural/International Programs," includes 
information about creative arts programs of various 
countries and a multicultural perspective for program 
development. (LL) 



ED340686 

Author: Bartz r David-E.; Miller, -Laura-K. 

Title: 12 Teaching Methods To Enhance Student 

Learning. What Research Says to the Teacher. 

Source: National Education Association, Washington , D. C. 

Committee on Civil and Human Rights of Educators. 

Publication Year. 1991 

Notes: 33 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: Thi'j monograph discusses 12 teaching 
methods that have a sound theoretical basis, have 
demonstrated a positive impact on student learning, and 
have a substantial research base. In many situations, the 
methods can be combined in such a way that the potential 
for student learning is greater than if used independently. 
Since no method will work in every situation for every 
student, teachers must use professional judgment in 
matching methods with other variables including students' 
previous skills and socio-psychological make-up, as well as 
available resources. In addition to an introduction, a note 
on multicultural educational suggests that all teaching 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ER1C 



o 38 



ERJC 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 36 



methods should be implemented in order to complement 
and support a culturally diverse society. The publication 
describes the following methods: (1) whole-group 
instruction; (2) teaching by objectives; (3) adaptive or 
individualized instruction; (4) mastery learning; (5) 
cooperative learning; (6) learning styles; (7) direct 
instruction; (8) discovery method; (9) integrated thematic 
instruction; (10) peer tutoring; (11) learning by doing; and 
(12) computer-assisted instruction. (LL) 



ED340661 
Author: Nimer,-Katnal 

Title: Cultural Diversity and lis Effect on Education. 
Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 33 p.; Paper presented at the Commission on Adult 
Basic Education Conference (Buffalo, NY, 1990). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Though the existence of a culturally 
pluralistic society has long been recognized in the United 
States, demographic trends will force new attitudes toward 
coping with a larger minority school population. Unless 
U.S. educators prepare to understand culturally pluralistic 
student bodies, the result will be an economy dependent on 
an under-educated or mis educated work force. The United 
States has a unique opportunity to capitalize on its 
diversity, but its educators must first view this diversity as 
an asset. Through training, educators can restructure their 
attitudes and methodologies to better interact with and 
motivate both minority and non-minority students. A 
21 -item bibliography is included. (Author/DB) 



ED340638 

Author: Lockledge ,~Ann 

Title: The Geography of Caribbean Holidays. 

Publication Year; 1991 

Notes: 13 p.; Paper presented at the International Social 
Studies Conference on the Caribbean (Miami, FL, June 22, 
1991). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper describes Caribbean street 
festivals as celebrations that reflect the historic, climate, 
and movement patterns of the region. Celebrations such as 
Carnival, Hosay, and Jonkonnu are discussed, and it is 
proposed that study of these and other festivals can be 
linked to the five thematic generalizations often utilized by 
geographers. These themes are location, place, 
relationships, movement, and region. It is concluded that 
placing holiday celebrations into the framework of the 
themes of geographic education will lead children to look 



beyond the celebration to the culture and the environment 
that created it. A perspective arc suggested, as are a 
number of learning activities. An 11-item list of references 
also is included. (DB) 



ED340548 

Title: An Early Childhood Education Bibliography for 
Parents, Preschoolers, and Professionals. 
Source: National Preschool Coordination Project, San 
Diego, CA. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 35 p.; Paper presented at the National Conference 
on Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers (Buffalo, NY, April 
29-May 2, 1991). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This bibliography was compiled for 
educators and parents involved in early childhood migrant 
education. It contains more than 200 entries of 
publications, publishers, and book dealers, to help parents 
and teachers encourage children to learn and read. The 
entries are arranged into three sections: (1) resources for 
staff; (2) resources for parents; and (3) bilingual and 
multicultural books. In the first section, curriculum 
resources, works on early childhood education theory, and 
a list of periodicals arc included. The second section, 
resources for parents, includes a list of child development 
books available in Spanish, informational pamphlets 
available in Spanish and English, and periodicals. The third 
section, bilingual and multilingual books, includes books in 
Spanish, a list of multicultural books, periodicals geared 
towards use with preschoolers and a listing of book dealers 
of international books and bilingual books. Each entry 
includes title, author, publication date, and publisher. The 
document also contains a 1989 Beginner's Bibliography 
compiled by the National Association for the Education of 
Young Children. Sources for locating additional 
bibliographies arc listed. (LP) 

ED339789 

Title: A View from the Inside: Multicultural Education. 
Report of the Select Seminar on Excellence in Education. 
Source: Capital Area School Development Association, 
Albany, NY. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 29 p.; Photographs will not copy well 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The Select Seminar on Excellence in 
Education met for 5 days between December 1990 and 
March 1991 to discuss multicultural education in schools. 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERIC 



39 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 37 



Participants were 27 master teachers, administrators, 
university professors, and community leaders. This 
monograph summarizes discussions at these meetings, 
emphasizing the kinds of attitudes, content, instructional 
resources, and strategics that arc necessary for the effective 
development and delivery of a multicultural curriculum. 
Such a curriculum is one in which specific attention is 
given tc knowledge and perspective drawn from the major 
cultural groups in our scciety. It implies an educational 
experience that prepares students to live in a global society. 
Attention is given to insuring that the knowledge and voices 
of many ethnic groups are included in the regular school 
experiences of all students. Suggestions are made as to 
types of classrooms that promote multicultural education, 
and how teachers, administrators, board of education 
members, parents, support staff, and community members 
can help promote multicultural education. Open letters to 
teachers and parents remind them of the parts they can play 
in multicultural education. In the final analysis, 
multicultural education is simply good education. (SLD) 



ED339698 

Author: Villegas r Ana-Maria 

Title: Culturally Responsive Pedagogy for the 1990s and 

Beyond. Trends and Issues Paper No. 6. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Teacher Education, 

Washington, D.C. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 50 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The purpose of this trends and issues paper 
is to advance the search for creative solutions to the 
difficulties experienced by minority students and to draw 
attention to what teachers need to know and do in order to 
work effectively with a culturally heterogeneous 
population. Attention is given to the schooling of minority 
students in general, with an emphasis on the experiences of 
African Americans, Hispanics, and American Indians. The 
paper is divided into three major sections: (1) a review of 
themes that emerged from the literature (explanations for 
the differential achievement of minority students and 
culturally responsive pedagogy); (2) implications from the 
research for the assessment of beginning teachers; and (3) 
concluding remarks. The empirical and theoretical literature 
examined is highly critical of the educational system with 
regard to the teaching of minority children. This element 
is balanced by an equally strong commitment to 
instructional practices that will afford these children a fair 
chance to prove their talent. The literature also confirms 
that teachers can have a positive impact on the academic 
growth of minority students if they are sensitive to the 



cultural characteristics of the learners, and have the skills 
needed to accommodate these characteristics in the 
classroom. A bibliography of approximately 160 titles 
concludes the volume. (LL) 



ED339631 

Author: GortrDeboralx, Ed. 

Title: Iowa's Ethnic Roots. 

Source: Iowa State Historical Society, Iowa CUy. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 33 p.; For related documents, see ED 328 475, ED 
319 641, ED 314 356, and ED 314 306. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The ethnic heritage of the state of Iowa is 
explored in this theme issue of Iowa's children's history 
magazine, "The Goldfinch." Through the numerous 
activities, photographs, games, and articles, answers to 
such questions as: Why did people from different ethnic 
groups come to Iowa? and What challenges have ethnic 
groups faced? begin to emerge. It is emphasized that an 
examination of children's ethnic roots helps them to 
understand who they arc. (DB) 

ED339629 

Author: Lynn,-Karen 

Title: The Africa Collection: Aft Annotated Historical 
Resource Bibliography for the Studeni of Africa. 
Publication Year/ 1991 
Notes: 149 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This annotated bibliographic collection of 
resources on Africa including non-fiction, fiction, texts, 
poetry, draft papers, addresses, periodicals, film, records, 
and travel agencies is designed to aid cccondary students 
and their teachers interested in research on Africa. An 
instructional approach is taken, drawing upon examples to 
demonstrate the wide range o f sources from which one may 
select topics. The included resources are compiled in a 
listing of 128 topics. Page numbers of chapters, indexes, 
subjects, addresses, and telephone numbers, if available, 
arc included. The main body of this bibliography lists a 
geographical area or general subject, identified by a 
number. Dates of publication, authors, titles of work, 
places of publication, periodical titles, volumes, numbers, 
annotations, and quotations complete the entries. Titles 
have been written in sentence format for clear 
interpretation of work. Quotations have been included for 
illustration of style. Page numbers have been included for 
ready referencing. (DB) 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



40 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 38 



ED339585 

Author: Luellen r Janice-E. 

Title: An Abstract of "A Study of the Native American 
Early Childhood Education Curriculum 'The Circle Never 
Ends.' H 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 12 p.; Abstract of a Ph.D. Dissertation, University 
of Denver. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This paper summarizes an ethnographic 
study conducted in 1989-1990 assessing the effectiveness of 
the Denver Indian Center's preschool program in preparing 
Native American children for the transition to public 
school. The Center, a fully licensed child care facility, 
serves an intertribal community of approximately 18,200 
Native Americans. The development of literacy, prc-math 
and other cognitive skills, fine and gross motor skills, 
social emotional growth, and knowledge of Native 
American culture is stressed through the curriculum. The 
researcher, as a nonparticipant observer for the school 
ycar t recorded teacher's and children's activities and 
teacher child interactions. The public school teachers were 
interviewed to assess their evaluation of the Native 
American students* achievement. The Iowa Test of Basic 
Skills, administered by the classroom teachers, provided 
information about Native American students' achievmcntin 
kindergarten, first, and second grade. Results of the study 
indicate that in kindergarten these Native American 
students were socially withdrawn and struggling 
academically. By first and second grade the students 
became more verbal and some chose to share their cultural 
heritage with others. Results of a questionnaire revealed 
that parents were supportive of the preschool curriculum. 
The study implies the need for the involvement of Native 
Americans in their children's education in order to foster 
a cultural identity and to promote awareness of the 
developmental needs of young children. (LP) 



ED339548 

Author: Gomez t -Rey-A. 

Title: Teaching with a Mult cultural Perspective. ERIC 
Digest. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early 
Childhood Education, Urbana, III. 
Publication Year; 1991 
Notes: 3 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 
ABSTRACT: This paper discusses teaching with a 



multicultural perspective in early childhood education. It is 
emphasized that a major goal of multicultural education is 
to help children become accustomed to the idea that there 
are many lifestyles, languages, cultures, and points of 
view. Other topics include negative stereotypes and the 
influence that early childhood educators can have on 
children's positive attitudes. Five myths associated with 
multicultural education arc presented and dispelled. These 
arc: (1) Other cultures should be presented as distinct ways 
of living that reflect differences from the dominant culture; 
(2) Bilingualism is a liability rather that an asset; (3) 
Multicultural education is only relevant in classes with 
students who are members of the groups to be studied; (4) 
There should be a separate, unified set of goals and 
curriculum for multicultural education; and (5) Merc 
activities, which are not placed in an explicit cultural 
context, constitute viable multicultural education 
curriculum. It is emphasized that the promotion of positive 
self-concepts for children is essential, as is a focus on 
activities that highlight the similarities and differences of all 
children's lives. The challenge for educators is to present 
an effective multicultural education foundation by means of 
which all children can learn to accept others. Sue references 
are appended. (GLR) 

ED339477 

Author: Nurkse, -Dennis; Castelle ,-Kay 

Title: In the Spirit of Peace: A Global Introduction to 

Children's Rights. 

Source: Defense for Children International-USA, New 
York, NY. 

Publication Year.- 1990 
Notes: 92 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This curriculum guide is a companion 
volume to a textbook created by Defense for Children 
International-USA to meet demands for a course on 
children's rights and Uie United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of the Child. This guide addresses 23 key children's 
issues from the perspective of the experiences of children 
of diverse cultures. The issues include the definition of a 
child ; children ' s best interests ; freedom from 
discrimination; survival and development; nationality; 
health; parental care; children without families; family 
reunification; education; armed conflicts; refugees; 
disabilities; abuse and exploitation; child labor; juvenile 
justice; narcotics; rehabilitative care; freedom of thought; 
freedom of expression; protection of privacy; and leisure. 
Readings for each of these issues portray children in 
real-life situations. Each lesson includes background 



ERLC 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 
41 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 39 



information, discussion questions, and suggested activities. 
The text is illustrated Mth maps, cartoons, and resource 
material from diverse cultures. The book is designed for 
junior high and high school students. Appendixes include 
the full text of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 
and a summary of the articles of the convention. (BC) 

ED339066 

Author: Ballan r Francine; And-Olhcrs 

Title: Multicultural Communication Arts, Grades 7 & 8. 

Source: New York City Board of Education, Brooklyn, N. Y. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 185 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: Designed to challenge students to think 
critically and to motivate them to relate their own personal 
experiences to a broader panorama of society, this 
curriculum guide presents a seventh-grade unit on "The 
Struggle for Equality" and an eighth-grade unit on "The 
Movements of People." The three related goals of the 
curriculum guide are: (1) to introduce students to a 
cross-section of literature representing a diversity of 
literary genres and cultural perspectives; (2) to develop in 
students an understanding of the ways in which literature 
reflects the customs, beliefs, and traditions of the many 
ethnic, cultural, and linguistic groups that make up our 
society; and (3) to correlate thematically learnings from 
communication arts with those of the multicultural social 
studies curriculum. The 19 activities for grade 7 and the 20 
activities for grade 8 presented in the guide are each based 
on a reading, and support cooperative learning and 
small-group work in order to promote intellectual 
accomplishments along with the practice of social skills, 
interpersonal understanding, and a sense of individual 
responsibility to the group and the class. The curriculum 
guide includes the student readings for most of the 
activities. (RS) 



ED338783 

Author: Lawson r Stanley-G. 

Title: Multi-Cultural Awareness Project, the Organization 
and Implementation of a "World Steel Drum Ensemble 
Publication Year; 1991 
Notes: S3 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This proposal describes the organization 
and implementation of a "World Steel Drum Ensemble" as 
a strategy to solve the problems of low minority academic 



achievement, high minority discipline incidents, and 
minority isolationism. The drum ensemble studied and 
performed music from Caribbean, Hispanic, and African 
heritages in a middle school setting in a Florida urban 
school district where about DO percent of students were 
eligible for free lunch. Program implementation involved 
at-risk students who were joined with average and 
above-average students in the ensemble to perform music 
complimentary to cultures of at-risk students, promoting an 
appreciation of the minority cultures. The target population 
was the 20 students from various ethnic backgrounds who 
made up the ensemble. Knowledge of cultures other than 
their own improved for all target students from a previous 
20 percent to 80 percent, as measured by a pretest and 
posttest. Ninety percent of target students were 
academically successful in all subjects, when success was 
defined as a "C" or higher. A similar 90 percent did not 
receive any discipline infraction reports during the 
practicum. The benefits of this multicultural music 
education were shared through videotapes and 
performances. Five appendices contain questionnaires used 
to determine student and educator reactions to the program. 
There are 13 references. (SLD) 



ED338778 

Author: Swanson,-Judy 

Title: Preliminary Evaluation of Office of Academic 
Achievement's Programs 1990-1991. Report No. 91-4. 
Source: Seattle Public Schools, Wash, 
Publication Year: 1991 
Notes: 24 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Three programs sponsored by the Seattle 
(Washingto n) public schools ' O ffice of Academic 
Achievement were evaluated: the Academic Achievement 
Project, Early Childhood Model (ECM) Schools, and Pilot 
Projects. Academic Achievement projects were designed to 
increase the academic achievement of at-risk learners and 
to decrease disproportionality. The ECM is a philosophy of 
early childhood education organized around a set of core 
characteristics. There were five pilot projects: two were 
building-based methods for restructuring schools; one 
focused on oral language and multicultural history; one was 
a computer-aided instruction system; and another was 
library based and encouraged parents reading with their 
children. Data were collected through interviews, 
observations, teacher questionnaires, and score analysis. 
The following were the major findings: (1) change was 
slow and gradual; (2) case of implementation of the pilot 
projects was varied; (3) some classroom attitudes began to 
change; (4) there were no measurable effects on 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



42 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 40 



achievement gains or any reduction in disproportionality; 
and (5) there were substantial correlations between the level 
of implementation and achievement gains: as the level of 
implementation increased, achievement gains increased. 
The report includes four references and a table 
summarizing the data. (JB) 



ED338769 

Title: InUrcuUural Programs: Program Evaluation 
Report, July 1991. 

Source: Des Moines Public Schools, Li. Office of 
lntercultural Programs. 
Publication Year. 1991 
Notes: 57 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This report evaluates the Des Moines 
(Iowa) Independent Community School District (DMICSD) 
lntercultural programs. The following types of programs 
arc in place: (1) a Voluntary Transfer Program; (2) paired 
schools; (3) magnet schools; (4) Extended Day 
Kindergarten; (5) English as a Second Language 
(ESL)/Bilingual Education; (6) a Bilingual Community 
Liaison/Advisor Programs; (7) multicultural, non-sexist 
education; (8) Minority Achievement Program; (9) 
affirmative action; (10) minority community liaison; and 
(11) discrimination compliance. In 1990-91 3,575 students 
were involved in the desegregation plan and the 
SSL/Bilingual programs. Budget expenses for salaries, 
benefits, materials, supplies, travel, and staff development 
we^e $1,307,455, with sources for funding including 
Federal Chapter II, state Title VII, state weighted formula 
for non-English speakers, and a general fund. DMICSD's 
The Office of lntercultural Programs staff provided 
leadership, guidance, and support to staff, students, and 
parents through inscrvicc programs, staff development, and 
professional meeting opportunities. A survey of staff, 
students, and parents of ESL student indicated the need for 
a night high school for at-risk students and parents of ESL 
students. Internal and external audits were also conducted. 
Included are five tables. Three appendices present one 
table, a study survey, and a form for filing a complaint of 
discrimination. (JB) 



ED3387S2 

Author: Caliguri,-Joseph-P.; Krueger r Jack-P. 

Title: A Selective Bibliography Update on Multicultural 

Education. 

Publication Year. 1990 
Notes: 52 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 



ABSTRACT: This selective annotated bibliography 
reflects a rich history of cultural, racial, and ethnic 
diversity that should be expressed through multicultural 
education in U.S. schools. It describes 115 books, journal 
articles, and reports concerned with issues related to 
multiculturalism and g'obal studies at all educational levels. 
Entries, published from 1977 through 1988, arc grouped 
according to the following headings: (1) cultural pluralism; 
(2) multicultural and ethnic studies for Hispanic American, 
African American, Asian American, and Native American 
groups; (3) multicultural education; (4) international 
studies; and (5) miscellaneous. For each citation, the 
authors, publication date, title, publication source, and a 
descriptive abstract are provided. Document numbers from 
the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) arc 
given when available. (SLD) 



ED338536 

Title: One Nation, Many Peoples: A Declaration of 
Cultural Independence. The Report of the New York State 
Social Studies Review and Development Committee. 
Source: New York State Education Dept., Albany. 
Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 94 p.; For a related document, see SO 021 665. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The committee that produced this report 
was asked to review existing New York State social studies 
syllabi and to make recommendations to the Commissioner 
of Education designed to increase students' understanding 
of U.S. culture and its history; the cultures, identities, and 
histories of the diverse groups that comprise U.S. society 
today; and the cultures, identities, and histories of other 
people throughout the world. A review of the existing 
syllabi respecting these concerns found them to be 
inadequate. The syllabi were found to contain insensitive 
language, to draw upon too narrow a range of culturally 
diverse contexts, and to omit content, felt to be essential, 
specific to some groups and aieas of the world. Among the 
committee's overall recommendations were that the present 
New York State social studies syllabi be subjected to 
detailed analysis and revision to provide more opportunities 
for students to leam from multiple perspectives and to 
remove language that is insensitive or that may be 
interpreted as racist or sexist. The committee also made 
recommendations concerning the specific areas of teaching 
and learning, the State Syllabi, and guidelines for 
implementation. The report concludes with reflective 
commentaries by several members of the committee in 
which some dissents arc registered and in which ethers 
expand upon positions that arc held by specific committee 
members. (Author/DB) 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



43 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 41 



ED338472 

Author: Bina,-Clarence-A. 

Title: The Bonfire of the Buffalo Commons: A 
Multicultural View from the Mid-Continent. 
Publication Year. 1991 

Notes: 42 p.; Paper presented at the Regional Equity 
Consultation Meeting of the Midcontinental Regional 
Educational Laboratory (Aurora, CO, October 5-7, 1991). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Much of today's multicultural education is 
ethnocentric and has little apparent concern for 
cross-cultural contacts, our best hope in ameliorating 
racism. Increasingly, multiculturalism exalts particular 
racial and ethnic pride at the expense of social cohesion of 
ihe American society as a whole. However, the notion of 
a "common American culture" has become suspect because 
it is seen as white, Eurocentric, and elitist. Since most 
people agree that no one can learn much without content, 
the question becomes, Whose history is taught? In 
reviewing debates on multicultural education, the fact that 
the United States social and economic system is based on 
the western tradition is emphasized. Another issue in 
multicultural education is that educators are generally not 
comfortable with teaching about alternate cosmologies or 
religions, but these are essential elements for understanding 
other cultures. Management education in both business and 
public administration has generally ignored multicultural 
issues. The ways in which the North Dakota state 
department of education is "managing" multiculturalism are 
discussed, including policies, staff development and 
training, personnel practices, research, and advocacy. 
Appendices contain a list of 8 findings on 420 teacher 
iraining institutions relative to multicultural education, and 
a chart showing numbers of persons in administrative 
positions by gender and race in the university systems of 
North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, and Wyoming. 



ED338436 

Author: Spodek, -Bernard, Ed. 

Title: Educationally Appropriate Kindergarten Practices. 

NEA Early Childhood Education Series. 

Sou rce: National Education Association , Washington , D. C. 

Publication Year. 1991 

Notes: 113 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: The basis for educationally worthwhile 
activities in kindergarten is examined in a series of papers 



that also provide examples of how kindergarten programs 
can be organized and worthwhile learning presented to 
children. Long-term projects or units arc seen as useful 
vehicles of instruction, and organizing teaching around 
topics or themes is shown to help teachers present complex 
ideas. Theoretical discussions are combined with examples 
of practical application. The papers and authors arc: "What 
Should We Teach Kindergarten Children?" (Bernard 
Spodek); "Developing an Integrated Unit for Kindergarten" 
(Patricia Clark Brown); "Long-Term Projects" (Mclanic 
Turnipsced Kcnney); "Fostering Emergent Literacy in a 
Publishing Center" (Jeanctte Allison Hartman); "Integrating 
Multicultural Perspectives into E\riy Childhood Education" 
(Min-Ling Tsai); and "Creating Meaningful Kindergarten 
Programs" (Mary Gatzke). Contains 82 references. (LB) 



ED338382 

Author: Skclton r Sarah-C. 

Tide: Our Shrinking World: The Need for Cultural 
Awareness. 

Publication Year. 1991 

Notes: 11 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Conference of 
the Associationfor Childhood Education International (San 
Diego, CA, April 2C, 1991). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper discusses the characteristics of 
middle school students and teachers, and provides 
suggestions for the development of cultural awareness at 
the middle school level. Between the ages of 10 and 14 
years, adolescents experience rapid physical growth, 
changes in social relationships and in emotions, and 
changes in intellectual development from concrete to 
abstract operations- Middle school educators must keep 
these changes in mind if they are to provide a high quality 
educational environment. Cultural awareness education 
programs should increase students* knowledge of cultures 
and minority groups, and minimize students' prejudice 
toward others who arc different. A cultural awareness 
program should include: (1) an interdisciplinary approach; 
(2) interesting curricular materials; (3) development of 
skills in analysis and critical thinking; and (4) materials and 
activities which are authentic and multidimensional, and 
involve cognitive and affective skills. A reference list of 22 
items is provided. (BC) 



ED337805 

Title: Literature. Special Collection Number 8. 
Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Reading 
Communication 3kiils, Bloomington, IN. 



and 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERIC 



44 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 42 



Publication Year. 1991 
Notes: 85 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This ERIC/RCS Special Collection contains 
10 or more Digests (brief syntheses of the research on a 
specific topic in contemporary education) and FAST Bibs 
(Focused Access to Selected Topics-annotated 
bibliographies with selected entries from the ERIC 
database), providing up-to-date information in an accessible 
format. The collection focuses on literature-helping 
students to understand and appreciate it, and using 
literature to improve reading and writing skills. The 
material in the special collection is designed for use by 
teachers, students, administrators, researchers, policy 
makers, and parents. A profile of the ERIC Clearinghouse 
on Reading and Communication Skills (ERIC/RCS), an 
order form, and information on a computerized search 
service, on searching ERIC in print, on submitting material 
to ERIC/RCS, and on books available from ERIC/RCS are 
attached. (RS) 



ED337766 

Title: McRAT Report-Multicultural Reading and 
Thinking. 

Source: Arkansas State Dept. of Education, Little Rock. 
Publication Year: 1991 
Notes: 18 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This report describes the instruction, 
assessment, and staff development of the Multicultural 
Reading and Thinking (McRAT) program and summarizes 
the results of a one-year study conducted in 1989-90. 
(McRAT is a nationally recognized staff development 
program designed to help teachers infuse higher order 
thinking skills and multicultural concepts into the existing 
curriculum.) The report (1) outlines the 4 kinds of 
reasoning— analysis, comparison, inference/interpretation, 
and evaluation-that students can use in academic subjects; 

(2) discusses various types of writing assessment; 

(3) describes the staff development program offered by 
McRAT; and (4) offers the (positive) results of a study 
designed to gain information on the effectiveness of the 
McRat instructional approach. Ten figures and three tables 
of data are included. (PRA) 



ED337540 

Author: Parrenas r Florante-Y.; Parrenas r Cecilia-Salazar 
Title: Cooperative Learning, Multicultural Functioning 



and Student Achievement. 

Publication Year: [1990] 

Notes: 20 p.; Document contains light print. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 

EDRS, 

ABSTRACT: Cooperative learning (CL) is reviewed as 
a tool for helping educationally disadvantaged or 
limited-English-speaking students. A review of meta 
analyses and literature on CL indicates its effectiveness 
when both group goals and individual accountability are 
incorporated into learning methods. The achievement gap 
between traditional majority students and the "new 
majority" (minority group students whose numbers equal or 
exceed the old majority) is widening, and the schools have 
not adopted effective practices to create positive ethnic and 
race relations. Basic elements of CL are positive 
interdependence, individual accountability, group 
processing, interpersonal and small group skills, and 
face-to-face promotive interaction. CL can help eliminate 
ethnocentrism and racism; and it is also valuable in 
socializing students, many of whom lack the social skills 
needed for school or work. The changing nature of society 
requires a shift in teaching approaches, with the emphasis 
on content balanced with an emphasis on process. CL will 
facilitate this shift even as it enhances achievement gains. 
Teachers will also benefit from implementation of CL 
approaches to interaction. A nine item list of references is 
included. (SLD) 



ED336814 

Author: Brown,-Brenda-B. 

Title: Supporting Teachers in a Multicultural School 
Environment: An Analysis of the Role of a Staff 
Developer. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 41 p. ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (Chicago, 1L, 
April 3-7, 1991). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Empirical data on the explicit and implicit 
roles played by staff developers in structuring a 
multicultural staff development program for teachers are 
presented in this paper. Methodology involved participant 
observation; document and content analyses; a teacher 
survey; and seven interviews with school district 
administrators, principals, subject area coordinators, staff 
developers , and teachers in an urban school system 
implementing a multicultural curriculum program in grades 
4-8. Findings indicate that despite institutional and personal 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



Infusing Multicultural Education inio Today's Schools page 43 



barriers, staff developers played significant roles in 
conducting demonstration. lessons, linking curriculum and 
staff development, and maintaining teacher interest. A 
paradigm for integrating staff and curriculum development 
is developed, based on the following recommendations: 
clearly defined expectations; requirements for multicultural 
teaching in teacher evaluation; coordination at the state, 
district, and school levels; provision of long-term fiscal 
support; and periodic evaluation. One figure illustrating the 
paradigm is included. Appendices outline the philosophy 
and goals of multicultural education. (59 references) (LMI) 



ED336439 

Author: Benard, -Bonnie 

Title: Moving toward a "Just and Vital Culture": 

Multiculturalism in Our Schools. 

Source: Northwest Regional Educational Lab. , Portland, 

Or eg.; Western Center for Drug-Free Schools and 

Communities. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 32 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper addresses the key findings of a 
previous study exploring the relationship between ethnicity 
and substance abuse and discusses them in relation to the 
school's role in prevention. Substance abuse cannot be 
addressed in ethnic communities without also addressing 
poverty, lack of adequate housing, health and child care, 
education, employment, and the underlying Ethnic Groups; 
♦Ethnicity; of racism. Since educational institutions have 
traditionally been a stepping stone for underprivileged 
minority groups, schools have a role to play in adopting 
policies and programs demonstrating an appreciation for 
our rich cultural heritage. Components for creating a 
multicultural school environment are as follows: (1) active 
involvement of the school community, including 
representatives from the ethnic groups in the school; (2) a 
school policy committed to all students successfully 
receiving an education affirming human diversity; (3) 
redistribution of power within the school and classrooms to 
include cooperative learning, peer resource programs, 
cultural sensitivity training, and instruction in the rules of 
the culture of power; (4) high expectations by teachers for 
ethnic minority and youth; and (5) infusing curricula with 
multicultural content, valuing primary languages, avoiding 
the labels of ethnic-specific learning styles, and hiring 
ethnic minority teachers when possible. Key findings from 
"Prevention Research Update Number Two" for Asian 
American, Black, Hispanic, and Native American youth are 
summarized in four lists. A list of 80 references is 



included. (CJS) 



ED336402 

Title: Multicultural Reading and Thinking. Executive 
Summary and McRAT Report. 

Source: Arkansas State Dept. of Education, Little Rock. 
Publication Year: 1991 
Notes: 19 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The Multicultural Reading and Thinking 
(McRAT) Program of the Arkansas public schools is 
described, and results of a study of its effectiveness are 
reported. The McRAT Program is a process that empowers 
teachers to refocus instruction and restructure standard 
curricula for higher order thinking. The multicultural 
emphasis provides a meaningful context for thinking 
activities and encourages parent and community 
involvement. Instruction focuses on: (1) analysis; (2) 
comparison; (3) inference and interpretation; and (4) 
evaluation. Assessment of student progress and 
achievement involves several performance-based measures, 
including portfolios, with emphasis on student writing. In 
1989-90, a study was conducted involving 340 
randomly-selected students in the McRAT Program in 
grades 4, 5, and 6 in six schools. Achievement of these 
students was compared with that of students receiving 
typical instruction. McRAT Program students made 
significant progress in their abilities to reason and to 
communicate in writing, and their achievement gains were 
significantly higher regardless of socioeconomic factors. 
Implications for compensatory education, teacher training, 
and educational reform are discussed in the context of the 
National Education Goals for the Year 2000. Ten figures 
and three tables arc incl'-.ded. (SLD) 



ED3363I1 

Author: Donley, -Susan-K.; And-Others 

Title: A Sampler of Ethnic Crafts. 

Source: Pittsburgh Univ., PA. Pennsylvania Ethnic 

Heritage Studies Center. 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 75 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This curriculum guide provides a sampler 
of the wide variety of expression practiced by cultural 
groups all over the world. The guide v/as developed to help 
fill the need for multicultural art resources that are 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



46 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools oaec 44 



respectful of both modem art education philosophy and of 
authentic, sensitive representation of other cultures. The 
types of materials represented in the guide include, fiber 
and fabric, paper and leather, wood, ceramic, metal, and 
other materials. Some of the ethnic groups represented 
include peoples from Ghana, Laos, Russia, and Peru, as 
well as Native Americans and German immigrants to 
Pennsylvania. To help teachers introduce each of the crafts 
within a cultural context, an illustration and short 
description of each craft tradition is provided, as well as 
directions on how to create the craft work in the classroom, 
motivation suggestions, background information, and a map 
for each of the ethnic groups represented. A 22-itcm 
bibliography appears at the end of the book for teachers 
who wish to explore further. (DB) 



ED336251 

Author: LaCounte,- Deborah; And-Others 

Title: A Plan for American Indian Education in Montana* 

Recommended Goals* 

Source: Montana State Office of the Commissioner of 
Higher Education, Helena. 
Publication Year: 1991 
Notes: 67 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This report lists recommendations made to 
the state administration, legislature, and various education 
administrative bodies, addressing the education of Indian 
people in Montana. The State of Montana and its education 
entities are asked to establish specific objectives, action 
plans, and evaluation strategies to complete the validation 
process of an educational sequence for American Indians in 
Montana. Problems include low educational attainment, 
high drop-out rates, high poverty rates, and high 
unemployment rates. Separate goals and suggested actions 
are recommended to the governor, the legislature, the 
Board of Regents, the Board of Public Education, the 
Office of Public Instruction, and the Local Boards of 
Trustees. The set of recommendations to each body 
includes statements of goals and suggested actions 
associated with each goal. The Montana Advisory Council 
for Indian Education conducted a statewide forum to gather 
information about the educational needs of Montana 
Indians. This work was followed by a retreat that 
developed strategies to address issues identified by forum 
participants. Additional input was gathered by the Montana 
Committee for American Indian Higher Education. 
Extensive appendices include a map of Montana 
reservations and tribes, p° ncies pertaining to American 
Indian Education, mission statements and philosophies of 
various tribal groups, a definition of American Indian, and 



statistical data about Indian students in Montana from the 
Office of Public Instruction, the Montana University 
System, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Lists of 
participants in the three meetings conducted to gather 
information for this report are also included. The glossary 
contains frequently used acronyms. (KS) 



ED335270 

Title: Inheriting the Theory: New Voices and Multiple 
Perspectives on DBAE. Proceedings of a Getty Center for 
Education in the Arts National Invitational Seminar 
(Austin, Texas, May 4-7, 1989). 

Source: Getty Center for Education in the Arts, Los 
Angeles, CA. 
Publication Year. 1990 
Notes: 108 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Proceedings from a seminar devoted to a 
discussion of issues related to discipline-based art education 
(DBAE), this document features three scholars addressing 
a given topic from the perspective of their particular 
discipline and experience in the field. Six topics were 
explored: (1) "New Voices on the Integration of Art 
Disciplines"; (2) "New Voices on Cognition and 
Teaching"; (3) "New Voices on Multicultural Concerns"; 
(4) "New Voices on Growing Up with Philosophy and 
Aesthetics"; (5) "New Voices on Evaluation and DBAE 
Teaching Effectiveness" ; and (6) "Familiar Voices Respond 
to the New Voices and Reflect Upon Three Generations." 
A summary of the remarks of the three scholars on each of 
the six topics is included as well as a summary of the w^ rk 
of discussion groups that were formed around each of the 
topics. (DB) 



ED334320 

Author: Young, -Russell-L. 

Title: A Paradigm for Examining Multicultural 
Education. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 23 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (Chicago, LL, 
April 1991). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Scholars and practitioners in the field of 
multicultural education need a historical perspective on the 
role of cultural pluralism throughout U.S. history. This 
paper begins by tracing the role schools have played in 
socializing people to assimilate to an Anglo-Saxon society 
and discussing the rise of the ideals of cultural pluralism in 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



47 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools pa£c45 



U.S. schools. Rising nationalism after the Revolutionary 
War and the War of 1812, combined with the growing need 
for a work force in the Industrial Revolution, spurred the 
rise of common schools in the 1800s. Large, diverse urban 
populations made educators more aware of the role of 
schools as a unifying force. As a result, all of the states 
had compulsory education laws by 1930, the core 
curriculum being strongly influenced by the Anglo-Saxon 
interpretation of Americanism. The paper describes Banks' 
model of ethnic revitalization, using it to frame an 
understanding of assimilation efforts in New York and 
Minnesota in the early 1900s, then discusses possible 
reasons why the multiethnic movement of the 1970s failed 
to replace Eurocentrism with democratic cultural pluralism. 
The following suggestions are made for those in the field 
of multicultural education: (1) provide equal access to 
benefits for all members of society, shifting from a 
win-lose to a win-win philosophy; (2) recognize the 
diversity between and within cultures and not rely on 
polarized education programs; (3) understand oneself as a 
cultural being; (4) recognize and counter deficit models of 
achievement; and (5) increase skills necessary for a 
culturally diverse society. A list of 45 references is 
appended. (CJS) 



ED334145 

Author: Reide,-Jerome-L. 

Title: Multicultural Education Resource Guide: African 
Americans, Asian Americans, Hispanic Americans, and 
Native Americans* 

Source: Michigan State Board of Education, Lansing. 
Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 164 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC07 Pius Postage. 

ABSTRACT: A resource guide is presented that is 
designed to broaden and deepen K-12 educators' 
understanding of four major racial, ethnic, and cultural 
groups. For each of the four groups, African Americans, 
Asian Americans. Hispanic Americans, and Native 
Americans, a background essay on the history of that group 
in the United Spates is included as well as an annotated 
bibliography listing suggested resources. An appendix 
contains resources recommended for planning workshops 
about each of the four groups. (DB) 

ED334124 

Author: Dufrene,- Phoebe 

Title: Exploring Native American Symbolism. 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 18 p.; Workshop presented at the Convention of the 
National Art Education Association (30th, Kansas City, 



MO, April 5-9, 1990). For related documents, see SO 021 
404-406. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper described the events and results 
of a workshop on Native American symbolism presented to 
educators and held in Kansas City, Missouri. The presenter 
maintained that some of the most crucial problems facing 
U.S. educators and students are caused by racial 
misunderstandings, and that the universality of artistic 
expression can be a vehicle for cross-cultural and 
multi-cultural dialogue. It was stressed that the exploration 
of Native- American imagery should be part of any art 
curriculum. However, it was argued, when 
Native-American art is studied, the past is usually 
emphasized. Romantic misconceptions of Indians as 
non-technical, stone-age artisans dominate the literature, 
thereby reinforcing the tendency to dismiss the evolving, 
contemporary Native-American culture. The workshop 
offered participants the opportunity to express their feelings 
via Native- American symbolism. Participants first viewed 
an intertribal powwow videotape; the powwow was 
presented as an aesthetic experience as a time for learning 
and carrying on a rich cultural heritage. The symbolic 
significance of the appearance of the participant flag 
bearers, singers, drummers, and dancers as they entered 
the powwow arena, was explained. The videotape was 
followed by a slide show that featured works emphasizing 
the present and future direction of Native-American art. 
These included Northwest Coast masks carved in the 
1980s, contemporary crafts, and paintings by Fritz 
Scholder. Participants then created their own symbolic 
images, during which time, sage, an Indian herb/incense, 
permeated the air. Some of the works created are described 
in the report. This method of introducing Native-American 
culture, it was concluded, is respectful of tradition. (KM) 



ED334038 

Author: 0'Sullivan r Rita-G.; Baber,-Ceola-R. 
Title: Evaluation of School incentive Teams and 
Multicultural Training To Increase Success for High-Risk 
Students in a Rural City School District. 
Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 22 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (Chicago, JL, 
April 3-7, 1991). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper presents the results of a study 
of a low-cost dropout prevention program in a rural, small 
city school district (approximately 3 ,500 students) that used 
school incentive teams and multicultural training to increase 



To Ot jer Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



9 

ERLC 



48 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 46 



success for students at risk of dropping out of school. 
Selected teachers in the eight schools in the district were 
organized into school incentive teams. Teams of four to six 
teachers met with university faculty to formulate dropout 
prevention action plans. The initial dropout prevention 
plans focused on making the school environment more 
inviting to students and emphasized non-academic areas in 
which the school incentive teams could create opportunities 
for positive recognition of students. Evaluation of the 
programs was based on written dropout prevention plans, 
field notes of meetings held, school observations, and 
school attendance records. Ten teachers, counselors, and 
administrators participated in multicultural training aimed 
at identifying attitudes, perceptions, knowledge, and skills 
concerning cultural diversity. The results of the program 
show it to be effective in maintaining a high level of 
teacher interest and effort in improving school success for 
at-risk students. No improvement in student attendance was 
noted. Results of the multicultural training show a positive 
impact on the attitude of school personnel toward at-risk 
students who are culturally different. This paper contains 
16 references. (KS) 



ED333732 

Author: Leach, -VaUrie 

Title: Hispanic Cultures through Literature. 

Publication Year; 1991 

Notes: 35 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
California Association for Bilingual Education (1991). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: A method for planning multicultural 
lessons for both regular and gifted and talented students, 
and sample lessons, are presented. The approach was 
developed in order to introduce Hispanic culture through 
literature in a bilingual classroom. All materials are 
constructed based on Bloom's taxonomy of educational 
objectives. The lessons were developed to show similarities 
between people and their roots, celebrate the positive 
aspects of diversity, and develop pride in heritage. The 
units are suggested for use in cooperative learning groups 
or as bases for discussion, individual work, and more 
advanced assignments for individual students. Lesson 
format includes initial input (pre-reading, reading, and 
post-reading activities), small group activities for both 
regular and gifted students, and culminating activities 
(pre-evaluation, revision, presentation of unit product, 
post-evaluation, and product display). Seven lessons, in 
both English and Spanish and including reproducible visual 
aids, have the following topics: family; favorite things; 
sweet foods; adventure; interpersonal relationships; a 
Nicaraguan legend; food and ecology; creation; and the 



meaning of legend. Suggested grade levels are indicated. 
Additional generic activities for each level of cognitive 
functioning are appended. (MSE) 



ED333620 

Author: Gollnick,-Donna-M.; Chinn,-Philip-C. 

Title: Multicultural Education for Exceptional Children. 

ERIC Digest UE49Z. 

Source: Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; 
ERIC Clearinghouse on Handicapped and Gifted Children, 
Reston, Va. 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 3 p.; Based on "Multicultural Education in a 
Pluralistic Society, " Third Edition, by Donna M. Gollnick 
and Philip C. Chinn. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This digest examines the demographic 
composition of the U.S. school-age population, and derives 
an estimate of 1.4 million children with disabilities who are 
minority group members. The digest notes the purposes of 
multicultural education for all students and stresses the 
teacher's role in recognizing forms of bias in textbooks and 
other instructional materials. Forms of bias include 
invisibility, stereotyping, selectivity and imbalance, 
unreality, fragmentation and isolation, and language usage. 
The digest also discusses the importance of making the 
curriculum multicultural, recognizing subtle and 
unintentional biases in teaching behavior, organizing 
learning environments conducive to individual students* 
cognitive styles, and creating a positive school climate. 
(Nine references) (JDD) 



ED333484 
Author: Fuchs,-Lucy 

Title: Gold from the South: Hispanic Literature. 
Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 15 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
National Council of Teachers of English (Indianapolis, IN, 
March 14-16, 1991). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: New Hispanic immigrants to the United 
States bring with them a different world view and a desire 
to succeed in a new country. They also find resistance to 
their presence, prejudice against their language, and 
ignorance of their customs on the part of many older, more 
settled Americans. In addition, children quickly leam that 
their old customs are not valued by the larger population, 
and often adopt this disdain for their family traditions. But 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



49 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 47 



these children are paying too high a price for their 
assimilation, as they ate- losing their own characteristics, 
traditions, and values. Most Americans are woefully 
ignorant of ail aspects of Latin American life. Through 
Latin American stories such as "The Legend of Food 
Mountain," "Atariba and Niguayona," "Mother Scorpion 
Country," "The Invisible Hunters," and "How We Came to 
the Fifth World" among others, Americans can learn to 
appreciate the many facets of culture that Hispanics bring 
to this country. In addition to offering these stories, 
teachers can use activities such as comparing creation 
stories, inviting immigrants, and celebrating Hispanic 
holidays to help children to understand the stories and the 
cultures of Hispanic Americans. (A list of 16 classroom 
activities is attached.) (PRA) 



ED332907 

Author: Lane r Sarah; Turkovich r Marilyn 

Title: Los Dias de Los Muertos. The Days of the Dead. 

1991 Edition. 

Source: World E e, inc., Wellesley, MA. 
Publication Ye* 1991 
Notes: 41 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: The Dias dc los Muertos is a celebration of 
Mexico that is a recognition of mortality, transience, and 
death, and a celebration of life, hope, and resurrection. 
This curriculum activity book begins with a general 
introduction to the festival followed by sections of 
explanations and activities intended to engage the learner in 
various aspects of the holiday. Each section begins with a 
brief reading that provides adequate information to 
complete the accompanying activity exercise. Most 
activities arc complete in themselves and can be presented 
singly. The material can be used equally well by students 
working individually or in a group led by the teacher. An 
annotated bibliography and a general bibliography are 
included. (DB) 



ED332799 

Author: Ball Lesley- A. 

Title: Music: An Avenue for Cultural Literacy, 

Publication Year. 1991 

Notes: 20 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Conference of 
the Southern Association on Children under Six (42nd , 
Atlanta, GA t March 15, 1991). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 



ABSTRACT: This paper discusses aspects of the role of 
music in the preschool setting. The teaching and singing of 
folk songs are an avenue through which cultural literacy 
can be explored. A sensory approach to song learning that 
includes visual, kinesthetic, and aural stimuli increases 
children's vocabulary. Some theories suggest that musical 
intelligence is only one of several forms of intelligence. 
Without active musical involvement, there is a loss of 
children's musical aptitude between ages five and six. 
Because art forms arc not isolated in the child's world, 
music can be used as a companion to other forms, such as 
dramatic play and stories. Strategies for teaching must be 
active. When such styles are used, children will be 
involved through sensory modes of learning. In conclusion, 
research shows that musical aptitude become* stabilized 
before age nine, and that more consideration must be given 
to the musical experiences of children between the ages of 
three and eight. Appendixes contain songs and examples of 
active listening teaching strategies. (BC) 

ED331943 

Author: Bar ger, -Robe rt-N. 

Title: Evaluating Multicultural Education. 

Source: Eastern Illinois Univ. , Charleston. 

Publication Year: [1991} 

Notes: 15 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This learning module comprises three 
activities that provide the opportunity to evaluate: (1) one's 
own level of cultural awareness; (2) cultural bias in 
textbooks; and (3) aspects of multiculturalism in a 
secondary school. The first activity, "Your Own Cultural 
Awareness," uses "Morgan's Central West Virginia 
Cultural Awareness Quiz" to demonstrate the experience of 
minority group students faced with tests that have been 
standardized on the white, middle-class experience and 
vocabulary. The 20-itcm multiple-choice quiz has been 
standardized on the experience of a poor, white 
Appalachian person. The second activity, "Biases in 
Textbooks," requires the evaluation of a college or 
secondary school textbook on the basis of the following 
criteria: (1) invisibility; (2) stereotyping; (3) selectivity and 
imbalance; (4) unreality; (5) fragmentation or isolation; and 
(6) language. The third activity, "Multicultural Life in 
Today's School," requires a site visit to a secondary school 
with at least a 20 percent minority group student enrollment 
and observing the following: (1) teacher expectations; (2) 
interracial and intergender interactions; (3) seating plans; 
(4) racial and gender composition of the teaching staff and 
administration; and (5) evidence of a multicultural 
curriculum. Written communication and cultural exchange 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



50 



with a secondary school student is suggested as an 
alternative activity. A three-item bibliography and the 
answers to the quiz are appended. (FMW) 



ED331641 

Author: Kagan,Sharon-L.; Garcia, -Eugene-E. 

Title: Educating Culturally and Linguistically Diverse 

Preschoolers: Moving the Agenda. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early 

Childhood Education, Vrbana, III 

Publication Year: 1991 

Notes: 38 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Despite growing interest in children's 
policy and in research regarding childhood bilingualism and 
language acquis ition, the early care and education of 
linguistically and culturally diverse preschoolers remains a 
matter of much concern. Relative inattention at the level of 
policy to the needs and interests of such children is due to 
several causes, including widely and tenaciously held 
personal beliefs, political ideologies, mispcrceptions 
regarding the lack of a demographic imperative, and 
disciplinary fragmentation among academics. Four 
fundamental isssucs muse be addressed if policy and 
practice in this domain are to improve. The issues are: (1) 
socialization, rcsocialization, and the family/child 
relationship; (2) modalities of instruction; (3) contextually 
discontinuous strategics; and (4) sub-system creation versus 
system reform. Each issue is discussed. Action principles 
and leadership strategics are presented in hopes of moving 
an action agenda to ensure that linguistically and culturally 
diverse preschoolers have access to high quality and 
developmental] y appropriate preschool experiences. 
Thirty-six references are included. (RH) 

ED330762 

Author: Theel,-Ronald-K. , Ed. 

Title: Planning for Multicultural Education at the 
Elementary and Middle School Levels. 
Source: Syracuse City School District, N. Y. 
Publication Year/ [1990] 
Notes: 14 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The Syracuse City School District 
recognizes that infusing the curriculum with multicultural 
education is essential to equal educational outcomes. The 
following recommendations for the elementary level arc 
made: (1) every curriculum area should be taught with a 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 48 

multicultural perspective; (2) field trips should be organized 
to expose students to culturally diverse experiences; (3) 
assemblies should be organized around multicultural 
themes; (4) multicultural classroom materials should be 
designed focusing on cognitive and affective domains; (5) 
cooperative learning should be used; (6) literature should 
represent multicultural perspectives and experiences; and 
(7) self-directed free play and structured games should be 
encouraged. The following recommendations for the middle 
schools are made: (1) multicultural education should be 
integrated into the total school program through an 
interdisciplinary approach; (2) curricular focuses should 
include the development of critical thinking skills; (3) 
multicultural classroom materials should be designed 
focusing on cognitive and affective domains; (4) materials, 
activities, and experiences should be varied; (5) cooperative 
learning groups and peer tutoring should be used; 
(6) a home-based guidance program should provide positive 
role models; (7) a mentor program should use community 
members with culturally diverse backgrounds; and (8) 
teaching strategies should reflect the learning styles of 
students from diverse cultures. Statistical data in four 
graphs are appended. (FMW) 

ED330219 

Title: Colorado Directory of Multilingual/ Multicultural 
Resourcesy 1991. 

Source: Colorado State Dept. of Education, Denver. Office 
of Educational Services. 
Publication Year; 1991 
Notes: 80 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01IPC04 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This directory is designed for school 
districts and others in search of quality educational services 
for limited-Engiish-proficient and language-minority 
students, especially refugees and immigrants. The directory 
lists multilingual and/or multicultural individuals and 
government, non-profit, and private organizations that will 
assist with translation, interpretation, and cross-cultural 
training. Individuals arc listed alphabetically according to 
language group (African, American Indian/Native 
American, Asian, European, Middle Eastern, 
Oceanic/South Pacific, andU.S.S.R.) and organizations are 
listed alphabetically in a separate section. An appendix lists 
the national origins of the languages spoken by students in 
Colorado's public schools. An index offers cross-reference 
to entries by language or geographic area. (MSE) 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



51 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 49 



ED329506 

Author: Ring r Diane-M. 

Title: Hindu Mythology: Gods, Goddesses and Values. 
Publication Year. 1990 
Notes: 24 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 



ABSTRACT: This unit on Hindu mythology is designed 
to help secondary students see beyond the exotic elements 
of another culture to the things its people have in common 
with people in the West: a continuous effort to find a 
purpose in existence, to explain the unknown, and to define 
good and bad, right and wrong. Students are asked to 
analyze Hindu religious stories in order to understand the 
Hindu worldview and moral ideals, and then to compare 
them with their own and those of the West. Five lessons 
arc presented: (1) The Hindu Triad; (2) TheRamayana; (3) 
The Image of Women; (4) Hindu Worship; and (5) 
Religion: A Comparative Essay. For each lesson a number 
of objectives arc identified, several activities are suggested, 
and the materials needed to complete the lesson arc listed. 
A 15-item bibliography also is included in the document. 



ED329490 

Author: Zimmerman, -Enid 

Title: Teaching Art From a Global Perspective, ERIC 
Digest. 

Source: Adjunct ERIC Clearinghouse for Art Education, 
Bloomington, IN.; ERIC Clearinghouse for Social 
Studies/Social Science Education, Bloomington, IN. 
Publicatioo Year.- 1990 
Notes: 4 p. 

EDRS Price - MFOI/PCOI Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: In global education programs, emphasis on 
commonalties shared by all peoples and the understanding 
and appreciation of differences within various cultures and 
subcultures may provide strong rationales for those who 
wish to teach art in a social context. Global education 
should not be viewed as a discipline with particular content 
or subject matter, rather it should be seen as an approach 
to the study of culture that can focus on international 
concerns or those related to study of students* own local 
communities. To prepare students to be citizens in a global 
age, educational efforts need to be undertaken to bring 
about changes in content, social context, and methods 
through which cultural values are taught. These changes in 
terms of a social context include moving from (1) a 
mono-national context to a multinational context; (2) a 
mono-cultural context to a multicultural context; and (3) a 



school-bound context to a community involving context. 
Art teaching is discussed from multinational, multicultural, 
and community-based contexts and as part of global 
education. A 16-item reference list concludes the digest. 

ED329459 

Author: Angry ^Raymond 

Title: Enhancing Ethnic Relations through Teaching 
Multicultural Education in the Secondary Schools. 
Publication Year/ 1990 

Notes: 71 p.; Ed.D. Practicum, Nova University. Contains 
sporadic thin type. 

EDRS Price - MF0I/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Enhancing ethnic relations among students 
of diverse ethnic backgrounds was the aim of this 
practicum . A spec' fie goal was to aid students in 
developing positive communication skills needed to enable 
them to work in collaborative learning groups without 
feelings of ethnic inferiority or ethnic superiority. Students 
were taught the vocabulary necessary for learning about 
other ethnic groups. They identified the countries of their 
peers' heritages, and each student wrote essays about two 
of them. They were provided with 12 weeks of lessons, 
activities, and projects that were designed to increase their 
knowledge and build positive communication skills, thereby 
enhancing ethnic relations among mem. Outcomes of the 
practicum were very positive. All five objectives were 
achieved and surpassed in most areas. There were 
additional successes, such as students sharing the 
knowledge gained about other ethnic groups with their 
peers, parents, and teachers. The data from this practicum 
indicated the following: (1) students increased vocabularies 
from learning about other cultures; (2) students were able 
to name the countries of origin of their peers; (3) students 
improved their communication skills; and (4) students 
played, worked, and related more positively with their 
peers. A number of tables appear throughout this report. 
Six appendices arc included, as is a 21-item list of 
references. (Author/DB) 



ED329407 
Author: Fenton,-Ray 

Title: Integrating Inter cultural Education: The Anchorage 
Alaska Experience. 
Publication Year.- 1991 

Notes: 15 p.; Paper presented at the Intercultural 
Cotntnunkation and Instruction Interest Groups at the 
Western States Communication Association Convention 
(Phoenix, AZ, February 15-20, 1991). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



52 



infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 50 



ABSTRACT: The desire for students to understand and 
lespect each other is a primary motivation for the effort to 
integrate multicultural education into all aspects of the 
Anchorage School District (Alaska) curriculum. The 
Anchorage curriculum emphasizes the cultural heritage of 
Alaska Natives, other resident ethnic groups and Pacific 
Rim cultures. In recent years, this emphasis broadened to 
include a more international focus. At the elementary 
grades, the intercultural curriculum is for the most part 
integrated into the social studies and language arts 
programs. In the secondary grades, the program 
emphasizes particular courses and programs. The Bilingual 
and Multicultural Education Programs also involve students 
through a variety of programs and activities. The 
University of Alaska and Alaska Pacific University offer 
district-sponsored credit courses in bilingual education , 
intercultural education, and Native education for interested 
teachers. Result of a needs assessment of minority 
secondary students (n=246) show that prejudice, racism, 
and intercultural communication are not major concerns. 
Academic achievement, planning for future college and 
career, and developing personal relations predominate. The 
survey supports maintaining the effort to integrate cultural 
information into the existing curriculum rather than 
attempting to introduce cultural education as a separate 
entity. The integration of intercultural issues, materials, 
and instructional methods is an ongoing process that has 
support from the community, school board, and school 
district administration. (Author/KS) 



ED328916 

Author: 17iompson r Deborah-L.; Meeks,-Jane-W, 

Title: Assessing Teachers* Knowledge of Multi-Ethnic 

Literature, 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 39 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Reading Formn (11th, Sarasota, FL, December 
12-15, 1990). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: A study examined teachers' familiarity with 
selected multi-ethnic literature and their use of it in 
litcrati»re~based classrooms. A questionnaire surveyed 50 
elementary teachers of whom 30 were from a K-5 inner 
city elementary school with a literature-based reading 
program, and 20 were classroom teachers completing 
requirements for a graduate degree in reading or library 
science. The survey instrument was constructed from a 
variety of genres, such as poetry, picture books, and 
biographies, and titles were subsumed under the following 
headings: Asian-American, Jewish-American, 
African -American , Native- American , and 



Hispanic-American. Teachers responded to each title by 
circling statements on a Likcrt-typc scale numbered from 
1 to 6 indicating whether they: (1) had used this material 
in the classroom in group instruction; (2) had recommended 
it for recreational reading; (3) had recommended it for 
research, reference, or resource; (4) had used it as 
read-aloud by the teacher; (5) were familiar with the title 
but had not used the book; and (6) were not familiar with 
the book. Results showed that the majority of teachers in 
the study were not familiar with multi-ethnic literature, 
with the exception of a limited number o f 
African-American titles. Uses of the books were mainly 
limited to the "recreational reading" and "read aloud" 
categories. (Six tables of data are included. Appendixes 
contain the survey instrument and five lists of selected 
children's multi-ethnic literature in the various ethnic 
categories.) (SR) 



ED328636 

Author: Perez-SeUes,-Marla-E. , Ed.; And-Others 
Title: Building Bridges of Learning and Understanding: 
A Collection of Classroom Activities on Puerto Rkan 
Culture. 

Source: NEFWORK, Inc., Andover, MA.; Regional 
Laboratory for Educational Improvement of the Northeast 
& Islands, Andover, MA. 
Publication Year; 1990 
Notes: 140 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This collection of 35 self-contained 
teaching activities about Puerto Rican culture for 
elementary school students is designed for teachers who 
wish to incorporate multicultural concepts into their 
curriculum or make their teaching more relevant to Puerto 
Rican students. All lesson plans and student worksheets 
needed for immediate classroom use are included. Section 
I, "Here and There: Location and Migration," explores the 
geography, climate, and location of Puerto Rico as well as 
issues that surround why people move from place to place 
Section II, "Puerto Rico: A Blend of Cultures," highlights 
some of the history of the island, from the indigenous 
Taino Indians to the arrival of the Spanish to stories of 
several heroes from diverse backgrounds. Section III, "An 
Island Rich in Tradition," looks at Puerto Rican symbols 
and traditions, including holidays and celebrations that arc 
important elements of Puerto Rican culture. Each unit 
includes basic background information for users who are 
unfamiliar with Puerto Rican culture; lists the unit's 
activities; and also includes suggested grade levels, subject 
areas, and time requirements. A variety of teaching 
strategies arc employed to meet the different learning styles 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



53 



Infusine Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 51 



of students. Some activities lend themselves especially well 
to the involvement of*parcnts and community members. A 
chart relates each of the activities to the following major 
subject areas: (1) art; (2) language arts/English; (3) 
mathematics; (4) music; (5) science; and (6) social 
studies/geography. (FMW) 



ED328552 

Author: Shutman,-Judiih-H., Ed.; Mesa-Bains ,-Amalia, 
Ed. 

Title: Teaching Diverse Students: Cases and 
Commentary \ 

Source: Far West Lab. for Educational Research and 
Development, San Francisco, Calif. 
Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 138 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This casebook was developed 
collaboratively by a researcher from Far West Laboratory, 
a staff developer/researcher from the San Francisco Unified 
School District, and 1 1 veteran teachers who teach in large 
metropolitan settings. It contains 14 narrative cases written 
by teachers about problems that all teachers face who teach 
ethnically and racially diverse young people in their 
classrooms. The teachers describe problematic events from 
their own experience. Some reflect back on incidents they 
encountered as beginning teachers, describe how they 
handled the situations, and examine what they have learned 
during the ensuing years. Others portray problems they are 
presently facing. The commentaries that follow each case 
analyze the situations and arc designed to take different 
perspectives in interpreting the accounts. The book is 
grouped into four sections highlighting the ways in which 
the cases are similar to each other. The first two chapters 
deal with instructional events: the challenges of teaching 
new concepts and skills to diverse learners, especially when 
the teacher is white and the students are of color, and the 
problems o f integrating non-English-speaking students into 
the classroom. The focus of the third chapter is interactions 
with individual or groups of students who are particularly 
challenging. In these cases, the teachers wrote about the 
ways in which their relationships with students contributed 
to, or in some cases, detracted from a learning experience. 
The cases in the last chapter portray the importance and 
influence of school/ family relationships on student learning. 
An annotated bibliography of 16 items is included, as well 
as guidelines for writing a case. (JD) 

ED328511 

Author: May ,-Wanda-T. ; And-Others 

Title: "Whose" Content, Context, and Culture in 



Elementary Art and Music Textbooks? Elementary 
Subjects Center Series No. 23. 

Source: Center for the Learning and Teaching of 
Elementary Subjects, East Lansing, ML; Michigan State 
Univ. , East Lansing. Jnst. for Research on Teaching. 
Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 65 p. ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (Boston, MA, 
April, 1990). For a related document, see SO 030 491. 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: An analysis and critique of two elementary 
textbook series: "Discover Art" by Davis Publications and 
"World of Music" published by Silver Burdett & Ginn are 
presented. "Whose content, context, and culture?" is an 
ideological question that assumes that equitable social 
relations and diverse ways of knowing ought to be valued 
and fostered in classrooms and curriculum materials in a 
democratic society. While this question deserves to be 
asked of any subject area's curriculum material, it is a 
crucial one for the arts. First, there is little evidence of 
analysis/critique of existing materials within the disciplines 
of art and music. Second, contemporary discourse in 
discipline-based art education (DBAJE) recommends 
equitable treatment of production /performance, aesthetics, 
history, and criticism and more explicit attention to 
sequencing content in arts curricula. (Both of the above 
series claim to do this.) Finally, little research in art and 
music education has been conducted in the natural setting 
of classrooms to study how curricular content and materials 
are used or socially mediated. Two theoretical frameworks 
guide the analysis: (1) From a critical sociological 
perspective, texts are viewed as guiding or constraining the 
construction of meaning, and often this construction reflects 
the interests of a dominant social group (class, gender, 
race, or culturc)~particularly when the texts arc used 
uncritically as expository, authoritative texts. 
What is possible in textbooks and schools partially depends 
on connections between schooling and its structures to 
economic, cultural, and political power in a larger 
sociopolitical context. This is one reason, for example, why 
textbooks look more alike than different across subject 
areas; (2) From the perspective of mediation, the text is 
viewed as another "participant" in instruction (rather than 
authoritative object) because teachers and students impose 
their own meanings on texts, and these meanings are 
derived from their past experiences and social relations in 
ue classroom. Thus, neither teachers nor students are 
viewed as passive recipients of others' texts. Neither the 
curriculum nor the subject matter is to be found only "in 
the text." Both perspectives, however, suggest that 
knowledge is socially constituted and produced. Both 
acknowledge how and why particular ways of knowing may 



To Order Call 1-80O443-ERIC 



ERLC 



54 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 52 



be mutually produced/reproduced in light of other 
possibilities. (AuthorfDB) 



ED328486 

Author: Hornstein,-Stephen-E. 

Title: If the World Is Round and Schools Are Flat, Can 
We Have Global Education in Schools? Contradictions, 
Questions, and Paradoxes of Global Education in 
Schools* 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 22 p. ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Comparative and International Education Society (Anaheim, 
California, March 24, 1990). 
EDRS Price - MF0I/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: A survey of recent literature on global 
education and observations of actual global education 
programs reveal that there is a wide gap between how 
global education is viewed in the abstract and how it is 
actually practiced. The argument is made that the nature, 
conduct, and purpose of schools are in conflict with the 
goals to which global education aspires. Changes in the 
basic structure of schools arc necessary if global education 
is to truly flourish. A 37-itcm list of references is included. 



ED328044 

Title: Multicultural Nonsexist Education in Iowa Schools: 
Talented and Gifted. 

Source: Iowa State Dept. of Education, Des Moines. 
Bureau of School Administration and Accreditation. 
Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 21 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The pamphlet is intended to help local 
Iowa school curriculum committees implement the gifted 
and talented component of their school's multicultural, 
nonsexist education plan. First, basic definitions of 11 
terms such as H multicultural education, " "giftedness," and 
"disadvantaged" arc provided. Next, the rationale and 
philosophy of multicultural education is explained followed 
by an extract of the Iowa code providing the legal authority 
for the program. The 4 program goals and their associated 
22 objectives are outlined next. A program self-evaluation 
checklist is presented next which covers program structure, 
program materials, and teaching strategies. An annotated 
bibliography of 22 resource materials, four gifted and 
talented serial publications, and 13 resource organizations 
is also provided. (DB) 



ED327613 

Author: Webb r Michael 

Title: Multicultural Education in Elementary and 
Secondary Schools. ERIC Digest Number 67. 
Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Urban Education, New 
York, NY. 

Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 3 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Schools have introduced numerous 
programs and activities, intended to recognize the 
achievements of ethnic groups, in the belief that a 
multicultural education prepares students for life in an 
ethnically diverse society and also results in cognitive and 
affective benefits. Multicultural activities have the 
following goals: (1) to remedy ethnocentrism in the 
traditional curriculum; (2) to build understanding among 
racial and ethnic groups, and appreciation of different 
cultures; (3) to defuse interracial tensions and conflicts; and 
(4) to make the curriculum relevant to the experiences, 
cultural traditions, and historical contributions of minority 
groups. Studies also indicate links between multicultural 
education and unproved academic achievement for African 
American and Hispanic American students. Most 
multicultural learning activities consist of discrete lessons 
organized around particular events. These activities may be 
confined to a particular classroom or can involve the entire 
school. Project Respecting Ethnic and Cultural Heritage 
(REACH) is a comprehensive, discipline-based 
multicultural program that infuses information on the 
history and culture of various groups into the middle school 
curriculum. Portland (Oregon) and Albuquerque (New 
Mexico) have also developed programs that integrate 
multicultural activities throughout the curriculum. 
The following considerations in developing interdisciplinary 
programs arc outlined: (1) needs assessment; (2) goals; (3) 
curriculum development; and (4) staff development. A list 
of nine references and a list of four resources are 
appended. (FMW) 



ED327605 

Author: Foody, -Margaret; And-Others 

Title: Developing a Plan for Multicultural Education. 

Source: Syracuse City School District, N. Y. 

Publication Year: 11990) 

Notes: 21 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: An analysis of student achievement and the 
ethnicity of students and instructional staff in the Syracuse 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



55 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page S3 



(New York) City School District found a need to develop 
a multicultural curriculum that would ensure equal 
educational opportunity. A comparison of the scores of 
White, Black, and Hispanic elementary and middle school 
students on the IOWA Standardized Tests of reading and 
mathematics achievement showed the following: (1) the 
percentage of Black students needing remediation was more 
than double the percentage of White students; (2) there was 
a higher percentage of Hispanic students in the low range 
of performance than cither Blacks or Whites; and (3) the 
percentage of White students in the high range of 
performance was generally four to five times larger than 
the percentage of Black or Hispanic students. An analysis 
of the ethnicity of teachers, administrators, and teaching 
assistants found that the racial/ethnic composition of the 
staff was not comparable to the racial/ethnic distribution of 
the students concentrated in urban schools. 
Recommendations for improvement are suggested in the 
following areas: (1) curriculum; (2) staff development; (3) 
staff recruitment; (4) parent and community involvement; 
and (5) elementary and middle school programming. Five 
graphs containing statistical data and a list of four 
references are appended. (FMW) 



ED327490 

Author: Wheeler, -Alan-H. 

Title: Internationalizing the Curriculum through 
Cooperation, Collaboration and Commitment. 
Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 16 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Conference of 
the National Council of States on lnservice Education 
(15th, Orlando, FL, November 16-20, 1990). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This paper discusses a 3-year project to 
promote an international perspective within schools, 
colleges, and departments of education in the United States. 
Guidelines excerpted from this project's statement of 
purpose clarify the project's goals. These guidelines cover: 
(1) administrative leadership; (2) curriculum; (3) faculty 
development; (4) student awareness; (5) resources; (6) 
service to local school districts, community agencies, and 
businesses; and (7) research. The paper discusses basic 
expectations for educators and professors who are involved 
in international education programs and plan to apply in 
their classrooms, schools, and programs those principles 
which affirm racial and cultural diversity. These principles 
include: self-understanding; understanding and acceptance 
of pluralism; and an affirmative approach to implementing 
international/multicultural education in the total school 
environment. The working goals for any effective foreign 
student program are listed, and the benefits of the global 



perspective to colleges and universities are described. (JD) 



ED327432 

Author: Baker, -Frederick-J. 

Tide: Internationalizing Public Education: Past Practices t 
Present Programs f and Future Promises. 
Publication Year; 1990 

Notes: 16 p.; Presented at the Annual Conference of the 
Comparative and International Education Society (March 
22-25, 1990). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: As the world becomes increasingly 
interdependent, the role of public education in the United 
States becomes correspondingly vital. In order for the 
United States to function in such a world its young persons, 
the leaders of tomorrow, must be able to understand how 
such a world works. Yet, as recent studies have show, the 
youth of the United States are woefully underexposed to 
other countries' languages and cultures, and to U.S. foreign 
policies. Many states have been responding to this need 
through the establishment of commissions to recommend 
ways of introducing broader instruction in international 
studies into schools, or have mandated some form of 
international education in all grades, from kindergarten 
through high school. A multitude of issues concerning 
global education has yet to be fully addressed, however, 
including specific questions as to teacher training and 
curriculum design and development. Comprehensive 
changes in education is implicit in the need for a more 
globally literate U.S. citizenry. (DB) 

ED327327 

Title: Helping Children Love Themselves and Others: A 
Professional Handbook for Family Day Care. 
Source: Children's Foundation, Washington, B.C. 
Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 147 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: An anti-bias, multicultural approach to 
family day care is presented in this book. Part A provides 
a rationale for such an approach; Part B outlines ideas for 
children's anti-bias, multicultural projects; Part C describes 
children's books and adult resources, and lists sources of 
hard-to-find items such as multicultural dolls and puppets. 
Subsections of Part A concern family day care as as a site 
for the transmission of bias; characteristics of an anti-bias, 
multicultural approach; language and stereotypes; 
developmental tasks at different ages; parents as partners; 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



58 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 54 



the family day care environment; and strategies to use with 
children. Subsections of Part B describe anti-bias, 
multicultural activities; and offer guidelines for celebrating 
nontraditionfcl holidays. Subsections of Part C offer a 
checklist for books, toys, and materials; an annotated 
bibliography of 301 items of children's literature that are 
indexed according to gender of the main character, the 
race/culture of the main culture, multiethnic content and 
other characteristics, such as special need content and 
strong anti-bias message; an annotated bibliography of 32 
resources for adults; a list of companies with anti-bias 
and/or multicultural books and materials; and a list of 
resource organizations. Fifty-seven references arc included. 



ED327326 

Title: Helping Children Love Themselves and Others: A 
Resource Guide to Equity Materials for Young Children. 
Source: Children's Foundation, Washington, D.C. 
Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 57 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Designed as a companion book to a 
handbook for family day care providers, this resource 
guide begins with a checklist for use by those selecting 
children's books, posters, recordings, and other teaching 
resources for family day care homes. The second section of 
the book offers an annotated bibliography of children's 
literature that includes the best antibias and multicultural 
books. The third section provides an annotated bibliography 
of resources for adults. Resources that help caregivers 
expand their understanding of antibias and multicultural 
issues were chosen for this bibliography. Many of the 
books contain information about specific cultures. Others 
outline learning activities for children. Companies with 
antibias or multicultural books and materials are listed in 
the fourth section. Some companies focus on antibias, 
peace, and multicultural materials; others have only a few 
items of this sort. (RH) 



ED326997 
Author: Barto, -Susan 

Title: Embracing Diversity through Multicultural 
Education. 

Source: National School Boards Association, Alexandria, 
VA. Educational Policies Service. 
Publication Year; 1990 
Notes: 9 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 



ABSTRACT: The debate between particularism and 
pluralism is summarized, and multicultural education 
policies in six states (California; New York; Minnesota; 
Portland, Oregon; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; and Walled 
Lake, Michigan) are described. Recommendations include 
planning for demographic change, reviewing curriculum 
policies, and emphasizing staff development and 
recruitment. (LMI) 



ED326970 

Author: Tye r Kenneth-A., Ed. 

Title: Global Education: From Thought to Action. The 
1991 ASCD Yearbook. 

Source: Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development, Alexandria, Va. 
Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 187 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: Viewed as a social movement for change, 
the global education movement calls for the infusion of a 
global perspective into all curriculum areas. Two 
assumptions of global education include the view of the 
individual school as the optimal unit for change efforts, and 
the importance of local teacher and school action for lasting 
school improvement. This yearbook defines global 
education, explains its importance, describes it 
implementation, and demonstrates its uses for school 
improvement. The first part examines the context of 
schooling in which a global perspective can be developed, 
and the second part is directed toward issues of practice. In 
chapter 1, Lee F. Anderson develops an argument for 
global studies in the schools. Barbara Benham Tye 
delineates the problems inherent in changing school 
curriculum in chapter 2. The last chapter of this section by 
Steven L. Lamy presents a framework for understanding 
extremist ultraconscrvativc attacks on global education. In 
the next chapter, James Becker links global education to 
citizenship education. Jane A. Boston discusses educational 
leadership in global education in chapter 5. Ida Urso 
examines the role of teachers in chapter 6 and uses 
qualitative data to show how global education can promote 
cross-cultural understanding and be a renewing force for 
teachers. In chapter 7, Jan L. Tucker explores the complex 
problem of creating educational collaborations between 
schools and universities. Charlotte C. Anderson documents 
many ways in which global education involves schools and 
students with their communities in chapter 8. In chapter 9, 
Toni Fuss Kirkwood uses personal experience to show how 
and why global education has become a successful vehicle 
for school improvement. The conclusion, by Kenneth A. 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



57 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 55 



Tye, explores themes gathered in a Center for Human 
Interdependence (ClH)*field study of bringing a global 
perspective to school curricula. Chapters include 
references. (LMI) 



ED326362 

Author: Spears acqueline-D. ; And-Others 
Title: Accommodating Change and Diversity: 
Multicultural Practices in Rural Schools. A Report of the 
Ford Western Taskforce. 

Source: Kansas State Univ., Manhattan. Rural 
Clearinghouse for Education and Development. 
Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 97 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: Rural Amrica has been experiencing 
dramatic changes in the transition toward a socially and 
culturally diverse society. This study is a first effort to 
explore multicultural reform in rural schools. Multicultural 
education is the process by which the school environment 
is modified to accommodate cultural differences as well as 
to teach the role culture plays in shaping people's view of 
society. The Rural Clearinghouse for Education and 
Development commissioned five separate case studies of 
selected rural schools in Alaska, Arizona, New Mexico, 
Nebraska, and Washington. At each site, school 
administrators, teachers, students, parents, and community 
members were interviewed and documentation on 
multicultural education was collected. The centerpiece of 
this document consists of the five case study reports, each 
by a separate writer, with the analyses focused on some or 
all of the following elements: (1) school mission; (2) 
staffing; (3) curriculum; (4) instructional strategies; (5) 
policies and norms; (6) home linkages; (7) community 
linkages; (8) staff development; (9) extracurricular 
activities; (10) assessment and testing; (11) multicultural 
leadership; and (12) student characteristics. A summary of 
various multicultural educational practices and a listing of 
resources on multicultural education are included. An 
appendix presents the protocol for the case studies. (ALL) 



ED325593 

Author: Taylor r Orlando-L. 

Title: Cross-Cultural Communication: An Essential 
Dbnension of Effective Education. Revised Edition. 
Source: American Univ., Washington, DC. Mid-Atlantic 
Equity Center. 
Publication Year: 1990 



Notes: 54 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This guide to improving cross-cultural 
communication is the second part of a four-part series 
addressing the essential characteristics of effective 
instruction that have a positive impact on the academic 
achievement of Black and Hispanic students. Since schools 
tend to reflect the norms and values of the majority culture, 
cultural misunderstandings often have a negative effect on 
a minority student's academic performance. The following 
topics are discussed: (1) cultural diversity and 
cross-cultural communication issues in schools; (2) 
discovering the characteristics of other cultures; (3) cultural 
differences in discourse; (4) using cross-cultural 
communication to improve interpersonal relationships; (5) 
teaching standard English to speakers of nonstandard 
English dialects, including implementation of Standard 
English as a Second Dialect (SESD) programs; (6) cultural 
bias in tests and assessment procedures; and (7) the effect 
of cultural and communicative incongruities on discipline. 
The following tables arc included: (1) a quiz about culture, 
communication, and language; (2) questions to ask about 
culture; (3) varieties of nonstandard American English; (4) 
communication contrasts among some African Americans 
and some Anglo Americans; (5) classroom problems arising 
from culture and communication conflicts; and (6) sources 
of bias in tests and testing procedures. The following 
materials are appended: (1) an abstract of the philosophy 
and assumptions of the Richmond (California) Standard 
English Program; (2) the attributes of field-independent and 
field-dependent cognitive styles; (3) information sources on 
SESD programs; and (4) a 34-item bibliography. (FMW) 

ED325209 

Author: Kirkland-Holmes, -Gloria; Federlein,- Anne-Cairns 
Title: Incorporating an African American Multicultural 
Self-Concept Building and Creative Arts Program into 
Your Class Curriculum. 
Publication Year/ 1990 

Notes: 18 p. ; Paper presented at the Annual Conference of 
the National Black Child Development Institute 
(Washington, DC, September 20-22, 1990). 
EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The incorporation o fan African- American, 
multicultural, self-concept-building, and creative arts 
program into the elementary school curriculum is discussed 
in this conference paper. Recommendations concern the 
relevance to African-American children of language and 
communication skills, mathematics, social studies, science, 
positive self-concept, African-American studies, 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



58 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 56 



self-concept development, creative arts and expression, and 
holidays. Other aspect* of working with African- American 
students include use of body language, use of standard 
English, equal talking time, group learning, music in the 
classroom, and nonviolent conflict resolution. Appended to 
the text are: (1) suggestions for setting up a cultural 
enrichment program; (2) a list of cultural enrichment 
activities for parents; (3) a cultural enrichment program 
report card; (4) a bibliography of children's books about 
Africa, Africans, and Swahlli; (5) a bibliography of 
folklore illustrating the cultural flow from Africa to the 
Caribbean, the American South, and Central America; (6) 
an annotated and indexed bibliography of children's 
literature for black youth; (7) a list of cultural enrichment 
activities in several curriculum areas; and (8) a list of ideas 
for learning centers that focus mainly on African-American 
themes. (RH) 



ED324593 

Author: Scheer,-JudUh-K. 

Title: Germ Smart: Children's Activities in Disease 
Prevention. 

Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 50 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: This booklet is part of the "Children's 
Activity Series," a set of four supplemental teaching 
resources that promote awareness about health, family life, 
and cultural diversity for children in kindergarten through 
third grade. Nine activities are included in this booklet to 
help children be "germ smart" help children in kindergarten 
through third grade be "germ smart" and understand and 
remember basic information about disease and disease 
prevention. Age-appropriate examples and a highly 
interactive, visual format are used to help students 
understand what germs are, how the body fights disease 
and infections, and how one's behaviors can help or hurt 
the body's immune system. Activities are designed to help 
children learn how germs spread from person to person and 
to understand which diseases are easy or hard to "catch." 
Students will also learn what steps to take to help them stay 
healthy: for example, getting enough sleep, eating right, 
washing hands, and other basic good health strategies. (NB) 



ED324308 

Author: McDiarmid,-G.-Williamson; Price,-Jeremy 
Title: Prospective Teachers' Views of Diverse Learners: A 
Study of the Participants in the ABCD Project. Research 



Report 90-6. 

Source: National Center for Research on Teacher 
Education, East Lansing, MI. 
Publication Year/ 1990 
Notes: 56 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Using data from pre- and postprogram 
questionnaires and interviews, the study describes the views 
that a group of 17 student teachers drawn from 5 Michigan 
universities hold of culturally diverse learners both before 
and after a 3-day workshop intended to influence their 
views. The study found that the multicultural presentations 
had little effect on students* beliefs-about the capabilities 
of learners labelled "high" and "low" ability, about the use 
of stereotypes in making teaching decisions, or about 
providing genuinely equal opportunities to learn challenging 
and empowering subject matter. It is suggested that teacher 
educators may need to rethink both the content and 
pedagogy of opportunities to learn about teaching culturally 
divers learners. The appendixes include: (1) The ABCD 
(Accepting Behavior for Cultural Diversity) for Teachers 
Training Schedule; (2) Description of the ABCD Sample; 
(3) Examples of Pre- and Postprogram Responses to 
Scenario #2. 



ED324270 

Author: Scott r Gail 

Title: Meet India's Urban Teenagers. 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 16 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Intended to be a culminating activity after 
seventh grade social studies students have studied India, 
this week-long lesson features autobiographical sketches of 
six teenagers from India. The lesson has three objectives: 
(1) to provide actual life stories of teenagers as a 
springboard for further research about the customs and 
culture of India; (2) to show that people everywhere take 
pride in their nation and will work to improve any 
weakness; and (3) to communicate research information 
with other class members. An 8-item bibliography is 
included. (DB) 

ED324163 

Author: Cantrall,- Becky; And-Others 

Title: Navajo Culture: A Bridge to the Rest of the World. 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 22 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (Boston, MA, 
April 19, 1990). 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERLC 



59 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 57 



EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This document describes a Navajo Indian 
program for making Navajo education more responsive to 
Native American cultural and educational needs. A survey 
of existing literature examines American Indian students* 
historical struggle between cultural identity and 
Anglo-American assimilation. As Navajo children may lack 
the schema for traditionally defined educational success and 
competition, schools might reexamine their customary 
teaching methods. The Greasewood Toyci Consolidated 
School began emphasizing bicultural education by weaving 
Navajo culture into the regular curriculum. Teachers were 
empowered to create their own culturally relevant study 
programs as part of a schoolwide curriculum reassessment. 
Student-testing and discipline policies were reevaluated. 
Teachers and assistants attended language workshops that 
exposed them to the Whole Language approach, a holistic 
learning method. An evaluation committee determined that 
the Comprehensive Tests of Basic Skills (CTBS) were 
inappropriate for Navajo students, and suggested that other 
achievement measurements be used. Surveys indicated 
growing use and popularity among teachers and students of 
the Whole Language approach, prompting additional 
training and curriculum changes. Greasewood staff 
developed a school philosophy encouraging further 
integration of Navajo culture into the curriculum, parental 
involvement, and the use of the Whole Language approach. 
As a result, the staff developed an entire new curriculum 
that balances Indian cultural requirements with state and 
CTBS testing standards. The document describes further 
curriculum revision procedures and summarizes new 
educational objectives for helping Navajo children achieve 
the balance that is one of the basic tenets of Navajo 
philosophy. (TES) 



ED323565 

Author: Cakmak,~Sibel 

Title: Multidisciplinary Perspectives on Cross-Cultural 
Education. 

Publication Year/ 1990 
Notes: 20 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: A pilot study explored the disciplinary 
perspectives and instructional practices within English, 
Foreign Language, and Social Science departments in a 
midwestern high school to determine the degree of 
collaboration practised by instructors to provide 
interconnected cross-cultural education. Data were collected 
by means of interviews with and classroom observation of 
eight subjects teaching the following disciplines: American 



Literature, and World Literature, French, German, 
Spanish, Modern World Civilization, Anthropology, and 
Sociology. Results revealed that the social studies teachers 
have taken on the leadership role in promoting 
cross-cultural education from a global perspective, that the 
English teachers have not broadened their materials to 
include literature at the international level, and that the 
foreign language teachers emphasize language competency 
and proficiency while attributing a secondary role to the 
teaching of other cultures. Findings suggest that little 
interdisciplinary cooperation exists in the teaching of 
eulturc-the mam barriers cited by teachers being tight 
teaching schedules and lack of time. (KEH) 

ED323281 

Author: Zanger r Virgmia-Vogel; And-Others 

Title: Drawing on Diversity: A Handbook for and by 

Boston Teachers in Multicultural Multiracial Classrooms. 

Source: Boston Public Schools, Mass. 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 48 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This handbook of culturally responsive 
ways to teach the basic, mandated curriculum to students 
from diverse backgrounds was developed by a multicultural 
group of teachers. The techniques draw on the students' 
diverse backgrounds to increase student motivation and 
maximize teacher effectiveness by decreasing the mismatch 
between the students' home and school environments. The 
following topics are discussed: (1) creating a family 
atmosphere in the classroom; (2) weaving culture into the 
mathematics, science, and language arts curriculum; (3) 
using student-to-student, student-to-adult, and 
teacher-to-student interviewing; (4) cooperative learning 
techniques for elementary and middle school classrooms; 

(5) tried and true ideas for celebrating cultural diversity; 

(6) briefcase studies to help develop appropriate responses 
to inappropriate expressions of intolerance among 
colleagues; (7) strategies for monolingual teachers of 
bilingual students; (8) strategies for teaching black 
children; (9) suggestions from Vietnamese parents for 
teaching their children; and (10) strategies for teaching 
Cambodian students. A list of 13 resources and brief 
biographies of the contributors are appended. (FMW) 

ED322274 

Author: Mitchell \-Vemay 

Title: Curriculum and Instruction To Reduce Racial 

Conflict. ERIC/CUE Digest No. 64. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Urban Education, New 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 
60 



Infiisin£ Multicultural Education into Today's Schools Page 58 



York, N. Y. 

Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 3 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Multicultural education, anti-racist 
education, and conflict resolution arc curriculum-based 
approaches to reducing racial conflict. Since the 1930s, 
attempts have been made to develop curricula to change 
negative racial attitudes and encourage appreciation for 
people of all races. In the 1980s, multicultural education 
has focused on the unique qualities and the mutual 
interdependence of minority and majority groups within a 
society and of various communitites within the world 
system. However, some critics have suggested that 
education labelled "multicultural" evades the issue of 
racism by diverting attention to milder topics. Some studies 
demonstrate the limited effectiveness of multicultural 
programs and the fact that some school districts without 
minority group students do not promote the discussion of 
racial or ethnic differences. Anti-racist education and 
conflict resolution address racism by allowing teachers and 
students to analyze the inequalities in power and economic 
status that determine race relations. The following 
recommendations for evaluating and reforming curricula 
and school policy are suggested: (1) issue policy statements 
that cover broad school district philosophy, hiring 
practices, and the handling of bias-motivated incidents; (2) 
maintain racial and cultural diversity among school 
personnel; (3) provide services for victims of 
bias-motivated violence; (4) report and monitor trends in 
racial attitudes; (5) establish school-wide committees on 
human relations; (6) use the arts to encourage critical 
thinking about social issues; (7) check textbooks and other 
resources for bias; (8) reflect the cultural diversity of the 
school in teaching strategies; and (9) affirm racial and 
cultural differences with regular and special activities. 
A list of 16 references and six resources are appended. 



ED320983 

Author: Ratter 'ay ,-Joan-Davis 

Title: Center Shift: An African-Centered Approach for the 
Multicultural Curriculum. 

Source: Institute for Independent Education, Inc., 
Washington, DC. 
Publication Year: 1990 
Notes: 46 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01IPC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The attempt by many urban school districts 
to develop African curricula creates a dilemma, because it 
usually places an African-centered program in a 



multicultural curriculum that is centered in the 
European- American educational tradition. Currently, some 
elements of an African and African-centered curriculum 
may be found in the multicultural education movement at 
some urban public schools. Independent schools owned and 
operated by blacks are developing African-centered 
programs with the assistance of a network of black study 
groups, lecture scries, and national associations. All 
multicultural curricula must center discussions on the 
perspective of various cultural groups in the experience of 
one of those groups. In most contemporary classrooms, the 
curriculum has a European-American center. The 
intellectual tradition of European- American education is 
incapable of embracing an African frame of reference, 
forcing the following developments by black scholars and 
historians: (1) exposing the falsehood of the myth of 
African inferiority; (2) advocating the inclusr of African 
history and culture in school curricula; (3) developing 
independent educational institutions; (4) developing Black 
Studies programs in higher education; and (5) defending the 
new curriculum content in elementary and secondary 
schools. Future development of a true African-centered 
curriculum will depend on the following factors: (1) 
philosophical orientation; (2) institutional implementation; 
(3) consultant support; (4) scholarship; and (5) assessment. 
A list of 57 references is appended. (FMW) 



ED320423 

Author: Zanger,-Virginia-Vogel, Ed.; And-Olhers 
Title: Classroom Activities for Cross-Cultural Learning. 
Source: Boston District Five Teacher Center, MA. 
Publication Year; [1990] 
Notes: 54 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: One-fourth of the students in Boston public 
schools have parents who were born outside of the United 
States. This guide contains a series of classroom activities, 
produced by Boston teachers and aides, that are designed 
to take advantage of the abundant cultural diversity found 
in Boston schools by encouraging these dual-culture 
students to share their multi- ethnic backgrounds with their 
peers. The activities help students construct booklets about 
themselves and their cultural backgrounds, and include 
information about the different countries these students' 
families came from as well as students' reflections on what 
it is like to live in two cultures. Other activities provided 
in this guide include the following: interviews/panel with 
foreign-born students; gestures in Spanish and English; 
middle and high school cooking classes; and other 
multicultural activities. (GLR) 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



O 61 

ERLC 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today's Schools page 59 



ED320262 

Author: Garcia, -J esuS; And-Others 

Title: Multicultural Textbooks: How To Use Them More 

Effectively in the Classroom, 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 21 p.; Paper presented as the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (Boston, MA, 
April 16-20, 1990). 

EDRS Price - MF0J/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: Although the minority content of textbooks 
has increased and improved over time, its purpose and 
application are seldom discussed. Various approaches that 
promote multicultural principles, such as films, intergroup 
contact, curriculum innovation, multi-ethnic readers, and 
literature packages, are outlined in this review of the 
effective application of multicultural textbooks in the 
classroom. The review of literature indicates that favorable 
information about minority groups has a positive modifying 
effect on racial attitudes. Preliminary findings of a study 
conducted by one of the authors indicate that students 
became more knowledgeable about A fro- Americans and 
changed their attitudes as a result of the teachers* use of 
multicultural materials. The results suggest that the 
problem may not be the textbooks, but the ways in which 
they are used in the instructional process. The teacher's 
role is crucial: books can be thought of as the tools, and 
teachers as the catalysts. The more effective teachers use 
a variety of materials, make effective use of curricula, are 
awarcof textbook limitations, and recognize the importance 
of interaction between teachers, students, and resources. 
(45 references) (LMl) 



ED320163 

Author: Solas Marilyn; Tkel r Debbie 

Title: A Bibliography of Literature for Micronesian 

Children. 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 90 p.; Developed by Project BEAM, University of 
Guam. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This bibliography contains an extensive list 
of works of literature for the children of Micronesia. The 
bibliography is divided into the following categories: (1) 
"Micronesia" (including 41 citations); (2) "Primary: Picture 
Books" (378 citations); (3) -Primary" (83 citations); 
"Intermediate" (88 citations); (4) Middle/High (68 
citations); "Informational Books" (217 citations); (5) 
"Poetry" (265 citations); (6) "Prose" (81 citations); and (7) 
"Multicultural." In the "Multicultural" section are 17 
Asian/Pacific Islander, 19 Japanese, 10 Chinese, 9 Filipino, 



17 Hawaiian, 9 African, 6 Hispanic, 12 Native American, 
6 Black American, and 3 Jewish- American works. Citations 
are not annotated. Some citations represent early 20th 
century works, but most represent more contemporary 
works. The bibliography also includes sample literature sets 
for first and second grade and a list of children's book 
publishers. (SG) 

ED320146 

Author: Imdieke,-Sandra-J. 

Title: Sharing Stories: Multicultural Traditions. 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 8 p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
International Reading Association (35th t Atlanta, GA, May 
6-11, 1990). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: As more emphasis is placed on helping 
children gain a global perspective and understanding of the 
world, children's literature seems to be a natural vehicle 
for fostering that understanaing. By studying the 
storyteller, educators can learn about literary traditions of 
communities, particularly traditions which reflect the use of 
stories. An explanation of West African minstrels' 
traditional use of the story can be shared with children and 
adapted for use in a classroom setting by hanging fishnets 
from a corner o f the classroom where all sorts of items are 
hung. Children can choose an item which brings to mind a 
favorite story to share with the class. Children can become 
storytellers and talce their stories from classroom to 
classroom in a way similar to the East Indian tradition, 
using story cloths to present stories through pictures. By 
identifying the original tradition and history of the 
storytelling technique, children learn about the value and 
use of stories from other cultures, and teachers can avoid 
the use of these traditions as merely another gimmick to 
capture children's attention. (MG) 



ED319831 

Author: Abi-NaderrJeannette 

Tide: Helping Minority High School Students Redefine 
their Setf-lmage through Culturally Sensitive Instruction. 
Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: IS p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (Boston, MA, 
April 16-20, 1990). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This report is based on an ethnographic 
study of a multicultural "college prep" program catering to 
minority students. It was part of the elective bilingual 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ER1C 



o 62 
ERLC 



Infusing Multicultural Eduction into Today's Schools page 60 



education offering at a large urban high school, and 
recorded an 11-year history of successfully graduating 
Hispanic high school students and sending at least 65% of 
them on to college. The report briefly describes the study 
and the research site, the program, and the participants. A 
major portion of the paper contains an explanation and 
examples of strategics which became evident in the 
teacher's approach to motivating the students in the 
program and to raising their self-esteem. Redefining the 
image of self is the goal of strategies the teacher uses to 
help the students imagine success and have the confidence 
to pursue it. This is accomplished by helping students in 
the following areas: (1) to be proud of their heritage; (2) to 
feel that their people can achieve success and reverse 
stereotypes; and (3) to develop adaptive behavior that will 
facilitate success in a new culture. The teacher helps the 
students redefine their self-image as learners and as 
communicators in the following ways: (1) by raising 
expectations and standards for academic and social 
performance; (2) by using positive language in clasroom 
interaction both to praise students for their successes as 
well as to correct mistakes; and (3) by giving them the 
opportunity to "try on'* new images through role-playing. 
The teacher helps them redefine their concept of self as 
communicators through the director/actor approach. The 
teacher also uses a director/actor approach to model 
language production and requires that students imitate the 
way he, as the "expert," does it. The results of the study 
and the implication for the design of instruction in 
multicultural classrooms are discussed. (JS) 



ED319830 

Author: Brumberg r Stephen-F. 

Title: Designing an Education for Life in Two Worlds: 
The Founding ofOte Bureau of Jewish Education of New 
York City. 

Publication Year. 1990 

Notes: 34 p. ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (Boston, MA, 
April 16-20, 1990). 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: The Bureau of Jewish Education, founded 
in 1910 as part of the Kehillah (Jewish Community) of 
New York City, had a seminal and lasting influence on the 
education of Jews in America. The New Jewish Educators 
trained at the Bureau stressed the cultural breadth and 
historical depth of Judaism while emphasizing that Jewish 
education was supplementary to and compatible with 
modern American public school education, a viewpoint that 
went unchallenged until the founding of the Orthodox and 
Hasidic day schools in the 1950s and 1960s. At the turn of 



the century, the two major waves of German and East 
European Jewish immigrants who were engaged in the 
process of assimilation into American culture feared the 
loss of Jewish religion and culture. The New Jewish 
Educators advanced a bicultural alternative to total 
assimilation into the majority culture based on two separate 
school systems that would support a complementary Jewish 
culture and would attract and hold American Jewish youth. 
Between 1915 and 1938 Bureaus were started in many 
major cities and resulted in the founding of Hebrew 
Teachers Colleges in Chicago, Cleveland, Boston, and 
Baltimore to train modern professional Jewish educators. 
Forty-seven footnotes are included. (FMW) 

ED319493 

Title: Five Position Statements of the Southern 
Association on Children Under 6 (SACUS): (1) Employer 
Sponsored Child Care; (2) Developmental^ Appropriate 
Assessment; (3) Continuity of Learning for 
Four-to-Seven-Year-old Children; (4) Quality Child Care; 
(5) Multicultural Education 

Source: Southern Association on Children Under Six, Little 
Rock, Ark. 

Publication Year; 1990 
Notes: 41 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from 
EDRS. 

ABSTRACT: Five position statements of the Southern 
Association on Children Under Six are presented in this 
document. The statement on developmentally appropriate 
assessment includes such topics as testing practices that 
harm young children; limitations of standardized testing; 
misuses of test data; and assessment criteria. The statement 
on continuity o f learning addresses the topics of children as 
learners; early childhood professionals and 
paraprofessionals; educational and child care settings for 
young children; and recommendations. The statement on 
quality of child care concerns children's needs to: (1) feel 
safe and comfortable; (2) be involved in meaningful 
activities; (3) be supported as full-time learners; (4) learn 
how to live comfortably with others; (5) have their physical 
development supported; (6) be given lessons on health, 
nutrition, and safety; (7) feel that there is consistency in 
their lives; and (8) know that parents and caregivers care 
about them. The statement on multicultural education 
concerns ways in which an improved understanding of 
multicultural education can be developed; ways in which 
teachers and parents can share the responsibility of 
enhancing children's multicultural awareness; and 
recommendations for keeping the learning environment 
consistently multiethnic. The statement on 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 



63 



Infusing Multicultural Education into Today f s Schools page 61 



employer-sponsored child care focuses on the issues of who 
needs child care, why employers should care about child 
care, what employers can do, and what the options for 
employer-supported care are. Selected references arc cited. 



ED318584 

Author: Sparks ,-Wxlliam; WaymanrLandace 

Title: Multicultural Understanding in Physical Education. 

Publication Year: 1990 

Notes: 38 p. 

EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

ABSTRACT: This study compares the knowledge, 
attitudes, and current practices of physical education 
teachers in urban and rural areas, with regard to 
multicultural education. A mailed questionnaire was 
completed by 70 public school physical education teachers, 
44 from rural Kansas and 26 from Detroit and Flint, 
Michigan. Of those responding to specific questions, 60% 
were male; 40% were 31-45 years old; 60% had over 10 
years teaching experience; 33% had been teaching physical 
education for over 20 years; and 75% had some sort of 
training in multicultural education. Ethnic mixtures within 
the school population ranged from 70% Hispanic or Black 
to 88% White. Compared to urban teachers, rural teachers 
had a poorer understanding of ethnic diversity; had a better 
understanding of the customs and traditions of differing 
cultures; had stronger beliefs in providing opportunities for 
students of different ethnic origins to have intercultural 
experiences; and had weaker beliefs in developing students' 
interpersonal communication skills as a means of promoting 
problem solving and conflict resolution. Physical education 
programs in rural areas seldom integrated role models from 
both sexes at the secondary level, or role models from the 
non-dominant race at either the elementary or secondary 
level. Neither rural nor urban programs provided an 
appropriate balance of activities of interest to both sexes. 
This report contains the survey instrument, 
recommendations for overcoming inequities in physical 
education programs, and 11 references. (SV) 



To Order Call 1-800-443-ERIC 




/ 



The Ins and Outs of 
Alternative Assessment: 
Outcome-Based 
Education and Other 
Innovations in Testing 

In response to the many requests 
from school systems for informa- 
tion on outcome*bascd education 
(OBE) and other alternatives to 
traditional stud ent assessment, 
the ERIC Document Reproduc- 
tion Service (EDRS) is pleased to 
offer a special collection on this 
topic Designed to meet the 
informational needs of teachers 
and administrators, this collec- 
tion presents the state-of-the-art 
on OBE, performance-based 
education, classroom assess- 
ments, and student portfolios- 
Some of tic topics included in 
this collection arc: 

■ Outcome-based education as 
an approach to improving 
school quality, 

■ Case studies (eg. Pasco, 
Washington and the Minne- 
sota model) of states and 
districts where OBE has been 
adopted; and 

■ Comparisons of alternative 
assessment protocols with 
traditional testing techniques. 

This microfiche collection is offered on 
an annual subscription basis for a cost 
of $1 95. The full subscription 
package includes the base collection, 
quarterly updates of newly released 
documents, a microfiche storage box, 
and hardcopy hdex (also updated 
quarterly). 



Infusing Multicultural 
Education Into Today's 
Schools 

Throughout the United States, 
school districts and State Depart- 
ments of Education have been 
making a commitment to multi- 
cultural education. This new 
special collection from the ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service 
(EDRS) offers teachers and 
administrators the most recent 
and relevant information on the 
topic. The collection includes 
specific resources, bibliographies, 
and activities on multicultural 
topics; evaluation reports of 
efforts of states and districts to 
implement multicultural cur- 
ricula; and, stcp-by-stcp instruc- 
tion onaddre sing the needs of 
a diverse student body through 
multicultural programming. 
Topics covered in this special 
collection include: 

■ Infusing multiculturalism into 
the arts, literature, history, 
and other subject areas, 
including physical education; 

■ Appreciating African-Ameri- 
can, Native American, Asi an, 
and Hispanic cultures; and 

■ A theoretical rationale for 
including multicultural edu- 
cation in school progr ammin g. 

This microfiche collection is offered on 
an annual subscription basis for a cost 
of $1 95. The full subscription 
package includes the base collection, 
quarterly updates of newly released 
documents, a microfiche storage box, 
and hardcopy index (also updated 
quarterly). 



Restructuring America's 
Schools: A Blueprint for 
Action 

Restructuring is central to 
educational reform. This new 
special collection from the ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service 
(EDRS) includes all documents 
on restructuring added to ERIC 
since 1988. This resource offers 
"hands-on 1 ' assistance to educa- 
tional practitioners in all schools 
in their quest to better serve 
students. The collection includes 
exemplary programs, case 
studies, and actual guidelines for 
facilitating change at the local 
level Examples of topics covered 
include: 

■ Developing a vision for 
change; 

■ The role of the principal in 
effecting reform; 

■ Teacher empowerment; and 

■ Decentralized budgeting and 
decision making. 

This microfictte collection is offeredon 
an annual subscription basis for a cost 
of $1 95. The full subscription 
package includes the base collection, 
quarterly updates of newly released 
documents, a microfiche storage box, 
and hardcopy index (also updated 
quarterly). 

To order coll: 1-800-443-ERIC 



ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service (EDRS) 

7420 Fullerton Road, Suite 110 
Springfield, Virginia 22153-2852 



ERLC 



All nc'tfl NNn^. JLMH.9/9MJp<Utr 

65 



