DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 268 579 



CS 209 724 



TITLE 



INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 




Literature, Literary Response, and the Teaching of 
Literature: Abstracts of Doctoral Dissertations 
Published in "Dissertation Abstracts International," 
July through December 1985 (Vol. 46 Nos. 1 through 
6). 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Reading and Communication 

Skills, Urbane, 111. 

85 

12p.; Pages may be marginally legible. 
Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

♦Adolescent Literature; Annotated Bibliographies; 
Autobiographies; Biblio therapy; *Childrens 
Literature; Content Analysis; Creative Dramatics; 
♦Doctoral Dissertations; *Educational Research; 



ng 



ABSTRACT 

This collection of abstracts is part of a continuing 
series providing information on recent doctoral dissertations. The 18 
titles deal with a variety of topics, including the following: (1) 
effects of creative drama instruction on the story grammar knowledge 
of field-dependent and field- independent pr* ^ary grade students; (2) 
a content assessment of trade books prefer Led by children in 
transescencu; (3) uses of the daily newspaper in the curriculum of 
elementary and secondary schools; (4) suicide in books for children 
age 11 through 14; (5) the treatment of childhood in autobiographies 
of twentieth century American women; (6) the effectiveness of 
bibliotherapy oi changing fourth, fifth, and sixth grade students' 
attitudes toward the elderly; (7) children's selection preferences 
based on the color, size, and thickness of books; (8) young adult 
novels as television films; (9) the role of the American father as 
revealed in selected fiction books for children in the elementary 
grades; (ID) native literature in junior and senior high school 
programs; and (11) children's perceptions of story content as 
elicited by three modes of presentation — the storyteller, the reader, 
and the sound slide sho>f. (HOD) 



*********************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 
A********************************************************************** 



o* .ot PMtrmtuT <* t docatkw* 

Office of Educational fleeeerch and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 



This document hat been reproduced ei 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 

O Minor changes have been made to ,m prove 
reproduction Quality 

• Points of view or opinions stated in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OEfil position or policy 



Literature, Literary Response, and the Teaching of Literature: 

Abstracts of Doctoral Dissertations Published in Dissertation 
Abstracts International , July through December 1985 (Vol. 46 
Nos. 1 through 6). 



Compiled by the Staff 
of the 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Reading and Communication Skills 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN QRANTEO BY 

UMI 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



The dissertation titles contained here are published with 
permission of the University Microfilms International, 
publisher 8 of Dissertation Abstracts International (copy- 
right (6) 1985 by University Microfilm International) 
and may not be reproduced withou: their proper permission. 



This bibliography has been compiled as part of a continuing serier 
designed to make information on relevant dissertations available to 
users of the ERIC system. Monthly issues of Dissertation Abstracts 
International are reviewed in order to compile abstracts ol 
dissertations on related topics, which thus become accessible in 
searches of the ERIC data base. Ordering information for dissertations 
themselves is included at the end of the bibliography. 

Abstracts of the following dissertations are included in this 
collection: 



Bush, Betty Johnson 
EFFECTS OF CREATIVE DRAMA 
INSTRUCTION ON THE STORY 
GRAMMAR KNOWLEDGE OF FIELD- 
DEPENDENT AND FIELD- INDEPENDENT 
PRIMARY GRADE STUDENTS 

D'Armond, Charlotte Dawn 
YOUNG ADULT NOVELS INTO TELE- 
VISION FILMS: A CONTENT 
ANALYTIC STUDY 

Ericson, Bonnie Ohrlund 
A DESCRIPTIVE STUDY OF THE 
INDIVIDUAL AND ^ROUP RESPONSES 
OF THREE TENTH- GRADE READERS 
TO TWO SHORT STORIES AND 
TWO TEXTBOOK SELECTIONS 

Gilmore, Carole Purcell 
CHILDREN'S SELECTION PRE- 
FERENCES BASED ON THE COLOR, 
SIZE, AND THICKNESS OF BOOKS 

Grant, Agnes 

NATIVE LITERATURE IN JUNIOR 
AND SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL 
PROGRAMS 

Green, Meryl 

THE DEVELOPMENT OF METAPHORIC 
COMPREHENSION AND PREFERENCE 

Kirkland, Catherine Elisabeth 
FOR THE LOVE OF IT: WOMEN 
WRITERS AND THE POPULAR ROMANCE 

Lehr, Susan Stewart 

A CHILD'S DEVELOPING SENSE OF 

THEME 

McKnight, Nancy T. 
A CONTENT ASSESSMENT OF TRADE 
BOOKS PREFERRED BY CHILDREN 
0 t* TRANSESCENCE 

ERIC 



Olson, Marilyn Ruth 
A STUDY OF THE USES OF THE 
DAILY NEWSPAPER IN THE CURRI- 
CULUM OF ELEMENTARY AND 
SECONDARY SCHOOLS 

Otstott, Michele 
TH~ ROLE OF THE AMERICAN 
FATHER AS REVEALED IN 
SELECTED FICTION BOOKS FOR 
CHILDREN IN THE ELEMENTARY 
GRADES: AN HISTORICAL 
OVERVIEW AND CONTENT ANALYSIS 

Rolando, Margaret Kernan 

AN INVESTIGATION OF CHILDREN'S 

PERCEPTIONS OF STORY CONTENT 

AS ELICITED BY THREE MODES OF 

PRESENTATION: THE STORYTELLER, 

THE READER, THE SOUND SLIDE 

SHOW 

Russell, David Alien 
A SURVEY OF COURSES IN LITER- 
ATURE FOR ADOLESCENTS AS TAUGHT 
IN SELECTED COLLEGES AND 
UNIVERSITIES 

Shiltz, Pauline Kay 

SUICIDE IN BOOKS FOR CHILDREN 

AGE 11-14 

Stone, Lorena May 
EXPLORING INTERPERSONAL PEACE 
CONCEPTS, EXEMPLARY LITERATURE, 
AND PEACE EDUCATION RESOURCES 
FOR THE SECONDARY SCHOOL 
ENGLISH CLASSROOM 

Unger, Myra Cozad 
THE TREATMENT OF CHILDHOOD IN 
AUTOBIOGRAPHIES OF TWENTIETH 
CENTURY AMERICAN WOMEN 



4 



Weixel, Kirk Richard 
TEACHING POETRY IN A NURSING 
HOME: A TWELVE- WEEK CURRICULUM 



Zeleznick, Eernadette A. Borgese 
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF BIBLIOTHERAPY 
ON CHANGING FOURTH r FIFTH, AND SIXTH 
GRADE STUDENTS' ATTITUDES TOWARD 
THE ELDERLY 




EFFECTS OF CREATIVE DRAMA INSTRUCTION ON THE 
STORY GRAMMAR KNOWLEDGE OF FIELD -DEPENDENT AND 
FIELD* INDEPENDENT PRIMARY GRADE STUDENTS 

Order No. DA8514608 
Bush, Betty Johnson, Ph D. University of Missouri • Kansas City, 
1965. 184pp. Chairman: John E. George 

The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship of 
creative drama instruction and the story grammar knowledge of 
second- and third-grade primary students. Also, the effects of 
different cognitive style tendencies and reading levels upon the 
effectiveness of comprehension reinforcement techniques were 
investigated. 

Fifty-six second- and third-grade students participated in the 
study. The subjects were placed in groups according to reading level 
as determined by the reading subtest of the Metropolitan 
Achiev e m e nt Test. The Children's Embedded Figures Test (CEFT) 
wee administered to each subject individually to determine cof nitive 
style tendencies. 

Following the determination of each subject's reading tevel and 
cognitive style tendency, two experimental groups were formed. 
These groups were formed on the basis of homogeneous reading 
abttty levels. Two teachers were trained in using both the creative 
drama procedure and the basal workbook/discussion procedure. 

Each group received instruction utilizing both treatments (three 
stones reinforced with Treatment A-creative drama procedure, and 
three stories reinforced with Treatment B-basal 
workbook/discussion). Following the treatment period for each story, 
each subject retold the story which was audio-taped and then 
transcribed verbatim by a teaching assistant forming a written 
narrative protocol. 

The written narrative protocol was then evaluated as to the 
student s use of story grammar knowledge in retelling the story. The 
protocol evaluations were judged by four professionally trained 
educators using the Protocol Evaluation Scale. 

The effects of the independent variables upon the dependent 
variable were analyzed using a three-factor ANOVA with repeated 
measures to compare mean scores. "?ne A NOVA yielded F-ratios for 
each independent variable and their interactions. 

Three conclusions were drawn from the results of the study: 
(a) the creative drama reinforcement procedure was found to be 
more effective with the higher readers of Group II. (b) the basal 
workbook/discussion reinforcement procedure was found to be more 
effective with the lower readers of Group I, and (c) the students with 
field-independent tendencies scored higher after both reinforcement 
procedures than the students with fieid -dependent tendencies- 



YOUNG ADULT NOVELS INTO TELEVISION FILMS: A 
CONTENT ANALYTIC STUDY Order No. DASS1 1 748 

O/Ahmonc, Cm* Atom Dawn, Ph.D. The Louisiana State University 
wid Agricultural and Mechanical Co/., 1984. 331 pp. Director J. 
Donald Rtgsdafe 

This study examined the material retained, altered, omitted or 
created specially for prime time television films baaed on young adult 
novate. The purp< * of the study was to determine the amount of 
original material retained by a specific television format, the telefilm. 

The telefilms studied were Go Aak Alice (1973) credited to Beatrice 
Sparka, adapted by Ellen M. Vioiett; Summer of My German Soldier 
(1871) by Bette Greene, adapted by Jane-Howard Hammerstein; and 
Are You In the House Aione? (1978) by Richard Peck, adapted by 
Judith Parker. 

Videotapes, transcripts, and the novels were studied by dividing 
t» tetter two into quarter pagea and categorizing them as to the 
function each performed in developing one of the following aspects of 
content theme, dramatic construction, characterization, dialogue and 
narration, description, aetting, and atyte. Reviewers and critics along 
with quantitative tables provided the data in individual chapters baaed 
on the content areas. 

Telefilms were found to deviate from the conterf ote m o n teintho 
novels an average of thirty-three percent with the most faithful 
anpwion cnengmg a ware of wis rrwnenai ana riwiwup 
cnengmg nsejny nev or we najajree* 

9 



Results of the study include: (1) Major plot Knee were increased 
and minor ones eliminated. (2) Theme wee exactly duplicated in only 
one of the telefilms. (3) Characterization was siinplAed and eduft 
roles enhanced. (4) Only a third of the dialogue and a tenth of the 
narrative was retained from the original. (5) Ten percent of the 
description in the telefilm had some basis in the novel. (8) Two 
telefilms increased the number of settings present**. (7) Style wee 
radically altered in only one of the telefilms. 

Three correlations became apparent: (1) the adapter who 
demonstrated the highest fidelity to the novelist's style showed a 
direct relation to the retention of the original wording and character 
study; (2) fidelity to content elements and retention of major plot Unee 
is interrelated; (3) a telefilm which does not change the amount of 
description is likely to also retain a large number of the novel's 
original tocatee. 



A DESCRIPTIVE STUDY OF THE INDIVIDUAL AND GROUP 
RESPONSES OF THREE TENTH-GRADE READERS TO TWO 
SHORT STORIES AND TWO TEXTBOOK ELECTIONS 

Order No. DA8508215 
Ericson, Bonnie Ohalund, Ph.D. Syracuse University, 1984. 214pp. 
Chairperson: Margaret J. Early 

If teachers are to help students become truly literate readers, they 
must lead their students beyond literal comprehension to critical and 
flexible response to both literature and exposition, two types of text 
which students encounter in and out of the classroom. To achieve 
this, they need an understanding of how students do read and 
reepond to these two types of text. This descriptive study comperes 
three adolescents* responses-articulated thoughts and feelinga 
evoked by a text during and following reading-to two short storiee 
end two textbook selections. These readers' expectations and group 
discussion responses are also examined. 

Three 1 0th -grade girts were interviewed to learn about their 
reading experiences and expectations. They responded 10 open* 
ended questions individually during and following their reading and 
aleo in group discussions. All response sessions were tape recorded 
end transcribed. Categories for describing responses, expectations, 
and group interaction were then identified or selected baaed on 
analysis of the transcriptions. All data were coded into the categories 
end exanrned by categories for similarities, differences, and patterns. 
Deecriptions of each of the three participants 1 ongoing, post-reading, 
group, and post-discussion responses are presented, as are 
deecriptions of text specific and general expectations. 

The findings of the study grow out of these descriptions. Among 
the findings for the three readers are the following: (1) each girt had 
a preferred way of responding which was similar for both the ehert 
stories and the textbook selections, (2) both types of text were 
evaluated on the basis of expectations for reading and knowledge 
end beliefs about text content, (3) all participants were able to benefit 
from group discussions, although to different degrees, and (4) all 
three girls demonstrated meta-response, awareness and monitoring 
of their responses, and were sensitive to the response patterns of the 
other group members. Overall, the findings support a theory of 
response which accounts for reader, text, and reading situation, and 
which also includes critical responses during aesthetic and efferent 
reading. Questions for future research were identified on the beeie of 
the findings. 



6 



CHILDREN'S SELECTION PREFERENCES BASED ON THE 
COLOR, SIZE, AND THICKNESS OF BOOKS 

Order No. DA6517H2 

GiiMOK. Carols Puucsll, Eo.O. Northern Arizona University, 1985. 

The purpose of the study was to determine how the external book 
characteristics of color, size, and thickness influence young 
children's book selection. Books for this study were specially bound 
to evaluate each of these characteristics independently within the 
school library setting. 

A total of 352 kindergarten, first, and second grade children 
participated by first selecting three books from amongst thirty books 
of ten different colors. Thereafter, the children were randomly 
aaafg n il to one of two groups to select books by either size or 
thickness. Two sets of eighteen books representing six A fferent sizoe 
or thicknesses, respectively, were arranged for the children to make 

size C thickness selections. Each child was obeerved as Ns 
selections were made and the choices recorded on a student 
chacksheet 

Tabulations of the data were analyzed utilizing Chi Square for the 
children's first second, and third choices. Each of the external 
characteristics studied was f xind to be statistically significant (.001). 
In making their selections, children predominately tended to choose 
books of three different colors, sizes, or thicknesses. 

Several conclusions appear warranted from the data: (1) the 
external characteristics of color, size, and thickness do influence 
ch Wren's book selections; (2) the different selections by boys and 
girls are statistically significant (.05) for color and size, but not 
significantly different for thicknees; (3) neither the children's grade 
level nor reading ability (high, middle, or low) is significant for color, 
size, or thickness selections; and (4) children tend to be strongly 
drawn toward extremes of book size. Comparisons with previous 
rssaarch are p re een t e d along with methodological recommendations 
for further i tmpttcabcos from the findings for book binders, 
p MbMe r ^llbrartane,andleacfviraareeMgQea^. 

NATIVE LITERATURE IN JUNIOR AND SENIOR HIGH 
SCHOOL PROGRAMS 

Quant, Agnes, Ph.D. T/»t University of Manitoba (Canada), 1965. 

The literature of North American Indians is not widely represented 
In Canadian schools. Because Native students are staying in schools 
In larger numbers than ever before K is important that Natus and non- 
Naive students alike receive positive and accurate information about 
Natives. Literature is an effective vehicle for the transmission and 
understanding of cultures. There have been problems in the 
acceptance of Native literature because the concept of "Native 
Msrature" has not beer, understood. Because it is still closely linked 
wHh the oral tradition there has been a reluctance tr accept it asa 
legitimate body of llteratu.e. Problems of transferring this literature 
from the oral to the written, in translation from Native languages to 
English end in selecting among variant van ons are examined. Myth 
and legend are defined and their importance in a culture are expi **d 
wNh special emphasis on folklore relevant to the development of a 
chid. Traditional poetry is described and its role as a functional 
aapect of Native society is explained. A brief historical survey of 
Native literature from pre- contact to contemporary times is given. 
Better known contemporary writers and their major works, both 
#norican and Canadian, are discussed. The mnjc aspects of 
cuntemporary writing are discussed. The dissertation concludes with 
a represents**, annotated bMography of Neft* literature suitable 
for Grades V» rnd XII literature courses. 



THE DEVELOPMENT OF METAPHORIC COMPREHENSION 
AND PREFERENCE Order No. DA651 3596 

G*kn,Me*yl,EdD. Boaron University, 1965. 161pp. Major 
Professor: J. Bruce Fraser 

This study sought to determine the effect of specific grounds on 
the development of metaphonc comprehension and preference and 
the relationship between the two domains 

Over 300 children in grades 1, 4, 7 and 8 pai ..cipated tn a multiple 
choice task. 32 adults were included in the preference portion only. In 
the preference portion, subjects heard a sentence fragment (topic) 
and three completions (vehicles) each based on a different ground, 
from which they selected the one they "liked best." In the 
comprehension portion, subjects heard 1 2 short stories, each biased 
toward one of the grounds and followed by 3 entices, one of which 
was a metaphoric completion. The grounds were form (static- 
perceptual), movement (dynamic-perceptual) and abstract 
(conceptual). 

Results showed an increase in comprehension with age; by grade 
4, children comprehended metaphors regardless of ground. No aex 
deferences were found. There was no relationship between 
comprehension end preference based on ground. At all ages, 
including adult form and movement were preferred almost equaJty, 
abstract was preferred least. There was no significant increase in 
abstract prefer mce with age. 

Academically talented and average students were compared in 
grades 7 and 8. The academically talented group comprehended 
significantly more metaphors thin the average students. There was 
no significant difference in their preference patterns. 

It would appear that metaphoric comprehension and p re f e ren ce 
are processed differently. Comprehension is approached ns an 
analytic problem solving task. This constraint is absent in the 
preference task. Individual differences and aesthetic judgments 
appear to be the crucial factors in preference. 



FOR THE LOVE OF IT: WOMEN WRITERS AND THE 
POPULAR ROMANCE Order No, DA06OM94 

•Oakland, Catherine Elisabeth, Ph.D. University ol Pennsylvania, 
1964. 357pp. Supervisor Larry Gross 

This study is an investigation of the media subculture constituted 
by female writers of the mass-market romance genre. Through In* 
depth telephone interviews with 55 published and aspiring romance 
authors in early 1963, three topics were explored: (1) thewrttsre* 
view of the popular romance genre, then approaching Ha peak; 

(2) their views of their own romance manuscripts, their work; and 

(3) the romance writing process itself. 

For the majority of respondents, previous romance reading 
experience had shaped the decision to write, and also contributed to 
such things as future writing goals, work habits, writing likes and 
dislikes, and the "inspiration" so often cited as a part of the writing 
process. These women were identified as romance readers-turned- 
writers who were drawn to a moro active participation in the genre not 
only because of their frequently extensive romance reading histories, 
but because they see this as an ideal in-home career allowing them to 
fulfill family responsibilities while earning money through independent 
effort. 

Through the interviews and through participant-observation of a 
natit.ut romance writers* group, the study also examined the nature 
of the romance community as a whole and the extent to which It 
influences members' views of their work and their situation In a larger 
literary and social arena. The authors thus talked about their books as 
"art" the relationship of romance reading and writing activities to 
feminism, and the political situation of romance writers with respect to 
editors end the publishing industry. A picture emerges of a cohesive 
community whose constituents view the romance itself, and both 
romance reading and writing activities, as contributing to a significant 
women's comm un i ca tion network that endows pro f s esicin al status ' 
and respect on Ha producers while at the same time is concerned with 
the articulation of a uniquely female fantasy. 



ERJC 



A CHILD'S DCVELOPING SENSE OF THEME 

Order No. DAM1S979 
Lbm*, Susan Stewart, Ph.D. The Ohio Star* University, 1985. 2l6pp 
Advieer Sharon Fox 

No research has been done exploring the elementary aged child's 
•WHty to identify or generate theme using real children's books in 
natural research settings, in the present study 60 kindergarten, 
second and fourth grade children, comprised of high and low 
literature exposure groups as determined by using the Revised Hue* 
Literature inventory, were read a'oud three books in two separate 
u sale ns Two of the books htd strong matching themes. Two genres 
were used. .eaJistic fiction and folktales. Developmental^ 
kindergarten children have not been shown to be capable of 
vastafeing themes from books. Furthermore, research suggests that 
second and fourth grade children are not adept with identifying main 
ik\ passages. Since theme is a higher level abstraction than main 
t one would not expect elementary aged children to be able to 
i theme statements. An informal Interview was taped for each 
student which probed for thereof rom different perspectives, which 
differed greatly from previous research. Answers were analyzed using 
s Thematic Sc*e. Results indicate a parallel growth pattern by grade 
and itsrature exposure group in ability lo generate theme. The 
Identification of theme appears to be an early development in 
checker., with folktales being more difficult to identify man realistic 
fiction Contrary to previous research, kindergarten children can 
summarize stories and they do attend to the internal motivation of 
character. Kindergarteners in the high literature exposure group were 
able to state theme at and above concrete' levels, whereas the low 
group was not. Second end fourth grsde children analyzed and 
generalized themes from stories contrary to previous research. 
However, there was a strong rotation between ability to generate 
theme and exposure to children's literature for all three grades 
beyond the .05 levels The use of real books in a natural research 
setting acted as a stimulus in eliciting thematic response, which 
previous research has been unable to attain. Focusing on the child's 
perspective of meaning indicated that children can abstract themes 
from atones heard, which differ from adult answers, but nonetheless, 
are congruent with the text itself. The use of quality children's 
literature at home and in the classroom as a source of building 
background knowledge, which is imoortant for reading 
co mprehension, cannot be massed enough. 



A CONTENT ASSESSMENT OF TRADE BOOKS PREFERRED 
SY CHILD* -N IN TRANSESCENCE Order No. DA 65 14693 
McKisght, Nancy T., Ph.D. The University of Akron, 1965. 258pp. 

The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of literature in 
meeting the needs of children in trsnsescence. Developmental 
characteristics and issues related to trsnsescence were investigated. 
Thae e elemen ts were then described as they occurred in the 
characters and contents of trade booka preferred by chidren ages 10- 

A random sample of 20 books was selected from s meaner book let 
compiled from three national or regional surveys of the reeding 
preferences of 10-14 year-olds. Content aaaeaament was the method 
of analysis used to gather data to anewer the questions posed for th* 
study. 



All but one of the books contained one or more developmental 
tues according to Erikson. The issue of intimacy was the meet 
prevalent The ieeue of industry and initiative occurred twice as 
frequently as did the identity issue. Although there were some 
differences noted about the occurrence of issues relative to the age 
suitability of books, si: of the issues were found across the entire age 
range. 

The elements of cognitive level of functioning, egocentriam, moral 
lessoning, and developmental isues were present in the books 
reviewed in this study. It was concluded that the trade books used in 
this study thereby fulfill the developmental needs of children in 
tranee ac ence. 



A STUDY OF TPS USES Oi- THE DAILY NEWSPAPER IN 
THE CURRICULUM OF ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY 
SCHOOLS Order No. DA6507066 

(Xson, Marilyn Ruth, Ph.D. University of Oregon, 1984. 183pp. 
Adviser Edna P. DeHaven 

The purpose of this study was to identify anc* describe the use of 
free newspapers in schools within the circulation area of one daUy 
newspaper. The study exploi sd four questions: Who uses the 
newspapers? When end how much are newspapers used 9 How are 
newspapers used? Why are newspapers used? 

Two levels of da'e were used to identify patterns of usage and 
practice among teachers; (a) information from teachers' orders for 
ctesroom sets of free newspapers over a four year period (i960* 
1184), end (b) information from a survey of teaching practicee among 
£22 lhe new »P*PW during the last school year 

(1883*1864). A curriculum model based on a theory of interaction 
among skills, substance, and attitudes was used to analyze the 
practices described. 7 

Findings indicated that those who used the newspaper were ae 
lady to be elementary as secondary teachers and to be in either 
urban or rural districts. Over 50% of the teachers who ordered the 
newspaper did so only once. 

Teachers appeared to be influenced to order newspapers by 
reminders of its potential and availability as a teaching resource. 
Findings indicated that most teachers used the newspaper for short 
units rather than for regular use throughout the school year. Only 10% 
of those who ordered the newspaper during the last year had ordered 
a the othe r three years. 

Teachers* intentions and their methods for using the newspaper 
•howed inconsistencies. Teachers reported that most newspaper 
activities were aimed at instruction about the newspaper, but a study 
of the assignments indicated that the newspaper was most Vten ueed 
m text for teaming content. Similarly, teachers reported that the main 
goel of newspaper use was skill development, but they identified the 
moot positive outcomes of newspaper studies to be improvements in 
knowledge snd attitudes. 

Teachore who had ordered and used the newspaper in the 
daasroom reported that they read the newspaper regularly and 
valued It as an information source. Even so, 63% of those who 
completed the survey indicated they ware leee than sure that they 
would order the newspaper for their daaaroom If ft were not free. 



THorsouHs of the study s howed that the book characters 
JUp ley id deve l op ment ch ara cte rtei ci found in t ra neee c en c a. The 

majority of characters were depicted st Pisgef s concrete stage of 
oogniion. A small number were st the transitional and the formal 
operaional stages. Approximately one-third of the characters 
*h**sd the trait of egocentriam. 

A large number of books contained situations in which moral 
diorama or conflict was present The majority of characters reasoned 
at KoMberg's Preconventional Stage 2 level in which reasoning is 
baaed upon one's needs. An additional number of characters used 
Conventional Stage 3 reaaoning which is baaed upon the expectation 
of others. Although several characters used the highest level of moral 
reasoning, Poetconventional, the majority functioned at Stages 2 and 
1 TNa indicated fiat tie characters in tie booka reflected thia 
cnaracisnasc aa n m rouna mi 




8 



THE ROLE OF THE AMERICAN FATHER AS REVEALED IN 
SELECTED FICTION BOOKS FOR CHILDREN IN THE 
ELEMENTARY GRADES: AN HISTORICAL OVERVIEW AND 
CONTENT ANALYSIS Order No. DA8509233 

Otstott, MiCHCif. Ph.D. forts Woman's University, 1984. 291pp. 
Chairman: Bernard Schlessinger 

This descriptive study was undertaken for the purpose of 
investigating the portrayal of the American father as revealed in 
selected fiction books for children in the primary (K-3) and upper (4*6) 
elementary grades. Periods under consideration were the years since 
1090. Since the problem under investigation dealt with trends, 
changes and subject matter of children's literature over specific time 
periods, the content analysis method was used . 

Three hundred and fifty-three fathers were identified in the 361 
Wee which were found to have met fhe criteria for inclusion in the 
study. Category designators for portrayal were determined by the 
activities the father was described as doing with or for his child, 
and/or by the problem or conflict presented in the book. 

The role of the father most often encountered was that of 
economic provider with 229 fathers or sixty-four percent shown in this 
wann e r. This role portra/a' *as most common at the oiimary and 
upper elementary levels. At the primary level the father was portrayad 
more as one who supports and nu lures his child; at the upper level, 
he wee seen more as an authority figure. 

Fathers were seen to be involved with their children in 254 distinct 
activities. When the number of incidences of each is examined, the 
number is tragically low. 

Throughout the study, the majority of the fathers were shown as 
being married with a family where the mother was present This 
portrayal was consistent st both the primary and upper levels. While 
the father is beginning to be portrayed in other types of marital 
fftualftons, the portrayal is not as frequent as It is in sctual life. Also, 
the fathers who ve not married to the child's mother are often shown 
as being generally ineffectual and often in a negative manner, 
especially at the upper level. 

With the exception of marital discord, the same types of problems 
and conflicts surfaced throughout the study. However, fathers were 
shown as dealing with the upheavals in a more graphic manner and 
expressed more emotion in the recent titles. Fathers also appeared 
more vulnerable in later books, being portrayed as being less self • 
confident and in control. 



AN INVESTIGATION OF CHILDREN'S PERCEPTIONS OF 
STORY CONTENT AS ELICITED BY THREE MODES OF 
PRESENTATION: THE STORYTELLER, THE READER, THE 
SOUND SLIDE SHOW Order No. DA85 1 2090 

Rounoo, Margarst Kernan, Ec.D. Montana Stete University, 1965. 
182pp. Chairperson: Henry Worrest 

This atucV attempted to determine if three different modes of 
presenting a story-storyteller, book and reader, and sound slide 
show-represented different information potential by bringing different 
contant to children's attention. Ninety third graders from three 
elementary schools in Butte, Montana, during spring 1984, were 
presented in small groups, with one of three presentations of the fairy 
tale. "The Wild Swans" and administered s paper and pencil 
instrument to determine their perceptions of three different types of 
content from the story-sffeciive, inference and factual. This content 
hod emerged from preliminary investigation with students and an 
adult panel analysis of the story text. 

Since there was no existing instrument to determine children's 
perception of the story content, s crucial preliminary was the 
instrument development which (though ancillary to the original intent 
of the study) became a major portion of the research. Aa most similar 
cross-media research has utilized individual presentations with 
f ollowup interviews for data collection, this paper and pencil 
tfwtntfnttwL mom naadaw amenable to statistical analysis. Droved a 
novel approach wor ra ning further contideraioa eepeciafty with 
dIVerent age groupa and reeding levels. 



RssuKs indicated there wee no statistically significant' difference 
ar.tong the modes in affective content in the foreground of attention, 
number of and ov^rsH inferences and factual recal. There wee no 
difference in approximately eighty percent of the specific inferences. 
While no definite conclusions about media differences could be 
drawn, the research process yielded some relevant observations: 
there appeared more active student participation with book/reader 
and sound slide presentations than with the storyteller. The format of 
the sound slide show illustrations may have influenced those specific 
questions evidencing response differences. Sound slide show and 
book/reader presentations m*.y not differ enough to elicit different 
perceptions, although this beers further investigation. 

The following cross-media research is also suggested: further 
research into the development of suitable paper-pencil instruments; 
continued investigation into the possible differences in information 
potential of different media, problem solving fostered, preferences 
retted to learning style, feng-term effects, and delineation of specific 
media ottributoe. 

A SURVEY OF COURSES IN LITERATURE FOR 
ADOLESCENTS AS TAUGHT IN SELECTED COLLEGES AND 
UNIVERSITIES Order No. D AS507979 

RUSSEU, David Ausn, Ph.D. The University of /ows, 1984. 249pp. 
Supervisor John W. Conner 

Sfafvmenf of the Problem. Do college and university programs in 
English education and in library science implement recommendatione 
reUdve to the study of literature for adolescents? With focus on the 
basic course in adolescent literature, research questions were 
designed to determine if the course were offered and for whom, as 
well as its emphasis, content and methodology. An additional 
dimension was to determine if the course differed according to the 
academic program in which it was taught 

Research Methodology. Graduate programs in secondary English 
education and in library science were selected for a questionnaire 
survey. Responses were received from 175 of the 200 programs 
surveyed. Data were analyzed and reported in the form of taftee and 
percentages for three academic programs which emerged from the 
analysis: English education, English, and library science. Some data 
were analyzed by using the Chi-square test for independence, with 
the alpha level of .05. 

Findings. The course was offered by 72.5 percent of the 
reepondents. The same course was required or recommended for 
both teachers and librarians by 42.1 percent Wide reading and 
inclusion of topics judged to be of central importance (juvenile novel, 
Hersry criteria, adolescent development) characterized the course, 
nsgardleae of the program in which it was taught. Significant 
deferences among programs were found, however, for other topics or 
Hems of course content beyond the three judged to be of central 
importance. For example, library science respondents assigned 
greater omphaaie to review sources, nonaction reeourcee, and 
nenprint materials. 



Generally, r e ep ondents used a variety of teaching methods. The 
«ndings for the methods judged most beneficial were inconclusive. 

Conclusions. The large number of institutions in the sample which 
offered adolescent literature affirms its importance in training English 
tsachers and librarians. Because it was common prsctice to aeeign 
wide reading and * > emphasize three items of content judged to be 
essential, the program in which the course is tsught is not s critical 
consideration, ideally, however, the course should be offered both in 
education and in library science programs in order to accommodate 
the differences in job functions between English teachers and 
•brariana. 



ERJC 



9 



SUICIOC IN SOOKS FOR CHILDREN AGE 11-14 

OrdtrNo. DA8514707 
Smnjx, Pauunc Kar , Ph.D. Th§ University of Akron, 1986. 333pp. 
Judith A. Noble 



The purpose of this study was to determine what attitudes. 
pNtoeophies, and information about children'* suicides are presented 
to cNMrWa contemporary realistic fiction and nonfiction books 
pnWe he d in tie United Staissdunng the yoors 1970-1984, for 
cNWren ages 1 1 to 14 years, and to compere the findings with current 

*tftftes on sufctte to determine the accuracy of ktfermation which 
ch»*en might encounter m books. Further, this study investigated 
WNotherapy ae one method of auidtfe prevention by aseee^ng the 

information found in books concerning suicide and by suggesting 
****** w^fl **ee books to help children understand the varying 
y*** °* suicide. The major questions which this study sought to 
answer revolved around attitudes, philosophies, *nd information 
about suicide. 

The sample for this study consisted of 27 fiction and 9 nonaction 
boofce (all that were available) concerned with suicide or attempted 
suicide. These bottks were published between 1970-1984 and were 
recommended as being of interest to children 11 to 14 years old. 

The research technique of content anclysis was used in analyzing 
the books. Thirteen predetermined categories were employed for the 
action books and five predetermined categories were utilized with the 
nonaction books. 

Each book was read in its entirety, and all passages referring to 
thepnjdetermined categories were recorded and tabulated. In 
addition, the nonfiction books were summarized and compared to 
current research for accuracy. Tne findings were used for 
conclusions and recommendations. 

Thirteen conclusions were suggested for the children's fiction 
bcoks and Ave conclusions were drawn for the children's nonfiction 
books. The major conclusion regarding children's books and suicide 
was: Taken as a whole, the children's fiction and nonfiction books 
**** * analyzed, seemed to give an adequate and realistic 
preeentation on the subject of children's suicides. It was concluded 
5ha? there were no gross distortions or serous exaggerations of ;eaiity 
j"** children's fiction books. It was encouraging to note that to 
some extent children's fiction books on suicide were reflecting what 
current reeeerch wee reporting. 

EXPLORING INTERPERSONAL PEACE CONCEPTS, 
EXEMPLARY LITERATURE, AND PEACE EDUCATION 
RESOURCES FOR THE SECONDARY SCHOOL ENGLISH 
CLASSROOM Order No. DA8508542 

Stoi*<Loa»u May, Ph.D. University of Merylend, 1984. 222po. 
Director: JohnC.Carr 

The urgency of peace is being felt by increasing numbers of 
people as they become cognizant of the complexities of living in * 
world poised for war; yet, peace education is almost nonexistent in 
elementary ano secondary schools. A lack of clarity of definition, 
goale, and approaches has added to the complexity of developing 
peace education curricula for these students. 

This study explored the feasibility for the development of a 
secondary level literature course for the English classroom to support 
JhJIheme of peace education, baaed on the identification of 
interpersonal peace concepts worthy of being taught, the 
identification of a boc> « exemplary literature appropriate to a 
eacondary level English class, and the identification of the availability 
of eupplementary resources for teaching peace. 

Six national peace education leaders deemed the following 
Interpersonal peace concepts aa moat worthy of being taught to the 
secondary school student: conflict resolution, social justice, global 
awareness, nonviolence, and world community. Theee five concepts 
were adop.sd for the remainder of the study. 
^Recommended literary works from the genres of short story, 
poetry, novel, and drama were rated by three secondary school 
teachers of English and five supervisors of English on the criteria of 
literary merit," "exemplifies concept," "interest level," "reading 
level," and "availability." Ftftyono selector* Judged es appropriated 

ERiC 



A list of thirty-seven organizations end thirty-one print resources 
for teaching peace was compiled by the researcher on the basis of 
her examination of peace education materials and the 
recommendations of peace education leaders. 

It wee concluded that the development of a sec >ndary level 
literature course for the English classroom is feasible, there is 
appropriate literature for teaching interpersonal peace concepts, and 
supplementary materials and information exist to support the teachino 
of peace. 

Recommendations for practice and further reeeerch include 
deeigning s course of study strjcNred on the information provided in 
Ihie diooertation and looting the efficacy gf such a courae. 



THE TREATMENT OF CHILDHOOD IN AUTOBIOGRAPHIES 
OF TWENTIETH CENTURY AMERICAN WOMEN 

Order No. DA8513793 
Unge*,My*aCoud,Eo.D. University of Kensas, 1984. 250pp. 
Chairman: N. RayHiner 

In order to investigate the perspectives autobiography-a formally 
shaped first person account of all or part of an individual s own life- 
brings to the study of female American childhood, over one hundred 
autobiographies written by American women (most were bom after 
1890) were surveyed, in addition to numerous works on the nature of 
autobiography, sex-role formation, women's history, and childhood 
development and history. 

Both the thesis and conclusion of this study is that identification 
and analysis of what autobiographers specify aa having shaped 
themselves, as well as investigation into the factors that shape a 
particular view of seft, provide data from which to draw valid 
inferences and generalizations about the experience of childhood, if 
that data is scrutinized with an awareness of its limitations. 

Chapters 2-5 deal with the four topics which emerged from study 
of the work of twentieth century American female autobiographers 
about the nature of childhood and follow a similar organizational 
pattern. Each chapter begins with s general introduction to the topic 
of the chapter, drawing upon a variety of autobiographies and other 
sources for examples. Then each chapter extensively anafyzee from 
2-4 autobiographies in which the main concern of the chapter ie 
embodied. These analyses ere followed by brief observation. 

Works extensively analyzed are as follows: Ch. 2, "Recreating the 
'Feel' of Childhood" -Seven Houses? A Memoir of Tirrm and Pfacea by 
Josephine Johnson, How Dear To My Hea/t by Emily Kimbrough, A 
Quaker Childhood by Helen Whitall Thomaa Flexner; Ch. 3, "Role 
Model:*"-/ Know my me Caged Bird Sings by Maya Angelou, 
Harhoerry Winter by Margaret Mead; Ch. 4, "The Development of Sex 
Roles"-77>e Woman Warrior by Maxine Hong Kingston, Fifth Chlneee 
Daughter by Jade Snow Wong; Ch. 5, "Success in Leaving Home 1 '- 
Looking Back by Joyce Meynerd , Home f o the Wilderness by SeNy 
Canighar, Facts of Life by Maureen Howard, 77* Hearthstone of My 
Heart by Elizabeth Borton de Trevito. 



10 



TEACHING POETRY IN A NURSING HOME: A TWELVE- 



ttfem,K*RK Richaro, D.A. Cernegie-Meiton University, 1984. 117pp. 

Thii dissertation provides a twelve- week curriculum applied 
s pocttcfcly to nursing home teaching. The twelve-week curriculum is 
derived from a course that I taught at Laurel Crest Manor nursing 
home, Cambria County. Pennsylvania between October 1981 and 
January 1962. In the first part of the dissertation I gamine differences 
batmen nursing home and traditional classroom teaching and assess 
current leaching practices in courses with the elderly. This part of the 
dheortafion discusses circumventing physical handicaps and 
choosing themes and subjects related to older people. 

In My review of the Laurel Crest Manor poetry course, I discuss the 
necessity of staff support and participation in the class sessions. I 
also darify the three-fold purpose of the Laurel Crest Manor course: 
to mr * available the reading and appreciation of poetry to people 
eta eight otherwise be denied such an opportunity; to provide a 
sM wu lsi ng social event for people who have little chance for such an 
activity; and to allow nursing home residents to explore their 
experiences and emotions through poems. Before beginning a class- 
by-class review of the Laurel Crest Manor course, I discuss poetry 
SStocMen and critical method. 

I^r .tview of the Laurel Crest Manor course examines the ten 
dessee, describing my intentions, evaluating student response, and 
dtocuasftng student poems. After my appraisal of the tenth class, I 
brisfty assess the strengths and weaknesses of the Laurel Crest 
Manor course and explain the changes I made in developing the 
twe l ve we ek curriculum. 

The next section is the twelve-week curriculum with objectives, 
method* and procedures, and rationale provided for each lesson. 

My concluding chapter discusses additional poems for teaching, 
elaborates upon the social effects of nursing home poetry courses, 
assesses the value of poetry readings for the elderly, emphasizes the 
importance of presenting poetry orally, and reiterates the need for 
nursing home courses. In a sslective bibliography I abo inoude 
l e fo r en cea on poetry therapy for readers interested in a therapeutic 
approach to poetry. 

THE EFFECTIVENESS OF BIBLIOTHERAPY ON CHANGING 
FOURTH, FIFTH, AND SIXTH GRADE STUDENTS' 
ATTITUDES TOWARD THE ELDERLY Order No. DA8509283 
Ziliznick, BtRXADCTTE A. Borgesc, Eo.D. Temple University, 1965. 
143pp. Major Adviser: Howard E. Blake 

The purpose of this study was to determine whether the use of the 
bibliotherapeutic process using realistic fictional literature could 
affect the attitudes of elementary age children toward the elderly. 

This study included 67 fourth, fifth, and sixth grade students who 
were randomly divided into experimental and control groups at each 
grade level. No pretest was given oae not to disclose the true 
meaning of the study, which the students thought was a program to 
gain additional reading class credit. 

During a three-week period the three exoerimental groups were 
randomly assigned to read three fiction boons containing rnaSstif 
portrayals of elderly characters, while the control groups were 
randomly aaaig.ied to read three fiction book* which contained no 
elderly characters. The books were not discussed in either group. 
Each chad was administered s multiple-choice test of comprehension 
on each of the three books. 

The instrument used to determine attitudinal differences was 
Tuckman Lorge Adaptation II Attitude Inventory which was adaptsted 
and pilot-tested by the researcher. This was administered to each 
child in both the experimental and control groupa at the conclusion of 
the three week study. 

The data collected from the attitude inventory waa analyzed by 
using a two-way analysis of variance procedure to test for significant 
differences, if any. A one-way analysis of variance procedure was 
used to test the comprehension test scores concerning the 
correlation of higher comprehension ability and greater positive 
attitude. 

The results indicated that no aignificant differences in attitude 
were ehown between the experimental and control groupa or among 
the three grade levels, and there waa no interaction between 



treetmant end grade levels. The nnmprehonelon teen anefrsie 
^catodthetsuidoo fc scori ng h*ghy^ 
if »pooh^at tt udoelswonj»»oidorVtian « 



WOK CURRICULUM 



Order No. DA650630S 




Copies of the dissertations may be obtained by addressing your request to: 

University Microfilms International 

Dissertation Copies 

Post Office Box 1764 

Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106 

or by telephoning (toll-free) 1-800-521-3042 



ERLC 



12 



