DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 424 528 



CG 028 833 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Ashlock, Larry; Hayman, Peter 
A Survey of Stress-Related Illnesses. 

1998-08-14 

23p . ; Paper presented at the American Psychological 
Association Annual Convention (106th, San Francisco, August 
14-18, 1998) . 

Reports - Research (143) -- Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

Adjustment (to Environment); Adults; Counseling Services; 
Males; Medical Research; *Posttraumatic Stress Disorder; 
Predictor Variables; Profiles; ^Stress Variables; ^Veterans 
*S tress (Biological) 



ABSTRACT 



The prevalence of stress-related medical conditions in 
clients of Readjustment Counseling Service at Veterans Centers was 
investigated. The purpose of the study was to gain further knowledge 
specifically pertaining to the long-term health consequences of exposure to 
combat trauma. A review of relevant literature is provided. Veterans Center 
clients (N=600) were surveyed using a five-page self-report checklist 
regarding their histories of 56 stress-related medical conditions. 

Demographic characteristics are described. The results indicated that 
veterans exposed to high stress (combat) reported more medical problems than 
did veterans not exposed to high stress (noncombat) . Among body systems, 
musculoskeletal and respiratory systems were shown to be especially affected 
by the high stress. Age differences are reported. Native American vets 
reported the highest average number of medical conditions, but no differences 
were found among ethnic groups in types of medical conditions. Veterans who 
reported a high number of psychological symptoms also reported more 
stress-related medical conditions than others. Results and clinical 
implications are discussed. (Author /EMK) 



★ ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★■nr** 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ 



028833 



Stress-Related Illnesses 1 



oo 

(N 

Tf 

<N 

Tf 



Q 



W 



A Survey of Stress-Related Illnesses 
Larry Ashlock 
& 



Peter Hayman 

Readjustment Counseling Service 
Department of Veterans Affairs 
Bay Pines, Florida 



Presented at American Psychological Association 
San Francisco 
August 14, 1998 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Running head: STRESS-RELATED ILLNESSES 



2 



^ u ® department of education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality. 



• Points of v»ew or opinions stated in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERl position or policy- 



“PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

L . ^SV \L^C.K 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



Stress-Related Illnesses 2 



ABSTRACT 

The prevalence of stress-related medical conditions in Readjustment 
Counseling Service (RCS) Vet Center clients was investigated. Six hundred 
Vet Center clients were surveyed regarding history of 56 stress-related 
medical conditions. The results indicated that veterans exposed to high stress 
(combat) reported more medical problems than did veterans not exposed to 
high stress (non-combat). Among body systems, musculoskeletal and 
respiratory systems were shown to be especially affected by the high stress. 
Veterans who reported a high number of psychological symptoms (PTSD) 
also reported more stress-related medical conditions than others. 




3 



Stress-Related Illnesses 3 



A Survey of Stress-Related Illnesses 

Although the relationship between psychological stress and physical 
illness was elaborated more than forty years ago (Selye, 1956), much remains 
to be learned about the long term health consequences of severe 
psychological trauma. Our purpose in conducting this study was to gain 
further knowledge specifically as pertains to the long term health 
consequences of exposure to combat traiuna. Of late, this issue has become 
critical as changes to the nation’s healthcare system for veterans have 
mandated shifting of resources and increased collaborative endeavors among 
providers of psychological and physical health care. 

Selye had speculated that high stress accompanied by chronic 
hyperarousal would eventually lead to physical damage to one or more body 
systems (Selye, 1956). More recently, Everly (1989) concluded that the 
increased blood pressure, muscle tension, and heart rate associated with high 
stress was at the psychogenesis of a number of gastrointestinal, 
cardiovascular, respiratory, musculoskeletal, skin, immune, and psychological 
disorders. Although the precise mechanisms by which chronic or severe 
stress could lead to development of physical health problems remain unclear, 

it has been speculated that functional changes in endocrine or hormonal 

o 

ERLC 



4 



Stress-Related Illnesses 4 



systems could result in weakened immune systems and consequent increased 
vulnerability to various diseases (Schneiderman, McCabe, & Baum, 1992). 

Research with combat veterans has generally supported a link between 
psychological stress and physical illness. The National Vietnam Veterans 
Readjustment Study reported that men and women exposed to high levels of 
war zone stress reported higher rates of physical health problems than other 
theater veterans, era veterans, and civilians (Kulka, Schlenger, Fairbank, 
Hough, Jordan, Mannar, & Weiss, 1990). Also, recent researchers 
investigating biological changes in male Vietnam Veterans with PTSD 
concluded that pennanent changes occurred in the regulation of the 
hypothalmic-pituitary-adrenal axis following traumatic experiences (Yehuda, 
Boisoneau, Lowy, & Giller, 1995). 

Several investigators reported evidence that certain reactions to high 
stress (e.g., PTSD) may exacerbate subsequent health problems (Friedman & 
Schnurr, 1996). Wolfe, Schnurr, Brown and Furey (1994) showed that 
exposure to high stress and presence of PTSD symptoms were together more 
predictive of health problems in trauma survivors than exposure to trauma 
alone. Similarly, Boscarino (1997) found that veterans with PTSD have 
higher lifetime prevalence of circulatory, digestive, musculoskeletal, and 
other disorders as many as twenty years after serving in the military. 

ERIC 



5 



Stress-Related Illnesses 5 



It is important to note that one recent study failed to find support for a 
link between psychological stress and physical illness. Gray, Coate, 
Anderson, Berg, Wignall, Knoke, and Barrett-Connor (1996) examined the 
utilization of health services by Persian Gulf veterans. They found that 
combat and non-combat veterans had similar rates of hospitalization over a 
two-year period following the Persian Gulf war. 

Specific purposes of our study were to answer the following questions. 
Do veterans exposed to high stress (combat) report more health problems 
than veterans not exposed to high stress (non-combat)? What body systems 
are most vulnerable to combat stresses? What demographic characteristics of 
veterans are associated with increased risk for health problems? And, are 
veterans who report psychological problems more likely to report health 
problems? 

Veterans participating in this study were active clients of Department 
of Veterans Affairs Readjustment Counseling Service Vet Centers. Vet 
Centers are small (average staff of four persons), community-based 
counseling centers established by Public Law in 1979 to assist veterans with 
such readjustment issues as PTSD, substance abuse, employment problems, 
family or marital issues, homelessness, and other concerns. 



Stress-Related Illnesses 6 



Method 

Subjects 

Twelve Vet Centers in the Southeast were randomly selected to 
participate in this study. Each team administered a survey questionnaire to 
fifty consecutive clients. Veterans who were intoxicated, acutely psychotic, 
or in crisis were not asked to complete questionnaires. 

Instrument 

' The survey questionnaire was a self-report five-page checklist of basic 

demographic data and fifty-six physical disorders. Physical disorders were 
grouped by body system (skin, respiratory, gastrointestinal, endocrine, 
senses, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, urogenital, and neurological). In 
addition, there were a total of eight psychological items on the survey, all of 
which have been linked to PTSD (Meichenbaum, 1994; Melman, Kulick- 
Nell, Ashlock, & Nolan, 1994). These items included anxiety, depression, 
nightmares, insomnia, phobias, vertigo, memory problems, and panic attacks. 
The questionnaire could be completed in five to ten minutes with minimal 
difficulty. Medical and psychological conditions were described in easy to 
understand terms. Other researchers have reported that such self-reports of 
health status were significantly correlated with measures of morbidity (Zautra, 

Okun, Robinson, Lee, R&th, & Emmanual, 1989). 

o 

ERIC 



7 



Stress-Related Illnesses 7 



Procedure 

Participating Vet Centers were sent fifty questionnaires with 
instructions and administration procedures. Veterans were informed that their 
participation was voluntary, and their choice to complete the survey would 
not impact on services. Surveys were completed in private and returned to 
investigators in one batch when all surveys had been completed. There were 
no personal identifying data on questionnaires. 

RESULTS 

Demographic Characteristics of Respondents 

A total of six hundred veterans completed questionnaires. The average 
age of respondents was 47.6 years, and ninety-three percent were males. The 
three major cohorts of veterans were Vietnam Theater (65%), Vietnam-era 
Non-Theater (14%), and Persian Gulf (8%). 

Do Veterans Exposed to High Stress Report More Health Problems? 

Veterans exposed to high stress (combat) reported ahnost twice the 
number of medical conditions as those who were not exposed to high stress 
(non-combat). Combat Veterans endorsed an average of 17.6 medical 
conditions as compared to the non-combat Veterans who averaged 8.9. 



Stress-Related Illnesses 8 



Combat veterans who were awarded the Purple Heart reported somewhat 
more medical conditions (m=17.8) than those who were not (m=14.6). 

In order to determine if differences in number of medical conditions 
reported by high stress and low stress veterans were statistically significant, a 
comparison between Vietnam combat and Vietnam non-combat veterans was 
performed. Vietnam combat veterans reported significantly more medical 
conditions than era-veterans (chi-square=466.752, p<005). 

What Body Systems Are Most Vulnerable to Combat Stresses? 

Musculoskeletal disorders were the conditions most frequently 
endorsed as having been experienced since leaving military service. Among 
all disorders listed on the survey, the four most frequently endorsed 
conditions were in this group (tension headache, backache, arthritis, and 
twitching muscles). Respiratory disorders were the second most frequently 
endorsed group. These included such conditions as sinusitis, allergy, and 
colds. Table 1 displays body systems in rank order of endorsement. 

What Demographic Characteristics Are Associated with Increased Risk for 
Health Problems? 

Four demographic characteristics were examined to identify possible 
risk factors for health problems among veterans. These risk factors were 
gender, period of service, ethnicity, and age. 



Stress-Relaled Illnesses 9 



Gender . Notwithstanding the fact that the vast majority of study 
participants were male, the average number of items endorsed by males and 
females was similar. Males averaged 15.2 conditions per veteran and females 
averaged 15.7 conditions. Male and female veterans were alike in the kinds 
of medical conditions reported. In order of frequency, male and female 
veterans reported experiencing musculoskeletal, respiratory, and skin 
disorders most frequently. 

Period of Service . Veterans were divided into one of four groups to 
examine effects of period of service on health problems: Vietnam Theater, 
Vietnam-era non theater, Persian Gulf, and Korean War Zone. Vietnam 
Theater veterans reported the highest average niunber of medical conditions 
per veteran (17.8), followed by Korean War Zone veterans (12.8), Persian 
Gulf veterans (11.5), and Vietnam non-theater veterans (8.8). 

Ethnicity. Only eleven subjects were Native American. However, 
Native American veterans reported the highest average number of medical 
conditions (m=28.9). This finding is consistent with results of the recent 
Matsunaga study (National Center for PTSD & National Center for American 
Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research, 1997). It was found in 
that study that American Indian veterans reported the poorest physical health 
and highest level of use of medical care of any of the ethnic groups of the 



Stress-Related Illnesses 10 



Vietnam conflict. Average number of medical conditions reported by other 
ethnic groups was as follows: Caucasian, 16.5; Hispanic, 14.6; and African 
American, 11.9. 

Data were further examined to identify differences among ethnic 
groups in types of medical conditions reported. No differences were found 
among ethnic groups in types of medical conditions. 

Age. Veterans in the age group 50-59 years reported the highest 
average number of medical conditions (m=17), and those 30-39 years 
reported the least. Table 2 displays the average number of medical conditions 
reported by each age group. The oldest group (70+), surprisingly, was only 
fourth in average number of medical conditions reported. 

Do Veterans Who Report More Psychological Problems Report More Health 

Problems? 

We compared the health conditions reported by two groups of 
veterans: those reporting a low number of psychological conditions (0,1, or 2), 
and veterans reporting a high number of psychological conditions (6,7, or 8). 

Veterans in the low group reported an average of 5.9 medical 
conditions. Veterans in the high group reported an average of 16.0 medical 
conditions. These data are inteipreted as clearly supportive of the concept 




11 



Stress-Related Illnesses 1 1 



that traumatized persons who develop psychological/PTSD symptoms are 
most at risk to develop negative health outcomes. 

Discussion 

This investigation provided further evidence of a strong link between 
severe stress and quality of health. In addition, findings supported the 
concept that occurrence of psychological/PTSD symptoms is a critical factor 
relating to which trauma survivors suffer more frequent health problems in 
their later years. 

The high frequency of certain reported medical conditions among 
respondents to this survey suggests that comprehensive screening of 
traumatized persons ought to include evaluation for musculoskeletal 
(arthritis), respiratory (sinusitis), and cardiovascular (hypertension) disorders. 
High occurrence of stress related health conditions observed among Native 
American respondents supports findings of other researchers, and confirms 
that traumatized Native American veterans should especially be a target for 
health screenings. 

Associated with a traumatic event history is a relatively high number 
(39%) of subjects who report one or more medical problems of the 
musculoskeletal body system. Apparently, the mechanism by which chronic 
stress leads to physical health problems is such that tension headache, 



Stress-Related Illnesses 12 



backache, twitching muscles, arthritis and rheumatism become primary focal 
points of the body’s response to stress. Medical interventions such as 
relaxation therapy, biofeedback, massage therapy, physical therapy and 
muscle relaxing medications would appear to be on the list of important 
interventions that may be assistive to this group of veterans. 

Thirty-five percent of the respondents reported high blood pressure. 
This level of hypertension in the sample is far above the national rate of 
fourteen percent estimated for the general population (Berkow, 1987). 
Because of the long term negative health impact of hypertension, these data 
suggest that medical professionals who work with combat veterans should 
routinely screen for cardiovascular related illnesses. 

The finding of a lack of a more linear relationship between age and 
medical condition was surprising. It appears from the data that occurrence of 
psychological symptoms was very strongly related to occurrence of other 
health conditions as well. Respondents in the 18-29 and 30-39 year old age 
groups reported the lowest rate of medical conditions. The 40-49 and 50-59 
year old age groups had more medical conditions than any other age group, 
including older veterans. This group includes Vietnam veterans who also 
reported the most psychological/PTSD symptoms. We had expected that 
older veterans would report more physical health concerns as a natural 



Stress-Related Illnesses 13 



consequence of aging. The group of Vietnam-era Non-Theater veterans 
reported a lower average number of medical conditions than any other group. 
It is probable that this group of veterans has not been impacted by combat- 
related psychological trauma and its negative effect on physical health as have 
the other groups of combat veterans. 

Finally, in consideration of the findings of this study, it is important to 
consider its limitations. Notwithstanding the fact that retrospective, self 
report surveys are not uncommon in psychosocial and health research, it is 
possible that reports about past conditions may have been influenced by 
current psychological states or motives (maintaining benefits). 

A second limitation of this study relates to the representativeness of the 
sample. Although the Vet Centers were selected by random procedures, the 
subjects were not. Rather, subjects were those veterans who came in for 
scheduled appointments during the study timeframe. Also, how 
representative treatment seeking veterans are as compared to the universe of 
veterans is open to some conjecture. 

With the above limitations in mind, the results of this survey indicate 
that clinicians who work with combat veterans should be aware of the long- 
term physical impact of severe psychological trauma on the human body. 

Clinicians should consider extending their models of PTSD assessment and 

o 

ERiC 



14 



Stress-Related Illnesses 14 



treatment (e.g., Hayman, Somers-Flanagan, & Parsons, 1987; Meichenbaum 
1994) to include health screening. A close review of medical records along 
with systematic health screening could help clinicians to diagnose and treat 
these medical disorders before they become chronic physical conditions. 



o 

ERLC 



15 



Stress-Related Illnesses 15 



TABLE 1 

STRESS RELATED PHYSICAL ILLNESSES RANKED BY BODY 







SYSTEM 






Rank 


Body System 


Number Of 
Items 


Total 

Responses 


Avg. No. 
Responses 
Per Item 


1 


Musculoskeletal 


7 


1,826 


260.9 


2 


Respiratory 


7 


888 


126.9 


3 


Skin 


5 


616 


123.2 


4 


Cardiovascular 


7 


861 


123.0 


5 


Neurological 


4 


489 


122.3 


6 


Gastrointestinal 


7 


734 


104.9 


7 


Sensory 


6 


610 


101.7 


8 


Glandular 


3 


173 


57.7 


9 


Urogenital 


10 


380 


38.0 



Stress-Related Illnesses 16 



TABLE 2 



MEDICAL CONDITIONS, BY AGE GROUP 


Aee Group 


Average Number Of 
Medical Conditions Reported 


18-29 years 


10.7 


30-39 years 


10.1 


40-49 years 


15.5 


50-59 years 


17.0 


60-69 years 


13.5 


70-over 


11.8 




17 



Stress-Related Illnesses 17 



References 

Berkow, R. (Ed.) (1987). The Merck Manual. Railway, NJ: Merck. 

Boscarino, J. (1997). Diseases among men 20 years after exposure to severe 
stress: Implications for clinical research and medical, care. Psychosomatic 
Medicine . 59, 605-614. 

Everly, G. (1984). A clinical guide to the treatment of the human stress 
response . New York: Plenum. 

Friedman, M.J., & Schnurr, P. (1966). The relationship between trauma, 
PTSD, and physical health. In M.J. Friedman, D.S. Carney, & A.Y. Deutch 
(Eds.), Neurobiological and clinical consequences of stress: From normal 
adaptation to PTSD . New York: Raven Press. 

Gray, G., Coate, B., Anderson, H., Berg, S., Wignall, F., Knoke, J., & 
Barrett-Connor, E. (1996). The postwar hospitalization experience of U.S. 
veterans of the Persian Gulf war. The New England Journal of Medicine , 
335. 1505-1513. 

ERIC 



18 



Stress-Related Illnesses 18 



Hayman, P.M., Sommers-Flanagan, R., & Parsons, J. (1987). Aftermath of 
violence: Postraumatic Stress Disorder among Vietnam Veterans. Journal 
of Counseling and Development . 65, 363-371. 



Kulka, R.A., Schlenger, W.E., Fairbank, J.A., Hough, R.L., Jordan, B.K., 
Mannar, C.R., & Weiss, D.S. (1990). Trauma and the Vietnam war 
generation: Report of findings from the National Vietnam Veterans 
Readjustment Study . New York: Brunner/Mazel. 

Meichenbaum, D. (1994). A clinical handbook/practical therapist manual for 
assessing and treating adults with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder . Waterloo, 
Ontario (Canada): Institute Press. 

Mellman, T., Kulick-Bell, R., Ashlock, L., & Nolan, B. (1995). Sleep events 
in combat-related Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. The American Journal of 
Psychiatry , 152 . 110-115. 




19 



Stress-Related Illnesses 19 . 



National Center for Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, & National Center for 
American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research. (1997). 
Matsunaga Vietnam Veterans Project, Vols. 1&2 . White River Junction 
(VT): National Center for Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. 

Schneiderman, N., McCabe, P., & Baum, A. (Eds.) (1992). Stress and 
disease processes. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum Assoc. 

Selye, H. (1956). The stress of life . N..Y.: McGraw-Hill. 

Wolfe, J., Schnurr, P., Brown, P., & Furey, J. (1994). Posttraumatic Stress 
Disorder and War-zone exposure as correlates of perceived health in female 
Vietnam war veterans. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 62, 
1235-1240. 



Yehuda, R., Boisoneau, D., Lowy, M., & Giller, E., (1995). Dose-response 
changes in plasma cortisol and lymphocyte glucocorticoid receptors 
following dexamethasone administration in combat veterans with and 
without Posttramnatic Stress Disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52^ 

583-593. 

o 

ERIC 



20 



Stress-Related Illnesses 20 



Zautra, A., Okun., M., Robinson, S„ Lee, D., Roth, S., & Emmanual, J. 
(1989) Life stress and lymphocyte alterations among patients with 
Rheumatoid Arthritis. Health Psychology , 8, 1-14. 




21 



References 



Berkow, Robert, MD, (1987). The Merck Manual, Merck & Co., Inc., 1292. 

Boyle, C.A., Decoufle, P., Delaney, R.J., Destefano, F., Flock, M.L., Hunter, M.I., 
Joesoef, M.R., Karon, J.M., Kirk, M.L., Layde, P.M., McGee, D.L., Moyer, L.A., 
Pollock, D.A., Rhodes, P., Scally, M.J., Worth, R.M. (1987). Postservice Mortality 
Among Vietnam Veterans . (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public 
Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, 1-2.) 

Colorado Health Net, (1997). An Overview of Arthritis and Related Disorders. Internet 
address, [http://bcn.boulder.co.us/health/chn/arthritis/arth_over.html]. 

Elder, G.H. Jr., Ph.D., Shanahan, M.J., Ph D., Clipp, E.C., Ph.D., R.N. (1997). Linking 
Combat and Physical Health: The Legacy of World War II in Men’s Lives. American 
Journal Psychiatry. 154:3, March, 330-336. 

Everly, G.S. Jr., (1989). A Clinical Guide to the Treatment of the Human Stress 
Response. Plenum Press, New York. 

Goldberger, L., and Breznitz, S., (1982). Handbook of Stress. Theoretical and Clinical 
Aspects. The Free Press, New York. 

Kulka, R.A., Ph.D.j Schlenger, W.E., Ph.D., Fairbank, J.A., Ph D., Hough, R.L., Ph D., 
Jordan, K.B., Ph.D., Marmar, C.R., MD, Weiss, D.S., Ph.D., Grady, D.A., Psy.D., 
(1990) Trauma and the Vietnam War Generation. Brunner/Mazel, New York. 

Lating, J.M. and Everly, G.S. Jr., (1995). Psychophysiological Assessment of PTSD. In 
Everly and Lating (Ed.) Psychotraumatologv. Plenum Press, New York. 129-145. 

Selye, H., (1956). The Stress of Life. McGraw-Hill, New York. 

Ullman, S.E., and Siegel, J.M., (1996). Traumatic Events and Physical Health in a 
Community Sample. Journal of Traumatic Stress. 9(4), 703-721. 

van der Kolk, B., McFarlane, A.C., Weisaeth, L., (Ed.) (1996). Traumatic Stress. The 
Effects of Overwhelming Experience on Mind. Body, and Society . The Guilford Press, 
New York. 




22 



t 



1 



Wolfe, J., Schnurr, P.P., Brown, P.J., Furey, J. (1994). Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and 
War-Zone Exposure as Correlates of Perceived Health in Female Vietnam War 
Veterans. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, . 62(6), 1235-1240. 

Yehuda, R., Boisoneau, D., Lowy, M.T., Giller, E.L., (1995). Dose-response changes in 
plasma cortisol and lymphocyte glucocorticoid receptors following dexamethasone 
administration in combat veterans with and without posttraumatic stress disorder. 
Archives of General Psychiatry . . 52(7) July, 583-593. 




23 



U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 



(Specific Document) 

I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: 

A SURVEY OF STRESS RELATED ILLNESSES 




Author(s): LARRY ASHLOCK, Ph.D. and PETER HAYMAN, Ph.D. 




Corporate Source: 

DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS 


Publication Date: 


II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 







In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Educetion (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 




Level 1 Level 2A Level 2B 

i i r 



x 




Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 

and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 

media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 

Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here,-* 

please 



ERjt 



/ hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copynght holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 



Signature: a > 



Organization/Address: 



Readjustment Counsel: 
VAMC Bldg. 11 (10B/R( 
Bay Pines f FT. 33744 




ock. Deputy Regional Manager 



Deter Hayman, Asso c iate Regional Man ager 



TO/598-9343 



Idress: 



613/398-9444 



10/30/98_ 



APa 98 



(over) 




