DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 364 i47 HE 026 944 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Hughes, Rees 

The Financial Aid Experience of Ethnic Students: Is 
It a Boon or Barrier? 
Apr 90 
lOp. 

Reports - Research/Technical (143) 
MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

American Indians; Asian Americans; Blacks; ^College 
Students; *Ethnic Groups; Financial Aid Applicants; 
Higher Education; Hispanic Americans; Minority 
Groups; ^Student Attitudes; *Student Financial Aid; 
Student Financial Aid Officers; Student Personnel 
Services 

Financial Aid Form 



ABSTRACT 

This study explored the experiences of white and 
non-white college students with the financial aid process and 
financial aid office and staff. The study used a 20*item survey 
administered to a sample of 710 student financial aid recipients. 
Questions covered procedural and informational aspects of the 
financi'^1 aid process, accessibility and comfort with the staff, and 
overall satisfaction with their financial aid experience. Findings 
revealed few differences in the responses of White and non-White aid 
recipients except that non-whites felt they had greater difficulty 
getting i:n appointment with a Financial Aid cotmselor than did White 
respondents. White and non-White students both gave highly positive 
ratings concerning their overall satisfaction with their experience. 
More interesting patterns emerged when non-White students were 
separated into different ethnic groups. When the responses of 
students representing six ethnic groups were compared, the findings 
included the following: Native Americans had consistently lower 
satisfaction levels; Chicano respondents were more satisfied even 
than Whites; statistically significant differences existed between 
the Native Americans and Asian students on the reasonableness of the 
aid package. Contrary to expectations from the literature minority 
students did not have difficulty completing the forms and were 
generally satisfied with financial aid services. (Contains 10 
references.) (JB) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 



t 



The Financial Aid Experience of Ethnic Students: 

Is It a Boon or Barrier? 



Dr. Rees Hughes 
216 Nelson Hall East 
Humboldt State University 
Areata, CA 95521 



April, 1990 



ERIC 



Abstract 

This article reports the results ol a 2()-itcm survey* adminislcrcd \o a sample of 710 
White and non- White financial aid recipients. Questions covered procedural and 
inforipational aspects of the financial aid process, accessihility and comfort with the sialT, 
and overall satisfaction with their financial aid experience. Although findings revealed 
lew differences in the responses of White and non-White aid recipients, more interesting 
patterns emerged when non-White students were separated into different ethnic groups. 
The paper concludes with a brief discussion of the implications of these findings. 



••PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

Rees Hughes 



TO THh EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC).'* 



U.S. OCPARTMENTOf CDUCAtlON 
OHica of C(Ktc«tton«i RMtarch and i m <Ko»»wan4 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES JNFOflMATfON 
CENTER (ERJC) 



fJht% (»ocum«nt hat bMn r««KO0uc«d M 
received from (h« p%ru>rt o< orgtfwltboo 

Ofigmaiing it 
Q Minor chanQes Mv« tmf* m%iH to •mprov* 
reproduction QuatKy 

a Poinuof vMworopiniontttalcdinthitdOCu- 
manI 00 not r^tcawrtly r#pr»a»nt oW»c«» 
OCR' poaitton or po«tcv 



BEST COPY AVAILAELE 



The Financial Aid Experience of Ethnic Students: Is It a Boon or Barrier? 



Newly admitied college and univcrsiiy siudenis Irom low-income families have often persevered, despite 
disudvaniuged school environments and difficult social conditions, to achieve university admission. 
However, once over the hurdle of access to higher education, these students still face a complex maze of 
rules and regulations, forms and processes required to prove financial need and to be granted aid. It is 
an intimidating gauntlet. 

This gauntlet may not be equally intimidating to all students. This study explores the concern that non- 
While low-inci)me students have a more negative perception of the financial aid experience ihan do their 
White counterparts. Do these students differ in iheir ability to complete application materials, in their 
satisfaction with the informalion received, and in their interactions with the Financial Aid OMice staff/ 
Is ii possible that financial aid programs, established to improve the access of low-income minority 
students to higher education, may aciually serve as a deierreni to their educational progress? 



Historically, financial aid is a fairly new phenomenon. Prior to World War 11, financial aid came almost 
exclusively in the form of merit-leased scholarships granted out of the funds ofan individual college. By 
\hc time the National Defense Education Aci of 1958 was implemented, the concept of need analysis had 
been operaiicmalized. This was expanded by the Higher Educaiion Act of 1965, wiiich iniroduced a 
number of programs (e,g., College Work-Study, Eduraiional Opportunity Grauts) intended lo assist the 
poor who had some educational catching-up to do. The subsequent two decades have seen a 
solidification of the focus of aid on low-income and historically disadvantaged students (1| and the 
growth of an almost byzaniine complexity throughout the aid process (see Qripins and Outcomes , 1987). 

The expansion of the student aid system has intended lo improve minority access to and retention in 
higher education (The Critical Difference , 1988). By l977, 32.2 percent of White high school graduates 
and 31.5 percent of Blacks and Hispani»:s nationwide were enrolled in college. However, by 1985 these 



Backgniund 




3 



Page 2 

proportions hud allcrcd lo 34.4 pcrccni, 26.1 pcrc«.;;i, and 26.y percent respectively (Jackson. I')88:4y). 
The reappearance of ihis cnrollmeni gap has underscored ihc limiled extent to which we understand why 
siniihirly situated White and non-Whites who are potential or current university students make dilTerenl 
decisions about applying to and slaying in college. 

Among the concerns is that the elaborate financial aid delivery system has a disproportionately negative 
impact on minority students. Olivas (1986:16) observes that ihc "complexity of financia'i assistance 
programs, which poses problems lor even middle-class families, renders them virtually inaccessible to 
poor families." Completing the aid forms involves wading through as many as 95 questions and eight 
pages of ip-'Tuciions (Collison, l^^tStS). This is further compounded in bilingual households. Moreover, 
many poor families have greater difficulty providing income documentation of the necessai^y specificity if 
they are not regularly employed (e.g., do piecework, housecleaning, odd jobs, etc.). Overextended aid 
offices are unlikely to be capable of providing the extra assistance necessary to help these students. 
Arbciter (l9tS7) suggests that the increase in the proportion of the aid package comprised of k)ans is 
discouraging to minority students whose annual family income may be half of the debt load they may 
accumulate at the conclusion of a four-year degree program. 

There is additional concern expressed in the literature (Bellia, 1971) that predominantly White financial 
aid staffs may be less effective with students from non- While backgrounds. Research suggests that Black 
students, for example, feel less positive, less trusting, and less comfortable with faculty and siaff than do 
White students at predominantly White institutions (Willie and McCord, 1972; Crawford, 198.^). 
Therefore, non-White students, who may feel less comfortable contacting available financial aid 
resources, may also be less likely to utilize the Financial Aid Office staff and less likely to be satisfied 
with their aid experience. 

Methodology 



This study compared the experiences and the satisfaction of White and non-White students with various 



Page 3 

aspeclb of ihc Tinancial aid process and Tinancial aid oirice support al one Insiiiulion, In order lo do 
ihis, a shon 20-iieni salisfaclion survey was mailed lo 710 linancial aid recipients in mid-April, 1989. 
The sample was composed of equal numbers of While and non-White students. Items on ihe survey 
instrument had, in pan, been adapted from surveys used ai San Francisco State University and al the 
University of Oklahoma and revised following a pilot test. Questions covered procedural and 
informational aspects of the financial aid process, accessibiUiy and comfort with the staff, overall 
satisfaction with their financial aid experience, and a limited number of demographic questions. The 
sample for this study was chosen from all students who were receiving more support than a Guaranteed 
Student Loan (GSL) through the Financial Aid Office (FAO) of a medium-sized state university. This 
sample tended to represent the heaviest users i)f FAO services (78% had four or more telephone or 
personal contacts with the office in the past year). Two-thirds of the sample had been receiving financial 
aid two years or less. A total of 370 students {52^/() responded to the initial mailing or to a follow-up 
mailing. 

Results 

When the responses of White recipients were compared with the responses of the non-White recipients, 
there was only one significant difference. Non-White respondents fell that they had graucr difficulty 
getting an appointment with a Financial Aid counselor than did White respondents. There was no 
difference in responses to questions concerning ability to complete financial aid fornv^, comfort with 
h'AO staff, perceptions of knowledge of slaff and fairness ;)l awards (see attached Table 1 lor a more 
complete summary). Similarly, the While and non-While students sampled did not report any differences 
in the frequency of their contact with the FAO. The overall satisfaction of both groups with the FAO 
was overwhelmingly positive. About 89 percent of the Whites and 87 percent of the non-Whites 
indicated thai Ihey were satisfied or very satisfied. 

When nt)n-Whiie responses were disaggregated and the responses of students representing six eihnic 
groups were compared, a more revealing pattern emerged as detailed in Table 1. (2) There were several 
noteworthy findings. Although all groups showed consistently high levels of satisfaction, the Native 



Page 4 



Table 1 



Klh.aic lfr4iii|) Mentis Tur All Quesllons 

Scale: I 2 3 4 5 

Sirongly Disagree Nculnil Agree Strongly 
Disiigree Agree 

Mean Si'urcs 

Nnlivc 

Ameitcan Asinn l^hick C'hicano Hispanic White Ail Question Summary 

.^.6^; 4.05 4.06 3.83 4.00 4.09 4.(K) I can normnlly complete the Student Aid Application 

by myself . 

3.92 4.10 4.03 3.94 4.15 4.12 4.07 1 can normally complete the other financial .-lid 

torms...by myself 

3 92 4,25 4.23 4.45 4.15 4.30 4.2(> The Financial Aid staff seemed well intbnncd and 

up-to-date on changing federal and state piUicies... 

3.43 4.05 3.58 3^96 3^ Xm 3.83* 1 leel that the financial aid package I received 

was/is reasonable. 

4.82 4.50 4.55 4.50 4.81 4.(>l 4.02 ll 1 had not received financial aid. 1 wiuild ni»l 

have been able to attend this college. 

3.(>4 4.00 4.10 4.21 .VS4 4.04 4.01* Information in my award letters legarding tinanclal 

aid...was sufficient and understandable. 

.V72 .V()8 4.10 4.00 4.00 4.10 4.01 'I he Financial Aid Office provided me with adequate 

information about righti* attd rcsponsihilitics... 

4.l<> 4.00 4.23 4..33 4.20 4.33 4.20 Assistance was available in "answering ijuesiions re- 

lated to filling out my financial aid torms. 

3.59 4.00 -U2 415 3.9() 4J9 4.08* Oenerally, I have not had problems in getting an 

appointment with a Financial Aid counscloi . 

3.92 4.20 4.23 £44 4 15 439 4.31* The receptionists (front counter statf) in the 

Financial Aid Ofilce made me feel comlotiable. 

4.11 4.20 4.29 £51 4.15 £44 4.37* The receptionists in the Financial Aid Dtlice were 

knowledgeable and helpful. 

394 4.00 4.13 4.21 4.09 4.19 4.14 I he counselors in the Financial Aid Ol lice made me 

Icel comfortable. 

4.0(> 4.13 4.21 4.44 4..^2 4.26 4.25 The counselors in the Financial Aid Office were 

knowledgeable and helpful. 

3.26 3.63 3.67 3.67 3.68 3.47 .V52 1 feel financial aid eligibility is determined and 

aid is awarded fairly and consistently... 

3.S5 4.05 4.23 4.12 4.19 4.24 4.17 I feci the Fitiaticial Aid Office has woikcd with mc 

in an efficient manner. 

3.85 4.10 4.16 £42 4.12 4.28 4.22* Overall. I am satisfied with the treatment and ser- 

vice 1 have received from the I'inancial Aid Office. 

N-(39) (20) (31) (52) (26) (197) (.^65) 

KHY: 

•significant differences in mean resjwnses at .05 level 

indicates a significant ditierence l>eiwcen this ethnic group and Native American respondents. Only one other sjgnjUcant difference 
"existed (Chicano vs. Hispanic student response on the "receptionists were knowledg'^able and helpfur Uem). 



^ BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Page 5 

Amt kans had consisiemly lower saiisfaciion levels even ihough the differences are generally siaiistically 
insignificant. The Chicano respondents, not the White students, tended to be the most satisfied with 
FAO services. Chicano and White respondents also indicated significantly higher levels of satisfaction 
than did Native Americans on six items (reasonableness of the aid package, award letters were 
understandable, no problems getting counselor appointmciiis, receptionists made me feel comfortable, 
receptionists were knowledgeable and helpful, and overall satisfaction). Statistically significant differences 
existed between the Native Americans and Asian students (reasonableness of the aid package). Native 
Americans and Blacks (no problems getting counselor appointments and award letters were 
understandable) and Native American and Hispanic respondents (reasonableness of the aid package). 
The lack of differences expressed in other areas is equally important. Contrary to the expectations 
drawn from the literature, students from different ethnic groups did not have difficulty completing forms 
and indicated a high level of satisfaction with FAO counselors. [3J 

Conclusions and Implications 

There are several observations worth further discussion. As might be expected, comparative analysis that 
aggregates non-Whitas inay obscure important differences in the experience^ of specific ethnic groups. 
There was wide variation in the experiences of the six ethnic groups studied. Most apparent was the 
consistently lower level of Native American student satisfaction and greater difficulty in completing 
forms. 

Fordham (1988) provides a possible explanation for this trend. In her analysis of high-achieving Black 
students, she suggests that successful minority students must become raceless. In other words, succcosful 
minority students inust adapt to the individualistic, competitive ideology of American schools an^l, to 
some extent, accept the measures of achievement of the majority culture. A scholastically successlul 
ethnic student may have to become "un-Black" or "un-Chicano" or "un-Hispanic." 

With the exception of the Native American population, most ethnic students attending this university 



7 



Page 6 

come lo ihis rural, predDminanily While community and campus, from urban centers 250 lo 7(K) miles 
away. |4) This would suggest lhai many of ihcse siudenis have already becx)me or may be willing lo 
become, lo some degree, "racciess." They operate effectively in both the school setting and White 
culture. The Native American student profile is somewhat different. For Ihem Ihis is an institution of 
convenience, not of choice. They live locally and, in many cases, exisl with feel in both the traditional 
Nalive American culture and community and the university culture and community. They confront daily 
the tension between their desire to succeed in the context of the majority culture (the yniversity) and 
the expectation from their ccmimunity that they continue to maintain a visible commitment to the tribe. 

There is no more linear/production-oriented office than the Financial Aid Office. Cultures, like the 
Nalive American culture, that lend to be more relationship-oriented and to place less emphasis on time 
may find encounters with the Financial Aid Office most onerous. This may be refiecied in ihe 
comments of one Native American Student, "It is not clear at times how the financial aid |olTicc| comes 
rp with the budget set for me. They tell me what is needed...l always feel Tm [beingj rushed." 

This study found significant correlations between a student*s satisfaction level and whether or not 
financial aid office recepiit)nists (.48) and counselors (.52) made the student feel comfortable. This 
clearly underscores the importance of the staff in humanizing a potentially dehumanizing process. Staff 
sensitivity to the potential clash of organizational style and individual culture is critical. Receptionists 
and counselors must be willing to adjust their approach to the culture of the specific ethnic student. 
The ability to make adjustments of this nature may well require training in cross-cultural awareness. 
Another potential strategy is to diversify the ethnic u)mposhion of the staff. As another Native 
American student eomiTienicd, "I feel thai an Indian should be hired lo work with Indian students and 
be there for rheir needs." 

Although .some elements of the financial aid delivery system may constitute a barrier to low-income 
students, there is no question that financial aid is critical lo the attraction and rcicnlion of these 
^ students. Nearly all respondents (90.2%) needed financial assistance in order to attend this university. 

ERJC o 



Page 7 

This sludy raises several imporiani issues for further siudy. The individuals who may be ihe mosi 
neguiively aflecied by the financial aid system arc more likely not to be students at all. The perceptions 
of and experiences with the financial aid process of low-income high school graduates who elect not to 
continue their education is an imporiani area ol inquiry. Similarly, perceptions of and experiences with 
the financial aid process of low-income students who leave the university (drop-out) are also important. 
Lasily, a more thorough effort to belter understand the relaiionsliip between working the financial aid 
system effectively and the level of "racelessness." 



Knd Notes 

The author would like to acknowledge the important role that E. M. "Buzz" Webb, Linda Wcirup, Randi 
Burke. Jack Aliman, Ruth Bennett, and Alan Freeman played in this sludy. Without their support and 
encouragement this study would not have occurred. 

[l| This philosophical direction, particularly as it relates to ethnic minorities, can be boen in the 
increasing proportion of Cal Grants that go to Asians, Blacks, Filipinos, Hispanic^, Native 
Americans and other non- While siudenis. in 1972. 32.9 percent of the awards went lo ethnic 
minoriiies. By 1985. this number had increased to 61.2 percent. (Oriains and Outcomes. 
1987:35) 

[2| Pairwise multiple comparisons were made. This statistically tests the mean response of each 

group against the responses of eveiy oiher group on the six significant questions (indicated by a 
* in Table 1). 

|3) Clearly, student aid application forms may well be most intimidating to those who do not make 
it to the university. A useful area for further study would be lo examine why high school 
graduates who are eligible lo attend university elect not lo. 

|4j Forty-five percent of Native Americans listed their "school of origin" as being in Humboldt 
County. Only I2r^ of Asian students, 1% of Black students, 20% of Chicano and Hispanic 
students, and 23% of While students listed their school of origin as being in Humboldt County. 



Page 8 



References 



Arhcilcr, S. (1987). "Black cnrollmcnis: The case ol' ihc missing siudcnis." Chanec . 1W3)> 14-19. 

Bcllia» AJ. (1971). "Variaiions in ihc response ol black and while slucJenls in their relationship with 
the financial aid counselor." The Journal ol' Student Financial Aid > 1(2), 41-46. 

CoUison, M. N-K. (6 July 1988). "Complex application form discourages many students (torn applying 
for financial aid, officials say." The Chronicle of Higher Education . A19, A3(). 

Crawford. L.M. (1983). A comparison of black and white siudenis' asscrlivcncss, authi)riiarianism, and 
attitudes toward college professi)rs. Unpublished Master's Thesis, Humboldt Slate Universiiy. 

The critical difference : student llnancial aid and educational opportunities in California . ( 1 988 ). 
Sacramento: The Eureka Project. 

Fordham. S. (1988). "racelessness as a factor in black studenis* school success: pragniaiic strategy or 
pyrrhic victory?" Har\^ard Educational Review , 58(1), 54-84. 

Jackson. Gregory A. (1988). "Financial aid and minority access." Change . 20(5)» 48-49. 

Olivas, Michael A. (1986) "The reireat from access." Academe . 72(6). 16-18. 

Origins and Outcomes: An Essay on the History of Student Aid in California . (1987). Sacramento: 
The Eureka Project. 

Willie, C.V. and McCord, A.S. (1972). Black students at white colleges. New York: Praeger. 



10 



