DOCUMENT RESUME 

HE 021 146 

Clewell, Beatriz C; Ficklen, Myra S. 

Improving Minority Retention in Higher Education: A 

Search for Effective Institutional Practices. 

Educational Testing Service, Princeton, N.J. 

ETS-RR-86-17 

Jun 86 

I62p. 

Educational Testing Service, Princeton, New Jersey 
08541. 

Reports - Descriptive (141) 
MF01/PC07 Plus Postage. 

Access to Education; Civil Rights; College 
Attendance; *Educational Opportunities; *Equal 
Education; Higher Education; *Minority Groups; 
Models; ^School Holding Power; School Policy; Student 

Attrition 

Boston College MA; California State University 
Fresno; Purdue University IN; University of North 
Carolina Greensboro 



Programs and policies at four-year majority white 
institutions with good minority retention rates are examined, and 
factors contributing to their success that are adaptaOsle to other 

sites are identified. Identification of the institutions used in the . 

study was based on an objective statistical procedure and expert 

nomination. The four institutions chosen were Boston College, 

California State University at Fresno, University of North Carolina 

at Greensboro, and Purdue University Minority Engineering Program. An 

introduction to the report provides a statemertL of the problem; 

review of the literature (student characteristics and behavior and 

environmental factors) ; and a summary of the study including 

descriptions of the two methods used to select the institutions and 

synthesis of results from methods one and two) . Case studies focus on 

the following: Boston College (the institution, African 

American/Hispanic/Asian/Native American student programs, and 

conclusions) ; California State University (the institution, access 

and retention, special programs, support services, and conclusions); 

Purdue University (the institution, the Schools of Engineering 

Minority Engineering Program, and conclusions) ; and University of 

North Carolina (the institution, access and retention, and 

conclusions). Findings focus on: differences among institutions and 

programs; characteristics of successful retention efforts; a model 

for developing effective minority retention programs; and a broader 

perspective of minority retention. It is concluded that retention 

includes motivating students to aspire to higher education, preparing 

them for the rigors of a college career, assiting them to 

matriculate, helping them finance their education, and offering 

academic and personal support during their college years. 

Ninety-eight appendices provide details on the programs at each 

institution. Tables are included. Contains 56 references. (SM) 

j 

J 

j 

1 

I 



ED 299 841 

AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



ABSTRACT 



RR-86-17 



* — 1 ( 

CO 

ON 

o 



R 
E 



E 
A 
R 
C 
H 



R 
E 
P 
O 
R 
T 



IMPROVING MINORITY RETENTION 
IN HIGHER EDUCATION: A SEARCH FOR 
EFFECTIVE INSTITUTIONAL PRACTICES 



Beatriz C. Clewei! 
Myra S. Fickien 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUrp tu.o 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRaSS 



ETS 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
OHiceol Eaucawnal Resea'Ch and imixo»cment 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 

V CENTER lERIQ 

DTnis document has Been :ei -uced as 

,eceiv«d Irom the peison oi t-ganuai-on 

originating il 
C M.not cnanges nave oeen made to improve 

reproduci'On Quality ^^^^^^^^ 

• Paints of view or opinions stated m miSdccir 
ment do not necessarily represent oHiCial 
OERI position or policy 



O 




Educational Testing Service 
Princeton, New Jersey 
June 1986 



IMPROVING raNORZTy RETENTION IN HIGHER EDUCATION: 
A SEARCH FOR EFFECTIVE INSTITUTI(»JAL PRACTICES 



Beatriz C. Clewell 
Ayra S. Ficklen 

Educational Testing Service 
Princeton, NJ 08541 



0 



Copyright 0 1986. Educational Testing Se-vice. All rights reserved. 



Acknowledgments; 



The work described in the present report benefited significantly 
from the assistance of a number of people. Special thanks are 
extended to the staff at the participating institutions for their 
cooperation, time, and effort and to the four consultants for their 
contributions. 

Thanks are extended also to the Program Research Planning Council 
for its support of the project. 

Finally, appreciation is extended to the ETS staff assisting the 
project: Joan Baratz, Thelma Benton, Joyce Gant, and Gita Wilder. 



5 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Page 

Abstract i 

Introduction 1 

The Problem 1 

Review of the Literature 2 

Student Characteristics and Behavior 2 

Environmental Factors 5 

The Study 7 

Description o£ Method One 8 

Description of Method ^o 10 

Synthesis of Results From Methods One and Two 11 

Case Study Summaries 19 

Boston College 19 

The Institution 19 

AHANA Student Programs 19 

Conclusions 22 

California State University at Fresno 23 

The Institution 23 

Access and Retention 23 

Special Programs 24 

Other Special Programs 26 

Support Services at CSUF 27 

Conclusion 27 

Minority Engineering Programs, Purdue University 28 

The Institution 28 

The Schools of Engineering 28 

Minority Engineering Program (MEP) 29 

Conclusion 33 

University of North Carolina at Greensboro 34 

The Institution 34 

Access and Retention 34 

Conclusion 36 

Findings 39 

Differences Among Institutions and Programs 39 

Characteristics of Successful Retention Efforts 46 

A Model for Developing Effective Minority Retention Programs.. 52 

Minority Retention: A Broader Perspective 54 

References 56 

Appendix 

Boston College 

California State University at Fresno 

Minority Engineering Programs, Purdue University 

University of North Carolina, Greensboro 



Abstract 



Attrition of minority students from postsecondary education 
represents a major obstacle to attainment of equal educational 
opportmity. Gains in admission rates of minority students that 
have been made over the past decade have been eroded by their 
higher attrition rate. From a policy perspective, the most 
important issue is not merely students drop out, but what can 
be done to prevent withdrawal. 

This study examined programs and policies at four four-year 
predominantly White institutions with good minority retention in an 
attenpt to identify variables that enhance minority retention. The 
institutions studied were: Boston College, California State 
University-Fresno, University of North Carolina-Greensboro, and 
Purdue University. These schools varied in terms of institutional 
environment, including selectivity, size, and proportion of 
minorities on can^us; rationale for developing minority retention 
efforts; grade level of students served by special programs; and 
scope and type of services. The differences we found across 
institutions demonstrate that retention efforts for minority 
students can be developed and carried out successfully in many 
different ways, at different types of institutions. 

Although we found much diversity among the programs, we also 
foxind that there were certain common characteristics across 
programs — characteristics that appear to be elements of successful 
retention efforts. These characteristics are: the presence of a 
stated policy on minority enrollments; a high level of institu- 
tional commitment; a substantial degree of institutionalization of 
the program; conprehensiveness of services; dedicated staff; 
systematic collection of data, monitoring, and follow-up; strong 
faculty support; and non-stigmatization of participants. 

From our study, we developed a general model that represents 
steps needed to formulate a retention program. The steps are: 
making a policy decision to enhance minority retention, conducting 
a needs assessment and developing a data base to examine minority 
enrollment patterns, iitplementing a program and monitoring and 
evaluating this program. This model enphasizes that retention 
effort'" include all parts of the institution and constitute an 
ongoing process in v^ich changes are made as needed. 

We hope that other colleges and miversities will view the 
programs described in this report as models from which to gain 
ideas for adaptation in their own settings. 



IMPROVING MINORITY RETENTION IN HIGHER EDUCATION: 
h SEARCH FOR EFFECTIVE INSTITUTIONAL PRACTICES 



Introduction 
The Problem 

Attrition of minority students from postsecondary education represents 
e major obstacle to attainment of equal educational oH^rtunity. Although 
there is great ambiguity in the literature regarding the actual attrition 
rate, research suggests that from 10-40 percent of all students vrtio enter 
college v?ill drop out before degree conpietion, but for minorities the 
proportion is sxJastantially higher, particularly in predominantly White 

schools (Astin, 1975; Astin, 1982; Astin &. Burciaga, 1982; Cross & Astin, 

1 

1981). ■ Although the effect of race on college attrition is not clear, most 
studies find disproportionally higher attrition rates and more reports of 
academic difficulty among minorities (Cross & Astin, 1981; Gosman, 
Dandridge, Nettles & Thoeny, 1983; Perry, 1981; Suen, 1983; Willie & McCord, 
1972).^ 

Thus, the full impact of gains that have been made in enrolling of 
minorities in postsecondary education over the past decade have been eroded 
by their higher attrition rate. The result is a continuing discrepancy in 
the proportions of degree recipients between minorities and non-minorities. 



For a comprehensive review of attrition studies see L. Ramist (1981). 

Two notable exceptions to these findings are: Hilton (1982) using the 
National Longitudinal Study and White and Brown (1980) comparing Black 
and White students at the University of Georgia. Both found no 
differences between Black and White students' attrition. 



o 
O 



-2- 

To close the gap in educational attainment between minority and non- 
minority students will therefore require more than enrollment gains among 
under represented groups; it will require a better xonderstanding of why these 
students drop out and a concerted effort to prevent their withdrawal. 

Improving minority retention is a major issue for colleges and 
universities. Policies established to enhance minority retention affect the 
individual students, the institution, and the broader concern of expanding 
equal educational opportunity. Minority retention is both a national 
concern and an issue for individual colleges and universities, for their 
actions can and do make a difference. 

Re view of the Literature 

The following section provides a brief overview of retention studies. 
For our discussion of these studies we first describe studies that focus on 
student characteristics that appear to affect retention, and then studies 
that examine the effects of various institutional factors. The final 
section of this literature review summarizes research on programs to enhance 
retention and/or iitprove minority performance on campus. 
Student Characteristics and Behavior 

There is an abundance of literature that attenpts to predict which 
students will drop out and explain why. Although there is disagreement 
about the relative importance of student characteristics associated with 
persistence, a great deal is known about v^ich students are most likely to 
persist and which ones are at risk (cf. Astin, 1975; Cross & Astin, 1981; 
Tinto, 1975). Cross and Astin found that the most significant predictors of 
full-time persistence were students' past academic achievement as reflected 



s 



-3- 

by high school grades, SAT scores, college prepe.ratory curriculum, and 
attendance at a four-year college. Other student characteristics such as 
race and socioeconomic status have also been associated with attrition 
rates. These variables (with the exception of type of college) are 
characteristics that students bring to the college with them and are 
therefore unchangeable by the institution. 

Students drop out for many different reasons; scxne are alterable and 
others are not. Reasons include academic, personal and financial factors. 
Pantages and Creedon (1978) examined 100 studies and found the following 
reasons for withdrawal (in order of frequency): academic matters; financial 
difficulties; motivational problems; personal considerations; 
dissatisfaction with college; military service; and taking a full-time job. 

Studies that focus on on-canpis behavior have found that attitudinal 
factors, such as personal and career goals, commitment to the institution, 
study skills, developing coping strategies, and academic performance 
including major and first semester GPA are crucial factors associated with 
student performance and persistence in college (Abasto, 1982; Allen, 1981; 
Bean, 1980; Brigman & Stager, 1980; Dallam & Dawes, 1981; Eddins, 1982; 
Newlon & Gaither, 1980). 

Dropping out is a process affected by a student's academic and social 
integration into the institution (Tinto, 1975). Drawing upon this concept 
researchers have found such factors as high use of campus facilities, 
holding a job on campus and having informal contacts with teachers and 
students outside the classroom to be associated with persistence in college 
(Astin, 1975; Churchill & Iwai, 1981; Pascarella & Terenzini, 19'^9) . In 
other words, students who are well integrated into the academic and social 



10 



-4- 

environicent of the institution are more likely to persist to graduation. 
This finding is particularly important for minority students on majority 
campuses v^ere they are less likely to fit in and more likely to feel 
alienated. Feelings of alienation among minority students may contribute to 
their withdrawal (Suen, 1983). Indeed, Braddock (1981), using the Tinto 
(1975) model, found that student characteristics accounted for only a snail 
proportion of the variance in drop out propensity among Black students at 
predominantly White institutions, vrtiereas low environmental congruence 
accounted for a greater proportion. 

Researchers suggest that there are differences between minority and 
majority students that affect their performance on campus. Specifically, 
attitudes, aspirations and expectations with which students enter may vary 
among subgroups and affect academic performance (Minatoya & Sedlacek, 1983; 
Nettles at al., 1985; Shaffer, 1973). Con?)aring Hispanic students and White 
students, Gutierrez (1981) found differences in self-esteem and perceived 
treatment by teachers. Minority experience on a canpis may contain certain 
factors that inhibit performance and/or lead to dropping out. These 
differences also mean that predictors of success for majority students may 
be inappropriate for minorities and therefore other nonconventional criteria 
should be applied (Dawkins & Dawkins, 1980; Sedlacek & Brooks, 1976). To 
improve prediction for minority students, Sedlacek and Webster (1978) have 
suggested the following noncognitive predictors of students' persistence: 
positive self-image; understanding of racism; realistic self-appraisal; 
ability to formulate long-range goals; availability of a support person; 
leadership experience; and community service. 



.11 



-5- 

Environmental Factors 

Persistence varies by type of institution. School characteristics 
associated with high persistence include selectivity, size, residential 
status, having religious affiliation, and available financial aid (Astin, 
1975; Cope, 1978; Cope & Hannah, 1975; Herndon, 1984; Tinto, 1975). Models 
to predict persistence in resicential colleges do not work the same in urban 
cojamuter settings where students have less opportunity for the type of 
institutional integration fo<jnd to be so important in residential canpises 
(Pascarella, Duby, & Iverson, 1983). 

Although some school characteristics are fixed, others that reflect 
general climai.e on the campus can be changed. Of particular inportance for 
minority students are issues surrounding race relations. A positive racial 
envj ronmanl" on a campus is associated wit good academic performance and 
persistence (Allen, 1981, Bennett & Okinaka, 1984; Nettles et al., 1985). 
Feelings of alienation and not belonging on campus contribute to minority 
attrition (Bean & Hull, 1984; Burrell, 1979; Edmc«nds, 1984). 

This brief overview of attrition research is not intended to be 
exhaustive but rather to indicate the con^)lexity of the retention issue. 
Students drop out for many reasons and various types of colleges and 
xaniversities appear to have different holding power. But more important 
from a policy standpoint is to understand not only the reasons students drop 
out but what can be done to retain them. Because the underlying reasons for 
withdrawal are multifaceted and complex, so are the solutions. 
Programs to Increase Retention 

Colleges and laniversities have tried a variety of programs to in?)rove 
minority retention, v;ith varying results. Some researchers maintain that 



12 



-6- 

special programs that provide academic and financial assistance have little 
impact on attrition of Black students (Francisco, 1983; Smith, 1980); other 
researchers suggest that special programs can be effective (Miller, 1977; 
Rayburn & Hayes, 1975; Trevino & Wise, 1980; Zanoni, 1980). Although the 
specific activities of retention programs vary, the most effective programs 
seek to integrate the individual into the mainstream of academic life 
(Tinto, 1982). Such programs often begin with recruitment efforts and/or 
outreach into the community and include all aspects of the institution — 
recruitment, admissions, academic advising, and financial aid (Anderson, 
1978; Beal & Noel, 1979; Crockett, 1978; Gamson, 1978; Ott, 1978). 

Beal and Noel (1979), in a comprehensive survey of retention programs, 
found that retention efforts involved admission and recruiting; advising; 
counseling; early warning and prediction; exit interviews; extracurricular 
activities; faculty, staff and curricular development; financial aid; 
housing; learning and academic support; orientation; and policy changes in 
such areas as grading and withdrawal. Other efforts that institutions have 
tried include paid work experiences for students, half-way houses for 
students living at home, increasing the number of minority staff v^ere there 
are large numbers of minority students, use of peer tutors, and special 
recruitment and retention projects. An important institutional policy 
change for improving retention is making retention a top priority and 
committing all aspects of the institution toward achieving retention goals. 

In a study of 13 institutions wfth substantial increases in Black 
enrollments during the 1970' s, Gamson (1978) found a variety of efforts that 
improved retention. Such efforts included a formal recruitment program, use 
of special admissions criteria, provision of financial aid, and development 



13 



-7- 

of support services. She also found that leadership and faculty support 
were key elements in successful retention efforts. 

Studies also suggest that how the program is implemented is as 
important as its content (Lenning, Sauer & Beal, 1980); therefore such 
factors as attitudes and interactions of students with faculty and staff are 
inportant considerations in examining programs. 

Minority retention efforts are aimed at increasing students' self- 
confidence and helping them to develop clearer goals, increasing their 
integration into the institution, improving their academic performance, and 
improving the ability of faculty and staff to meet individual student 
needs. This means that in developing programs for minorities the special 
needs of minority students must be addressed. 

The Study 

The purpose of this study was to examine programs and policies at 
four-year majority white institutions with good minority retention rates and 
to identify the factors that contribute to their success and that are 
adaptable to other sites. Although the study was to some extent exploratory 
in nature to determine if such variables could be isolated and identified 
within complex institutional environments, our search was enhanced by the 
research literature on retention programs. We examined the aforementioned 
retention strategies, paying particular attention to the implementation of 
the activities. 

The first step, and a problematic one, was to identify the institutions 
to study. We used two methods, one based on an objective statistical 
procedure and the other based on expert nomination. 



-8- 

Description of Method One 

The source of data on v^ich the Method One selection was based was 
Round Three of the Summary Reporting Service of the College Board for the 
successive years 1981 and 1982. Unfortunately, the schools that are 
represented are self-selected, and therefore it is difficult to interpret 
the units as a probability saiiple from some fixed target population. 
Nevertheless, this provided us with a list of colleges and tiniversities from 
all regions of the country on v^ich we had information on sttident 
characteristics and retention rates through the freshman year. The measure 
of persistence is the number of students that are still in school at the end 
of the first year. Thus, there is no indication of whether those same 
students returned to the institution after their first summer break, and 
therefore persistence is probably overstated. Assianing, however, that the 
bias is constant across institutions, we can make comparisons and identify 
institutions that deviate from the norm. 

We carried out the analyses separately for each of four minority 
groups: Blacks, mainland Puerto Ricans. Mexican Americans, and American 
Indians. For this report we have focused on Blacks, mainland Puerto Ricans, 
and Mexican Americans. We exclxided military institutions and institutions 
in which there were fewer than four of the relevant minority group in the 
freshman class and we limited our analysis to majority White institutions. 
For Blacks, there were 134 institutions included in the 1981 data and 209 in 
the 1982 data. Of the institutions included in 1981, 97 were present the 



Round Three refers to a level of summary tape report provided to colleges 
in vrfiich basic student descriptive questionnaire data are merged with data 
on student performance and persistence through the freshman year. 




-9- 

following year. For Puerto Ricans, there were 63 institutions included in 
1981 and 93 in 1982. Thirty-six of the 1981 institutions were included in 
1982. For the Mexican American sanple there were 41 institutions included 
in 1981 and 62 included in 1982. Thirty-two of the 1981 institutions were 
included in the second year. 

The first step in the analysis was to pass through the Round Three file 
consisting of student records and conpite averages and other statistics of 
interest for each minority group, including Whites for comparison in each 
college or university. The result of this procedure was a file for each 
minority group of school records containing measures on a large number of 
variables for each school in v^ich that group was represented. 

The general analytical approach was to develop a linear regression 
model relating the logit of the percentages of minority students persisting 
in a school to a set of characteristics of the students — ^with the student 
characteristics such as performance on tests, socioeconomic status, 
attitudinal measures, etc. considered to be variables over \ihich the school 
has no control after admission. Thus a school for which the actual value of 
persistence is much greater or less than that predicted by the regression 
model could be considered to be remarkable, and that phenomenon would 
suggest that there is some process taking place within the particular school 
that either enhances minority persistence or works to its detriment, 
depending upon v^ether the residual from the regression is either positive 
or negative. The objective of this procedure was to be able to select a 
limited number of institutions identified as "outliers" in this analysis 
for further study to determine vdiy they deviate from the norm. For a full 
description of the analytical approach used, see Ficklen, M. S. and 




-10- 

King, B. F., Minority retention Phase I , Princeton, NJ, Educational Testing 
Service, 1984. 

From tiiis analysis we identified "outliers", both positive and 
negative. We then developed a smaller list to consider for further 
investigation. Our criteria for inclusion on the smaller list were: 

o at least 14 students in the relevant minority group 

o a standardized residual of at least 1.5 if included for^ 
one year, and if included for both years, a standardized 
residual of 1.5 or greater in one year ^nd 1.0 or greater 
in the other. 

The resulting list included nine institutions with high persistence for 
Blacks, six institutions for Puerto Ricans and four for Mexican Americans. 
These institutions were combined with institutions selected according to 
Method Two to produce a list of 25 institutions. 
Description of Method Two 

Because of the limitations in the data base used for Method One, an 
alternative method was also used to identify schools with good minority 
retention practices. This method consisted of eliciting nominations from 
experts in the area of minority retention. For a conplete description of 
the procedures used, see Clewell, B.C., Identification of Institutions with 
Good Minority Retention Practices; A Feasibility Study , Princeton, NJ, 
Educational Testing Service, 1984. 

Five researchers, chosen because of their reputation as experts in 
minority retention, were asked to nominate five institutions each that, in 
their opinion, had good minority retention practices. They were also asked 
to give reasons for each nomination. A list of 24 institutions was conpiled 
(one institution was nominated by two members of the panel), and was 



•f CM 



-11- 

circulated to the panel with accoirpanying reasons for nomination. Panel 
members were asked to agree or disagree with the naninations. 

Once the panel had voted, a final list was made up of those schools 
that received a majority of "votes"; that is, a majority of the panel (three 
out of five) had agreed that they had exeirplary minority retention 
practicies. In cases v^ere the expert indicated that he/she v/as not 
familiar with the practices or programs at the institution, the "I don't 
know" reply was counted as a "disagree" vote. The final list, therefore, 
was based on a clear "agree" vote of at least three out of five members of 
the panel. 

Limitations of funding and time precluded a larger panel and additional 
rounds to achieve consensus. 
Synthesis of Results Fran Methods One and Two 

We created a list of institutions by combining the results of Methods 
One and Two, listing the institutions with the information available on each 
one. Those identified through the SRS analysis contained information on the 
relevant ethnic group for ^ich persistence was high, the freshman year 
persistence rate, and a comparative measure of persistence v^en controlling 
for student characteristics. We did not have information on programs for 
those institutions. Conversely, institutions identified through the 
nomination process contained information on programs, but did not contain 
measures of persistence. There were only four institutions nominated that 
were included in the SBS list of institutions. One of these was identified 
as an outlier and was thus placed at the top of the list of institutions to 
be screened. The other three did not show up as outliers in our analysis, 
and were therefore ranked at the bottom of our list. We also listed 



-12- 

Carnegie Classifications, control, and regions. From this list, we selected 
ten institutions, balancing all the relvant factors known to get a diverse 
group of institutions. We then screened these institutions by telephone 
using the following criteria: 

o high minority persistence 

o existence of at least one special program to inprove 
minority retention 

o data available on program participants 

o data available on persistence rates 

o agreement to participate 

Through telephone screening of the ten institutions, we were able to 

select four that met our criteria and offered diversity in terms of 

institutional types (see Taole 1). 

In choosing the final four institutions we considered the following: 

o representation of public, private, large, and small institutions 

o representation of institutions with high retention rates for Black 
and Hispanic students 

o representation of different regions of the country 
The four institutions selected represent a mix of three public and one 
private, religiously-affiliated institution. We felt this combination to be 
appropriate since a greater proportion of minority stiKients attend public 
colleges and universities than attend private institutions. The 
institutions are geographically diverse, located in the West, Midwest, 
Northeast and South. 

Because of our limited resources, we could only screen ten institutions 
and were able to select only four for study. Our final choice of four is 
not intended to be interpreted as a representative sanple. The procedures 



13 



-13- 



Table 1 

Rank Order of Top Ten Institutions '■.o Screen 
For Rirther Study 



Insti- Nomiiia- SRS High Freshnan Etlmic Geographic Has a Carnegie 
tution tion Analysis Year Persist. Group Region Prcgram Control Classification 
(Method 2) Qfethod 1) 



A 
tx 


Y 
A 


V 
A 


les 


Til ^ 

Black 


Mv 


Yes 


PUB 


a 


B 




X 


Yes 


Mex.Am. 


W 


* 


IRV 


a 


C 




X 


Yes 


Black 


SE 


* 


PRV 


e 


D 


X 




* 


* 


m 


Yes 


PUB 


a 


E 


X 




* 


Black 


SE 


Yes 


PUB 


d 


F 


X 




* 


* 


m 


Yes 


PRV 


b 


G 


X 




* 


* 


m 


Yes 


PUB 


d 


H 


X 




* 


* 


m 


Yes 


PUB 


b 


I 




X 


Yes 


BlM 


w 


* 


PUB 


e 


J 




X 


Yes 


P.R. 


ME 


* 


PRV 


e 



* Don't know 

Carnegie Qassifications: a Research University I 

b Research University II 

c Doctoral Granting University I 

d Doctoral Granting University II 

e Comprehensive University and College I 

f Comprehensive University and College II 

g liberal Arts College I 

h Liberal Arts College II 



-14- 

used were only a mechanism to help us select four schools that had 

successful programs. We know that there are many other institutions with 

excellent programs that are not represented among our screening list or our 

final selection. Nevertheless, we believe that the knowledge gained from 

studying the four schools selected will provide a useful source of 

information about programs to enhance minority retention and serve as a 

basis for further study. 

We conducted a case study of each institution. In addition to the 

three-day site visits at each institution by project staff, an outside 

consultant with expertise in minority retention and familiarity with the 

institution provided contextual analysis for each school. The contributions 

of the consultants have been incorporated into the case studies. The 

consultants for each study are: 

Boston College — James E. Blackwell, Professor of Sociology, 

University of Massachusetts, Boston, Massachusetts 

California State University-Fresno — John A. Bilorusky, Director, 
Western Institute for Social Research, Berkeley, 
California 

University of North Carolina, Greensboro — Peggy A. Richmond, 
Education Consultant, Research and Evaluation 
Association, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 

Purdue University — ^William Sedlacek, Associate Director, Counseling 

Center, Associate Professor of Education, University of 
Maryland, College Park, Maryland. 

The following report places minority retention in an institutional 

context and focuses on programs and policies that address the issue from an 

institutional perspective. Through examination of programs, we have 

designed a model for an ideal program that may be adaptable to other 

settings. Establishing a program requires commitment, planning and 

coordination throughout the institution. Although development of programs 



21 



-15- 

is an iterative process, there are discrete steps involved. The initial 
steps include a policy decision to address the issue, a needs assessment and 
development of a data base. The needs assessment forms the basis for a 
statement of policy wd development of a program consistent with that 
policy. Program in^)lement^tion, monitoring and evaluation feed back into 
the needs assessment so f^at changes can be made and progress monitored. It 
is through this institution-wide process and concerted effort that charge 
occurs. Because the schools and programs differ, each case study varies. 
Our studies cover both special programs and institution-wide efforts. Our 
focus at each site was the same: to describe programs and policies that 
enhance minority enrollment and gradxiation. 

The follov;ing section presents summaries of the four case studies. The 
complete case studies are included in the appendix. 



CASE STUDY SUMMARIES 



-19- 
Boston College 

The Institution 

Boston College is a private Jesuit Institution, located in Chestnut Hill, 
Massachusetts, a suburb of Boston. Its academic programs include under- 
graduate and graduate colleges of arts and sciences and schools in law, social 
work, education, management, nursing and theology. The current undergraduate 
enrollment of Boston College is approximately 8,000 with another 6,000 
enrolled in professional and graduate schools. 

With a tuition of approximately $8,000 per year, Boston College caters to 
the middle class. Most students are White, middle class and Catholic. Blacks 
conqprise only about three percent of undergradiiate enrollments, Hispanics four 
percent, and other minorities four percent. Boston College is selective in 
admissions. About 61 percent of entering freshmen have verbal SAT scores 
above 500 and 78 percent have math scores above 500. The admissions office is 
making a strong effort to attract more Black students and provide additional 
financial aid, but Boston College must compete with more prestigious colleges 
for Black students, thus making recruitment of Blacks difficult. 

AHANA Student Programs 

Activities 

The Office of AHANA (African American, Hispanic, Asian, and Native 
American) Student Programs serves as a center for academic and personal 
support services for students from ethnic/racial groups subsumed under the 
acronym AHANA (African American, Hispanic, Asian, and Native American). The 
Office has existed since 1968, but has experienced many changes over its 
17-year history. Since 1978 several retention programs have existed in a 
form similar to the current one. The office operates a svunmer transition 




-20- 

program, Options Through Education (OTE), for prematriculating freshmen v^o 
are selected as high risk minority students with potential for success at 
Boston College. This program has been very successful in improving the 
retention rate of minority students. The overall retention rate of OTE 
students is 81.2 percent. 

The Options Through Education Program is a six-v/eek summer program to 
inprove basic academic skills in math and English and provide an orientation 
to college life. In addition to two hours of English and two hours of math 
each day, students take courses in biology, chemistry, intercultural 
awareness, oral communications and human sexuality. Students are placed In 
English and math according to level of ability, and those taking upper level 
courses may receive credit, thereby allowing them to take a lighter load of 
courses during their freshman year. 

OTE students receive monitoring and advising throughout their four years 
at Boston College. Staff make a great effort to prevent students from falling 
into academic difficulty. Tutors, who are paid by the AHANA Office, are- 
available to help students. Additionally, OTE students may make up academic 
deficiencies during the summer on a tuition-free basis. Students must meet 
with advisors monthly, and as an additonal check on performance, the AHANA 
Office requests progress reports from teachers asking about student 
performance. The AHANA House provides personal, financial, and career 
counseling as well. 
Staff 

The AHANA Student Programs are part of the Office of Student Affairs. 
The staff consists of the Director, Assistant Director, and Administrative 
Assistant. Three graduate students, assisted by six administrative aids, who 



2'o 



-21- 

are undergraduates at Boston College., serve as advises. For the summer 
program, AHANA enploys two full-time coordinators, four math instructors and 
five English instructors, four of whom are graduate students. 
Participants 

All minority students may take advantage of the AHANA House and many of 
its services. The OTE program, however, is for 40-50 students in each class 
who are identified when they apply to Boston College as having potential, but 
who otherwise do not meet the normal admissions criteria for entrance into 
Boston College. Usually such students have strong high school grades and good 
ICLcers of recommendation, have demonstrated leadership ability and interest 
in community service, but have SAT scores that are lower than those of the 
typical Boston College student. Many of the OTE students come from high 
schools that are not as strong as those of the average Boston College student. 
Students accepted into the OTE program receive full funding for their four 
years at Boston College. The OTE student must sign a contractual agreement in 
which he/she agrees to specific conditions for the summer program such as: 
attending all classes, participating in study halls, and seeking help when 
experiencing difficulty in courses. The student also agrees that during the 
academic year he/she will meet regularly with a graduate assistant, s'^ek 
tutorial assistance when needed and attend all meetings as prescril ed by the 
Office of AHANA Progams. 
Evaluation 

There has been no formal evaluation of the program, but the AHANA Oftxce 
keeps careful records on students and reports the retention and graduation 
rates of each class of OTE students. Staff also keep records of office visits 
and frequency of tutorial assistance. 



-22- 
Conclusion 

The AHANA Scudent Programs are viewed as a valuable resource for Boston 
College and as a successful endeavor to increase minority retention. The OTE 
program provides financial, academic and personal support to students v^o are 
educationally disadvantaged. The program has been very successful and enjoys 
widespread support throughout the university. Additionally the institution is 
planning to increase recruitment efforts and provide more financial aid for 
Blacks. Attracting a more diversified student body and faculty is seen as an 
inpDrtant part of the mission of Boston College, and the Office of AHANA 
Student Programs plays a vital role in achieving this institutional goal. 



2? 



-23- 

California State University at Fresno 

The Institutiu-i 

The California State University at Fresno is the sixth oldest 
institution in the California State University 19-meinber system. Founded as 
a junior college in 1910, the institution experienced rapid physical and 
academic expansion after World War II. From an initial enrollment of 150, 
CSUF has grown to an enrollment of more than 16,000. 

As the major public university in the San Joaquin Valley, the 
institution serves a large geographical area with a rapidly growing 
population, a very large portion of vhich is Mexican American. It is 
estimated that by the year 2000 this area will be more than 50 percent 
Hispanic. It is already 30-35 percent Hispanic (mostly Mexican American) 
and four percent Black. CSUF considers it part of its mission, as a 
publicly supported institution, to serve stxadents "from groups that 
historically have not participated in university education, vrfiether because 
of age, socioeconomic background, physical ability or geographical 
location." 

Access and Retention 
The issue of the access and retention of minority students is 
inseparable from the university's sense of mission. Currently, the Mexican 
American enrollment is 14 percent, vrtiile the Black enrollment is four 
percent. The university would like to see the enrollment more closely 
reflect the ethnic conposition of the community it serves vrtiich is four 
percent Black, 30-35 percent Hispanic and approximately 60 percent White. 
To acconplish this, it has undertaken a number of outreach activities. 



9^ 



-24- 

Systemwide, CSUF ranks second in retaining freshmen. Its freshman 
first-year retention rate is 81.5 percent compared to the systerawide average 
of 76.2 percent. The majority of CSUF's minority students enroll as 
transfers from community colleges. A conparison of transfer retention rates 
(based on retention two years after matriculation) across ethnic groups 
shows Hispanic transfer students as having the highest retention (74.7%), 
followed by Asians (74.3%), Whites (73.1%), and Blacks (58.7%). The 
viniversity has instituted a niunber of efforts to increase minority 
retention. These take the form of tutorials, counseling, and special 
courses. 

Special Programs 

The two main special programs vrfiich focus on access and retention are 
COEffi-SAA and EOP. The first serves regularly admitted students, v^iile the 
second focuses on "special admits." 
CORE-SAA 

CSUF has been a leader of the CSU system in developing the CORE-SAA 
(College Outreach Retention and Enhancement-Student Affirmative Action) 
program. Many have credited this program with being on the "cutting edge" 
of new strategies and techniques for recruiting and retaining minority 
students. Whereas the EOP has primarily worked with and assisted special 
admissions students, there had never really been any concerted efforts to 
recruit and retain the regularly admissible minority student. CORE-SAA 
fills this gap. The program has three main conponents: An Outreach 
Component, a Retention Coirponent, and an Enhancement Component. 

Outreach Conpjnent . The major goal of this conponent is the 
recruitment of minority students. Main program elements are: recruiting, 



2d 



counseling, academic advising, campus tours, orientation, and early career 
development outreach (career awareness). The four staff members, together 
with five student peer counselors (part-time), work with coiranunity colleges 
and high schools in the university's service area to identify promising 
students, give presentations about CSUF, and counsel prospective students 
individually. They also provide other services such as tutoring and study 
skills instruction as well as assisting students to apply to CSUF. 

The Retention Conponent . The major goal of this conqponent is to 
increase the successful degree conpletion of historically under represented 
students. Its three main activities are: Peer Counseling, v^ere graduate 
students counsel freshmen, transfers, and students on probation; the Faculty 
Referral Program v^ereby students are referred by faculty for tutoral 
services; and the Special Retention Advising Program that provides courses 
for credit to students on academic probation. The staff of two retention 
specialists, two peer counselors (half-time), and two tutors teach classes, 
conduct study skills workshops, tutor, and counsel students. Many of the 
participants in this conponent are students who have been recruited through 
the Outreach Conpsnent. 

The Educational Enhancement Component . This cot^ranent attenpts to 
increase faculty awareness of the needs of minority and non-traditional 
students. It has sponsored 'Jndergraduate Academic Advising Conferences 
including a workshop on advising minority students, a Black staff-student 
mentorship program, and a Chicano Student Leadership Program. 
The Educational Opportunity Program (EOP) 

The EOP provides the services for "special admits" that CORE-SAA does 
for "regular admits." Most canpises in the system have had EOP's since 



-26- 

1970. The major goals of EOF are to provide access to higher education for 
minority, low-income students, and to provide support services throughout 
their mdergraduate education to graduation. Support services include 
career counseling, personal counseling, and tutoring provided either by EOF 
or by other— speciralTsirvices programs on canpjs. 

Participants must meet certain criteria in order to enroll in the 
program. They must come from a low-income household; their parents must 
have less than a baccalaureate degree; they must have a high school GFA of 
at least 2.0; they must be residents of the state of California; and they 
must have completed eight semesters of college preparatory English and four 
semesters of college preparatory math. Other factors taken into accomt in 
the selection of participants are test scores, motivation, and potential to 
succeed in college. With an enrollment of 1,050 students, EOF has one 
sixteenth of all CSUF students as well as an even larger proportion of the 
minority enrollment. 

The EOF staff consists of a Director; an Assistant Director; an 
Academic Service Coordinator vrfio oversees tutorials, learning skills and 
work with students on probation; an assistant to the Academic Service 
Coordinator; five counselors vAio do personal counseling and oversee 
different functions of the program; three full-time clerical staff; and 
40 to 50 students vAio work part-time in various capacities — from peer 
adviser to data entry. 

Other Special Programs 
In addition to the two programs described above, CSUF has a number of 
other programs on campus that work to increase the access and retention of 
minority students. Those that focus on students at the xindergraduate level 



3i 



-27- 

include the College Assistance Migrant Program (CAMP), the Health Careers 
Opportianity Program (HCOP), and the Minority Engineering Program. These are 
described in detail in the CSUF case study in the appendix. 

Support Services at CSUF 
Interviews with students revealed their feeling that the special 
programs and support services at CSUF play a central role in aiding minority 
students on campus. The fact that these services are visible, varied, and 
effective seems to confirm to students that these programs are a legitimate 
part of the university. Students do not feel defensive or insecure about 
having used special programs; they are, rather, proud that they are making 
use of valuable resources. 

Conclusion 

The access and retention activities of the California State University 
at Fresno represent a concerted effort involving all levels of the 
university. A unique feature of this effort is the extent of coordination 
among the various programs and administrative units responsible for these 
activities. The strong leadership of the President and top administrators, 
the dedication and concern of the directors and staffs of the programs, and 
the cooperation of the faculty combine to produce a highly successful 
university-wide attempt to enroll and retain minority undergraduate 
students. 



-28- 

Minority Engineering Programs 
Purdue University 

The Institution 

Purdue University is one of the 25 largest universities in the nation. 
It has a systemvfide enrollment of 46,964 at its various campuses in Indiana, 
with the West Lafayette campus enrolling 31,457 students. The university 
was established in 1869 as a land-grant institution specializing in the 
agricultural and mechanical arts. Its traditional academic strengths have 
been in technology and applied science. 

Situated in a state with fairly low Black representation — about eight 
percent — and an Hispanic population of about two percent, Purdue has had 
some difficulty attracting minority studentc ^hd undergraduate minority 
enrollment is about four percent, and most of these students are Black. 
The Admissions Office has made an effort to recruit minority students, 
concentrating on areas with large minority populations such as Cleveland, 
Detroit, northern New Jersey and New York City. The Admissions Office works 
closely with the Minorities in Engineering Program in their recruitment 
activities. 

The Schools of Engineering 
With an enrollment of 6,000 tindergraduates, the Schools of Engineering 
at Purdue represent one of the largest conponents of that institution. 
These schools coitprise one of the largest engineering collegs in the 
country, as well as one of the most distinguished. The Department of 
Freshman Engineering is the entry point for all freshmen entering 
engineering programs and is responsible for initial advising and counseling 
as well as for first-year classes. The Department of Freshman Engineering 



Qq 



-29- 

administers the Minority Engineering Progreum which is the subject of this 
case study. 

Minority Recruitment and Retention in the Schools of Engineering 

Recruitment and retention of minority students is a priority of the 
Schools of Engineering at Purdue. An affirmative action goal of 16 percent 
enrollment of under represented minority students (Blacks, Hispanics and 
American Indians) was set in 1984. 

Although Purdue's enrollment of minority undergraduates in engineering 
(5.1 percent) is somewhat below the national figure of 8.4 percent, Black 
engineering students at Purdue persist at a slightly higher rate than 
nationally (48% vs 45%). Hispanic student retention, on the other hand, is 
slightly lower than the national average for Hispanics in engineering 
programs (57% vs 60%). The Schools of Engineering have the highest 
enrollment of minority students of any school at Purdue — 5.2 percent of the 
total engineering undergraduate enrollment and 6.5 percent of the beginning 
freshman class. This relatively large minority enrollment as well as a 
fairly high retention rate for minority students is due primarily to the 
efforts of the Minority Engineering Program. 

Minority Engineering Program (MEP) 
The Minority Engineering Program (MEP) at Purdue University represents 
a unique blend of coaponents that combine several approaches to motivating, 
rcciuiting, enrolling, retaining, and graduating minority engineers at that 
institution. It is located in the Department of Freshman Engineering in the 
Schools of Engineering. Established eleven years ago, the program's goal is 
to provide a coitprehensive effort to increase minority enrollment by 25 
percent each year. Funds from several private industries are used to 




-30- 

support programming activities and scholarships, vrtiile staffing and 
facilities are ftinded by institutional fxands allocated to the Freshman 
Engineering Department. 

Programs that operate xander MEP can be classified into two types — 
Pre-College and College-Level activities. The former include efforts to 
identify, motivate, and enroll high school students who demonstrate high 
potential and who indicate mathematics, science and engineering as 
interests. The latter focus on the retention of minority students already 
enrolled at Purdue. 
Pre-College Activities 

Summer Workshops for High School Students . MEP sponsors summer 
workshops for minority high school students to familiarize them with the 
Purdue canpus and motivate them to consider careers in engineering. 
Different workshops are aimed at students of different levels and 
abilities — seventh and eighth grades, freshmen and sophomores, and juniors. 
The workshops provide the opportxanity for students to participate in 
engineering projects, tour engineering laboratories and facilities, discuss 
various engineering topics with other engineering students and professional 
role models, and attend presentations by admissions officers on requirements 
for technical studies at the college level. The workships vary in length 
from one to two weeks. 

Target Cities Luncheon Program . These are special Itincheon programs 
for academically talented high school juniors and seniors as well as their 
teachers and counselQrs in selected cities throughout the midwest. 
Presentations focus on engineering programs and opportunities available at 
Purdue . 



35 



-31- 

Recruitment Activities . Although the sunmer workshops described above 
are, to some extent, efforts to recruit minority engineering students for 
Purdue, MEP conducts activities that focus more narrowly on recruitment. 
One of these is a two-day effort aimed at talented juniors and seniors. 
Another is a two-and-a-half day progre designed to encourage minority 
students v^o have been admitted to Purdue to enroll in the freshman 
engineering program. Students are encouraged to attend this activity with 
their parents. 

Other Activities . MEP conducts teacher/counselor workshops for junior 
and senior high school teachers and counselors to disseminate information 
regarding activities and developments within engineering. Minority 
engineering students at Purdue offer their services (such as sharing 
information regarding their own experiences at the institution) to 
prospective minority engineering students. MEP provides industry-sponsored 
grants of from $1,000 to more than $3,000 to attract highly qualified 
minority engineering students. PREP, a six-week intensive preparatory 
program for entering Engineering freshmen, was initiated this summer (1985). 
An impressive array of recruitment materials, engineering career literature, 
and information regarding financial aid and admissions has been developed 
and disseminated through the MEP. 
College-Level Retention Activities 

The MEP staff maintains contact with minority engineering students once 
they are enrolled at Purdue by providing the following support services: 
individual and career guidance sessions; orientation and retention seminars; 
incentives for academic performance through the Continuing Student Awards 
program; enployment of students in MEP; information on employment and 



-32- 

scholarship opportunities from the MEP newsletter; and a positive working 

relationship with the Society of Black Engineers. 

Staff 

The staff of NEP consists of one full-time director and one assistant 
director who is half-time. There is one full-time secretary and one 
part-time secretary, as well as two undergraduate student helpers and four 
undergraduate student tutors. 
Participants 

Students currently enrolled at Purdue who participate in the 
college-level activities feel that the program has helped to ease the 
transition from high school to college. They mentioned the program's 
usefulness in introducing them to available resources, providing services, 
bringing them closer to other minority students in engineering, and 
providing moral support as well as academic support. All students praised 
the dedication of the staff,- particularly the Director, and considered this 
to be a very important ingredient in the program's success. Currently 
enrolled students who had been participants in the pre-college programs 
credited MEP with influencing their decision to choose an engineering career 
and to enroll at Purdue. 
Evaluation 

Most of the programs described above have been evaluated by the Office 
of Education Research and Information Systems in the Department of Freshman 
Engineering. Evaluations have been formative as well as summative , and are 
conducted on a yearly basis. Results of evaluations of the individual 
programs are given in the complete case study in the appendix. 



37 



Conclusion 

The Minority Engineering Program at Purdue University represents a 
commitment on the part of the Schools of Engineering as well as the 
University to increase minority recruitment and retention in the engineering 
programs, it is probably the most focused and successful effort of its type 
at Purdue and enjoys the support of the institution, the commitment of a 
dedicated staff, and the assistance of the institutional research office of 
the Freshman Engineering Department. There has also been a substantial 
investment on the part of industry. The difficulty of this undertaking in a 
state with a very low minority population and at an institution with low 
minority enrollment is considerable. The success of MEP under such 
circumstances is encouraging, if not remarkable. 



-34- 

The University of North Carolina, Greensboro 

The Institution 

The University of North Carolina, at Greensboro is one of 16 
institutions in the University of North Carolina System. UNC-G has a 
long-standing commitment to the liberal arts in iindergraduate education, 
along with undergraduate and graduate preparation in many professional 
fields of study. 

UNC-G has an enrollment of over 10,000 students of which over one- 
quarter are graduate students. Blacks comprise about ten percent of the 
students ari other minorities about three percent. The average combined SAT 
score of incoming freshmen is 940 and over half of the freshmen rank in the 
top quarter of their high school class. About 88 percent of the students 
are state residents. 

Since 1973 the University of North Carolina System has been under court 
order to desegregate' all of its constituent institutions. Prior to the 
court order, UNC-G had the best minority retention rate of any predominantly 
White institution in the system. Following the court order, there was 
increased competition within the system for minority students, and UNC-G has 
had to increase its efforts to attract and retain minority students. 

Access and Retention 

Many factors at UNC-G appear to contribute to the high minority 
retention rate. These factors include efforts within regular university 
services — ^Admissions, Student Aid, Student Affairs, Academic Advising, and 
Academic Departments In addition to university-wide policies to improve 
minority retention, there are two special projects — Special Services and a 
new Student Retention Project — that are designed specifically to improve 



39 



"35- 

retention and the academic perforniance of students. Both projects are under 
the auspices of Academic Affairs. 
Special Services Program 

The Special Services Program is a federally-funded and university- 
supported educational program begun in 1970. Students who do not meet 
regular admissions criteria may be admitted to UNC-G through the Special 
Services Program. To qualify students must be first generation college 
students, economically and educationally disadvantaged and/or physically 
handicapped, if^roximately 120 students are admitted each year undrr these 
criteria, and about 70-80 percent of these participate in the procrreun. 
About 80 percent of Special Services students are Black. 

The program provides a variety of academic and support services. These 
include academic advising, mathematics instruction, reading and study 
skills, writing instruction, tutoring and counseling. Prior to registering 
for classes, students are given assessments in writing and math and a 
program of study is developed. Most instruction is on an individual basis. 

Staff include a fuH-time director, a counselor, a reading/study skills 
specialist, a mathematics specialist, a secretary and a tutor coordinator. 
Upperclassmen or graduate students provide tutoring. Sludents wi^o 
participate in the Special Services program have higher retention rates than 
those who do not participate. The one year retention rates for Special 
Services students in good standing is 87 percent vs. 39 percent for tlvjse 
students vrfio do not participate. 
Student Retention Project 

The Student Retention Project was begun in 1984 as an effort to improve 
graduation rates of minority students. The project is coordinated by a 



40 



member of the Admissions Office staff in cooperation with the Academic 
Advising Office. 

The principal activities of the Student Retention Project are early 
identification of academic difficulties, developtient of special study 
skills, and enhancement of academic advising. The monitoring of students' 
academic progress is designed to prevent students f rran getting into academic 
difficulty. In addition, the project holds a series of workshops on time 
management, test-taking, reading and note-taking. 

Participants for the initial effort were 233 minority students and 100 
non-minority students vAio were not eligible for Special Services. The goal 
is to open up the project to all undergraduate students. 

The coordinator of the project is an assistant director of admissions. 
Two student volunteers assist her. A steering committee consisting of 
faculty and the Dean of Academic Advising provide overall direction. 
Fourteen student assistants serve as peer counselors, and 95 faculty members 
provide the service to students. 

Although it is too early to look at the impact of the program on 
student graduation, the project has made faculty more aware of the 
importance of advising students and monitoring student progress. 

Conclusion 

UNC-G exemplifies a university that is making an institution-wide 
effort to increase minority retention. Through regular university services 
and two special projects—Special Services and the Student Retention 
Project — UNC-G has been successful in enhancing minority retention. 



41 



FINDINGS 



42 



-39- 
Findings 

The institutions presented in the case studies represent schools with 
a wide range of characteristics as well as differing aj:c*roaches to 
enhancing the retention of their minority students. In looking across 
institutions and programs, however, certain similarities also emerge. The 
follov;ing two sections summarize the characteristics of the programs, 
highlighting both differences and similarities. 

Differences Among Institutions and Programs 

The programs at the four institutions all have a common purpose: 
to enhance minority retention. While there are many similarities in these 
programs, there are also differences in the services offered. The major 
areas of variation that influence program effectiveness are institutional 
environment; rationale for minority retention efforts; locus of control; 
grade levels of students served; and scope and types of services. These 
differences are in^xjrtant to the successful development and inplementation 
of programs, since minority retention efforts must be tailored to meet 
the special needs of students and fit into the overall institutional 
environment. 

Institutional Environment 

The institutions we visited vary in selectivity, size, control and 
location, factors that are fixed but affect the type of student served and 
the nature of recruitment efforts. Boston College is a very selective, 
Jesuit institution, with an enrollment of about 8,000 undergraduates. It 
is located in a predominantly White middle-class suburb of Boston, a city 
where Blacks conprise approximately 22 percent of the population. Because 
of its location, selectivity, and cost, Boston College must make special 



43 



-40- 

efforts to attract Black students and assist them in meeting costs and, 
where necessary, improve their academic skills. It must provide assistance 
while maintaining high academic standards. Recruitment takes place 
primarily in the inner-city areas of Boston, New York, New Jersey, 
Connecticut, and Washington, D.C. Although the school is relatively small 
(coitpared to Purdue), it is still large enough that students, particularly 
Black students v^o represent only a small proportion of the student body, 
need assistance in negotiating the university. 

Purdue is a very large (over 30,000 students) public institution that 
is relatively selective, particularly in its Schools of Engineering, it is 
located in a small town in the midwest, an area of low minority population. 
The school is isolated and not near a major metropolitan area. Purdue's 
MEP program has made special efforts to attract Black students, aiming 
these efforts on junior high and high school students in nearby states, 
particularly in cities with larger concentrations of minorities. 

The University of North Carolina at Greensboro (UNC-G) is a medium- 
sized public institution. Its relatively small size makes the institution 
seem more open and accessible for students, while its entrance requirements 
are less selective than Purdue or Boston College. Because it is in an area 
with a relatively large population of Blacks, its recruitment efforts are 
targeted for the most part in-state. Its relatively low cost makes the 
UNC-G attractive to Black students. 

Fresno State University is a large multi-purpose state university with 
a mission to serve students from the San Joaquin Valley, which has a high 
proportion of Mexican Americans. Fresno admits students v*io graduate in 
the top third of their high school class or \^o transfer from community 



44 



-41- 

colleges. Fresno has made special efforts to recruit Mexican Americans viho 
might not have considered going to college and has developed recruitment 
and support programs to serve their.. 

The four institutions vary xn the proportion of minorities on canpis, 
a factor that affects the general climate of the institution. The 
University of North Carolina at Greensboro and Fresno State have student 
bodies with a critical mass of minorities on canpis reflecting the 
population of the area. In addition, Fresno and UNC-G have interracial 
staffs. These factors help in recruiting other minority students, since 
they see that the campus is receptive to minorities. 

Boston College and Purdue University have only a small Black presence 
on canpis. They are located in areas that are predominantly Vftiite. This 
creates a different environment for minorities and requires these 
institutions to make special efforts to attract and retain minorities. 
Boston College, however, has been able to attract a relatively large group 
of Hispanic students with no special efforts due to the Jesuit ties to the 
Hispanic community. 

Rationale for Minority Retention Efforts 

The rationale underlying the decision to increase minority presence on 
campus and improve retention of minorities differs across the institutions. 
During the 1960's, the administration and Board of Trustees of Boston 
College determined that they had a responsibility to provide education to 
minorities, especially Black students. They developed a program to 
identify talented Black students and to increase Black enrollments. The 
decision at Purdue University's Schools of Engineering was also an internal 
one. Because of the low proportion of minorities in the state and in the 



45 



-42- 

engineering profession, Purdue developed outreach programs starting in the 
7th and 8th grades and going through high school to increase interest in 
and preparation for entering an engineering program. For both Fresno State 
University and the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, practical 
as well as philosophical concerns led to the decision to enhance minority 
access and retention. Fresno has a mission to serve the San Joaquin 
Valley, an area which is heavily populated by Mexican Americans. By the 
year 2000, the Mexican American population is projected to increase to 
50 percent. Therefore, to serve this population and to plan for future 
enrollments of increasing nvimbers of Mexican Americans, Fresno developed 
programs to meet the needs of these students. UNC-G as a state institution 
has a mission to serve the population of the state, which consists of large 
numbers of Blacks. With additional pressures of a court order for the 
system to desegregate, and increased competition within the system for 
minority students, UNC-G must make strong efforts to recruit and retain 
Black students. 
Locus of Control 

V4here programs exist in the institution appears to be related to the 
organization of the school, the history of the program, the individuals 
involved and the services provided. At Boston College the AHANA StiKient 
Programs was developed out of the Office of Minority Affairs which was 
within the Office of Student Affairs. It has existed within that office 
since its founding, although the main focus is on academic performance of 
students. The programs at Fresno State have a more complex structure, but 
one that is appropriate to the institution. Organizationally the programs 
are located under the Office of Student Affairs, but the parts of programs 



48 



-43- 

that deal with academics are part of academic affairs. Because the 
programs at Purdue focus on engineering students, they are located within 
the Schools of Engineering. AT UNC-G, the Assistant Vice Chancellor for 
Academic Affairs oversees the overall retention effort and the two special 
programs for in^)roving retention. Both programs focus on inproving 
academic performance of students. 
Grade Levels of Students Served 

The programs we visited serve students at different grade levels. 
They begin and end at different places along the educational pipeline. 

Purdue University's programs serve students beginning in junior high 
school and continue through freshman year of college. These efforts are 
designed to increase motivation and interest in engineering and to improve 
academic performance. After freshman year the responsibility for support 
services is transferred to the various engineering schools, although the 
program does provide some services beyond the freshman level. 

Fresno State's programs are also very comprehensive. They begin with 
outreach into the junior high schools, and encourage these students to 
enter college through counseling, motivation and academic support programs. 
There are also programs for high school students. Academic and personal 
support programs for matriculating students begin with orientation and 
continue through undergraduate and even graduate school. 

The University of North Carolina at Greensboro begins recruitment 
efforts at the high school level, but the focus of its programs is on 
students who are matriculating at UNC-G. For Special Services students, 
these activities begin with an orientation and preregistration in June 
before the freshman year. The personal and academic counseling and 



47 



-44- 

tutoring are available throughout the four years at UNC-G, although 
freshmen are the heaviest users of services. The student retention project 
began as a project to serve freshmen, but has now opened up to all 
students . 

The program at Boston College is directed at undergraduates at Boston 
College. It reaches out into high schools to identify students with high 
potential who might not have considered Boston College, but the main thrust 
of the program begins with acceptance to Boston College, and to the OTE 
program. Activities begin the summer prior to entering Boston College and 
continue with monitoring, tutoring and advising throughout the four years 
at the institution. 
Scope and Types of Services 

The range of services offered at these institutions has been developed 
to meet the needs of students at the particular school. These services are 
focused on addressing academic, financial and personal needs of students. 
Fresno and Purdue have many special programs throughout the campus to serve 
students with different needs. At Boston College there is one very 
intensive effort that focuses on a small number of students. UNC-G has two 
special programs, but also J idividuals within regular offices (admissions, 
financial aid, etc.) who are concerned with special needs of minority 
students. 

Although all the schools provide financial aid to students through 
scholarships, loans and work-study, this is not a major part of retention 
efforts at the three public institutions we studied, since tuition is 
relatively low. At Boston College, the high tuition is believed to be a 



43 



-45- 

barrier to increasing Black enrollments, so providing financial support for 
OTE students is an inportant aspect of the program. 

Most of the academic support in the special programs consists of 
individual and/or group tutoring, but two of the institutions offer courses 
for credit as part of the special program. Purdue University courses 
entitled "Techniques of Academic Problem Solving" and "Minority Engineering 
Student Seminar" are part of the regular curriculum, but grew from the 
special engineering program. At Boston College the courses taken in math 
and English in the summer OTE program may be for credit if students place 
in the upper levels. Lo\^r level courses are designed to bring skills up 
to college level and therefore are not for credit. 

Ftesno is the only institution that has established a faculty 
development conponent. This activity is designed to make faculty more 
aware of the special needs of minority and nontraditional students. Other 
institutions have held workshops to make faculty more aware of these needs, 
but this has not developed as a formal ongoing activicy. 
Summary 

As described above, we found great variation in the institutions and 
their student bodies. As a result of these differences, the retention 
efforts differed in terms of target population, types of services offered, 
scope and intensity of services and their location within the institution. 
These differences demonstrate that retention efforts for minority students 
can be developed and carried out in many different ways, at different types 
of institutions. 



45 



-46- 

Characteristics of Successful Retention Efforts 
Although we found many differences in the four institutions and their 
programs, we also found that there were certain conimon characteristics 
across the programs — characteristics that appear to be elements of 
successful retention efforts. These characteristics are: the presence of a 
stated policy; high level of institutional commitment; substantial degree of 
institutionalization; comprehensiveness of services; dedicated staff; 
systematic collection of data, monitoring and follow up; strong faculty 
support; and non-stigmatization of participants. 
Policy 

Establishing institutional policies to enhance minority retention 
emphasizes the inp)rtance of the issue on campus. All four institutions 
have policy statements supporting retention efforts for minority students. 
CSU-F has this as part of its statement of mission; UNC-G has a mission to 
serve the population of North Carolina with explicit racial goals; Purdue's 
Schools of Engineer! -g have i<?«;ued a statement that sets affirmative action 
goals and procedures for «xhi. ving those goals; and the trustees of Boston 
College hnve stated ^.he institution's ccuimitment to a specific target level 
or minoirit^ enrollmints. 

Another important area where institutional pol i-^y can make a difference 
is admissions. All four institutions have special admissions policie** under 
which certain requirements for admissions can be waived. Moreover, all four 
institutions provide the necessary support and academic assistance for 
specially admitted students. 



5u 



-47- 

Institutional Commitment 

At all four institutions, endorsement and support for minority 
retention policies are present at the highest levels of the administration. 
This support assures strong leadership in implementing these policies. 
CSU-F's president has made minority retention a priority and has taken a 
vigorous stance to ensure implementation of a retention policy. Purdue, 
UNC-G, and Boston College, all have institutional support and leadership at 
very high levels for their retention efforts. This results in respect and 
legitimacy for such efforts, financial support, and a high degree of 
cooperation from other areas within the institution. 
Institutionalization 

The extent to which a retention program is institutionalized is 
important to its stability, its ability to plan, its acceptance by other 
entities within the institution, and its continued existence. All four 
retention programs discussed in this report have become important functions 
of the institutions and are viewed as integral parts of the schools. The 
institutions provide a good portion of their financial support as well. 
Institutional Climate 

A climate that is favorable to the existence of minorities on campus 
contributes to the success of minority retention programs. In such a 
climate where differences flourish, minority-related activities are a normal 
part of can()us life and minority students feel more comfortable and less 
alienated. A favorable institutional climate may be the result of 
institutional commitment to minority access and retention, and/or the 
presence of a "critical mass" of minority students on campus. CSU-F and 
UNC-G have institutional climates that are favorable to minority students. 



-48- 

while Boston College and Purdue University have cliaiates that have been 
characterized as "neutral but not hostile." 
Comprehensiveness of Services 

Although there are many variations in the types and delivery of 
retention services among the institutions studied, all offer a wide range of 
support services that include counseling (academic and personal), tutorials, 
financial aid, and basic skills assistance. These services are designed to 
help students adjust to all phases of college life — assisting in personal, 
academic and financial concerns. 

The programs provide support over a period of time from pre-enrollment 
through at least the freshman year. They include recruitment, orientation, 
and the in-school support services described above. All four institutions 
make special efforts to recruit minority students, although the extent and 
focus of recruitment efforts vary among the institutions. Orientation is 
another important component of retention, and all the subjects of the case 
studies offer some type of orientation program, although the degree of 
intensity and length vary. And finally, all programs contain substantial 
efforts to assist students once they enroll at the institution. 

Provision of financial assistance to minority students is another 
service that all programs provide. There is much variation in amounts and 
types of financial aid, ranging from assistance in obtaining financial aid 
from the luiiversity, to scholarships, with aid awarded on the basis of need 
as well as merit. 
Dedicated Staff 

The presence of dedicated staff is one of the most important 
ingredients of success in a retention program. In addition to being devoted 



to the goals of the progccun, the director should be a strong, capable 
individual, who is able to foster and maintain cooperative relationships 
with other areas within the institution. The degree of dedication evident 
in the staffs of all the programs studied is remarkable, as are the 
excellent leadership strengths of the directors of these programs. 
Furthermore, the directors bring a wealth of experience to their jobs, 
having worked in their respective programs for several years. 
Data Collection 

Ihe establishment and maintenance of a data base ensures the accurate 
identification of needs; allows the monitoring of program effectiveness as 
well as student progress; provides an early warning system fot problems; and 
makes possible the implementation of important features of most programs, 
such as follow up and evaluation. All four retention efforts enjoy the 
support of an efficient system of data collection and maintenance. Purdue's 
Office of Education Research and Information Systems performs this function 
for the Minority Engineering Programs, as do UNC-G's and CSU-F's Offices of 
Institutional Research for their respective programs. At Boston College, 
data are collected and maintained jointly by the AHANA Student Program and 
the Office of Admissions. 
Faculty Support 

The support and cooperation of faculty are important factors 
contributing to the success of retention efforts. As one of the 
administrators whom we interviewed noted, the most inportant changes in the 
institutional environment take place in the classroom. Factors that 
contribute to increased faailty support are strong institutional commitment 
and support for retention at top levels of administration; the ability of 



-50- 

the program director to establish good relationships with faculty; and the 
demonstrated success of programs in inproving minority students' academic 
skills. Education of the faculty via workshops and conferences to increase 
their awareness of minority needs might be another method of gaining the 
support and cooperation of faculty. All four institutions enjoy a high 
degree of faculty support; at all four institutions the factor*, contributing 
to increased faculty support are present. Two of the institutions, UNC-G 
and CSU-F, also have activities to promote faculty awareness of minority 
needs. 

"Non-Stigmatization" of Participants 

The lack of stigma attcijhed to participating in special retention 
progrars is a function of a positive racial climate on canpus and of faculty 
support. An institutional environment that supports and encourages minority 
related activities will foster pride in a student's affiliation with any 
minority program. Faculty v^o respect retention programs will rot 
discriminate against the participants of such programs in their classes. At 
none of the institutions included in this report did students complain of 
being sti^utatized for belonging to a minority retention program or receiving 
special services for remediation. On the contrary, many of them felt proud 
of their participation as well as fortunate in being able to take advantage 
of the services offered. 
Discussion 

The findings of our case studies regarding characteristics of 
successful retention programs agree with much of the literature ::ited at 
the beginning of this report. The effect of a positive racial envirc'- t 
on campus is mentioned by several researchers as contributing to increased 



-51- 

retention and good academic performance (Allen, 1981; Bean & Hull, 1984; 
Bennett & Okinaka, 1984; Burrell, 1979; Edmonds, 1984). Retention efforts 
that include recruitment, admissions, academic advising and financial aid as 
well as special admissions criteria and support services — in other words, a 
conprehensive offering of services — are considered by many to be a necessary 
ingredient for success (Anderson, 1978; Heal & Noel, 1979; Crockett, 1978; 
Gamson, 1978; Ott, 1978).. Leadership and faculty support for retention 
efforts are found to be key elements in successful retention, as are 
attitudes and interaction of students with faculty and staff (Gamson, 1978; 
Lenning, Sauer & Beal, 1980). Institutionalization of programs and the 
conprehensiveness of support services are mentioned by Keimig (1983) as 
being the two most inportant characteristics of successful developmental 
programs; this might also apply to retention programs, many of which include 
con^)onents that are developmental in nature. 

The wide range of variation among the institutions studied illustrates 
how these characteristics can be present in very different settings. The 
manner in which the institutions have applied similar principles to their 
particular circumstances can serve as a guide for other institutions. We 
hope that other universities and colleges will see thess programs as models 
from which to gain ideas for adaptation in their own settings. 

The following section describes a process for developing effective 
minority retention programs, it is a gene'-al process that is adaptable to 
all institutions. 



-52- 

A Model for Developing Effective Minority Retention Programs 

Figure 1 is a simple diagram representing the major steps needed to 
formulate a retention program. The first step, \^ich is carried out by the 
top levels of administration and/or the Board of Trustees, is to make a 
policy decision to enhance minority enrollment and retention. Once this 
decision is made, the institution must formulate a way to carry it out. 
This involves a needs assessment and development of a data base to examine 
minority enrollments and retention rates and plan for the future. Usually 
institutional research, often working with other offices such as admissions 
and the registrar, will coordinate this effort. 

After the needs assessment, the institution is in a better position to 
decide what can be accoii^lished within a specified period of time. At this 
point, the administration of the institution — ^usually the president's 
office — develops a policy statement with specific goals or targets to meet. 

Develop.nent of a program can now proceed from this policy statement. 
The program addresses in a practical manner how goals are to be 
accomplished. Usually a committee consisting of both faculty and 
administrators, as well as individuals v^o will be responsible for program 
efforts, coordinate program planning and developoient. 

Once the program has been developed, implementation begins, sometimes 
with a small pilot test, and sometimes on a larger scale. The program 
director and program staff are the major actors in this phase, but they are 
also in contact with others in the school, including faculty, deans and 
administrative staff. 

Monitoring and evaliiiation are inportant elements in the whole process 
of program developnent and inplementation. Program efforts must be 



0 0 




Figure 1. Major steps In formulating a retention program. 




-54- 

monitored to determine if any finetvining is needed. Usually the program 
staff, often working with institutional researchers, are responsible for 
this function. In addition, an inqpact evaluation should be carried out by 
institutional researchers to determine the effects of the program and see if 
goals are being met. Data collected through monitoring and evaluation 
activities are added to the data base and may alter future needs assessments 
and goals development, and in turn, program efforts. 

Thus, from this model it is clear that retention efforts include all 
parts of the institution and constitute an ongoing process in v^ich changes 
are made as needed. 

Minority Retention; A Broader Perspective 
It is obvious from the retention efforts of the four case studies 
described in this report that they involve all aspects of the institution — 
recruitment through admissions, orientation, academic and personal support 
during the undergraduate years and even beyond. Retention, then, is much 
more than "keeping students in school until they graduate." It begins with 
motivating students to aspire to higher education, preparing them for the 
rigors of a college career, assisting them to matriculate, helping them 
finance their education, and offering them academic and personal support 
during their college years. As we have seen in the case studies, 
undertaking such tasks requires a considerable commitment of resources on 
the part of the institution, and institutions make that commitment for a 
variety of reasons. 

Some institutions may wish to support retention activities because of a 
belief that one of the roles of higher education in a democratic society is 



Do 



-55- 

the developnerxt of talent and skills in its citizens, both as a means of 
facilitating their own social and economic advancement and as a mechanism 
for developing and utilizing the nation's human resources. Others may 
realize that the changing profile of the college population, vrtiich is 
becoming older and increasingly minority, calls for a plan of action that 
will enable them to respond to the needs of this population or face 
extinction. Still others may give both the above reasons for their decision 
to work to increase minority retention. Nevertheless, institutions must 
realize that the issue of minority retention is part of the larger issue of 
equal access to educational opportunity and cannot be addressed without 
considering all aspects of equal access. 

The goal of equality of access to education requires that latent as 
well as manifest talent be identified and fostered in a nation's citizens. 
The reservoir of latent or potential talent that disadvantaged populations, 
especially minority populations, represent is considerable, as is the 
investment required to tap this resource. In view of this nation's 
commitment to the ideals of a democratic society, this investment is 
worthvrtiile and praiseworthy. In the face of the harsh reality of a changing 
college-going population and the needs of an increasingly technoloi. .cal 
society, this investment is a necessity. 



53 



-56- 
References 

Abasto, Y. (1982). Coping strategies; Retaining Black students in college . 

Atlanta, GA: Southern Education Foundation. (ERIC Document Reproduction 

Service No. ED 235 741) 
Allen, W. R. (1981). Correlates of Black student adjustment, achievement, 

and aspirations at a predominantly White southern university. In G. E. 

Thomas (Ed.), Black students in higher education; Conditions and 

experiences in the 1970' s . Westport, CT; Greenvraod Press. 
Anderson, E. (1978). A retention design applied to an equal opportunity 

program. New Directions for Student Service s, 3, 37-46. 
Astin, A. W. (1975). Preventing students from dropping out . 

San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Astin, A. W. (1982). Minorities in American Higher Education . San 

Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Astin, H. S., & Burciaga, C. P. (1982). Chicanos in higher education: 

Programs and attainment . Los Angeles, CA: Higher Education Research 

Institute, Inc. 

Beal, P. E., & Noel, L. (1979). What works in student retention . Iowa 

City, lA: American College Testing Program and Boulder, CO; National 

Center for Higher Education Management Systems. 
Bean, J. E. (1980). Dropouts and turnover; The synthesis and test of a 

causal model of student attrition. Research in Higher Education , 12(2), 

155-187. 



60 



-57- 

Bean, J. P., & Hull, D. F., Jr. (1984, April). The determinants of Black 

and White student attrition at a major southern state university . Paper 
presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association, New Orleans. 
Bennett, C, & Okinaka, A. (1984, i^ril). Explanation of Black student 
attrition in predominantly Black universities . Paper presented at 
the annxial meeting of the American Educational Research Association, 
New Orleans. 

Braddock, J. H. (1981). Desegregation and Black student attrition. Urban 

Education , 15(4), 403-418. 
Brigman, S. L., & Stager, S. F. (1980). An examination of characteristics 

of voluntary college stopouts, dropouts, and transfers . Paper presented 

at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, 

Boston, MA. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service ED 187 274) 
Burrell, L. F. (1979). Perception of administrators and minority students 

of minority student experience on predominantly White campuses . Bar re, 

VT: Northgut Studio Press. 
Churchill, W. A. , & Iwai, S. F. (1981). College attrition, student use of 

facilities, and a consideration of self-reported personal problems. 

Research in Higher Education , 14(4), 353-365. 
Clewell, B. C. (1984, September). Identification of institutions with good 

minority retention practices; A feasibility study (Final Report). 

Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
Cope, R. G. (1978). t-i.y students stay, why they leave. New Directions for 

Student Services , 3, 1-11. San Francisco: Jossey Bass, Inc. 




-58- 

Cope, R. G., & Hannah, W. (1975). Revolving college doors; The causes and 
consequences of dropping out, stopping out, and transferring . New York: 
Wiley. 

Crockett, D. S. (1978). Academic advising: A cornerstone of student 
retention. New Directions for Student Services , 3, 29-35. 

Cross, p. H., & Astin, H. S. (1981). Factors affecting Black students' 
persistence in college. In G. E. 'Jhomas (Ed.), Black students in higher 
education: Conditions and experiences in the 1970 's . Westport, CT: 
Greenwood Press. 

Dallam, J. W., & Dawes, B. E. (1981, Winter). What followup studies can 
tell about student retention. College and University , 56(2), 151-159. 

Dawkins, M. P., & Dawkins, R. L. (1980). Perceptions and experiences as 
correlates of academic performance among Blacks at a predominantly White 
university: A research note. College and University , 55(2), 171-180. 

Eddins, D. D. (1982). A causal model of the attrition of specially 
admitted Black students in higher education . Paper presented at the 
annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New 
York. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 224 422) 

Edmonds, G. J. (1984). Needs assessment strategy for Black stxidents: An 
examination of stressors and program implications. Journal of Non-White 
Concerns , 12(2), 48-56. 

Ficklen, M. S., & King, B. F. (1984, June). Minority retention; Phase x . 
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 

Francisco, R. P. (1983). Special programs for Black students in higher 
education: The need for reorganization during a conservative era. 
Journal of Non-White Concerns in Personnel and Guidance , 11(3), 114-121. 



P2 



Garason, Z. F. (1978). Programs for Black students, 1968-1974. In M. W. 
Peterson et al. (Eds.), Black students on White Canpuses; The inpacts of 
increased Black enrollments . Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, 
Institute for Social Research. 

Gosman, E. J., Dandridge, B. A., Nettles, M. T. , & Thoeny, A. R. (1983). 
Predicting student progression: The influence of race and other student 
and institutional characteristics of student performance. Research in 
Higher Education , 18, 209-236. 

Gutierrez, J. (1981). Study of attrition of Chicano students at the 
University of Southern Colorado. Pueblo, CO: Mid-Continent Regional 
Educational Lab, Inc. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 212 396) 

Herndon, S. (1984, Spring). The impact of financial aid of student 

persistence. Journal of Student Financial Aid , 14(2), 3-9. 
Hilton, T. L. (1982). Persistence in higher education (College Board Report 

No. 82-5). New York: College Entrance Examination Board. 
Iwai, S. I., & Churchill, W. D. (1981). College attrition and the 

financial support system of students. Journal of Research in Higher 

Education , 17(2), 105-113. 
Keimig, R. T. (1983). Raising academic standards: A guide to learning 

improvement (ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Research Report No. 4). 

Washington, DC: Association for the Study of Higher Education. 
Leaning, 0, T., Sauer, K. , & Beal, P. E. (1980). Student retention 

strategies (AAHE ERIC/Higher Education Research Report No. 8). 

Washington: The George Washington University, ERIC Clearinghouse on 

Higher Education. 



fio 



-60- 

Miller, R. (1977). Institutional characteristics affecting minority 

admissions and enrollment levels at state universities in Ohio , 

1973-1976 . Oxford: Miami University. (ERIC Document Reproduction 

Service No. ED 165 691) 
Minatoya, L. Y., & Sedlacek, W. E. (1983). Assessing differential needs 

among university freshmen: A conparison among racial/ethnic subgroups. 

Journal of Non-White Concerns , 11(4), 126-132. 
Nettles, M., Gosman, E. J., Thoney, A. R., & Dandridge, B. A. (1985). 

Causes and consequences of college students' performance; A focus on 

Black and White students' attrition rates, progression rates and grade 

point averages . Nashville, TN: Tennessee Higher Education Commission. 
Newlon, L. L., & Gaither, G. H. (1980). Factors contributing to attrition: 

An analysis of program ^mpact on persistence patterns. College and 

University , 55(3), 237-251. 
Noel, L. (1978). New directions for student services: Reducing the dropout 

rate (Number 3). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Inc. 
Ott, L. S. (1978). Admissions management with the focus on retention. 

"V w Directions for Student Services , 3, 23-28. 
Pantages, T., & Creedon, C. (1978). Studies of college attrition: 

1950-1975. Review of Educational Research , 48, 49-101. 
Pascarella, E. T., Duby, P. B., & Iverson, B. K. (1983, April). A test and 

reconceptualization of a theoretical model of college withdrawal in a 

commuter institution setting. Sociology of Education , 56, 88-100. 
Pascarella, E. T., & Terenzini, P. T. (1979). Student-Faculty informal 

contact and college persistence: A further investigation. Journal of 

Educational Research, 72, 214-218. 



-61- 

Perry, F. (1981). Factors affecting academic performance and persistence 

among Mexican-American, Black and Anglo students. College Student 

Journal , 51(1), 53-62. 
Ramist, L. (1981). College student attrition (College Board Report No. 

81-1). New York: College Entrance Examination Board. 
Rayburn, W. G., & Hayes, E. D. (1975). Compensatory education: Effective 

or ineffective? Journal of Counseling Psychology , 22(6), 523-528. 
Sedlacek, w. E., & Brooks, G. C, Jr. (1976). Racism in American 

education: A model for change . Chicago, IL: Nelson-Hall, inc. 
Sedlacek, W. E., & Webster, D. W. (1978). Admission and retention of 

minority students in large universities. Journal of College Student 

Personnel , 19, 242-248. 
Shaffer, P. (1973). Academic progress of disadvantaged minority students: 

A two-year study. Journal of College Student Personnel , 14(1), 41-73. 
Smith, D. H. (1980). Admission and retention problems of Black students at 

seven predominantly White universities . Washington, DC: National 

Advisory Committee on Black Higher Education and Black Colleges and 

Universities. 

Suen, H. K. (1983, March). Alienation and attrition of Black college 

students on a predominantly White campus. Journal of College Student 

Personnel , 24(2), 117-121. 
Tinto, V. (1975). Dropout from higher education: A theoretical synthesis 

of recent research. Review of Educational Research , 45, 89-125. 
Tinto, V. (1982). Limits of theory and practice in student attrition. 

Journal of Higher Education , 53(6), 687-700. 




-62- 

Trevino, C, & Wise, B. (1980). Sviinmer acceptance program; A viable 
option for provisional students entering a private university . 
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Western College Reading 
Association, San Francisco, CA. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
No. ED 188 118) 

White, A. J., & Brown, S. E. (1980). Relationship between the attrition 
rates of Black and White co'lege students at the University of Georgia. 
Negro Education Review , 31(3-4), 137-139. 

Willie, C. v., & McCord, A. S. (1972). Black students at White colleges . 
New York: Praeger Publishers. 

Zanoni, C. (1980). Implementation of an entry-level retention program for 
high risk college freshmen . Paper presented as part of a round table 
discussion at the American Educational Research Association Special 
Interest Group for Two-Year College Research Conference, Colximbus, OH. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 191 530) 



APPENDIX 




Boston College 
The Institution * 

Boston College was founded fay Jesuits in the seune year, 1865 ^ in which 
the Emancipation Proclamation became effective, it is one of the oidest 
Jesuit institutions in the United States, and it is rich in Jesuit 
tradition. For its first fifty years, it was located within the city of 
Boston. However, just prior to World War I, the college moved to its 
present site in Chestnut Hill which forms a border between the affluent, 
middle and upper-income suburb of Nevrt:on and the comparatively poor city of 
Boston — a city in which 20 percent of the population is at or below the 
poverty line. The middle-class status of the town of Chestnut Hill mirrors 
the present composition of the student body. This fact stands in sharp 
contrast to the original purposes of the founding of Boston College as an 
institution catering to poor, Irish Catholics who were then excluded from 
Yankee culture and social institutions. 

Inasmuch as Yankee prejuaices and discriminatory practices initially 
excluded signficant numbers of the Irish population from participating in 
its institutions, Boston College became the primary training ground for 
Irish Catholics in Boston, Massachusetts and the New England area vAo 
could not or found it difficult to enter such institutions as Harvard, 
ifale and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The institution pains- 
takingly built a strong liberal arts curriculum and began to emphasize 
spacialized, professional training in such fields as law, education. 



* Our consultant, James Blackwell, provided the information on 
institutional climate and historical context of Boston College. 



6 



App-2 

business/management and nursing. This emphasis has had enormous 
consequences for the assimilation of the Irish middle-and-upper classes 
into the cultural, political and social life of Massachusetts. Equally 
inpjrtant is the fact that as \5nkee power and influence either waned or 
shifted, training received at Boston College enabled many men and wc^men 
of that heritage to assume powerful and influential positions. Graduates of 
Boston College include such political personalities as Thomas P. O'Neill, 
Jr., Speaker of the U. S. House of Representatives; William Bulger, 
President of the Senate in the Massachusetts.- State Legislature; Charles 
Flaherty, Majority Leader in the Massachusetts House of Representatives; 
Father Robert Drinan, former member of the U. S. House of Representatives 
and influential religious leader and educator; and several members of local, 
state and federal legislative bodies. 

In addition, graduates of Boston College are extremely influential in 
banking institutions in Boston. The institution has been the training 
ground for a number of principals and guidance counselors in the Boston 
Public School System. But, the institution's majors in the field of 
education rarely are required to do internships or practice teaching in 
Boston. Rather, they tend to receive this training in suburban schools. 
Nonetheless, when decisions are made with respect to placement in the 
leadership of school systems, Boston College graduates play a significant 
role in rendering those decisions. 

As an institution of higher education, Boston College has emerged as 
prestigious and influential. Its status is due largely to the quality of 
its liberal arts curriculum, its schools of law, management, social work, 
education and nursing whose curricula are rigorous and whose faculty have 
established a national and sometimes international reputation. In terms of 



the institution's status within the community of colleges and universities 
in metropolitan Boston, Boston College is in the upper level of the second 
tier of these institutions. The upper tier is led by Harvard University and 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (h I.T. ). The second level institu- 
tions probably include, in alphabetical or »r, Boston College, Boston 
University, Brandeis, and Tufts University. None of these institutions has 
the national or international standing of the first tier institutions. 
Institutional Climate 

The 225 acre site at Chestnut Hill, dominated by neo-Gothic architec- 
ture esnd a tri-level physical plant, is one of the most idyllic and 
visually beautiful campuses in New England, its upper campus consists of 
dormitories; the middle/second level contains classrooms, laboratories, 
administrative and student services. The lower caitpus contains apartment 
complexes, recreational facilities, and parking areas. The entire area is 
tree-lined with spacious walks and gives the appearance of being completely 
walled-ill, separate and apart £i.om the world outside. 

The institution offers 28 baccalaureate majors in traditional liberal 
arts /science fields plus one inter-disciplinary or self-devised under- 
graduate major. As is the case with most colleges and universities in the 
New England area, Boston College has a well-defined core curriculum required 
of all undergraduates. One major difference in that core is that, unlike 
moct institutions in the Boston area, undergraduates at Boston College are 
required to take two courses in theology. This limited number of courses i -> 
religion/theology exemplifies the shift of Boston College to a more secular 
curriculum in recent years. 

Academic programs at Boston College include graduate and undergraduate 
schools of arts and sciences, and schools : iw, social work, education. 



i 'J 



management, nursing and tJieology. Its current vindergraduate enrollment is 
approximately 8,000 with another 6,000 enrolled students in the graduate and 
professional schools. 
Student Body 

The student body of Boston College in 1985 is a far cry from the poor, 
Irish Catholics of earlier years. With a tuition of approximately $8,000 
per year, the institution caters to the middle-class. The student body 
remains primarily white middle-class and Catholic. Student attitudes toward 
others seem to reflect the full rang*> of values, attitudes and belief 
systems found in the Boston area. 

Serving Black <nd other minority students is part of the mission of 
Boston College and its Jesuit tradition. Yet there is a paucity of Blacks 
at Boston College. Only about ten Blacks, approximately one percent, hold 
faculty positions in the institution. This lack of a critical mass may be 
an inpediraent to the hiring of Black faculty since attractive Black 
candidates may perceive the social situation as hostile and unreceptive to 
them. Blacks go elsev^ere even v^en departments make a serious attenpt to 
recruit them. 

Black students comprise only about three percent of undergraduate 
student enrollment. They are drawn largely from the middle class 
environment? of. New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Washington, D. C. and 
Massachusetts. These students are also likely to be Catholic and to have 
attended parochial schools. Many have selected Boston College as a second 
choice to such institutions as Georgetown, Harvard or Tufts, but seme have 
selected Boston College because of the persuasive powers of Vlhite alumni in 
their high school systems or cities. Many students have selected Boston 
College because of its etttractive, idyllic environment, and the nature of 



71 



the support services provided by the institution in a Catholic environment. 
For many, it is an attractive place to be — in Boston but not a part of 
Boston. The physical setting provides a pLotective cocoon frcxn the 
perceived hostile environment of tlie city. 

Hispanics comprise about four percent of the student body and other 
minorities about four percent. The Roman Catholic ties to Hispanic groups 
have resulted in substantial Hispanic enrollment with little or no special 
efforts necessary. In general, Hispanics are from middle class families and 
fit into the mainstream of the student body; they are indistinguishable from 
majority students. 

One of the interesting aspects of Black student life is the in^xjrtance 
of the Black Student Forum. This body enables Black students to share their 
concerns with others and to persuade the institution to respond to the 
problems identified, i^parently, those effoits are beginning to have some 
impact since the Student Government Association began to take some steps to 
address grievances articulated by Black students during 1984-1585. One 
group that has enjoyed immense popularity has been the group of Black 
athletes v*io came in larger numbers v^en the College decidpd to expand its 
athletic enterprise. The stars of the basketball team, in recent years, 
have been Black. A few Blacks have become recognized members of the 
football team but football has been dominated by White players v^se 
performances have been given much more attention by the Bocton and school 
media than has been the case with the basketball team. Despite the favored 
status and popularity of Black athletes, there is a feeling among some 
faculty members and students that the college exploits these weekend 
gladiators by not assuring that they perform sufficiently well to graduate 
from college. Only one Black basketball player in the class of 1978, had 



graduated on time prior to 1985. To ameliorate this problem, Boston College 
has instituted a new program to monitor the progress of student athletes and 
provide tutors as needed. 

Boston College is an institution tatider going profound social and 
educational changes. Yet it remains steeped in history and traditions. It 
is atten5)ting to rise in status among institutions of higher learning in the 
area, strengthen its academic programs, attract a more diversified student 
body, and build strong athletic programs with winning teams that will result 
in substantial donations by an ever influential group of alumni. 

Recruitmen t 

Recruitment of minority students is an important part of minority 
retention efforts at Boston College. The school has a national student 
body, but draws heavily from the Northeast and Massachusetts in particular. 
Fifty-one percent are state residents. About 61 percent of entering 
freshmen have verbal SAT scores above 500 and 78 percent have math alx)ve 
500. Blacks have been difficult to recruit for seveijl reasons. Boston 
College often competes for Black students with more prestigious Ivy League 
schools that can provide more lucrative aid packages. Tlie predominantly 
White, upper middle-class student population may not seem appealing to 
Blacks. All agree that the presenc-- of more Blacks will help attract other 
Black students, so increasing Black enrollments has become a high priority 
at Boston College. Enrollments of entering freshmen Black students have 
increased from 42 to 84 in the last three years. Although numbers are still 
small, this represents a dotibling of Black freshmen. 

The admissions office is placing substantial effort on recruiting more 
Black students. One admissions officer, a Black female who is a former 
graduate student and teacher at Boston College, spends considerable time on 



73 



App-7 

Black recruitment, including going to fairs, visiting high schools, 
telephoning, and engaging Black altanni in the effort. A special brochure 
targeted at Blacks has recently been published. Staff believe this 
increased publicity aimed at Black students is helpful. Recently, Boston 
College received a favorable review in the Black Students^ Guide to 
Colleges , v^ich administrators hope will increase the interest of Black 
students in attending Boston College. In addition, there are now special 
funds targeted for Black student financial aid. The high tuition at Boston 
College is believed to be a barrier to increasing Black enrollments. 

There is some disagreement within the Boston College community 
regarding where to direct recruitment efforts. On the one hand, some 
believe that taking more at risk students and providing necessary support is 
the best way to increase Black enrollments. Others indicate efforts should 
be directed at higher ability Blacks and believe substantial support for 
educationally disadvantaged Blacks may deter recruitment of talented Blacks. 
Currently, the institution is using both approaches. One effort aimed at 
higher ability minorities is to increase the ntmiber of Black participants 
for Discovery Weekend, a special event that brings 60 top high school 
students to Boston College. Another effort, aimed at high risk students, is 
the Options Through Education program that will be described in detail 
later . 

Although the overall number of Black applicants and acceptees is 
growing, getting Blacks to matriculate is difficult. Boston College has 
followed up thos» who were accepted but did not matriculate and found no 
systematic reasons for their failure to enroll at the college. Students 
went to rat y diff^reiit schools — public and private — and the admissions 
office could not discern any pattern not recommend any course of action to 



increase the matriculation rate. There is at Boston College a coramitraent — 
from facultjj, administrators, and students — to increasing Black enrollments. 

The AHANA Student Programs 

The Office of AHANA Student Programs serves as a center for academic 
and personal support services for individuals from ethnic/racial groups 
subsumed under the acronym AHANA (African AmericcA, tiispanic, Asian, and 
Native American). The goals of the AHANA office are to provide personal and 
acad' 2ic support to AHANA students in order to increase retention. Ihe 
office functions to help students negotiate their way through Boston 
College. In addition, the office tries to make the school more sensitive to 
the needs of AHANA student:,. The Office of AHANA Student Programs operates 
a summer transition program (Options through Education) for high potential, 
economically and educationally disadvantaged minority students, and provides 
tutoring and advisement to these and other minority students throughout 
their four years. The AHANA house also functions as a drop-in site for 
students to socialize as well as a place to receive services. 

The Office of AHANA Programs is located in a row house v^ere other 
houses of the tiniversity with iiqportant offices are found: the Academic 
Vice President and Dean of Faculty, Vice President for Student Services, and 
Vice President for University Relations. The location of the AH/iNA House is 
therefore a visible symbol that the AHANA services are inqportant to the 
Boston College community. 
History of AHANA Student Services 

The major functions of the AHANA programs have existed since 1968, but 
the particular activities and organization of the office have undergone 
several changes since that time. In 1968, Rev. Michael P. Walsh, S. J., 



then president of Boston College, initiated the Negro Talent Search Program, 
and committed $25,000 per year for this purpose. In the first year of 
operation, the program identified 34 students and developed a special 
orientation program for them. In 1969, 35 more students were added to the 
program. The University Board of Trustees in 1971, made a commitment to 10 
percent minority enrollment and expanded the program to about 75 students 
each year from 1971 to 1974. 

During this period, (1971-1974), the program was renamea Black Talent 
Program and was run by students with a faculty advisor. Black enrollments 
in the mid 1970 's rose to their highest level of about 500, but below the 
goal of 10 percent. The student leadership of the Black Talent Program 
controlled the admission of Black students and the distribution of financial 
aid to them. Student leadership made judicial decisions about various 
aspects of the daily lives of Black students, and served as advocates for 
Black students who felt they had been victimized by some form of injustice. 
While the Talent Program may have been the source of inportant social and 
emotional support, the program's critics claim that it did little to 
strengthen the academic quality and performance of many less well prepared 
L.lack students recruited under this program. Consequently, a one point, 
there was only a 17 percent retention rate among Black students at Boston 
College. This situation changed after 1975 when the Committee on Minority 
Education decided to recommend the termination of the Black Talent Program 
and to replace it with an Office of Minority Student Programs. 

The Office of Minority Student Programs was formed and a full-time 
professional dJ.rector appointed. The program developed into a form similar 
to the current one with tutorials, academic advisement and counseling. The 
name of the office was changed from Office of Minority Affairs to AHANA in 



App-10 

1978 and, under the leadership of the current director, developed into its 
present form. It serves all A"ANA students, although the priority is in 
recruiting and retaining Black students, since that is where there is the 
most need. 

Faculty and administrators indicate that since 1978 the AHANA House has 
obtained a more important presence on the census, with substantial long-term 
support. The Office of AHANA Student Programs has made an effort to address 
the needs of minority students and to collaborate with other institutional 
offices to serve those needs. The AHANA House and its activities have 
contributed to increased awareness of other cultures on the campus, but some 
indicate, with the small number of AHANA students the impact is limited and 
more awareness of faculty and students to other cultures is needed. 
Options Through Education 

A major activity of the AHANA office is the Options Through Education 
(OTE) Program, a transitional, six-week summer program for specially 
admitted Boston College students. The admissions office identifies 
approximately 40-50 AHANA students who show high motivation and potential 
for success at Boston College, but vHno are economically or educationally 
disadvantaged. Students accepted into this program receive full funding 
for the four years at Boston College. Students receive no stipend for the 
summer transition program, but tuition, room and board for the summer are 
free. This commitment to the financial needs of these students is believed 
to be an important factor in their high retention. 

The OTE program has been very successful in improving the retention 
rate of hign risk minority students. Despite educational deficiencies. 



7^p-ll 

these students are able to succeed at Boston College. The overall retention 
rate of OTE students is 81.2 percent. The retention rates for the past four 
classes are shovm below, along with the proportion viio withdrew for academic 
reasons (Table 1). staff believe they can continue to in^jrove the retention 
rate of OTE students. Now that retention is good, staff want to work on 
improving grades of the OTE students. 

Table 1 

Retention of OTE Program Participants 
(1983-84) 

Class of Class of Class of Class of 
1986 1985 1984 1983 
(1 year) (2 years) (3 yearr,) (4 years) 

Retention Percentage 93.8 84.1 78.3 68.6 

Attrition (Academic 

Reasons) 4.1 6.8 6.5 14.3 



Source: Office of AHANA Student Programs 
Highlights of 1983-84 

The purpose of the summer transition program is to build up basic 
academic skills in math and English and provide an orientation to college 
life, the summer program gives students an idea of vdiat college level work 
will be like. Depending on the level of math and English students pursue, 
they '"''V receive three to six college credits, allowing them to take a 
lighter load during their freshman or a subsequent year. The overall 
philosophy of the OTE program is based on building the self-confidence of 
students, in^roving thinking skills and increasing interaction of faculty 
and students. The courses also try to teach students to examine assignments 
and understand what the instructor expects of them. 

V o 



App-12 

The program consists of two hours of English and two hours of math each 
morning. Afternoon classes have varied over the years. For exanple, last 
summer the students could elect to take courses in biology, chemistry, 
intercultural av/areness, oral communications, and hxmian sexuality. Some 
faculty believe this kept the students too busy, so this summer there will 
be fewer afternoon courses. The major components, English and math, have 
remained essentially the same over the past few years. 

English . Students are divided into three levels of English: one ESL, 
one somewhat below a college level course, and a high group at the level of 
work of a Boston College course. An English professor, with five Ph.D. 
students as instructcrs, coordinates the English program. Classes are 
small, allowing substantial feedback and individual attention. The purpose 
of the ESL and college preparatory course is to prepare students for 
college-level work. In all classes (except the ESL) the emphasis is on 
writing. Faculty attempt to teach students to write the kinds of essays 
required in college. Students indicated that constant writing practice was 
invaluable and prepared them for assignments in all their classes. 

Generally, faculty find that OTE students have many of the same 
difficulties as other Boston College students, but often more severe. Many 
are timid with the use of language. In some cases there are also problems 
with fundamentals, such as grammar, that most Boston College students 
usually do not have. Although most of these students do not usually take 
many higher level English courses, this introductory course prepares them 
tor writing assignments they encountei in their courses at Boston College. 

Math . Upon acceptance to the OTE program, students are given a 
diagnostic test to take at home and mail in and then are placed in math 



73 



App-13 

classes at one of three levels: pre-calculus (for which students receive 
college credit), a basic review course to prepare for pre-calculus, and a 
course for those four or five students who have fundamental arithmetic 
problems. Because there are two course hours per day and classes are small, 
students get considerable practice in working problems and going over 
assignments. Faculty can be sure students understand fundamentals. For 
many students the math is review, but most have weak areas that they can 
inprove. For the weakest students, the instructors try to upgrade 
arithmetic skills and understanding of algebraic concepts and then advise 
students not to take math during their four years at Boston College. (Fine 
arts or commmications may be taken as a distribution requirement in place 
of math). Part of the enphasis, especially for the weaker students, is to 
build confidence. T'-ose students who go on to take higher level math 
courses at Boston College do reasonably well. 

Both math and English instructors are available in the dorms in the 
evenings to help students with their assignments. This helps students keep 
up and understand each lesson. Bj' being in the dorms, faculty are 
accessible and viewed as non-threatening by students. One faculty member 
said the message they want to give is, "Come in and you will find people 
smiling. Relax and they can help you with your work." Non-credit courses 
are not graded, which further alleviates tension, so that the focus can be 
on improving skills and learning basics, rather than receiving a hign grade. 

During the summer, staff hold weekly meetings in which any problems of 
students can be discussed. Faculty indicate that this is useful and often 
helps them to understand what might be going on with a student. Because o£ 



constant contact with students and weekly meetings, faculty are always aware 
o£ student progress. 

Students find the summer useful both in terms of academic preparation 
and in getting to know the campus. Yet, freshman year on a campus in which 
most of the students are from VHtdte middle-class backgrounds is still a 
shock to some. Although students indicate the atmosphere is friendly, they 
say it is more competitive than vrtiat they are accustomed to. One advantage 
OTE students have is that they know faculty in English and math, along with 
the program staff. OTE students often contact these faculty for advice or 
assistance, although students are more likely to use AHftNA house for this 
purpose. All of this seems to put these students ahead of others in 
learning to negotiate the college. 
Monitoring and Advising 

The OTE students receive monitoring and advising throughout their four 
years at Boston College. The monitoring and advising are key components of 
the retention effort. Special care is given to prevent students from 
falling into academic difficulty and to help with personal and financial 
problems as well. One graduate assistant and two administrative aides are 
assigned to each group from freshman through junior years. The Director and 
Assistant Director take charge of the seniors. Students must meet with 
advisors at least monthly, although most come in more frequently. If a 
student is having difficulty in a subject, the advisor will usually be aware 
of the problem even if the student is not, and suggest that the student get 
a tutor. The AHANA office keeps a list of tutors available, but students 
are responsible for making contact. Most tutoring is one-on-one and is 
carried out by upperclass and graduate students who are paid on a per 



81 



student basis. Last year -ere 30 tutors. Tutors \indergo training 

throughout the academic , consists of monthly workshops on 

instruction and discussions about how to handle difficult situations. 
Occasionally two or wore' s'cijdents may request tutoring together. Last year 
there ware 207 tutorial cecjuests; 95 of these were fr m freshmen, but only 
17 from seniors. 

As an additional check on student performance, progress reports are 

sent to each instructor viiich she/he sends back to the AHANA office. (All 

AHANA students, in addition tc OTE students, may sign permission forms to 

have this <nonitoring. ) The progress report asks for the following 

information: 

o Does the student complete assignments? 

o How m--ny absenses? 

o Does the student seek help? 

o Do you recommend tutorial? 

o What skills does she/'\e need to develop? 

o What are the weaknesses? 

o Grade to date 

o Expected final grade 

Students and faculty indicate that this system helps tremendously and 
prevents most students from falling too far bshind. It also helps to assure 
class attendance. The message students get is "don't come in only at crisis 
times; keep in frequent contac*- with the office to avoid last minute 
crises." Staff indicate that once in a while a student will slip through 
the cracks, but for the most part the system vrorks well. 

Both students and faculty told us that the advising OTE students 
receive is far superior to that received by most Boston College students. 
The Assistant Director, along with the graduate assistants and faculty, 
advise each student, based on their interests and abilities. One faculty 
member at Boston College indicated that in the past the regular academic 



82 



App-16 

advising has not been very good (there have been some recent changes to 
improve it), so OTE students get much better advice, on a more 
individualized basis. Some students come in with unre?l expectations about 
what they can handle. Through the advising, staff try to redirect their 
interests. For example, some students come in wanting to be premed, but the 
math and science skills are not there; some students are confused by 
requirements and have difiiculty choosing courses. Students with v^om ve 
spoke indicated this advising was very helpful to them. One student said, 
"They [Boston College] just give you thv -atalogue and tell you to choose 
courses. We would not have known what to dc without the advice in the AHANA 
office." 

Other Counseling 

Although academic concerns are the basis for most visits to the AHANA 
office, personal issues and financial matters are also reasons. The largest 
users of these services are freshmen and che rate of use declines as 
students progress through their four years. 

AHANA assists with career counseling as well. The AHANA office 
maintains a career coordinator who assists students in the career office, in 
making appointments with visiting recruiters, and arranging the career-E3CP0 
week-end. The AHANA HOTLINE , a bi-monthly newsletter, lists opportunities 
for internships, jobs, and scholarships for AHANA students. 
Other Services 

The AHANA House is the hub of activity for AHANA students. It is a 
place to meet other students, to drop by and talk with someone and to 
receive academic and personal support. 



83 



The AHANA office aso coordinat s, with the Office of Student Affairs, 

the B^ack Family Weekend and other intercultural activities. It serves as a 

focal point and coordinating office for student activities such as: 

0 Voices of Imani-Boston College's Gospel choir 

o Black Educators Association 

o Black Student Forum 

0 La Union Latina 

0 Asian Student Association 

o N.A.A.C.P. 

0 Gamma Nu Psi 

0 Omega Psi Phi 

o Alpha Kappa Alpha 

o Delta Sigma Theta 

These other student programs vary in their degree of activity and 
popularity with students. The Voices of Imani is a popular activity with 
Black students and is an active group, as is the Black Student Fonim. 
Tuition Remission 

Boston College offers students, selected on the basis of need, the 
opportunity to make up deficiencies in approxinately 125 courses during the 
simimer on a tuition free basis with free meals and housing. The AHANA 
office can recommend students for this benefit. It has a yearly budget of 
$125,000 for that purpose. Occasionally this is used to reward students for 
good work, by letting them get ahead in their coursework. Although there 
are no tutors available for sjmmer courses, students indicate that there are 
usually students around vrtio have taken courses and will provide assistance. 
For students having difficulty during the year, the tuition remission 
program is a big help, and contributes to the high retention rate. It 
allows students to take lighter courseloads during their four years. 
Staff 

The Director of AHANA Student Programs assumes overall responsib'.'' ity 
for the programs, including .'anning, budget allocation, staff, etc. He is 



Si 



responsible for university relations with the AHANA office. The Director 
interacts with other offices in the college through coiamittees or special 
functions. For pxsiiiple he serves on the Committee on Student Eligibility 
(for extra-curricular activities) and on the Martin Luther King Scholarship 
Cononittee with the Academic Vice President. 

The current Director has been in the position since 1978. Prior to 
this he worked in youth services and earlier for an Upward Bound Program. 
One faculty member indicated that he believes this background in human 
resources and youth services is a real asset because the director seems to 
know how to mar shall all the resources on the campus to help a student 
unlike a faculty member who might only know how to help a student in one 
area. The director is highly respected by faculty, ad^/nistrators and 
students. When we asked about the strength of the program, inevitably the 
first thing mentioned was the Director and his staff. 

The current Assistant Director, an Hispanic \Km*n, has been in the 
position for two years. She is responsible for the day to day activities, 
training of preceptors and graduace assistants, data collection and hejidling 
many student problems. Her two predecessors were in the position two to 
three yecrs each. Although there has been some turnover in this position, 
several people indicated that all individuals in the position have been very 
capable and there has not been any problem due to staff changes. Both the 
Director and Assistant Director monitor the progress reports of students and 
meet with other university staff on matters relating to students or the 
project. 

During the academic year, the AHANA House enploys three graduate 
assistants to counsel students. There is one for each class of freshmen. 



i^p-19 

sophomores, and juniors; seniors rely on the Director and Assistant 
Director. These graduate assistants are usually from the counseling 
psychology or social worK departments and therefore have backgrounds and 
interests in counseling. The Assistant Director trains these individuals 
along with the administrative aids in workshops and has developed a manual 
to help them in working with students. If problems arise that the graduate 
assistants cannot handle, they defer to the Dire^^or or Assistant Director. 

Each graduate assistant has two administrative aids, who a^e upperclass 
undergraduates at Boston College. These students assist with locating 
students v^o have not met with graduate advisors and assisting the graduate 
advisors in other counseling matters. 

The Administrative Assistant handles scheduling of student appointments 
and carries out c;eneral office management duties. She keeps a list of 
tutors available in 25 subject areas. When students are advised to get a 
tutor for a subject, the student will ask the Administrative Ar>sistant for 
the name of someone, and then the stvident will contact the tutor and 
schedule an appointment. 

The AHANA House employs two ^'ull-time coordinators for the OTE summer 
program. These people are responsible for the organization and arrangement 
of the .six-week session and handle day to day problems of students. In 
addition, former OTE participants serve as peer counselor.'; during the 
summer. 

There are four instructors for math: two regular Boston College faculty 
and two graduate stuc'ents. The English faculty for OTE consist of one 
full-time professor and four graduate students. Although there is no 
special training for the program, all the instructors have experience 



83 



App-20 

teaching and/or tutoring -Jid all have an interest in vrorking with minority 
students, since they choose to teach in the program. One of the math 
instructors, for example, had previously devf^luped a math help center for 
students at another college. He tiad also tutored in the dorms as an 
undergraduate and indicated that this background made him more sensitive to 
the needs of students and the inportance of being accessible to them. Most 
of the college faculty who teach in the program return for several years. 
There is, however, more turnover among graauate students as they conplete 
their studies. Yet, the program has a sense of stability and tradition 
within the institution. None of the facu.- / is Black or Hispanic, but 
students do not find this to be a problem. Overall, they find instructors 
accessible and concerned with the needs of AHAMA students. 

The Director plans to add one more full-time staff person to help with 
AHriNA House. Since the approach of the program is individualized support to 
help students negotiate the school, the director indicates more assistance 
is needed. This new person will also assist in keeping statistics on 
participants, including follow-up information. 
Participants 

All minority students may take advantage of the AHANA House and many of 
its services. These students conprise about 11 percent of undergraduate 
enrollment at Boston College. The Options Through Education Program, 
however, is for a selected group of students, usually 40-50 in each class, 
v^o are identified as having potential but who do not otherwise meet the 
criteria for entrance into Boston College. Usually such students have 
strong high school grades and good letters of recommendation, have 
demonstrated leadership ability and interest in community service, but have 



87 



App-21 

SAT scores that are lower than the mean for Boston College students. Many 
come from schools that are not as strong as those of the average Boston 
College student. The admissions office, working with the director of AHAIm 
Programs, selects the students. With acceptance into the OTE program, 
students receive a commitment of full funding for the four years. For 
nearly all students accepted to Boston Collsge unde*- this specie! plan, 
acceptance is conditional upon participation in the OTE program. Upon 
acceptance to the program the student signs a contractual agreement in vrtiich 
he/she agrees to specific conditions for the summer program such as: 
attending all classes, participating in study halls, responding to curfew, 
and seeking help when experiencing difficulty in subjects. The student also 
agrees that during the academic year hV-'he will meet regularly with the 
graduate assistant, seek tutorial assistance when needed, and attend all 
meetings as prescribed by the Office of AHANA Student Programs. 

Most AHANA students hear about the OTE/AHANA program at the time of 
their acceptance to Boston College. /J.though the students include Hispanic, 
Asian, Black, and some foreign students, the priority is on locating and 
accepting more Blacks into the program. Staff indicate this requires more 
outrea^ into the high schools. Although many of the OTE students come from 
weaker high schools than the typical Boston College student and have more 
trouble with fundamentals, once they gc througx. the OTE program they can 
handle the college curriculum. Students from OTE usually major in 
communications, psychology, political science, sociology, nursing, or 
education. Many who start out in more difficult areas such as science or 
math and have difficulty are often advised to change to a less demanding 
area. 

83 



Students generally find the stunmer experience a good one, in that it 
inproves acavlemic skills and provides a preview of college life. Yet no 
program can fully prepare them for the change. One big difference between 
sunmer and the academic year is that the OTE group becomes a very small part 
of the overwhelmingly White student body, whereas in the summer, they "own" 
the campus. Students regard the OTE program as an opportunity and would 
reco2>mend it to other minority students. Thoy do not believe there is 
anything about the prograr that stigmatizes minorities. 

Blacks at Boston College usually have a harder time fitting in than 
Hispanics or Asians. Hispanics have ties to the Roman Catholic traditions 
and Asians seem to excel in math and computing areas. But Blacks sometimes 
feel isolated due to the small number of Black students and faculty. Boston 
College has recently made a commitment to furd Black students more heavily 
in order to increase Black enrollments. The students with whom we spoke 
said they feel a part of the Boston College community but that the AHANA 
House is essential for them. Overall students fird the AHAMA programs 
invaluable and believe they havi- contributed to their success. Two students 
with whom we spoke indiccted they would have never made it through Boston 
College without the AHANA programs. 
Evaluation 

There has been no formal evaluation of the program. Staff, however, 
keep careful records on students and report the .etention and graduation 
rates of each class of OTE students each year. Staff also l:eep records of 
office visits and tutorial assistance. For the program and those we 
interviewed in the Boston College administration, the graduation rate is the 



App-23 

most inpv. tant outcome measure. The administration is happy with the record 
and continues to support the program. 

Although students have not been asked to evaluate OTE courses or the 
services they receive, staff and instructors receive constant feedback so if 
there need to be modifications, these can be made. For example, in the past 
summer session, students indicated they were kept too busy and did not have 
enough time to study. The schedule will be changed next summer to allow 
more study time. 

Faculty have not participated in any evaluation of the project, but are 
able to provide on-going feedback to the director at weekly meetings 
throughout the summer. During the academic year staff hold regular meetings 
to discuss both students and program activities. 
Relationship tc Rest of Institution 

The Office of AHANA Student Programs reports to the Vice President for 
Student Affairs. The Director of AHANA indicated that he feels more closely 
allied to academic affairs than student affairs, since this program is 
concerned primarily with academic performance. The Director has good 
relationships with the Deans and the Vice President for Academic Affairs and 
enjoys CLcdibility throughout the university. He indicated he has support 
throughout the tiniversity and access to all offices — from the President on 
down. 

The AHANA House is seen by the AHANA students, especially the OTE 
students, as a valuable resource for the institution. Students believe 
AHANA House contributes to improvea intercultural awareness on campus. But, 
some administrators believe that the House contributes to segregation of 
Blacks. Students we interviewed indicated that this was not the case. 



80 



App-24 

rather a person could choose to remain separated or to integrate with the 
rest of the student body. One administrator indicated she would like to see 
the House serve all students, not just AHAN^ students. She believes that 
the crjE program may send out mixed signals to talented Blacks since these 
high risk students receive full funding and many regularly admitted Black 
students do not. 

Faculty are very supportive of AHANA House and the OTE program. Many 
point to the good job the current director is doing both for students and 
the university relations. While most indicate faculty are sensitive and 
supportive of efforts, some believe more could be done to encourage better 
intercultural relations and to attract more Black students. There has not 
been any formal program to make fa Jlty more sensitive to Black, Hispanic or 
Asian students, but students indicated they find faculty generally 
responsive and accessible to them. Faculty also expressed the need for more 
Black faculty and staff on campus. All see the program and House as a much 
needed facility to encourage diversity within the stxident body. As one 
person said, "without AHANA House, the student body would be like white 
bread." 

The program is totally supported by institutional funds and thee are 
no plans to change this. There is strong support for the program from both 
faculty and administrators throughout the college. All administrators v/e 
interviewed indicated they expect AHANA to continue at its current level 
with only minor program modifications as needed. 
Other Services 

Although there are no other services on cair?)us specifically for 



91 



App-25 

minorities, Boston College maintains the folic ng services for all 
students: 

Learning Resources for Student Athletes — This is a new program in 
which the varsity athletes are monitored and provided academic 
support services as needed. 

Learning to Learn — This is a federally supported project, open to all 
stvdents, but located in the AHANA House. It is a one semester 
course to improve study skills for vAiich students receive credit. 
Some AHANA students take the course. 

These services have no rel'.tion to the AHANA House, but AHANA students 

may participate in the activities. 

Summary 

Overall, the AHANA Student Programs are viewed as a valuable resource 
for Boston College and as a successful endeavor to increase minority 
presence on the campus. The Options Through Education Program provides 
financial, academic and personal support to stude' ' 3 v^o are educationally 
disadvantaged. This program has been very successful and enjoys widespread 
support throughout the college. Yet, because of the small number of Blacks, 
and the small number of students served in tht OTE program, most recognize 
that the institution-wide impact is limited. To increase its impact and to 
overcome the charges of separatism, the Director of AHANA programs has made 
an effort to be involved with all parts of the university and increase 
collaboration with other offices. This has increased the credibility of 
the AHANA House. But all agree that there is still a need for more Black 
faculty and students on campus. To this end, the institution is increasing 
its recruitment efforts and providing additional financial a-d for Blacks. 
Attracting a more diversified student body and faculty is seen as an 
important pa t of the mission of Boston College, and the Office of AHANA 
Student Programs plays a vital role in achieving this institu'rionaJ goal. 



92 



Calif ornir State University at Fresno 
The Institution 

History 

The California State University system is made up of 19 canpuses, 16 of 
which have the title "university." Brought together as a system by the 
Donahoe Higher Education Act of 1960, it became The California State 
University and Colleges in 1972 and The California State University in 1982. 
Responsibility is vested in the Board of Trustees, appointed by the 
Governor. The Trustees appoint a Chancellor, the chief executive officer of 
the system, as well as the Presidents, who perform the same function for the 
individual canpuses. Systemwide policy is developed by the Trustees, the 
Chancellor and the Presidents, with the /icademic Senate of the California 
State University system (made up of faculty elected as representatives from 
each campus) recommending academic policy to the Board of Trustees through 
the Chancellor. The oldest canpus, San Jose State University, was 
established as a Normal School in 1857, whi^e the newest campus at 
Bakersfield began instruction in 1970. 

California State University at Fresno is the sixth oldest institution 
in the California State University system. Foundad as a junior college in 
1910, the institution experienced rapid physical and academic expansion 
after Woild War II. In 1961 under the newly created California State 
College system, it joined the other state colleges in the transfer of 
authority and control from the State Board of Education to an independent 
board, the Trustees of the California State Colleges. 

From 1965 to 1968 the transition was made to official university 
status, which became effective June 1, 1972. The university at present 
comprises the following Schools: Agriculture and Home Economics, Arta and 



Humanities, Business and Administrative Sciences, Education and Human 
Development, Engineering, Health and Social Work, Natural Sciences, Social 
Sciences, the Division of Extended Education, and the Division of Graduate 
Studies and Research. From an enrollment of 150 (most of them women) in 
1911, Fresno State has grown to an enrollment of more than 16,000 in the 
fall of 1983. 

with the Sierra Nevada moiantains as a backdrop and the San Joaquin' 
Valley vineyards as its setting, the campus occupies over 220 acres at the 
northeast edge of the City of Fresno (population over 200,000). The 
atmosphere is relaxed and informal, with modern and mission-style buildings 
and beautiful grounds. (The campus was officially designated as an 
arboretum in 1978 and boasts more than 4,000 trees.) 
Mission 

In order to understand Fresno State's commitment to tlie access and 
retention of minority students, it is essential to understand its mission. 
As the major public university in the San Joaquin Valley, one of the world's 
largest agriculture and agribusiness centers, the institution serves a large 
geographical area with a rapidly growing population, its particular service 
areas are: Fresno, Madera, Kings, and northern Tulare counties. A very 
large portion of the population in the service area is Mexican American and 
rural. It is estimated that by the year 2000, this area will be more than 
50 percent Hispanic; it is already 30-35 percent Hispanic, mostly Mexican 
American, and 4 percent Black. 

As to its mission, the catalogue states that "as a publicly supported 
institution, the university has a special mission to serve students from 
groups that historically have not participated in university education, 
whether because of age, socioeconomic background, pJiysical ability or 

8-i 



geographical location." The section entitled "Retention and Access" will 
discuss wore fully how the institution's interpretation of its mission has 
influenced its policy regarding minority students. 
Institutional Climate 

The institutional climate at Fresno State as characterized by persons 
we interviewed is strongly supportive of minorities on campus and of 
minority-focused activities. One administrator credited the institutional 
climate for attracting minorities. His view was that there were two key 
programs that had contributed to the developnent of this environment. One 
was the EOP (Equal Opportunity Program) and the other, the Chicano Studies 
Program (and to a lesser degree, the Black Studies Program). Others cited 
the high proportion of Mexican Americans on the administrative staff, many 
in key positions; the large number of Chicano student organizations as well 
as Chicano and Black faculty and 'jtaff organizations that were very activ 
and vocal; the willingness of many faculty members to work with staff in 
minority-focused activities; the dedication of the str*"* members in the 
various special programs; the university-wide requirement that each stude>it 
take at least one Ethnic Studies course; and, above all, the leadership of 
the President of the \iniversity, for whom the access and retention of 
minority students is a high priority. 

One administrator, although agreeing that the climate was positive 
towards minorities, especially Mexican Americans, went on to say: "You know, 
you can have soul food, you can have Mexican food, you can change the 
J'.rinitory rooms with regard to color schemes, but what it really gets down 
to is, the only thing that really matters is what happens in the class- 
room. ... And I think that the environment has not changed as much there as 
it has in other areas. I think we've done some things to the campus to make 



App-30 



the students feel welcome, but I think when you get into the classroom, 

that's where we have a better job to do Getting more faculty to be 

aware of different attitiades, different levels of background and so on. 

And I think if we press on, we'll do that." 

The following are observations relate -"j to the institutional climate 

based on interviews with seven Mexican-American students and two Black 

students who were participants either in the Student Affirmative Action 

program (SAA) or EOP.* (This ratio is appropriate since Mexican i-»mericans 

are 14 percent and Black students are four percent of the total enrollment.) 

Several students talked about the importance of a general 
atmosphere v:hich supports and validates ethnic pride and equal 
rights. One student noted th?\t it is important that since the 
60's, the idea and value of echnic pride has come to be more widely 
accepted. A Black student said that at Fresno State there is an 
atomosphere that students ca\ rally for their rights (even in the 
face of what students and administrators say is rather widespread 
apathy and political conservatism among the student body as a 
whole). Although the overall campus climate is conservative, 
minority students seem to have perceived and created openings for 
the expression o£ their concerns and interests. This can be seen 
partly in the proliferation of Mexican-American organizations on 
campus, some of which are mainly political, along with many others 
which are mostly career-oriented. 

The Ethnic Studies Departonent has also contributed to the 

overall campus atmosphere by helping White/Anglo students to: 
get a more enriched (and multicultural) sense of history, get rid 
of stereotypes, and realize that minorities are important and can't 
just be excluded or discounted. In fact, one student indicated 
that most students enrolled in ethnic studies classes are Anglo. 
In addition, most minorities take some ethnic studies, and through 
these classes, one student said that "we learn how to develop and 
integrate our ideas with Anglo society." 

iu.though students didn't freely offer comments about racism, 
when . . . asked . . . whether or not most White students are sensitive 
to their needs and concerns, many of the interviewed students 
proceeded to talk in detail about their experiences of racism on 
canpus. Several said that some Whites won't even sit next to them 
in class or in the library, or will move away when walking past 



*The interviews were conducted and the description prepared by our 
consultant on the project, John Bilorusky, Director, Western Institute for 
Social Research. 



them on the sidewalks. Further, most of them commented on how the 
Whites... eat in one cafeteria and the minorities usually eat in 
another, older one across the walkway. The students I interviewed 
add that they have a number of White friends, and certainly one can 
observe a nianber of instances of cross-ethnic conversation around 
the caucus.... Mexican-American students from rural areas with a 
high concentration of other Mexican-Americans also are struck with 
the fact that they are now experiencing racism more directly or 
overtly than they did in their home conmiunities. 

At the same time, all these students seem to be very resilient 
in the face of this. They seem to have a healthy anger. It is not 
indiscriminately directed at all Whites, turned inward on them- 
selves, nor does it seem to be suppressed and festering. 



Access and Retention 

Overview 

The issue of the access and retention of minority students is 
inseparable from the university's sense of mission. One administrator 
explained that a commitment had been made not only by the system, but by the 
institution, as a state institution, to serve a very specific population. 
Since admissions criteria for the system are si'cli that it must accept the 
top one third of the graduating high school class, it does not expect to 
consistently enroll students of high academic quality. Given the nature of 
the students it can expect to enroll, the institution feels that it has an 
obligation to provide them a quality education and ensure that they 
graduate. 

The institution is also very much aware of its future and of the 
changes that are beginning to occur already m the clientele it serves: "We 
are an institution that piior to the year 2000 will be more than 50 percent 
Hispanic. We have been watching the high school system change and become 
more and more ethnic minorities. We are meeting and talking with our 
community colleges and working with them to accept this change in the 
population. So we have all the environmental signals that tell us that we 



App-32 

have to be receptive to a minority student body in a very foreseeable 
future. We have signs that tell us that the minority population will not 
want or require the same coursework that we have given for the last twenty 
years.... So, jAiilosophically, we understand that we must continue to keep 
reshaping our institution to meet the new demands." 

Meeting the demands of the future requires recognizing and dealing with 
the problems that change brings: "With our Hispanic population, we have 
been facing the fact that we have some si;per bright Chicano kids who do not 
have the rudimentary fundamentals that will get them through their classes. 
Our philosophy has been that if we have to face our future, we have to deal 
with these problems. The mission of the university is to be the university 
for central California, drawing 80 percent of its student body from central 
California — 50 percent of that being Chicano. We must shape its future as 
well as understand its future and, v^at is more, do it with a good heart as 
well as a good head. You cannot meet your mission as an extraneous Anglo 
portion of your community." Administrators agreed that solving both 
present and future problems requires input from the caitpis Chicano 
population as well as the off-can^us Chicano leadership. 
Access 

Presently, tne Mexican American enrollment is 14 percent, while the 
Black enrollment is four percent. The university would like to see the 
enrollment more closely reflect the ethnic conposition of the community it 
serves. As a result, a number of outreach activities have been landertaken by 
the various special programs. These activities involve relations with 
junior high schools, high schools, as well as cor^unity colleges (more 
minority students enroll as transfers than as freshmen) and wiM be 
described below under the program headings. 



Retention 

In a study of systerawide retention, the California State University, 
Fresno ranks secrnd in retaining freshmen. Its freshman first-year 
retention rate is 81.5 percent conpared to the systenwide average of 76.2 
percent, its overall five-year retention rate for students v*io enrolled as 
freshmen is 53.2 percent, as compared with a systemwide average of 44.4 
percent. At the systemwide level, Asians, at 55.7 percent, do best; 
followed by Whites at 50.2 percent; Unknowns at 44.6 percent; Hispanics at 
42.8 percent; Native Americans at 40.8 percent; and Blacks at 38.8 percent 
(See Table 1). 

For transfers (the majority of minority students enroll as transfers) 
the story is different. A comparison of transfer retention rates (based on 
retention two years after matriculation) at Fresno State across ethnic 
groups shows Hispanic transfer students as having the highest retention 
(74.7%), followed by Asians (74.3%), and Whites (73.1%). The retention rate 
for Black transfer students was 58.7 percent (see Table 2). 

The university has instituted a number of efforts to increase minority 
retention. Most of these efforts have been undertaken by the special 
programs and will be described below under each program heading. Activities 
to increase retention take the form of tutorials, counseling, and special 
courses. 

Special Programs 

Overview 

The dual enphasis on access and retention of minority students has 
resulted in these activities being a focus of most of the special programs 
at Fresno State. Many of these programs contain both an access and a 
retention con^nent. Special programs at CSUF have assumed a leading role 



App-34 
Table 1 

Systemwide Five-year Retention and Graduation Rates 
Regular Admits by Ethnic Group 





Enrolled in 
Fall 1978 


Still Enrolled 
in Fall 1983 


Graduated 
by 1982/83 


Total Retained 
or Graduated 


Amerind 


228 


19.3% 


21.5% 


40.8% 


Asian 


1 731 


25 7 


30 0 


55 7 


Black 


650 


21.2 


17.5 


38.8 


Hispanic 


1,210 


23.3 


19.5 


42.8 


White 


12,124 


17.6 


32.6 


50.2 


Unknown 


5,853 


18.9 


25.7 


44.6 


TOTAL 


21, )6 


19.0 


29.2 


48.3 



Source: Those Who Stay, Phase V . Technical Memorandum #11, January 1985, 
Office of the Chancellor, p. 8. 

Table 2 

Attrition Rates of Entering CSUF Transfer Students by Ethnicity 

Total After First Total Loss 

Entering in Year After 

Fall 1983 Fall 1984 2 Years 



Chicano 


237 


28 


11.8 


60 


25.3 


Asian 


148 


21 


14.2 


38 


25.7 


White 


1,412 


183 


13.0 


380 


26.9 


Overall Average 


2,026 


276 


13.6 


565 


i7.$ 


Unidentified 


137 


23 


16.8 


49 


37.6 


Black 


80 


18 


22.5 


33 


41.3 


American Indian 


12 


3 


25.0 


5 


41.7 



Source: SIMS select & report (STRACK) 



106 ' 



in implementing institutional policy regarding recruitment and retention of 
minority students. The following are descriptions of the two main special 
progictms that focus on access and retention. The first serves regularly 
admitted students, while the second serves "special admits." 
CORE-SM 

The College Outreach Retention and Enhancement-Student Affirmative 
Action program has three main conpjnents that assist regularly admitted 
undergraduates: An Outreach Component, a Retention Component, and an 
Enhancement Component. (Most California State University campuses have some 
variation of this program and there is a systerawide coordinator.) Although 
the final responsibility for the entire program lies with the Office of 
Student Affairs, the Retention Component comes under the direct supervision 
of the Director of the Learning Assistance Center, who reports to the Vice 
President for Academic Affairs. The Graduate portion of the Enhancement 
Conponent is vinder the jurisdiction of the Dean of Graduate Studies. Each 
component is housed separately. As one administrator explained, "What we've 
done here is that all outreach activities ana other non-instructional kinds 
of activities such as orientation counseling, study skills, are under 
Student Affairs. Anything that is instructional, like the Learning Center, 
the tutorials for class courses, educational enhancement, and the graduate 
con^Jonent are linder Academic Affairs. However, they all report to the Dean 
of Student Affairs, who's responsible for the entire program." 

The Outreach Component . Originally called RSVP, the Outreach Con^jonent 
started out as a pilot project funded by the Chancellor's Office to look at 
innovative ways to provide access for Chicano students to the \iniversity. 
The focus of the program was working primarily with parents. Bilingual 
literature was used, and many of the workshops were in Spanish. The project 



lot 



i!^p-36 

was in existence until 1979. The present project makes use of many 
techniques and strategies developed by the various programs serving minority 
students . 

The major goal of the program is the recruitment of minority students. 
Program funding comes from the Chancellor's Office as well as from the 
President's Office. Program staff prepares a proposal giving projected 
goals for funding on a yearly basis. The program must also submit a 
mid-year report indicating progress in reaching those goals and a final 
report which also serves as an evaluation of the component. Main program 
elements are: recruiting, counseling, academic advising, campus tours, 
orientation, early development outreach (career awareness). 

There are four staff members. Three do the actual outreach (one of 
these is the Director as well) and one is a secretary. There are also five 
student peer counselors who work on a part-time basis. The outreach staff 
works with community colleges and with high schools to develop relationships 
with these institutions. They have established a rapport with the 
counseling offices at these institutions and regularly visit them to give 
presentations regarding Fresno State or to counsel students individually. 
Recruitment of students takes many different forms. Outreach staff members 
are provided with lists of potential candidates by the Admission offices at 
the community colleges and the Admissions Office at Fresno State also sends 
them a printout of minority students v*io are transferring from community 
colleges to Fresno State. Letters are then sent to these minority students 
informing them of the services of the Outreach Component. High school 
counselors will inform the outreach staff about promising students and will 
arrange for the staff member to counsel the student at the high school or at 
Fresno State. 



102 



The outreach staff does academic and career advising; they also assist 
high school students in filling out application forms and remind theai of 
deadlines (especially financial aid deadlines). They work with younger 
students — seventh and eighth graders — "so that \rtien they become high school 
students they'll know that we're available and they'll come to us." The 
staff of three outreach workers attempts to make as much contact as possible 
with the potential pool of minority stiidents. 

A file is kept on every student vrfio has been counseled. Prospective 
applicants are labeled as such. Records are kept of all contacts. Once a 
student has been admitted to a university, that notation is made. Extensive 
follow up is required, and the follow up activities are considered to be an 
important part of the outreach effort. Tracking is done up to the point 
where the student is enrolled at Fresno State, then the Retention Component 
takes over. 

The Outreach Component has recently started a pilot program involving 
minority students in two high schools and two junior high schools whereby 
they provide tutoring on campus in math and English once a week and study 
skills instruction once a mionth. They also provide career awareness 
activities and are planning a parent conference. 

During 1983-84 the Outreach Component visited 20 high schools, 
interviewing approximately 576 high school seniors, of whom 222 (38%) 
submitted applications to Fresno State. At the commtunity college level, 
eight colleges were served, resulting in 86 transfer students who applied to 
Fresno State. 

Vlhen asked about the effects of the program on the institution, 
administrators and staff said that they felt that it had definitely 
increased the number of mdnority students attending Fresno State. As for 



103 



App-38 

its effect on students, it has made the transition easier for them. As one 
staff member put it: "They're not as in awe of entering the university 
because of the preparation they've gone through in our program.... It's 
made them feel more comfortable." 

The Outreach Component maintains a direct relationship with all the 
other Outreach programs on canpus — EX)P, CAMP, the Office of Relations with 
Schools (in the Admissions Office). Off-campus, there are ties (through the 
Coordinating Council) with the University of California Outreach Office, and 
the Fresno County Economic Opportunity Commission. They also maintain ties 
with the Office of Advising and Orientation, Admissions, and Financial Aid 
to keep abreast of changes in institutional policy that might affect their 
advisees. Faculty have been extremely cooperative, giving generously of 
their time to give workshops for the program. 

The Retention Compone nt. This component of CORE-SAA was established in 
1981, after the Outreach Component. CORE-SAA began with the outreach effort 
and then, as this grew and was successful, the need to establish a conponent 
dedicated to the retention of stvdents v^o were recruited became apparent. 

Funded, as is the Outreach Component, with special monies from the 
Chancellor's Office as well as some funds from the President's Office, the 
Retention Component is physically located in the Learning Assistance Center 
(LAC). Although the final responsibility for this unit resides with the 
Division of Student Affairs, the Retention Component's instructional 
activities are under the daily supervioion and coordination of the Director 
of the LAC (who, in turn, is under Academic Affairs). 

The major goal of this component is to increase the successful degree 
completion of historically under represented students. To this end, it 
provides a variety of services and activities in close cooperation with tne 



App-39 

other SAA con^ponents as well as with other special services programs, 
faculty and staff. The three main activities of the Retention Conponent 
are: 

0 Peer Counseling, where graduate students counsel freshmen, 
transfers and students on probation; 

o The Faculty Referral Program, v*iereby students are referred 
by faculty for tutoring services; and 

0 The Special Retention Advising Program that provides credit courses 
for students on academic disqualification. 

When the program first began it was strictly a peer counseling program. 

Then the activities gradually changed and expanded to include other 

services, such as the faculty referral system and the class for students on 

academic disqualification. 

The staff consists of two retention specialists, two peer counselors 
(half-time), and two tutors (ten hours a week). The retention specialists' 
main duties are to teach classes, conduct study skills workshops, and 
counsel students. One of the retention specialists also is the Coordinator 
of the program and is responsible for the yearly report. In addition to 
counseling, the peer counselors also assist the tutors in tutoring in 
English, writing, and math. 

Participants in the Peer Counseling Program are usually students vitio 
have been recruited through the Outreach Conponent. Upon receiving a list 
of these students (already admitted) from Outreach, Retention sends them a 
letter advising them of the services available as well as a form on which to 
indicate their particular needs. Students who respond are put on the peer 
counselor caseloads and typically will spend a year in the program where 
they receive counseling and instruction in test-taking and study skills as 
well as other areas such as time management. At the end of this period, if 
they are doing well academically, they are put on inactive status to make 



105 



room for the next group. However, if they are on probation (if their GPA 
falls below 2.0), then they remain in the program. During the 1983-84 
academic year, the Feet: Counseling Program had a caseload of 202 students, 
of whom 42 percent were Chicano, 13 percent Black, and 21 percent White. 

The Faculty Referral Program operates on the premise that faculty, 
staff and students cannot be expected to know all the various programs and 
services on campus. The system sets up a central unit which links 
individuals on canpus with appropriate services and programs. Faculty are 
advised about the services the system provides and urged to refer needy 
students to the system either individually or via a roster. (Students have 
also been known to refer themselves.) Referral forms are filled out by the 
faculty member. Once this form is received, the Retention staff calls the 
student, then follows this up with a letter. When the student comes in, 
his/her needs are assessed and he/she is referred to the service best able 
to meet his/hei needs. Records of the referral action and its outcome are 
kept and a copy sent to the faculty member responsible for the referral. 
Since this service depends on faculty response, a great deal of effort has 
been made to publicize the system. This has been done through presentations 
at departmental meetings, talking with individual faculty, and, most 
recently, letters and program flyers. During 1983-84, a total of 406 
referrals were received. Of these, 311 students (77%) responded. 
Of those referred in Spring 1984, 10 percent were Black, 30 percent were 
Chicano, 35.5 percent White. 

The Retention Advising Program assists academically disqualified 
students to improve their academic standing through a two-unit course, 
"College Planning Skills." ( A disqualified student is one v^o is placed on 
probation for having a GPA below 2.0 and vdio fails to meet the contractual 



App-41 

conditions in^xjsed by the institution, or one who has a certain cumulative 
deficiency on either the overall or 'CSUF record. ) The Admissions Office 
includes a letter of invitation to this course, together with other 
materials, with their standard letter to students on acaderaic probation. 
Students who enroll in the course are given a Study Attitudes and Methods 
Survey and a Needs Assessment and a Study Style Profile during the first 
week. The course focuses on the development of effective college planning 
and study skills. During the academic year 1983-84 eleven sections of the 
course were taught (four in fall 1983 and seven in spring 1984). Enrollment 
for the academic year usually averages 175 students. 

The year-end evaluation report for this con^xjnent for 1983-84 showed 
that students who used the program's services withdrew at a lower rate than 
students who did not. The mean GPA of students who took the College 
Planning Skills course increased while the mean of their deficiency points 
decreased. An overall increase in grade point averages, enhancement of 
academic standing, and an increase in student contact were the result of the 
1983-84 activities of this component. In the opinion of administrators and 
staff, the component's effect on the institution has been to enhance faculty 
participation and interest in SAA's activities and to obtain faculty support 
for minority retention efforts. As for students, when interviewed they were 
extremely supportive of the programs. One even suggested that the College 
Planning Skills course be made mandatory for all freshmen. Students 
regretted that this course was only available to disqualified students and 
felt that other students should have the benefit of such a course. 

Ekjucational Enhancement Component . This component attempts to increase 
faculty awareness of the needs of minority and non-traditional students. It 
has sponsored Undergraduate Academic Advising Conferences that included a 



App-42 

workshop on advising minority stxadents, a Black staff-student mentorship 
program that paired 30 students with 11 staff members, and a Chicano Student 
Leadership Program where 50 students were selected to participate in 
leadership skill& workshops. 

The Academic Advising Conferences have been credited with having 
increased faculty members' appreciation of the uniqueness of the minority 
and the non-traditional student as well as having developed new policy for 
academic advising. The institution hopes to sponsor many more activities 
aimed at faculty development in this area during the coming academic year. 

The California State University at Fresno has been a leader of the CSU 
system in developing the CORE-SAA Program. Many have credited this program 
with being on the "cutting edge" of new strategies and techniques for 
recruiting and retaining minoritv students. WheL<jas the EOP has primarily 
worked with and assisted special admissions students, there had never really 
been any concerted efforts to recruit and retain the regularly admissible 
minority student. CORE-SAA fills this gap. 

The Learning Assistance Center . This Center, in which the Retention 
Conqponent of CORE-SAA is located, was established in 1981 to coordinate 
and house remedial and developnental instructional activities on campus. 
Although not focusing on the assistance of minority students, the LAC 
provides support and services to many minority students, primarily through 
a federally funded Special Services program for 225 students from 
economically and educationally disadvantaged backgnounds or students who 
are first generation college goers anchor limited-English proficient. The 
pr-jijtasi's services focus on enhancing the retention and graduation of these 
•dents who are, for the most part, Hispanic. Three staff members provide 
ing, writing and stuoy skills instruction as well as individualizei. 



independent work with students. Through the PASS program (Progress and 
Advancement through Special Services), the Center works closely with other 
equity programs such as CAMP and HCOP and encourages them to send students 
who meet the Special Services criteria for basic skills development, since 
many of these programs do not have such an instructional conponent. 

Another component of the LAC is a tutorial service that provides 
tutoring in fifty different academJc majors. The Center also offers non- 
credit refresher courses and test prepa ation in many of the frequently 
administered examinations. 
The Educational Opportunity Program (EQP) 

The EOP provides the services for "special admits" that CORE-SAA does 
for "regular admits." On the Fresno campus, EOP started out as an 
experimental program in 1967 with 17 low-income minority students whom the 
university brought in for advising. The program did not officially start 
until 1969 \Aien legislation was passed to establish Educational Opportunity 
Programs in the State of California. By 1970, most campuses in the system 
had EOP's. The program comes lander the jurisdiction of the Division of 
Student Affairs. 

The major goals of EOP are to provide access to higher education for 
minority, low-income students, and to provide support services throughout 
their undergraduate education to graduation. Support services include 
career counseling, personal counseling, and tutoring that are provided 
either by EOP or by other special services programs on campus. 

The EOP staff consists of the Director; the Assistant Director; the 
Academic Service Coordinator vAio oversees the tutorials, learning skills, 
and works with disqualified students; the Assistant to the Academic Service 
Coordinator; five counselors who do the personal counseling and oversee 



103 



App-44 

different functions of the program; three full-time clerical staff; and 
40 to 50 students v*io work part-time in various capacities — from peer 
adviser to data entry. 

EOF works very closely with SAA and CAMP in coordinating recruitment. 
There is one main counselor who works at outreach with high schools and each 
of the other counselors is responsible for outreach in several schools. The 
federal Educational Opportunity Center is an integral part of their outreach 
effort as well. Because the majority of EOF stiKients come from the central 
valley area, the program attracts relatives of previous students as well as 
friends v^o have heard about EOF. 

Participants must meet certain criteria in order to enroll in the 
program. They must come from a low-income household (the cut-off varies 
with family size); their parents must have less than a baccalaureate degree; 
they must have a high school GFA of at least 2.0; they must be residents of 
the State of California; and they must have conpleted eight semesters of 
college preparatory English and four semesters of college preparatory math. 
Other factors taken into account in the selection of participants are test 
scores, motivation, and potential to succeed in college. EOF students who 
qualify for financial aid may receive an EOF grant for up to $1,000 per 
academic year. 

Once students are selected, they come in for an orientation session to 
assist them in selecting courses for the fall term. There is also a summer 
program for incoming new students during which they live on campus for 2-1/2 
to three weeks in the dorms. After classes have started, they are required 
to go to the EOF office for a weekly meeting with their advisors who monitor 
their progress. Tutoring and counseling are available on an as-needed 
basis. Contacts with advisors and with other service providers are 



1-f -V 
lU 



App-45 

recorded, as are academic records and attendance at the weekly meetings. 
Participants stay with the program until they graduate — an average of five 
years. 

As a state-funded program, EOF has reporting responsibilities to the 
state such as demographic information on new students, information on the 
student services provided, and student class levels. This data base is 
updated on an annual basis. In addition, several tracking studies on 
students have been done as well as two or three system-wide evaluations of 
EOP programs. Although the graduation rate of the participants is the 
number one indicator of success from the point of view of the Chancellor's 
Office, the program also looks at retention rates, GPA and units completed 
per semester. In the eyes of some administrators, the success of the 
program can also be measured in terms of its ability to take students from 
disadvantaged backgrounds and help them break the poverty cycle and their 
dependence on public aid. 

The program presently enrolls 1,050 students. Four years ago the 
program had 750 students. This increase is due as much to increased 
retention as to increased admission rates. Sixty-seven percent of 
participants are Chicano, 19 percent are Black; five to six percent White, 
two to three percent Native American, and four to five percent Asian. 

Its in^ct is significant. In 1965 there were less than 200 minority 
students on campus. It was not until the EOP was established that minority 
students began to enroll. Currently one third of the Black and Chicano 
students on campus are EOP students. A third of the students who apply to 
EOP are admissible through regular admissions, but they see the program as a 
vehicle for doing well in college and wish to take advantage of the services 
it offers. With 1,050 students out of a total enrollment of about 16,000, 



111 



App-46 

EOF has one sixteenth of all students as well as an even larger proportion 
of the minority enrollment. 

The program's impact on the students it serves is especially great for 
those students who attend the Summer Institute. Data show that graduation 
rates are higher for summer participants and they seem to maintain their 
ties with the program during their college years. 

Other Special Programs 

In addition to the two programs described above, there are a number of 
other programs on campus that work to increase the access and retention of 
minority students. Since the focus of this report is on undergraduate 
retention, only those programs that deal with this level will be described. 
These are: CAMP (The College Assistance Migrant Program), HCOP (the Health 
Careers Opportunity Program), and I1EP (the Minority Engineering Program). 
The College Assistance Migrant Program (CAMP) 

With funding from the Office of Migrant Education Programs, U.S. 
Department of Education, CAMP was established on the CSUF campus in 1981 to 
make up to 125 first year students from migrant or seasonal farmworker 
backgrounds aware of the options and resources available to them. A second 
goal of the program is to provide support services in order to increase 
freshman retention for this target population. The program is under the 
Division of Student Affairs. 

Within the CSUF service area there are 1,000 migrant students 
graduating from high school. To be eligible for the program students have 
to be considered seasonal or migrant farmworkers or dependents of 
farmworkers, and they must be full-time freshmen. CAMP also specifies 
criteria that define the term "seasonal farmworker." The program provides 

1?2 



App-47 

personal and academic counseling, career advisement and exploration, 
tutoring in subject areas, referral services, financial assistance 
(stipends), basic skills remediation, and enhancement. 

Most of the recruiting is done through the migrant counselors at the 
high schools. The CAMP recruiter visits the schools with EQP, SAA, or Office 
of Relations with Schools recruiters and counsels the migrant students. 
When those students apply to the university and are accepted, the Admissions 
Office informs CAMP and they send them an intake form and invite them to 
apply to the program. The program has no eligibility criteria other than 
those cited above and those required by the university for both special and 
regular admission. Because many of the students are eligible for both CAMP 
and EOP, CAMP often advises these students to apply to EOP. CAMP is funded 
on a yearly basis and only works with the student for one year, whereas EOP 
is committed to supporting the student iintil graduation. 

As soon as possible, the student meets with his/her counselor and 
provision of services begins and continues throughout the year. The 
counselor keeps a log of student contacts together with academic records 
such as transcripts, course of study, schedule of courses. 

The program has served 350 to 400 students since 1981 and has 
maintained a freshman retention rate of 80-85 percent. A study of freshmen 
conducted through the Office of Migrant Education found that 80 percent of 
the students who finish their freshman year go on to finish college. This 
is why the program concentrates on the first year. According to one of the 
counselors, "These are very special students. They have special problems, 
but many of them have the motivation and perseverance to make it through 
college." CAMP is graduating its first six or seven students this year and 
hopes that the institution will institutionalize this program. It feels 



113 



App-48 

that "the only way [the university] is going to increase PTE's is through 
minority students, because they're a growing population in California. They 
could get a lot of students through CAMP and other programs like this." The 
program staff feels that the administration is supportive of their efforts. 
The Health Careers Opportunity Progcams (HCOP) 

The campus has two health area programs — the premedical program and the 
allied health program funded by HCOP, a federal program. HCOP funding for 
the premed program, which began in 1981, has ended; and the program has been 
funded for the past year by CSUF and the University of California at San 
Francisco (UCSF). The allied health program is currently being funded by 
HCOP. 

The premedical program developed out of a need perceived by the medical 
school at UCSF to inprove the provision of medical care in the San Joaquin 
Valley. They decided that the best way to do this would be to enlarge the 
pool of minority medical students who came from the valley, because research 
showed that physicians from the valley tended to establish practices there. 
CSUF collaborated with UCSF on the proposal vrtiich was funded by HCOP, with 
CSUF providing the undergraduate training component. The program reports 
directly to the Dean of Natural Sciences. 

The major goal of the premedical program is to increase the number of 
qualified minority students applying to the health professions 
schools — medicine, dentistry, optometry. This goal has recently been 
expanded to increase the number of students studying in the hard sciences. 

A staff consisting of a director, a counselor, one clerical person and 
two faculty advisors provide services which include a summer program, 
advising, tutoring referral, MCAT preparation, speakers, field trips to 




medical schools in the state, and placement into summer programs around the 
country. 

Participants are recruited from private high schools with a high 
concentration of minority students. The program has established relations 
with a network of counselors v*io identify potential participants at their 
high schools. Information is also sent to ninth and tenth grade classes. 
In addition, every minority student vrtio is admitted to the university and 
who is interested in a health profession is invited to the program. 
Selection of participants is made on the basis of an application, two 
letters of recommendation, transcripts, and an interview. The program seeks 
students with a B average in science and math courses. Program staff also 
look for candidates who are committed to the health professions, who will 
stand up to the rigors of a premedical or a prehealth education, and vrtio 
have some sense of community and a desire to serve that community. 

Students begin their participation in the program with the summer 
program consisting of five weeks of introduction to the health professions, 
concepts in science, basic skills, visits to hospitals, and a heavy dose of 
counseling. Since advising is done by faculty advisors, and not only is 
information imparted in this process, but a relationship is established with 
faculty that will ease the student into the first year of college. Students 
then meet with the advisor at least once a semester. Students' work in math 
and science classes is monitored on a individual basis through contact with 
professors in the various classes. 

Other activities and services include an MCAT (Medical College 
Admission Test) preparation class, assistance with the medical school 
application, speakers who can serve as role models, field trips to medical 
schools and placement into summer programs around the nation. Records kept 



115 



App-50 

on students include their progress- major, transcripts and other academic 
records, the extent of their participation in HCOP activities and contacts 
with their advisor. 

The premedical program has not been in existence long enough to see 
many of its students accepted to medical school. However, last year, of 
CSUF White students, two were accepted and 20 rejected, whereas 
four HCOP participants were accepted and one rejected. "Although these 
figures are gratifying," says one program staff person, "personally, I 
measure it in just the students going here. We have students going here who 
could not have gone here before or graduated or gone to medical school." 

The effect of the premedical program on CSUF has been to increase the 
number of minority students majoring in the sciences and taking science 
courses. The program has also had an effect on the science faculty. 
Faculty members are impressed with the HCOP students. According to a 
faculty member, the program has turned around the thinking of many faculty 
members with regard to the performance of minority students in special 
programs. They now see that these students are doing well in hard science 
courses and some of them are even getting into medical school. Program 
personnel feel that one of the things that has made the premedical program 
successful has been the cooperation of the faculty. 

As this phase of the premedical program ends and it becomes 
institutionalized, the allied health program will begin. As of fall 1985, 
minority students in allied health will be receiving support through a 
special HCOP- funded program in the School of Health and Social Work. 
Minority Engineering Program (MEP) 

This program started as an offshoot of MESA, which exposes talented 
minority high school students to careers in engineering and math. MEP began 



116 



2-1/2 years ago on the CSUF campus with funding from the MES,*. statewide 
office. Organizationally, it is under the Vire President for Academic 
Affairs through the Dean of Engineering. 

MEP's goal is to increase the number of minority students graduating in 
Engineering and Computer Science. Students are recruited from the area high 
schools through counselors and math teachers at the schools. MEP hosts 
activities for promising potential students such as lab demonstrations, 
exposure to engineering students, etc. Also, they approach all minority 
acceptees to the Engineering program at CSUF and invite them to participate 
in MEP. 

Once a student has been admitted to the university, MEP assists them 
with housing and financial aid applications. Students who have been 
admitted to the program must also participate in the Summer Bridge program 
which MEP holds with HCOP, where their skills and academic preparation are 
assessed and remedial work given where necessary. Once classes begin they 
are required to take a study skills course for engineers. Other approaches 
the first year include the teaching of group study techniques, the grouping 
of students to create a support network, the fostering of student groups, 
professional societies and the interaction of those student professional 
societies with industry. Other elements that the program feels contribute 
to success are the clustering of students in a particular class, such as the 
entry level calculus class. An upper division math major is then hired to 
sit in on that class and then meet with the MEP students to instruct them in 
group study techniques as well as review the material. This is done in 
Fortran, math, and chemistry classes. The students' first semester, then, 
is usually very successful, whereas for most minority students that first 
semester is the biggest drop-out point. 

JL p i 



App-52 

Students stay in the progreun until they graduate, which is an average 
of five years. Since MEP has nniy been in existence for 2-1/2 years, it has 
not been possible to conduct a meaningful evaluation. This summer, however, 
65 of their students applied Lot summer employment with industry. There are 
presently 130 students in MEP. 

The effect that MEP has had on CSUF has been "tremendous." The year 
prior to the establishment of MEP the School of Engineering had ten minority 
students. This year 27 minority students have been admitted and another ten 
are expected to be admitted. Although the academic success of students is 
not yet measurable, it is logical to assame that their participation in the 
study center increases their success in class. As for contacts with 
industry, the National Council on Minority Engineering has given $15,000 a 
year in scholarships to the institution. Chevron has also given scholarship 
money as well as funds to make a videotape. Faculty have also been 
favorably impressed with the performance of MEP students. 

Support Services at CSUF 
The consultant on this project made a site visit to CSUF and 
interviewed several students from the CORE-SAA and EOP programs. The 
following is his description of students' assessments of support services at 
CSUF together with his own conclusions regarding the effectiveness of these 
services: 

» 

All the students were emphatic about the value of the various 
student support services. At first I wondered whether they might 
have felt obliged to say good things about their EOP and SAA 
programs to an outsider who might be perceived as an evaluator. 
I do not believe this was the case. The students are genuinely 
proud of these support services, and quite sincere in saying that 
these programs play a central role in aiding minority, and also 
White/Anglo, students on campus. 

llo 



The support services are visible , varied, atxi effective . 
Together, these qualities seem to convey to students that these 
prograii»s are a legitimate part of the university. In part, it 
seems that the legitimacy and solidity of these programs may help 
minority students to feel that their own individual educational 
endeavors are therefore also quite legitimate. It is as though 
they gain added confidence and hope in their own efforts because 
of the visible importance and demonstrated effectiveness of the 
support programs. 

Further, the presence of a wide and extensive range of 
support programs may help to give added credibility and 
visibility to aach one of the programs. It is important to add 
that the two students from more affluent, professional families 
went out of their way to let it be known that they hadn't been in 
the EOP program (for students who are from "high risk" groups, in 
terms of their predicted likelihood of success), and that they 
had always done well in school. But none of the other students 
acted in the slightest bit defensive or insecure about having 
used special programs. In fact, if anything, they seem to have 
been proud that they were making good use of valuable resources, 
and were now well on their way toward successful completion of 
their degrees and a bright future. 

An especially revealing question I asked all students was, 
"Can you pick out any point when you came to the realization that 
you were going to make it through college?" The two women from 
professional families said that their parents brought them up to 
have the confidence and expectation of success, and that they 
always knew they would succeed. The others seemed to have often 
had parental support, but formal education was not such a deeply 
rooted tradition in their families. Most of the students said 
they came to the realization that they could succeed during their 
freshman year, or sometime just before entering college. These 
students often mentioned the role of student service staff and 
programs in giving them the confidence that they could and would 
succeed. For example, one man said the realization came in his 
freshman year when he "saw all these opportunities — EOP, 
Financial Aid...." Two mentioned the encouragement given by 
campus recruiters from special programs. Another said, "after 
one semester here, looking at my grades I knew I could do it — all 
you have to do is read and study. .. [and] decide that you can put 
off partying." 

From such comments, and other things noted by the students, 
I believe that low-income minority students gain crucial 
confidence in their abilities to succeed from any of the 
following three circumstances: 

(1) when they see tangible opportunities, 

(2) when they experience some tangible successes, and 



173 



App-54 



(3) when someone, whom the student respects as someone 
who is in a position to know, believes in them and 
clearly acts with the conviction that the student 
can and will succeed. 

The students frequently referred to the in^rtance of things 
feeling familiar to them. For example, the Summer Institute 
helps students to get acquainted with people on campus (including 
peers), to learn how professors teach, to learn how the library 
works, etc. Similarly, the pre-college efforts of school 
districts and the college, alike, have helped some of these 
students to anticipate and plan for their college experiences. 
(It is worth adding that many of these students have had to 
overcome the low expectations that high school counselors often 
had for them.) The students often noted that at Fresno State the 
"red tape" doesn't seem overw»^elming or mysterious, and vrtienever 
necessary, they can go to support staff for help. The students 
quite commonly said chat the support programs help them to feel 
like they are part of a family. 

The students also indicated that faculty are generally 
approachable . One said that "a lot of faculty make me feel like 
I'm at my house." Faculty are often friendly and accessible, 
without being "buddy-buddy." They support students if they know 
the student is really trying. The students feel confident that 
almost all faculty will pass them if they are really trying to 
learn and are "staying with it." There is an institutional 
expectation that faculty will have at least five open office 
hours per week, although some don't adhere to this. And of 
course, some faculty are aloof, insensitive, or prejudiced. One 
student commented on the racism of one faculty member, who, when 
giving her an "A," added that she must have gotten her ideas from 
another student. But this same student feels that many faculty 
are quite open and accessible. 

The academic departments aid and motivate the learning of 
all students by sponsoring extra-curricular, career/academic 
activities in their particular fields of study. Often, faculty 
get to know students through student organizations in the 
department. A number of faculty encourage students to form study 
groups to help one another. One student stressed the value of 
these study groups to her success in college (she is planning to 
go on to graduate school). It seems that these groups are 
sustained by the cooperative and motivated efforts of the several 
participating students, without further faculty assistance. 



Summary 

The access and retention activities of the California State University 
at Fresno represent a concerted effort beginning from the interpretation of 
its institutional mission and the setting of goals by the top administrative 



I2j 



personnel under the strong leadership of the President, to the Ltiplemen- 
tation of these goals by specially designated xinits within the xaniversity. 
A unique feature of this effort is the extent of coordination anuang the 
various programs and administrative units responsible for these activities. 
This may be due, in part, to the Outreach Coordinating Council vdiich 
includes representatives from all the special programs and which coordinates 
outreach activities to avoid duplication of effort. It is also due, in 
large part, to the strong leadership of t!ie President (and top adminis- 
trators), the dedication and concern of the directors and staff of the 
programs, and the cooperation of the faculty. As one top administrator 
explained in describing the close relationship between the Office of 
Academic Affairs and the Dean of Student Affairs: "Sometimes we go the 
rounds on how things should be effected more efficiently, sometimes we 
discuss concerns that one or the other has with regard to recruitment or 
retention, but in the long run I think the dialogue is there. And that's 
been something that has not occurred overnight, but it's something that has 
occurred over a number of years because it's not a naturally marrying of two 
offices. It's been a tough job to get those things working out properly. 
And it's really personalities, too. If you get people vrfio want to do the 
best job for the university and who have the students in mind, I think it 
can work." 



A: -57 

Minority Engineering Programs 
Purdue University 
The Institution 

History and Description 

Purdue University is one of the 25 largest universities in the nation. 
Located in America's heartland, the institution has a systemwide enrollment of 
46,964 at its various canpuses in Indiana, with the West Lafayette campus 
enrolling 31,457 (26,254 undergraduates) of these. The university was 
established in 1869 as a land-grant institution specializing in the 
agricultural and mechanical arts, and its traditional strengths have been in 
technology and applied science. Undergraduate instruction at the West 
Lafayette campus is offered through schools of Agriculture; Consumer and 
Family Sciences; Engineering; Humanities, Social Science, and Education; 
Management; Pharmacy, Nursing, and Health Sciences; Science; Technology; and 
Vtterinary Medicine. 

Purdue's schools of Consumer and Fejnily Sciences; Engineering; Health 
Sciences; Humanities, Social Science, and Education; Management; Nursing; and 
Science admit Indiana applicants in the upper half of their high school 
graduating class. In addition, applicants to Freshman Engineering must ha' e 
SAT scores of at least 400 Verbal and 500 Math, or ACT scores of Englisn-19 
and Math-25. Out-of-state applicants applying to the Schools of Enginefcrinn 
and tne Veterinary Technology program must "present records that reflect the 
minimum of upper-quarter quality." Out-of-state applicants to Freshman 
Engineering must also meet the SAT or ACT minimum requirements mentioned 
above. The schools of Agriculture; Consumer and Family Sciences; Health 
Sciences; Humanities; Social Science, and Education; Nursing; and Science 
require that out-of-state applicants prove "upper-half quality"; while the 



122 



schools of Technology and Management require academic records showing 
"upper-third quality." 

In a state with a fairly low Black representation — about eight percent — 
and a Hispanic population of about two percent, Purdue has had some difficulty 
attracting minority f '•.udents. Its essentially Midwest, non-urban image and 
its low minority enrollment have tended to discourage the applications of 
minorities frcan out-of-state. As one administrator said, "This is a difficult 
environment for minorities because there are so few of them." The under- 
graduate minority enrollment is about four percent; most of these students 
are Black. 

The Admissions Office has made an effort to recruit minority students. 
They have concentrated on areas with a large minority population such as 
Cleveland, Detroit, northern New Jersey and New York City and have held 
"college nights" at parochial and private schools with large minority 
enrollments. The Admissions Office works closely with the Minorities in 
Engineering Program in their recruitment activities. 
Institutional Climate 

The West Lafayette campus is located approximately 65 miles from 
Indianapolis and 126 miles southeast of Chicago. It occupies 647 acres 
and contains 135 principal buildings. (There are four smaller canpuses 
scattered throughout Indiana.) For a campus this size, the atmosphere is 
surprisingly warm and friendly, with a decided emj*iasis on the provision of 
services to the undergraduate student. Administrators, faculty and students 
who were interviewed felt that the campus was conservative, friendly, and 
extremely competitive, and that students were serious and hard-working "but 
not deadly." Although the curricula are very demanding conpared with most 
state viniversitiec, students also manage to have fun and enjoy themselves. 



123 



Since Purdue is a school that is overwhelmingly White in an area vAiere there 
are few minorities, the overall institutional climate becomes an important 
factor in recruitment and retention of minority students. Even though it is 
a state institution, the university has had to recruit in other states for 
minority students. Students mentioned that at times the atmosphere felt 
"cold," but they enphasized that it was not "hostile." Students saw the 
Minority Engineering Program as a place v^ere they could meet and interact 
with other minority students. They felt that the somewhat alien environment 
brought them closer together. One student mentioned that the can^us, though 
not "bad", was "different." "Your attitude can help or hinder you. It's like 
the real world," said another. Students with whom we talked seemed to have a 
fairly realistic and accepting attitude towards their position as a minority 
person in a White environment. The Black Cultural Center vAiich was described 
as being "one of the best in the nation" may also have helped to integrate 
Black students into the institutional environment. 

One administrator who has been at the institution for many years believes 
that Purdue has solved 90 percent of the problems of overt discrimination that 
may have existed 10 or 15 years ago. He describes the campus as "racially 
neutral." Several years ago a minority student was so visible that he or she 
had to "live a political statement," v*iich was emotionally exhausting. 
Increasing the numbers of minority students has helped to alleviate that 
situation. This feeling was echoed by many of the faculty and staff whom we 
interviewed. 

The Schools of Engineering 
With an enrollment of 6,000 undergraduates, the Schools of Engineering at 
Purdue represent one of the largest conponents of that institution. These 
schools con^rise one of the largest engineering schools in the country, as 



124 



well as one of the most distinguished. There are undergraduate programs in 
aeronautical engineering, agricultural engineering, chemical engineering, 
civil engineering, electrical engineering, industrial engineering, ntechanical 
engineering, materials science, and metallurgical engineering. The Department 
of Freshman Engineering is the entry point for all freshmen entering 
engineering programs and is responsible for initial advising and counseling as 
well as for first-year classes. The Department of Freshman Engineering 
administers the Minority Engineering Program v^ich is the subject of this case 
study. 

Minority Recruitment and Retention in the Schools of Engineeri ng 

Recruitment and retention of minority students is a priority of the 
Schools of Engineering at Purdue. The Procedures Manual for Implementation of 
Engineering Faculty Document 3-82 ( Admission to Professional Programs in 
Engineering ) dated August 1984, sets affirmative action goals for the Schools 
of Engineering as follows: "The goal percent enrolled of under represented 
minority students in any program should reflect the goal of Schools of 
Engineering at large. Currently, this goal is approximately 16 percent 
underrepresented minority students (Blacks, Hispanics and American Indians)." 
The manual goes on to prescribe that "special attention" focusing on course 
selection, tutorial classes, and personal counseling be given to 
underrepresented minority students. 

In keeping with the emphasis on minority recruitment and retention, the 
Office of Educational Research and Information Systems (in the Department of 
Freshman Engineering) maintains excellent statistical records on minority 
enrollment and progress. Table 1 shows the beginning freshman minority 
engineering enrollment over a ten-year period, v^ile Table 2 gives the total 
undergraduate minority engineering enrollment. Conpared to national figures 



App-61 
Table 1 

Beginning Freshman Minority Engineering Enrollment 



Total Total American 

E-l's Minorities Black Hispanic Indian 



Year 


No. 


No. 


% 


No. 


% 


No. 


% 


No. 


% 


1974 


1259 


34 


2.7% 


27 


2.1% 


9 

7 


0.6% 


0 


0.0% 


1975 


1550 


90 


5.8% 


73 


4.7% 


14 


0.9% 


3 


0.2% 


1976 


1752 


101 


5.8% 


84 


4.8% 


15 


0.9% 


2 


0.1% 


1977 


1582 


80 


5.1% 


66 


4.2% 


14 


0.9% 


0 


0.0% 


1978 


1749 


98 


5.6% 


81 


4.6% 


17 


1.0% 


0 


0.0% 


1979 


1696 


90 


5.3% 


78 


4.6% 


11 


0.6% 


1 


0.1% 


1980 


1514 


95 


6.3% 


80 


5.3% 


13 


0.9% 


2 


0.1% 


1981 


1578 


99 


6.3% 


83 


5.3% 


16 


1.0% 


0 


0.0% 


1982 


1498 


111 


7.4% 


80 


5.3% 


28 


1.9% 


3 


0.2% 


1983 


1499 


83 


5.5% 


63 


4.2% 


20 


1.3% 


0 


0.0% 


1984 


1547 


100 


6.5% 


73 


4.7% 


23 


1.5% 


4 


0.3% 



Source: Statistical Data, 1984-85 , Minority Engineering Programs, Purdue 
University 

Table 2 

Total Undergraduate Minority Engineering Enrollment 



Total 

Engineering Total American 
Students Minorities Black Hispanic Indian 



Year 


No. 


No. 


% 


No. 


% 


No. 


% 


No. 


% 


1974 


4424 


91 


2.1% 


91 


2.1% 


NA 




NA 




1975 


4951 


135 


2.7% 


135 


2.7% 


NA 




NA 




1976 


5843 


250 


4.3% 


200 


3.4% 


46 


0 8% 


4 


0.07% 


1977 


6167 


268 


4.3% 


217 


3.5% 


47 


0.8% 


4 


0.06% 


1978 


6512 


304 


4.7% 


239 


3.7% 


61 


0.9% 


4 


0.06% 


1979 


6750 


308 


4.6% 


254 


3.8% 


51 


0.8% 


3 


0.04% 


1980 


6660 


348 


5.2% 


280 


4.2% 


64 


1.0% 


4 


0.06% 


1981 


6631 


372 


5.6% 


285 


4.3% 


83 


1.3% 


4 


0.06% 


1982 


6605 


396 


6.0% 


309 


4.7% 


82 


1.2% 


5 


0.08% 


1983 


6488 


358 


5.5% 


267 


4.1% 


86 


1.3% 


5 


0.08% 


1984 


6396 


331 


5.2% 


242 


3.8% 


82 


1.3% 


7 


0.11% 



Source: Statistical Data, 1984-85 , Minority Engineering Programs, Purdue 
University 



hpp-62 

for minority undergraduate enrollment in engineering programs, Purdue, at 
5.1 percent, is somevdiat below the national figure of 8.4 percent. 

With regard to retention, conparison of 1980 and 1981 data on retention 
of Black engineering students at Purdue shows that after six semesters, 
these students persist at a slightly higher rate than nationally (48% vs 
45%). Hispanic student retention, on the other hand, is slightly lower than 
the national figure (57% vs 60%). The Schools of Engineering have the 
highest enrollment of minority students of any school at Purdue — 5.2 percent 
of the total engineering undergraduate enrollment and 6.5 percent of the 
beginning freshman class. This relatively large minority enrollment as well 
as a fairly high retention rate for minority students is due primarily to 
the efforts of the Minority Engineering Program. 

Minority Engineering Program (MEP ) 

Overview 

The Minority Engineering Program (MEP) at Purdue University represents 
a unique blend of conponents that combine several approaches to motivating, 
recruiting, enrolling, retaining, and graduating minority engineers at that 
institution. The MEP, located in the Department of Freshman Engineering in 
the School of Engineering, is the result of a proposal developed 11 years 
ago by the former head of the Freshman Engineering Department, the Director 
of Educational Research, and others. The goal of the program is to provide 
a conprehensive effort to increase minority enrollment by 25 percent each 
year. 

Industry responded to Lie proposal with a number of unrestricted grants 
to fund a variety of activities. The funding from several industries is 
used for programming and scholarships, while staffing and facilities are 



127 



funded by institutional funds from the Freshman Engineering Department 
budget . 

Below is a description of the various programs, their components, and 
activities. The programs can be classified into two types — Pre-College and 
College-Level activities. The former include efforts to identify, motivate, 
and enroll high school students v*Jo demonstrate high potential and who 
indicate mathematics, science and engineering as interests. Although not 
all of these students v^o enter the field of engineering will do so at 
Purdue, this is an important recruitment effort. The latter focus on the 
retention of minority students already enrolled at Purdue. 
Pre-College Activities 

Seventh and Eighth Grade Summer Engineering Workshops . Formerly 
funded by the Sloan Foundation through the Committee on Institutional 
Cooperation and Midwest Program for Minorities in Engineering, this program 
began in 1976. It provides two one-week siammer workshops for minority 
students who have just completed the seventh and eighth grades. The 
workshops are held on the Purdue campus at West Lafayette, Indiana. 
Participants are recommended by their junior high school counselor, math, or 
science teacher. Although previously limited to eighth grade students from 
targeted junior high schools in Indiana, the program expanded this past year 
to include seventh graders and students from Illinois and Ohio were also 
included. • 

Workshops provide the opportunity to participate in hands-on 
engineering projects, tours of engineering labs and facilities, discussions 
with engineering students and professional role models, as well as 
presentations by admissions officers on the appropriate high school courses 
to take in preparation for technical studies at the college level. 



12c 



To date, over 700 students have participated in the workshops. Of 
those who have graduated, 66 have enrolled at Purdue — 27 in engineering and 
39 in other disciplines. The first two engineering graduates from the 
initial group graduated in 1983-84. 

PREFACE . The Purdue Iftiiversity Pre-Freshinan and Cooperative Education 
program for minorities was originally fiinded by the Department of Energy and 
was designed (in 1980) to give high school students completing their 
freshman and sophomore year an opportunity to experience engineering for a 
week at the Purdue main canpis. 

Participants, vrtio are residents of Indiana and neighboring states, are 
recommended by high school teachers and counselors. They may also have been 
participants in the Seventh and Eighth Grade Summer Workshops. Although the 
content of the week-long workshop program is similar to that of the seventh 
and eighth grade workshops, more enphasis is placed on motivating students 
to consider career choices as they relate to their values, abilities and 
goals. Course selection during the remainder of their high school career is 
also discussed. 

So far PREFACE has worked with over 191 students, 120 of vrtiom have 
graduated from high school. Of that group, 13 percent have enrolled in 
engineering at Purdue with another 11 percent choosing other majors at 
Purdue . 

MITE . The Minority Introduction to Engineering program was begun in 
1975 under the sponsorship of the Eastman Kodak Company through the 
Accreditation Board for Engineering (ABET) . For the past three years it has 
been funded by various companies, with limited ABET participation. 

The program is for high school juniors who are identified through the 
College Entrance Examination Board and selected on the basis of their PSAT 



123 



App-65 

scores, high school grades, and expressed field of interest. Participants 
are typically Indiana residents or from surrounding states. The week-long 
program of activities is designed to provide students with the opportunity 
to meet and interact with other minority students who have similar interests 
and goals, and to learn about engineering at Purdue while evaluating their 
own potential. 

During 1983-84, 29 percent of the 49 students participating in the 1983 
MITE program enrolled in engineering at Purdue, with 11 percent enrolling in 
other majors at that institution. 

Target Cities Luncheon Programs . These are special luncheon programs 
for academically talented high school juniors and seniors as well as their 
teachers and counselors in selected cities throughout the midwest. 
Presentations focus on programs and opportunities available at Purdue 
Schools of Engineering and in the field of engineering in general. Emphasis 
is also placed on high school preparation and admission to college. These 
programs use Purdue minority engineering students as well as engineers as 
role models. 

Target Cities Luncheon Programs have been presented in Chicago, Peoria, 
Cleveland, Indianapolis, Fort Wayne, St. Louis, and Des Moines. Over 100 
high schools, more than 400 students, and several high school personnel have 
participated. 

PROMISE . Purdue's Recruitment of Minorities Interested in the Schools 
of Engineering program works with talented juniors and seniors. Partic- 
ipants are recruited through a nvunber of sources, including the Target 
Cities Luncheons and MEP's network of teachers, counselors and students. 
Students who were unable to attend the MEP pre-college summer programs may 
attend this Fall program. Former participants in the Seventh and Eighth 



130 



Grade Summer Workshops who are currently juniors in high school are also 
invited to attend this program, which serves as a reunion for this group. 

During a two-day on-campus workshop, participants are given information 
on admission and financial aid procedures, the freshman engineering 
curriculum, a tour of the campus and' engineering labs, and an opportunity 
to meet faculty, staff and students. 

Engineering Preview . This is a 2 1/2-day program designed to encourage 
minority students who have been admitted to Purdue to enroll in the 
freshman engineering program. Initiated in 1975, the program is sponsored 
in conjunction with the Purdue Chapter of the Society of Black Engineers. 
Students are encouraged to attend this activity with their parents. 

This is one of the most successful recruitment programs, with 
88 percent of the 42 students who participated in 1983 enrolling in the 
Purdue Schools of Engineering for the 1984-85 academic year. 

Teacher/Counselor Workshops . An outgrowth of the Seventh and Eighth 
Grade Summer Workshops, this activity is designed to inform junior and 
senior high school teachers and counselors of activities and developments 
within engineering education and the profession in general. It also 
provides a network and recruitment resource for potential engineering 
students and Minority Engineering Program participants. 

Phone-A-Thon and Letter Writing Campaign . This activity has been 
conducted for the past two years in conjunction with Engineering Preview to 
supplement recruiting efforts. Minority engineering students at Purdue 
contact prospective minority engineering students by letter or telephone to 
offer their services in answering questions about the institution or about 
other related concerns. 



Freshman Merit Award Program . Since 1974 a number of industries have 
sponsored these grants which provide awards from $1,000 to more than $3,000 
in order to attract, as well as aid, highly qualified minority engineering 
students to Purdue. 

Other Activities . During the stmtmer and fall months large quantities 
of engineering career literature as well as financial aid -und admissions 
information on opportunities at Purdue and within the Schools of Engineering 
are mailed to prospective minority students. An impressive array of 
recruitment materials, including brochures, posters, flyers, slide 
presentations, and other methods, is developed and disseminated throughout 
the year. 

This S'jmmsr (1985), as part of a new program, prep (Preliminary 
Retention Engineering Program) , I-lEP hosted nine students who will be 
entering Engineering freshmen in the fall of 1985. PREP is a six-week 
intensive preparatory program which focuses on mathematics, English 
composition, and coping skills. Its purpose is to assist students to 
complete their frashman year on schedule and those students who will derive 
the most benefit from extra preliminary preparation are selected for the 
program. 

College-Level Retention Activities 

The MEP staff maintains contact with minority engineering students once 
they are enrolled at Purdue by providing the following support services: 
individual and career guidance sessions; orientation and retention seminars; 
incentives for academic performance through the Continuing Student Awards 
program; employment of students in MEP; information on employment and 
scholarship opportunities from the HEP newsletter; and a positive working 
relationship with the Society of Black Engineers. 



132 



App-68 

General Academic and Personal Counseling . Counselors in the Department 
of Freshman Engineering, as well as in the professional school, advise 
students individually concerning course selection and career plans. The 
Counselor/Tutorial Program, v^ich is open to all students, provides 
individual and group tutoring to incoming freshmen; 50 percent of those 
served are minority students. Minority students are also encouraged to take 
advantage of additional services offered by MEP, such as: 

Minority Engineering Student Seminar: Engr 195-M . This 16-week course 
is designed to assist entering minority engineering students to make the 
adjustment to the university environment. It also encourages the explora- 
tion of the career opportunities in the various fields of 
engineering. 

Techniques of Academic Problem Solving: Engr 195-R . This course was 
developed in 1981 as part of a Purdue/NACME experimental retention project 
to assist upper division minority engineering students to improve their 
academic performance, particularly in certain sophomore and junior level 
math, science and engineering courses. As part of the course, individual 
and group tutoring is provided by graduate students, v^ile undergraduate 
peer/counselors provide supplementary tutoring and personal counseling. 

The project was designed to increase the retention of minority 
engineering students (juniors and seniors) from 50 to 60 percent over a 
one-year period. Another major goal was to increase semester grade point 
averages by at least one-half point compared to their grade point average 
of the semester before. Results of the first year (1981-82) were quite 
favorable, and demonstrated a significant increase in grade point averages 
and retention, especially for students enrolled for two semesters. 



kpp-69 

Tutorial Service . Tutors vdio are junior, senior, and graduate 
engineering students are employed through MEP to assist minority engineering 
students. They also identify and disseminate academic resources available 
throughout the engineering schools as well as the university. 

Incentive and Recognition Awards . Monetary awards which vary in 
amovjit and number (depending on the availability of industrial support each 
semester) are given to students who maintain outstanding grade point 
averages and demonstrate leadership ability. 

Advisoi: to Society of Black Engineers . The close interaction of MEP 
with NSBE provides an opportunity for members to develop leadership and 
group interpersonal skills. This group also provides a channel for informa- 
tion on career and professional opportunities. 

Other Activities . Other support activities administered by MEP 
include: maintaining relations with industry, proposal and report writing, 
fund raising, maintaining statistical data, and representing the program on 
various university and national committees, panels and workshops. 
Staff 

The staff of MEP consists of one full-time director and one assistant 
director, who is half-time. There are one full-time and one part-time 
secretary, as well as two undergraduate student helpers and four 
undergraduate student tutors. The following is a description of the 
responsibilities of each sti'^f member. 

Director . The D-iector has the major responsibility of administering 
the programs. She is responsible for all main activities — recruitment, 
motivation, and retention. She also prepares reports as they are required 
from the various industries who fund the programs as well as proposals to 
secure more funding. She sees the major goals of the program as 



App-70 

"motivating, recruiting, admitting, retaining, and graduating qualified 
[minority] engineers," and sees her role as doing whatever is necessary to 
facilitate this process. The director believes that one way to accomplish 
this is to encourage students to be "mainstreamed into this university, to 
interact with everybody who is here." She is opposed to "putting students 
into this program and keeping them here," and maintains that they need to 
experience the real world. The present director has held that position 
since the inception of the program. 

Assistant Director . The Assistant Director sees his role as that of 
facilitator. His is a half-time appointment; the other half of the tiflie 
he works in the Freshman Engineering Counseling Program. As Assistant 
Director, he oversees some of the programs and has run some as well. He 
does a lot of proposal and report writing, and develops brochures for the 
recruiting programs. He stated that since the program was so understaffed, 
the staff does vAiatever they need to do. There have been two previous 
assistant directors, whose duties differed somevrtiat from those of the 
present Assistant Director who has been on the job since this past summer. 

Clerical Staif . the two secretaries perform regular clerical tasks 
required by the programs. They also deal with routine student requests for 
information. 

Student Assistants . Student Assistants are volunteers in the program. 
Two of them help in a general capacity. Four are student tutors who assist 
students in their coursework aivi research and disseminate information to the 
minority engineering studen , body regarding additional academic resources 
available throughout the engineering schools and the University. 

Other Volunteer Assistance . The program relies heavily on volunteers 
for assistance in their activities. Faculty members are called upon 



regularly to give presentations at workshops, and menibers of the 
administration are also asked to conduct vrorkshop sessions on such topics 
as financial aid or admissions. Student volunteers have been especially 
helpful and have participated enthusiastically in activities such as 
Preview, where they act as a "host" to a prospective engineering student 
during a two-and-a-half day program. 

The staff is composed of dedicated, sensitive, and caring individuals 
who are willing to work hard in order to promote the goals of the program. 
The leadership of the Director is a vital i edient in the success of ''.he 
programs. All the institutional personnel arJ students interviewed 
concurred in feeling that the Director was an extraordinary person with 
total dedication to making the programs work. The student volunteers seemed 
extremely enthusiastic and felt that they were helping other students just 
as they had been helped and that it was only natural that they should 
volunteer to do this. 
Participants 

The nature of the participants has changed over the years in that the 
preparation and qualifications of the students have improved. Some of the 
VJSP staff have also seen a change in attitude. Students in earlier years 
were, in the Director's words, "hungry." They were not as well qualified 
and therefore less self-assured but more eager to learn. There was also 
more of a "sense of community" among the earlier students. 

In terms of numbers, participants in each of the programs seem to vary 
from year to year and there does not seem to be any identifiable trend. 
A decline in the undergraduate minority engineering enrollment (396 in 1982 
vs. 331 in 1984) seems to be attributable in part to a decrease in the 



App-72 

number of beginning freshmen who enrolled in the two previous entering 
classes (83 in 1983 and 100 in 1984, conpared to 111 in 1982). 

Participants in the Engineering Preview during the spring of 1985 were 
very impressed with the services offered by HEP. Those interviewed 
expressed the desire to attend Purdue. Their parents commented on the 
excellent reputation of the institution's Schools of Engineering as well as 
the pleasant surroundings and well-kept facilities. 

Students currently enrolled at Purdue v*o participate in the college- 
level activities feel that the program has helped to make the transition 
from high school to college easier. They mentioned the usefulness of the 
program in introducing them to available resources, providing services, 
bringing them closer to other minority students in engineering, and 
providing "moral support as well as academic support." One student v^o is 
now a junior (but v/ho had participated since the senior year in high school) 
commented: "I couldn't have made it [without MEP]." All students mentioned 
the selfless dedication of the staff, particularly the Director, as being a 
very important ingredient in the program's success. 

Perhaps one of the most telling indications of participants' 
appreciation of the program is their willingness to volunteer their help. 
Vol\anteers, both currently enrolled and graduated, are used extensively in 
many roles — "hosts" for incoming freshman students, role models, speakers. 
Some of the ex-students who are now engineers come many miles in order to 
speak at some of the activities and to share their experiences with present 
students . 
Evaluation 

Most of the programs described above have been evaluated by the Office 
of Education Research and Information Systems in the Department of Freshman 



Engineering. Hhe director and some of the staff in this office maintain a 
keen interest in the recruitment and retention of minorities and women in 
engineering and science, and the office works closely with the Minorities in 
Engineering Program. The director was a member of the National Research 
Council Task Force on Minority Retention in Engineering and is currently 
a member of the NSF (National Science Fovindation) Committee on Equal 
Opportunity in Science and Technology. He and his colleagues have published 
several studies on minorities and women in engineering and science, 
including evaluations of MEP. 

To avoid confusion, the effects of those programs that have been 
evaluated have been included in the description of the program. Evaluations 
are formative, as well as summative, and are conducted on a yearly basis. 
These may take the form of yearly reports that are required by funding 
groups. 

Relationship to the Institution 

The Institution . MEP has received strong support from the University, 
including the former Dean of Engineering, the present Dean, and the Head of 
the Department of Freshman Engineering. One top administrator confirmed 
that the program had "very good" support from central administration: 
"[The MEP] program is key to us." According to one administrator, the 
administration had decided to concentrate efforts to increase minority 
enrollment and retention in certain areas, and engineering was one of them. 

The Administration . Administrators who were interviewed regarding 
their impressions of MEP and its students, were unanimous in praising the 
program for doing an excellent job. They believed that it fit perfectly 
into the overall institutional goals. All thought that it had helped 
mirority students to enroll in and graduate from a very demanding program. 



App-74 

Many felt that by increasing the presence and visibility of minority 
students on can^s, MEP had made faculty and the institution as a v*iole more 
aware of the needs of minority students on canpus. One adminir orator 
remarked that it had "broadened our sensitivity to the special needs of 
special students, no matter vdio they are." 

The Faculty . Engineering faculty with whom we spoke noted that there 
was great variation in the performance of students in the MEP program. Many 
of the students suffer from poor preparation in high school, but many are 
capable of performing at least adequately, given some assistance. One 
faculty member also mentioned that the best student in one of his classes 
had been a minority student. A professor commented on the change in the 
quality of participants, and mentioned that although earlier participants 
had had weak backgrounds, almost all the students during the last three or 
four years have been "good, solid students." Some faculty said that they 
were aware that the institution might seem an alien environment to many 
minority students and credited MEP for helping to make these students feel 
more ease. Another professor acknowledged that the assistance given 
freshman students by the program was very helpful but expressed concern that 
without the continuation of the services students would find it difficult to 
make the transition beyond freshman engineering. 

The Director of MEP credited the institution, including individual 
administrators, with being supportive and cooperative. Outside of the 
Schools of Engineering, she interacts closely with *-he Admissions Office, 
Financial Aid, and Housing. She also has found the Engineering faculty to 
be very cooperative and mentioned that she had called on them on several 
occasions to give presentations or participate in program activities. 



App-75 
Summary 

The Minority Engineering Progrcun at Purdue University represents a 
commitment on the part of the Schools of Engineering as well as the 
University to increase minority recruitment and retention in the engineering 
programs. It is probably the most focused and successful effort of its 
type at Purdue and enjoys the support of the institution, the commitment of 
a dedicated staff, and the assistance of the institutional research office 
of the Freshman Engineering Department. There has also been a substantial 
investment on the part of industry. The difficulty of this undertaking in 
a state with very low minority population and at an institution with low 
minority enrollment is considerable. The success of MEP imder such 
circumstances is encouraging, if not remarkable. 

In spite of the relative success and comprehensive nature of MEP, its 
Director and the Director of Educational Research are concerned about recent 
developments in admissions and GPA requirements in engineering programs both 
nationally and at Purdue, and fear their possible negative impact on 
recruitment and retention of minority engineering students. They are 
presently exploring ways to address problems that may arise due to these 
developments. 

Although most of the retention services provided by the MEP focused on 
the freshman year, emphasis on retention has now extended to graduation. 
New efforts at retention have enlisted the faculty and staff in the 
professional schools. Designated faculty and staff in each of the Schools 
of Engineering will be working closely with the staff in the Department of 
Freshman Engineering to increase minority retention all the way through to 
graduation. 



140 



App-77 

The University of North Carolina 
at Greensboro 
The Institution 

The University of North Carolina ac Greensboro (UNC-G) is one of 16 
institutions in the University of North Carolina System, and is one of the 
few granted authority to offer doctoral programs. It hails as one of the 
premier public institutions in the state of North Carolina. In 1963, the 
University became coeducational follovdng seven decades as a liberal arts 
college for women. In the 1960 's and 1970 *s the University grew in size and 
scope. By 1980, its student enrollment had grown to its current size of 
over 10,000 students, with over one-quarter being graduate students. UNC-G 
maintains a reputation for academic excellence. It continues its 
longstanding commitment to the liberal arts in undergraduate education and 
has recently established a new masters program in liberal studies. This 
tradition is enriched by undergraduate and graduate preparation in many 
professional fields of study. The University offers the baccalaureate 
degree in 69 majors, the masters degree in 50 fields of study, and doctoral 
degrees in 13 areas of study. UNC-G is especially strong in the humanities, 
business, human services, education, and the fine arts. The University of 
North Carolina at Greensboro is located in the triad region of Greensboro, 
Winston-Salem, and High Point with a population base of 391,200. 
Greensboro, with a population of 182,000, enjoys the recent acclaim of being 
ranked "number one" among all cities in the USA for overall quality of life. 
In addition to UNC-G, Greensboro is the home of four other senior colleges 
and universities — Bennett College, a small historically Black private 
college for women; Greensboro College, a small private liberal arts 
institution; Guilford College, also a private liberal arts institution; and 



141 



App-78 

North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University (another of the 
16 institutions con^jrising the UNC System), a historically Black coedua- 
tional institution with an enrollment of about 5,000 students. Within 
Greensboro, UNC-G is the largest and most conprehensive institution of 
higher learning. It serves a large segment of resident students as well as 
a growing population of part-time and other students, characteristic of an 
urban university. 
Institutional Climate 

The campus is part of the town, but is situated on 158-acre green, 
wooded area. It enjoys the atmosphere of a small liberal arts college along 
with the advantages of a multi-purpose university with exceptional faculty 
and a commitment to fine teaching and research. The older georgian 
buildings create an ambiance of southern charm, and the newer architecture 
is carefully designed to blend with the traditional themes v^ile also 
reflecting the contenporary thought and character of the newer university. 

Throughout the institution emphasis is placed upon serving the 
individual student. Administrative offices, such as Admissions, Student 
Affairs, Registrar, and Student Aid, are open and accessible to students. 
Students encounter the service units of the institutions as people able and 
willing to help them, rather than as a University bureaucracy filled with 
hurdles and barriers of institutional convenience. 

The student-faculty ratio is 14 to 1. Although there are some large 
introductory classes, the institution is characterized by its small class 
size and frequent student faculty contact. Its enphasis is on good teaching 
and academic advising. Faculty are very interested in the students and the 
students sampled believe faculty to be open and responsive. 



142 



Stvident Body 

The University of North Carolina at Greensboro projects a climate of 
scholarship and cultural enrichment. Consistent with its early mission as a 
woman's college, UNC-G currently has an enrollment that is 68 percent 
female. Ihe University's eirphasis on scholarship and cultural enrichment 
gives the institution an overall atmosphere of strong, serious, intellectual 
pursuit by young men and women. The 32 percent male enrollment appears 
unaffected by the majority female student body and past image. The average 
combined SAT score of the incoming freshmen is 940 and over half of the 
freshmen ranked in the top quarter of their high school class. About 88 
percent of the students are state residents. 

From the early 1960's, UNC-G has been viewed as an institution that is 
open and re^ .e to Black students. Students, both Black and White, 
participated in the "sit-ins" during the 1960'&, demonstrating their 
commitment to establishing an interracial society. Blacks comprise about 10 
percent of the students and other minorities about 3 percent. The 
institution supports the development of cultural awareness and observation 
of different cultural heritages of its sttadents. UNC-G does not appear to 
promote cultural isolation. For exanple, since the late 1960's the leaders 
of a campus organization, the Neo-Black Society, have been active in and 
asstuned leadership roles for other Ifiiiversity-wide student organizations. 
The prevailing attitude seems to be that students, irrespective of race or 
gender, attend UNC-G to gain a sound university education. 

Black students at UNC-G tend to be traditional-age college students 
(18-22) and are less well represented among the older, commuting students. 
A higher proportion of the Black students live in the dorms than is the case 
for the White students. There are 22 residence halls with 3,650 residential 



143 



students, of vdiich Blacks number about 1,000. Thus, Black students have a 
more svibstantial presence in the dormitories than they do in the classroom. 
Dorm life contributes to involvement in campus life and is believed to be a 
factor in the retention of minority students. Student Affairs has designed 
residence programming to enhance the quality of life at UNC-G and contribute 
to better intercultural and interracial relations. Such programs include 
social activities and student development services such as exploration, 
conflict resolution, stress management, etc. Programs attempt to be 
sensitive to the needs of Black students without singling them out. 

Several faculty members and administrators indicated their belief that 
self-selection among the Black students vjho attend UNC-G contributes to good 
retention. Several Black students reported that they receive some pressure 
from Black students at the local historically Black university to enroll 
there, but that relations between the two schools are quite good. A survey 
conducted by the Office of Institutional Research reveals that the parents 
of Black students were less likely to have supported their choice of UNC-G 
than were the parents of White students. We believe that these comments 
suggest that many Black students at UNC-G have made an independent decision 
to attend this institution and may "-herefore be somevAiat more determined to 
succeed than others v^o were less committed to their decision. 
Access and Retention 

Access and retention of Black students are institution-wide priorities, 
recently made more explicit with an institutional self-examination and the 
appointment of an assistant vice chancellor for academic affairs to manage 

■''This finding is in opposition with Bean and Hull (1984), who found parental 
support an important contributor to persistence. 



144 



;^p-8i 

enrollment and to coordinate retention efforts for all student populations. 
Since 1973 the University of North Carolina System has been under court 
order in all of its constituent institutions, historically White and 
historically Black, to desegregate (tinder Adams vs. Richardson ). Prior to 
the Consent Decree, UNC-G had the best minority retention rate of any 
predominantly White institution in the system. Minority retention generally 
equalled or surpassed that for Whites. First-year retention rates for Black 
females has exceeded all other groups; for Black males, the rate in the past 
two years has exceeded that for White males (see Table 1). 

In establishing a system-wide plan for desegregation, administrators in 
central university offices looked to UNC-G as a model. Subsequently, as all 
institutions enhanced their efforts to recruit and retain minority students, 
UNC-G has faced much greater competition in attracting Black students. 
Since UNC-G' s budget is enrollment-driven, recruiting and retaining a 
diverse student body is a practical as well as a philosophical concern. 
Maintaining total enrollments as well as increasing minority enrollment are 



Table 1 

One-year Retention Rates — Freshmen 







78-79 

% 


79-80 

% 


80-81 

% 


81-82 

% 


82-83 
% 


83-84 

% 


White 


Male 


70 


74 


70 


73 


69 


70 


White 


Female 


76 


76 


76 


77 


78 


72 


Black 


Male 


69 


68 


63 


70 


74 


76 


Black 


Female 


83 


83 


79 


79 


73 


76 



Source: Office of Institutional Research 

University of North Carolina, Greensboro 



, l4o 



App-82 

matters of importance and are reflected in retention efforts throughout the 
institution. 

UNC-G is an institution that has made minority retention a priority 
throughout the University and has established a successful record. This 
report focuses on factors that appear to contribute to this good retention 
rate. These factors include special efforts within regular university 
services — ^Admissions, Student Aid, Student Affairs, Academic Advising, 
Academic Affairs, and Departments — and the contributions of local can^us 
ministries. In addition to University-wide policies to impLOve retention, 
there are two special projects — Special Services and a new Student Retention 
Project — that are specifically designed to improve retention and the 
academic performance of students. 
Admissions and Advising 

The Admissions Office and the Academic Advising Office both play 
major roles in the retention effort. The institution has a commitment to 
graduating the students it admits. careful pre-selection, the Admissions 
Office admits students that .iprj?Jii a>le to succeed at UNC-G. Although each 
application is reviswed individually, a generaj. "rule of thumb" for 
admission to UNC-0 is an £00 combined SAT score with neither the math nor 
verbal score lower than 350, graduation in the top half the high school 
class, and/or a GPA of 2.0 or better. Each year approximately 120 students 
are admitted who have not met tne minimum criteria. They qre typically 
first-generation college students, and/or are from economically disadvant- 
aged backgrounds. They are referred to the Special Services Program for 
academic and personal support. Also each year, approximately 50 students 
are admitted as "special admits." Generally, those who do not meet the 
admissions criteria have good high school grades, but SAT scores that are 



14G 



App-83 

lower than those generally accepted by the institution. By working with the 
Office of Institutional Research and keeping careful records, the Admissions 
Office has been able to accurately predict student success at UNC-G. 

Specially admitted students v^o participate in the Special Services 
Program have high retention. The one-year retention rates for Special 
Services students (in good standing) is 87 percent vs. 39 percent for those 
students who do not participate. (The services these students receive are 
described in the section under Special Services.) Special Services students 
are considered high-risk students with potential; about 80 percent are 
minority students. Although these students do not meet all admissions 
criteria, the Admissions Office believes they have a reasonably good chance 
to succeed. 

The Admissions Office places a high priority on attracting Black 
students. Recruitment of Black students includes outreach activities, 
talent searches, a special Black orientation weekend, fairs, and a telephone 
campaign by enrolled Black students. Although the major recruiting takes 
place within North Carolina, staff also recruit in Virginia, New York, 
Pennsylvania, Florida, Washington, DC, and New Jersey. There are two Black 
admissions officers (both are graduates) v^o have been very effective in 
recruiting Black students. Black almmi and the Black student organization 
(the Neo-Black Society) are also involved in this process. 
Financial Aid 

Another reason frequently cited for good minority retention is the 
careful attention to the financial needs of students and the interesting 
work-stucty experiences provided. Approximately 49 percent of all students 
at UNC-G receive financial aid, but 85 percent of the minority students 
receive such aid. Most minority students receive minority presence grants 



•147 



of $500. The rest of the aid package consists of loans, work-study, grants 
and scholarships. After all financial aid packages are distributed, monies 
remaining are used to reduce the loan burden of minority students. The 
office tries to keep loan burdens as low as possible — the average debt after 
four years is about $3,000. 

In putting together a financial aid package, there is an effort to 
minimize loan and self-help and to provide good work-study experiences for 
minority students. Not only does this reduce loan burden, but studies show 
that work-study on campus enhances retention (Astin, 1975; Herndon, 1984). 
Staff believe that freshmen and sophomores often have difficulty managing 
their time, and that the structure of the work schedule helps. Furthermore, 
the work site often provides an additional support system. Frequently the 
work-study supervisor is the first to hear about a student's problem. The 
Financial Aid Office holds workshops for the approximately 100 work-study 
supervisors. Hhe purpose of these sessions is tc discuss the job skills 
that they should try to develop in students and to learn about University 
services so as to be able to advise students. 

There is also a workshop during orientation for students who will hold 
work-study positions. It aims to teach students about office etiquette and 
expectations of their supervisors. A faculty member talks; with students 
about communication skills — answering the telephone, body language, etc. 
A student with previous work-study experience talks to other students about 
dress and general demeanor. 

The Financial Aid Office serves as a personal counseling and support 
system for students. The minority financial aid counselors have been 
particularly effective with Black students in helpinc; them use the system to 
solve problems. They may also advise students with personal problems, such 



143 



as difficulties with a roommate. The office often gets involved in 
individual cases vrfien students appeal decisions on ineligibility for 
financial aid due to unsatisfactory academic performance. 

The Financial Aid Office wrks with academically gifted as well as 
marginal students. Although there is only one competitive scholarship 
specifically earmarked for a minority, minorities are encouraged to apply 
for all competitive scholarships. The office works with high school 
counselors in identifying talented Black students for scholarships, and with 
faculty to increase Black representation in competitive scholarships for 
enrolled students to assure the top Black students receive the recognition 
that they deserve. 
Student Services 

Nearly everyone with whom we spoke emphasized the positive ambiance of 
the campus as a factor in retention. Black students are a substantial 
presence on campus. The Student Affairs Office tries to create a climate of 
openness and acceptance for all students. As one administrator indicated, 
"Black students know that if they have a grievance it will get dealt with. 
The trouble is we don't always know beforehand what the problems are. We 
have an advisory panel and we consult with Black faculty, but we still get 
accused of being insensitive." 

Students confirm the inpressions of administrators and staff. They 
indicate that the administration is usually responsive, but often does not 
know the needs and concerns of Black students until these are brought to its 
attention. For exanple, students assisted the administration in redefining 
the responsibilities to be associated with the position formally termed 
Assistant Dean of Minority Affairs, now designated as the Assistant Dean of 
Students . 



143 



App-86 

Connnittees with students and faculty help bridge the gap between races. 
The administration is in frequent contact wi*:h leaders of the Neo-BlacI% 
Society. Creating a multi-racial staff has been a high priority with 
University administration. Additionally, training sessions for faculty and 
staff are held yearly on matters of racial sensitivity. The University is 
committed to creating a truly integrated atmosphere, but as one 
administrator said, "We haven't perfected the elimination of racism." 
Although most acknowledge that there is still a certain degree of separation 
(for example. Black students usually eat in a particular cafeteria), overall 
relations are good. 

Students, fcculty, and administrators with whom we spoke indicated the 
importance of the Neo-Black Society (NBS) in attracting and retaining Black 
students. The Neo-Black Society is the largest student organization on 
campus. The NBS has a room in the student union and yearly budget from the 
Student Government. It promotes Black identity and culture and helps ' j 
expose the University to Slack culture — such as dance, gospel singina, and 
Black literature. There is some attendance by Whites, but the theme is 
intra-racial . Black History Week at UNC-G is celebrated by several 
organizations on campus. NBS is also active in recruitment activities and 
plays a role in orientation. 

Another important bridge to better relations has been the development 
of Black student leaders for positions outside the Neo-Black S'ciety. 
Faculty and administrators identify Black as well as White students "ho show 
promise for a leadership development program that lasts about one and a half 
semesters. At first there was some resistance from Black students. Black 
leaders, particularly males, often stayed within the Neo-Black Society. 



Now, however, Black leaders occupy approximately 50 percent of the student 
positions in institutional governance and leadership. 

Academic Life 

Involving students in the academic life of the institution is an 
essential aspect of the retention effort. This includes better advising, 
more contact with faculty, and additional academic support services. 
Several faculty members indicated their belief that more student-faculty 
contact in and out of the classroom would be beneficial. One program that 
has achieved this goal is the Residential College. This program serves 120 
freshman and sophomores who take their classes in small seminars in a 
special residence hall. It provides closa contact between students and 
faculty and maintains the atmosjdiere of a small college within a university. 
Minority participation in this program has been low, however. Other 
alternatives are to hold smaller classes — more seminars — and to provide 
faculty with resources to entertain small groups of students. The recent 
self-study within departments and the new retention effort have raised 
awareness of the important role that faculty and good academic advising play 
in retaining students. 

Both faculty and staff indicate the need for more Black faculty. 
Non-Black faculty are sometimes attuned to needs of Black students, yet 
there are still differences and Black students feel they need more role 
models. An English professor, for exanple, told us that he includes Black 
writers where appropriate. Yet as one administrator indicated, a White 
faculty member is less likely than a Black faculty member to quote W.E.B. 
DuBois. While not a racist atmosphere, there are such subtleties that 
separate. The presence of more Black faculty would help. The University of 
North Carolina at Greensboro has placed a high priority on attracting more 

1 cr- 



Black faculty. To this end a fonnal network in affirmative action was 
developed this year whereby each College/School and Office identifies a 
faculty or staff member to provide leadership in minority recruitment within 
all searches. These individuals work together to learn and develop more 
effective affirmative action practices throughout the University. Also, a 
program called GRASP atten^ts to identify talented students, pair each with 
a faculty mentor, and encourage them to pursue graduate studies toward the 
Ph.D. and careers in higher education. 
Campus Ministries 

Several local canpus ministries play an in^ortant role in student life 
at UNC-G. Although private and not directly affiliated with the University, 
these ministries are on or near the canpus for easy access. Their services 
fill a void left by the University. The Presbyterian House (Presby House) 
holds weekly breakfast meetings for students that promote interracial 
leadership. Both students and faculty indicate that this serves an 
important function. St. Mary's Church plays an important role in personal 
counseling of Black students. The Church hired a part-time Black covinselor 
(UNC-G does not have a Black person on its counseling staff) v^o was sought 
out by Black students. 

Special Retention Efforts 
Following are descriptions of the two special retention efforts at 
UNC-G — the Special Services Program and the Student Retention Project. 
Although the programs differ in their approach and target populations, both 
have as their major purpose enhancing retention and academic performance of 
students . 



152 



App-89 

Special Services Program 

The Special Services Program is a federally-fvinded and University- 
supported educational support program, begun in 1970. The original proposal 
was written vinder the direction of the Dean of Academic Advising, The 
project operates as a ccMnprehensive vinit offering all services within the 
program. This program, along with the Student Retention Project, is part of 
the special retention efforts that are monitored by the Assistant Vice 
Chancellor for Academic Affairs. The program enjoys strong support 
throughout the University. Faculty are aware of the program and compliment 
its track record. They view the services as a valuable resource for 
students vAio need extra help to succeed at UNC-G. The goals of the program 
have remained constant over its fifteen-year history: to enhance the 
retention and graduation rate of educationally disadvantaged students. The 
basic approach is to provide individual attention in both academic and 
personal services to increase the likelihood of success. 

To qualify for Special Services, students must be first-generation 
college students. In addition, students must be economically and 
educationally disadvantaged or handicapped. Some students of limited- 
English proficiency can also be served. 

Upon receiving a student's application to UNC-G, the Admissions Office 
determines if the student meets the admissions criteria. If the student 
does not meet all usual admissions criteria, he/she may be accepted and 
referred to the Special Services Program and strongly encouraged to take 
part in the program although participation is voluntary. Upon contact with 
Special Services and conqpletion of the program's application form, the 
Director determines if the student is eligible to receive program services. 



Approximately 120 students are admitted tinder Special Services 
criteria, but not all use the services. This past year, there were 165 
participants in the Special Services Program, of whom 84 were freshmen. 
Approximately 80 percent of Special Services students are Black. 

Services. The Special Services Program provides a variety of academic 
support services. The approach of the Special Services Program emphasizes 
individual attention in providing students with academic support and 
counseling services. It aims to increase self-confidence and improve 
academic skills. Eligible Special Services freshmen receive information in 
the spring before their freshman year about the services. Students are 
assessed in English and math to help determine the level of assistance 
needed. The Special Services Office preregisters the students in June for 
their courses and holds its own orientation. Students feel they have a base 
of support to help them through the University. 

Mathematics instruction — Students having difficulty in math may receive 
instruction on an individual and/or small group basis. About 50 students 
per semester use this service. The mathematics specialist is en^jloyed for 
20 hours per week by Special Services and is also an instructor in the math 
department. Her approach is to relieve math anxiety and give the students 
extensive practice. Three students with whom we spoke were receiving 
mathematics instruction and they all indicated this instruction is very 
helpful. One student said as a result of the instruction she is performing 
much better in math than she had in high school. 

Reading and study skills — Students may receive assistance in reading 
and study skills. About 30 students each semester use this service, most of 
whom are freshmen. Students take a pretest to determine what they need, 
then a course of study that includes weekly sessions with the instructor and 



App-91 

independent use of lab facilities and workbooks is designed according to 
individual needs. The goal is to increase reading comprehension, 
vocabulary, and study skills. Students generally show the greatest 
improvement in reading conprehension and vocabulary skills. Students may 
also come in for assistance on a less-structured basis. 

Writing instruction — Students receive assistance on an individual 
basis in writing. The instruction is designed to meet individual needs and 
lasts as long as the student and instcuctor feel it is needed. Several 
freshman indicated they plan to continue using this service throughout their 
college careers to help them with paper assignments. 

Tutoring — Tutoring is available according to student request or 
recommendations from the faculty and/or Special Services staff. Tutors are 
usually graduate students with at least a 3.0 average, and an A in the 
subject area to be tutored. Stiadents sign up to request a tutor in the 
stibject area desired. The student is assigned to a tutor by the tutor 
coordinator and meets with the tutor on a mutually agreed-upon schedule 
approved by Special Services. Such tutoring usually covers nine or more 
stibject areas per semester. During exam week, group tutoring is provided. 

Academic Advising—The Special Services staff act as academic advisors 
for first-year students in the Special Services program. Students meet with 
Special Services staff during pre-registration and registration periods and 
on an as-needed basis. Students believe this advising is very helpful in 
planning their programs of study. 

Counseling — The program provides conprehensive counseling and referral 
services for students. These services include personal counseling, peer 
counseling, group dynamics, career exploration, and academic motivation. 
Staff provide advice about graduate school opportunities, as well as career 



15o 



App-92 

possibilities. All services are available to assist students throughout 
their years of study at UNC-G. 

Staff — The director has overall responsibility for the program — 
developing the proposals, allocating resources, supervising staff and 
relating to other parts of the University. She was involved with similar 
piojects at other institutions before coming to UNC-G. 

There is also a counselor, a writing specialist, a reading/study 
skills specialist, and a mathematics specialist. These individuals are 
automomous in their areas. All feel they have strong administrative 
support. In addition, there is a secretary and a tutor/coordinator. 
Subject matter tutors are ujperclassmen or graduate students. With the 
exception of the graduate students, there is relatively little turnover 
among staff. The staff meet weekly to discuss the project and any problems 
that arise. In addition, there are a variety of staff training and staff 
development workshops throughout the year. 

The staff with vdiom we talked appear very dedicated to the students. 
For example, the math instructor, v^o is employed for 2C hours a week, 
spends additional time outside of class working with students. There is a 
friendly, congenial atmosphere and students seem to feel comfortable about 
approaching staff and asking for help. Students do not feel stigmatized by 
being in this program, but rather they feel fortianate to have these 
services. Students -tre not indentified as Special Services students in 
regular classes, so faculty do not know vdiich students are in the program. 
Thus, students remain part of the mainstream of academic life at UNC-G, 
v^ile receiving the support needed to succeed in their courses. Faculty are 
aware of and supportive of the program and its good track record. 



i^>p-93 

The Special Services Program has been very successful on the basis of 
studies conducted by the Office of Institutional Research. Special Services 
students who participate in the program have substantially higher retention 
rates than those who do not participate (see Table 2). 
Student Retention Project 

The Student Retention Project began in the fall of 1984. In looking at 

performance of Black freshmen, administrators found that many of these 

students were performing on the margin, though deemed "satisfactory 

Table 2 

First Year Retention Rates 
Among Special Services Students 
1983 — ^New Freshmen 

% in Good Standing 

Regular admits 82.7 

Special admits 83.2 

Special Services Admits with Active 

Participation in the Program 88.9 

Special Services Admits with 

Non-participation 41 . 3 



Source: Office of Institutional Research 

University of North Carolina, Greensboro 

performance." But, as these stiadenfcs progressed, they had to catch up in 
order to reach the required grade point for graduation. The University 
became concerned when studi 3 indicated that many Black students had 
grade-point averages below 2.0. A special effort began last year to address 
this problem. It is coordinated by a member of the Admissions Office staff 
in cooperation with the Advising Office. 



The focus of this effort is to inprove graduation rates. Blacks and 
Whites had similar four-year graduation rates over the past two years (see 
Table 3), yet the rate was below earlier levels and below administrative 
goals. The five-year graduation rate shows some yearly fluctuation, with 
the rate for Blacks exceeding that for Whites for two of the past four 
classes. Yet, for only one class (1977-81) did at least half of the 
entering Black freshmen graduate. 



Table 3 
Graduation Rates 



Four-Year Graduation Rate 






1977-81 

% 


1978-82 

% 


1979-83 

% 


1980-84 

% 


Black: 


Graduated 


52 


34 


36 


38 




Still Enrolled 


13 


19 


22 


18 


White: 


Graduated 


43 


40 


37 


37 




Still Enrolled 


14 


14 


17 


17 








Five-Yea r 


Graduation Rate 








1976-81 
% 


1977-82 
% 


1978-83 
% 


1979-84 
% 


Black: 


Graduated 


48 


63 


46 


49 




Still Enrolled 


5 


3 


5 


6 


White: 


Graduated 


57 


53 


50 


48 




Still Enrolled 


3 


3 


5 


5 



Source: Office of Institutional Research 

University of North Carolina, Greensboro 



App-95 

Services . The principal activities of the Student Retention Project 
are early identification of academic difficulties, special study skills 
development, and enhanced academic advising. In the beginning of the 
academic year a cohort of 333 potentially high risk Black and White freshmen 
students were selected for participation and selected faculty advisors were 
assigned to the participants and informed of the importance of increased 
contact. Each advisor set up preregistration meetings with the students. 
At mid-term, the project director contacted all faculty advisors and 
suggested that they hold a mid-term conference with students. Additionally, 
during spring semester registration students met with academic advisors. 
All unsatisfactory reports on students were sent to advisors, who pronptly 
contacted students to discern why they were having difficulty and provide 
assistance early enough to reduce the likelihood of poor achievement by the 
end of the semester. The increased monitoring is designed to prevent 
students from getting into difficulty and to provide a support system for 
them. The program will operate along similar lines next year. 

In addition to better advising, the project also holds a series of 
workshops on time management, test-taking, reading, and note-taking. This 
past year they were not well attended. Second semester workshops wtre held 
in the dorms and were somewhat better attended, but still below expecta- 
tions. Students indicated that the most helpful workshop was the session on 
time management. The project director also provides personal support and 
counseling for students and refers them to appropriate University services. 

Participants . Participants for the initial .effort were 233 minority 
students and a sample of 100 non-minority students, who met regular 
admission requirements and were not eligible for Special Services. During 
the second semester this effort was opened up to all students. The goal is 



App-96 

to have all undergraduate students participate in this program. Students 
with vrfiom we spoke believe this advising is useful and the faculty helpful. 
They do not think of this effort as a special program. 

Staff . The coordinator of the project is an assistant director of 
admissions and also a former student. It was initially her findings on 
Black student marginal performance that led to the formation of the project. 
She has two student assistants (volunteers) to help her. A steering 
committee consisting of faculty and the Dean of Academic Advising provide 
overall direction and, on occasion, manual labor — such as stuffing envelopes 
and sorting materials for mailing. There are also 14 student assistants who 
serve as peer counselors. Ninety-five faculty advisors provide the service 
to students. Those advisors who request student assistants to help track 
and locate students are assigned one. 

This project (as well as Special Services) is under the jurisdiction of 
the Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs, since the focus of the project is 
on enhancing academic performance. The Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs 
emphasizes good advising and considers this an inportant responsibility 
of a pr0i.cssor. Heretofore, academic advising had not been given such 
importance. 

The advisors had one orientation meeting, one luncheon at the end of 
the semester, and many written communications. Most advisors believe they 
have sufficient information to provide students with good advice. UNC-G has 
a centralized Academic Advising Office and the Retention Project will 
increasingly become a part of this function. The project coordinates 
activities with the Registrar's office to receive unsatisfactory reports and 
w" ..h the Student Affairs Office on issues of student life such as residence 
hall violations. The office also informs advisors about other services of 




the University to vAiich students may be referred for non-academic problems. 

In the first year of operation more than half of the advisors attended the 

orientation meeting and more than three-fourths of the advisors met with all 

of their target students. Although it is too early tc look at the inpact of 

2 

the program on student graduation, the project has had an influence on the 
institution in terms of increased awareness of the importance of student 
advising and monitoring student progress. The project has been well 
received by faculty and administrators and has enlightened the entire campus 
about the retention issue. There is some information about the 
effectiveness of service. Survey results indicate that students find 
advisors to be most helpful in setting up a general course program, in 
discussing academic performance, and in identifying overall academic goals. 
The most frequently Lecommended change by faculty is to require students to 
meet with their advisors. One suggestion to acconplish this is to have 
registration cards mailed to advisors so that students would have to meet 
with them in order to register. But, the effectiveness of the program will 
develop as the students and faculty seek each other out regularly for 
advisement and guidance. Overall, faculty and administrators are pleased 
with the project and believe that it will enhance the quality of academic 
advising and eventually the graduation rate of UNC-G students. 
Summary 

UNC-G exemplifies a university that is making an institution-wide 
effort to increase minority retention. All aspects of the University — 
recruitment, admissions, financial aid, academics and student life — are 



Institutional research is conducting an evaluation of the first year of the 
project, which includes extensive student and faculty surveys. 




App-98 

important conpsnents of this effort. In addition, two special projects in 
Academic Affairs provide services to students to enhance their performance. 
The Retention Project concerns the in^rovement of academic advising and 
monitoring all students. The Special Services Program provides individual 
academic, financial and personal support services to students vdio are 
educationally and economically disadvantaged. Both services are under the 
auspices of Academic Affairs and have strong support throughout the 
university. 



1B2 



