I .1 £ L S 

F I d r 



International Journal of Education & Literacy Studies 
ISSN 2201-568X (Print), ISSN 2201-5698 (Online) 

Vol. 1 No. 1; July 2013 

Copyright © Australian International Academic Centre, Australia 


a i 





Black Culture 


Angela Khristin Brown 
E-mail: brownlas6@aol.com 


Received: 15-05- 2013 Accepted: 28-06- 2013 Published: 01-07- 2013 

doi:10.7575/aiac.ijels.v.ln.lp.l08 URL: http://dx.doi.Org/10.7575/aiac.ijels.v.ln.lp.108 

Abstract 

The migration of blacks in North America through slavery became united. The population of blacks past downs a 
tradition of artist through art to native born citizens. The art tradition involved telling stories to each generation in black 
families. The black culture elevated by tradition created hope to determine their personal freedom to escape from 
poverty of enslavement and to establish a way of life through tradition. A way of personal freedoms was through getting 
a good education that lead to a better foundation and a better way of life. 

Keywords: Black culture, African-American tradition 

1. Introduction 

African-American literature is the body of literature produced in the United States by writers of African descent. It 
begins with the works of such late 18th-century writers as Phillis Wheatley. Before the high point of slave narratives, 
African-American literature was dominated by autobiographical spiritual narratives. African-American literature 
reached early high points with slave narratives of the nineteenth century. The Harlem Renaissance of the 1920s was a 
time of flowering of literature and the arts. Writers of African-American literature have been recognized by the highest 
awards, including the Nobel Prize to Toni Morrison. Among the themes and issues explored in this literature are the role 
of African Americans within the larger American society, African-American culture, racism, slavery, and equality. 
African-American writing has tended to incorporate oral forms, such as spirituals, sermons, gospel music, blues, or 
rap. [1] 

As African Americans’ place in American society has changed over the centuries, so, has the focus of African-American 
literature. Before the American Civil War, the literature primarily consisted of memoirs by people who had escaped 
from slavery; the genre of slave narratives included accounts of life under slavery and the path of justice and 
redemption to freedom. There was an early distinction between the literature of freed slaves and the literature of free 
blacks who had been bom in the North. Free blacks had to express their oppression in a different narrative form. Free 
blacks in the North often spoke out against slavery and racial injustices using the spiritual narrative. 

African-American literature has both been influenced by the great African diasporic heritage [7] and shaped it in many 
countries. It has been created within the larger realm of post-colonial literature, although scholars distinguish between 
the two, saying that ’’African American literature differs from most post-colonial literature in that it is written by 
members of a minority community who reside within a nation of vast wealth and economic power. 

African-American oral culture is rich in poetry, including spirituals, gospel music, blues, and rap. This oral poetry also 
appears in the African-American tradition of Christian sermons, which make use of deliberate repetition, cadence, and 
alliteration. African-American literature—especially written poetry, but also prose—has a strong tradition of 
incorporating ah of these forms of oral poetry. [9] These characteristics do not occur in all works by African-American 
writers. 

African-American literature has both been influenced by the great African diasporic heritage [7] and shaped it in many 
countries. It has been created within the larger realm of post-colonial literature, although scholars distinguish between 
the two, saying that ’’African American literature differs from most post-colonial literature in that it is written by 
members of a minority community who reside within a nation of vast wealth and economic power. 

African-American oral culture is rich in poetry, including spirituals, gospel music, blues, and rap. This oral poetry also 
appears in the African-American tradition of Christian sermons, which make use of deliberate repetition, cadence, and 
alliteration. African-American literature—especially written poetry, but also prose—has a strong tradition of 
incorporating ah of these forms of oral poetry. [9] These characteristics do not occur in all works by African-American 
writers. 

Some scholars resist using Western literary theory to analyze African-American literature. As the Harvard literary 
scholar Henry Louis Gates, Jr. said, ”My desire has been to allow the black tradition to speak for itself about its nature 
and various functions, rather than to read it, or analyze it, in terms of literary theories borrowed whole from other 
traditions, appropriated from without. " [10] One trope common to African-American literature is Signification. Gates 
claims that signifying “is a trope in which are subsumed several other rhetorical tropes, including metaphor, metonymy, 
synecdoche, and irony, and also hyperbole an litotes, and metalepsis.” [11] Signification also refers to the way in which 
African-American “authors read and critique other African American texts in an act of rhetorical self-definition” [12] 








109 


IJELS 1 (1): 108-110, 2013 

2. Refuting the dominant literary culture 

Throughout American history, African Americans have been discriminated against and subject to racist attitudes. This 
experience inspired some Black writers, at least during the early years of African-American literature, to prove they 
were the equals of European-American authors. As Henry Louis Gates, Jr, has said, "it is fair to describe the subtext of 
the history of black letters as this urge to refute the claim that because blacks had no written traditions they were bearers 
of an inferior culture. " [45] 

By refuting the claims of the dominant culture, African-American writers were also attempting to subvert the literary 
and power traditions of the United States. Some scholars assert that writing has traditionally been seen as "something 
defined by the dominant culture as a white male activity. " [45] This means that, in American society, literary acceptance 
has traditionally been intimately tied in with the very power dynamics which perpetrated such evils as racial 
discrimination. By borrowing from and incorporating the non-written oral traditions and folk life of the African 
diaspora, African-American literature broke "the mystique of connection between literary authority and patriarchal 
power. " [46] In producing their own literature, African Americans were able to establish their own literary traditions 
devoid of the white intellectual filter. This view of African-American literature as a tool in the struggle for Black 
political and cultural liberation has been stated for decades, perhaps most famously by W. E. B. Du Bois. [47] 

3. Existing both inside and outside American literature 

According to Joanne Gabbin, a professor, African-American literature exists both inside and outside American 
literature. "Somehow African American literature has been relegated to a different level, outside American literature, 
yet it is an integral part," she says. [48] She bases her theory in the experience of Black people in the United States. Even 
though African Americans have long claimed an American identity, during most of United States history they were not 
accepted as full citizens and were actively discriminated against. As a result, they were part of America while also 
outside it. 

Similarly, African-American literature is within the framework of a larger American literature, but it also is 
independent. As a result, new styles of storytelling and unique voices have been created in relative isolation. The benefit 
of this is that these new styles and voices can leave their isolation and help revitalize the larger literary world (McKay, 
2004). This artistic pattern has held true with many aspects of African American culture over the last century, with jazz 
and hip hop being just two artistic examples that developed in isolation within the Black community before reaching a 
larger audience and eventually revitalizing American culture. 

4. frican American criticism 

African-American culture is rooted in Africa. It is a blend of chiefly sub-Saharan African and Sahelean cultures. 
Although slavery greatly restricted the ability of Americans of African descent to practice their cultural traditions, many 
practices, values, and beliefs survived and over time have modified or blended with white culture and other cultures 
such as that of Native Americans. There are some facets of African-American culture that were accentuated by the 
slavery period. The result is a unique and dynamic culture that has had and continues to have a profound impact on 
mainstream American culture, as well as the culture of the broader world. 

Elaborate rituals and ceremonies were a significant part of African Culture. West Africans believed that spirits dwelled 
in their surrounding nature. From this disposition, they treated their surroundings with mindful care. Africans also 
believed spiritual life source existed after death. They believed that ancestors in this spiritual realm could then mediate 
between the supreme creator and the living. Honor and prayer was displayed to these " ancient ones", the spirit of those 
past. West Africans also believed in spiritual possession. [1] 

For many years African-American culture developed separately from European-American culture, both because of 
slavery and the persistence of racial discrimination in America, as well as African-American slave descendants’ desire 
to create and maintain their own traditions. Today, African-American culture has become a significant part of American 
culture and yet, at the same time, remains a distinct cultural body. [6] 

5. Oral tradition 

Slaveholders limited or prohibited education of enslaved African Americans because they feared it might empower their 
chattel and inspire or enable emancipatory ambitions. In the United States, the legislation that denied slaves formal 
education likely contributed to their maintaining a strong oral tradition, a common feature of indigenous African 
cultures. [9] African-based oral traditions became the primary means of preserving history, mores, and other cultural 
information among the people. This was consistent with the griot practices of oral history in many African and other 
cultures that did not rely on the written word. Many of these cultural elements have been passed from generation to 
generation through storytelling. The folktales provided African Americans the opportunity to inspire and educate one 
another. [9] 

6. Discussion 

African American culture often developed separately from mainstream American culture because of African Americans’ 
desire to practice their own traditions, as well as the persistence of racial segregation in America. Consequently African 
American culture has become a significant part of American culture and yet, at the same time, remains a distinct culture 
apart from it. 

From the earliest days of slavery , slave owners sought to exercise control over their slaves by attempting to strip them 
of their African culture. The physical isolation and societal marginalization of African slaves and, later, of their free 







IJELS 1 ( 1 ): 108 - 110 , 2013 110 

progeny, however, actually facilitated the retention of significant elements of traditional culture among Africans in the 
New World generally, and in the U.S. in particular. Slave owners deliberately tried to repress political organization in 
order to deal with the many slave rebellions that took place in the southern United States, Brazil, Haiti, and the Dutch 
Guyanas. 

In turn, African American culture has had a pervasive, transformative impact on myriad elements of mainstream 
American culture, among them language, music, dance, religion, cuisine, and agriculture. This process of mutual 
creative exchange is called creolization . Over time, the culture of African slaves and their descendants has been 
ubiquitous in its impact on not only the dominant American culture, but on world culture as well. 

7. Conclusion 

African-American neighborhoods are types of ethnic enclaves found in many cities in the United States. The formation 
of African-American neighborhoods is closely linked to the history of segregation in the United States, either through 
formal laws, or as a product of social norms. Despite this, African-American neighborhoods have played an important 
role in the development of nearly all aspects of both African-American culture and broader American culture. 

Although slavery greatly restricted the ability of Africans in America to practice their cultural traditions, many 
practices, values and beliefs survived and over time have incorporated elements of European American culture. There 
are even certain facets of African American culture that were brought into being or made more prominent as a result of 
slavery; an example of this is how drumming became used as a means of communication and establishing a community 
identity during that time. The result is a dynamic, creative culture that has had and continues to have a profound impact 
on mainstream American culture and on world culture as well. After Emancipation , these uniquely African American 
traditions continued to grow. They developed into distinctive traditions in music , art , literature , religion , food , holidays , 
amongst others. While for some time sociologists, such as Gunnar Myrdal and Patrick Moynihan, believed that African 
Americans had lost most cultural ties with Africa, anthropological field research by Melville Hersovits and others 
demonstrated that there is a continuum of African traditions among Africans in the New World from the West Indies to 
the United States. The greatest influence of African cultural practices on European cultures is found below the Mason- 
Dixon in the southeastern United States, especially in the Carolinas among the Gullah people and in Louisiana. 


References 

Okpewho, I. & Nzegwu, N (2009). The New African Diaspora. Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-35337-5. 

Olaniyan, T.S & James, H (2010). The African Diaspora and the Disciplines. Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0- 
253-35464-8. 

Hine, D.C., Danielle, K., Trica; S.S .(2009). Black Europe and the African Diaspora. University of Illinois Press. 
ISBN 978-0-252-07657-2. 

Davies, C. (2008). Encyclopedia of the African Diaspora: origins, experiences and culture, Volume 1. Santa Barbara, 
Calif: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-700-5. 

Wisdom, T; Puplampu, Korbla P (2005). The African Diaspora in Canada: negotiating identity HYPERLINK 
M http://books. google. ca/books?id=QpoxptJZ73sC&lpg=PPl&dq=The%20African%20diaspora%20in%20Canada%3 A 
%20negotiating%20identity%20%26%20belonging&pg=PP 1" & HYPERLINK 

M http://books. google. ca/books?id=QpoxptJZ73sC&lpg=PPl&dq=The%20African%20diaspora%20in%20Canada%3 A 
%20negotiating%20identity%20%26%20belonging&pg=PPl" belonging. University of Calgary Press. ISBN 1-55238- 
175-7. 

Olliz-Boyd, A.. (2010). The Latin American Identity and the African Diaspora: HYPERLINK 

M http://books. google. ca/books?id=hCcMb_2iOSUC&lpg=PP 1 &dq=African%20diaspora&pg=PP 1 "Ethnogenesis 
HYPERLINK "http://books.google.ca/books?id=hCcMb_2iOSUC&lpg=PP 1 &dq=African%20diaspora&pg=PP 1" in 
Context. Cambria Press. ISBN 978-1-60497-704-2. 

Carter, D.L. (2010). Navigating the African Diaspora: The Anthropology of Invisibility. University of Minnesota Press. 
ISBN 978-0-8166-4777-4. 

Conyers, J., & James, L/ (2009). Racial Structure and Radical Politics in the African Diaspora. London: Transaction. 
ISBN 1-4128-1045-0. 

Curry, D., Duke, D., Eric, D & Smith, M.A. (2009). Extending the Diaspora: New histories of Black people. University 
of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-03459-6. 

Arthur, J.A. (2008). The African Diaspora in the United States and Europe: the Ghanaian experience. Ashgate. 
ISBN 978-0-7546-4841-3. 












