DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 418 336 


CG 028 158 


AUTHOR 


McCorrister, Kandy 


TITLE 


Intergenerational Impact of Alcohol on Children: A Native 
Perspective . 


PUB DATE 


1997-10-09 


NOTE 


8 5p . ; Master's Research Project, Brandon University, 
Brandon , Mani toba . 


PUB TYPE 


Dissertations/Theses (040) -- Reports - Research (143) 


EDRS PRICE 


MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 


DESCRIPTORS 


*Alcohol Abuse; Alcohol Education; * American Indian Culture; 
^Canada Natives; Child Behavior; Children; * Ethnography ; 
Foreign Countries; ^Parent Child Relationship; * Parent 
Influence 


IDENTIFIERS 

ABSTRACT 


First Nations; * Intergenerational Factors 

A review of recent literature suggests excessive drinking by 



parents has a negative impact on the behaviors of the child. The families in 
First Nations communities in Canada have suffered considerably because of 
alcohol and the pressures of the surrounding non-native community; valuable 
teachings of the Elders have come under attack and the loss of these 
teachings has left communities in turmoil; the role of the parent has been 
taken over by a loosely connected extended family, which can result in 
children feeling unwanted and unloved by the natural parent. Alcohol leaves 
many First Nation communities in a state of oppression as the young people 
soak up the behaviors being modeled by parents, teachers, relatives, friends, 
elders and leaders. This paper presents a study that examined the 
intergenerational impact of alcohol on First Nations children. Interviews 
with substance abuse counselors and/or elders from the community guided the 
process of data collection. Seven stories from participants and two from 
counselors are reported and related to the questions: "How does the 

intergenerational impact of alcohol affect children today?" and "What can we 
do about it?" Five issues are reported on: (1) "Learned Behaviors Not Our 

Own"; (2) "Focus of Concern" (the psychological gaps in one’s life due to 
inconsistent parenting, violence and destructiveness within the family) ; (3) 

"Is Leaving the Answer?"; (4) "Healing within: Spiritual Help"; and (5) 
"Loneliness and Healing." Five recommendations for recovery and healing are 
presented. Appendices include letters and interview protocols. (EMK) 



******************************************************************************** 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



******************************************************************************** 




3028158 



Intergenerational Impact of Alcohol on Children: 
A Native Perspective 



VO 

m 

m 

oo 



@ 



Research Project 

in partial fulfillment of the Master's program 
Guidance & Counseling 



Kandy McCorrister 



U S. DEPARTMENT OP EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 



Faculty of Education 
Brandon University 
Brandon, Manitoba 




• Points of view or opinion a stated m this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OEPl position or policy 

s — _ . _ y 



n 

4 



“PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC).” 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



.1 



Intergenerat ional Impact of Alcohol on Children: 



A Native Perspective 



( Ti t le ) 



A thesis /pro jecc submitted to the Senate of Brandon University in partial 
fulfilment of the requirements of the degree of 



MASTER OF EDUCATION 



(Year) 

1997 



Permission has been granted to the LIBRARY OF BRANDON UNIVERSITY to lend or 
sell copies of this thesis/project to the NATIONAL LIBRARY OF CANADA, to 
microfilm this thesis/project and to lend or sell copies of the microfilm: 
and to UNIVERSITY MICROFILMS to publish an abstract. 

The author reserves other publication rights, and neither the thesis/ 
project nor extensive extracts from it may be orinted or otherwise 
reproduced without the author's written permission. 




3 



BRANDON UNIVERSITY 



FACULTY OF EDUCATION 



The undersigned certify that they have read, and recommend to the Senate for 
acceptance, a Master's Thesis/Project entitled: 



Intercjeneratio na.l . Impact, of. Alcohol, on Children: 
A Native Perspective 



submitted by . McCorrister 

in partial fulfilment for the requirements for the degree of 



MASTER OF EDUCATION 





4 



2 



Table of Contents 



Acknowledgments 3 

Abstract 4 

Poem 6 

I. Introduction 8 

II. Literature Search 15 

III. Purpose of the research 27 

- Hypothesis 

- Question for study 

IV. Methods of Collecting Data 28 



- Personal stories from parents and elders 

- Personal stories from students (Grades 3, 6, 9 and 12) 

- Interviews from effective alcohol counselors 

- Research site 



V. 


Results of Case Analysis 


34 




- Learned Behaviors Not Our Own 


37 




- Focus of Concern 


42 




- Is Leaving the Answer? 


47 




- Healing Within - Spiritual Help 


55 




- Loneliness & Healing 


59 


VI. 


Conclusion 


63 


VII. 


References 


72 


VIII. 


Appendix 


75 




5 



X 



3 



Acknowledgment 



There are many people who I would like to thank for making this project a 
success. The encouragement and personal support I received was enough to 
keep me from giving up. The strongest motivation has been the personal stories 
and interviews from participants and counselors. I truly appreciate and give my 
heart-felt thanks to each of you for sharing your inner being. Without your 
voices, this project could not have happened. Again thank-you for your insights 
and valuable information. 

I also thank my faculty advisor Dr. Beverley Bailey and second reader 
Dr. Roger Neil for their direct work with the readings and feedback, but most of 
all for reminding me of the importance of this work and the importance of who we 
are as a people. Your guidance and encouragement is greatly appreciated. 
Thank-you. 

A special thank-you to the Peguis School Board and Post Secondary 
Education Counselors for their sponsorship and acceptance of me for who I am. 
Thank-you for making this opportunity possible. Your encouragement and 
support is greatly appreciated. 

To my husband Dennis, who has been my faithful companion, ardent 
supporter, friend, and pillar of strength throughout my studies. To my children 
Dennis Jr., Robin, Angel, Laurie-Anne, and Stephen. Thank-you all for your 
love and support. 

Most of all I give thanks and praise to God who answered my prayers and 
was with me spiritually throughout the entire study. Thank-You Lord for 
speaking to the depths of my heart on many of the issues. I thank-You for Your 
healing powers and the strength You have given to each of us to help face our 
inner being. 




8 



4 



Abstract 

From a review of recent literature, support strongly suggests that 
excessive drinking by parents has a negative impact on the behaviors of the 
child. Children learn so much from the parents and therefore many of the 
behaviors displayed by the child can also be seen in them. Children of alcoholic 
families go through life facing many uncertainties. They are deprived of love 
and other basics needs, which leaves them feeling insecure. Life for the 
alcoholic child is a lonely one and many times they keep silent about many 
things that happen to them. Children grow up quickly and learn to defend 
themselves and their younger siblings. They fail to face their own feelings and 
they tend to internalize everything, blaming themselves for the destruction or 
negativity in their lives. The families in First Nations communities have suffered 
considerably because of alcohol and the pressures of the surrounding non- 
native community; valuable teachings of the Elders have come under attack and 
the loss of these teaching has left communities in turmoil; the role of the parent 
has been taken over by a loosely connected extended family, which can result 
in children feeling unwanted and unloved by the natural parent. Alcohol leaves 
many First Nation communities in a state of oppression as the young people 
soak up the behaviors being modeled by parents, teachers, relatives, friends, 
elders and leaders. Many communities live a double standard when it comes to 
alcohol, therefore leaving the child in a state of confusion. Mistrust and silence 
are barriers created to deal with one’s feelings. Understanding the 
intergenerational impact of alcohol on the Native Child is an important issue 
which needs to be addressed more fully so that effective programs can be 
created to help the child. 




A 



5 



This study has shown that the behavioral pattern from one generation to 
the next is intergenerational. The child learns the behaviors that are modeled in 
the family and community. When the child constantly sees his or her parents 
turning to alcohol as an escape from everyday problems, then the child soon 
learns to develop those kinds of behaviors. It is important for one to realize that 
behaviors can be changed and one need not go through life feeling like a loser. 
Change can happen, but it means digging deep into the hearts and souls of 
your being, being honest with yourself and wanting that change to take place. 
This study brings to light the fact that our behaviors may not be just our own, 
they could be learned behaviors passed unto us from previous generations. 
Behaviors become our own only when we break the cycle and begin to make 
independent decisions about how we want to live our lives. When this process 
takes place healing comes and we begin to see the common elements of 
alcoholism in our lives and in those closest to us. This study shows the common 
elements of alcoholism suffered by each participant. Sometimes we think we are 
the only ones going through this crisis, but if we look to each other we can see 
the similarities in each of our life styles. 




s 



I 






s 



6 



The Child Within 

The child within this circle of life 
cries out, WHY? 

Why God have you created me? 
I am so lost 
I am alone 

As though You were not there. 



I bear my very soul 
asking You to make me whole; 

I examine my own heart 
sift through every part 
BUT STILL 
I am so lost 
I am alone 

This child within this circle of life. 



Who am I? I wonder at times 
As I listen to my heart's broken chimes; 
Shattered! Shattered from the phony life 
this world has offered me. 

Will I ever grow to be sensitive and strong? 
I am so lost 
I am alone 

The child within this circle of life. 



I am tired, I am afraid 
to stop playing my pretending game. 

If I reveal what's in my soul 
Could You stop and make me whole? 

BUT, please I do not want to be fooled this day, 

FOR 

I am so lost 
I am alone 

The child within this circle of life. 




1G 



7 



I hear Your laughter 
I see Your tears; 

WHY then, is it so hard to hold out a hand 
To gently lead and guide me 
through this discouraging land. 

I am so lost 
I am alone 

The child within this circle of life. 



It's only you 

who can bring me to life. 

Being gentle, being kind, being encouraging 
Understanding why I am the way I am. 

I ask nothing else, for I will cry BECAUSE 
I feel so lost 
I feel alone 

The child within this circle of life. 



My heart begins to mend and heal 
very slowly at first, 
only to be sure 
I am able to feel 

Your power to touch and make me real. 
I was so lost 
I was alone 

A broken child within this circle of life. 



Author: Kandy McCorrister 




8 



Introduction 

From the time I can remember, alcohol was a commonly used substance 
in my community. Everywhere I went, alcohol was the main source of 
entertainment. Alcohol has brought much devastation, humiliation, shame and 
degradation to the First Nations People. Although alcohol was prominent in the 
community, it is important to mention that it not only devastated the First 
Nations people, but it had similar effects to the Metis and the non-status 
members of the community as well. However this study focuses on First Nations 
People and will refer to those people who are registered Indians living on Indian 
Reservations. Indian Reservations are defined as small pieces of land allotted 
by the Federal Government for groups of First Nations People to live on as 
defined in the Indian Act. Substance abuse, referred to in this particular study, 
deals only with alcohol and its impact on the First Nations Family. 

Adults within the child’s life are faced with the responsibility of guiding 
young people. First Nations Youth must make choices and decisions that 
constantly change because of changes in society. Drug and alcohol abuse is a 
complex problem that often originates in previous generations. Within this 
complex world, children become and have been victims of many things in life, 
often involving incest and child abuse. Some children come from economically 
deprived families, while others suffer various kinds of learning disabilities. Still 
others become involved in crimes that range from petty theft to violent criminal 
activities against others inside and outside the community. Some First Nations 
Youths suffer serious despair and depression that often leads to suicide. In 
Canada, First Nations suicide, the ultimate dysfunction, is over 5 times the 
national average. 




12 



9 



I personally believe we all, as First Nations People, face painful 
memories of alcohol at some point in our lives, through our mothers, fathers, 
grandparents, aunts, uncles, and friends. Even those who have never touched 
alcohol are affected in many ways. Alcoholism is a disease which affects and 
destroys our inner spirit. It alters the way one thinks, feels, and behaves. It is 
often used as a means of facing reality when life pressures are very great. 
However, alcohol not only affects the person who consumes, but affects all 
those whom he or she is in contact with. 

The history of alcoholism in First Nations communities began with the 
social system brought in by the early settlers. First Nations People had no 
history of alcohol consumption much less over-indulgence and addiction. The 
Royal Commissions Report (1996) states that alcohol has affected First Nations 
People for many generations. The same report indicates, "Stereotypes of 
drunkenness among Aboriginal [First Nations] people have been greatly 
exaggerated, but there can be no doubt that the problem of abuse was - and is - 
real." (p. 157). Alcoholism affects millions of people, and in our world, holds 
and carries the stigma of despair, disgrace, and dishonor. 

Studies by Jaynes & Ruggs (1988); Topper (1981); Volk, Edwards, 
Lewis, & Sprenkle (1989); Woititz (1983), have found that children tend to turn 
to alcohol as an escape, especially when this behavior is modeled by one or 
both parents in the family system. Children do what they see their parents do. 
First Nations Children see this type of role modeling in every aspect of their 
lives, from parents, grandparents, teachers, and community leaders. Is it any 
wonder they believe this activity is the way to alleviate their problems? Our First 
Nations Youth lack positive self-identity which, I believe, is carried over from 




I 



o 



10 



parents who also lack positive life goals. Young people lack a clear sense of 
belonging, not knowing how or where they fit into the realms of the family 
system, community, and into the rest of society. Today there is a high degree 
of frustration experienced by elders, leaders, educators, and parents as they 
try in desperation to find solutions to this ongoing problem. Too often we are 
forced to sit by and watch our young people fall into the strong, gripping fangs 
of alcoholism. 

First Nations Children live in two worlds. The inner communities to which 
they belong, and the outer community of the non-native population. The 
communities to which they belong try steadfastly to fight the ever increasing 
economic and social conflicts of society with the little resources they have, yet 
often fail to meet the needs of the child. The outer community, often neither 
wants nor accepts First Nations People as they are. First Nations People are 
frequently given negative labels such as, lazy, bums, drunks, etc. . With such 
labels how is it possible for First Nations Youth to overcome the negativity and 
secure a sense of belonging in this society? 

First Nations Youths get caught up in alcohol as they try in desperation 
to live by the standards emphasized by society. The fast pace and forever- 
changing technology has drastically altered the lifestyles and ways of the First 
Nations families. Living conditions on most Indian Reservations are deplorable 
and many times the people give up and turn to alcohol as a way out. One can 
only wonder why communities fail to recognize that the loss of one's cultural 
values is a primary factor in the drinking behaviors of the First Nations Person? 
Values once taught through stories are no longer part of our daily lives because 
other things such as alcohol has taken over. Much has been taken from the 




*2 * 

14 



11 



First Nations People and try as they might, they are unable to live by the 
standards the non-native society has placed upon them. The whole family 
structuring system has gone from cohesiveness to destructiveness. Parenting 
skills, as noted by Grant (1996), were greatly damaged when the children were 
taken away and placed in residential schools. Languages were lost and barriers 
were put up as children were taught that their parents were unworthy parents. 
This resulted in a lack of communication between parent and child. 

Along with the problem of alcoholism comes the violence and self- 
destructive behaviors among the First Nations Youths. Instability within family 
units filters down from one generation to the next. The impact of alcoholism on 
each generation has profound effects on not only the behavioral patterns and 
academic performances of children, but also on family structures, family 
interactions and family life cycles; but these are only some of the issues faced 
by First Nations People as they try to teach their young. What are the factors 
leading to such behaviors? Are these behaviors the result of intergenerational 
alcohol abuse? How can Native communities help young people cope with 
feelings of helplessness and worthlessness? 

These are major questions I would like to find answers to as I conduct this 
study. Alcoholism is a nation wide problem, it knows no boundaries, and its 
destructiveness is prevalent within First Nations communities across Canada. It 
is my desire as a First Nations person, to reach out to the young people in 
hopes of helping them gain a sense of rebirth in their troubled lives. Healing 
does not come easily, but when it does it lifts the weight of the world from the 
shoulders of the one carrying it. I know for I have carried this burden for many 
years and now I am carrying new responsibilities for my children and 




15 



12 



grandchildren. Mable Cuffee (1993-94), a Native American mother, speaks 
these words from her heart as she tries to reach the young people of our 
Nations; 

Respect from your heart what has been given to us from the Creator and 
we will live forever. Be aware of our surroundings and ... of who we are, 
and where we are going in the future. . . . remember, it is good to look, 
feel, listen and understand with your heart rather than your mind.... 
Sometimes. ( Cuffee, 1993, p.19). 

This message means much, but is lost to many of the young people. 
Respect from the heart the good things which surround you, is part of the advice 
given from the elders; but how do we heed this simple advice when most of us 
live broken lives due to alcohol and other abuses within society? It is not easy 
being a First Nations Child, for many are broken spiritually and feel nothing but 
defeat in their lives. The First Nations Child may find it difficult to remember 
their oneness with others and the universe when his or her own life has been 
marred by the effects of alcohol. As alcohol consistently takes control of the 
family unit, the child will find other means of coping and surviving, thereby 
stifling the Child Within, as referred to by Whitfield (1989) as, " that part of 
each of us which is ultimately alive, energetic, creative, and fulfilled; it is our 
Real Self - who we truly are" ( p. 1 ). Children who are not given opportunity to 
express their feelings or are constantly denied nurturing, live their lives with a 
false perspective of who they really are. These children take on a victim role 
and live their lives accordingly. They often find it difficult to resolve daily 
mishaps and traumas. A study by Woodside, (1986), indicates that; 




18 



13 



One of every eight Americans comes from an alcoholic home and 7 
million of these are youngsters facing the daily fear, uncertainty, and 
problems that result from their parents' alcohol abuse. ... 21 million 
children of alcoholics . . . have reached adulthood, many continue to 
suffer the long-lasting mental, emotional, and physical consequences 
caused by life with an alcoholic parent . . . ( p. 448). 

The Royal Commission Report (1996) states, "addictions are part of a circle of 
oppression, despair, violence and self-destructive behaviors that must be 
addressed as a whole" (p. 163). 

By gathering personal stories from community members and interviewing 
effective alcohol counselors and / or elders I want to gain a better understanding 
of how alcohol affects the child within each of us. I believe the first step is 
listening to and accepting ideas and suggestions from young people. Thus 
support services can be provided with the child being the focal point. To begin 
healing the inner child, one must look at a holistic model approach, for each 
individual carries within themselves that which is spiritual, emotional, physical, 
mental, and intellectual. There are many hidden factors rooted in alcoholism 
and until communities begin dealing with the roots of the problem there will 
always be the unbroken cycle of alcohol abuse. 

Most programs dealing with alcohol fail to help the child, therefore the 
alcohol carries over into the next generation. I have seen this behavioral 
tendency of children in various communities across the province. Programs are 
geared for those who are eighteen and up, therefore the younger generation 
has no outlet for problems occurring from alcohol. As stated by Cork (1986), "At 
all levels of research and treatment, . . . children have been grossly neglected" 




17 



14 



(p. 1 9). Most programs are set up for adults which leave the children to cope and 
fend for themselves. I believe this process of help must change to include 
children if we are to see healing begin in future generations. Children must be 
helped at an early enough age in order to put a stop to the intergenerational 
impact of alcohol on the next generation and only then may we begin to see 
attitudes change for the better. I have a profound desire to help others achieve 
a strong sense of security and a higher understanding of who they are. I will do 
this through expanding my understanding of the impact that alcohol has on 
future generations. How can we as parents, educators, and leaders work 
together to help young people overcome the helplessness they feel? 





15 



Literature Search 



William Glasser (1984) delineates belonging as one of our basic 
psychological needs. Others (Kohut, 1984: Maslow, 1962) support this premise 
and both Glasser and Maslow state that if the belonging needs go unsatisfied, 
other or higher needs will be thwarted. Such unmet needs will drive behaviors 
(Harver and Retter, 1995) which may prevent or delay a person’s success in 
meeting other needs. As Ackerman states, children in alcoholic families often 
feel confused, unsure of who they are, and uncertain of their role in the family, 
community, and in society. They are filled with despair, conflict, resentment, 
anxiety, anger, and loneliness as the weight of the world seems to hang on 
their tiny shoulders: 

Aside from the normal emotions associated with "growing" pains, children 
of alcoholics must handle a variety of emotions for which they may be ill- 
equipped due to an inadequate state of emotional development. ... the 
child takes on a [false] sense of identity or self-concept. . . . Some 
children of alcoholics feel that they were and are unwanted. They see 
themselves in positions of inferiority, inadequacy, and even 
worthlessness, (p.66). 

These children are afraid to be who they are and afraid of taking on the roles of 
an adult. They carefully monitor how they think, feel and act. They are 
deprived of love and other basic needs, which in turn leaves them with feelings 
of insecurity. Authors such as Glasser (1984); Maslow (1962); Miller (1983); 
Weil (1973) and Whitfield (1989) indicate, "In ideal circumstances, some 
human needs must be fulfilled so that our Child Within [or our Spiritual Self] can 
develop and grow." (p. 1 7). The same authors have compiled a list of basic 




16 



needs intrinsic to one's relationship with oneself and with the people around 
them. Whitfield (1989), then goes on to say, . . we apparently require most of 
these needs" (p.17). He lists the needs which are included in Table 1 below. 

Tablet. A Hierarchy of Human Needs (Taken from Whitfield 1989, 18) (Compiled 
in part from Glasser, 1984; Maslow, 1962; Miller, 1981; Weil, 1973) 

1. Survival 

2. Safety 

3. Touching, skin contact 

4. Attention 

5. Mirroring and echoing 

6. Guidance 

7. Listening 

8. Being Real 

9. Participating 

10. Acceptance; Others are aware of, take seriously and admire the Real You, 
Tolerance of your feelings, Validation, Respect, Belonging and love 

1 1 . Opportunity to grieve losses and grow 

12. Support 

1 3. Loyalty and trust 

14. Accomplishment: Mastery, 'Power,' 'Creativity,' Having a sense of completion, 
making a contribution 

1 5. Altering one's state of mind 

16. Sexuality 

17. Enjoyment or fun 

18. Freedom 



0 

ERIC 



19. Nurturing 



17 



20. Unconditional love (including connection with a Higher Power) (p.18). 

Children in alcoholic homes face the adult world early in life, a world 
where people continue to hurt one another, refusing to accept their own 
responsibilities. In situations like these, the child tends to miss important 
learning processes therefore finding it difficult to become a responsible, loving 
human being. Cork (1987) states; 

. . . children . . . feel parental rejection. Some accept the situation 
passively, while others become hostile and seek escape. They are 
overly concerned with the future to the point of worrying about their own 
marriages . . . they think family life is not worthwhile (p.60). 

Young people subjected to such an alcoholic environment quickly lose 
their sense of belonging, feeling more like an adult than a young person. 
O'Gorman and Oliver-Diaz (1987) state; 

Having an alcoholic parent has a direct impact on the way you parent. 

. . . children of alcoholics have problems with intimate relationships, seek 
approval constantly and fear authority figures. . . . children . . . see the 
world as either black or white and have difficulty having fun. . . . [or] are 
terrified of abandonment and will do anything to hold onto a relationship. 

. . . children of alcoholics often feel lost and frightened when they become 
parents (p.4). 

In our lives there are changes that leave us scrambling to meet our daily 
needs. Change in our personal lives is inevitable. Change happens all around 
us and for the alcoholic, as Woodside (1986) and Wholley (1984) point out, 

" the family member or friend ... is paying a tremendous price (p.xvi) due to the 




21 



18 



consistent inconsistencies in [his or her] behavior, attitudes and rules which 
change according to the level of alcohol in the . . . blood stream." 

First Nations People are spiritual people. Most have developed a strong 
respect for God the Creator and creation itself. As First Nations People grow, 
they may choose to live a balanced life - a balance that nurtures and connects 
the body, mind, soul and spirit of the person to family, community, and all life 
within nature. This in our culture is good. As the Royal Commissions Report 
(1996) points out, ". . . Aboriginal concepts . . . take the view that all the 
elements of life and living are interdependent and, by extension, well-being 
flows from balance and harmony among the elements of a personal collective 
life." (p.205). I believe a balanced life comes forth by listening to and accepting 
valuable teachings by the Elders. Their teachings include wisdom, love, 
respect, bravery, honesty, truth, humility, and faith in a Higher Power than 
ourselves. It is important to note that all tribes vary in values and individual 
differences and according to Winter (1992), "Each tribe considers itself to be 
distinctly different from others, [and] because of these extensive tribal and 
individual differences, it can be understood that no researcher has yet listed the 
particular value orientation of each tribe." (p.22). However, as Cajete (1994), 
has pointed out, native American peoples hold many common core values. 

When the inner spirit of First Nations People becomes unbalanced and 
stifled by alcohol the natural way of meeting everyday needs is disrupted or 
destroyed. As Thomas (1981 ) states; 

Western civilization has almost replaced the natural world as the 
environment for Indians. And Indian communities have responded and 
tried to adapt to this new and over-whelming social environment. In the 




22 



19 



process Indian groups have taken over a great many European ways, 
but, perhaps more important, tradition has been weakened and called 
into question, the relations between kin disturbed, and the moral 
prestige of the elderly eroded . . . (p.31). 

Change, as mentioned earlier, is inevitable and when it happens, there 
are many aspects that are beyond First Nations control. First Nations Children 
living with alcohol find any means they can to meet and fulfill their personal 
needs. Destructiveness is found within the family system on a constant basis. 
They face continuous negativism and are often confused about who they really 
are. As Woititz (1983) states, ". . . children of alcoholics . . . have a low self- 
esteem. This is not surprising, since . . . the conditions which lead an 
individual to value himself and to regard himself as a person of worth can be . . . 
summarized by the terms 'parental warmth,' 'clearly defined limits,' and 
respectful treatment.' " (p.xvi). Children in alcoholic homes lack the above 
mentioned elements needed for healthy growth and development and I strongly 
believe they do become parents to their own parents and siblings. 

Parents are the primary care givers in a child's life. In First Nations 
Communities the role of the parent has been taken over by the extended family 
(either grandparents or aunts) due to high consistent drinking by the natural 
parents. This is not to say they are bad, but the prevalent use of alcohol 
prevents them from being the kind of parent they might wish to be. Children who 
are continuously exposed to alcohol become vulnerable targets, learning to use 
alcohol to help them through life's crisis. These children learn quickly how 
limited their choices are because of alcohol. Making choices in life is an 
important learning process and for First Nations People this process includes 




2 



o 



20 



listening to and respecting each other, but more importantly respecting one's 
own values incorporated through the teachings of the elders. Life, as pointed 
out by Woititz (1983), is: 

... an ongoing process. If you are centered, if you are in control of your 
feelings, thoughts and desires, you journey through life . . . and 
experience each phase fully and completely. . . . choices are yours, 
whatever they may be. You are in charge . . . [and it is up to you to make 
choices that best suit your needs] (p.120-121). 

First Nations People are taught from birth that all living things have a 
purpose in life. Today, many have lost that purpose in their own lives and are 
instead bombarded with the false spirit of alcohol. A falseness that makes the 
poor feel rich, the old feel young and the weak feel powerful, but this lasts for 
such a short time and adds more conflict to an already unstable situation. It is 
during times like these that I very much believe people treat alcohol as a God, 
a Higher Power which helps them to cope with the struggles of daily living. This 
aspect of the First Nations struggles brings to mind a Bible character named 
Ruth. It is a story of a woman who forsakes her former heritage in order to cling 
to the people of Israel and to God. The story is written at a time when Israel was 
in the midst of rebellion and immorality and Ruth's faithfulness to God and those 
around her becomes quite apparent. This type of faithfulness to ones kin and to 
the realities of their life styles holds quite true for First Nation families. As Ruth 
follows the pathway of her people and God she states, ". . . entreat me not to 
leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for whither thou goest I will go; 
and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: Thy people shall be my people, and thy 
God my God" (The New Open Bible 1990; p.317). Children react the same way 




24 



21 



to their parents as Ruth reacted to the situation that she was in. Children 
believe their parents are doing the right thing so they follow in the footsteps set 
before them without realizing it is a road to destruction and turmoil. 

People live a double standard when it comes to alcohol. Children are 
continuously told alcohol is not good, but yet those who give this advice 
continue to indulge in it themselves. Where alcohol is present, children often 
identify with the negative behaviors associated with alcoholism within the home, 
community and society. If it is modeled everywhere, there seems to be no 
escape from it's treacherous grip. Ullman & Orenstein (1994), show how 
children identify and follow the patterns of interactions within the family unit with 
the following statement; 

. . . before children and offspring ever drink, they have seen howto 
behave when intoxicated. In playing their roles in these episodes they 
have also been rehearsing for the role of the drinker, . . . they are likely 
to be ambivalent and anxious about their own use of alcohol [and] ... to 
expect that alcohol will help them to be and to feel powerful (p. 8-9). 

The history of alcoholism within First Nation communities is based on 
what seems to be the norm of the social system that we live in. Conversely it is 
also the nature of the individual First Nation person who is a part of this social 
system. Studies by Ackerman (1983); Jaynes & Ruggs (1988); and O 'Gorman 
& Oliver-Diaz (1987) brings to the forefront evidence that shows how strongly 
adolescents and children reflect the behaviors of their parents. Children do what 
they see their parents do. Jaynes & Ruggs (1988) state, "adolescents strongly 
reflect their parents behavior. . . . children learn or imitate both positive and 
negative parental drinking behaviors as they grow up and that such behaviors 




25 



22 



become incorporated . . . into the young person's own behavior pattern." (p. 
102-103). 

Elders teach that life experiences are necessary, and as we learn from 
each, we begin an upward spiral towards a higher level of understanding of who 
we are as individuals. Children living with alcohol, live in a state of fear and 
despair with little or no parental guidelines to follow. They do not experience a 
normal life, but feel there is no other way. They fail to understand what is 
happening, therefore life experiences are uncertain, which results in problems 
that leave the child blaming his or herself for what is happening. In an article 
Understanding Indian Children Learning From Elders. Garrett (1994), quotes 
an Elder who states. 

The (Indian) children are our future, but we (elders) are their bridge to 
the past, while they are the bridge to the future. . . . We ... all benefit 
from intergenerational programs and activities that encourage 
involvement and sharing. . . . children are like little sponges . . . that can 
absorb even more than we realize through observation and learning. . . 
The closeness of the family has been threatened with the "new survival" 
... in a hostile environment . . . including the persuasiveness of drug 
and alcohol abuse ... by so many youths, (p.18-19). 

The impact of alcohol on First Nations People has been horribly 
devastating and crippling. It leaves them in a state of oppression. Young 
people soak up the modeling techniques of parents, teachers, relatives, elders 
and leaders at such phenomenally high rates that the consequences are often 
scary to think about. Children are drinking at an earlier age than their parents. 
This shows the bridge from our past has been corroded and still is corroded with 




28 



23 



alcohol. We must now clean those bridges from past debris and plant our 
children and grandchildren's feet on clean uplifting bridges free from alcohol. 

We must accept and take the weight of alcohol abuse off the shoulders of our 
youth so they to can begin to heal from within. 

Alcohol too often becomes the norm in First Nation communities and try 
as we might there seems to be little one can do to control the destructive 
drinking habits of our generation. Lack of communication, mistrust and silence 
are all part of First Nation survival where alcohol is concerned. To be drunk 
means one can interact more fully with others without fear, one can trust easier 
if they are drunk, drunkenness gives one the courage to face reality yet silence 
and shame is the result once they are sober. Generation after generation have 
been unable to deal with the impact of alcohol in life and many other contributing 
factors add to the distress it causes. Thomas (1 981 ), lists a few beginning 
affects of alcohol as he states: 

In Canada. . . tribal groups have generally been unable to deal with heavy 
alcohol use. Placement on reservations, affairs completely administered 
by the federal government, their religions and cultures were attacked and 
discredited, and their children placed in schools. The school was 
designed to ”de-lndianize" them [ a process that collapsed the structural 
system of a noble people] (p.33). 

Destruction of the family system and the prevalent use of alcohol has 
brought more negativism, destruction, and confusion into the lives of First 
Nations People (Thomas, 1981). The more families indulge in alcohol the more 
it leads to criminal offenses, family troubles, and suicide. Living with alcohol 
becomes unbearable for many youths and they soon lose sight of who they are. 




27 



24 



Overcoming the deformities of alcoholism within the family system often results 
in added problems, which in turn leaves feelings of failure and self-blame. 
Woodside (1986) states, "Children of alcoholics usually feel guilty and 
responsible for their parent's alcoholism. . . . they think parental drinking is their 
fault." (p.448). Alcohol effects every aspect of a child's life. 

For the First Nations Child there is little for them to do in their 
communities. The resources provided by the government are very limited, and 
as a result there are no community projects or outreach centers in place for 
them. Once again as studies by Cork (1987); Jaynes & Rugg (1988); and 
O'Gorman & Oliver-Diaz (1987) indicate, treatment and recovery is geared for 
the adult, " We therefore have little understanding of the sufferings of thousands 
of children in our communities." (p. Forward). Everyone seems too busy to deal 
with the younger population. Or is the problem adults who lack the knowledge of 
how to be parents, possibly a direct impact of alcoholism? 

Today the problem of alcoholism, depression, violence, and self- 
destructive behaviors is rampant within our communities. I ask the question; 
'What are the causes leading to such problems'? Woodside (1986) states, 
"problems associated with parental alcohol misuse pass from parent to child, 
and grandparent to grandchild as the family cycle of pain continues." (p.448). 
She then goes on to list further problems associated with alcohol abuse and the 
child. These are: 1) children feel guilty for their parent's alcoholism, 2) they 
feel invisible or unloved, 3) they are anxious and insecure about themselves, 

4) they lack self-confidence, 5) they are not risk takers and are overly anxious 
to pick up cues and learn, 6) they are prone to reality distortion, 7) they have 
difficulty separating the real from the unreal, 8) they deny, overlook, and 




28 



25 



ignore bizarre events in the home, 9) they have few friends and avoid open 
interaction with anyone, 10) they fear embarrassment and are afraid to trust, 

1 1 ) they are more likely than others youngsters to have mental, emotional and 
physical problems, 12) they are school drop-outs, marry earlier than others, 
etc. How can we help First Nations Youths cope with feelings of helplessness 
and poor self-worth? Is talking about it the first step in the healing process to 
recovery? I don't know the answers to these questions. I only hope this 
research will bring light to those who want to help the youths of today. The 
problem of alcohol is huge, but trying to get to the root of the problem may help 
in providing support systems for the youth. I believe whole families can heal 
and regain their confidence by bringing themselves back into balance with who 
they are. 

Other studies ( Casper & Elder, 1988; Cowan, Cohn, & Pearson, 1996; 
Cummings, Davies, & Simpson, 1994; Volk, Edwards & Sprinkle, 1988;) all 
show consistent links between adults and their children and how these links 
become detached as alcohol takes control of their lives. The studies show 
ample evidence that a parents' insecurity can be conceptualized as a marker of 
risk for the quality of the parent-child relationship and how it effects the child's 
abilities to adapt. Memories, feelings, and expectations that parents derive 
from early relationships with their parents shape the current behaviors they have 
with their own children. For instance aggressive behaviors and the externalizing 
processes of the child tends to be passed down from the fathers, while 
internalizing and self-blame is the direct result stemming from mothers (Cowan, 
Cowan, Cohn & Pearson, 1996) The importance of understanding the impact 
of alcohol on the family system and attachments early in one's life is significant 
when trying to understand how lifestyles and family structuring changes from 




2S 



one generation to the next. Identifying what parents carry internally can 
enhance understanding of how negative or positive patterns persist from one 
generation to the next. 

By doing this study, I hope to gain a deeper understanding of the First 
Nations Child and their life experiences with alcohol. Recommendations for this 
study will go beyond mere survival as I look for ways to help the child heal the 
inner spirit. 



27 



Purpose of the Research 

Existing research evidence strongly suggests that excessive drinking by 
parents has a negative impact on children. Children imitate behaviors modeled 
by their parents. In many homes alcohol becomes the prominent factor in the 
development of similar personality characteristics between parent and child. 

Such characteristics as noted by Ackerman (1983) are, immaturity, anxiety, 
dependency, inferiority, depression, and low self-esteem. With such problems 
being incorporated from birth one can see how these problems may be 
compounded when the child reaches adulthood. Too often children of alcoholic 
parents become alcoholics themselves and therefore the process repeats itself 
into the next generation. However, many studies show that not all children of 
alcoholics become alcoholics. Some children do learn howto overcome the 
powerful effects of alcohol and yet others do not. As a researcher, I want to find 
out how the impact of alcohol can be broken before it is passed on to the next 
generation. 

Basic Questions for the study: 

How does the intergenerational impact of alcohol affect children today? 

What can we do about it? 




31 



28 



Method 

The location I chose for this research is a First Nations community north 
of Winnipeg. I feel this community is an ideal community for doing this type of 
research because I see the impact alcohol is having on the young people and I 
feel there is a need for help. The people have come a long way in terms of 
healing, although there are those who are silent and believe silence is the only 
way to stop alcohol abuse. This community has its own Alcohol Recovery 
Center, but it is only in place for those who are eighteen and over. There is no 
direct outreach for young people under eighteen and only when the child is 
experiencing problems in the home or in the community does the social services 
worker intervene. While this community is well advanced in terms of community 
development, and to one visiting appears to have overcome many of the 
dysfunctions other communities face, it is still dealing with the problems of 
alcohol abuse. 

Unsure of howto begin this project, I decided to personally contact 
higher authorities within the community. I met with the School Board and 
phoned the school administrators to let them know my interest in doing a study 
on the Intergenerational Impact of Alcohol on the First Nations Child. These 
people have been a real inspiration in modeling the approach this project has 
taken. The information and recommendations I received proved to be very 
valuable as was the interest they have in this type of study being done in the 
community. It was recommended that I begin with the school, then branch out 
into the community. Having accepted this advice I went ahead and contacted 
the principal of the school by telephone. The principal gave permission and 
more insight into what I should be doing to make this study run more smoothly. 




32 



29 



It was stated at this time that follow up letters (see appendix A1 & A2) should be 
sent to each level of authority requesting written consent, which I did without 
delay. The letters ensure the confidentiality of any information gathered for the 
purpose of this study. The information needed for this study was collected from 
students in grades three, six, nine, and twelve, and their parents. From this 
sample one would normally expect a return of fifty percent, but due to the nature 
and sensitivity of the study I expected approximately ten percent. Letters (see 
appendix B1 & B2) were sent to each parent asking if they and their children 
would like to take part in this study. A self addressed, stamped envelope were 
included with each letter. The parents were asked to send their responses back 
as soon as possible so the next phase of the study could begin. 

Confidentiality and anonymity of all information was held in highest regard 
to protect the rights of all participants. The research code of ethics addresses 
individual rights to dignity, privacy, confidentiality, and avoidance of harm 
(Glesne & Peshkin 1992, 110). Written stories from participants were used only 
to extract pertinent information relevant to this study. Judgment and 
interpretation of feelings and behaviors was not interjected at any time during 
interviews so as not to lead the participants during the study. The stories were 
not used to gather evidence against any one person, but were used as a 
grouped analysis of information in regards to the impact of alcohol within the 
community. Through personal stories I wanted to gain an in-depth view of the 
problems transferred from one generation to the next. From the information 
gathered, recommendations have been put together to help teachers, parents 
and counselors in dealing with troubled young people associated with alcohol. 




33 



30 



The first source of data was stories collected from participants taking part 
in the study. The stories did not include any names, only the age and gender of 
the writer. Story writing about one's life has a way of generating information that 
is rich in detail and embedded with context (Wholey, 1984, p3). By asking the 
child and the parent to write personal stories, I was also asking him or her to 
open doors that have been kept closed for years. I was asking them to be 
honest as they let their feelings flow to the outer surface of their being. 

The second source of data was personal interviews with at least three 
effective alcohol counselors and/or elders from the community. An effective 
counselor, for the purpose of this study, is defined as someone who has 
overcome the impact of alcohol in his or her life and has determinedly given 
guidance to youth on this topic. The interviews consisted of gathering 
information on, as well as personal reflections of, the healing process each 
counselor went through, and how they use this process to help children and 
others heal. Interviews with the counselors were recorded and lasted 
approximately forty-five minutes. An interview protocol (see appendix C) has 
been used as a guide when interviewing counselors and relevant participants 
who are the adult children of alcoholic parents. By using stories and personal 
interviews I gained valuable information which will led to recommendations for 
support programs and healing opportunities for youths in First Nation 
Communities. 

Letters were sent out to parents requesting permission for participation in 
March, 1 997. The month of April, 1 997 was designated for doing the literature 
search and the proposal write-up. May 1 , 1 997 marked the commencement of 
my collection of stories for those who have sent back the permission forms. 




34 



31 



Some of the consent forms were returned by the end of May, 1 997. I began 
this research in hopes of collecting stories from school age children, because it 
was the child I saw suffering the most. In my ignorance, I failed to see the 
inner suffering of the adults until they reached out with their own stories. The 
participants specifically indicated they did not want their children to tell their 
stories of alcohol and this I deeply respected. As a result of this I did not go into 
the school as was planned and therefore had to make a few changes in how I 
was going to do the research and gather information for this delicate issue. It 
was at this point that I decided to collect stories from the adult which was to 
include information from as far back as one was able to remember. No 
interviews were done with the parents because the stories covered the main 
issues of the research topic. 

Participants were then contacted by phone for specific instructions on 
doing the stories. A letter reinstating what was said during the phone 
conversation followed soon afterwards (see appendix A). Three counselors 
were contacted by phone to find out if they would be interested in taking part in 
this research. Two of the three counselors contacted accepted the invitation to 
take part in the study while one backed out at the last minute leaving two 
counselors participating in the study. At this time I scheduled a time and place 
for each interview. One of the interviewees did not want to meet in person and 
felt more comfortable talking over the phone and this I accepted without 
question. The conversation lasted approximately forty minutes. The interview 
protocol (see appendix C) was used to keep on track. The second interview was 
held in the home of the counselor. There was soft background music playing, 
and the atmosphere was very peaceful. Again the interview protocol was used 
to keep on task and to make sure that important information was not being left 




35 



32 



out. This interview lasted approximately forty-five minutes. The counselors 
were very supportive on various ideas and were very informative when giving 
information. It was also stated that more research of this nature needs to be 
done because there are many areas that needs to be looked at in respect to 
both child, parent, and other family members. Both counselors indicated that 
we are only scratching the surface. The problem of alcohol has many dark, 
underlying secrets that need to be identified and dealt with in order for healing to 
have a positive outcome. 

A third source of data was to be visits to other First Nation Communities 
which had already developed effective programs. At this time I was to collect 
documents, interviews, and fieldnotes with a continued focus on children. 
Information on how to develop and implement effective programs culturally 
relevant to one’s community was also to be investigated. Information gathered 
was to be correlated with the data collected from the literature, stories, and 
interviews. Attempts at contacting other First Nations communities was 
unsuccessful. Because of this, the information within this research may be 
biased in the sense that the information comes mainly from the one community. 
Although the information was collected from 5% of one hundred twenty-five 
respondents, I believe it is safe to say that many First Nations People suffer in 
silence and will continue to suffer if they fail to speak out. 

All participants sent their stories to me at which time I began to analyze 
and classify the information into significant categories. In total there were seven 
stories received from participants of two First Nations communities. The stories 
were from adult participants, four female and three male. The interviews were 
from two counselors, one male and one female. The male counselor lives and 




33 



works in a First Nations community, while the female counselor is well known by 
First Nations communities across Canada. Her travels to various communities 
across Canada conducting healing seminars on alcohol and abuse has brought 
much understanding and healing to the people. 

As I read each story, the pain and hurt each participant suffered became 
quite apparent. Each story was read and reread and each time specific themes 
began to surface. As each theme surfaced, I wrote them down and began to 
watch for underlying details that would back up the specific questions related to 
this study. The main questions being, How does the intergenerational impact of 
alcohol affect children in todays society and what can we do about it? The 
stories not only answered these questions, but also brought more questions to 
the surface. This research opens many doors to further studies as we look for 
ways to deal with families and the problems associated with alcohol. 




37 



34 



Results 

As I collected information for this study I soon realized people were not 
ready to open up and talk of past experiences. Some became bitter and angry 
that someone from their own culture would even think of digging up past 
experiences. One female caller responded by saying, " Why is it so important to 
dig up the past when we buried it for so long? I can't see how you can help 
anyone by digging into their past. You will not get anyone here to take part in 
this study because it's too personal." As I sat at the other end of the phone I 
could hear the hurt and pain coming through and yet I felt powerless to help. 
How do you get someone to open up when they are not ready? Other people 
became silent and withdrawn, while others willingly talked of their past, but 
refused to have it recorded in any way. Gathering information was no easy task 
and I soon realized more time would be needed to accomplish the task that lay 
ahead. 



I began this study by sending out one hundred twenty-five letters to 
parents of students in grades three, six, nine, and twelve. From this number 
there was a positive return of 5%. From this 5%, 3% were females ranging in 
the age group of 30 - 43 years, (referred to in the study as, "Sarah," "Joan," 
"Arlene," and "Penny"). The remaining 2% were male respondents ranging in 
the age group of 31 - 51 years, (referred to in this study as, "Ben," "Kevin," 
and "Ron"). Permission to gather stories and interviews from children was not 
granted, therefore information pertaining to this study was collected from the 
adult child only. The counselors who were interviewed will be referred to in this 
study as, ("Issac" and "Simone.") Name changes were made to guarantee 
confidentiality and anonymity to the participants. Visits to three other First 




38 



35 



Nations Communities was unsuccessful. Communities were busy and arranging 
meetings was difficult to schedule. As I spoke to various resource people I 
sensed fear; fear of the unknown, and yet there was a strong desire to see a 
study of this nature being done. This study is, considering the actual problem, 
unfinished. Healing takes time and only begins when we see what is happening. 
Healing must begin within ourselves before it can branch out into the community. 
Once we see what is happening in our own lives we have no time to look and 
point fingers at others because there is so much to heal from within ourselves. 
There are many issues to be looked at when developing effective programs 
culturally relevant to First Nations People and their communities. 

As I began to read and analyze the stories many issues came to the 
surface. Participants spoke deeply of their feelings on alcohol, the impact it had 
on their lives and how they very much wanted to see changes for future 
generations. For the purpose of this particular study, I chose to develop and 
speak on the five issues holding the most importance for me although other 
issues which continued to surface are of equal importance. The five issues are: 

1 . Learned Behaviors not Our Own - This section deals with taking on the 
behaviors modeled by parents, grandparents, elders, teachers, leaders, etc.. 
A child can find who they are by understanding the behavioral patterns of 
previous generations and how they relate to this behavioral pattern. It is 
important to recognize the abnormality of the dysfunctional alcoholic behaviors 
of previous generations. 

2. Focus of Concern - deals with the psychological gaps in one's life due 
to inconsistent parenting. It focuses on the violence and destructiveness within 
the family, as well as the many abuses the child of an alcoholic faces. It talks of 




3S 



36 



the fear and danger, the silence and shame that goes with it, as well as the loss 
of self-respect and respect for others. 

3. Is Leaving the Answer? - Deals with leaving home to get away from 
the devastating effects of alcohol in one's life, whether it be through parent, 
self, or significant others. This section also touches upon the residential 
syndrome as being the most devastating to First Nations People often causing 
them to turn to alcohol as a means of escape. 

4. Healing Within - Spiritual Help - points out how important it is for one 
to recognize that it takes a Higher Power than our own to bring healing into our 
lives. Recognizing the importance of sharing with others brings healing, 
restoration, and strength to one's life. As an individual wanting to heal one must 
be able to turn one's suffering and confusion over to a Higher Power. A person 
needs to know what it is they are turning over. One must be allowed to 
experience the conflicts, feelings, and frustrations within one's life in order to 
see the darkness caused by alcohol and how it destroys the beauty within the 
individual. The importance of choosing to heal on one's own rather than being 
forced into it is an important step because the reality comes from within one's 
self. 



5. Loneliness and Healing - This section deals with the loneliness in 
one's life as one begins the road to healing. The unmasking of hidden behaviors 
and breaking the silence one has endured for so long. Beginning to understand 
who one is as one works through the inner pains to find the spiritual child within. 

Each of the sections I address will include pieces of the participants' 
stories followed by what the counselors have to say in regards to each issue. 




40 



37 



The first issue I labeled, 'Learned Behavior Not Our Own' because many of the 
participants spoke about learning from parents and grandparents. What they 
saw and learned as a child remained with them throughout adulthood, therefore 
teaching their own children according to the way they were taught. It becomes 
clear how the cycle of alcohol abuse continues to repeat itself without any 
changes being made and until one begins to look deep within themselves and 
want change, only then does change happen. 

Learned Behaviors Not Our Own 

Exploring the relationship between child, parent, and grandparent along 
with the impact of alcohol on that relationship has suggested interesting findings 
regarding the behavioral patterns of people throughout the generations. What 
emerges most clearly is that dysfunctional alcoholic behaviors are being seen as 
normal behaviors by the child, the parent, and the community. With this in 
mind I am reminded of a saying I have often heard elders repeat, "Whatever we 
sow, we shall also reap." One needs to find strength within one's self in order to 
fight and take control of the external happenings. If one fails to find satisfactory 
strength then one has difficulty facing reality. People need to see their own 
behaviors in order to deal with them. Participants have indicated they didn't 
know the way they were living was sick and abnormal because behaviors such 
as drinking, fighting, screaming at one another, yelling, hitting, etc. was all 
part of a normal life style in most communities. Many encountered this type of 
behavior on a daily basis, therefore, it became a normal thing, even though 
they may have despised such behavior. Sometimes entire communities were 
like this, so you didn't think of it as being sick or dysfunctional. You fit in to 
belong, and if you were different then you were labeled an outcast. Janet 
Hardwick (1996), an author of a short story in Word Ag low points out how 




4 







careless we can be as we teach young people to follow the right path. She 
states: 



38 



Everyday you and I sow seeds. Today’s seeds are tomorrow’s harvest. 
And what we harvest depends on what seeds we sow. . . . Careless 
sowing can result in disastrous situations that may continue to haunt the 
sower for a lifetime. . . . Remember every act you perform is seed for 
crop. Whether you are horrified by what springs up or delighted depends 
on how and what you sow (Hardwick, 1 996 : p.4). 

Participants described their behaviors as being consistent to that of their 
own parents. The style of drinking and the consequences of the drinking 
patterns varied widely from person to person and family to family but non-the- 
less each resulted in similar patterns from generation to generation. Arlene 
recalls seeing alcohol being present in the home from a very early age. She 
indicated that wine was always part of the daily meal, but the alcohol was never 
abused by her parents. However, she turned to alcohol early in life. Arlene 
relates alcohol to friendship and has witnessed the tragedy alcohol caused in 
the homes of many of her friends. To her alcohol helped the socialization 
process between friends, therefore having a few drinks would not hurt anyone 
until it happened to her. She felt it was okay because it was something she 
related to as being part of a normal life style. She has this to say: 

I grew up in a household where there was always liquor present, 
generally in small quantities. I was exposed from a very young age to the 
social drinking attitudes of my parents. There was almost always a bottle 
of wine served with every Sunday meal. When I was around eleven, I too 
was allowed to have a glass of wine. Alcohol was never a taboo in our 




4 



n 

4 



39 



home. It was always present, and looking back now, I can see it was 
never really abused by my parents. 

Some participants stated they have never witnessed their parents drinking 
and weren't too sure why they themselves were drinkers. The participants 
indicate that the influences within the community was a great factor in helping 
them to decide whether or not to consume alcohol. They felt they needed to fit 
in and be part of the crowd and drinking was the only way to do that since most 
of their friends drank. Yet others stated only the fathers drank while the mothers 
were the pillars in the family. Mothers were always there to protect as Ben 
indicates in his story: 

I took for granted . . . and began to believe alcohol was part of our 
lifestyle. It was the common and accepted norm for many families 
including my own. To look back on those years brings both joy and tears. 
The only positive outcome at this time was my mother. My mother was 
the stronghold of the family. I now believe it was her strength, presence, 
and unconditional love that kept the family so secure. She was a tower of 
strength and even though we must have broken her heart many times, 
she showed only love and wisdom to each of us. 

Still, other participants have witnessed both parents drinking and abusing 
alcohol to the point of creating total disaster for the entire family, while others 
such as Arlene seen alcohol as a part of their daily agenda and to her alcohol 
was part of the family norm. But, regardless of which parent drank or how often 
they drank, it became apparent from the stories that alcohol created nothing but 
an unpredictable abnormal life setting for all family members. In most cases it 
was the children who suffered and they are still suffering today. This suffering 




43 



40 



happens without parents realizing that they themselves are demonstrating 
behaviors their children may identify with for the rest of their lives. As indicated 
earlier, careless sowing can result in a disastrous harvest that can continue to 
haunt for a lifetime. Kevin, another participant, has this to say about the effects 
of alcohol on his young life and how these memories often come back to haunt 
him: 

When I was growing up my dad drank a lot. He was an alcoholic. The 
life I had growing up was very hard, for myself, for my sisters, and for 
my brothers. My mom drank too, but not too much. She often went with 
our dad hoping he would not come home and fight us. ... I can 
remember my dad using my sister for a footstool. When I was small, dad 
used to crack boiled eggs on me and my friends in front of his friends. 

One time he pointed a loaded gun to my head. He wanted to see the fear 
on my face. He would often throw my mom and us kids out in the snow in 
the middle of winter and we would have to walk to my granny's. 

This behavioral pattern by fathers was seen throughout most of the 
stories and yet there seemed to be an inner respect for the person, just not for 
the alcoholic behavior. Reading through each story one could feel not only the 
love radiating out towards the parents, but also a deep hatred for what was 
taking place behaviorally. It seems as though something grips the inner spirit of 
the drinker and refuses to let go, which results in the child or children suffering 
from loneliness, fear, anger, and numerous other feelings which they have no 
way of understanding or dealing with. As Ron indicates in his story: 

My experiences with alcohol relates back to when I was young. My 
parents drank until they died. I didn't understand that when we went 




44 



I 



41 



hungry it could have been because of the alcohol. I just thought that 
everyone lived like we did. My mother and father's drinking did not have 
a negative effect on me back then, but I now know that drinking 
excessively can and does effect children in negative ways. Our parents 
were caring, loving, and beautiful parents. 

Simone, one of the counselors, states many people fail to recognize 
where their behaviors are coming from. They feel the behaviors they display are 
normal because they have been shaped according to past generations. People 
too often structure their lives on the lives of the previous generation without 
really identifying with their own individuality. Too often people fail to recognize 
who they are and what they really want in life because they have never been 
given the chance to venture out alone. Simone indicates this ideology quite 
clearly in the following statement, (also see Appendix D for Behavioral 
Patterning of Families which she uses in her counseling sessions): 

This behavioral pattern can be seen in family genealogies and you can 
even see how precise these patterns are from one generation to the next. 
Because of these behaviors and the shame people feel it is difficult to get 
them to open up. People would rather keep the silence and have life go 
on as it was without dealing with the problem. People keep silent for 
years and all the while this demon within keeps eating away their inner 
being, so what do they do? They cover it up some more by drinking more 
and therefore the cycle continues with negative behaviors being shown on 
a daily basis. 

The next concern we all face is the impact of alcohol in our lives. We all 
know and have experienced from time to time that alcohol not only has impact on 




45 



42 



us, but it has an even greater impact on those closest to us, specifically our 
children. Alcohol has left many lives in turmoil. It has brought us much shame, 
humiliation, inconsistencies, voids, abuses, fear, loneliness, etc.. 

Participants spoke about their feelings and losses in very positive ways 
because they are now able to see the destruction alcohol causes in the lives of 
those closest to them. Each participant, both parent and counselor shared 
inner feelings and gave valuable insight into the healing process. This issue I 
labeled, 'Focus of Concern' because it speaks of the concerns we all have 
about the impact of alcohol in our lives. 

Focus of Concern 

Today alcohol has left many children and adults with deep psychological 
voids or gaps. These gaps are the result of inconsistent parenting, as well as 
the lack of appropriate and emotional supports. Alcohol has taken everything 
from the family, including self-respect and respect for others. Children harden 
themselves to any outside forces and often do not allow for their own needs to 
be met. Joan, one of the participants says she began her drinking at the age of 
seventeen. She stated she never really saw her parents drink when she was 
young, only when she was older and this had a dramatic impact on the family. 
Joan says she only drank to be part of the crowd, which shows peer pressure 
also has a lot to do with young people taking alcohol. Joan labels herself as a 
happy drunk and only drinks to have a good time. She also stated there was a 
period in her life where she lost who she was because alcohol took control. This 
is what she has to say about that period in her life: 

There was a period in my life when I moved to the city. This became my 

drinking period. I drank almost everyday during the five months that I 




46 



43 



lived in the city. I lost a lot of weight, but most of all I lost who I was and 
what I stood for. I lost all respect for myself. I did anything to get money 
for booze. I really didn't care and felt that no one else gave a damn what 
was happening to me. The boozing and partying helped me to close my 
eyes to what was happening to me. I was no longer a person, but a 
product of alcohol. I feel you must read the truth in order to see the 
horrible hold alcohol has on us as Native People and human beings. I let 
myself go. I didn't know it then, but when I look back on it now I can 
clearly see how alcohol destroys who you are. I worked the streets 
because there was a lot of other things going on in my life, things I was 
unable to deal with at the time. You see, I too, was abused as a child 
and maybe this is all part of the cycle. ... I came back, sobered up, 
and started my road of healing and recovery, but believe me this was not 
an easy road to ride. 

A number of the participants clearly recall the violence and abuse they 
were submitted to as children because of alcohol. Many have witnessed their 
parents arguing and fighting with one another. The experiences and the 
histories of one's past with alcohol has and will stifle self-development and 
growth that is needed to be successful at becoming functional and productive in 
society. Children were and are faced with a significant amount of verbal abuse 
and it often doesn't matter to the abuser(s) if they are wrong. The impressions 
and feelings left by this type of harassment remains with the child for a lifetime. 
When trying to help a child come to terms with these various feelings one must 
be able to see the interrelatedness between alcoholism and abuse whether it be 
physical, sexual, emotional, or psychological. Abuse within the family system 
does not and often will not show visible results. One does not have to carry 




44 



around black and blue marks to realize that he or she has been abused. Abuse 
comes in many forms and can leave a person mentally and physically 
incompetent when dealing with life situations. Emotional abuse leaves many 
invisible scars and frequently carries the potential for physical abuse later in 
one's life. We must remember this behavior is learned and is often not our own. 
In reality, it is someone else's behavior that is learned because no one taught 
us any differently. Children frequently experience intensely frightening and 
dangerous situations that leaves its toll on their young lives. This is evident in 
the story told by Kevin when he speaks of his father pointing a loaded gun to his 
head. His view was that his father only wanted to see the fear on his face. 

Penny, another participant has this to say as she tries hard to understand 
why her father acted the way he did when he tried to shoot her. At this point in 
her life she is unable to understand how something like this can happen when 
one claims to love you. Here is her version of the episode that continues to 
haunt her to this day: 

To go back to my father's influence on my life, he had a very kind heart 
and used to do everything for me. He gave me all I needed in clothes, 
money, and emotional support. I don't see my father as a bad influence, 
but I don't understand how a person that I loved and cared for so much 
would try to shoot me. This is one incident that I have never come to 
terms with and I really don't know if I ever will. I have tried many times to 
understand and deal with this but something keeps blocking my mind. 
When my father passed away, I resented him and I told myself to hate 
him for trying to shoot me, but I couldn't because he was the only father 
that I knew. I blame the alcohol for his behavior because he never would 




48 



45 



have done such a thing if he were sober. Even now I feel the effects 
alcohol had on my life, therefore I don't drink very much. I know the 
destruction it causes in one's life. 

The sadness felt by Penny is quite apparent. As one reads between the lines 
one could sense the fear of revealing to much of ones' self. There is a strong 
love for those who harm and yet the abnormal behavior is brushed aside leaving 
alcohol as the sole heir to blame. 

Simone , one of the counselors, stated she had to deal heavily with her 
alcoholic problem. Her first advice to those who seek help is to look deep within 
your own self. She says if you look deep within yourself, you begin to see many 
unwanted behaviors, behaviors passed down to you from your parents and. 
grandparents and that is where you must begin your healing. Too many of our 
people hide within themselves. We have been silenced to long about the impact 
of alcohol on our lives and it is now time to open up and rebuild from the inside 
out; tear down the walls we built for protection because they only create more 
hurt and pain for us. She states: 

There are no hopeless cases. We only build walls around ourselves and 
we do not allow ourselves to come out. The scariest part of this life is 
when nothing in it matters anymore. Until we allow ourselves outside the 
wall we've built only then will we begin to heal ourselves. 

Isaac, a male counselor, indicated the family has lost much because of 
alcohol. Families have been stripped of self-respect and respect for others. 
Blame is laid on the innocent which in most cases is the children. There are 
many "ifs" in life, but no healing because we fail to recognize that which hurts 




4S 



46 



the family the most, alcohol. With alcohol in our lives, we can hide because it 
acts as a shield to underlying behaviors. This is what Issac says about alcohol 
in the lives of families: 

The morals and values that were once so dominant within Native 
families is now lost to the spirit of alcohol and gambling. Self-respect and 
respect for others becomes a farce because alcohol and gambling 
controls the behaviors and activities of the person. Children are silenced, 
and they quietly absorb all behaviors and activities associated with 
alcohol and other clutches of life. They harden themselves, having no 
feelings of their own, as if to divide their being and say I will no longer 
use this side of me. I must be strong, but I will do it without feeling. 

Cutting themselves off from any feelings is only one way children deal with the 
hurting effects of alcohol. This behavior is then carried into adulthood and when 
the child marries he or she tends to close themselves off from their own families 
which results in no communication, therefore the pattern repeats itself once 
again and the cycle keeps growing. As one respondent stated, "The cycle does 
not stop itself, it's like a snowball rolling down a hill, the steeper the hill the 
more it collects. This is the way for many of our Native People." 

The third issue which participants, both parents and counselors dealt 
with was that of leaving or running away from the problem itself, therefore 
labeled 1 Is Leaving the Answer'. Participants indicated time and time again how 
hard it was to deal with the painful hurting effects of alcohol in their lives. Many 
believed if they left home the problem would go away, but found themselves 
even deeper into the horrifying grasp of alcohol. 




50 



47 



Is Leaving the Answer? 

Another interesting finding was the fact that many of the participants left 
home at an early age only to find this did not solve the problem. In fact, many 
have said the problem escalated to the point of trying to commit suicide as a way 
out. Some left home for good reasons, but ended up turning to alcohol as a 
means of coping. Others left as an escape from what was happening only to find 
themselves in further turmoil and deeper into alcohol. Still others left home 
because they wanted to be independent and free from alcohol and abuse within 
the home. Some talked about being taken away and sent to residential or 
boarding school. Regardless of the reason for wanting to move the effects were 
still the same. Each one of the participants reported alcohol gripped them like a 
vise that would not let go until they looked deep within themselves and admitted 
to themselves there was a problem. This is what Ben had to say: 

My struggle with alcohol began in my teen years. I left home at the age of 
sixteen to attend high school in Winnipeg. My first two years away from 
home were quite uneventful. Eventually I began going out and I was soon 
caught up in the big city way of life. ... I was never away from home 
alone before and this move was very frightening for me. I didn't know the 
city, and I was placed in a home with people who knew nothing about me 
or I them. . . . One thing that became apparent to me was the 
consumption of alcohol. I not only saw the effects and the importance 
that people put on alcohol at this time, but I too, began to use it. ... I 
saw only the 'good' side of alcohol which was the only thing that I wanted 
to see at this time. I lived a double life. I would go to school all week and 
then on week-ends I would party. 




51 



48 



Sarah, one of the participants, began to drink when she was fourteen 
years old, maybe even younger. She comes from a large family and since she 
has no recollection of seeing her parents consume alcohol she, doesn't know 
why she turned to alcohol. Sarah struggles with communication. She feels the 
loss of her parents even though her parents live together in marriage. As a 
young child she remembers her father as being away all the time. There never 
seemed to be any time for family sharing because her parents had to go out and 
work to support the family. Sarah lived a lonely life and turned to alcohol as a 
means of opening up and having fun. She believes the boarding school system 
has taken a lot from her parents although they never spoke about it much. She 
believes the boarding school system has a lot to do with her own drinking habits. 
She has this to say: 

I ran away from home because of drinking. I felt ashamed, guilty, 
remorse, and was so sick from drinking. I never knew what I did because 
of the black-outs and passing out from drinking to much. I would 
hitchhike to Winnipeg and come home three days later. A friend talked to 
me and told me running away from my problems doesn't help, it just 
makes things worse. ... I remember once, I tried to commit suicide by 
taking pills, but that just made me more sick. I knew I had a drinking 
problem, but I never once thought I was an alcoholic. I was a week-end 
drinker. ... I know I used and hurt people because of my drinking. I 
missed work, ... I lost my license, ... I froze my feet, ... I lost and broke 
my glasses, ... I never had a relationship, . . . and I spent a lot of money 
all because of drinking. ... I needed help and I didn't know who to turn 
to. ... Mom and Dad had no parenting because they did not have 
parenting skills passed on to them. Mom was in boarding school and Dad 




52 



49 



was given away when he was born. How and where would they get these 
skills so vital in teaching and raising our own children. 

Penny was always searching for something that was missing in her life. 
She too, felt the effects of alcohol in the home and blames residential schools 
for the way her parents were. She stated her mother never showed any 
emotions and many times Penny needed a mother's love which she never got. 
Penny loved her mother dearly, but there was no communication in the home 
and the children felt unloved much of the time, although outwardly the parents 
were good providers. Here is what Penny has to say: 

. . . alcohol played a significant role in my life both as a child and as a 
parent. I left home as soon as I could in order to become independent 
and to get away from the situation at home. I always looked for comfort in 
other peoples' lives. I wanted a family that was close to me and me to 
them. I wanted to laugh and tease and be teased back and laughed with. 
But, how can one get this in a family where everyone was always scared 
to say the wrong thing? This I believe is not a family that knows how to 
talk to or share with one another. My mother was not an emotional 
person. I often blame residential schooling for this. Many of my people 
who were sent to these schools did not learn howto become emotionally 
supportive because they were never exposed to this type of relationship 
between mother and child. 

Ron also describes how moving from a small town to a big city effected 
his life; how alcohol took control and how as a teenager he was unable to cope 
with facing the reality of alcohol in the home. He never brought friends home 




53 



50 



unless they were in similar situations to his own. He felt others made fun of him 
and was always aware of how different his life style was. He states: 

Alcohol started to have a negative effect on me when we moved to the 
city. By this time I was a teenager. I remember dreading to come home 
from school and finding the house all dirty or when you went to school 
with the house in a mess and having to come home to that mess. I never 
brought back any friends to my house except the friends who lived on my 
street and shared the same experiences as I. I remember one time when 
I had to go up for an award in school and I didn't have anything good to 
wear. 

Kevin also talks of his experiences with alcohol once he left home. He 
indicated that he just had to try out the spirit that had such a strong hold on his 
dad. He found, as time went on, the alcohol only brought more hurt and 
destruction into his life. He saw the personality changes within his brothers and 
sisters when they drank and it disgusted him. Many feelings were suppressed 
but came out in many ways when alcohol was involved. Here is what he has to 
say: 



My dad kept all his money when he worked. Finally mom had enough, 
and she decided to go to school. She wanted to educate herself to make 
a better life for us. During this time I went my own way. I was only twelve 
years old when I left home. I wanted to be independent and not have to 
rely on anyone for anything. During this time I promised myself that I 
would never treat my kids or wife the way dad treated us. ... During this 
time I had my own share of booze and drugs, and I fell on my face many 
times. I felt I just had to try out this thing that had such a strong hold on 




54 



51 



my dad. It never did me any good, only brought more hurt and 

destruction into my life so I quit. 

Each story has its own being. Each client brings to realization how 
ineffective silence is when it comes to the healing process, how important it is to 
communicate with each member of the household and how ignorant we are of 
our own behaviors as we continue to pass them down from one generation to the 
next. There is a sense of wanting to identify with and understand personal 
behaviors with what happened in previous generations. A sense of wanting to 
understand the kind of being they have become and how to undo what has been 
done to them. Some of the clients blame the residential schools for the way 
things are today. To them the residential schools have taken everything from 
them including their right to proper parenting skills, skills they needed to pass 
onto their own children. Parents from previous generations not only lost their 
parenting skills in the boarding school system but they also lost their language 
and family structural awareness which I believe is essential in carrying out 
valuable teachings. Both counselors and participants indicate that Boarding 
schools have done nothing but create chaos and turmoil for the First Nations 
people. Today communication between many family members is almost non- 
existent and what there is, is limited and done in very negative ways. 
Participants indicate they have seen loved ones open up and communicate only 
when they have alcohol within their system. It is only through alcohol they feel 
brave enough to face what is hidden within themselves, otherwise they keep the 
silence. It is through this type of behavior children learn to suppress their 
feelings, they learn to be tough, they learn not to trust, and they soon learn to 
behave exactly like the parent. Parents on the other hand, tend not to realize 




k) k) 



52 



what is happening because they too, learned behaviors from their parents and 
thus the cycle repeats itself. 

Despite all the negativity within one's up-bringing it is important to 
remember that change can and does happen. Recognizing painful experiences 
and knowing that you do not want this for your own children is a positive step for 
a brighter future. Running from the situation does not bring healing only added 
turmoil. This then is one step to breaking the cycle. Recognition and healing 
begins to takes place for Sarah as she talks about positive parenting and 
communication within her own family as opposed to her own up-bringing. She 
has this to say: 

Mom and dad had no parenting skills because they did not have parenting 
skills passed on to them. ... In boarding school children were sexually 
or physically abused either by priests, nuns, or older boys and girls. 

Mom never said anything about things like this, but we heard others tell 
their stories. She remembers her brothers being hungry and she would 
sneak food to them. . . . Dad never taught us Cree, because he did not 
want the same thing to happen to us that happened to him. ... I am 
trying to understand why I drank because I never seen it at home. . . . 
[but] we never learned to talk about our feelings and we kept them in all 
the time, which is not healthy. Alcohol, I guess was a way to cope with 
my feelings. Feelings that I know are part of being human and are 
healthy no matter if they are sad, hurt, anger, etc., but before I was 
always pretending to be happy. ... I love my parents dearly. . . . We 
talk more about our feelings now that we are grown up. The cycle has to 
be broken. Communication is very important for a family. . . . Maybe 




56 



53 



things could have been different for me if mom and dad didn't work so 
hard and had more time with us. If they had parenting skills passed down 
to them. If mom hadn't attended boarding school. If dad hadn't been 
given away. If we learned to express our feelings instead of keeping them 
inside. Each of us has been affected in one way or another. ... I hope 
that by talking to my girls I could change the cycle of the above 
happening to them. It’s hard to talk to your own children ... but I am 
trying to change and educate in all areas of their lives. ... I tell them that 
Granny never talked to us about these things. No matter what's in your 
past it always comes back if you haven't dealt with it. 

As a counselor, Simone has a lot to say about parenting and residential 
schooling. To her the past has made her into what she is today. She uses her 
past experiences in her work as she helps people learn to recognize who they 
are as individuals. She uses the negativity that was in her life as a positive 
building block to help others. Her past has given her strength, as our pasts can 
give us strength if we recognize and allow it to do so. We must allow the journey 
from our head to our heart to begin if we want to heal ourselves of the past. 

Once we begin to feel then we begin to heal and the road to recovery begins, 
thus breaking the cycle of abuse. Here is her story of parenting and residential 
schooling: 

. . . parents raise their children the way they were raised, again back to 
the learned behaviors and this is passed down from generation to 
generation. Parents don’t know how to parent. Nobody parents anymore. 
Nobody teaches young girls how to be mothers and that mothering is a 
valued gift given to us by God. Young men are not taught how to be 




57 



54 




fathers and are not taught to respect themselves and the women in our 
communities. The man in our culture is supposed to be the caregiver 
the nurturer, he is supposed to protect and not abuse those in his life. 

The women are gift givers and are to be highly respected, but this is not 
the way it is in our communities today. . . . boarding schools have taken 
everything from our people. Children taken off to boarding school were 
not taught howto parent. All you got was discipline, strictness, do things 
this way, and always being put down because you were Indian. Because 
of this you got angrier and angrier. This then, is the anger that is 
passed down through the generations and it is still this way today. Also 
you went through racism and this has a lot to do with the way you parent. 

I could see how it controlled me and the effect it had on my life because 
when I was in boarding school, I learned howto hate. When I was very 
young, I was taken away to boarding school and no one prepared me for 
what was going to happen to me once I got there. . . . when we got to this 
strange place we were taken into a big building, and all herded into the 
showers where we were deloused and scrubbed until we were raw. We 
stood there wondering what the hell was happening to us, . . . you don't 
understand, . . . you are scared, . . . you feel abandoned, . . . you go 
through much. . . . You are lonely, . . . you are sad and you wonder why 
no one loved you. ... I was also the only Indian in an all white class. I 
got called down and teased everyday of my life. I quickly learned to be a 
fighter, I learned to hate white people, and I learned to be a very angry 
person, ... so when I left I really didn't care much for anyone. I was full 
of hate and anger. ... I never wanted alcohol in my life but it just 
happened. ... I couldn't handle the abuse and drinking was the only way 
I was able to cope and keep my sanity. This then is the kind of behaviors 



58 



55 



that I passed down to my children, but they are behaviors that were also 
passed down to me from my parents and grandparents and those at the 
boarding schools. . . . The toughness, the anger, the pain, I see these 
same behaviors in my children as they raise their own, but now we are 
working together to break that cycle, so that my grandchildren do not 
have to carry it on. 

Despite all the negativity within Simone's up-bringing, she manages to 
recognize the pain of her experiences and do something to better the situation 
for herself, her children, and her grandchildren. Recognizing and developing a 
perspective on her past helped her to rejuvenate the negativity she learned into 
positive inspirational behaviors for the future of her children and grandchildren. 

Healing oneself is a process each of us journey through in different ways. 
The participants spoke openly of healing with spiritual help. Many indicated they 
were unable to heal on their own and each looked to a Higher Power than their 
own for guidance and strength. This section I labeled 'Healing Within - Spiritual 
Help' because I feel it takes a Greater Power than our own to carry us through 
the difficult times in our lives. 

Healing Within - Spiritual Help 

Another interesting finding which emerges throughout this study is that of 
spiritual healing. Each participant, parents and counselors at some point in 
their healing process, sought strength from a Higher Power often referred to as 
God or Creator. The participants recognize that sharing brings healing, but in 
order to share the turmoil within themselves they needed spiritual guidance from 
a power greater than their own. Sharing one's inner thoughts with others and 
dealing with the feelings that lie within our being brings a release that restores 




5S 



56 



and strengthens who we are. The struggles we encountered because of alcohol 
becomes easier when we realize we are not alone. One must live one day at a 
time to get through the pains and hurts caused by alcohol. Adults appear to 
benefit from spiritual help as they begin to take ownership of the behaviors they 
passed on to their children and grandchildren. Here are the participants' 
versions of their own spiritual guidance towards healing: 

I promised when I got married my life would be different for my own wife 
and children. I've seen a lot of pain and hurt in my life so I made a 
conscious decision to make a life change and I did. With the love and 
help from the Creator I am doing it day by day ( Kevin). 

I am in a relationship that had a rocky start. His lifestyle is an alcoholic 
one as well. I don't know why I am drawn to these kinds of guys, . . . [but] 
we care a lot for each other. . . . We feel ... we can overcome just about 
any obstacle that may come up. I feel I need to leave it in God's hands 
for it is only God that can make things right between two people (Penny). 

Joan has this to say in remembrance of almost losing a brother: 

Alcohol almost killed my baby brother along with the driver of another car. 
Now, I must come to terms with it and fight back for him and my family 
and my sons and daughters to come. We have come to believe that God 
has spared his life to be a living testimony to other young people who 
abuse alcohol. He knows what alcohol has done to him and he cannot 
go back to what he was. ... he has gone through his ups and downs 
and he accepts life as it comes. He enjoys life too much to give it up. 




60 



57 



Sarah, in her healing process points out the darkness alcohol brings to 
life and how she has never noticed the dark side before. To her the darkness 
represents the evils of alcohol in one's life and how it destroys the beauty of life 
itself. Here is what she has to say: 

One time I went to sit in the bar with my friends. ... I asked her why the 
pub was so dark, the music so loud, and why it stunk? She laughed and 
said, " Don't you remember, it was always like this." I said, "No, I never 
noticed before." ... as I worked on myself ... I learned to ask my Higher 
Power for help as I understood Him. We attended church when we were 
small and dad talked to us about the Bible, so I did not have a hard time 
finding a Higher Power. I had to ask for help in everything. ... I still went 
out with my friends on week-ends. ... I thought I should drink, but I 
didn't want to. One time I went outside, sat in the car, kneeled down 
and said, Dear God, I need your help. I do not want to drink, but I 
cannot do it by myself. Then something wonderful happened, the craving 
and the urge to drink just left me. . . . This was the last time I went into 
the pub. ... I had to change my old habits. ... I learned to be grateful 
and not take things for granted. I . . . had to work for my sobriety. It just 
doesn't come by praying. I had to do my part too. 

Ben in his struggles to overcome alcohol indicates it takes time to heal. It 
is a long arduous process. Those in the healing process must be shown a lot of 
love, kindness and compassion in order to help them deal with their inner 
broken spirits. It is good to remember you are important, and the behaviors you 
are dealing with are not really your own, they are learned from those previous to 




61 



58 



you. Support from others is important, but it is you who must make the choice to 
heal. Here is what Ben has to say: 

I reached out and grasped unto my crutch (alcohol). Alcohol . . . was 
prominent in my life. ... I began to use alcohol to help me face my 
problems. ... At this point my wife left me . . . and I truly believe this was 
a turning point in our lives. My wife changed her life ... . I began to think 
hard about myself and where I stood in my walk with God and I found it 
was a walk that held no value to life. ... In 1989, ... I too, became a 
Christian ... I remember as I knelt at the alter of prayer, God dealt with 
my alcoholism in a more complete way. ... as I poured out my inner 
being unto the Lord, He delivered me completely. Any cravings I had up 
to this point in my life were completely taken away and were totally 
obliterated from my mind. We all need a renewing in our lives, . . . We all 
need a Higher Power and for me God is that higher power. God has 
completely healed me and brought my family very close once again. 

Healing is not an easy road to journey. As indicated previously, healing 
takes time and is often a long lonely journey. This last section I labeled 
'Loneliness & Healing'. Healing just doesn't happen on its own, you must work 
through all your inner pain. It is something you must recognize and want for 
yourself. It takes a lot of forgiving, meditating, crying, and understanding of 
what you are going through. Healing is a lonely process. Many times you feel 
alone because everyone you used to know turns away from you, but as the 
participants indicate, healing comes when you begin to share what is in your 
heart and not only what is in your head. 




62 



59 



Loneliness & Healing 

In addition to the other findings, one can easily see the healing process 
as being a long, lonely one. People have fought a long hard battle as they 
came to terms with the alcohol in their lives. Some have found strength from the 
Bible and changing their life patterns to include the values taught within. Others 
have to turn to other means of healing such as the traditional ways of our 
people. It is important to understand that each individual must find his or her 
own path to recovery. Healing itself does not end once it begins. It is 
continuous and it unmasks many hidden behaviors within a person's life, 
behaviors that many of us would rather keep hidden. Participants, both parents 
and counselors have found that others judge you for being different and being 
different has no place in a community where everyone is the same. As one 
counselor states: 

They [people] judge, but have no idea what is happening in your life. . . . 
people go into the world wearing all kinds of wonderful masks. You 
laugh, joke, have a good time, but behind closed doors the horrors 
begin again. . . . Many of our communities are in denial. People live in a 
taboo world where they do not want to talk about their abuses. It brings 
too much shame and pain to everyone and thus it is brushed under the 
rug. . . . Children are the ones paying the price. It is them who are being 
hurt the most. . . . children who act out are really calling out for help. 
Authorities do not know how to deal with these behaviors, so what do 
they do? They yell at the kid, throw them out of school, label them, 
etc.. This is not a healing process and it does not help the child who has 
learned behaviors from previous generations. ... I believe that children 
should be encouraged, praised, and empowered for whatever little thing 




63 



60 



they do. This brings a positive outlook into broken lives. . . . everyone 
walks an even path, a path set for success and healing. I always see 
people looking for the negative things in others and they never see the 
good or positive things within another persons' life and this I believe is 
where our society is falling apart. . . . Instead of focusing on the negative, 
we must begin to focus on the positive. We must change our attitude, 
even towards ourselves. We must begin to see the good in all human 
beings and not just the bad or negative. . . . This then takes time, 
patience, encouragement, unconditional love, and a willingness to want 
this kind of change. ... It is hard to watch your children's behavioral 
patterns. Seeing them model your old behaviors with their children really 
hurts because you know they have been passed down from you. 

Breaking this cycle is not easy, it takes a lot of time and patience, caring 
and loving, sharing, feeling and crying together in order to get through. 

To the one reading this paper, it is easy to judge by what you can see. 
First Nations People have lived broken lives for many years, and as you listen 
to the spoken word of those so brave, there is something of value to be learned. 
First, look deep into the hearts and the eyes of those you are judging and you 
will see the hurt, the pain, and the turmoil alcohol has caused within. Ask 
yourself, "Do I have the right to be judge and juror?" 

It becomes apparent from the stories that healing just doesn't happen. 
One needs work through their inner pains and search their inner being to find 
the lost child within themselves. It takes strength to find who you are and as you 
begin to heal you find a peace you have never known before. You begin to see 
the beauty that surrounds you. You learn to love unconditionally and accept 




61 



people just the way they are. You realize others must choose the healing 
journey for themselves and you can only stand beside them in support. As we 
begin to show love, compassion, kindness, joy, gentleness, and goodness to 
others we soon realize it is our responsibility because many people do not 
understand this behavior. Simone, a counselor, has this to say about healing 
and the loneliness one faces in the process: 

You are going to be alone much of the time because people will not 
understand. You are going to walk and feel alone, but you are not alone. 
God is walking with you and when God walks with you, you are never 
alone. If you believe in what you are doing . . . make sure it happens. It 
doesn't matter what you go through, just think about Jesus. When Jesus 
walked this earth, what did people crucify Him for? They crucified Him 
for love, He was showing love and kindness. He was teaching and 
modeling love to people in many different ways. People killed Him for 
that. It is not any different today. People are going to try stop us from 
doing what is best. If we try to stop the abuses from happening, we are 
told not to talk about it and it is better left under the rug. If we want drugs, 
alcohol, and violence to stop, then we need to get to where it originates, 
inside each of us. We need to get to the roots . . . and peel each layer 
off. We need to get to the secrets because secrets are binding, they 
keep a person locked within themselves. . . . There are lots of secrets in 
our communities that stem from previous generations. We need to break 
through this barrier in order for healing to begin. 

Clearly, one can see the intergenerational impact of alcohol on the lives 
of each of the clients. If things like this happen in their lives, what about our 




65 



62 



own? Are the behaviors we claim really ours? One cannot say until we look 
deep within ourselves and begin the healing process others have bravely faced. 
With this in mind I can honestly say alcohol can appear to be stronger than love. 
It takes away from every part of you. It takes you away from those you love the 
most. It most certainly leaves you empty without feelings of your own. You 
carelessly lose your life because alcohol is a spirit that steals, destroys, lies, 
and hangs on until you make the choice of dealing with it. 




66 



63 



Conclusion 

The road to healing and recovery from alcohol was not easy for any of the 
participants. When one falls or hits rock bottom, they lose their sense of 
character, spiritual strength is drained, and moral strength and values are lost 
to the deviances of alcohol. The plight and experiences of the First Nations 
child is understandable when ones begins to look closely at the life styles of the 
intergenerational family. Much of the behavior displayed by the child, whether it 
be at home, in the school or out in the community are re-enactments of the 
behaviors being displayed in the home. Children often display anger and a 
toughness that says, "No one can hurt me anymore." This behavior is a coping 
mechanism. It is often the behavior role modeled in the home and many times it 
is also modeled in the schools without one even being aware that it's there. 

As the data for this study was being assembled, it soon became apparent 
that many of the participants came from a background where alcohol was a 
prominent substance in the home and community. The desire to drink was often 
generated in families where alcohol had the power of control. What led the child 
to a need to imitate the behavioral patterns of the parents, grandparents, aunts, 
uncles, cousins or friends? Alcohol became the means of power, the means of 
feeling powerful, a way of being able to deal with the problems life has to offer. 
Alcoholism was a key factor in much of the deprived and distorted backgrounds 
of each of the participants. Some talked about the loss of who they were as a 
person, others spoke of the loneliness they faced throughout entire adolescent 
lives, others spoke of the anger and rage they felt within themselves but were 
unable to understand why they were feeling this way until they reached out for 
help. Still, others talked about shouldering the responsibility of bringing up 




67 



64 



younger brothers and sisters. Many felt psychologically drained because there 
was no emotional support offered to them because of the unpredictable and 
inconsistent parenting. Families who were inconsistent and unpredictable often 
displayed behaviors such as; denial - denying the rest of the family members of 
feelings of their own, secretive - having one or more family secrets, controlling - 
controlling those around them, trust - trusting only in themselves and the power 
of alcohol to help them through crisis, dependency - dependency on others and 
alcohol to get them through life situations, not taking the initiative to make 
decisions on their own, identification and expression - unable to identify or 
express positive images of who they are as individuals, not being able to deal 
with their inner feelings, therefore suppressing any feelings that may surface. 
Children in troubled families learned quickly to expect the unexpected. 
Participants, as well as the counselors, have indicated they have lived in 
chronic fear, always wondering when they would suffer their next trauma. 

The participants and counselors in this study have repeatedly discussed 
how alcohol has proven over and over again to be the great remover of normalcy 
in the family system. Alcohol destroys many lives, it destroys families, it 
destroys whole communities, it destroys relationships, but most of all it destroys 
the inner child. When alcohol is in our lives we are unaware of what is 
happening to our children, even by those we trust the most. As alcoholics, we 
have a tendency to send our children off with others without realizing that we 
may be putting them in situations they are unable to control. This then leaves 
the child open to sexual abuse and other abuses that goes on behind close 
doors. Sexual abuse most often happens by those we trust the most, mainly, 
family members. This behavior then can be seen as a direct off-shoot of alcohol 
because the offender often has learned this behavior from the generation 





65 



previous to them. So when one deals with the alcohol and begins the road to 
recovery they must also deal with the underlying issues in order to heal 
spiritually within, otherwise the guilt stumps the healing process for them. As 
was said before, healing from one's past is not easy as we look at the behaviors 
we have learned from previous generations. 

Healing just doesn't happen, it begins when we see what is happening 
and we desire to see a change. We must look deep within ourselves and take 
responsibility for the behaviors that we pass down to our children. We must stop 
blaming others, even though we may have learned negative behaviors from 
them. We must face our own self and want to change the way we are. The 
participants point out that it is much easier to point fingers and blame others 
than to face the reality within ourselves. Once we face our self, we see many 
unwanted behaviors and we begin to deal with them one by one. This process 
leaves no room for us to point fingers and look at what others are doing because 
we have many layers of learned behaviors to work through. It is important to 
note that the behaviors children learn can be unlearned quickly if it is dealt with 
early in their lives. If one looks beyond the behaviors of the child or adult, one 
can see only frightened boys and girls. The negative behaviors being displayed 
act as shields to protect one from further hurts. We must be all accountable for 
our own behaviors and learn to admit when we are wrong. We must be careful 
what we say, so that we don't hurt others. It is hard to live a good life because 
others don't understand you and many times our old behaviors try to take 
control. The inner peace one seeks in the healing process is not found on the 
outside, but is on the inside. We must look into the places we have kept hidden 
and silent for many years. We must find this place in order for us to begin our 
healing journey. For the child this process is easier than it is for the adults 




66 



because the child is only at the beginning stages of secrecy. Regardless, only 
you can begin and want this healing for yourself, others can be there to help by 
showing acts of love and kindness toward you. 

With these things in mind I would like to now give five recommendations 
that may help the child develop enough skills to overcome and replace the 
negative conditioning that alcohol placed upon their lives. Regaining control 
and balance in one's life is not an intellectual or rational process, nor is it an 
easy process. The healing or recovery process is one that must take the person 
back to the hierarchical needs that have been quelched from the time they have 
been born. These hierarchical or human needs as stated by Whitfield (1987) 
are; survival, safety, touching, attention, mirroring or echoing, guidance, 
listening, being real, participating, acceptance of self and others, being able to 
grieve losses and grow, support, loyalty and trust, accomplishment, being able 
to make decisions, sexuality, enjoyment and fun, freedom, nurturing, and 
loving self and others unconditionally including connection with a Higher Power. 
The child or person in therapy is given the opportunity to get in touch with their 
feelings. They go through the process of pain and joy, discouragement, 
excitement, and a renewed strength in order to find their inner being. The 
following recommendations transpired from the participants' stories. 

1 . The first and most important recommendation is the need for 
communities to give greater attention to the needs of the children. Many 
children suffer silently and there needs to be a stronger outreach and more 
healing programs for the youths in First Nations communities. Existing programs 
are good, but they are designed to help those who are over eighteen. This 
leaves the younger people with no where to go for help until they reach the 




70 



67 



appropriate age. Experiences have shown that children can be helped to adjust 
to life with alcoholic parents. They can be helped to resolve or handle some of 
the fears, conflicts, and hostilities in their lives. Children can be helped to gain 
a sense of trust and love for other people and to develop their self-awareness, 
self-esteem, and a sense of security which will enable them to continue to grow 
and achieve some success in life. It is also very important for children to 
understand their own cultural background in order to understand who they are 
as a people. 

2. The second recommendation is the need for treatment of whole 
families and not for only the alcoholic. In treating the whole family, one must 
look at restructuring the behavioral pattern of the family. Helping each member 
understand the behavioral pattern of previous generations would bring forth 
renewed attitudes toward the healing process. Through counseling, families will 
be able to move towards a more meaningful life together. Opening up the lines 
of communication between family members is an important step which must be 
taken. Parents must work together to understand and learn about the roles in 
family life, about discipline, about the give and take among family members, 
about understanding and enjoying their children, and about loving one another 
unconditionally and accepting each other for who they are. But most of all they 
must learn to accept themselves and become responsible for their own 
behaviors. 

3. The third recommendation is that we must begin to teach our young 
people to become responsible members of the community. We must teach them 
to go out and do something with their lives instead of sitting at home always 
feeling sorry for themselves. We need to give our young people direction that 




71 



68 



will help them develop into responsible young people and we need to stand 
behind them but not suffocate or take the responsibilities away from them. 

Young men and women need to be taught to respect themselves and to respect 
the individuality of each other. Young men need to be taught how to become 
good husbands, fathers and providers to his family. Young women need to be 
taught what it is to be life givers and to respect motherhood as a valued gift, 

4. The fourth recommendation is that spiritual healing is important to any 
programs set up to help the family. In order for families to heal one needs to 
attack the problem from the grass-roots level. We must remember that alcohol is 
only one part of the problem and there are many off-shoots because people use 
alcohol to cover up unwanted behaviors. Participants in this study have all 
stated they could not have healed on their own and that it took something 
greater than their own strength to help them through the healing process. 
Churches and the different organizations within communities need to work 
together to build effective programs that will help meet the needs of the children 
in the community. Every individual in the helping profession has an opportunity 
to work toward changing public attitudes towards alcoholism and emotional 
disturbances. It has also been stated that those in the helping field must go 
through the healing process themselves before they can really understand and 
help the alcoholic overcome. As one of the counselors states, " There are too 
many helpers in this world who are trying to help, but they themselves have 
never gone through the healing process." Helpers try to save everyone else and 
in the meantime they themselves are dying inside, their dreams gone out the 
window, they burn out, and they don't say what is bothering them. They don’t 
share their own feelings and they don't show any emotions and yet they are out 
there trying to help. 




72 



69 



5. The fifth recommendation is to help the child understand the ravages 
of alcohol. Listen to your children regardless of what it is they are saying. Many 
times the alcoholic destroys things in the home, but we always try to cover it up 
and hide these things from our children and from the alcoholic themselves. Face 
the realities of the alcoholic behavior and let the child as well as the alcoholic 
see the destruction that alcohol carries with it. Let the children know that you 
are not doing this to hurt them, but to help them understand the impact alcohol 
brings to life. Reality cannot be denied and to spend energy denying what is 
real hinders the healing process for all those involved. Let children know that 
you are interested in what they have to say about the situation. You may not 
accept or agree with what they are saying, but at least the child knows that you 
are listening. 

Although I have given five recommendations there are many other factors 
that must be taken into account as we work with the alcoholic and their families. 
Recommendations given by participants show that First Nations People need 
family healing. Many of the behaviors and hurts passed down for generations 
need to be broken. Children need to take responsibility for their own behaviors 
and not blame others. Young people need to be given direction and it is the 
responsibility of the older people of the communities to teach the young people. 

It is important for communities to give greater attention to the needs of children, 
to help children make choices that lead to better lifestyles. It is important for 
parents to listen to what the child is saying to them. Many times we fail to listen 
until it is too late. Spiritual healing is an important step in the healing process. 
Information from participants have shown they needed a greater strength than 
their own to help them overcome the ravages of alcohol. Another important 
factor is the change from what one sees as being "normal" to the realization of 




73 



70 



alcohol being "abnormal". It takes much courage and strength for one to talk 
about this issue in their lives and I truly admire the courageous abilities of each 
participant of this study. 

It is important to remember that children suffer the most. Children learn 
from the adults around them and sometimes the seeds we sow are not healthy 
ones therefore the child must break from this cycle later in life. I would like to 
end with the following poem: 

Children Live What They Learn 

If a child lives with criticism, 

He learns to condemn. 

If a child lives with hostility, 

He learns to fight. 

If a child lives with ridicule, 

He learns to be shy. 

If a child lives with shame, 
he learns to feel guilty. 

If a child lives with tolerance, 

He learns to be patient. 

If a child lives with encouragement, 

He learns confidence. 

If a child lives with praise, 

He learns to appreciate. 

If a child lives with fairness, 

He learns justice. 

If a child lives with security, 




71 



He learns to have faith. 

If a child lives with approval, 

He learns to like himself. 

If a child lives with acceptance and friendship, 
He learns to find love in the world. 



Author unknown 




75 



72 



References 

Ackerman, R.J. (1983). Children of alcoholics: A guide for parents, educators. 
and therapists. ( 2nd edA Holmes Beach, Florida: Learning 
Publications. 

Clark, R.M. (1987). The forgotten children: A study ofchildren with alcoholic 
parents. Markham, Ontario: Paperjacks, LTD. . 

Cork, M. (1969). The forgotten children . Toronto, Canada: Addictions 
Research Foundation. 

Cowan, P. A., Cowan, C.P., Cohn, D.A., & Pearson, J.L., (1996). 

Parent's attachment histories and children's externalizing and 
internalizing behaviors: exploring family system models of linkage. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology ; v.64 (1), 53-63. 

Cuffee, M. C. (1993 - 94); A message to Children Today. Sometimes. . . . 
Children Today : v.22 (4), 19. 

Garrett, J.T., (1993-94). Understanding Indian children learning from Indian 
Elders. Children Today : v.22 (4), 18-21-40. 

Glasser, W. (1984). Control theory: a new explanation of how we control our 
lives. Harper & Row: New York. 

Glesne, C. & Peshkin, A. (1992). Becoming qualitative researchers: an 
introduction. Longman. White Plains; New York. 

Gordon, A. J. The cultural context of drinking and indigenous therapy for alcohol 
problems in three migrant Hispanic cultures: An ethnographic report. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, suppl. No. 9, 1981, 217-240. 

Grant, A. (1996). No end of grief: Indian Residential Schools in Canada. 
Pemmican Publications Inc., Canada. 

Hardwick, J.S. (1996). Your Seed. Your Crop. Your Choice . The Vision: 
World Aflame Publications, vol. 28, no.4, pt. 5. 

Holy Bible: The New Open Bible Study Edition , copyright (1990). Thomas 
Nelson Publishers: Nashville 




76 



73 



Jarma, A.L., & Kozak, A.E. Young adult children of alcoholic fathers; 

depressive experiences, coping styles, and family systems. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psycholog y: v.60 (2), 224-251 : American 
Psychological Association Inc. 

Jaynes, J.H., & Rugg, C.A. Adolescents, alcohol and drugs: A practical 
guide for those who work with young people. Charles C. Thomas 
Publishers, Springfield, Illinois, 1988. 

Kohut, H. (1984). How does analysis cure? New York: International 
University Press. 

Maslow, A. (1962). Toward a psychology of being. Princeton, NJ: Van 
Nostrand. 

Miller, A. (1983). For your own good: Hidden cruelty in childrearing and the 
roots of violence . Farrar, Strauss, Giroux: New York. 

O'Connell, J.C. A family systems approach for serving rural reservation Native 
American Communities. Journal of American Indian Education. 1985, 
v.24(2), 1-6. 

O'Gorman, P.O. & Oliver-Diaz, P. (1987). Breaking the cycle of addiction. 

Health Communications, Inc., Deerfield Beach, Florida. 

Ronnau, J. & Poertner, J. (1983). Identification and use of strength: a family 
system approach. Children Today: v. 22(2), 20-23. 

Smith-Harvey, V. & Retter, K. The development of the basic needs survey. 
Journal of Reality Therapy. 1995, XV(1), 76-80. 

Thomas, R.K. The history of North American Indian alcohol use as a 

community-based phenomenon. Journal of Studies on Alcohol. Suppl. 
No. 9, 1981. 

Volk, R.J., Edwards, D.W., Lewis, R.A. & Sprenkle, D.H. Family systems 
of adolescent substance abusers. Family Relations, 1989, 38, 266-272. 

Weil, A. ( 1973). The natural mind Houghton Mifflin: New York. 

Whitfield, C.L. (1989). Healing the child within: discovery and recovery for 

adult children of dysfunctional families. Deerfield Beach. Florida: Health 
Communications, Inc. 



77 



V 



74 



Wholey, D. (1984). The courage to change: hope and help alcoholics and 
their families. Warner Books Inc. New York. 

Winter, M. Counselling the native child. Manitoba journal of Counselling . Dec. 
1992, 19(2), 22-25. 

Woodside, M. Children of alcoholics: breaking the cycle. Journal of School 
Health . December 1 986, vol.56, No. 10, 448-449. 

Woititz, J.G. (1990). Adult children of alcoholics. Health Communications, I 
nc. Deerfield Beach, Florida. 

Zvonkovic, A.M. Greaves, K.M. Schmiege, C.J. & Hall, L.D.: The marital 
construction of gender through work and family decisions: a qualitative 
analysis. Journal of Marriage and The Family. (1996): 58, 91-100. 



o 

ERiC 



78 



APPENDICES 




79 



( 



76 



APPENDICES 
Appendix A1 



March 6, 1997 

Superintendent 

School Board 

Box 1 90 

, Manitoba 



Dear Superintendent, 

I am currently working on my dissertation which is the final project to complete my Masters 
Degree. The area of my study is titled, Intergenerational Impact of Alcohol on Children. My 
study is qualitative in nature and requires insight into one's feelings and attitudes. The process 
requires collecting personal stories and confidential interviews. 

This is to ask for permission to have access to go into the school to begin the collection of stories 
and interviews. All information is confidential, participants names will not be used and the 
participant may withdraw at anytime throughout the study. Identifying information will not be 
included at any time. Findings are based on grouped findings, rather than individual findings. 

All taped stories, fieldnotes, and materials will be returned to the participants or destroyed at 
completion of this study. 

By doing such a study, my hope is to gain a deeper understanding of children and their life 
experiences with alcohol. Recommendations given will go beyond mere survival. As you are 
aware, substance abuse is rampant in our Native communities. Young people tend to turn to 
alcohol as a means of escape from reality and nothing seems to be done to help them deal with 
this deviancy. By doing this study, I hope to find answers that will result in providing culturally 
specific programs and Healing Circles for the youths. Our children are our future and we must 
begin to give them hope by showing we care about the struggles they encounter in life. A written 
summary of this study will be granted at your request. 

Please let me know as soon as possible by letter if I have permission to do this study. 

Thank-you for your support. 



Yours Sincerely, 



Kandy McCorrister 



cc/ Administrators 

School Board Members 




80 



« . 



77 



APPENDICES 
Appendix A2 



March 6, 1997 



Principal 

School 

Box 670 

, Manitoba 



Dear Principal, 

I am currently working on my dissertation which is the final project to complete my Masters 
Degree. The working title of my study is: Intergenerational Impact of Alcohol Abuse on 
Children. My study is qualitative in nature and requires insight into one’s feelings and attitude. 
This process requires collecting personal stories and confidential interviews. 

This letter is to confirm our verbal discussion in regards to having access to students in grades 3, 
6, 9, & 12. I am requesting written permission to begin the study in the school. All information 
is confidential, participants names will not be used, identifying information will not be included 
and the client may withdraw at anytime throughout the study. Findings are to be based on group 
findings rather than individual findings. All taped stories and field notes will be returned to the 
participants or destroyed at completion of this study. 

As you are aware, substance abuse is rampant in our Native communities. Young people tend 
to turn to alcohol as a means of escape from reality and nothing seems to be done to help them 
deal with this deviancy. By doing this study, I hope to find answers that will result in providing 
culturally relevant programs and Healing Circles for the youths. Our children are our future and 
we must begin to give them hope by showing we care about the struggles they encounter in life. 
A written summary of this study will be granted at your request. 

Thank-you for your support in this project. 



Yours Sincerely, 




Kandy McCorrister 



APPENDICES 



Appendix B1 



March 6, 1997 

55 Elviss Cresent 
Brandon, Manitoba 
R7B 2K8 

Dear Parents, Guardians, Grandparents; 

Hi! My name is Kandy McCorrister. I am a student at Brandon University. I am currently 
working on my dissertation, which is the final project to complete my Masters Degree. The title 
of my study is; Intergenerational Impact of Alcohol Abuse on Children. 

We as parents become exasperated as we see our children turn to alcohol as a means of escape 
from reality. The question I ask is, "What can we do to help them overcome this problem?" 

I am asking your help in this study by inviting you and your child(ren) to take part. Any 
information collected from you and your child(ren) is held in strict confidentiality, with only myself 
and my advisor having access to it. No names will be used in this study, only age and gender. 
Our children, yours and mine, are suffering silently and we need to start helping them. By doing 
this study, I hope to find answers that will result in providing culturally specific programs for the 
youths. Our children are our future and we must begin to give them hope by showing we care 
about the struggles they encounter in life. 

This study requires collecting personal stories, either written or taped, along with a confidential 
interview. Again all information is confidential. The story deals with your personal thoughts, 
feelings, and experiences with alcohol, either as a child or an adult. 

Please let me know as soon as possible if you would like to be a participant in this study. I have 
included a self addressed envelope along with a permission slip. I can also be reached at 726- 
3462 (collect) if you have any questions concerning this study. If you do not want to take part, 
kindly return the form unmarked. You also have the option of pulling yourself out of the study 
anytime you wish. 

Thank you for your cooperation and I am looking forward to working with you as we struggle to 
find ways to help our young people. 



Yours Sincerely, 



Kandy McCorrister 



COPY AVAILABLE 



< i- r 



79 



APPENDICES 
Appendix B2 



Permission Sheet 



Names: Mother: Age: 

Father: Age: 

Children: Age: 



Please check one or more of the following items. 

Yes, We would like to take part in this study, we understand all information we 

give is confidential and will be destroyed on completion of this study. 

Yes, our child(ren) have permission to take part of this study. All information 

he/she may give is confidential and will be destroyed on completion of this 
study. 

No, we do not want to take part in this study. 

No, I do not want my child(ren) to take part in this study. 

Yes, I would like to take part in the study, but not my child(ren). 

Yes, I would like my child(ren) to take part, but not myself. 




83 



« V •• 



80 



APPENDICES 
Appendix C 
Interview Protocol 



A strong desire to drink among young people of alcoholics is often generated by families where 
the alcoholic has power of control. This then, leads to a greater need to imitate and identify with 
the behavioral patterns of the parents by the child and the adolescent. Because of these 
processes, children and adolescents leam to depend on alcohol as a means of feeling powerful. 
Below is a list of subsidiary questions directly related to this study. Please answer each question 
as best as you can. 



1. What are the relationship behavioral patterns of the alcoholic from one generation to the 
next? Does this change over time? How? 



2. Does the relationship within the family structuring system change in regards to alcohol 
being passed down from one generation to the next? 



3. Healing from within or Spiritual Healing. Is it important and relevant to those dealing 
with alcohol abuse? Should it be recognized as part of the healing process? 



4. How do you think children affected by alcohol see themselves in a society that 
continuously lives a double standard in regards to alcoholic intake? 



5. There are many things associated with alcohol use. Is it important for one to deal with 
the underlying causes or roots of the problem in order to be successful in overcoming 
the abuse? 



6. What would you like to see happen in regards to helping First Nation Children overcome 
alcohol and drug abuse? 





BEST 



COPY 



AVAILABLE 



4 



81 



Appendices 

Appendix D 

Behavioral Patterning for Family Healing 

Parents 



Mother 

- shows no emotions 

- low self-esteem 

- denial of negative behaviors 

- lying to hide / cover up behaviors 

- low frustration level 

- feelings of isolation 

- anger 

- broken promises 

- hitting, yelling, throwing things 

- blames children & others for what is happening 

- dependency on others 

- emotional towards others & self 

- deprived of love / confusion 

- others 



Father 

- verbal attack on family 

- damages property 

- acts of jealously 

- ridicules others 

- beats & blames family 

- harasses 

- swearing / use of foul 
language 

- beats wife & children 

- slapping, kicking, 
strangulation 

- possessive 

- isolates family 

- spies on those he loves 

- lies 

- others 



Our Own Behaviors 

- lying 

- denial 

- low self-esteem 

- unable to make own decisions 

- acting brave & tough in front of others 

- shows no emotions 

- high frustration levels 

- anger 

- striking out at others 

- protective of parents 

- hitting, swearing & putting others down 

- pretending everything is okay 

- use of alcohol & other drugs to forget 

- loss of identity 

- others 

Children are shaped according to the behaviors of the parents and grandparents. Children often 
have no idea of who they really are. According to the child the behaviors they leam are normal. 
Children who see and hear negative things all the time soon leam to behave that way. Children 
need to belong and they quickly leam 'how', but in negative ways. This can be seen as one 
works through the behavioral pattern program above. As the child goes through the patterning, 
they begin to see the behaviors they need to change in order to achieve a positive outlook in 
their own lives. 




85 




® 

U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 

National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 





II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents . 




The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to a!! Levs 1 2A documents 




The sample sticker shown below will be 

affixed to a!! Level 25 documents 


* * " * ’ ' i 

PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE.THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY ' 

c<f 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND. 

. DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN. 
MICROFICHE. AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
’ DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 






cP 




cP 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




J 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 


Level 1 

t 

i 




Level 2A 
t 




Level 2B 
1 


m 




□ 




□ 


Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival • 
media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. 




Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination In microfiche and in electronic media 
for ERIC archival collection subscribers onty 




Check here for Level 28 release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination in microfiche onty 


Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here,-* 

please 

O 

FRir 



1 hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 




Printed Name/Position/Title: 


Organization/Address: / 


Telephone: ^ ^ y n 


FAX: 


E-Mail Address: 


“* IjU. J¥/9g 






mMM 



IHKM & SIB 



' V^:;- • 



"Wfiat is ERIC? 

The Educational Resources Information Center 
(ERIC) is a national information system designed to 
provide users with ready access to an extensive body of 
education-related literature. The ERIC database, the 
world’s largest source of education information, contains 
more than 850,000 abstracts of documents and journal 
articles on education research and practice. Print and 
database ERIC products are distributed to thousands of 
locations around the world. You can access ERIC online 
via commercial vendors and public networks, on CD- 
ROM, on the Internet, or through the printed abstract 
journals, Resources in Education and Current Index to 
Journals in Education. 

y/fiat is ERJC/CASS? 

The ERIC Counseling and Student Services 
Clearinghouse (ERIC/CASS) is one of sixteen subject 
specific clearinghouses. Its scope area includes school 
counseling, school social work, school psychology, mental 
health counseling, marriage and family counseling, career 
counseling, and student development, as well as parent, 
student, and teacher education in the human resources 
area. Topics covered by ERIC/CASS include: the training, 
supervision, and continuing professional development of 
aforementioned populations; counseling theories, 
methods, and practices; the roles of counselors, social 
workers, and psychologists in all educational settings at 
all educational levels; career planning and development; 
self-esteem and self-efficacy; marriage and family 
counseling; and counseling services to special 
populations. 

Advantages of J-faving a Document in 
ERIC 

• World-Wide Visibility 

• Free Reproduction/Distribution 

• Free Publicity/Marketing 

• Timely Dissemination of Your Publication 

• Assurance That Your Publication Will Always Be 
Available 

• Ease of Submission 

• Freedom to Publish Elsewhere 

SeCection Criteria EmpCoyedBy ERIC 
Quality of Content — All documents received are 
evaluated by subject experts against the following kinds of 
quality criteria: contribution to knowledge, significance, 



relevance, newness, innovativeness, effectiveness of 
presentation, thoroughness of reporting, relation to 
current priorities, timeliness, authority of source, intended 
audience, comprehensiveness. 

Legibility and Reproducibility — Documents must 
be legible and easily readable. 

Reproduction Release (see reverse) — All 
documents must be accompanied by a signed 
Reproduction Release form indicating whether or not 
ERIC may reproduce the document. 

Approjrriate Xinds of Documents for 
ERIC 

• Research Reports/Technical Papers 

• Program/Project Descriptions and Evaluations 

• Opinion Papers, Essays, Position Papers 

• Monographs, Treatises 

• Speeches and Presentations 

• State of the Art Studies 

• Instructional Materials and Syllabi 

• Teaching and Resource Guides 

• Manuals and Handbooks 

• Curriculum Materials 

• Conference Papers 

• Bibliographies, Annotated Bibliographies 

• Legislation and Regulations 

• Tests, Questionnaires, Measurement Devices 

• Statistical Compilations 

• Taxonomies and Classifications 

• Theses and Dissertations 

A document does not have to be formally 
published to be entered into the ERIC database. In fact, 
ERIC seeks out the unpublished or “fugitive” material not 
usually available through conventional library channels. 

yvfiere to Send Documents? 

If you and/or your organization have papers or 
materials that meet the above criteria and you would like 
to submit them for possible inclusion in ERIC’s Resources 
in Education abstract journal, please send two laser print 
copies and a signed Reproduction Release form for each 
to: 

ERIC/CASS Acquisitions 
School of Education, 201 Ferguson Building 
University of North Carolina at Greensboro 
Greensboro, NC 27412-5001 



