DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 356 013 JC 930 201 

AUTHOR Fullen, Jim, Ed. 

TITLE OATYC Journal, 1992-1993. 

INSTITUTION Ohio Association of Two-Year Colleges. 

PUB DATE 93 

NOTE 98p.; Published twice annually. 

AVAILABLE FROM Ohio Association of Two-Year Colleges, University of 
Akron Community and Technical College, 304 East 
Buchtel Avenue, Akron, OH 44325 ($3 each; annual 
subscription, $6) . 
Collected Works - Serials (022) 
OATYC Journal; vl8 nl-2 Aut 1992-Spr 1993 

MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

Classroom xinvironment ; College Curriculum; ''College 
Faculty; ''^College Instruction; Community Colleges ; 
Educational Finance ; Facul ty Publ ishing; 
Instructional Innovation; Part Time Faculty; 
^Teaching Methods; ^'Two Year Colleges 
^'^Ohio 



The OATYC Journal provides the two-year colleges of 
Ohio with a medium for discussing problems and sharing concepts, 
methods, and findings relevant to the two-year college classroom. The 
fall 1992 and spring 1993 issues contain: "What We Are Doing Right: 
Can We Do It All?," by Linda Houston; "Campus Profile: A Walk through 
Shawnee State University," by Catherine H. Roberts and Susan Warsaw; 
"Portfolio Assessment as an Evaluation Tool," by Carolyn Wulfhorst; 
"Teaching Entrepreneurship to the Two-Year College Student: An 
Instructor's Guide," by Ralph Lindeman; "Applications of EECAP (Early 
English Composition Assessment Program): Writing Assessment through 
Research," by John Fallon; "To Acquire Stature: 'To Thine Own Self Be 
True','* by James 0. Hammons; "Illiteracy on the Run," by George Kemp; 
"Professional Sense of Community," by Candice Johnson and "I am a 
Good Buy," by Susan Heady, both responding to concerns about the 
influence of growing numbers of part-time faculty on educational 
quality; "OATYC President's Message," by Linda Houston; "University 
of Cincinnati Clermont College: Focus on Access," by Karen N. 
Williams; "Critical Thinking: A Matter of Ability, Experience, or 
Trust?" by Marilyn J. Valentino; "Maybe We Don't Teach Grammar 
Anymore, But It's a Good Thing," by David J. Johnson; "Of Pearls and 
Pigs," by Janet Green, recommends strategies for making literature 
more accessible to students; "A Native American Model," by Daniel 
Wildcat and Edward Neceper, which focuses on Haskell Indian Junior 
College; "A Teaching Technique That Works: The Teaching Pretest," by 
Jerry Bergman; and "Larger Institutions Absorb Unanticipated Cuts," 
by Julius F. Greenstein and "Two-Year Colleges Suffer More," by James 
J. Countrjonan, both address the comparative impact of state budget 
cuts on two- and four-year colleges. Each issue contains letters 
reacting to articles in previous issues. (PAA) 



PUB TYPE 
JOURNAL CIT 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 

IDENTIFIERS 
ABSTRACT 




60 

rH 

o 

in 

CO 




> 

CD 
<— »- 

CD 
O 



CD 
> 

3 

CD 

o' 

03 

> 

(/) 
(/) 
O 

a 

Hi 
5' 



o 

o 
3 
3 



O 

9l 
cd" 

CQ 



o 
o 

, «^ 

iFRir 



o 

o 

> 
c/) 

Cf) 

O 
o 

o 
o 

"n 



9 

-< 
m 
> 

O 
O 



m 
Q 
m 

C/D 




Volume XVIII, Nos. 1-2, 
Autumn 1992 - Spring 1993 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

J. Fullen 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CF.N7ER (ERIC) " 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Oftjce of Educational Research and Improwempnt 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER lERiC) 

□ This document has been reproduced as 
received fror.i ihe person or orgcmzation 
originating it 

HD Minor changes have been rriade to improve 
^reproduction quality 

• Points of view or opinions stated in this docu 
meni do not necesianiy represent official 
OERl position Of poticy 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




> 

I 

CD 



rr 

CD 
> 

3 

CD 

> 

C/) 
C/) 

o 

o 

Si 
o' 

::3 



O 
o 

3 

3 
c 

13 



Q. 
C_ 

c 

O 
o 

CD 
CO 
(D 



o 

o 

> 

(n 

O 

g 

o 
z: 

O 

TI 
H 



< 
m 
> 

O 

O 
t— 
t— 

m 
G) 
m 

03 



CW>C 



JOURNAL 



Vol. XVIII No. 1 



Autumn 1992 



THIS ISSUE: 

COMMENT 
What We Are Doing Right: Can We Do It Ail? 

TEXT 

FOCUS: Campus Profile: A Walk through 
Shawnee Stale University 

Portfolio Assessment as an Evaluation Tool 

Teaching Entrepreneurship to the Two- Year 
College Student: An Instructor's Guide 

Applications of EECAP: Improving Writing 
Assessment through Research 

PLUS ONE 

To Acquire Stature: 'To Thine Own Self Be True" 

PRACTICUM 
Illiteracy on the Run 

FORUM 

ISSUE: To What Extent Does the Increasing Proportion 
of Part-Time Faculty Threaten the Quality of 
Programs and Teaching in the Two- Year College? 

Professional Sense of Community 
I Am a Good Buy 

REACTION 

Reaction to Del Crandell and Carolyn Crandell's Ar'icle: 
"Self-Starting Administrator, Coach and Counselor" 

Reaction to Robert C. Peterson's Article: "The 
Skills Assessment/Skills Enhancement Program 
between the Chrysler Motor's Twinburg Stamping 
Plant and Kent Slate University-Geauga Campus" 

Slop Calling Them Mentorsl 



ERJC 



Provides: 

- Collectivc'influence on the future direction of Ohio's two-year campus system; 

- Access to classroom liability insurance protection of $1,000,000; 

- An open forum for the discussion of trends, problems, accomplishments, and 
challenges unique to state assisted two-year campuses; 

- A newsletter which informs members of the proceedings and activities of the 
OATYC and of Ohio's two-year campuses; 

- The journal which provides an opportunity for publication and exchange of 
scholarly views and concepts; 

- Conference and workshops providing opportunities for professional 
development, visits to other two-year campuses, presentation of p;»pers, and 
socialization with other two-year campus personnel; 

- Affiliation with the American Association of Community and Junior Colleges 
and its activities throughout the nation. 

Puq>oses: 

- To provide a forum in which all state-assisted two-year campuses can meet to 
discuss and resolve mutual problems; 

- To foster cooperation and communication among Ohio's institutions of higher 
education; 

- To provide the viewpoint of the state assisted two-year campuses to the Ohio 
Board of Regents and to the State Legislature; 

- To identify and improve the status, prestige, and welfare of all state-assisted 
two-year campuses in Ohio; 

- To cooperate with other Ohio agencies, colleges, and universities in research 
and activities that promote the effectiveness of higher education in Ohio; 

- To increase the contribution of the state-assisted two-year colleges to the total 
educational process in the state of Ohio. 




A((ricu1lurjt Technicil Intlilule, 

OhioSljteUnivenitv 

Djn D Garrison. Oireclor 

Belmont Cimpus, Ohio Univenity 

|.«mc4 W Newton. Dean 

Belmonl Ttthnical College 

Wt* Channcll. I'fv»id»rnl 

Cenlrjl Ohio Technical College 

|ul)us Ownstoin. I'rt^itienl 

Chillicoihe Cjmpu*. Ohio Univentiv 

lX lb«rt E MoviT. UiMn 

Clirk suit Communitv College 

Albert A S.^lcmo. frt^^idtnl 

Clerrnonl College. L'ntvenHy o* Cincinnati 

RiiftM Biinv. Dvitx 

Cniumbus Stjte Community College 
Hpirold M N«tor. I'resijtrnl 
Community It Technical College, 
Univenily c< Akron 
TrxsJ Slumi. Df;an 
Community tt Technical College, 
Univenity oi Toledo 
Ch-irlwH Bohl«n. L>cAn 
Community it Technicil College. 
Univenity o( Youn^^ttown 
Victor H Richlev. lX>jn 
Cuyhogi Community College, 
Konald bob«l. Actinf^ I'rrJHient 



Institutional Members 

Edison Stite Community College 

Kt^nnclh Yowell. I'n-ndi-nt 

Firelindi Cimput, 

Bowlinit CrT«n Stite Univenity 

Kui>ert r^eBjrd. Dean 

Ceiugi Cimpui, Kent Stjte Univenitv 

i^rrv ionw. Dt^n 

Hockinit Coll'^e 

Ii»hn I. Li^ht. f'rc^idont 

\eiienon Te hnicjl College 

Edward L Florak. I'rviidi-nt 

Likelind Community Collei^e 

RjlphR Di>lv. Prcsidfrn 

l.imi Trchnicil Collei^e 

l.imc-t I CiKinlrvrTLin. l'ri»«.idonl 

Lorain Countv Community College, 

RovChurch. i'rrtidonl 

Marion Campu*. Ohio State Univenity 

I'rancis HA/jrd. DvAtx 

Marion Technical Collrfie 

I Richard Brvion. Pf\>-tidcnt 

Middletown Campui, Miami Univenity 

MichAOl CKJvonwnti. DuixlMr 

MuikinRum Ar»aT«hnical Collejte 

LvnnH Willftt. Prrtidoiit 

Newark Campui. 

Ohio State Univenity 

luliusCrcfnsirin. Dvan 



Vorth Centrai Technical College 
Brvon t Kcc l'r»>«iidi'nt 
Northwest Technical Collet*- 
L.^rrv t>. McDuutsk*, I'n-^idcnt 
Owens Colleite, 
Diiniel Ofown. l'f\*iidt»m 
Raymond Walters College, 
Univenitv of Cincinnati 
WmI K^i.tman. IX-an 
Rio Grande Communitv Collefte. 
EJtirrv LXirttfV. l*rt-Mdont 
SinclairCommunity Colleite 
D.^vid H Tonil/. I'rx-Mdeni 
Southern State Communitv i^a\\e%e, 
C"*i\»rKC Mc-Curmn-k, rri-MdiMit 
Stark Campus, Kent State Univenitv 
Willum (iiltlc, LX^n 
Terra Technical College, 
Richard SioKin. rn.-sidonl 
TuKarawaras Campus 
Kent State Univenitv 
Hjmtd Sh.^do.Dfjn 

Univenity CoileKe. Univmitv of Cincinnati 
r>.uid H.mlcb. l\Mx 
Washinf^ton blilt Community College 
Cjtvm Milk-r. lVi»^idcnt 



JOURNAL 

OF THE 

Ohio Association of Two-Year Colleges 

(Affiliate of the American Association of Community and Junior Colleges) 

VOL. XVIII NO.l Autumn 1992 

The Journal of The Ohio Association of Tivo-Ycar Colleges is published by the 
Association to provide the two-year colleges of Ohio with a medium for the 
sharing of concepts, methods and findings relevant to the two-year college 
classroom and to provide an open forum for problem discussion and review. 

Subscription is part of the OATYC active, associate, or institutional 
membership. However, single copies of the journal are available at $3 each. A 
yearly subscription is available for $6 to persons or organizations who do not 
want membership in the OATYC. Postage is prepaid on all orders within the 
U.S.; $.50 per year is added for Canada, $1 per year for all other foreign 
countries. Communications regarding orders, special subscriptions, single 
copies, advertising, and permission to reprint are to be addressed to: 

The Ohio Association of Two-Year Colleges 
c/o Russell K. Davis, 111 
University of Akron Community and Technical College 
304 East Buchtel Avenue 
Akron, OH 44325 

Journal Officers 

Jim Fullen, Editor, Central Ohio Technical College 

Linda Houston, Assistant Editor, Agricultural Technical Institute, Ohio State 
University 

Editorial Board 

Anna Maria Barnum, University of Akron Community and Technical College 
Marc Green, Cincinnati Technical College 

Judy Hanneken, Community and Technical College, University of Toledo 
David Humphreys, Cuyahoga Community College, Eastern Campus 
Jack Tabor, Columbus State Community College 

Readers 

Gordon Brooks, Columbus State Community College 
Edward Martin, Columbus State Community College 
Jack Metcalf, Central Ohio Technical College 
Carlos Tackett, Lakeland Community College 





OATYC Journal, Autumn 1992 
Table of Contents 



COMMENT 

WJmt We Arc Doing Right: Can We Do It All? 

Linda Houston, Ohio State University, Agricultural Technical Institute 3 

TEXT 

FOCUS: Campus Profile: A Walk Through Shawnee State University. 

Catherine H. Roberts and Susan Warsaw, Shawnee State University 6 

Portfolio Assessment as an Evaluation Tool 

Carolyn Wulfhorst, Central Ohio Technical College 14 

Teaching Entrepreneurship to the Two-Year 

College Student: An Instructor's Guide. 
Ralph Lindeman, Kent State University, Geauga Campus 17 

Applications ofEECAP: Improving Writing Assessmott through Research 

John Fallon, Lima Technical College 20 

PLUS ONE 

To Acquire Stature: "To Thine Ozon Self Be True". 

James O. Hammons, University of Arkansas 32 

PRACTICUM 

Illiteracy on the Run. 

George Kemp, Cuyahoga Community College 40 

FORUM 

ISSUE: To What Extent Does the Increasing Proportion 
of Part-Time Faculty Threaten the Quality of Programs 
and Teaching in the Two-Year College? 

Professional Sense of Community. 

Candice Johnson, Ohio State University, Agricultural Technical Institute 43 

/ Am a Good Buy. 

Susan Heady, Ohio State University, Agricultural Technical Institute 44 

REACTION 

Reaction to Del Crandell and Carolyn CrandelVs Article: 
"Self-Starting Administrator, Coach and Counselor" 
Barb Thompson, Columbus State Community College 45 

Reaction to Robert C. Peterson's Article: "The Skills 

Assessment /Skills Enhancement Program between the Chrysler Motor's 
Tivi)iburg Stamping Plant and Kent State University-Geauga Campus" 

Nancy Brooker, Ohio State University, Agricultural Technical Institute 46 

Stop Calling Them Mentors !. 
Anna Maria Barnum, 

University of Akron Community and Technical College 47 



2 



RIC 



COMMENT 



What We Are Doing Right- Can We Do It All? 

Linda Houston 



Having just read The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People by Stephen R. Covey, I 
am feeling that I can do anything because, of course, faculty at two-year colleges 
are effective people. Who else can teach 15-18 contact hours, t^ke charge of 
committees, publish, present papers at professional meetings anvi be involved in 

professional organizations like OATYC? This 
academic year we have the added challenge of 
"doing more with less/' So as I read the book, as 1 
looked over the 7 habits, 1 thought that those of us at 
two-year colleges had all the habits already. We just 
did not find time to write the book. 

As educators, wo have a challenge this fall in 
our nation, in Ohio, and 1 expect, in our local 
communities. Higher education has not been 
considered a priority in the political climate of this 
country and this state in recent years. So, while we 
are trying to continue all the services to our students 
this fall, while we are trying to continue our 
involvement in work that brings meaning to our 
lives and those we serve, 1 urge you to take some of 
your time (if you have any left) and seek out the 
candidates running for office who have shown a 
commitment to education. My father used to tell me that if 1 met someone who 
was 51% O.K., I should not worry about the other 48%. In every election, there is a 
choice. Find that candidate who is 51% O.K., making sure, of course, that 
education is part of the 51%) and even in the short time left before election day, 
work hard to see that person elected. 

Two-year colleges in Ohio play a major role in "doing things right." We hope 
you can join us on October 23, 1992, to share the many things that two-year 
colleges in Ohio are doing to assure that we continue to serve our students. While 
we cannot do it all, we can continue to use the habits of highly effective people. 




Linda Houston 
OATYC President-Elect 
The Ohio State University 
Agricultural Technical Institute 
Wooster, OH 44691 



INFORMATION FOR PROSPECTIVE CONTRIBUTORS 

The ]oHnial encourages submission of material for any of its sections by 
faculty, staff, administrators and /or trustees of any of Ohio's community, 
general and technical, junior, regional and technical campuses. The journal is 
particularly receptive to articles of general professional importance in the areas 
of administration, instruction, and baccalaureate or technical studies for two- 
year institutions. 

There are forty-four solicitors of editorial material listed here. Contact your 
campus solicitor or one nearest you to inquire about submittin<^ a specific 
manuscript. 

Manuscripts must be typed, double-spaced and of approximately 1,000- 
3,000 words in length. All submissions must be accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed envelope for return. Art work must be black and white. Photos 
glossy; tables and drawings on 8 by 11 paper. The name and address of the 
contributor should be on the back of all art copy. 

Editorial Policy 

The Journal is not responsible for manuscripts or materials lost in mailing 
nor is it responsible for returning items not accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed envelope. 

The journal reserves the right to edit manuscripts to meet its needs and 
objectives. Where major revisions are necessary, every effort will be made to 
clear the changes with the author. 

Submission deadline for the next journal is March 15, 1993. 



JOIN 



OATYC Application for Membership 

n I am enclosing $25 for regular membership dues for 1992-93. 
n New Member 
n Membership Renewal 

College Address _ 

Name _ 

Please Print 

Title/Speciality 

Two- Yea r Ca mpu s " 

Cit}- State Zip 

C/O Russell Davis, University of Akron Ccniimunity and Technical College, 
Shank 152 B, Akron OH 44235. 



3 ' 
ERIC 



Professional Liability 
Protection Plan for Educators 




Offered to Employees of OATYC/ AACJC Member Colleges 



OATYC/ 
AACJC 



The Ediicalnrs Pmri-ssional Ijahtlily I'lan (.nvcrs the .irlsdroinissions (if iJii- i-tinillcc find pmlci.ts ilu- ciirollfc forth.; 
oclsuf anyont- uniiiThiSDrhiTsiilMTVisiim This IM.iii dKo.issislsilii-i-iin»Ilfi'ln pmti-i.l his nrhrrjnb 

1. Yuurchoici' of $500,000 iir $1,000,000 in pniln lion I)(-frnsc i.ii:.ls dn- p.ii(l(.i lu/i/M/on Ki ihisainouni 

Thisamtiuni is fur all cl.nins duniiK llii- l'l.ni yisir If yiiii snprrvisc DlhiTt'nipUiycvsand urc sued by one of 
Ihcm. Ihe Plan pr«vidi!s TO%or $2.ri00. whii hcvi-r :s less, fnr dcfi-nsr uists (jlOOdfdui.lible to be paid by you) 
Tht> maximum $500.000 or $1.000.000 ainnuni siitl upplif-s Ki daniofti's 

2» The Plan provides prolw.lion against claims under ihc followmn provisions 

• The occurrences take place on or after thr effective date of thr pohcy. 

• The claim, or written notjficatioti of circutnstotices which r.ould reasonably give rise to n claim, is first made by 
or ogainsi the insured dunng the agreement period or within 60 days after expiration or termination of the 
agreement. 

3* The Plan will pay up tn $50 fnr your initial consultatiun wilhanattorni'yand il will pay up to $250 of the cost uf 
having an attorney represpMl yciuai a formal lieantiK of a school board or other authority if you are threatened 
with terminal ion. reassign mrnt or demotion You will also n.'Cpiveupto$Z50 for legal fees, subject to a $100 
deductible, if you decide to sue 

NOTE: Members whose primary i»mploynu'nl is wilh an educational organtzation may cover part-time educational 
jobs (consultant, tutor, tuacher) by paying an additional $40 for the $500,000 benefit or $70 for ihe $1,000,000 benefit. 



PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY PLAN ENROLLMENT FORM 

A Special Membership Services Plan of Ohio Association of Two- Year Colleges; 
American Association of Community and junior Colleges 

Regular Coverage ~$500.000/$500.000 

Coverage 0 $40 per year □ 

Institution Including part-time private 

consultants $500.000/$ 500.000 Coverage 
Address . . @$(W per year □ 

City Regular Coverage-$1.000.000/ 

~ " $1,000,000 Coverage @ $70 per year. . . . □ 

Slate ZIP Including part-lime pnvate 

„. , ^ ^ ,^ consultants $1.000.000/$1.000.000 

Birth Date Soaal Sccunty No. Coverage ©$140 per year □ 

Date— Signature 

Cnveu;(p brcomi>^ etfcrtivp ihp tirti of tl»p montti fulluvvinX r*t.ctpt of i>nr\>llmrni funn tnd pjvmont in full muM to officr dwij^n^ird on Ihr 
b*<)L of (Ills fonn PI. «.«■ do nol m*.l tl ,\ fofm if yiu currcnliy iniuffd by thi* pljn. you wit! autumjhcfllly tc<ct\e * renf w^t notice ToM-ragp 
ptipnd* fur 4 fult 12 monlti^ S<nd you? pnrottmcnt form tni d k wv^blc lu Poiroil T I«n« and CumMnv. In< . P O Bo> 41811] 1|10 
Bro*dw4V, »tjn«5 Citv, M{)MI4I <*nt 



ERIC 



TEXT 



Campus Pr^/ile: A Walk through 
Shawnee State University 

Catherine H. Roberts and Susan Warsaw 



Tlic structure nnii organization of the tivo-i/car colleges iii Ohio arc chau^^in^. The 
};^overnor's task force ho'^ recommended that branch campuses, especially those having 
existing technical collc^e^, become community collcKi^es. Some tivo-year colU\^es have 
already made si/Wj a chansi^e. Shau^iur State is one of tho^r ^}id ha^ led the umy — all 
the wini to a university. Shatojiec hopes by telliii;^ its story that it imbues respcst and 
understajidij}^ for and of the process and of the chan^i^a^ as loe take a visit of its campus. 

Getting to Shawnee State University is difficult these days. It isn't that the 
University has moved: Shawnee State is in Portsmouth, Ohio, 90 miles south of 
downtown Columbus on U.S. Route 23. The highway normally takes a visitor 
through Portsmouth and into the downtown area, where a left turn at the last 
major street before the flood wall takes people onto campus. The campus is still 
adjacent to the floodwt'.ll protecting the city from the Ohio River and, 
incidentally, providing a green hill on the south edge of campus. Just to the west 
is the highway bridge to Kentucky/ and looming abo\'e the flood wall are the 
Kentucky hills where the Shawnee Indians had a lookout commanding the 
combined Scioto and Ohio River valleys stretched for nules below. 

It's difficult to come to campus for several reasons. First, both the University 
and the City of Portsmouth are re-arranging nearby streets, the City doing a 




Shawnee State University 

6 



n BESTeUFfAlWilE 



streetscape project on the major downtown thon^ughfare leading away from 
campus and the University widening a street behind its new Library in order to 
create a new main route from downtown to the southeast side of the city. Once 
completed, traffic which now passes between major University buildings will be 
routed around the north edge of campus, and the University will create a 
campus green and pedestrian ^valkways where now there's a heavily travelled 
street. 

Second, the University has changed so rapidly during its existence that 
those who re-visit campus find it significantly different. Wiien Shawnee State 
began as Shawnee ' »tate General and Technical College in 1975, it was formed by 
the merger of Scioto Technical College, with a campus ten miles north of 
Portsmouth, and Ohio University's Portsmouth branch, which had an eight-year 
-old classroom/library buildiiig on a small tract of land where SSU now 
occupies 13.1 acres. The new institution began creating its own campus around 
the O.U. building, Massie I iail, using its classrooms and labs for students in arts 
and sciences associate degree programs and transfer programs. The new 
Shawnee State buildings, designed to house the technoUigy degrees from Scioto 
Tech, were just being completed when Shawnee State and several other two-year 
institutions were designated as community colleges. 

Campus Buildings 

Shawnee State Community College turned its "north campus" over to the 
Scioto County Joint Vocational School and settled into its downtown campus 
with growing enrollment. Not totally severing its ties with Ohio University, 
Shawnee Slate housed an O. U. Resident Credit Center which offered limited 
junior and senior level courses and a rotating series of graduate programs 
staffed by Ohio University and adjunct faculty. That contractual relationship 
continued until 1992, and Ohio U. is still offering some graduate programming 
on the SSU campus, an advantage for both institutions. 

Other than Massie Hall, Shawnee State's buildings are a varigated brick 
with contemporary design. Programs in Allied Health, Business, and 
Engineering Technologies each had their own building, and Shawnee State 
Community College added a multi-purpose Activities Center and the James A. 
Rhodes Sports Center after classroom buildings were completed. The Activities 
Center is as popular with the community as with students, who use it for athletic 
classes, after -class intramurals, and intercollegiate sports. 

The Sports Center has a "junior-sized" Olympic swimming pool, locker 
room.s, /veight room, exercise room, racquetball courts, and work space. Like the 
Activities Center, the Rhodes Sports Center is heavily used by students and the 
community. Physical Education classes are just one activity among many, and a 
visitor may see a senior citizens' exercise class splashing in the pool, students 
taking a racquetball course, and SSU staff and local citizens working out in the 
weight room. At 6 a.m., the Sports Center is occupied by the Golden Bears, a 
very active senior citizens' group whose lives are enriched by the University and 
who, in turn, assist the campus as volunteers, boost sports by their attendance, 
take classes under the State of Ohio's auditing provision for senior citizens, and 
make themselves an important part of campus. After public school classes are 
over for the day, the pool may be filled by a high school swim team, an SSU 
class, or student, staff, and community swimmers doing laps during "open 
time." 

As the community college campus was built, planners linked Massie Hall 
with two extensions to the west: the Business Annex and Commons. A 1985 



student who walked Into Commons would expect to find most of the Student 
Affairs staff and services, such as tho offices of the Registrar and Financial Aid. 
The cafeteria was located downstairs, and the Library was down the hall on the 
main floor of Massie, Many faculty offices were conveniently located in the 
Business Annex, in an external circle around the Developmental Education 
Center and Learning Lab. The President's Office and adjacent Board Room were 
just off the main Commons lobby, and students could visit the Bookstore on the 
lower level of the Business Annex or pay their bills in the Business Office 
upstairs. 

Students at Shawnee Stale 

A walk around campus, day or evening, shows that SSU's "lypi<^v»l student" 
is hard to single out. Enrollment at 5SU has pursued an irregular but steady 
upward climb since 1%2, increasing 477r during that time period. Although fall 
enrollment was virtually the same from 1^)87-8^J, the following two years saw 
increases of 7.77< and H.27< . Once SSU's initial baccalaureate programs were 
appnn'cd in April 1988, the University began an aggressive recruiting program 
and was able to provide the information prospective and enrolled students 
needed. The 1991 enrollment increases continued for Winter and Spring quarters 
in 1992, with those enrollments also significantly higher than comparable 
quarters in preceding years. 

Scioto County continues to be the primary source of students for the 
University, ns it was for the community colU'ge. The percentage from Scioto 
County is declining as more students enroll from other parts of Ohio, along with 
Kentucky and nearby West Virginia. Campus life is enlivened by international 
students as well, including some from Ori/nba, Mexico, and Zittau, (East) 
Germany, Portsmouth's two sister cities. Students look like those on most 
commuter campuses, teenagers mingling with working adults and "returning" 
students. As a reflectiim of this student diversity, SSU students selected since 
1988 to serve on the Board of Tmstees have ranged in age from barely 20 to over 
40, 

The age composition of the SSU student body did not show significant shifts 
until 1986, but since that year, the 18-27 age group has steadily grown. A 
particular shift tc younger students is evident because 18-21-year-olds have 
increased dramatically, a trend wntrary to national high school graduation rates. 
SSU has also seen a noticeable increase in students age 17 and under, a reflection 
of Ohio legislation on Post-secondary Enn ' .ient Options and some "for credit" 
programming for that age group. 

For the first time ever, the privately-owned Celeron Square apartments 
adjacent to campus are filled to capacity for Fall quarter, 1992. Until a complex 
legal issue is settled, the Univ(Tsity is unable to build any university housing, 
and for this reason, SSU does not recruit many traditional freshmen who live 
beyond commuting distance. Older students and transfers can choose from a 
wide assortment of reasonably priced housing options near campus or within 
easy driving distance. At certain times of the day, it can be difficult to find a 
parking place in the open lots nc^rth and east of campus. 

Single students continue to increase in comparison to married students, and 
the number and percentage of female students have also increased. In 1991, 38% 
of students were male and 62% female, in contrast to 1982's 43% male, 57% 
female. Minority enrollment on campus is increasing slowly in response to 
targeted recruiting. About 40% of SSU's students attend classes in the evening, 
continuing a long-standing pattern. In Fall 1991, 25.6%. of SSU's students were 

8 




juniors or seniors. Although a few of the certificate and associate degree 
programs were phased out during SSU's 1986-88 transition, the remaining one- 
and two-year programs are strong. Enrollment in associate degree programs 
reversed a declining trend, increasing 7.7% over the 1990 figure, and the 
University has added an associate of Applied Busmess degree in Legal Assisting. 

As SSU's president, Olive C. Veri, noted in a recent speech, Shawnee State in 
1992 ''has more younger students, more degree-oriented students, more 
residents, more day stu dents, more full-time students, and more women than at 
any time in its hislory." 

Academic Development 

According to its mission statement, Shawnee State "prepares students for 
the changing needs of business, industry, education, and society through its 
diversified degree programs." In Health Sciences, students pursue associate 
degrees in dental hygienu, nursing, medical laboratory technology, respiratory 
therapy, and radiologic technology, or they prepare as Occupational Therapy 
Assistants and Physical Therapist Assistants. Ihey can also seek certification in 
the EMT-A and Paramedic programs. Arts and Sciences students choose from 
the Associate of Arts and Associate of Science degree programs which are SSU's 
Ohio University heritage, or they seek a Bachelor of Arts in English/Humanities 




Massic Hail 



or in Social Science. The Bachelor of Science major is Natural Science, but 
concentrations are offered in applied mathematics, chen^istry, and related fields. 

As faculty developed SSU's baccalaureate programs they chose not to offer 
an education major but to develop curricula which allowed students to major in 
one of the Arts and Sciences fields while taking the courses needed for 
certification in elementary education. Although these students have almost no 
electives, they graduate with an academic major and a strong background in 
practice-centered inquiry, which extends the knowledge of a discipline to how 
one learns that discipline. Housed in the Center for Teacher Education, SSU's 
certification program in elementary education received approval from the Ohio 
Department of Education in 1992, and all of its earlier graduates earned 
certification on a case by case basis. 

Baccalaureate majors in SSU's traditional technologies are also built on the 
solid base of successful associate degree programs in applied business and the 
engineering technologies. The Associate of Applied Science in Plastics was joined 
by the Bachelor of Science in Plastics Engineering Technology, while the major in 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology was built onto faculty and 
student strengths in Electromechanical Engineering Technology, Instumentation, 
Robotics, and Computer- Aided Drafting and Design. The Bachelor of Science in 
Business Administration is a flexible degree choice for a freshman or a 
transfer/Shawnee State returnee who majored in accounting, management, data 
processing, or office administration on the associate degree level. 

While keeping its community college traditions, Shawnee State began a 
new, 50-quarter-hour general education core of classes required for baccalaureate 
majors. Spread over four years, these courses develop skills in reading, writing, 
speaking, and computing, and stress quantitative skills and critical thinking. 
Many of the associate degree programs require several of the freshman/ 
sophomore core courses. 

Although all core courses integrate disciplines, students note some specific 
differences in SSU's requirements compared to those usually found elsewhere. 
The mathematics course includes questions about the nature of mathematical 
knowledge and the impact of mathematics on modern life. Most students take 
Ethics in Public and Private Life as juniors and seniors, and are challenged by 
reflecting on ethical problems and developing the intellectual skills involved in 
making difficult value decisions. Requiring 40 hours of community service, the 
upper level Community Service core course asks students to reflect on the 
benefits they have received from society and the need to share the fruits of their 
education with others. A Senior Seminar capstone course reinforces the major 
skills and goals of the core sequence and rounds out the student's major in an 
interdisciplinary context. 

Although Shawnee State did not build its baccalaureate majors onto 
two-year degree programs ommunity college students from Shawnee State and 
elsewhere find it congenial lo build a baccalaureate degree program onto their 
two-year course work. Faculty and administrators alike agreed to keep the best 
of Shawnee State's two-year heritage and build four-year programs on it. 

From Community College to University Faculty 

Like buildings and degrees, the faculty have changed. In a ten-year period, 
Shawnee State has doubled its full service faculty while at the same time seeing 
wUi increase from fewer than 97f to more than 42% with a doctorate or MFA 
degree. Since 1987, the percentage of full service faculty with just a bachelor's 
degree has fallen from 29% to U7c, while faculty with a master's have remained 



10 



relatively constant, decreasing from 52% in 1987 to 47% in 1992. The 57 full 
service faculty in 1982 have grown to 119 in FalL 1992. 

While the University has endeavored to employ faculty with the 
appropriate terminal degree, faculty from community college days have 
significantly upgraded their academic credentials by taking advantage of the 
University's liberal faculty development policy. Since 1987, two Arts and 
Sciences faculty members completed the Ph.D., two others are ABD and 
finishing dissertations, and one completed a second, specialized master's degree. 
Two business faculty members earned the MBA, and three Health Sciences 
faculty members earned appropriate master's degrees. Because no nearby 
institutions offer needed coursework in engineering technologies, four faculty 
members in that College are using satellite technology to work with National 
Technical University to improve their credentials in line with ABET (the 
Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology) accreditation standards. 

Faculty offices are mostly located in buildings where classes meet, but some 
faculty find themselves in remodeled quarters because Shawnee State also 
expanded by incorporating usable existing structures. Arts and Humanities 




Shawnee State's University Center 



^ BEST COPY WSPM 



faculty are in the 1004 building, named for its street address and hiding it. 
original name, "The Home for Aged Women." The former city incinerator, a 
sturdy brick building with a towering smokestack tucked against the floodwall, 
was gutted and redone for art classrooms, office space, and studios. 

Consistency and Change 

Physical changes are readily apparent at Shawnee State University in its 
new buildings, completed since SSU changed its status. The Library (1991) is 
north of Massie Hall and will someday face the main campus green, once Second 
Street is relocated. In addition to space for a 160,000 volume collection, the 
Library houses a media center, a curriculum materials center for elementary 
education students and regional teachers, a multi-purpose 350-seat auditorium 
which easily becomes three classrooms, and the Selby Board Room. Students and 
faculty enjoy the on-line catalog and access to data bases provided by the 
computers and terminals located at strategic points. The Library's architectural 
and visual focal point is its glass -enclosed, circular stairwell joining the lower, 
first, and second floors. 

In keeping with growing enrollments, the University Center (1992) is 
heavily used by day and evening students, staff, and the community. Once 
inside the door, the visitor finds the information desk, a large, airy lounge, and 
the cafeteria. Along the side of the building toward the Library are two floors of 
offices which serve students: Student Senate and student club offices, the 
Registrar, the Office of Transfer/Placement, the Admission Office, and the 
Financial Aid and Veterans Office. Designed as the gateway to campus, the 
University Center also has an upstairs lounge and TV lounges for students, a 
large meeting/banquet hall, and several smaller meeting rooms. Commuter 
students can relax, eat, or study in a comfortable atmosphere in the University 
Center, first-time campus visitors find most of the services and offices they need, 
and future residential students will enjoy its space and facilities. 




Shawnee State's Campus Green 
12 

13 



The Vern Riffe Advanced Technology Center, just south of the University 
Center, is actually a new building skillfully joined to the building which housed 
most of the community college engineering technology associate degree 
programs. The "KIQ," opened for classes this fall, has three floors of classrooms, 
labs, and offices related to engineering technology programs and the sciences, 
including new chemistry and physics labs. From south-facing windows on the 
top floor, students can see across the flood ;va 11 and look down on the Ohio River. 
The ATC provides space for a planetarium, which the University plans to fund 
by donations, and a foyer completed by a Foucault pendulum. 

Although the campus is larger, it's also well connected with underground 
fiber optic cabling and a central VAX computer system that gives people 
immediate access to other individuals or campus groups through electronic 
messaging. Through computer connectivity, a person on campus can 
communicate with a friend in the next building or, through the Internet, with 
SSU's Russian sister institution, Nizhny-Novgorod University. 

As an organization, Shawnee State is also larger. It's now organized into 
four colleges and the Center for Teacher Education, each with a dean, and has 
academic departments in lieu of its former divisions. All academic and academic 
support functions report to the Office of the Provost, while Business Affairs and 
Student Affairs perform supporting operational and student services. The Board 
of Trustees, once composed only of residents from the Ihree-county community 
college district, now includes five representatives from those counties, four other 
Ohioans, and two student trustees who are also Ohio residents. 

Shawnee State's campus is the focus of student and community activities: 
there are more sports events, more intercollegiate games, more cultural offerings, 
more student clubs and organizations, and more opportunities for younger 
students to come on campus. SSU houses Ohio's second largest Governor's 
Summer histitute for high school juniors statewide, has several outreach and 
early intervention programs for schools in its region, hosts science fairs and 
academic competitions, and just earned a three-year federal Upward Bound 
grant to increase its outreach to disadvantaged high school students with the 
potential to succeed in higher education. Continuing education programs draw 
participants of all ages, from Computers for Kids to several successful 
Elderhostels focused on Appalachian life and culture. The Activities Center, 
which can be used as a large auditorium, provides space for symphony concerts, 
major lectures, political rallies, the Air Force Band, pageants, plays, and county 
music festivals. 

Change made it possible for Shawnee State to mount its first capital 
campaign, an effort to provide an equal match for half a million dollars provided 
through the federal Title III Endowment Challenge program. SSU's campaign, 
Crossing the Threshold, met that goal and ended with a $3.8 million addition to 
what was once a very small endowment fund. As a baccalaureate institution, 
Shawnee State is also eligible for more grants and grants from more distant 
sources. 

Shawnee State has not changed its student-oriented approt.ch or its emphasis 
on faculty as excellent teachers. Its mission and goals are built on Shawnee State 
traditions and strengths. As an institution creating a four-year curriculum, faculty 
had the opportunity to "start from scratch," and both the general education core 
and the elementary education certification program have distinctive approaches. 
As a university, Shawnee State has kept its responsiveness to regional business and 
cultural needs, and it has kept the positive town-gmwn relations which are often a 
part of the community college tradition. 

13 

t 



In front of Massie Hall is a reclining stone lion with a curly mane and a 
faintly quizzical look. Where once he faced a row of older homes, he now faces 
the new Library and watches students, faculty, and community residents come 
and go. When Second Street is re-routed, his view will change once more, and 
he'll overlook the new campus green. His life has altered considerably since he 
was ensconced outside of the Ohio University branch campus building in the 
1960s, and Shawnee State University has created change of that same magnitude 
in the education and the lives of its students, and in the heritage of its 
community. 

Catherine H. Roberts 
Assistant President 
Susan Warsaw 

Director of Development and Community Relations 
Shawnee State University 
Portsmouth, OH 45662 



Portfolio Assessment as an Evaluation Tool 

Carolyn Wulfhorst 

Outcry for Acaninlabilily in Education 

The outcry for educationeil accountable grows increasingly louder as we 
move into the last decade of this century. Education 2080: An Education Stratcgi/ 
reports: 

...our employers cannot hire enough qualified workers. 
Immense sums are spent on remedial training, much of it at the 
college level. ...while the age of technology, information and 
communications rewards those nations whose people learn new 
skills to stay ahead, we are still a country that groans at the 
prospect of going back to school.. .(The president is challenging 
Americans to; 'go back to school' and make this a 'Nation of 
students') and is urging every American to continue learning 
throughout his or her life, using the myriad formal and informal 
means available to gain further knowledge and skills. (19) 

Johnston and Packer reinforce the need for educating people to be critical 
thinkers in zoorkforcc 2000: work and workers for the 2'lst Century. "As a society 
becomes more complex, the amount of education and knowledge needed to 
make a productive contribution to the economy becomes greater.... Even the least 
skilled jobs will require a command of reading, computing and thinking that 
was once necessary only for professionals" (p. 116). 

The above cited needs from the work community are a strong driving force in 
the call for greater accountability of our educational system. Assessment of the 
effectiveness of educational programs is being demanded to demonrtrate that these 
programs are working, and i'* 'v are not, to point out the need to "fix them." 

Standardized Testii i^^: 

Standardized testing is one way this assessment is being done on a large 
scale. But standardized tests yield a one time snapshot of performance and 



IC 



14 



Rir 



understanding possessed by the learner. Shepard (1989) lists several limitations 

of standardized tests: 

The Contents of such tests must be negotiated. Most state- 
developed tests go through a consensus-building process. ..these 
procedures are sensible, but they have a homogenizing effect, 
limiting both the breadth and depth of content coverage... The 
narrowing of content.. .constrained by the emphasis on basics 
skills, limiting the 'height' as well as the depth and breadth of 
permissible content ...Given the huge numbers of examinees and 
time limits, test developers use multiple-choice formats to the 
exclusion of tasks aic strikingly shorter and less complex than the 
texts students use for daily instruction. 

Accountability of the educational system is an important issue. Standardized 
tests will give a measurement of one moment in a lifetime of learning. But, because 
of the constraints and problems listed above, an alternative that gives a clearer 
overview of the process as well as the product is desirable. 

Portfolio Asscssmcu t: 

Portfolio assessment will provide an ongoing picture of a learners 
development. 

A portfolio is a purposeful collection of student work that 
exhibits the student's efforts, progress, and achievement in one or 
more areas. The collection must include student participation in 
selecting contents, the criteria for selection, and evidence of 
student self-reflection. ...Portfolio assessment requires students to 
collect and reflect on examples of their work, providing both an 
instructional component to the curriculum and offering the 
opportunity for authentic assessments. If carefully assembled, 
portfolios become an intersection of instruction and assessment: 
they are not just instruction or just assessment, but rather, both. 
Together, instruction and assessment glue more than either glues 
separately. (Paulson, Paulson and Meyer, 1991) 

The establishment of an "intersection between instruction and assessment," 
is the power of the portfolio. No standardized test yet designed, or that ever will 
be designed can engage critical thinking like the synthesis that takes place in the 
writing process. Collaborating with a more experienced instructor in assessing 
the written communication will allow even greater student insight into the 
strengths and weaknesses of his or her writing. Portfolio assessment is an 
excellent means for collaboration between learner and teacher. The portfolio may 
serve as an intersection between instruction and assessment (Paulson and 
Paulson, 1990). 

Portfolio Assessment Provides Active Involvement: 

An effective writing portfolio is much more than a collection of papers 
placed in a folder for the teacher to grade. An effective writing portfolio will 
consist of many pieces of writing, of different types in different stages. The 
effective writing portfolio will provide a vehicle for the instructor and the 
learner to come together collaboratively to discuss the material contained therein 
and to reflect on the development and growth of the writer's abilities. The 
effective writing portfolio will provide a growth profile with samples along the 

15 



i u 



way of the writers developing skills. 

"Portfolios actually '^et students involved in reflecting upon what it is 
they're about; what goais they have; what they're achieving and how they have 
improved" (Tierney, Carter & Desai, 1991). Stratton (1991) lists five questions 
that need to be addressed in determining the content of a student portfolio: 

(1) What kind of structure will the portfolio have? (2) What 
evidence will the portfolio contain? (3) How and when will the 
classroom teacher assess a student's works in the portfolio?(4) 
How will the portfolio be evaluated and scored? and (5) What 
will happen to the portfolio at the end of the term? 

The portfolio itself can take many forms, depending on the student's 
preferences and tastes, the instructor's requirements, and the institutional 
assessment procedi res adoptr.-d. The portfolio is more than just a file of 
materials. It is an active learning environment. The portfolio should contain a 
broad sampling of a variety of types and styles of student writing. Materials to 
be placed in the portfolio should be determined by several vested parties to the 
assessment process. Instructors should provide guidelines for including some 
material to meet curriculum requirements. Student writers should choose some 
pieces based on their own feelings and thoughts that develop as the pieces are 
written. Finally, governing bodies such as school boards, state departments of 
education, or the board of regents may require evidence of mastery of specific 
writing skills. All parties involved in the assessment process should have a clear 
understanding of the purpose, scope, and process of the portfolio and the nature 
of the assessment, including the use of results. 

Assessment Will Streui^^tlien Education: 

Measuring the skills level of the students in the American education system 
with standardized tests is accomplishing little. Standardized testing tells us only 
where the learner was at only one point in his or her development. No 
accounting is given for all of the real world influence on standardized ^'^st scores. 
Standardized testing, indeed, has little to do with the re^^.l world. 

An alternative such as portfolio assessment which engages the learner and 
the facilitative instructor in a collaborative effort to evaluate and build the skills 
level of the learner Is much more valuable. The student will learn how to learn 
through the critical thinking, meaning-making of engagement in reflective 
portfolio assessment. Growth and development of skills in thinking and 
expressing one's ideas will be documented over time as the portfolio evoh^es. 

The outcry for educational accoun^an'l-ity should grow increasingly louder 
as we move into the last decade of this century, we now live in a world 
community and must be competetive in that community. But, educational 
accountability should be documented through meaningful, quality assessment 
processes, not single shot testing. 

Carolyn Wulfhorst 

Pre-Technical Studies Faculty Coordinator 
Central Ohio Technical College 
Newark, OH 43055 



2 J 



16 



Teaching Entrepreneurship to the 
Two- Year College Student: An Instructor's Guide 

Ralph Lindeman 

Entrepreneurship is one of today's hot topics. In both the academic and 
business worlds, the career alternative of starting one's own business is 
perceived as an increasingly viable option to the traditional path of corporate 
employment. The emergence of the smaller, innovative business enterprise was 
recognized in the 1980s by the leading business schools such as Harvard, 
Wharton, and Northwestern, who incorporated the study of entreprenerrship as 
an integral part of their curricula. 

Although not as well publicized as the efforts of the major business schools, 
the study of entrepreneurship at the two year college level is .ilso increasing. 
During the past two years, the Geauga Campus of Kent State University has 
added entrepreneurship to its business curriculum on a regular basis. Although 
the Geauga Campus is the smallest of KSU's regional campuses, with a Fall 1992 
enrollment of approximately 700, this program has drawn enthusiastic response. 

Teaching entrepreneurship is different from teaching most other classes at 
the two year college level. The purpose of this paper is to describe some of these 
differences, and to offer some guidelines in the areas of textbooks, exams, 
instructional/k-arning methodology, and grading criteria. 

Student population. As an elective with a specialized interests, the course 
tends to draw a more diverse range of students than other programs. Over the 
two-years the program has been offered at Geauga, nearly a third of the students 
have been non-business majors. Students majoring in such diverse areas as 
history, general studies, and even biology have enrolled. We had one student 
whose only course at Kent State University was entrepreneurship. He was a 
graduate of Denison University who enrolled to learn more about 
entrepreneurial strategies to enhance a small vending business he had started a 
few months before. 

In part, this diverse student population emanates from the fact that, as a 
general elective, there is no prerequisite. However, professors teaching these 
courses should discourage students from taking this program if their academic 
background or business experience appears insufficient. Since most of our 
elective courses at Geauga have small enrollments — the largest entrepreneurship 
class we've had totaled 12 students — overall class progress is likely to be 
impeded if one or two students do not even understand the basic rudiments of 
business. As an instructor, one does not want to spend time teaching, for 
example, the basics of accounting in an entrepreneurship class. 

With student backgrounds ranging from some who are only a year or two 
out of high school to middle aged executives seeking a career alternative, one 
might think that the classroom interaction would be limited~or even 
nonexistent. While a few problems have surfaced, the overall experience has 
been very positive. Students are encouraged to strengthen their creativity 
skills-a trait long recognized as an important characteristic of successful 
entrepreneurs. 

One of the best creative business ideas came from a student barely two 
years out of high school who listed his major as "undecided," This young, but 
creative student developed his business plan-required of each of our 
students-around a firm he called "SafeWay Used Car Cc nsultants." His business 



17 



idea was to provide sellers of used cars with a thorough mechanical check-up 
prior to them offering the vehicle f.^: oale. I thought the idea to be excellent; 
some months later I noticed an article in a leading business journal where an 
entrepreneur in New Jersey had developed a large business using exactly the 
same concept! 

Textbooks. At the two-year level, entrepreneurship should be taught as a 
"hands-on" course-a practical guide for those considering forming- their own 
business. As such, the textbook becomes more of a reference guide rather than a 
major learning tool. Some may not agree with this, but in general 1 have found 
the quality of textbooks available to the entrepreneurship instructor to be at best 
fair. 1 won't name them here, but some entrepreneurship texts I have referenced 
appear to be warmed-over versions of "introduction to business" texts. As such, 
they contain the standard topics of management, accounting, marketing, human 
resources, etc., with a few small business chapters added. If you are seeking a 
meaningful text, steer away from these traditional types. 

Fortunately, some of the more recently published entrepreneurship texts are 
improved. The more creative texts stress the entrepreneurial aspects of 
business-particularly in the marketing and human resourc? area-rather than 
general business p 'inciples. Look for the texts whose chapter sequence focuses 
on creative entrepreneurship topics such as innovative marketing strategies, 
managing the growing enterprise, and creative financing. 

One technique which has proved valuable at the Geauga Campus is to use 
supplemental texts. These are resources which are really not designed as 
complete texts, and may not cover all aspects of entrepreneurship, but can be 
very valuable as a supplemental reference. Some of these are actually designed 
for more advanced study, such as in graduate seminars, but 1 have found has 
applicability at the two-year level as well. One such example is Startup: An 
Entrepreneur's Guide to Ijiunchin^ & Mana^in;^ the New Venture (Rock Creek Press, 
1989). Written by William J. Stolze, a successful entrepreneur himself, this 
shorter text focuses on the innovative marketing thrust of the entrepreneur. In 
this well written book, Stolze draws on his experiences as founder of RF 
Communications, Inc., an entrepreneurial business which he and his partners 
built from scratch into a worldwide leading producer of single sideband radio 
communications. Since this text focuses on marketing and business planning, it 
cannot readily be used as a standalone text for a two-year school format. 
However, it is a valuable supplement which, for example, could be put on 
reserve in the campus library for students to draw on during the semester. 

To reiterate, regardless of the text or texts selected, 1 have found that texts in 
an entrepreneurship course are best kept as a reference guide. Additionally — for 
reasons discussed further in the instructional methodology section — the 
instructor should consider assigning only selective chapters which emphasize 
entrepreneurship principles, rather than the entire book. 

Exams and Grading Criteria. It is especially important in entrepreneurship 
that grading criteria be clearly specified in the syllabus. As compared ^o other 
courses at the two-year level, exams should form only a portion of the total 
grading scale. Experience suggests that perhaps no more than 60-70% of the final 
grade should be determining by pure exams. I recommend a major portion of 
each student's final grade-up to 25%-bQ determined through a Strategic 
Business Plan on an existing or proposed business. A specific, separately 
identified, grading criteria for this project should be determined. Criteria may 
include such items as (1) creativity of business idea, (2) organization of plan, (3) 
integration of plan between key sections, and (4) grammar/clarity. 



18 





When we first started teaching entrepreneurship at the Geauga Campus, 
there was some concern about such a major creative writing exercise within an 
two-year environment. However, most students have been able to handle this 
exercise well The concept of the "SafeWay Auto Consultants" emanated from 
this exercise. 

In terms of exams, entrepreneurship lends itself to a combination approach. 
In addition to the traditional objective portions-most entrepreneurship texts 
come with test bankj-short essay, case studies and exercises are also important 
testing criteria. Exercises focus on understanding the financing aspects of the 
newer enterprise. The case studies are either drawn from our text or 
supplemental materials from other sources. 

For a semester length ccurse, we typically have two hourly exams during 
the term, plus a final. The final is comprehensive in nature, but concentrates on 
material covered after the second hourly exam. Exams typically count for about 
60% of the final grade, with an additional 10V( based upon attendance /class 
participation. 

Lcarnins^ Methodology. In contrast to manv basic courses, straight lecture is 
only one of many components of the learning process in entrepreneurship. Our 
class time is divided between class discussion of assigned cases from the text, 
and discussion of the reading material, as well as lectures based upon the 
textbook reading. About 3-4 case studies are assigned each semester, with some 
done on an individual basis and some on a small group basis. Case studies are 
assigned from a theme perspective, e.g. one case may focus on innovative 
marketing strategies, a second on financing the new enterprise, a third on 
human relations, etc. 

In scheduling the class work over the semester, 1 frequently have found it 
necessary to adjust the order of the chapters in the text from the usual sequential 
format. Through doing so, one is able to better integrate the case studies to the 
overall learning process, and also move the class toward its natural 
conclusion-the strategic business plan prepared by each student. Another reason 
for this out-of-sequence scheduling is to accommodate the topics covered by our 
guest speakers. Quite frequently, some chapters in the text are not covered at all, 
so that the more important material may be examined in more depth. 

Another learning technique we have found a valuable addition to our 
program is guest speakers from the field of small business. During the semester 
at least three guest speakers are invited to our campus. These normally are 
individuals who have started their own businesses and come to share their 
experiences with the class. During the past two years, we have drawn upon the 
outstanding entrepreneurial resources which exist in Northeastern Ohio. Some 
of the more interesting guests who have visited the Geauga Campus include: 

• Robert D. Gries, President, Gries Investment Company, and minority 
owner of the Cleveland Browns, who spoke to our class on "Reflections 
of a Venture Capitalist" 

• Sherrill D. Paul, President, Trolley Tours of Cleveland, who discussed her 
experiences in forming the firm which operates the popular "Lolly the 
Trolley" tours in downtown Cleveland 

• Timothy D. LaGanke, President, Lube Stop of Cleveland, who provided 
our students with a serious, yet light-hearted presentation on how he 
started and built the largest quick change oil company in Northeast Ohio 

These guest speakers, plus others, have brought the "real world" of 
entrepreneurship to the Geauga Campus. Students are given a form to assess the 

19 



ERLC, 



positives and negatives of each speaker's business, and quizzed on this as part 
of the final exam. 

A final learning method emanates from the Strategic Business Plan which 
each student must prepare near the end of the semester. Not only are students 
expected to prepare a professionally done written plan, they must present it 
verbally to their classmates. This process takes 3-4 class sessions each 
semester — depending on class size, and involves both feedback from the class on 
the business plan. In this process, students not only learn more about each 
other's business ideas, but also how to give (and take) constnjctive criticism. The 
presenter is given the opportunity to defend his/her plan in an actual meeting 
situation, such as budding entrepreneurs would when meeting potential 
investors in their enterprise. 

Our work on the entrepreneurship programs at the Geauga Campus is not 
complete. With each new class, we learn new techniques to better serve our 
students planning to enter the world of business on their own. At the same time, 
we believe we have made a positive start on a new program we expect will 
continue into future years. 

Ralph Lindeman 
Assistant Professor 
Business Technology 
Kent State University 
Geauga Campus 
Burton Twp., OH 44021 

Applications of EECAP: Improving 
Writing Assessment through Research 

John Fallon 

As a first year Project Director in the Ohio Board Regents' Early English 
Composition Assessment Program (EECAP), 1 was introduced to a statewide 
initiative to improve writing in the high schools. EECAP programs are 
attempting to bridge the gap in classroom writing environments between h"gh 
school and college. 

Revised EECAP 
Trait Scoring Guide 
Ori^atiizatiou 

The writer addressed the assigned topic and focuses on a specific, 
manageable thesis which guides the reader smoothly in a deliberate, controlled, 
and interesting pattern. The writing has a discernible beginning, middle, and 
end and provides an interesting pattern of organization. Furthermore, the writer 
makes effective and creative use of transitions, resulting in a paper with an 
apparent, logical, and easy structure. It is obvious that the writer not only 
understands the assignment but also makes clear his/her intention through 
focusing on a major point and maintaining a consistent point of view. 

Middle 

The writer's thesis is inappropriately focused, yet the writing has some 



20 



sense of direction. The assigned topic, though, is insufficiently addressed. 
Transitions are used, but they are often mechanical and repetitious. The paper 
seems imbalanced and might contain forced logic or flawed e'liphasis. The focus 
of the essay may drift somewhat from beginning to end, giving the impression 
that the writer is not always in full control of the topic r purpose. 

Lcno 

The writer does not deal with the assigned topic and seems unaware of any 
organizational pattern at all. As a result, even though the paper may have a 
thesis, the paper lacks a sense of direction or seems completely out of tlie control 
of the writer. There is little or no use of transitional devices, causing the reader to 
have to invent logical connections between the ideas. The writer seems to have 
no discernible intention or purpose; the paper demonstrates no point of view. 

Dcvclopmriit 

The writer uses original, fresh, and unusual ideas; the paper manages, in 
fact, to make the common uncommon. Sufficient to develop the topic, the points 
are appropriate and developed enough to convince the reader and satisfy the 
task at hand. In addition, details are related and described with deptli cuid 
specificity; the writer not only uses real experiences, but discusses them with 
insight. The writer has a developed awareness of his/lier audience, 
demonstrated through the choice of appropriate details that frequently go 
beyond the personal. 

Middle 

The writer offers supporting ideas, but they are usually predictable and 
mundane. There are sufficient details, but they are somewhat limited in range, 
mainly personal. There is some unevenne:>s in development, with some points 
unsubstantiated. The writer does not seem to have a clear awareness of who 
his/her audience is. 

Low 

The writer offers few ideas, and they are often unclear. The writer is not able 
to support the topic, so the essay remains generalized and unconvincing. If 
details are used, they are sparse, superficial, and repetitious, and often unrelated 
to the topic. The writer gives the impression of being unable to find any 
relationship between real experience and the assignment. The writer shows no 
awareness of the audience. 

Sh/lc 

The writing is original and unique. The reader senses that the writer has 
consciously created a persona; the writer has appropriately addressed the 
audience. Both the vocabulary and sentence constructions are rich and varied 
and may involve intentional violation of convention. The writer is able to draw 
successfully upon figurative language and various rhetorical devices to add 
variety and emphasis. 

Middle 

The writing is adequate but ordinary. While the diction and sentence 



21 



construction are usually appropriate, they are also predictable. The vocabulary is 
adequate but occasionally limited, and the writer may rely on cUchcs. The writer 
has some success in attempting to use figurative languages and various 
rhetorical devices. 

l.n 

The writing is unimaginative and ineffective. The reader is distracted by 
inaccuracies and unwarranted shifts in diction. The vocabulary is noticeably 
deficient, repetitious, inappropriate and uses obvious cHches or dead wood. The 
writer lacks or ineffectively uses figurative language and various rhetorical 
devices. Senter re construction is unvaried, overly simplistic, or awkward. 

Mcchnuicji 

The writing is relatively mistcike-free. The sentence structure is generally 
correct even in varied and complicated sentence pattern. Fragments are 
acceptable if used effectively and sparingly. There are few errors in usage by 
present standards of formarwritten English. There are no serious violations of 
punctuation, capitalization, abbreviation, use of number, etc., beyond what 
appear to be slips of the pen. Misspellings occur only in words that are hard to 
spell. The spelling is consistent; words arc not spelled correctly in one sentence 
and misspelled in another. 

Middle 

The writing contains a few errors in some areas, but they do not detract 
from the overall meaning. The sentence structure is generally correct, but there 
may be occasional errors in complicated patterns; there may be some errors in 
parallelism, subordination, consistency of tenses, reference of pronouns, etc. 
There are a few departures from conventional usage, but not enough to obscure 
meaning or to become very noticeable to the reader. There are some violations of 
punctuation, capitaii/.ation, abbreviations, use of numbers, etc. beyond what 
appear to be slips of the pen. There may be several spelling errors in hard words 
and a few violations of spelling rules. 

Low 

The assignment contains sufficient errors to detract from the overall 
meaning. There are so many errors in sentence structure patterns and basic 
usage that the reader has difficulty interpreting what the writer means. Basic 
punctuation is omitted or haphazard, resulting in fragments, run-on sentences, 
etc. There are many spelling errors, particularly in often -used words. 

In Lima Technical College's (LTC) EECAP project, we analytically assessed high 
school student writing and then designed intervention strategies to remediate 
deficiencies. F-)llowing is an account of how the the use of an EECAP trait 
scoring writing as?ossment model uncovered biases in Lima Technical College's 
writing placement process. 

Lima Tech's EECAP program developed a rubric to evaluate the writing of the 
high school juniors from Lima Tech's EECAP schools. The EECAP rubric took the 
shape of an analytical trait scoring grid (see Table 1) that rated four writing traits, 
"organization," "development," " style," and "mechanics," on a scale of 1 (low) to 6 
(high). Prior to EECAP, I had been trying to think of a way to evaluate LTC's 
placement process. Now that our EECAP group had field tested a rubric to 

22 

.?3 



c 



11 

5 £ 



..He 

O (J o 

t; u o 

.£ 2 ^ 

LU 

§ 2 ? 

i2 



a. o 

i 

^ Si 

^ i 



5 ,n 



^ o 

2 ^ 

< S z 

^ 1 ?j 

"5 Ft: 

^ to 



o 



? c 

^5 



> ^ 
c ^ ;S 
.2 O v; 

£ 5: 2 

rj 

■B 

I ll 



c ; 

.S "S ' 
0-5 



.E c g -c 



d X ^ t-i 



O 3 



C 3 a "-i^ 

s 5 1,1 



I 



■5 < 
o 



E ■■ 



I $ I l''^ 



o in " (/I Xp r: 
ri it! \C r>^ 



s. 



I 1 1 1 ^ -2 ^ 

^1 a, ^ 5 o ■ 

15 .-^ ri 1 



00 5 



;a C N 



c c »- 



w c c: C 



^r CI. T3 



23 



measure writing ability, I felt that I had a way to evaluate LTCs current method of 
placement. I used the EECAP rubric to compare the EECAP analytical trait scoring 
model to the current LTC method of writing placement, which is holistic. 

First off, to set up my comparison, I needed a sample of student writing to 
assess. I decided to use LTC students writing placement exams and evaluate these 
writing samples using the four-trait EECAP rubric. I also kept track of which of 
Lima Tech s three levels of first-year writing classes, low, middle, and high, these 
students being assessed were placed into. Another piece of information I collected 



TRAIT SCORES AND PLACEMENT PERCENTAGES 

FOR 3 LEVELS OF WRITING CLASS 

ORGANIZATION 




TRAIT SCORES AND PLACEMENT PERCENTAGES 
FOR 3 LEVELS OF WRITING CLASS 

DEVELOPMENT 



100 



80 



Percentage 
within ^0 



each 
trait 
score 



40 



20 



1-2-3 4 5-6 

Trait Scores 

! Slow □ middle Hhigh ! 



was the grades these students being studied received in their first writing course at 
LTC. Now 1 had three groups of information; and I wanted to find out the 
relationship between EECAP trait scores and Lima Tech college placement; and the 
relationship between HECAP trait scores and Lima Tech class grade. For the study I 
took measures on 132 students who took the Lima Tech writing placement exam in 
Winter, Spring, and Summer quarters 1991. 

The results of the study showed that all 4 EECAP traits had a statistically 



26 



TRAIT SCORES AND PLACEMENT PERCENTAGES 
FOR 3 LEVELS OF WRITING CLASS 

STYLE 



loo- 



se 



Percentage 
within 60 
each 
trait 
score 



40 



20 



0 



4 

Trait Scores 



1-2-3 

Slovv/ □ middle Shigh 



5-6 



significant relationship to placenaent into the 3 levels of LTC first year writing 
classes. (All positive correlations mentioned in this paper were significant to the 
p .05 level-) In other words, students with higher EECAP trait scores were 
generally placed into the high hvel class of Lima Tech's 3 first year writings 
classes. And students with lower trait scores were generally placed into the low 
level first-year writing class. The correlation held true for all four traits. Taking a 
closer look at one of the traits will help clarify this correlation. Figure 1 is a bar 



27 



OX 



graph which illustrates the correlation between placement and EECAP trait 
scores for ''organization." For each trait score(s), from 1-6, the bars on the graph 
indicate what percentage of students were placed into the 3 levels of writing 
classes. For all the students who scored a 1 or 2 in "organization/' about 45% 
were placed into the low writing class; about 40% were placed into the middle 
writing class; and about 15% were placed into the high writing class. Thus, a 
lower trait score correlates to placement into a lower level writing class. And, as 
the trait scores went up, less students were placed into the lower class and more 
were placed into the middle and high classes. Continuing to look at Figure 1, of 



TRAIT SCORES AND PLACEMENT PERCENTAGES 

FOR 3 LEVELS OF WRITING CLASS 

MECHANICS 



100 



80 

Percentage 
within 60 
each 
trait 
score 



40 



20 



0 



El 



1-2 3 4 5-6 

Trait Scores 

I Slow □ middle El high I 



on 28 



all the students who scored a 3 in "organization/' 40% were placed into the low 
writing class; 40% were placed into the middle writing class; and 20% were 
placed into the high writing class. And of the students who scored a 4, about 
60% were placed into the high writing class. Only about 20% were placed into 
the middle class and about 15% into the low class. Of the students who scored a 
5 or 6, about 78% were placed into the high writing class with only about 15% 
being placed into the middle class and 5% into the low class. Overall, students 
with a low trait score were placed into the low level writing class and students 
with a high trait score were placed into the high level writing class. 

You will notice that this pattern is consistent with the pattern shown in 
Figures 2 and 3 which are are bar graphs illustrating the correlation between 
placement and trait scores for both "development" and "style." A lower trait 
score for either "development" or "style" correlates to placement into the lower 
level writing class. A higher trait scores correlates to placement into the higher 
level writing class. While the pattern is consistent for "development" and 
"style," the correlation is not as dramatic as it was for "organization." 

Looking at the final trait, "mechanics" (Figure 4), the relationship between 
placement and trait scores is much more substantial than it was for any of the 
three previous traits. A low trait score (1-2) correlates to placement into the low 
level writing class at about a 70% rate while a high trait score (5-6) correlates to 
placement into a high level writing class at a 100% rate. Every student who 
scored a 5 or 6 on "mechanics" was placed into the high level writing course. 
The pattern for "mechanics" is consistent with the patterns for the other three 
traits, yet in "mechanics" the pattern appears to be more substantial. 

(If you are still with me, and all this talk about correlations and percentages 
has not put you off,) Let us look at another set of relationships, (to confuse 
matters momentarily) that will show there are areas in which, generally 
speaking, Lima Tech's placement testing does not correlate well with EECAP 
trait scores as a method of placement. In Figure 5 you will find the results of the 
correlation between Lima Tech placement and EECAP trait scores as a method of 
placement. Of all the students placed by Lima Tech into the low level writing 
course, EECAP had a coincidence rate, or agreement rate, of 75% That is, in the 
low class EECAP and Lima Tech were placing students in the same course 75% 
of the time and into a different course 25% of the time. Looking at placement 
into the high level writing course, you will notice that EECAP placement and 
Lima Tech placement coincide about 809( of the time. Thus in the high level 
writing course, EECAP is placing students differently than Lima Tech in 20% of 
the cases. The most dramatic difference in placement between EECAP and Lima 
Tech occurs in the middle course. Of all the students Lima Tech placed into the 
middle course, EECAP correlates at only about a 40% rate. Thus, about 60% of 
the time EECAP is placing the students from the middle section into one of the 
two other sections, low or high. While I cannot tell which method of placement 
is "better," 1 can tell that the two methods placed 45 of the 132 students 
differently and that placement into the middle course is especially divergent. 

Another way to look at the relationship between EECAP trait scores and 
Lima Tech placement is to look, once again, at the position of "mechanics." 
When we do, we will find that 'mechanics" is as good a predictor for placement 
into Lima Tech writing classes as all 4 EECAP traits put together. (See if you can 
follow me here.) To me this is a really interesting correlation. In Figure 6 you will 
see a table that shows the relationship between using combinations of EECAP 
trait scores for writing placement and Lima Tech placement. The combination of 
all 4 EECAP traits (0="organization," D="development," S="style,' and 

29 



CORRELATION BETWEEN EECAP TRAIT SCORES 
AND LIMA TECH PLACEMENT 




Lima Tech Placement 



M="mechanics") used for placement showed that 45 students were placed 
differently than Lima Tech's method as you already know). Now, what is 
interesting about the data represented in Figure 6 is that whenever "mechanics" 
is included into the combination of EECAP traits being compared to Lima Tech 
placement, the number of students placed differently is lower than it otherwise 
would be. Looking at the combination of "organization/' "style/' and 
"mechanics/' 45 students were placed differently. Looking at the combination of 
"organization/' "development/' and "mechanics/' 47 students were placed 

30 



RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EECAP 
TRAIT SCORES AND LIMA TECH PLACEMENT 



EECAP Traits 



O 
O 
O 
O 



O 
O 
O 



O 



M.. 



M., 
M., 
M., 



M. 



M. 
M. 



M., 



Number of Students 
Plac ed Differently 

45 

56 

45 

45 

48 

58 

56 

47 

69 

48 

48 

62 

69 

48 

73 



differently. The pattern is consistent; whenever "mechanics" is included in the 
combination of traits, the number of students placed differently between the two 
methods is lower than it otherwise would be. If we rated placement essays tor 
"mechanics" alone (second line from the bottom in Figure 6), about 48 students 
would be placed differently than Lima Tech's method. Yet when we used all 4 
traits, as we saw in the top line of Figure 6, 45 students were placed differently. 
Amazingly, "mechanics" alone is nearly as good a predictor of placement, in 
terms of correlating to the Lima Tech placement method, as all 4 traits put 
together. Yet despite "mechanics" relative predictive strength, more than one out 
of three students (45 out of 132) were classified differently between the two 
processes, even in the best model of correlation which used the combination of 
all four traits. 

In looking at the relationship between EECAP trait scores and grade in the 
Lima Tech writing class, two EECAP traits - "mechanics" and "style" - showed 
a statistically significant relationship to grade Students who scored a 2 in "style" 
had a mean class grade of C. The mean class grade continued to rise as trait 
scores rose so that students who scored a 6 on "style" for the traits had a mean 
class grade of B+. For "mechanics" the correlation was even more dramatic. 
Students who scored a 1 in "mechanics" also averaged a C in their wrt ng class. 
But students who scored a 6 in "mechanics" had a mean class grade of A-. Thus, 
for both "style" and "mechanics," as the trait score went up so did class grade. 
The other two traits did not positively correlate to grade in the writing class. 

The results of this study reveal "mechanics" relative predictive strength. 
This result suggests that structure is valued in the Lima Tech placement process 
as shown by the relationship between "mechanics" and placement into the 3 
levels of Lima Tech writing classes. We can also see structure is valued in the 
relationship between "mechanics" and grades. 

31 




The implications of this study are two fo.d. For Lima Tech it appears that 
the placement process is unintentionally placing a high value on a student's 
ability to use appropriate grammar, spelling, and punctuation. 

Instead of placing such a premium on "mechanics/' the Lima Tech 
placement readers might want to think about how they could evaluate for 
content and critical thinking which would, perhaps, be better measured by the 
EECAP traits of "style" (which includes a rhetorical component), 
"development," and "organization/' For other institutions as well, the study 
asks us to reexamine our values in writing (which ought to extend beyond 
whether a paper is only 'mechanically" correct) and to reflect on the values 
embedded in such evaluative activities as writing placement Schools need to be 
able to figure out just what it is that's actually being assessed when they 
examine student writing and then further question whether that assessment is 
compatible with their stated criteria for good writing. More fundamentally, I 
believe tliat studies such as this illustrate how research can open up to us new 
possibilities for documenting what is happening in our writing programs, 

[This research was conducted under the supervision of Joseph Petraglia, 
PhD, Bowling Green State University (BGSU) and submitted to Professor 
Petraglia in a BGSU graduate course. Research in Composition. Donna 
Sagonowsky, Dr, Sally Schwartz, and Thomas Beery of Lima Technical College 
helped the authors work through the data analysis and implications of this 
study] 

John Fallon 

EECAP Project Manager 
Lima Technical College 
Lima, OH 45904 



PLUS ONE 

To Acquire Stature: 
"To Thine Own Self Be True" 

James O. Hammons 

Rather than ivasic time attempting to impress universities, eamnninity colleges should 
focus their efforts on building stature h\j striving for excellence. (Reprinted zcith the 
permission of ERIC, taken from Number 78, Summer 1992 edition of New Directions 
for Community Colleges. 

The time has come for community colleges to recognize what some of them 
already know: The only constituency with whom they need to acquire stature is 
themselves. For too long, community colleges have been looking to their 
baccalaureate-granting "big brothers" for approval, rather than following the 
example set by some community colleges ai.J relying on their peers for 
recognition of excellence. In this chapter, I focus on those community colleges 
that arc striving for excellence within the world of the community college. 

32 



To begin, I explain why it is virtually impossible for community colleges to 
acquire stature based on what nearby four-year colleges and universities think of 
them. Then, I describe the characteristics that contribute to excellence in a 
community college — in essence, the qualities that together characterize an ideal 
community college. I conclude by explaining why now is the time for 
community colleges to focus on achieving excellence. 

Although this chapter is rooted in a great deal of personal experience (over 
five hundred separate visits to the campuses of over 170 community colleges in 
forty-two states and provinces), I want to acknowledge in advance that it is an 
opinion piece. Naturally, in those instances in which I refer to the v/orks of 
others, I give them credit. But make no mistake about it, this work is the 
expression of one person's observations and experience — largely compiled in 
hotel rooms where 1 reflected on what I had seen, heard, or felt during visits to 
community college campuses. 

Why Trying to Acquire Stature by Impressing Four- 
Year Institutions Is Counterproductive 

There are at least two reasons that community colleges should not waste 
time and energy attempting to impress four-year institutions. The first reason is 
rooted in the dilemma that a community college president faces when trying to 
impress a four-year college or university. The dilemma is quite simple: Whom 
should one try to impress? Let us look at the alternatives, starting with the 
president of the university or college. How does a community college president 
go about trying to impress a university president? Does the process begin with a 
meeting, and, if so, where should it h ^ held — on the university or the community 
college campus? Assuming that the meeting takes place at the community 
college, on what should the meeting focus to ensure the maximum positive 
impression? Facilities? Faculty qualifications? The success of community college 
transfer students at the senior institutions? And even if the university president 
is properly impressed, so what? It is naive and uninformed about the nature of 
universities and the priorities of most university presidents to assume that the 
invited guest is going to return to the university and extol the virtues of the 
community college. At best, the meeting will have impressed one person — one 
who will quickly explain the limits of his or her influence. 

If the community college president is determined and not easily daunted, 
the same process can be carried out at the level of vice president and again at the 
level of dean. Decisions will need to be made V)ut whom to contact and what 
the focus of campus tours and meetings should be. If the meetings are fully 
successful, the vice president and the deans may well say, ''You know, we had no 
idea that you community colleges were doing such a good job. We're really 
impressed! But you realize, of course, that the vice president and the deans at a 
university are not where the real power is. The strength of any university is in its 
departments, and department chairs are the ones with the power. That's where 
the real decisions are made." The number of individuals to be impressed at this 
level provides some indication of the enormity of the task, and the reason I 
would advise the community college president to "forget it." 

The second reason that it is counterproductive to try to impress four-year 
institutions is related to the nature of universities (and many four-year colleges). 
Cohen and March (1973, p. 3) described universities as "organized anarchies 
[because the typical university! does not know what it is doing. Its goals are 
either vague or in dispute.... Its major participants wander in and out of the 
organization." Having spent over twenty-five years as a student and a professor 



33 



at five four-yenr college nnd university campuses and having worked as a 
consultant on the campuses of fifteen to twenty four-year colleges, I think that 
these two authors are right on target. Given that, I question why a community 
college that is striving for excellence would be interested in seeking recognition 
from that kind of organization. 

In addition, universities, by their very nature, are notoriously 
compartmentalized and inner-directed. Usually, it is only when their own self- 
interests are severely threatened that their actions reflect their acceptance of the 
idea that they exist in an open system, and they make an effort to be responsive 
to the needs of the society that funds them — or to the "feeder" colleges that send 
them students. 

Defining Excellence 

My article "Five Potholes in the Road to Community College Excellence" 
(Hammons. 1987) generated a few letters, several telephone calls, and two or 
three heated discussions in the hallways of several meetings. The article 
described "potholes" or deterrents to community colleges' achievement of or 
aspirations for excellence. I did not define excellence in that article. Here is a 
good place to do so: Excellence is "accomplishing one's mission, goals, and 
objectives in a cost-efficient manner, while maintaining a positive institutional 
climate for staff and students." In the following pages, I outline twelve 
characteristics that exemplify ways in which community colleges have 
succeeded in achieving excellence. While all of the characteristics are important, 
the first three are critical. 

Excellent Colleges /^re Clear About Their Purposes and Have Goals That 
Clearly Support Those Purposes, In hi Search of Exci'llcucc: /.rsso/fS [row 
America's Best -Run Cow panics, one of the most popular books on management 
ever published, Peters and Waterman (1*^^82) discuss eight characteristics of 
successful American corporations, one of which is "stick to the knitting." While 
some scholars (for example, Carroll, 1983) have been quite critical of these two 
authors' methods and findings, my experience supports the relevance of that 
characteristic to community colleges, but with one caveat: Colleges cannot "stick 
to the knitting" if what they are knitting (1 equate knitting with purposes) is not 
well known, agreed to, and used as the basis for decision making of all types, 
ranging from the criteria used in evaluating personnel t(7 decisions about 
organization structure. Three cliches amplify this caveat: "If you do not know 
where you are going, any road will do." "If you do not know where you are 
going, how will you know how to get there?" "If you know where you are 
going, you'll know when you arrive.'' 

Excellent Colleges Develop Action Plans (Including Budgets) Tied to 
Their Purposes, Goals, and Short-Term Objectives. Excellent colleges do not 
develop master plans that sit on shelves gathering dust. They develop the plans 
and then they set out to implement them. One sure indicator of the seriousness 
of any planning effort is the extent to which budgets and plans are related. In 
most colleges, planning and budgeting are like parallel lines — no m. 'ter how far 
they extend, they never meet. It is difficult to understand why, in ai. institution 
managed largely by persons holding doctoral degrees in educational 
administration, this situation exists. 

In the exception-to-the-rule colleges, planning and the setting of goals and 
objectives are prerequisites to budgeting. In these institutions, it is a well-known 
and accepted way of life that expend itua*s for new projects or new positions can be 
considered only if they werc earlier approved as part of the objectives for that year. 

34 



Co 



Excellent Colleges Hold Themselves Accountable, As Crosby (1979) has 
observed, quality is contormance to requirements. The previous characteristics 
are meaningless without some method of enforcing accountability. 

The history of higher education clearly demonstrates that colleges and 
universities have consistently been criticized for lack of responsibility But when 
the current accountability movement began, it did so because institutions were 
not holding themselves accountable. Many years ago, I described a four-step 
process by which a college could derive accountability statements (outcomes 
assessments) to accompany statements of mission, goals, and means for 
achieving them (Hammons, 1977). I concluded by observing that "the utilization 
of the process . . . can be a first step towards restoring public confidence in 
higher education" (p. 135). If community colleges had moved to implement 
some version of that model, they would not be drowning in the pool of 
accountability laws and regulations that now surround them, and the current 
pressure for outcomes assessment would not be required. 

Excellent Colleges Have an Institutionally Approved Statement of Values. 
A number of colleges meet the first three criteria. It is clear where Ihey are going, 
how they are going to get there, and how they will determine if they have 
arrived. What is missing is an understanding of liow they will behave en route; 
in particular, how they will treat the people who make their journey possible. To 
date, perhaps a handful of colleges have taken the time to think through their 
values and put them in writing. The importance of values in business and 
industry is well documented in Ouchi (1981), Although written for American 
business, there is much about Ouchi's book that makes it worthwhile reading for 
community college educators. Especially helpful are the value statements in the 
appendices of the book. 

For example, Hewlett-Packard's statement of corporate objectives says that 
"we are proud of the people we have in our organization, their performance and 
their attitude toward their jobs and toward the company. The company has been 
built around the individual, the personal dignity of each, and the recognition of 
achievements.... We want people to enjoy their work at H-P and to be proud of 
their accomplishments. This means that we must make sure that each person 
receives the recognition he or she needs and deserves. In the final analysis, 
people at all levels determine the character and strength of our company" 
(Ouchi, 1981, pp. 230-231), Equally of interest is Intel's statement about informal 
culture: "Open I constructive I confrontation is encouraged at all levels of the 
corporation, and is viewed as a method of problem solving and conflict 
resolution. Hiding problems is not acceptable. Covert political activity is 
strongly discouraged. Decision by consensus is the rule. Decisions once made 
are supported. Position in the organization is not the basis for the quality of 
ideas. Decisions are encouraged to be made at the lowest possible level in the 
organization" (Ouchi, 1981, pp. 251-252), These two statements articulate clear, 
succinct values that are the vital missing link in the planning documents of most 
colleges, even those that are well down the road to excellence. 

Excellent Colleges Have an Institutionalized Human Resources 
Development Program. In the last twenty-five years, there have been a number 
of short-term, largely unsuccessful efforts at implementing staff development 
programs in community colleges. Today, a very optimistic estimate would be 
that only a small percentage of community colleges have a comprehensive 
humar resources development program that is institutionalized, that is, an 
integral part of the college. To be comprehensive, the program must encompass 
all aspects of human resources development, including advertising, recruitment. 



35 



selection, orientation, development, and evaluation. be institutionalized, the 
pro^»,ram must be made a part of the regular budget process, not dependent on 
grant money or funds leftover from the budget process. 

As of this writing, a doctoral student at the University of Arkansas is 
analyzing results from the first comprehensive, national assessment of the 
human resources development function in community colleges. From a 
preliminary review of the data, it is clear that most community colleges do not 
have either an institutionalized program or a comprehensive program. This 
finding seems somewhat incongruous given that community colleges are in the 
human resources development business. It places them in a situation much like 
that of the house painter whose house needs painting! 

Excellent Colleges Have Effective Performance Appraisal Plans for All 
Personnel. One of the single most important ingredients in the success of any 
organization is a system for recognizing, rewarding, and reinforcing the 
performance of its people. Based on the very large number of colleges that send 
representatives t() workshops and conferences on the topic of faculty evaluation, 
as well as on my own experiences in working with over fifty colleges as they 
attempted to develop a way of evaluating faculty and managerial performance, 
il is clear that evaluation is a problem with which most community colleges are 
still wrestling. In this regard, one observation must be made: Whether 
performance plans are used for developmental or judgmental purposes does not 
appear to be as important as whether employees know what their supervisors 
think about their performance and whether employees believe that their 
productive performance is being recognized, rewarded, and reinforced. 

Excellent Colleges Adapt to Environmental-Social Changes. Compared to 
the ages of many four-year colleges, most of today's community colleges are in 
their infancy. In fact, for many, most of their "charter" faculty are still active. Yet, 
a surprising number of these institutions are just as steeped in tradition or as set 
in their ways as some of the oldest of the four-year colleges. 

The history of the community college is a history of change. Some analysts 
of the community college are convinced that this ability to adapt to change has 
been a major factor behind the success of the community college. The excellent 
colleges are the ones whose environmental antennae are out and working, 
whose internal climate sensors are on and registering, and whose 
administrations are not afraid to rethink priorities, to change direction, and to 
add or drop programs when social climate and environmental factors indicate 
that it is appropriate to do so. 

Excellent Colleges Manage Their Resources Wisely. More tha'\ twe.ity - 
years ago, there appeared marked differences in the ways that college', wath 
essentially the same funding sources managed their resources. It was often all I 
could do to keep a straight face while a president or dean explained that he (and 
in those days, almost all were male) would like to do something or make some 
change but "there just wasn't any money for that," when I had been on the 
campus of another college in the same state that was doing precisely what he 
said could not be done. Since then, the differences in how colleges use resources 
no longer surprise me — only the degree to which a lack of funding is used as an 
excuse or barrier to making needed changes. 

A detailed discussion of the ways that comn unity colleges might be more 
efficient is a topic worthy of a treatise. For now, the four areas where differences 
in efficient use of resources are most obvious warrant mention. These four areas 
are administrative structure, new-course controls, course scheduling, and use of 
technology. 

4 J6 



In the area of administrative structure, some institutions seem to have 
administrators who multiply like amoebas. For every new vice presidency 
created, there will soon appear an associate vice president, who will soon 
acquire his or her own administrative assistant or executive secretary. The effects 
of this practice are devastating — to faculty morale, to communication, and to 
budget. All too often, these top-heavy institutions have secretarial pools with 
1:20 ratios for faculty and administrators who complain of not having enough 
money for staff development. 

The number of courses offered and the manner in which they are scheduled 
are two other areas where particularly inefficient management practices are 
often found. At one time, the typical community college curriculum could be 
likened to a stripped-down Chevrolet — it got us where we wanted to go, but 
with very few "extras." Not anymore. Today, it is common to find a 
Cadillac-style list of course offerings that equals or even exceeds the bloated 
offerings of nearby four-year colleges. Over two decades ago, Dressel (1971) 
illustrated how, in the absence of significant infusions of new money, course 
proliferation results in lower salary increases, increased scheduling problems, 
and classrcK>m shortages. The accuracy of his predictions is quite evident today. 

Colleges also waste dollars in determining the number of multisection courses 
to be scheduled. At institutions such as Miami-Dade Community College, the 
average si/e of classes within a division is a carefully determined goal that division 
chairs must achieve. Because of the resultant savings in their academic budget, 
significant dollars are available for other activities, such as faculty travel. Again, it 
is safe to say that colleges that are not careful in controlling class scheduling are 
often the same ones that complain about "not having any money." 

Another resource that is used differently by the excellence-oriented colleges is 
minutes — the time of their people. The differences between the two types of 
colleges can be understood only after recognizing that community colleges are 
labor-intensive organizations in which personnel costs often consume over 
three-fourths of the budgets, and in which, with few exceptions, most personnel are 
paid by the hour. 

In the non-excellence-oriented colleges, staff, faculty, and upper-level 
administrators often pay little regard to the person-hours that tasks require. 
Inefficient methods and redundant operations constitute standard operating 
procedure. The routine is not routinized (''Let's see, how will we handle 
registration this time?"), and staff and faculty are often required to continue 
using outmoded time wasters such as ditto machines and manual typewriters. 

In contrast, excellence-oriented colleges view their people as their most 
valuable and costly resource. They recognize the value of "routinizing the 
routine" (without "rut-in izing"), and they look for ways to make the job of each 
person as meaningful and financially rewarding as possible. As a consequence, 
they are quite receptive to the use of technology, both to increase efficiency and 
to ensure that their people'are not required to do what machines can do better. 

Excellent Coll ges Seek to Identify and Solve Their Problems, Lewin 
(1^M7) suggested that excellent institutions are institutions that can solve their 
own problems. The truth in this observation is obvious. But before a college can 
solve a problem, it has to recognize and accept that the problem exists. Over the 
years, the colleges that have impressed me have been those that seem to actually 
enjoy finding problems. A problem identified was an opportunity to learn how 
to improve, and they welcomed it! Further, once a problem was identified, the 
search for a solution brought out the best in their people. 

In the olher-than-ideal colleges, a very different attitude tov/ard problems 



37 




exists. Mostly, problems are dreaded, and there is often a reluctance to admit that 
a problem exists, which is sometimes tied to the mistaken notion that the 
presence of a problem is prima facia evidence of wrongdoing. In other instances, 
once it is recognized that a problem exists) there is usually a long delay (often 
filled by attempts at blame placing) before the organization finds and 
implements an effective method of resolving it. 

Excellent Colleges Have an Effective Way of Involving Their Various 
Constituencies in College Governance. The board of trustees is the legal 
governing body of most community colleges, and in less-than-excellent colleges 
that point is repeatedly emphasized as a reason why something cannot be done: 
"They [the board] would have to approve that" or "It's board policy" In the 
college oriented toward excellence, the board is recognized for what it is — a 
legally constituted body with specific responsibilities and accountabilities. The 
board, the president and his or her staff, the deans and vice presidents and their 
staffs, the faculty senate, the student council, the staff society, and the faculty 
association are all seen as individuals or groups who have a vested interest in 
the welfare of their constituents and who have the interests of the college as a 
whole to consider. In these institutions, great effort is made to delineate the 
authority, responsibility, and accountability of each group so that conflict is 
minimized, and at all times they strive to observe the primary underlying 
principle of any effective shared governance system: Those affected by a 
decision must be involved in the decision making. 

Excellent Colleges Believe in Teamwork and Practice a Team Approach. In 
the ideal college, there is a conscious decision to work as a team, and individual 
members are willing to put aside self-interests for the good of the team. This 
decision often has a synergistic effect, where group output is better than might have 
been expected given the talents of individual members. In this kind of work 
environment, team members look forward to coming to work and even enjoy 
spending time with other team members and their families away from work. 

A lack of teamwork usually characterizes less than ideal colleges, where 
enlightened self-interest prevails and an "everyone for themselves" mentality 
exists. The result is often one or two "stars" who succeed in pursuing their own 
agendas (then use that achievement to move on to other institutions while leaving 
behind messes for someone else to clean up), a "we-they" mentality that can result 
in duplication or missed opportunity, and a work climate best characterized as 
somewhere between totally unbearable and just barely tolerable. 

Excellent Colleges Have Effective Communication Systems. Effective 
communication is the glue that holds a college together. Without effective 
communication, attempts to do the things that lead to excellence — plan and set 
goals, recognize and solve problems, and function as a team — are all doomed to 
fail. As a consequence, in the excellence-oriented college, all parties — board, 
administration, faculty, and classified staff — recognize that good comn unication 
is something that takes effort, and everyone works as hard at listening to one 
another as they do at ensuring that they are sending clear messages. In these 
institutions, most people usually think that they know what is going on, and 
when they do not know, they are not afraid to speak up and do not hesitate to 
"go to the horse's mouth" to get the true story 

In contrast, in institutions with poor communication, rumors are rampant. 
In these colleges, people expend a great deal of energy to find out what is going 
on, the prevailing mode of communication is one-way via written messages, and 
people rarely speak their minds. As a consequence, any attempt to make 
significant improvements is doomed to fail. 

38 



One additional observation must be made. Vhe size of ihc institution or the 
presence or absence of detailed governance mechanisms appears to have little 
relationship to effective communication. There are small colleges with fewer 
than fifty faculty that have major communication problems, and there are large 
colleges that, on paper, have little in the way of shared governance structures in 
place but have staffs who are well-informed about what is going on and believe 
that they have an appropriate role in decision making. 

Conclusion; The Importance of Now 

It is especially critical at this time in their history for community colleges to 
focus on improving their performance and on impressing themselves and their 
communities with their worth. First, there is the importance of now. Virtually 
any well-informed individual is aware that our country is at a crossroads in the 
international economic community. Our choices are simple. We can elect to 
change course and move in the direction of a higher quality of life, or we can 
continue on our present route, which has led us to drop several notches below 
our former position of number one in the world. The choice is ours. The task of 
improving the quality of the education of our youth, our work force, and our 
citizens must be our first priority. Once that goal is achieved, the benefits that 
will follow include a well-informed electorate, a renewed interest in 
participating in local, state, and federal elections, an environmentally conscious 
citizenry, a "kinder, gentler society," and a higher quality of living for all of 
us — in short, the kind of society that we once thought possible. 

Obviously, community college leaders alone cannot effect these changes, but 
they can get their own houses in order! In all likelihood, community colleges will 
continue to be the only chance for postsecondary education for hundreds of 
thousands of high school graduates. Community colleges arc already the only hope 
for millions of persons who are beyond high school age and who are living and 
working in our communities, many in jobs that will not exist five years from now. 

The challenges facing community colleges are too urgent for them to waste 
valuable time trying to impress and change the attitudes of university tvpes. 
Instead, their energies should be directed at getting cn with their major 
task — that of achieving excellence. By focusing on this goal, community colleges 
will be doing what is right for the only groups that they should be trying to 
impress: their communities, their students, and their own stafi's! In this regard, 
the only mission that a community college has is to provide the highest quality, 
postsecondary educational services possible to the citizens of its community. 
This is a very simple, straightforward mission. It is a mission around which staff 
can rally because, even in today's materialistic society, it is a mission that is 
worthy of the devotion of those who staff the "people's college" — if they 
perceive that their institution is seriously interested in pursuing it. 

James O. Hammons 
Professor and Coordinator 
Graduate Program in Leadership 
University of Arkansas 
Fayetteville, AR 72701 



/i 



39 



PRACTICUM 

Illiteracy On the Run 

George Kemp 

The arrival of mami foreign students, the increasing hi<;^h school drop out rate and 
unemploymeut have placed a real literacy problem on the doorstep of the two-year 
colleges. George Kemp shares zoith us Cuyahoga's program and zvork in this area. 

Recently 600 people showed up at 5 A.M. to apply for one factory position 
in Cuyahoga County; with our current economy this would not seem unusual, 
except 200 were turned away because they could not complete or even read the 
employment application - - - let alone meet the requirements of the job! 

The frustrated employer put it bluntly, "Of course, I am disappointed by the 
number of job applicants that cannot read or do simple mathematics for this 
job." He added in anger, "As for some of the personnel I have already hired, 
there are too many secretaries who cannot spell, managers who cannot construct 
a clear, concise memo or employees who cannot calculate percentages. Like 
other employers, I expect to hire people who can read, write, speak, listen, 
reason, and mathematically compute to be effective on the job as well as to 
advance." Looking me straight in the eye he said, "It makes me wonder just 
what the state cf literacy is in the Greater Cleveland area? Illiteracy or 
innumeracy can no longer be hidden and ignored in the workplace." 

This employer's controversial and passionate concern is a valid one. First of 
all, people should recognize that the national standards of literacy in America 
have changed. No longer are five years of schooling adequate to achieve 
"functional .teracy;" rather ninth grade competence is the new national ideal 
because of the economic sophistication of our society. Those workers who want 
to compete in today's changing workplace, need to take the initiative in 
educating themselves towards higher levels of employability. 

Using this new national criteria, Cuyahoga County is in severe trouble. Of 
the Cuyahoga County's 1,110,089 people, 18 years of age or older, nearly 200,000 
adults are for all practical purposes, functionally illiterate. With illiteracy 
blighting the lives of 20% of our citizenry like the fifth horseman of the 
Apocalypse, it is little wonder that we are glutted with unemployment even in 
good economic times; welfare lines keep growing. 

Such statistics are shocking. According to Martin Kinsella, Employment 
Counselor at the Western Campus of Cuyahoga Community College, "Everyone 
who hires employees wants high school graduates or their equivalents. Even small 
businesses rely so completely upon computers and high technology, that the 
workplace as we knew it, is no more. Only a few people with limited academic 
achievements bucceed with just a 'strong back and willing hands.' Furthermore, you 
cannot expect to be a high school dropout to earn high wages in a manufacturing 
environment or even expect to work thirty or forty years with the same paternalistic 
employer. Now every 5 or 10 years workers are economically or geographically 
displaced. They are forced invariably to re-market or upgrade their job skills in a 
cyclical job search. In most cases, the best jobs go to the best communicators, and 
those individuals who are able to adapt basic skills to a new situation." 

This is serious business. The United States Department of Labor 
Employment and Training Administration states, "The challenge of providing 

40 



4. 



traditional academic skills in the workplace is one that can be met by using an 
applied approach to basic workplace skills training, using or adapting materials 
and concepts that are job-based." Deficiencies in workplace skills are reflected in 
productivity decline, increased accident rates, costly production errors, and the 
inability to effect critical job retraining. 

Fortunately, the North Coast of Ohio has a program which serves as a 
transitional agent between high school and the community. Cuyahoga 
Community College's Literacy Service Program, under Director Raymond E, 
Manak, offers the cure — a new opportunity for high school dropouts to develop 
their skills and to increase their employability and income. 

Cuyahoga Community College's Center for Training and Economic 
Development operates a number of successful literacy initiates. There is the 
nationally recognized workplace literacy project called "BIG STEP"; the Center 
also runs literacy programs for Cuyahoga County's JOBS Program and the city 
of Cleveland JTPA. Other literacy programs which are operated by the Center 
include programs in the fields of Corrections, Youth Development, and English 
as a Second Language. These programs are so successful, in fact, that among 
two-year colleges, Cuyahoga Community College is considered one of the 
largest literacy service providers throughout the country. 

As for income, the Bureau of Census reaffirms that the more education one 
has, the more likely is the prospect of consistent higher earnings. The average 
annual earnings of someone w^ » did not finish high school w^s less than $6,000 as 
compared to the approximate $19,000 of a high school graduate. Those who go on 
for advanced education, as one suspects, show even greater earning power. 

Currently there are five target populations for the program through which a 
candidate can regain personal dignity and economic capability once he/she 
completes the required studies. These populations include ex-offenders, welfare 
recipients, single heads of economically disadvantaged households, unemployed 
veterans, and the handicapped. Workplace skills in mathematics and English are 
taught to them contextually to reflect their actual use on the job. Now it is about 
time that astute and ambitious citizens turn to the Literacy Service Program to 
improv^e their economic well- being. 

Cuyahoga Community College will continue to lead on the national scale 
only if it can improve the quality of life for its citizens in the Greater Cleveland 
area. The Adult Learning Center, for example, has played a key roll in helping 
students reach their GED and job placement goals. Approximately 309c of its 
graduates go on to 2 or 4 year colleges and universities. The students have 
approximately better than two years grade level improvement in mathematics 
after 45 hours of instruction and almost two years average reading level 
improvement after 60 hours of instruction. 

If we live in times of trouble, in a period of recession, so also do we live in a 
time of great opportunity for those who search it out. The men and women who 
made the effort to enroll in the literacy program or basic skills services know that 
reading is basic to survival in today's world. Reading enables men and women 
to participate in the community and to vote intelligently. It is through this simple 
medium "reading," that a substantial measure of happiness comes Irom public 
service, preserving the environment, and upholding the sanctity of life. 

Perhaps, the most amazing literacy technical program is Cuyahoga 
Community College's "Television Tutor." Teachers and coordinators have 
initiated practical, not theoretical ways, of gaining those skills to compete in this 
highly technical and sophisticated world. They build upon the prior knowledge 
of the learner and emphasize problem identification, reasoning, estimating and 



41 



problem solving. As a result, computer-based learning, telephone tutoring, taped 
television instruction, and humanized classroom instruction blend into a 
winning combination for its targeted participants. 

With the State of Ohio Department of Education Funding, and partnership 
with Kentucky Educational Television (KETV), Ohio Bell, Ameritech, and the 
Garfield Heights Community Center, a systematic and efficient literacy program 
has been brought to southeastern Cuyahoga County. What is offered to these 
students, is the "best buy in town." 

Here is how it works. Under a renewable Department of Education Grant, 
Cuyahoga Community College provides each committed adult with videotapes 
from its cable channel 51 series "Learn to Rei.<d," a newspaper-formatted 
workbook, and Telephone Tutor to guide every step of his or her progress 
towards literacy." And the good part, says Donna Levine, adult reading 
specialist, "is that. ..no one has to know you can't read or that you don't 
understand." Now all a learner has to do is phone his telephone tutor for help. 

Students review classroom lessons and do 87 three-minute segments which 
correspond to in-center drills. The difference is that students need not leave their 
home; all they have to do is effectively use their touch-tone phones. Although 
this service is to supplement classroom instruction and not replace it, the service 
is an innovative educational breakthrough, second in the state. Over 3,000 
students have profited so far. On an average, students are demonstrating a gain 
of one and a half grade levels after only three months into the program! 

As a result, most readers appreciate their local Cuyahoga County Library 
more than ever. The library has books of every type, both vocational and 
recreational, which compel them to learn more as literate citizens. These 
students no longer live as Thoreau put it, "lives of quiet desperation." Most of 
them feel and express gratitude that an educational program gave them a second 
chance as "non-readers" to become educated as best they can. 

But more importantly, as employees, these adults can greatly assist an 
employer or corporation in meeting its strategic goals and competitiveness. They 
accomplish this by effectively applying new knowledge — literacy skills — to job 
duties and tasks. Hopefully they evolve into secretaries who can spell, managers 
who can construct a clear concise memo, and personnel who can calculate practical 
math problems. In short, a better self-image is a positive incentive to achieve. 

If more residents would "fearlessly" explore the other courses and 
programs made available to them by colleges and universities in the greater 
Cleveland Compact, basic skills could be readily improved and employability 
increased as we emerge from this recession. Most of area institutions, in spite of 
fiscal constraints, support tutoring activities by assigning staff, experts, 
volunteers and classroom space to youth and adult literacy. 

The Greater Cleveland Compact, and Cuyahoga Community College 
actively assist adults to achieve personal success and employment by altering 
poverty and ignorance. As it is now, everyone who values the ability to read and 
to write-endorses Cuyahoga Community College's innovative programs 
committed to "stamping out illiteracy in Cuyahoga County." After all, America's 
standard of living and quality of life are improved by a literate electorate. By 
keeping "illiteracy on the run," we help preserve this free society. 

George P. Kemp 
Professor of English 
Cuyahoga Community College 
Parma, OH 44130 
(216)987-5580 



42 



FORUM 



ISSUE: To What Extent Does the Increasing 
Proportion of Part-time Faculty Threaten the Quality 
of Programs and Teaching in the Two-year College? 

One of the great fears of many in tivo-year education is that the increased hiring of part- 
time faculty zvill result in loss of quality, content, control, and mission of programs and 
courses. Candice Johnson and Susan Heady, both part-time faculty, address this issue. 

Professional Sense of Community 

Candice Johnson 

In my view, the quality of programs and teaching in the two-year college is 
threatened by the increasing proportion of part-time faculty only to the degree to 
which the school perceives this group as inferior to full-time faculty. A college that 
isolates part-time faculty, not including them as part of the "club," sets up a process 
which lessens the quality of programs and teaching. 

A sense of community, a camaraderie among peers, is indeed, an important 
aspect of the college setting A self-fulfilling prophesy goes into effect when part- 
time faculty are made to feel like second class citizens. Teachers, whether full-time 
or part-time, must be treated as professionals if they are expected to contribute 
effectively to the academic program of the college. Providing a professional 
atmosphere to all faculty, rather than reserving such treatment for full-time, tenure- 
track members is a vital step in decreasing the threat to the quality of programs and 
teaching. Links between bureaucratic and professional systems and teaching 
satisfaction, commitment, and efficacy are well established in the literature. 
Teachers who are given job conditions which are important to them and which 
respond to their needs in turn will provide the school with the things that it 
considers imp ^^tant. Furthermore, recent studies provide compelling evidence that 
teacher satisfaction, commitment, and efficacy are linked to student achievement 
(Sergiovanni & Starratt, 1988). 

When special care is taken to counteract the negative attitudes that can so 
easily develop around this issue, and when part-time faculty lose their second class 
citizen image, these faculty members can be seen as a gift rather than as something 
to be criticized or merely tolerated. Part-time faculty members can then be valued 
for the uniqueness they bring to the college as a result of their other activities. In my 
own case, course work 1 have taken while teaching part-time has, indeed, increased 
my classroom effectiveness. Likewise, those involved in research or another job 
brinp a perspective to their teaching that full-time faculty cannot offer. Thus, when 
ueated professionally and with respect, the entire faculty, both full-time and part- 
time, can unite, strengthening the overall quality of programs and teaching in the 
two-year college. 

Candice Johnson 

Learning Assistant Counseling Services 
Lecturer, The Ohio State University 
Agricultural Technical Institute 
Wooster, OH 44691 



I Am a Good Buy 



Susan Heady 

As a part-time instructor for the last six years, I looked at this question 
perplexed because it assumed I was threatening the programs and teaching at 
my school. I believe there are advantages and disadvantages to having part-time 
faculty. 

I love to teach, and given my circumstances, 1 relish such opportunities. 
Most obviously, I am saved from burnout by not teaching every quarter. Besides 
teaching, I do research, and thus I more fully enjoy each of these jobs because 
they are so different. My research is applicable to my teaching, and I bring this 
new material to my lectures. Full-time teaching would not have this advantage. I 
believe that research and teaching are compatible since each feeds the other. I 
have observed that those part-time teachers who teach aspects of their work 
include aspects of their full-time job in their teaching. For example, a practicing 
lawyer who teacher as course about law brings practical, pertinent experience to 
the classroom. There is an expression that those who can, do; those who can't, 
teach. 1 disagree because I believe the best are those who can do and can teach 
what they do. With teaching comes understanding. Therefore, I believe I bring 
something new and worthwhile to the classroom. The school gains. 

From the school's perspective, I am a good buy. 1 am underpaid and used 
just as needed. There is no commitment to me after the quarter ends. At the 
same time, 1 cannot be expected to take on an activity such as recruiting because 
of my temporary status. Because I am not a member of the full-time faculty, I am 
thought of and treated as a second-class citizen. Sometimes I have a mailbox and 
office, sometimes not. My term is only three months; whether I teach again is 
always a big question; thus I cannot be counted on to be there the next term. My 
full expertise is underutilized. When I have gotten involved in committee work, 
I have found it frustrating to develop an idea and not be around to implement 
the changes. By design, my primary goal is to teach my class well, not to 
evaluate and change the school's programs. I have often thought that if I knew I 
was going to teach a specific class for a while, I would invest considerable time: 
for example, write a new lab book, rework lectures. But I do not know when and 
if I will teach a particular class again. This is a matter of priority and loyalty as to 
where I put my energies. The school loses. 

I teach my class, fulfill my obligation, and then am gone (often to another 
job). This design makes it difficult for students to find me though 1 hold 
scheduled office hours and do make appointments. If special programs, such as 
tutoring or assistance for disadvantaged students are in place, I am not likely to 
know about these. Thus, I believe that part-timers are less likely to utilize such 
services; they continually face the burden of not knowing about policy changes 
within the school. This is especially true for those who teach but one quarter per 
year. However, part-time faculty orientations and patient secretaries are helpful. 

Susan E. Heady 

Agricultural Business 

Lecturer, The Ohio State University 

Agricultural Technical Institute 

Wooster, OH 44691 



44 



REACTION 

The Journal cncourai^cs letters and articles in response to its contents, policies and 
OATYC activities. 

Reaction to Del Crandell and 
Carolyn Crandeli's Article: Self-Starting 
Administrator, Coach and Counselor {Spring 1992) 

Barb Thompson 

The effective two-year college teacher, by necessity, is obliged to wear 
many acaden^ic hats. In their article the Crandells address three major areas 
that are the foundation for any effective two-year teacher. 

As "self-starting adminii^trators," full-time two-year faculty must serve as 
mentors and coaches for part-time faculty if the department is to maintain 
quality and consistency in course offerings. It is also obvious that the larger 
the department, the more crucial this networking is. 

Our Communication Skills Department at Columbus State Community 
College consists of well over 100 faculty, 15 of of whom are full-timers. One 
way we touch bases with our adjunct faculty is to hold once-a-quarter 
meetings on Saturdays when most faculty can attend them. At these meetings 
we can address curriculum changes, college policies, and instructional 
problems. To deal with specific issues, break up into subgroups representing 
the various areas of teaching interest in the department. During these 
sessions, both full-time and part-time discuss problems and concerns relating 
to those issues. 

Our adjunct faculty are also invited-and encouraged-to participate in 
committee work, especially when it involves curriculum changes such as 
course content and textbooks. Both full-timers and veteran adjuncts share 
course materials and teaching strategies with new adjuncts. Adjuncts who 
wish to add new courses to their repertoire are invited to observe another 
faculty member's class for a quarter. As the Crandells observe, "Many 2-year 
colleges exist mainly on the backs of part-time faculty." Therefore it is vital 
that experienced faculty serve as resources, coaches, and counselors for 
adjunct faculty. 

In the role of "coach," we must provide support to all segments of the 
diverse population we serve. The older, apprehensive student; the returning 
homemaker; the first-generation college student; the minority student; the 
ESL student; the transferring student — all need assurance that the^ will 
succeed. As effective teachers, we must set our standards high and encourage 
our students to set their sights high as well. 

The "counselor" role is one of the keys to student retention. When a 
student shows up on our doorstep with her problem — the babysitter didn't 
make it, the employer demands extra hours we need to negotiate with the 
student alternative ways of reaching her goals. If occasionally we postpone a 
deadline or allow make-up work, we encourage the student to stay and 
"tough it out." If we remain inflexible (i.e., "Sorry, that paper was due 
yesterday"), we may discourage the student from continuing. And if students 
don't continue, neither do we. 

45 




How do we measure effectiveness? We measure it not by student 
evaluations but by student success. An enthusiastic and dedicated learner can 
be our greatest reward. 

Barb Thompson 
Associate Professor 
Communication Skills 
Columbus State Community College 
Columbus, OH 43215 

Reaction to Robert C. Peterson's Article, The Skills 
Assessment/ Skills Enhancement Program between the 
Chrysler Motor's Twinsburg Stamping Plant and the Kent 
State Universitxj - Geauga Campus {Spring 1992) 

Nancy Brooker 

In the Spring 1992 issue of the OATYC journal, Robert C. Peterson 
provided an overview of the program Kent State University -Geauga Campus 
launched with the Chrysler Motor Corporation in Twinsburg, Ohio. This 
program, Job Skills Assessment l]ob Skills Enhancement: Re-tooling for the 21st 
Century, which offered career exploration opportunities for members of the 
United Auto Workers to help prepare them for the job requirements of the 
auto industry in the 21st Century, consisted of a two-credit hour course 
divided into twelve sessions dealing with five basic components. These 
components consisted of a personal assessment of worker skills, career 
interest exploration, identifying specific job skills, preparing personal action 
plans, and implementing the plans. 

Of a total work force of approximately two thousand people, fifty-one 
persons showed initial interest in the program. Thirty-one persons actually 
enrolled, with sixteen completing the program. Workers who completed the 
program felt that it was a positive and successful experience. Peterson cited 
several reasons for low enrollment and attrition from the program: an absence 
of employee interest due to a lack of perceived personal value, retirement 
plans in the near future, a perceived lack of quick results with the program, 
and rumors of the plant's closing or being sold. 

I was impressed with the thoroughness of the program that Kent State 
University and Chrysler were able to design for the UAW workers. The 
program offered a comprehensive package to help wori<ers remain employed 
or to help them begin to think about other job interests. It is unfortunate that 
the workers did not perceive the intrinsic value of this program, especially in 
the uncertain economic climate of the auto industry and growing national 
unemployment. Major corporations, such as Chrysler, must be applauded for 
their efforts to maintain a skilled work force and to offer career exploration 
opportunities to those employees that they may no longer be able to keep on 
their payrolls. Institutions of higher education need to play a pivotal role in 
helping corporations accomplish this task. Kent State University and the 
Chrysler Motor Corporation must be praised for their collaborative effort, and 
other institutions of higher education must strive to participate in similar 



46 

5j 



opportunities to fuse educational opportunities on the college campus with 
those in the industrial environment. 

Nancy Brooker 
Counselor 

The Ohio State University 
Agricultural Technical Institutf? 
Wooster, OH 44691 



Stop Calling Them Mentors! 

Anna Maria Bamum 

The perversion, in recent years, of the word mentor has finally gotten to me. 
My young friend reported that his "mentor" (i.e., supervising teacher) had called 
him a "Worm," when he announced his decision to withdraw from the Practice 
Teaching part of his degree. Where do we get off calling a supervision teacher a 
mentor, anyway? A mentor, classically, was a tutor, as Mentor to Telemachus. 
But not every tutor is a mentor, certainly. In a narrow sense, a tutor is someone 
who knows something that we wish to know-my Chinese language tutor, for 
example. A tutor helps us learn something, either formally or informally But not 
every tutor is a mentor, and certainly a paid consultant is not, by any stretch of 
the imagination, a mentor, no matter what it says on pages 36 and 37 of the 
April /May issue of the Community, Technical and junior Colle<^e journal. In the 
humanities project under consideration, the participants receive "the services of 
a mentor for a full year." Presumably, then, after the year is up, the so-called 
mentor goes back to being a total stranger? As everyone who has had or been 
one knows, there are only two ways to end a true mentor relationship, by death 
or by a serious falling-out. The nature of mentoring is the informality of the 
concept. The experienced, for a variety of reasons, guide and encourage the 
inexperienced, who, for their own reasons, become the proteges. Being assigned 
to be someone's mentor or someone's protege is a logical impossibility. 
Mentoring is one of the last possibilities for luck, chance, and joy in the 
workplace. Do we really wish to make it normative? 

Anna Maria Barnum 

Associate Studies 

University of Akron 

Community and Technical College 

Akron, OH 44325 



The Editorial Board of the OATYC Journal is soliciting written responses (three or 
four paragraphs) to the question: Do the four-year and tzvo-year colleges suffer 
unequally from state budget cuts? The response should address one of the many 
possible perspectives. Here is your chance to participate, and the Board encourages 
you to do so. As determined by the Board, the best responses will be published in the 
next edition's "Forum" section, deadline: March 15, 1993. 




OATYC Journal Campus Solicitors 



Agricultural Technical Institute, Lind*; Houston 
Belmont Technical College, Rusty Stevens 

Bowling Green Stale University, Firclnnds Branch, Ronald Willard 

Central Ohio Technical College, Scott Wilson 
Cincinnati Technical College, David f). Ballinger 
Clark Stale Community College, Kathy Kalinos 
Clcrmon I College, Karen Williams 
Columbus State Community College, Rita Bova 
Cuyahoga Community College East, Thomas Morris 
Cuyahoga Community College Metro, Stanley Klosek 
Cuyahoga Community College West, Arthur Polen 

Edison State Community College, Mary 1 larris 

lloikmg College, Elaine Dabelko 

Jefferson Technical College, Carolyn Leech 

Kent State University, Ashtabula Campus, Claudia Cjieenwood 
Kent State University, East Liverpool Campus, Darwin Smith 
Kent State University, Cjeauga Campu?, Larry Jones 
Kent Stale University, Salem Campus, James Cooney 
Kent State University, Stark County Campus, Judy Ohles 
Kent State University, Tuscarawus Campus, Agnes K. Swigart 
Kent Slate University, Trumbull Campus, Janet Crawford 

Lakeland Communilv College, Sallv Carr 

Lima Technical Colk-ge, Will Wells " 

Lorain County Community College, Marilyn Valentino 

Marion Techiucal College, Betty M Dietsch 
Michael J. Owens College, Charles Ballard 
Muskingum Area Technical College, Catherine Cummings 

North Centra! Technical College, Bruce Sliney 
Northwest Technical College, James Nagel 

Ohio Stale University, Newark Campus, Robert Klingensmith 
Ohio University, Belmont Campus, Thomas Flynn 
Ohio University, Chillicothc C ampus, J. Steven Phillips 

Raymond Walters General and Technical College, lames E. C ebula 
Rio Grande Community College, Raymond Boggs 

Sinclair Community College, Benjamin McKeever 
Southern Stale Community College, Ket^neth Store 
Stark Technical College, Thenice Gall 

Terra Technical College, Kenneth I lahn 

Toledo Community and Technical College, Robert Stmiugye 

University of Akron Community and Technical College, Anna Maria Barnum 

Uniwrsily of Akron, Wayne College, Robert MrElwee 

University of Cincinnati General and Technical College, Patrick Kumpf 

Washington State Community College, Joe Testerman 

Youngstown State College of Applied Science and Technology, 
Violet Boggess 



48 



OATYC Officers: 1991-92 

President: David Humphreys, Professor of EnRlish, Cuyahoga Community College, Eastern Campus, 
4250 Richmond Road, Highland Hills, OH 44122 (216) 987-2358. 

President-Elect: Linda Houston. Associate Professor of Communication Skills, Agricultural lochnical 
Institute, 1328 Dover Road, VVmster, OH 44t)91 (216) 264-391 1 . , , , . 

Treasuren Russell K, Davis, III Associate Professor of Business Management Technology, University 
of Akron Communitv and Technical College, 304 East Buchtel Avenue, Akron. OH 44235 (216) 972-7391. 
Secretary: Anne Peterson, Associate Professor. Behavioral Sciences, Columbus State Cc»mmunity 
College, 550 E. Spring St. Columbus, OH 43216 (614) 227-24(X). 

Past President: James Marcotte, Director of Developmental Education, Cincinnati lechnical College. 
3520 Central Parkway, Cincinnati, OH 45223 (513) 569-1612. 

Board of Directors: 1991-92 
Nancy Gilson, Director of Media, Marion Technical College, 1465 Mount Vernon Avenue, Marion, OH 
43302(614)389-4636. , , „ j 

Kenneth Hahn, Director of Educational Services, Terra Technical College, 2830 Napoloan Road, 
Fremont, OH 43420 (419) 334-3886. ^ 

Marilyn Valentino, Assistant Professor. Coordinator o( tho U-arning Support Center, Lorain County 
Community College. 1U05 North Abbe Road, Elyna, OH 44035 ( 216) 365-4191. 

Judith A. Woottcn, Director of Writing, Kent State University, Salem Campus. 2609 State Route 45 
South, Salem, OH 44460-9412 (216) 332-8601. 



Bt'lmoni TcLhrncalt'ollcKi' 
)oE)lcn Hopp 

IWImR tlrLvn bt.tk* UniVL-rbilv hirL-Umds 
]ot O'Louf^hlin 

Ci'niMi Dim* ri'Lhnii-.iKiilk-m' 
Scott WiUon 

L incmruiti lixhnir.il C dIIurl- 
|lm Marcollc 

Cl.irk State Cum munilvCulk'RL* 
Kathcrinc K«linos 

Ctcrmont College 

Roger J. BAtry 

(513)7:\2-2W) 
Columbus Suite Communitv tollege 

iohn Shawkey 

(614)227-2453 
Cuyahoga Communitv ColleRc* 

C'.irwr Resource!. In-itilule 

Alllc Dunham 

(216) 987-40-18 
Cuvahoga Cummuniiv CulieRe-Ea^tenA 

Dave Humphr«yi 

(216) 987-<)<K)0 
t uyahoga Communitv ColiiTie -Meiro 

Nancy Roberls-HarrinRlon 

(2IM y»7-4(KX) 
Cuv.ihoKa Coinmuniiv Ci>IU"ge.-WL'>lcrn 

ArlhurD. Polen 

(216) H4S-4O00 
hdison bl.ile Communitv College 

Mary Harris 

(sn) 77Hmt) 

HtKking College 

Gary Bover 

{6I4)753-WI 
lelfcrson revhniLal College 

BoniU Schaffncr 

(bl4) 264 ■Sii'Jl 
Kenl Slate Universitv-AshtabuLi 

Claudia Greenwood 

(216) .1322 
KontSlaie Umv\'rsitv-hast livcrptH>l 

Darwin Smith 

(216) .'^8!i-3fl05 
Kent Sidle UniVL'rsitv-Cie.niga 

Lanry Jone* 

(216) 285-221<^ 
Kenl St.ilo Universitv-Salem 

Tad Shura 

(216) 332 0361 



OATYC CAMPUS LIAISON LIST - 1992-93 



Konl Stale Universnv-Stark 
Judy Ohlen 
(216) 4W.<*6()() 
Kent State UniverNilv- frumbiill 
Janet Crawford 
(216) 847-0571 
Kenl Sl«ite UluverMtv■ru^^:.^r.lWfl•. 
Al^nct Swigart 
(216) 3391341 
Likcland Communitv College 
Carlo! Tackell 
(216) 9"^ 3-7342 
l.ima Technicil College 
Will W^lls 
(419)221-1112 
l,or«iin Couniv Communitv College 
Lou Sauccz 
(216) 365-4191 
Miinun Technical College 
Nancy Gilson 
(614) 389-46.V^ 
Miami UniversitvU.imilton 
Robert Baer 
(513) 863-KH33 
Miami Univerbilv-Middlelown 
Rob Sprckerl 
(513)424-44+4 
Muskingum Area lahnical College 
Chcrie White 
(614)454-2501 
North Central Tec inic.il College 
Bruce SHnev 
(419) 755-48( 0 
Northwest fcchnciil College 
James Na^el 
(419) 2»,7-"il 
I'Jhio Slate UniverMiv 
AgriL-ultural Tethnicil IriNlitiite 
Linda Houston 
(216) 2(>4-3911 
Ohio Slate UniverMtv-Linia 
Violet Meek 
(41*^) 2211112 
Dhio St.Me UniverMtv-MansfieUI 
Charles Bird 
(419)755-4011 
Ohio Stale Univcrsiiv-Mdrion 
Francis Harard 
(614)389-2361 
Ohio State Universilv Ncwark 
Robert Klingensmith 
(614)366«.1321 
Ohio Universitv-Belmont 
Richard G. McMann 
(614)695-1720 
Ohio UniverMt\'-Chill,colhe 
J.Steven Phillips 
(614)775-9500 



(.)hio Universitv- lrx^iMiin 
Eric Cunningham 
(614)533-4600 
Ohio UniverMtv-l^ncrtsier 
Joanne Wolford 
(614)6^1-6711 
Ohio Univerjiilv-Z-Tnesville 
Craig Uubenttial 
(614)654-6711 
{■)wen!.College 

Kathy Brubaker 
(■119)423 **27 
RavfTiond W-illers tieneriil Technicil 
Larry Waldrop 
(513)745-5<i9« 
Kio Grande Community College 
Sanford Lane 
(614) 245-5353 
Sinclair Cumm unity College 
Thomai M. Pr<l»«r 
^'^\^) 226-2500 
*k»ulhern Stale Communitv College 
John Porter 
(513) 695-0.307 
Siark Technical Collvge 
John Thornton 
(216) 494-6170 
Terra TLfhnical College 
Kenneth Hahn 
Mim ^34-3886 
L'niversttv ot Akron 
Velma Pomrenke 
(216)37^-7220 
Univer^iily of Akron. VVavnel olkxe 
Robert McElwee 
(216)68.3-2010 
Universitv of Cincinnati LniverMtvl ».illef;e 
R. William Viltner 
(513)475-4062 
Universilvof Cincinnati Clernumt Geiier-il 
and Technical College 
Roger J. Barry 
(513)732-520() 
Univefbitv of Toledo Cummunitv and 
FLi-hnical College 
Judy Hanneken 
(419)537-3126 
Washinglun State Communitv Lotlege 
Jo* Testerman 
(614)374-8716 
Wright State Univep?itv-L.ike Campus 
Arthur Molitlemo 
(419) 586-2365 
Youngstown State Universitv 
Robert Campbell 
(216)742-3312 




> 

CD 
Q 



CD 
> 

3 

CD 

o' 

> 

CO 

c/> 
o 
o 

^ 

o 
o 

O 
o 

3 

3 
c 

3 

O 
o 

CD 

ca 

CD 



O 

I 
O 
> 

CO 
CO 

o 
o 

§ 

o 
z 

o 

-n 



O 

-< 

m 
> 

30 

o 
o 

r- 
r- 
m 
Q 
m 
en 



CWtC 



JOURNAL 



Vol. XVIII No. 2 



Spring 1993 



THIS ISSUE: 

COMMENT 
OATYC Presidettt's Message 

TEXT 

FOCUS: Vie University of Cittcitmati 
Clermont College: Focus ott Access 
Critical Vwtkin^:A Matter of Ability, Experience, or Trust? 
Maybe We Don't Teach Grammar Anymore, But it's a Good Vting 
Of Pearls and Pigs 

PLUS ONE 
A Nat ive American Model 

PRACTICUM 
A Teaching Technique Hiat Works-Thc Teaching Pretest 

FORUM 

ISSUE: Do the Four-Year and Two-Year Colleges 

Suffer Unequalhj from State Budget Oi/s? 
Larger Institutions Absorb Unanticijiatcd Cuts 
Two-Year Colleges Suffer More 



REACTION 
Reaction to Candice Johnson's Article: 
Professional Sense of Communitu 

Reaction to Candice loltnson's Article: 
Professional Sense of Community 



55 




Provides: 

- Collective influence on the future direction of Ohio's two-year campus system; 

- Access to classroom liability insurance protection of $1,000,000; 

- An open forum for the discussion of trends, problems, accomplishments, and 
challenges unique to state assisted two-year campuses; 

- A newsletter which informs members of the proceedings and activities of the 
OATYC and of Ohio's two-year campuses; 

- The Journal which provides an opportunity for publication and exchange of 
scholarly views and concepts; 

- Conference and workshops providing opportunities for professional 
development, visits to other two-year campuses, presentation of papers, and 
socialization with other two-year campus personnel; 

- Affiliation with the American Association of Community and Junior Colleges 
and its activities throughout the nation. 

Purposes: 

- To provide a forum in which all state-assisted two-year campuses can meet to 
discuss and resolve mutual problems; 

- To foster cooperation and communication among Ohio's institutions of higher 
education; 

- To provide the viewpoint of the state assisted two-year campuses to the Ohio 
Board of Regents and to the State Legislature; 

- To identify and improve the status, prestige, and welfare of all state-assisted 
two-year campuses in Ohio; 

~ To cooperate with other Ohio agencies, colleges, and universities in research 
and activities that promote the effectiveness of higher education in Ohio; 

- To increase the contribution of the state-assisted two-year colleges to the total 
educational process in the state of Ohio. 



Asricullurjl Technicjl Institute. 

Ohio StJte University 

Dan D. G.imson, Director 

Belmont Cjmpui, Ohio University 

James W. New ion. Dtan 

Belmont Technicjl Collefie 

VVwChannell, Prvsident 

CentTJI Ohio Technicil Collefie 

Jiiljus Gfwnslem, I'rx-sidcnt 

Chlllicolhe C*mpui,Ohlo Unlverxily 

Dtlbert K. Mevcr, Dean 

Cijrk Sl^te Community College 

Mbcrt A b.:lcn>o, I'rcsidcni 

Clermont CoHex*' Univenityof Cincinnjli 

RiJi^cT Barrv, Dean 

Columbuf Sute Community College 
H.^n>td M Ni-sltir rrvMdont 
Community & Technical Collej^e, 
University of Akron 
Fred Sturm. Di'an 
Community ic Technlci! College. 
University of Toledo 
C hjrlcsH. 8«»hlcn. Dv.m 
Community ic Technicjl College, 
University Of Younf^town 
ViUOr H RichJuv, lX:\n 
CuyjhoftA Community CollfKe, 
Jerry Sue l)wen*. Pmidcnt 



Institutional Members 

Edl»on Stite Community College 

Kenneth Yowdl. Pn-iidi-nt 

Tirclandi Ompui, 

Bowling Green Sute University 

Robert Di,'Biird. Dvan 

Gejug* Campus, Kent Sljte University 

Lirrv JtmLS, Do^n 

Hocking College 

John J. Li>;hl. [*mid«.-n( 

JeHerson Technicjl College 

Edward L Rorak. I'ri'sidtfnl 

Likeljnd Community College 

R.\\ph R. PrvMdent 

Limj Technicjl Col1ei(e 

J.>m«J.Co«nirvm.m. Prvsident 

Lorain County Community Coliejte. 

Rov Church. I*f\*<iid*;nl 

M jcion Cjmpu*, Ohio StJte University 

Trancu Ha^Jird.Dvan 

Mjrion Technicjl College 

J Richard Hrvvin. I'ntident 

Mlddletown Cjmpus, Mljml (University 

Michael Cxivenunn. Dirvcfor 

Muskingum Arej Technicjl College 

l.vnnH. Willctt.Pmident 

NewJrk Cjmpus. 

Ohio Sute UntversitY 

Julius CnKnatcuv. Don 



North CentTjl Technical College 

Brvon E. Kw, I'ri-sidcnt 

Northwest Technicil Col lege, 

Larry C McOougle. I'rt^sidcnt 

Owens College, 

Daniel Bmwn. I'midenl 

Rjymond Wjlters College. 

University of Cincinnjli 

N'oal R^isnun, Dvan 

Rio Grjnde Conimunitv Colle^^e. 

Barrv Dorsev. President 

Si ncljir Community College 

D.K-id H Ponit2. 1'n««;nlcnt 

Southern St Jte Community College, 

GwrRe McCormick. IV-sidvnt 

Stjrk Cjmpus, Kent StJte Universily 

William Bittlc.Dvan 

TcrtJ Technicjl College. 

Richard Simon. Prr-.idcnt 

Tuscjrawjras Campus 

Kent State University 

ll.uold Sh.ide. Dv*n 

University College. University of Cincinnati 
n.ivid Hartlcb. Dt-an 
Washington btate ComL..unity College 
Carson Miller, Prvsidcnt 




58 



JOURNAL 

OF THE 

Ohio Association of Two- Year Colleges 

(Affiliate of the American Association of Community Colleges) 

VOL. XVIII NO. 2 Spring 1993 

The journal of The Ohio Association of Tzvo-Ycar Colleges is published by the 
Association to provide the two-year colleges of Ohio with a medium for the 
sharing of concepts, methods and findings relevant to the two-year college 
classroom and to provide an open forum for problem discussion and review. 

Subscription is part of the OATYC active, associate, or institutional 
membership. Howev^er, single copies of the journal are available at $3 each. A 
yearly subscription is available for $6 to persons or organizations who do not 
want membership in the OATYC. Postage is prepaid on all orders within the 
U.S.; $.50 per year is added for Canada, $1 per year for all other foreign 
countries. Communications regarding orders, special subscriptions, single 
copies, adv^ertising, and permission to reprint are to be addressed to: 

The Ohio Association of Two-Year Colleges 
c/o Russell K. Davis, III 
University of Akron Community and Technical College 
304 East Buchtel Avenue 
Akron, OH 44325 

Journal Officers 

Jim Fullen, Editor, Central Ohio Technical College 

Linda Houston, Assistant Editor, Agricultural Technical Institute, Ohio State 
University 

Editorial Board 

Anna Maria Barnum, University of Akron Community and Technical College 
Marc Green, Cincinnati Technical College 

Judy Hanneken, Community and Technical College, University of Toledo 
David Humphreys, Cuyahoga Community College, Eastern Campus 
Jack "labor, Columbus State Community College 

Readers 

Gordon Brooks, Columbus State Community College 
Edward Martin, Columbus State Community College 
Jack Metcalf, Central Ohio Technical Colli 'i^e 
Carlos Tackett, Lakeland Community College 



OATYC Journal, Spring 1993 
Table of Contents 



COMMENT 

OATYC Prci^idcnl's Mci^i^n^c 

Linda Houston, Ohio State University, Agricultural Technical Institute 3 

TEXT 

FOCUS: The Uuivcr^ihf of Cinch wati Ckrmoni College: Focus on Access 

Kristen Fitzpa trick, U. C. Clermont College 8 

Crificnl Thiiikhi^^: A Matter of Abilit}/, Experience, or Trust? 

N4arilyn Valentino, Lorain County Community College 11 

Maybe We Don't Teach Grauuiiar Ani/uiore, But It's a Good Tiling 

David J. Johnson, Edison Community College 15 

Of Pearls and Pi^s 

Janet Green, Kent State, Ashtabula Campus 17 

PLUS ONE 

A Native Awericaii Model 

Daniel Wildcat, Haskell Indian Junior College 22 

PRACTICUM 

A Teach i} i^^ Tecln liquc Tha t Wi i rks-The Teach iu^ Prct es t 

Jerry Berman, Northwest Technical College 30 

FORUM 

ISSUE: Do the Tour-Year ami Two-Year Colh\^cs Suffer 
Unequally from State Budget Cuts? 

Larger Institutions Absorb Unanticipated Cuts 

Julius Greenstein, The Ohio State University-Central Ohio Technical College ..34 
Two-Year Colleges Suffer More 

James Countryman, Lima Technical College 35 

REACTION 

Reaction to Candice jolinsoii's Article: Professional Sense of Couununity 

Trina Steward, Columbus State Community College 36 

Reaction to Candice \olntson's Article: Professional Sense of Community 

Marc Green, Cincinnati Technical College 37 



53 





COMMENT 



OATYC President's Message 

Linda Houston 




Li}hin iioHskvi 



In a recent telephone conversation, 
someone asked me the benefits of being an 
Institutional member of OATYC. The 
person also asked the benefits of being an 
individual member of this organization. I 
did not have ready answers for the 
inquirer, but I have given both questions a 
great deal of thought since then. 
Unfortunately, the answers to those 
questions, and to the more general one of 
whether or not to belong to professional 
organizations, do not necessarily result in 
tangible benefits. Nevertheless, as I review 
my past twenty-eight years in education, I 
realize that my teaching and professional 
growth would have been very stale had 
not belonged to educational organizations 
from the local level to the national level. The benefits have outweighed the cost in 
every category. Let me share some of those benefits with you. 

Belonging to educational associations provide us with current reading 
material both in our discipline and in the general fields of education, business, and 
psychology On the local and state level, we are privileged to meet professionals in 
education'and business which support our college's efforts. Such organizations 
give us a chance to share the importance of our college and the programs with 
which we work. Through conferences and networking, wc renew our daily 
classroom commitment as others share with us their frustrations and triumphs to 
be adopted and improved upon in our own work. The organizations on the state 
level allow us to review and work for legislative support for education as well. On 
the regional and national level, professional associations provide us with the 
excitement of revitalizing our professional dedication; participation in all the 
various affiliations strengthens our credibility in our classrooms, in our research, 
and in our ser\'ice to our colleges and the larger community of education. 

There are many other benefits, both tangible and intangible, but for me there 
is one advantage which shines above all the others and that is the network of 
friends which reach from the East Coast all the way to California that I have made 
through professional organizations. Should you join OATYC? My answer is a 
resounding YES! 

Linda Houston 

OATYC President 

The Ohio State University 

Agricultural Technical Institute 

Wooster, OH 44691 



INFORMATION FOR PROSPECTIVE CONTRIBUTORS 

The journal encourages submission of material for any of its sections by 
faculty, staff, administrators and/or trustees of any of Ohio's community, 
general and technical, junior, regional and technical campuses. The journal is 
particularly receptive to articles of general professional importance in the areas 
of administration, instruction, and baccalaureate or technical studies for two- 
year institutions. 

There are forty-four solicitors of editorial material listed (see page 38). 
Contact your campus solicitor or one nearest you to inquire about submitting a 
specific manuscript. 

Manuscripts must be typed, double-spaced and of approximately 1,000- 
3,000 words in length. All submissions must be accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed envelope for return. Art work must be black and white. Photos 
glossy; tables and drawings on 8 ^ by 11 paper. The name and address of the 
contributor should be on the back of all art copy 

Editorial Policy 

The journal is not responsible for manuscripts or materials lost in mailing 
nor is it responsible for returning items not accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed envelope. 

The journal reserves the right to edit manuscripts to meet its needs and 
objectives. Where major revisions are necessary, every effort will be made to 
clear the changes with the authon 

Submission deadline for the next journal is September 17, 1993. 



JOIN 




cm: 



OATYC Application for Membership 

□ I am enclosing $25 for regular membership dues for 1992-93. 

n New Member 

n Membership Renc^val 

College Address _ 

Please Print 

Title /Speciality . _ ._ — 

Two-Year Campus . . 

City State. Zip . 

C/O Russell Davis, Universilv of Akron Community and Technical College, 
Shank 152 B, Akron Oi l 44235! 



6 J 4 



Professional Liability 
Protection Plan for Educators 




^ Offered to Employees of OATYC/AACC Member Colleges 



OATYC 
-AACC_ 



The I'.diiuUors IVoft'ssu.iuI l.wbiliU' IM.in clivits llu- .u'ls or omissions of lUv enrol kv and proU'tis the t-nrolkr for 
tlu' .uls of .in vt) 11*' undiT his or hfr'siijx'rvisinn This I'lan aKt) assists the L-nrolk-f lo prott-Lt his or her job 

1. Ytnir ihoia- ot S?<K),IKH) or SI .l^^).nOO in pmlivlion. Defensf losI> are p.iid in addition to this .iniount. 
This amount is lor all claims during iIk' I'lan vcar. It vou supervise tilher empUiyet.'s and are sia-d by oiu'of 
Ihem, the Plan pnn idts or S23lX). whichevL-r is less, for defenso e<ists (SUH) dL-diictiblL- to bo p,iid by voii). 
The maximum S5lX1,lKK) or SI ,lXl<'.t^K) amount still applies lo dainaj;es, 

2. The Vhn provido pn>toclKm a};ainsl claims undor tht- Uillowiii}; provisi<ms: 

• Th e oeeu rrences ta ke pl.Ke t>n or a f I f r I II e f f k-cl i \ e d .Ue o f I h p< )h e >■ : 

• The claim, or wnttt-n notificatitnt of circuinst.inees which couki reason,\blv ^i\v risj.- to .i claim, is tirsl made 
by or aj;ainst the insmx-d during; the afireemenl periiKl or within W) d.n s after expiration or terminalion ot the 
aj;rivmi.'nl 

3. The Plan will pay up to $3(J ft>r vour initial tonsullation with an atlorne\- and it ^viil \\\y up tn S2^0 ot llu- cost 
of havinj; an attorney represent vou at a tormal h earing; of a sc1hk)| board <ir other authorit\' it you are 
threatened with termination, reassi};ninent or dt-motion. ^ou will also reCL'i\ e up \o S2?0 tor le^al fetN, subial 
t(>a SKH^ di'duchble, if vou decide to sue 



NOTE: Menibers wlmse ^ 
iHiucation.il jt^bs (consultant, i 
Sl.()lH),lXX»b<.'neJil. 



e prinwrv empknwent is with an oiiuialional or};ani/alinn m,\\ eo\er narl-time 
illant. tutor, teacher) bv paying an additional 'Mtl t<ir the S3(HUHHi iH-m-til or S7il tor the 



PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY PLAN ENROLLMENT FORM 

A Special Membershif) Services Plan of Ohio Association of Two- Year Colleges; 
American Association of Community Colleges 

Regular Cowrage — '?=i(H).(Hlt)/"i.StKl,(HH) 
Coverage G $40 pet vcar -> 

Including part- time pri\ at<' 
consultants c.^{Xl.{KK)/$'^(HU1lMKoverage 
*i: "?Si) per year -1 

Kegulanoveragi- -SI. HIM) .0(H), 
$l.(l(KUHX»rovi'rage i' '^711 pt-r year J 

Including part-tinic pri\ atf ctmsultants 
Sl,()UO.(hXV'$l.tXXX\lJ(i(X» 
Coverage S14i) jx-r year J 



Name 
Institution 
Address 
( itv 

Slatf. Zip 
Birth Date 
Uali' Signature 

Coverage bi'comes etleclivi- Ihi- tirst iif the month folk>wing receipt of enrollnient ttirni and payment in lull maik\l to 
offitedi'Mgnaled on the back of this form Pleasr do not mail this form if vou arc eurrt-ntly insuivd bv this plan, vou will 
^lutomaliiallv r<\ei\ea renewal notice Ct»\eragee\lt'nds tora tull 12 months S-nd vour enrolhiu-nl torm and cfu-tk 
pavablelo I'ora-st T. lonesaiid uimpanv. liK ,VO |Jo\ 4isni-in0 hnodwav. Kansas t itv. NK) (vn41-»M31.l'hone 1- 
son-S21-7Mn 



^-KKial VturitN' \o. 



c 



TEXT 



University of Cincinnati Clermont College: 
Focus on Access 



Karen N. Williams 



In thin edition of the Journal, wc visit Clermont College under the direction of Karen N. 
Williiuns, Assistivit Denn of Public Information. "Clermont College is continualhj 
cJialleni^ed to keep pace with the iweds of one of the fastest ^roioin^ counties in the state, 
an area lehich is additionally evolvinsi^ from a riiral community to ed^c city." 

UC Clermont College, opened in 1972, is one of seventeen colleges that form 
the University of Cincinnati system, and share the tradition, benefits and pride 
of that maj(>r educational and research institution. Clermont College is also one 
of five UC colleges with an "open door" mission to provide access to higher 
education for all segments of society. Why tht^ focus on access? It is simple: 
American democracy is founded on the belief that all people have the right and 
deserve the opportunity to achieve to the limits of their ability. Put another way, 
higher education, properly serving its constituents, provides access to the 
American Dream to live comfortably and provide for one's children and their 
education. 




Clermont College Students 

62 'besisp 



At Clermont College this means that skills needed to perform adequately on 
the job must be acquired in the technical programs. Students in the university 
parallel programs must be ready to do junior level work when they graduate 
and transfer to a senior institution. Those seeking non-credit learning 
experiences, cultural enrichment activities, and professional training for business 
and industry must not be forced to travel outside the county for opportunities. 

Clermont College is continually challenged to keep pace with the needs of 
one of the fastest growing counties in the state, an area which is additionally 
evolving from a mral community to edge city. Student enrollment at the college 
is growing dramatically because of this population increase, and because the 
college is building new programs and services to boost participation in higher 
education by Clermont's citizenry. Perhaps most critical to the college's current 
and future 'growth are the strong corporate and private partnerships, the 
community-staffed advisory councils and the broad-based and enthusiastic 
cooperation between the college and the community it serves, 

One way Clermont is preparing for growth is the S5,9 million, 56,000 
square-foot building expansion, opened in December 1992, to enhance 
educational experiences for students. The Donithy and Cooper Snyder building, 
first in a multi-phase master plan to meet community needs, includes nine 
spacious, state-of-the-art science, engineering, secretarial and arts laboratories, 
six classrooms, a lecture hall, faculty offices, a community art gallery, and space 
for a fitness area. A seminar room and conference facilities are available for 
business jse, and complement the programs, such as LEAD Clermont, offered 
by Clermont's Center for Business] Industry and Public Service. Parking has 
been expanded and renovations made to the older building to increase its service 
to a larger student body Work is already underway to obtain funding for the 
second phase in which two buildings will be added to house three main 
activities: student services, physical education and recreation, and instruction. 

Bricks and mortar aside', Clermont College is building for the future by 
developing comprehensive education programs which meet demands of local 
businesses and industries, such as computerized court reporting and aviation 
technology. Court reporting is one of several degrees, including criminal justice, 




Classroom/Biology Lab 



nursing, and legal assisting, brought to Clermont from other colleges of the 
university. Aviation technology, which offers students an opportunity to "Get the 
Wright Stuff," including a strong general education background and private and 
commercial pilots' licenses, was developed from scratch in conjunction with a 
nearby aviation business. Less than a year old, aviation technology is already 
preparing for three-fold growth. Local industry requested strengthening specific 
engineering offerings; this fall we expect to enroll students in a degree in 
computer aided design. 

In addition to suggesting new areas of opportunity, community 
partnerships in the form of Program Advisory Committees and cooperative 
education employers enhance many of Clermont's existing technical programs. 
PAC's provide a vital link in keeping programs relevant to the changing needs of 
students, society and employers. Cooperative education, an integral component 
to many of our technical degrees, offers local companies the opportunity to try 
new ideas, whether a staff position or staff member, and gives students an edge 
of experience in an increasingly competitive workplace. Information shared in 
this process often results to changes in curricula, or degree and certificate 
offerings. 

Applying this practice on a larger scale, Clermont is a member and fiscal 
agent of the Greater Cincinnati Tech-Prcp Consortium, a group of Southwest 




Office Environment Lab 



Ohio organizations which recently received a $525,000 two-year Federal grant to 
develop better ways to deliver advanced technical training to the workers of 
Ohio. Consortium members will work in true partnership to develop the 
curriculum and students for the world closs work force of the 21st century 

The Tech -Prep project focuses on occupational training in two high-demand 
fields — engineering /manufacturing and health technologies. The aim is to meet 
the needs of a large number of students, local employers and labor markets with 
a program that has broad application. Key goals are to ensure equal access to all 
students; to increase professional development activities, including continuous 
improvement of quality principles, for faculty and counseling stali; and to 
closely cooperate with business, industry and local private industry councils. 




Two grants from General Electric, the most recent for $10,000, have 
supported the integration of Total Quality Management into college operations 
and curriculum, including a one-yoar TQM certificate program. 

Grants developed in collaboration with other community organizations are 
supporting new services at Clermont. A two-year, $86,047 FIPSE grant to 
establish a comprehensive substance abuse and prevention program "represents 




a great opportunity to help our college, our students and our community/' 
Project SLIME (Science Laboratories in Middle School Environments) is a joint 
effort among the college, the county Office of Education and UC University 
College, to improve pre-college science and math instruction. Funding of $36,167 
came from the OBR's Dwight D. Eisenhower Mathematics and Science 
Education Program. 

Another key to Clermont's support structure for future growth is increasing 
diversity in its student body, and in educational and cultural programming. For 
each of the past three years, the college has doubled its enrollment of 
African-Americans. The Clermont College Cultural Diversity Con^mittee serves 
both students and the community by advocating better understanding of the 
rich heritages within our county and beyond. As an example, in February 1993, 
the Committee sponsored a month-long series of events to "Celebrate Diversity," 
including: lectures and performances by the Urban Bush Won^en; a National 
Issues Forum; the Khamisi African Drum and Dance Group; and noted 
Appalachian expert Billy Best of Bcrea College. A 1992-1993 planning grant from 
the Ohio Arts Council and the formation of the Appalachian Advisory Council 
accelerated Clermont's efforts to assist the county's large Appalachian 
population in building targeted cultural and educational programs. 

Our dedication to increasing the cultural enrichment opportunities in 
Clermont County has been recognized by the Clermont ^yl^] Committee, a 300 



member citizens' group working together to prioritize community needs. 
Clermont ZOOTs summary report specifically recommended Clermont College ns 
the ideal location for a county cultural center, necessary to develop a "sense of 
commitment to Clermont as one community" and "for upgrading quality of life 
throughout our whole citizenry" 

Likewise, the Post-Corbett Award committee lauded our efforts with an 
award for Outstanding Arts Organization in the greater Cincinnati area in 1992. 
Over the past six years, the Clermont College Community Arts Program has 
grown from five events to sixty, bringing theater, dance, music, mime and a 
variety of visual arts programs to approximately 25,000 people each year. Our 
audience composition has grown from mostly children and their families, to 
include adults, senior citizens and people with disabilities. In fact, we have 
developed programs for disabled persons that are a model for other arts 
presenters in the state. The college has committed to support a year-long dance 
residency with the Shawn Womack Dance Projects that will afford community 
residents an unprecedented opportunity to explore and absorb the process of 




Stenography Lab 



choreography and dance — as well as its results. We also expect to reap a lasting 
benefit as the residency helps us build stronger collaborative relationships 
between the College and area arts programs, schools and artists. As with many 
of its programs, the college relies heavily on input from the community, in this 
instance, the Clermont College Arts Advisory Council — community and civic 
leaders, educators and representatives of local arts organizations — who provide 
additional guidance for programming, outreach activities, auditorium 
improvements, publicity and fund raising . 

Students attending Clermont College come from varied economic 
backgrounds as well, and each year a large percentage of full-time and part-time, 
new and continuing students receive financial aid to attend. Clermont has more 
than $1 million available to students in financial aid programs designed to 
reduce the price of an education, and private scholar- hips to encourage 
participation. Business and community support has funded Vermont's "Stay in 
School Fund," a novel approach to helping students overcome financial 
constraints such as car repairs or child care expenses, that may otherwise cause 
them to quit school. The fund provides no-interest, quick turnaround loans, and 
the reassurance to students that the college and community care. 

Additional support services abound at Clermont College, and students are 
urged to explore opportunities to gain academic credit for life experiences, to 
pursue non-traditional forms of study, and to take advantage of flexible 
scheduling and Weekend College tt) arrange courses around work, parenting 
and other schedules. The YES (You Expect Success) program supports ADC 
students who want to earn an Associate's degree at Clermont with financial aid 
for tuition, and books, personal, academic and career counseling, and child care 
and transportation assistance. Project ASSIST (Area Schools Support Involvnig 
Teamwork) helps at-risk students, many from low-income Appalachian families, 
prepare and plan for college. 

All of which brings us back to access: To admit all who w^nt to learn, we 
must be creative, flexible and supportive, and promote an equal opportunity for 
those who have basic skill deficiencies. We must take pride not in the excellence 
of those attracted to the college, but on the excelk'iit skills of those who 
graduate. It is not a simple or easy task to open the doors of higher education for 
the community, while maintaining high standards of academic achievement. 
But, it is the meaning of our mission at Clermont College, 

Karen N. Williams 

Assistant Dean of Public Information 
University of Cincinnati 
Clermont College 
Batavia, OH 45103 

Critical Thinking: 
A Matter of Ability, Experience, or Trust? 

Marilyn J. Valentino 

Slumped over another batch of fifty English papers, I'm baffled by the lack 
of de\'elopment and detail in my students' papers, both in content and in word 
choice. Students often make a general statement and assume that it speaks for 

11 t i 



itself. Ask one student about the Civil War, and she'll say, "It was awesome." 
Ask for more clarification, and she'll add, "It was different from other wars." As 
a teacher, I'm chomping at the bit, spewing out: "WHY? HOW? Give me 
examples! Give me reasons! I want them to thiiik, not regurgitate, 

This penchant for the quick answer really should not surprise me. In this 
age of the political sound byte, the instant replay, the microwave zap, is it any 
wonder students don't take time planning main points, offering examples and 
reasons, revising their ideas and passages? 

Maybe I should, as some teachers do, blame this avoidance of particulars on 
the media, on laziness, on ignorance, or all three. Or is it more a matter of past 
orientation? Values or trust? 

I decided to go to the source, to ask my composition students 
(anonymously) for some answers which I have summarized below. 

Reason #1: Never lau^ht before (or at least it never sank in) 

A lack of experiences in clarifying information or in modeling critical 
thinking can hinder some students. The problem may partially be ours as 
parents and as surrogate parents. Two-year olds often ask why. Yet, we 
sometimes stifle that natural curiosity at home and at school. Asking why in 
school often labeled a student a wise guy by the teacher or "teacher's pet" by 
other students. We can't blame students who learn to remain quiet to avoid 
ostracism. 

Because teachers are also pressured by time constraints, they often tell 
students facts, not to teach them to think, but to teach them all the information 
required to pass a test. While everyone obtains a great deal of information, 
thereby conforming to the same mold, students remain passive vessels to be 
filled rather than organic minds to interpret information (Fox, D. Studies in 
Higher Education. 1983: 15M63). Theodore Sizer {Rereading America 1992: 496- 
507) calls this practice merely "collecting knowledge," yet "savoring it" and 
analyzing it, he says, are rarely expected or practiced. In fact, in class we allow, 
on average, one second for students to answer a question when they need at 
least five to eight seconds to digest and respond thoughtfully (Rowe, M. B. 
journal of Teacher Education 1986: 37). We who teach 100-150 students a quarter 
give multiple choice tests because essay tests take too long to read. Thus, we 
seem to reinforce the sound byte. The result is that students are heard 
complaining: "We don't know what you want. Just tell us what you want us to 
know, and we'll study it." As if they have no input, no power over their own 
learning. Our failure is echoed in some student comments: "1 was never told to 
[support my ideas] before." "In high school many teachers do not push it." "Not 
many other classes need examples." If we do not challenge students, we cannot 
expect they will know how to think independently or, more importantly, to 
value that skill. 

Reason #2: Interferes with the zoritiiii;^ process 

Besides a lack of experience and expectation, one student noted that 
thinking of reasons and examples as he wrote "interfered with his thought 
processes while writing." Others assumed the implied presence of examples in 
their work; their "minds sometimes incorporate[d] the example without its 
actually being written." Thus, many basic writers fill in gaps of comprehension 
and expect readers will, also. If research has shown us that basic writers intent 
on getting ideas down on paper suffer from syntax errors, they may also lose 
sight of supporting examples and reasons due to short-term memory constraints 
(Daiute, C A. Neiv Directions in Coiupositioii Research 1984 : 205-224). That means 

C3 12 



that teachers need to allow time for revision, to add those supporting elements 
as a second, independent step. To ensure that students learn to develop their 
ideas in elementary school teachers are introducing a 1-2-2 or 1-2-3 method of 
planning wherein the 1 represents the main subpoints, and 3 examples. 

Reason #3; No perceived need or sense of audience's needs 

Some students do not support their assertions because they have no sense 
that others may have to understand their points. Linda Flower {College English 
1988: 528-163) calls them writer-centered; their concern is getting their ideas on 
paper in whatever order thei/ think of them. One student described how difficult 
the writing process is: "Writing can be hard for people in general and it might 
take them a while just to put thoughts down let alone trying to figure out if other 
people can under>.(and whv you wrote what you did." 

When questioned, some students recognized they could add support but 
felt no compelling need to "reinforce their ideas . . . because it's common 
knowledge." Used to teacher proclamations or media generalizations, perhaps, 
"they do not feel what they said is in need of proof or an example. The student is 
taking it for granite (sicf that the teacher already knows what's been said." 
Students didn't want to be found guilty of "going off on a tangent" and 
"blubbering nonsense." In their experience, there is safety in generalizations and 
short answers. 

Reason #4: Fear of Retaliation 

One message students received loud and clear from past teachers was not to 
introduce their own ideas. They fear that "the details they might use might not 
make sense to the teacher or the teacher might not see a connection the student 
i.^es" or that "their answers are wrong anyway, so why bother." If they add 
details, they are "afraid of going off track." Anyway, how many details? The 
following excerpt is a strong indictment of our pedagogy: 

lAMrning tt) write in high school was nc\'er really writing what wc thought. U 
w.is cilwrH's the tUcKhcr's interpretation and so we focused on making sure 
WL* were writing whiit Ihe teacher wanted. We didn't e\'en pay attention to 
details or supporting evidence. The evidence was that the teacher had said it 
was right. 

Another student warned that if students "put examples down and think a little 
for themselves, they will get a bad grade." Again, this may not have been true, 
but it is their perception, one which makes them avoid support, not because they 
can't give it, but because they are afraid of the consequences. Generalizations, 
then, may not be demonstrative of ignorance; rather, they may be expressions of 
political savvy and survival skills. 

Reason #5: Exigency. Time Constraints. No Interest 

I collapsed Uiese three categories into the last reason because they are 
ccMVsiderati(Mis, aithough not voiced as strongly or as consistently as the previous 
four reasons. Students complained that with work and school, they didn't have 
the time to g(^ into detail "after writing what is "B" work. Examples, for them, 
are time consuming. English, after all, is not their main interest and is not given 
the priority we think it de^erves. I would like to add that if our students did not 
haw families or fortv-h(Hir work weeks, many might be able to spend more time 
revising their first drafts. Still, I think as teachers we cannot control these forces; 
we can only ^ ompensate f(^r them in our classroiMiis by enforcing srandards and 
creating i rilical thinking environments. 



Reason #6: Imdequate knowledge base 

During the planning of this article, I asked colleagues what they surmised 
were the factors involved in students avoiding support. Besides reasons #1 and 
#2, they offered reason #6. Many students do not have a wide reading base, 
whether that be the classics and academic material or current information 
gleaned from newspapers and magazines. Moreover, they generally lack a deep 
reading base on the particular subject they are discussing. Choosing examples 
^.ind supplying analysis, therefore, is difficult. Teachers must often spend an 
inordinate amount of class time supplying background material to supplement 
deficiencies when their ten-week schedule is already full. That means something 
from the syllabus must be sacrificed. 

So what can leacJiers do? 

In light of these six factors, how do students develop the ability to make 
decisions and solve problems independently when the system is based on fifty 
minute periods, multiple choice tests, and "co\'ering" the material rather than 
forming ideas and conclusions based upon that material? While the founding 
fathers may have believed education would promote conformity and 
homogeneity, in the 1990's our goal is to make students active learners and 
individual thinkers. How can we blame them when we don't allow them more 
opportunities to think? 

We need to encourage students to view wriiing not only as a way of 
thinking for themselves, to clarify and re-envision, but also as a way of 
communicating or transacting information and ideas to others. Those who fail to 
support their suppositions fail to do so because they do not anticipate someone 
has to follow their ideas and perhaps respond to their ideas. Writing is still seen 
as a test (of answering the question and of "grammar"), not as a forum for 
presenting an idea and negotiating thought. 

What can we do to address these student concerns? To eliminate the 
impediments? We can do very little about time constraints our students face. As 
college professors, we also have little influence over the teaching that precedes 
us. However, we can change our pedagogy and methodology to incorporate 
some strategies which stimulate critical thinking. 

One approach, which has become a necessity in the last twenty years, is to 
introduce students into the academic community (Bartholomae & Petrosky. 
frtc/s. Artifacts and Counterfacts. 1986). We must be explicit about college 
expectations and list specific criteria for assignments. Although we can trll 
students to add examples, few really believe us and even fewer can translate 
lecture into their writing. Instead, analyze student samples of assignments. 
Show which examples and reasons support ideas and which are ineffective. 

Second, if we view writing as a way of knowing for oneself and a way of 
sharing and/or negotiating one's knowledge, then writing becomes a vehicle for 
learning for both student and teacher. Writing journal entries or short in-class 
writings to review or initiate ideas need only take ten minutes. They do not have 
to be graded, collected, or even read. Research has found that the mere act of 
writing and reading regularly improves writing. Peers, if given appropriate 
guidelines, can respond to each other's ideas (Gere & Stevens. The Acquisition of 
Writitii^ Laui^uni;^e. 1985. 85-105). Papers can be taped on ih( 'all and the class 
can view (just ns artists do) the range and quality or responses without fear of 
failure or hyper-correction. Quality seems lo sort itself out when individuals 
begin to admire one particular paper. 

Teachers can also promcUe risk taking, especially in ideas, when they 



14 



r-1 . 
i J 



employ a variety of assignments, some graded, some not. When teachers do 
respond, they should do so based upon a short list of criteria, explained 
beforehand, focusing on one or a few points at a time, rather than using a 
buckshot approach. Asking questions in the margins rather than merely labeling 
''awk" and "RO" stimulate thought and relays to the student the primacy of text 
over rules Labeling errors simply reinforces the use of simple ideas in smiple, 
safe sentence oatterns, rather than exploring complex ideas. This practice does 
not mean that' standards of usage are not important, just that people generally 
do not notice minor errors unless they interfere with meaning. For example, 1 
have purposely made three errors in this paper. Have you found them? 

The changes suggested above involve a tradeoff. You may have to sacrifice 
lecture time (although background information that doesn't need much 
explanation can be given as homework reading). You may have to sacrifice some 
control— over time and activities— since some students take longer to discover 
inductively. But the reward is that students will learn critical thinking skills they 
can use throu\*Jioiit their lives 

Finally to build this sense of trvist in students, explicitly tell them what you 
expect and show student samples you like. Let them see the product and 
understand the process. Writing is more than rules-it is a matter of practice, 
value, and trust. 

Marilyn Valentino 

Assistant Professor of Arts and Humanities 
Lorain County Community College 
Elyria, OH 44035 

Maybe We Don't Teach Grammar Anymore, 
But It's a Good Thing 

David J. Johnson 

How often do English teachers hear the claim that "They don't teach 
crammar anymore?" I hear it on radio call in shows, in casual conversation, and, 
now and then, from exasperated colleagues. If 1 \vere a disinterested observer, I 
might be cimused by such talk. But it's not amusing to be charged with academic 
malfeasance. It's a claim that drives me to a minor rage when I hear it from 
people in education because to assume that those of us who are in the discipline 
don't know what we are doing and that those with no experience do is a kind of 
academic betrayal. And, on a less emotional level, it's wrong. 

First, if the "they" means English teachers in general, then the claim is false. 
From junior high on through senior high, an inordinate amount of time is taken 
up teaching grammar in the typical English classroom. Second, Ihere is no real 
agreement on what is meant by grammar. A linguist and an office practices 
teacher would have very different definitions of the word. The first definition in 
tiic dictionary is, "the study of the formal features of language, as the sounds, 
words, morphemes, or sentences." I doubt if most people who use the word 
would'even know the definition of mt^rphome ( a meaningful word unit). 

"Traditional grammar," that svstem which deals with parts of speech and 
correct expression-l lartwell, Patrick iColk-^c Eui^ii^h 49 (1^85): 110) quoting 
older research, uses the term "cc^mmcni school grammar" tt^ name the system 
most of us were taught— is not in its origin a description of English at all. Rather, 

\5 



it's Latin grammar applied to English. Since Latin is a synthetic language, one 
that bases the meaning of a sentence on inflection, and English is a syntactical 
one, a language where meaning is based on word order — the applying of Latin 
grammar to English causes some problems. While in some cases and in some 
instances it makes some sense, this traditional grammar is a poor guide to the 
way English really w^orks. Being prescriptive rather than descriptive, it carries 
with it a tinge of morality. One who has learned its intricacies and speaks 
according to its rules is somehow morally better than one who does not. This 
feeling that grammar is morality is enough, frequently, to drive students away 
from even trying to learn it (Meyers, L.M. The Roots of Modem English. 255-256). 

I have heard and read fond stories of Miss Snark, the prototypical English 
teacher who spent her time looking for error and truth with her red pencil while 
teaching lessons about life and duty. But these are anecdotal accounts. The truth 
is that there never has been an empirical study that shows that teaching 
grammar in my way has any beneficial effect on writing or speaking for the vast 
majority of students. For individual students who aru ambitious and want to join 
the "in group/' grammar of this sort may help some. But for all other students, 
taking time to teach common school grammar is counter-productive (Hartwell, 
Patrick. Coiiege English 47 (1985): 105-127). 

The whole notion of there being a prescription for correct speech goes 
against current research into language and how it is formed. No language, 
ancient or modern, hn lA'er had a universal, standard consistency from speaker 
to speaker. Folks who read and wrote Latin and Greek in the middle ages and 
during the Renaissance, w^hen many of the practices of teaching grammar began, 
may have been led to believe that such was the case. In fact, though, they were 
not using living languages with millions of speakers negotiating with one 
another about meaning and form but were rather using carefully preserved 
languages which had no native speakers who had learned them from the cradle. 
This was a highly artificial way to draw conclusions about languages, but that is 
what they did. 

Think, for instance of some of the rules wc have been saddled with. Don't 
split an infinitive we are told. But as far back as the written documents go, native 
users of English have been splitting infinitives. Today Captain Kirk and Jean-Luc 
Picard say, "To boldly go where no man has gone before," not "to go boldly . . . ." 
Don't end a sentence with a preposition: A rule made up by John Dryden in the 
seventeenth century, who saw that in Latin the preposition was attached to the 
noun; he and his rule assumes that English should be the same (Meyers, L. M. 
The Roots of Modern English. 209). If we look at it a little closer, we can see the 
difficulty there is w^ith this rule bound notion of grammar. It assumes that words 
are fixed grammatical units. The question, "Arc you going in?" has come to be 
considered wrong because "in" is a preposition. But English is not a language in 
which words stay the same. "In" could as well be, by definition, an adverb, a 
word referring to place. Would any native speaker really say "In are you going?" 
just to follow a rule precisely? 

In English, a word is a part of speech because of the position it has in a 
sentence. Is ivnjited a verb? Yes, but it is an adjective, too, as in "The wanted man 
surveyed the wall of the post office carefully before he went to the window to 
buy some stamps." It is also a noun, as in "He sighed despondently, wishing he 
weren't one of the wanted." 

None of what I have written so far is start! ingly new knowledge (the 
copyright on the Meyers' book, tor instance, is and'he surely drew on what 



1(1 



was already known), but somehow, it has not reached much beyond English 
departments. 

Is this analysis self-serving? Possibly — I do not like as an English teacher, to 
be blamed for failing to do the impossible. But it's accurate. My colleagues in 
career programj will tell me how important grammar is to their students, many 
of whom cannot get jobs unless they learn to speak well. There is a big difference 
between speaking and writing. Most of my students, when given the chance to 
edit their work, make very few errors at the end of a term. So maybe I haven't 
taken their complaints seriously enough. 

But it's also true, as one not native to the area I now live in, that I hear the 
talk with unaccustomed ears. Many of the educated people don't know the 
difference between lie and /m/, sit and set; they say "drug" instead of "dragged"; 
they confuse, in speech anyway, "suit" and suite"; and they hear nothing wrong 
with the sentence, 'This chair needs covered." Clearly, many of my expressions 
must sound odd to them. 

Since it is spoken not written language that people complain about, I can 
offer a suggestion. I learned enough German grammar in college to read the 
American sections of German newspapers because I was orally drilled. Starting 
with "der, die, das," I and the class moved through the more complicated 
structures until some of them were in our heads. In a similar way, students who 
don't display the proper verbal skills could be drilled as long as the need for the 
drill is expressed in non-moral terms. I can just hear it now, "All together now, 'I 
don't,' 'you don't', 'he doesn't', 'we don't' . . . And again, 'I am', 'you are', 'he is', 
'she is', 'it is'. 'We are', 'they are', 'those are'" over and over until those with 
problems have internalized the expressions they need to use to sound like 
correct speakers. It would be a more successful way of solving the problem than 
asking writing teachers to Jo the impossible. 

David J. Johnson 
Professor of English 
Edison Community College 
Fiqua, OH 45356 

Of Pearls and Pigs 

Janet Green 

"We are casting pearls before swine," I've heard fellow teachers of literature 
say on bad days. Perhaps such an attitude is not so much ill-natured as 
confused. My students more often assume that they are pearls of wisdom, and 
they think the literary masterpieces zee assign are piggish — and ourselves as 
well, for our spirited advocacy. 

It's true that students' frequent adverse reaction to works we love and 
revere may contradict this assumption. Writing of Romeo and his Juliet, a 
student said, "They are just crybabies, whiners, and saps. Their parents should 
have scheduled more after-school activities." Of Dante, another said, "What does 
Hell have to do with mc? Boring!" And, "If T. S. Eliot weren't so dumb, I 
wouldn't have to look up so many words." (Is there sense in that somewhere?) 
My favorite remark refers to Emily Dickinson. An exasperated student wrote, "If 
you're afraid to cross the street, how you ever going to get married?" 

In this paper, I will describe some teaching devices that I think have made 



17 



literature more accessible and pleasant to my students. Admittedly, there are 
obstacles. One is the heavy, hardbacked monster anthology or five-pound 
paperback that we too often use as a text and whose very format is forbidding. 
My classes find smaller paperback collections more appealing. Also, since so 
much literature indicates that the end of all endeavors is the madhonse or the 
grave, I try to choose many selections that deal with students' more immediate 
interests. To assure what they believe to be relevant topics, I often ask student 
committees to pick some of the literature of the course. 

Another obstacle is surely this: literature, often seeming to the students to be 
difficult, unresolved, ambiguous, and troubling, is not like television. All the 
television exposure, however, has made students very conversant with obvious 
plot elements and basic, if not crude, characterization. In some cases, its 
influence seems debasing. One of my students said of Lysistrata that the whole 
plot was ridiculous. "Since the Greeks dug gays, when the women held out on 
them, why didn't the fellows just get together?" Another asked when I listed 
Shakespeare's children, "How do we know they were his?" You have to admit 
that these are matters we never thought of. 

An additional problem is the decline in students' reading skills, almost too 
well-wept to mention. Too often they are unwilling to read anything, even a 
haiku, more than oncc-if that. After all, they are accustomed to using the 
classroom as a one-shot pit stop. Also, they tend to measure every class by its 
immediate utility. (As tuition goes up and up, one cannot entirely blame them.) 
Then, too, we have to admit that if literature is rarely mentioned in any other 
classrooms on campus but our own, it is no wonder that our emphasis seems 
arcane and irrelevant. I have heard some professors say that students have 
become too self-centered to read about other people with enjoyment and 
interest. I have heard more professors blame a cultural decline in patience and 
humility for students' refusal to engage with difficult material. 

A survey in the Chwnkie of Higlicr Education has frightening implications (20 
Nov. 1991). It shows that students have changed markedly in the last 25 years, 
and, except in one or two matters such as giving more community service, they 
have gotten worse. In fact, "students are less prepared now than they were in the 
1960's and 1970's" (A3), less used to reading, less likely to attend college to 
improve their reading and study skills, more conservative, much more interested 
in financial success and much less interested in developing a meaningful 
philosophy of life (A38-39). (Of course, students vary — from each other and from 
campus to campus, sometimes wildly.) Still, too many of these depressing 
descriptions fit those who sit in our classrooms with their "classroom faces" 
nicely adjusted, daring us to enlighten them through literature. 

Indeed we still can! All is not lost. We have become expert pedagogical 
strategists. We have had to be ingenious, persevering and aware of what our 
peers are doing in what becomes more and more — in a military sense — "the 
field." Classic repositories of lore on teaching literature are cxtremelv valuable 
such as Gilbert Highet's The Art of Tcachifti^, as are more recent works such as the 
evaluation of texts on teaching in Richard C. Gebhardt's "The Chair's Role in 
Enhancing Teaching: A Review Essay" in ADE Bulletin. 100 (1991): 45-48. 
Kenneth E. Eble gives a long, useful bibliography in Tlie Craft of Teaching (2nd ed. 
San Francisco-London: Jossey-l3ass Publishers, 1988.) Louise M. Rosenblatt in 
literature as Exploration (4th ed. New York: Modern Language Association, 197h) 
has helpful ideas for secondary school and college teachers of literature. 

The Modern Language Association series, Amnvaches to Teaching World 
Literature, has published about forty volumes so far, each on a different author. 



These excellent collections of essays include, for example, in the Dnnte volume, 
critical, philosophical textual, comparative approaches, pedagogical strategies, 
and a bibliography. (These volumes, hardcover and paperback, with a discount 
to MLA members, are available at very reasonable prices from MLA, Customer 
Services, 10 Astor Place, New York, NY 10003-6981). I cannot recommend them 
too highly. 

Literature teachers have used many excellent films and videos for years. I 
do too, but I have two reservations. First, students tend to accept the visual 
version of a work rather than the text itself when there are discrepancies; and 
secondly, their viewing the work is not the same as their literary experience 
through reading the work, yet students accept it as equal or better. 

Visual assignments work very well for our TV-saturated pupils— no pun 
intended— and students enjoy completing them. For example, in a recent study 
of Dante, my class first looked at many drawings of the Inferno's plan, then 
produced their own huge scrolls of Hell, with their own sinners and 
punishments set forth in horrid detail. (This suggestion 1 culled from Sister Mary 
Clemente Davlin "The Divine Comedy as a Map of the Way to Happiness." 
Approaches io Teachiu;^ Dante's Divine Corned]/. Ed. Carole Slade. New York: MLA, 
1982.141.) 

Yet another practice 1 like very well is to get my students to write their own 
original poems, short stories, short dramas. Since so many have had creative 
work in high school, they like this familiar assignment. For us teachers, too, 
reading students' original work is a breather from their literary criticism. 

One of the best ways to teach literature is to have students read out loud 
with as much meaning" as possible. At least all the others will be attentive, 
watching for mistakes. Ask the readers after they finish, "What did you just 
say?" and "What does that mean, now that you've said it?" (A practice I learned 
from Dr. Richard Wells, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK.) 

A colleague from Texas taught me the following "lap reading" technique at 
a conference. Put a literary passage on a transparency and flash it up on the 
screen without laborious prologue. Turn out the lights. Then read it aloud slowly 
as the class follows the material on the screen. Many of our students have n'^ver 
been read to. This soothing practice focuses their attention on the text, and the 
dark encourages them to comment freely. You will find that they hate to turn on 
the lights and go out into the blinding, distracting world again. 

Of course, your reading the material aloud from the book is the easiest, 
probably the oldest, way of getting it across. Since words that are only speed 
bumps to us are barricades to them, 1 may explain some before 1 start. 1 ask my 
students to close their books, but they usually prefer to follow along. I'll read a 
short work twice, a poem perhaps many times with discussion intervening. 

I have found that the more I am willing to reveal my feelings about the text 
the more the students will take me seriously, and the more they will reveal 
theirs. We too often hide our deepest feelings about literature but still expect the 
students to reveal theirs. (In all my years as a pupil in public school, I never saw 
an English teacher visibly affected in the least by anything she rec.d to us except, 
on one memorable occasion, a memo from the principal,) 

Once you have patiently created "a safe place," a classroom atmosphere of 
tolerance and good will, students feel free to express tiiemselves. I took my Great 
Books class to our theatre when we were studying Samuel Beckett's Fjuii^atne, 
which had pu//led and annoyed ihem, when it wasn't "boring!" But on the 
stage, standing under the spots and aching it out, however haltingly, with book 



in hand, they got excited. The stage worked its old magic, and the play leapt into 
life for them, dynamic and funny 

Other more tricky even bizarre, assignments can inspire a sluggish class to 
analyze literature to good effect without quite realizing they are doing 
something difficult. For example, ask them to put a character from one literary 
work into another, and then explain what changes in plot, theme, tone and 
atmosphere might ensue. Make Chekhov's weepy Anna in "Lady with a Dog" a 
major character in Hemingway's "The Killers." Put Kugelmas from Woody 
Allen's "The Kugelmas Episode" into Margaret Atwood's "Rape Fantasies." 
Transplant pius Aeneas or the wily Odysseus the Odyssey to Lysistrata. Plunge 
J. Alfred Prufrock in T. S. Eliot's "The Lovesong of J. Alfred Prufrock" into Walt 
Whitman's "Song of Myself," 

Another strategy I created to introduce the traditional elements of fiction. 
On the board I put the major elements, such as plot, dialogue and 
characterization, giving each small group in the class one of these to develop as 
part of a class "story." The class first agree on main characters and setting. Then 
each small group devises its element without knowing what the other groups 
were doing. When we put the whole thing together, it almost alv/ays fits 
amazingly well. (All right, so the story lines are a bit tacky.) But the dialogue 
groups produce some fine lines, and the characterizations miraculously merge. 
This lively exercise illustrates the elements of fiction well, and it gives the 
students a change from lectures. 

A more difficult enterprise is to make the mighty authors themselves seem 
accessible to our students, many of whom are too easily intimidated by the 
written word. Interesting biographical details, if sufficiently sordid, will kindle 
even the dimmest interest. Too often fed pasteurized versions of authors' lives 
and works in public school, students are enthralled with news of Eugene 
O'Neill's tragic alcoholism, Robert Frost's strange domestic cruelty, Byron's 
bi-sexuality and incest, and thereafter read their works with greater interest and 
sensitivity. 

Along these lines, one can proceed gently with literature students to forge 
some exacting artistic standards by building at first on a shared love of trash. 
When they say such stuff is "good," they usually mean it's easy or like 
themselves something pleasantly different which leaves no lasting, deep feelings 
but which instead nicely stimulates rather simple emotions, and which ends 
happily, or at least completely. They don't like pulsating ambiguity though our 
culture throbs with it. Still, it's amazing how similar some of the principles of 
great art are to trash, the difference being, of course, that great artists write so 
much better. 

Students can get more involved if the \ss is divided into groups of three 
or four and , each group given a short list ol different questions or subjects to 
discuss within a certain period of time. (If not timed, they lose momentum.) One 
person, chosen by each group, can report to the whole class at the end of the 
time, or all can. They like this device very well. How rarely are the busiest 
students able to discuss course material with each other. How rarely do the 
quietest ones feel they can speak up without painful exposure. 

An alterative method is to give each small group the same questions and 
with their help determine the best conclusions after the discussion time is over. 
(As you circulate cheerfully, making as few comments as possible, you will find 
you can usually tell who is prepared.) 

1 have found a good variation on the lecture method of reviewing for an 
exam. I give everyone a review sheet of the vital terms and names of the course. 



20 



Students "volunteer" by two's for the item they want. At the next class, the 
couple reviews this item orally, in effect reteaching it to the class, with a time 
limit of about 3-5 minutes. Fledgling teachers especially will take this 
assignment and fly. They may even call peremptorily on their startled classmates 
and chide them for their ignorance. The whole thing is good practice in the kind 
of oral presentation so often required in the "real" world, a swell as a useful 
review of the course. The other students pay close attention and clamor to award 

a grade. , , 

To summarize, we should use whatever methods work for us that don t 
exhaust us, frighten the students, or damage the woodwork. Taking up class 
notes (with a decent warning) is an old device that helps communication a great 
deal (once you recover from the shock of how little they deem worthy of writmg 
down). Asking students to memorize a passage is still one of the best methods 
there is, though students always moan loudly We should teach them how to 
read as we do— how to skip, summarize, review, use indices and headings. 

Above all in teaching literature, let us enjoy ourselves. Let us begin by 
bestowing mercy on ourselves. If we assign so much work that we are weary 
and cross, the students will justly conclude that since literature obviously makes 
people miserable, they don't want any part of it. As for getting the students to 
write about literature, we must do that, of course, but if we spend more time on 
their papers and journals than they do, something is amiss. I like Matthew 
Prior's conclusion in "On the Same Person": 

Let him be kept from paper, pen and ink 
So he may cease to write — and learn to think! 
And while we're doing all these things, and no matter what pedagogical 
devices we employ, let us keep the control of our classrooms firmly in our own 
hands Speaking informally of the buzz word, "empowerment," Peter Elbow has 
said, "KEEP IT" (CCCC, Chicago, 1991). 

Alas, though, the most empowered, the most adventurous teachmg method 
doesn't always work. We need to accept this truth without guilt or blame. If 
Shakespeare himself doesn't speak to students, ours is a minor failure. There's 
even humor in our students' preference for "bad" literature, especially "bad" 
poetry, perhaps because it is simple, rhymed, and expresses familiar sentiments 
like the greeting cards they've been buying in the grocery stores for years. All we 
can do is what Dante did: "1 have set out food before you, but you must feed 
yourself" {Pnrndiso. X. 25). 

Once, in exasperation, I made up a bad poem— a real pig poem— for a test 
and asked the class to compare it with a poem by Howard Nemerov on the same 
subject and then determine which was better. This is Mr. Nemerov's: 

The Sparrow in the Zoo 
No bars are set too close, no mesh too fine 
To keep me from the eagle and the lion. 
Whom keepers feed that 1 may freely dine. 
This goes to show that if you have the wit 
To be small, common, cute, and live on shit. 
Though the cage fret kings, you may make free with it. 
This is mine. 

O pretty little sparrow in the zoo cage 
Let me write about you one little page. 
You live on others' food. 

21 



I think that's really smart. 
And so I give to you my heart. 
You go in and out of the bars of the cage. 
Now I've written my page. 
They loved it. 

Janet Green 

Assistant Professor of English 
Kent State University 
Ashtabula Campus 
Ashtabula, Ohio 44004 



PLUS ONE 



A Native American Model 



Daniel Wildcat and Edward Neceper 



Commnnihf, technical, and junior colleges embody the American ideal of democracy; 
they were the first to proclaim higher education an enfranchising velucle--an 
opportunity accorded to all Americans. Two-year Colleges have a special respwiisibility 
to serve the needs of the minority student. In the following article, Daniel Wildcat and 
Edward Neceper help us to understand more fully the "teachings of native American 

students at the Community college level "(Reprinted with the permission of Enid 

B. Jones, Editor, Lessons for the Future, AACC Special Reports No. 2, 1993) 

TEACHING NATIVE AMERICAN STUDENTS AT THE COMMUNITY 
COLLEGE level is challenging and very rewarding if effective instruction is 
given. More than any other minority group. Native Americans can claim to be 
the least understood and most ill-served by typical pedagogical approaches to 
math instruction. According to the National Center for Education Statistics 
(1988), Native Americans have the lowest American College Testing scores and 
the highest high school dropout rates in the United Slates. This classroom 
failure, combined with the overrepresentation of Native Americans in the lowest 
economic levels of our society, makes it all too clear why so few Native 
Americans pursue careers in the field of science. 

The key problem in providing minority students the mathematics 
preparation they need to successfully pursue degrees in scientific and 
science-related fields is not the students themselves or the subject matter: it is the 
failure of colleges to structure a program whereby creative teaching methods can 
be applied. 

Many Native Americans who are successful in completing high school enter 
postsecondary institutions academically unprepared for rigorous college science 
curricula. Community colleges must face the challenge of creating programs of 
instruction whereby these ill-prepared students from underrepresented 
minorities in the fields of science and technology can be prepared for the 
rigorous courses of studv required in these fields. 

Maskell Indian Junior College (HIJC) is meeting this challenge by 

^ 22 



\mc\ 



undertaking a systematic restructuring of its math instruction program. Troubled 
by the high failure rate in its mathematics program, and the low self-esteem and 
increased dropout rate associated with this failure, the math faculty at HIJC 
decided to structure a math program for student success. The faculty's goal was 
to create a program with high academic standards that not only would seek to 
use Native American-related material in the classroom, but would 
fundamentally draw its organizing principle from Native American worldviews. 

In short, the math faculty at HIJC have looked beyond the exclusively 
rational and logical world of mathematics to explore humanistic and holistic 
approaches of knowledge delivery to Native American students. Central to this 
approach is the recognition that Native American worldviews emphasize the 
importance of grasping the "big picture" before one sets about studying 
particular things or subjects. The importance of particular activities or specific 
knowledge is defined by how these activities or this knowledge fit^ in the big 
picture or in what John Mohawk (1988) has described as the "complex web of 
life." The complex web of life refers to a complex set of relationships— social, 
biological, and metaphysical— that define one's existence and give meaning to 
particular aspects of one's life. An important component of successful math 
instruction for Native American students is transforming the learning of 
mathematics from a purely abstract logical exercise to a subject with a history 
and applicability to the complex web of life, 

HIJCs Mission 

Haskell Indian Junior College is located in Lawrence, Kansas, and is one of 
the oldest government-supported schools in the United States. Established in 
1884 to fulfill treaty and trust obligations, HIJC has become a nationally 
recognized interrtribal institution of higher education for more than 100 Indian 
nations from over 30 states. HIJC has evolved from an elementary school, to a 
trade and high school, to a vocational-technical school, and finally, in 1970, to a 
fully accredited junior college. 

More than 800 Native American students attend HIJC and have the option 
of pursuing an associate of arts, associate of science, or associate of applied 
science degree. HIJCs mission is to provide (1) a high quality education that 
prepares students to meet the challenges of a changing and multicultural w-orld; 
(2) programs that are responsive to the diversity of the student body and 
dedicated to the total development of each individual; and (3) programs that 
support the study and appreciation of American Indian and Alaskan native 
cultural values. 

Until recently, most instructors at HIJC initially had a general lack of 
knowledge and understanding of Native American cultures and contemporary 
issues. Consequently, instructors had difficulty appreciating and teaching the 
relevance of mathematics to Native American peoples. 

Learning Aptitude and Instmctional Relevance 

Native Americans have made significant contributions to the world of 
mathematics (Closs, N. Native Ajinrkau Mathcmntic^, 1990). Well before the 
arrival of Christopher Columbus, many Native American tribes had recorded 
number systems and calendars that applied to daily life, in fact. Native 
Americans made tremendous contributions to European and world 



development (Weatherford. Indian Givers, 1988). Yet most of this knowledge is 
not used in classrooms, especially in science and math classrooms, where the 
ahistorical character of instruction continues to rely heavily on abstract logic to 
teach math. The role of intuition in teaching mathematics is even downplayed 
and generally avoided (Anderson and Stein. \^02) 

No wonder the subject of mathematics seems foreign to Native American 
students. The subject falsely confronts them as something that they, as native 
students, must lack in aptitude to understand. They conclude mathematics 
unimportant and unrelated to their own culture and, like far too many students, 
fail to see the relevance of the subject to their own lives in modern society. 

Understood in this light, the first challenge math instructors of Native 
American students must face is to create a classroom environment in which 
mathematics is seen as relevant and meaningful. Studying math just for the sake 
of studying math is foreign to Native American cultures (Megginson R. 
Mathematical Native Americans, 1990). Native American students have to be 
convinced that mathematics relates to their life, or they will avoid the subject 
and /or refuse to fully participate in the leaming process (Green, 1978). 

Cultural sensitivity to Native American values and behavior is crucial to 
successful classroom instruction. Direct eye contact, competitiveness, and 
boasting about oneself are taboos among most Native American peoples 
(California State Department of Education, 1991). 

Methods of instruction must be evaluated to conform with the learning style 
of Native American students. For the past 300 years mathematics has been 
primarilyjaught using the lecture approach. Math instructors typically lecture 
and work out sample problems during class. Students work on assignments out 
of class. Unfortunately, this approach is ill-suited to the learning style of Native 
American students (Rhodes, R. "Native American Learning Styles." 1988). 

Native American students prefer group-oriented leaming environments and 
view group cooperation and harmony as more important than the success of one 
individual (Anderson and Stein, 1992; Rhodes, 1988). Consequently, instructors can 
initially expect less verbal participation and eagerness to contribute in class. An 
instructor comfortable with long silences and willing to gradually encourage 
participation will develop trust and rapport with native students. Once gained, this 
trust will guarantee increased classroom participation by Native American students. 

Finally, the limited amount of required contact hours in the classroom and 
lack of professional Native American role models in the field of mathematics are 
contributing factors to the poor success rates of Native Americans in 
mathematics. Most Native Americans enter postsecondary institutions 
underprepared in mathematics. Colleges must find creative ways to prepare 
these students. To throw underprepared students into a college-level class and 
tell them to sink or swim is morally and educationally irresponsible. 

Two issues converge here that suggest that colleges might need to throw out 
artificially time-bound conceptions of learning. First, it does not make sense to 
have at-risk students who have been failed for years by formal instruction in 
mathematics to make up their lost years in a semester or two. For instance, 
students placing in a typical three-credit/contact-hour, pre-college-level 
"Introduction to Algebra" course may get through the class but will not 
necessarily retain concepts needed for the next higher-level course. As a result, 
the students become bogged down in the review of concepts and topics they 
should have mastered in their previous course. By the end of the semester these 
students will be again behind and not getting all the concepts they will need to 
be successful in their next higher-level math course. 



Second, the learning style of Native Americans does not fit a time-bound 
notion of learning. The Native American approach to learning encourages one to 
learn by doing and admonishes one to be patient if a task at hand is not 
accomplished on the first try. 

Finally, the lack of professional Native American role models in 
mathematics often contributes to stereotypes Native American students may 
have of non-native mathematicians from the dominant society (Megginson, 
1990). Native students often perceive mathematicians as calculating, obsessive, 
sloppy, isolated, and interpersonally out of touch with the real world. This image 
directly conflicts with attributes Native Americans value. 

During the 1980s HIJC's mathematics department becan^e increasingly 
dissatisfied with the high failure rate in its classes. The failure rate was well over 
50 percent, and in the upper-level courses it approached 80 percent. The 
department was embroiled in a dispute over teaching effectiveness. There were 
complaints that not enough was being done to help the students succeed. After 
much frustration, the instructors decided to revise the entire math program. 

In order to create a successful learning environment for mathematics at 
HIJC, all math instructors were advised to incorporate Native American-related 
materials into their courses. In addition, all non-native instructors henceforth 
were to stress the advantages of Native American values in the learning process. 

Course syllabi were altered to reflect the needs of Native American students 
while still retaining academic integrity. Instructors were encouraged to attend 
national mathtmiatics conventions as a way to instill enthusiasm and generate 
motivation, and to share ideas learned at these meetings with other faculty 
members in the department. 

The "Introduction to Algebra" course became a five-credit/contact-hour 
course as opposed to a three-credit /contact-hour course. The extra two contact 
hours provided more time in which to review, as well as more time in which to 
teach new material. A few students complained, but overall students began to 
realize they needed all the help they could get. 

In the fall of 1991, the HIJC math department instituted departmental finals 
for its two pre-college courses: "Introduction to Algebra" and "Intermediate 
Algebra." Students failing these minimum competency exams must retake the 
course. The implementation of this final examination policy brought about two 
significant behavior changes in the students and instructors. As a result of 
understanding very clearly what it mcnnt to be successful in these courses, more 
homework was completed and more after-class hours were devoted to math 
assignments. Instructors also put in more after-class hours. They spent more 
time developing lesson plans, review sessions, and tutoring strategies to 
encourage student participation in a culturally sensitive manner. 

Instructors developed a broader array of instructional methods, employing 
cooperative learning techniques. As Lee Little Soldier {PJii De^ta Kappan, 1986) 
states, "Cooperative learning matches traditional hidian values and behaviors: 
the harmony of the group supersedes the importance of the individual" (162). 
Through cooperative learning, students help one another. In the absence of the 
fear of appearing wrong or stupid to their teacher, students seem more willing to 
tackle problems and ask questions when working in groups. 

Finally, math instruction was supplemented with a well-organized and 
much utilized tutorial program. The math tutorial program, which operates six 
days and five nights a week, offers students computer-assisted instruction, math 
videotapes, peer tutoring, and individual one-on-one tutoring with professional 
math tutors. Of these services, the peer tutoring program has been the most 




popular and successful. The tutoring center recruits peer tutors from the higher- 
level math courses, such as calculus, pre-calculus, and college algebra. Math 
peer tutors are students with A or B grades who display a desire to help others 
and a bountiful amount of patience. 

The peer tutoring program has helped not only the students needing 
tutoring, but also the tutors themselves. Peer tutors have increased their skills 
and their interest in math- and science-related careers. Also, with so few Native 
American role models available as math and science faculty, these Native 
American peer tutors function as positive role models for students. 

Early indications are that these changes have produced positive results. The 
"Introduction to Algebra" department final has been given twice. In the fall 
slightly more than 50 percent of the students passed the finals; in the spring 70 
percent passed. Maybe more im.po riant than the increased rate of success at this 
level was the fact that the students who passed the final demonstrated much 
better preparation for the "Intermediate Algebra" course. Less time was spent 
reviewing concepts at the "Introduction to Algebra" level because students had 
a better retention of what they had just learned. Instructors were able to cover all 
the topics in the "hitennediate Algebra" syllabus because the students did not 
require a prolonged review Introductory-level concepts. Consequently, one of 
the main problems the department faced — the maintenance of academic 
integrity of math courses throughout course offerings and sequence — had 
greatly improved. 

Meeting Academic Expectations 

It is unrealistic to expect Native American students to make up for 12 years 
of neglected or failed math instruction and immediately complete college-level 
math courses. Yet this is exactly the way most colleges treat underprepared 
students. The human mind and intellect is much more complicated than the 
mechanical apparatus of an automobile. Nevertheless, an analogy to the way we 
treat these students would be to take an unmaintained 12-year-old automobile 
that has seen little use and decide to immediately drive it again at highway 
speeds. Of course, the automobile would break down. We would expect it to. 
Any reasonable person would get the car inspected, provide a complete 
mechanical tune-up, and then initially drive the automobile slowly and carefully 
to see if any problems arise. Any reasonable person would do this with an 
automobile; yet we fail to give the same attention to the neglected and little-used 
intellects of Native American students when it comes to math and science 
education. 

Native American students can meet high academic expectations if they are 
given the opportunity to have their skills assessed, get a tune-up, and most 
important, learn in a program that is not strictly time-bound. It may take more 
time for them to get up to speed, but if they are striving hard and learning the 
material, why fail these students? Colleges must look at ways to create 
in-progrcss grades. In short, they should look at ways to extend courses for 
students who need more than three contact hours a week for 15 weeks in order 
to get through college algebra. 

Skills of incoming freshmen must be assessed independently by math 
departmenvs. .uvcn the problems of grade inflation and social promotion that 
many minoiily students face, high school transcripts often prove unreliable. 
Community colleges must be willing to provide academic preparation courses in 



26 



the areas of math and science. Colleges must be prepared to give all 
underprepared students the time needed to develop math maturity. Haskell 
Indian junior College currently provides three levels of preparatory mathematics 
below college algebra. 

Outside class assistance must be made available. After-class contact hours 
arc crucial to student success. When possible, peer tutors should be used in paid 
part-time positions through tutoring centers. 

Mosi important for Native American students, mathematics must be put in 
the "big picture" if they are to see the study of mathematics as relevant. 
Relevance is not something they are willing to take for granted. In fact, as noted 
previously, the notion that one would accept the importance of mathematics 
without seeing it connected to the complex web of life is conceptually foreign to 
Native American students. Some HIJC math faculty have even begun requiring 
students to do written reports on the connection of mathematics to their own 
tribal traditions or to Native Indian contemporary issues in order to help make 
this point. 

Native American-related information must be included in math instruction. 
Without it, many Native American students will continue to perceive math and 
science as foreign to their own culture, even fundamentally hostile to their 
worldviews 

It is known that Native American students respond to warm and caring 
classroom environments (Kleinfield. ScJwol Reviczo 1975: 301-344). But make no 
mistake about the absolute necessity of maintaining rigorous programs with 
high academic standards. Ultimately, that is what minority students will need if 
they are going to succeed in scientific and science-related fields. It is obvious 
minority students are often victims of programs that expect them to run full 
speed without any concern for their preparation. It is also known thai many 
minority students are victims of what is called the "missionary complex." The 
missionary complex is seen in the well-intentioned teachers who want to save 
our students by lowering standards and, unwittingly, expectations. They know 
all too well the many reasons why minority students cannot possibly be 
expected to work at a level commonly expected of mainstream students. The 
result of this attitude is just as devastating to the future success of Native 
American students as the insensitive attitude of those wh'"' espouse high 
expectations and standards but fail to offer ways for students to meet those 
standards. In short, community colleges must hold high and rigorous standards 
for math and science programs, but must create instmctionnl programs whereby 
students have an opportunity to meet those standards. 



Daniel Wildcat 
Chairperson 

Natural and Social Sciences 
Haskellh dian Junior College 
Lawrence, KA 66045 



Edward Necepker 
Instructor 

Natural and Social Sciences 
Haskell Indian Junior College 
Lawrence, KA 66045 



PRACTICUM 

A Teaching Technique That Works - The Teaching Pretest 

Jeny Bergman 

At Northwest Technical College, jeny Bergman has just tested and initiated a very 
interesting concept of his — "teaching pretest." Bergman holds, "Students are 
encouraged to learn from the mistakes they make if they have an opportunity to 
demonstrate that they know the material missed." In the followmg article, he shares his 
concept, process and results. 

What teaching tool is easv to use, inexpensive, effective and useful for slow, 
average, and gifted students? The answer is the Teaching Test. 

The teaching test is actually a pretest designed to teach. The most common 
pre-tesuj are those used in formal "pre-post test research'' to ensure that any 
difference between two groups at the end of a research study can be attributed to 
the experimental treatment and not to original differences between the two 
groups. A researcher must either ensure the experimental and control groups are 
approximately equal in relevant variables at the start of a study, or be cognizant 
of how much of a difference exists. If the groups are not equal, various 
compensations can be made. 

A Teaching Pretest 

Another type of pretest, the type we are concerned with in this paper, is 
used specifically as a teaching tool. Called a teaching pretest, it is specifically 
designed to be used as a learning tool and not for a grade. The student 
completes the test, grades it and either learns the material he/she missed on 
his/her own, or the teacher develops a program to help him/her the material 
he/she did not learn. Then, a few days later, the student takes the same or a 
similar test again. This test is used for grading the students and is called a post 
test, grade test, or final test. If the student does poorly on this test, the same 
process can be repeati^d. 

Ideally all tests should serve as teaching tools for students that can and 
should learn from their mistakes. Most students learn Si>mething from their 
mistakes although often not as much as we would like them to. Students, 
though, benefit greatly from their mistakes and sometimes the more wrong 
answers they make, the more they learn. Fearing the test questions will "get out" 
into the hands of other students, gi^'ing them an unfair advantage if they take 
the test in the future, teachers usually do not allow the students to retain their 
answer sheet from which to study. Teachers reason there are only 80 many 
different questions that can be developed in a certain area, and it is difficult to 
make up a totally new test for each class. Thest disad\'antages of pretesi-- ca>'. be 
overcome with computer generated tests and the attention to on\y a few 
questions each time a test is produced. 

If the students go ovvr the test i [ class, often their motivation is to justify 
their "wrong" answers in order to raise their grade ins(entl of U'arning from their 
mistakes. Siiidenls typically ha\e little molivdlion to learn the right answer 



because they will probably not have an opportunity to see the same questions 
again unless they will be given a comprehensive final. Students are encouraged 
to leani from the mistakes they make on a test if they have an opportunity to 
demonstrate that they know the material missed. A teaching pretest, for this 
reason, encourages the student to learn the material missed on the first test. The 
pretest can also be used to obtain data for the teacher and the administration's 
needs. A pretest is usually given a day or two, sometimes a week, before the 
final test which is used to give a letter grade. This test is called a practice test or, 
the term used in this paper, a teaching pretest. This term is preferable when 
discussing this tool with students because it is more descriptive of the purpose of 
the test. The term teaching pretest differentiates this type of a pretest from the 
type which is commonly used for research only. 

How a Learning Test is Used 

About three or four days before the grade test, the teaching pretest could be 
administered and corrected in class so students have an opportunity to learn 
from their mistakes. Class discussion and researching the areas in which they 
did poorly on their own are also useful. In addition, the students could take the 
test home to direct their home sludy. Since the same or a similar learning test 
could be used over and ever, the extra work required for this exam would be 
minimal. There also would be little reason to cheat since the instructor does not 
need to see how well the student does. Only the student himself knows. 

The f^rnde test is usually identical in conteut to the teaching pretest, although 
specific questions may be different, histead of asking, for example, to solve for 
"X," as on the teaching pretest, the grade test would have the student solve for 
"Y." It is not necessary that ever}/ item on the teaching test corresponds with the 
grade test, but most or many items should. To systematically assess the attitudes 
of college students about the teaching pretest, a questionnaire was used to assess 
their experiences. Using the 5 point rating system below, the class rated the 
teaching pretest 4.8 (n - 66) and almost all students felt "very positive" about this 



technique. 

Scale n 

Very negative feelings 0 

Somewhat negative 0 

Neutral 2 

Somewhat positiw 11 

Vurv positive 33 

Total 66 



The vast majority of students were strongly in favor of regular use of teaching 
pretests, and only two were neutral. Some comments that students expressed 
could be interpreted as negative, but even these students were as a whole very 
positive. 

The majority of students felt a teaching pretext guided their studying, 
making it more meaningful and often more rewarding. It also helped them focus 
on th'^ material they fell thoy would probably need for tlie grade 
test;conse(iuently, the grade test became much less of a guessing game, ^"-tudents 
also felt the leaclung pretest exp' rience reduced their anxiet}' when taking the 
grade test. Thev hc\d a gt>od idea of what was g(Mng to be on this test before they 
walked Into tlie n)om tuul consequently were more prepared, or at least they felt 
more piepured. 1-urthermore, Ihey felt that it reduced their anxiety whih 



studying and possibly raised their performance level. In reference to this 
advantage, one student said 

I'm a very nervous person and take Pepto-Bismol on days that I am 
expecting a quiz. Frankly, I would much rather have the learning test than 
Pepto-Bismol— and I felt better, not only because I feel better having the 
learning test, but also because the learning test is proKibly better for me than 
Pepto-Bismol. 

The students feel more confident since they already have been through a 
similar test. As one student stated, "Having seen a familiar question before is 
like seeing a familiar face, or at least a friendly face in a crowd of unfamiliar 
people/' Most students felt strongly that they should be given "as many class 
tests as possible." 

The sample also felt that a learning teaching pretest helped them in 
studying. They not only knew what type of questions would be asked, but they 
also had a good idea of the specific areas which would be covered, especially 
useful ?f vin exam covers a large amount of material. 

Those students that were neutral felt most of their teachers usually told 
them basically what would be on the test anyway. Some teachers give what 
amounts to a teaching pretef if their exams arc made up primarily from 
previous quizzes. Quizzes are often used as a teaching pretest, especially if the 
final exam covers essentially the same material the quizzes did. But if ten 
quizzes, for example, count the Snme as a single exam, the advantage of this 
approach is probably not nearly as great as the single learning test and single 
iest approach. Ideally, it would probably be better to give four or five quizzes 
none of which count tov>'ard the student's grade (or which count at the option of 
the student). The grade exam (or last exam) would be based upon the same 
content that the quizzes cover, but utilizing different questions or ones that are 
worded differently. 

Although teaching pretests may not be equally helpful in all courses, they 
could be helpful even in art, music, and similar areas. At the least, they give the 
students a chance to learn the instructor's expectations relative to performance, 
helping the students to work towards these expectations before being graded, 

A number of students also mentioned the teaching pretest itself was rewarding 
and gave them more ambition to study for the grade test. One student stated: 

I normally only get 'C's' or sometimes 'B's' on the final test. My studying 
time tends to be close to the same for each class, taking a learning test and 
achieving a high 'C on it gave me encouragement that a little extra work 
W(Hiid earn a 'B' or possibly an 'A'! The learning test also relieved the 
pressure, in that if I did nothing else 1 would earn at least a 'C —the grade I 
normally recei\'ed. Therefore, there was no pressure to study, but a reward 
waiting if i did. 1 studied and achie\ ed the 'A.' 

Importantly, after taking a learning test, time should be spent discussing the 
answers. Students normally are concerned only abtiut the questions that were 
wrong — and then often only so they can justify their answers to raise their 
grade. Ft)r a teaching pretest, whether an answer is right or wroiig is somewhat 
immaterial and the score i^ only a rough guide of the studt iil's progress. Most 
students v* ill ci>nrenlr,]tr on the lontent of the question and rarely concern 
themselves with justifying a wrtMig answer. Several stuilent^ pbser\'ed I ha I even 
if thev guessed correrth', or felt an answer was correct but did not knmv ( \actly 




why, realizing they would see the same material again, motivated them to look 
up the material or ask for clarification in class. Students recognize the important 
goal is not selecting the right answer, but knowing which answer is correct and 
lohy. 

Most students stated they studied more when the teachmg pretest was used. 
Only two students out of 66 felt they studied less, and then only when they did 
quite well on the teaching pretest. In these cases they felt they should do at least 
as well on the grade test, thus they did not need to study Reducing anxiety can 
also increase the motivation to study. A clear advantage of the learning test is 
that it encourages the students to study earlier and spread out their studying 
time. If a test is on Friday, a student may not begin to study seriously until 
Wednesdav or Thursday. But use of a teaching pretest moti\'ates the student to 
begin to stud/ on Sattirday or Sunday; for example, to take the teaching test on 
Monday, and then if the grade test is to be given on Friday, study again on 
Wednesday or Thursday. Probably it is best to have the teaching pretest and the 
grade test separated by five to ten days or fifteen at the most. As the student has 
already studied before the teaching pretest, the pressure should be functional. 
For the traditional test, often so much material a student could study, or would 
like to study, exists that he or she does not have the time. Thus, he or she 
becomes frustrated and probably accomplished less than he/she otherwise 
might. Taking a teaching pretest actually forces a student to study for longer 
periods of time. By doing so, there is often less pressure and the student often 
accomplishes more on the night before the grade test than if only one test was 
given. 

Students arc generally quite concerned with what each instructor's test is like, 
how he or she grades, and the type of questions asked. A learning test is a very 
effective method of showing the sHidents what the instructor's test \vill be like. 

For many college level classes often only two exams are given. This gives 
little time to familiarize oneself with each teacher's tests and likewise little 
chance to demonstrate one's abilities. If only a few tests are given, doing poorly 
on one test results in a poor grade in the class as a whole. The teaching pretest 
gives students more of an opportunity to do their best. One student, who had a 
teacher that used this approach the previous term stated, "Everyone seemed to 
be more relaxed and earned better grades. No one was really worried when the 
test was going to be and everyone seemed more interested in the material 
presented." 

In directing one's studying, it is necessary to determine the areas one is 
most in need of work. Studying should be rewarding and spending time going 
over material one already knows, although it may be reinforcing, is often not as 
enjoyable (or as profitable) as going over les? faniiliar material. Importantly, too, 
the learning test often helps the student to develop improved studying habits, 
including reviewing the unil over a period of time. Spaced learning is far more 
effective than studying in a less systcMTiatic manner. 

A teaching pretest can be an'imptirtant aid to provide th' instructor with the 
feedback needed to review important points with the class because tliey are still 
motivated to learn. When discussing the material after a test, students are not 
often receptive. Musi sluJ(»nts are anxious to move on to new things and 
consuquentiy, are not as alert as they are when reviewing material that they W'U 
hv tested over shortly. 

When a teacher goes owr the answer students fuL-l partiallv becau'^e the 
review is usually too fast cuui very brief, that it was difficult to unLl»;rstand [he 
reason for the ccirrect answer. Rarely will one spentl time t(^ check the answers in 

31 r 



the book. The Teaching Pretest approach enables the student to discuss the 
answers with the instructor after class, or take them home to research the 
answers, pondering over them, and discussing their thoughts with peers and 
parents. 

The instructor can assess from the teaching pretest which questions are 
functional and which ones should be altered before the grade test is given. Then, 
if the teaching pretest is used as a basis for the grade test, fewer complaints will 
result. As the students are usually ego-involved in the grade test, they will look 
for flaws in the questions they missed to argue for a "point" to raise their score. 
And too, it is difficu.U for instructors to avoid constructing at least a few 
ambiguous questions. Avoidance of most poor questions could be achieved by 
including experimental test questions on the teaching pretest, and questions 
which are successful could be used with slight modification on the grade test. 
The teaching pretest could also be new test questions for another class. 

If both exams cover the same material, the advantages of double 
reinforcement results. Learning is more effective when the same idea is reviewed 
twice in different contexts as opposed to being exposed once in the same context 
or to two different ideas. Although, some of the repetition may be unnecessary, 
experience could help an instructor utilize repetition that is helpful, and avoid 
repetition where it is not needed. 

To prevent students from "slacking off" after doing fairly well on the 
learning test, the teacher could stress simpler ideas of the teaching pretest and 
the more complex ones on the grade test. So the students do study harder, and so 
the grade test is not a disappointment, the instructor must inform the students 
the second test will be harder. The tearher might mention, for example, that 
students usually get one-half to a whole grade lower on the grade test as 
compared to the teaching pretest. 

'^he experienced teacher can utilize this approach without much additional 
work. The teacher simply creates a pair of equivalent questions, then uses the 
harder one for the grade test. For beginning teachers, the content of the question 
pairs can be almost identical. Only the word order needs to be changed and 
possibly one or two of the incorrect responses. A simpler way is to prepare a test 
as usual, and use it as a teaching pretest then from the class discussion modify 
and improve the questions for the grade test. Actually, the grade test is often a 
revised, improved more detailed version of the teaching test. A teacher should 
perform item analysis on the teaching pretest to find which responses do not 
carry their weight, and thereby waste student's time. These alternatives could be 
replaced or improved so the responses stimulate students, and yet carry their 
weight. Since it is very difficult for an inexperienced teacher to accurately 
anticipate a student's reaction to any one question, an effective test usually 
requires a substantial amount of feedback from the students. Feedback is also 
important t(i assess the student's understanding of each question. In 
multiple-choice questions, the most common problem is ambiguity. Sonu'times 
one question can be understood by asking several different things. Note the 
following test question: 

1 . The most common student/teacher evaluation rating error is the: 

a. generosity error 

b. severitv qtvdt 

c. central tendency error 

d. logical error 

TIh' framer of this question is referring to the situation which the students 

32 



rate or evaluate the icacher. The sentence could also be understood as asking for 
the most common rating error in a situation where teachers rate students as well 
as when a student teacher is being rated by either the critic or supervising teacher. 
The meaning was clear in the mind of the test constructor, but students 
understood this as being three different questions. The problem in this case was 
not discovered until later, partially because in this example the correct answer 
for all three possibilities is the same ("a" or generosity error). Consequently, the 
learning test can serve a dual function, both to prepare the student and help the 
teacher revise his/her tests to produce better tests. 

The students are freer to discuss problems with the questions in the 
teaching pretest because they realize it is a test for learning ana not a grade. But 
for the grade test, students perceive a poorly written question as being unfair 
and repeated similar experiences can cause them to become quite hostile 
towards the instructor. 

Sunifnari/ 

The teaching pretest approach helps students to direct their studying f()r the 
grade test and reduces anxiety, helping them feel more confident and more 
relaxed because it provides information as to ^vhat type of questions will be on 
the grade test. By understanding about what the students are confused both 
relating to the wording of the question and the learning situation, modifications 
can be made on the grade test on which the students are most concerned about 
doing well. This enables both the student and the teacher to learn from their 
mistakes. 

With a teaching pretest, there is less concern that the questions will "get 
out" as none of these questions are used for the grade test. Ideally, the students 
should be able to keep a copy of the teaching pretest, but this would not be 
necessary if the student was given time to take notes although most students 
should know to 807f of the questions and consequently would not need to 
take many notes. When taking the teaching pretest, the students could put the 
letter of the answer they choc . on a sheet of notebook paper and leave several 
spaces in-between each answer to jot down notes on questions they missed. The 
sy-'tem works; when introduced to this idea, students training to be teachers 
oUen utilized this idea in their classroom. 

The few negative aspects of learning tests include the possibility that if a 
student does well for the teaching pretest, he/she may not be motivated to study 
as much for the grade test, and ihey may give some students a false sense of 
security. 

The advantages of a learning test were summed up by one student as 
follows: "/^learning test is fun, directs my studying, gives me confidence, 
motivates me and helps me get better grades — what more can I ask?" 

Jerry Bergman 
Engineering Instructor 
Northwest Technical College 
Archbold, OH 43502 



3*^ 



FRir 



FORUM 



ISSUE: Do the four-year and two-year colleges suffer 
unequally from state budget cuts? 

Larger Institutions Absorb Unanticipated Cuts 

Julius F. Greenstein 

All higher education in Ohio has more or less felt the pinch of state budget cuts; 
hozoever two-i/ear colleges hr.ve often wondered if they have suffered more severely 
than the four-year colleges and universities. Julius Grecusteiu and James 
Countryman reply to this issue in the following discussions. 

The question posed is reasonable enough but the answer is a complex one 
and not easily considered in a few paragraphs. 

How budget cuts affect 2-year versus 4-year institutions depends more on 
where a particular institution finds itself at the time of the cuts rather than on 
to which sector of higher education it belongs. 

For example, the impact of cuts will vary depending on what portion of 
the institution's total revenue is derived from instructional subsidy. That, in 
turn, will be influenced by the size of the student body and whether the 
campus is at a steady state, growing or declining mode. Also, some 2-year 
colleges have local levies which influences their dependence on state subsidy. 
Larger institutions tend to have more outside grants and Oiher 
revenue-producing enterprises. 

Another key factor is an institution's ability to respond to a cut in terms 
of tuition increases, internal re-allocations, cost-savings, retrenchment, or 
whatever measures are deemed necessary. This will depend again on the 
institution's relative position with regard to others of its kind as well as its 
previous history in dealing with declining revenues. Raising tuition to offset 
cuts can be dangerous in a highly competitive situation and might result in 
reduced enrollment. Tied to that might also be the influence of selective 
admissions versus open enrollment. 

Additionally, there are the relative impacts of cuts on financial aid, which 
is also related to tuition levels. Cuts have significant impacts on management 
and operation of the physical plant, so size 0/ campus looms important as well 
as whether a campus is in the midst of capital improvements. Obviously, cuts 
impact differently on resident versus commuter campuses with regard to 
student support sxTvices nnd student life requirements; and, no I incidently, 
cuts affert I he relative quality of instruction, faculty salaries, use of full-time 
V'Tsus part-time faculty and staff, etc., etc. 



Overall, it would probably be safe to say that larger institutions have 
economies of scale that help absorb unaniicipated cuts. Most of these large 
campuses tend to be 4-year institutions. On the other hand, instructional 
subsidy rewards growth, and most of that is occurring in the 2-year sector. So, 
take your pick. 

Julius R Greenstein 
Dean and Director 
The Ohio State University 
President 

Central Ohio Technical College 
Newark Campus 
Newark, OH 43055 

Two-Year Colleges Suffer More 

James J. Countryman 

Like most straightforward questions, "Do the four-year and two-year 
colleges suffer unequally in state budget cuts?, the answer cannot be an 
unqualified yes or no. In general, I believe the two-year colleges do suffer 
more. They are typically young institutions, havo not built the reserves of the 
more mature, and state aid makes up a larger percentdg? of their budgets. 
Further, while state aid has declined about 24% over the last four years, the 
two-year colleges have been growing while the four-year units generally have 
not. Thus, two-year colleges have had to "do more with less" to a significantly 
greater degree than our colleagues in the four-year system 

Institutions whose tuition and fees are below average have had to be lean 
and efficient in order to preserve access for students by keeping the price 
students have to pay as low as possible. Any cuts immediately affect the 
substance of the operation. There simply is no fat to do without. Further, 
individuals often have two or three different assignments so that if personnel 
cuts are necessary, the institutions, which are generally larger, usually have 
multiple staff in functional areas and thus do not lose the entire function in 
cutbacks. 

Budget cuts accompanied by tuition caps further aggravate the situation 
for low tuition institutions. They are even further penalized when budget cuts 
are accompanied by tuition caps in terms of percentage increases. Their small 
bases generate much smaller increases in operating revenue than a similar 
percentage on the larger base of more expensive tuitions at the four-vear 
units. 

The real problem is across-the-board cuts. They penalize efficient lower 
cost institutions to a much greater degree than the high cost ones whether 
they are two-yoar of four- year. In this environ mi-nt the only sensible strategy 
for a college is to get as fat as possible as quickly as possible so it gets hurt 
less in the next dip in the economy. 

James J. Countryman 
Frcsidenl 

Lima Technical College 
Lima, Oil 45804 



REACTION 



Reaction to Candice Johnson's Article 
Professional Sense of Community 

Trina Steward 



The Journal cticoura^c^^ letters and articles in respoiise to its contents, policies and 
OAJYC activities. 

Whatever happened to the idea that education as well as educators should 
benefit the student? If this idea still holds true, then it is inconceivable to believe 
that part-time faculty could possible threaten the programs and teaching in the 
two-year college. 

I have to agree with Candice Johnson when she stated that part-time faculty, 
because of their supplemental jobs and /or educational experiences bring a fresh 
perspective to a course that a po<;<;ib]3/ j^^ded full-time faculty member may not. 
This is not to say that once an educator has reached full-time status that all 
creativity and enthusiasm must cease; however, teaching a full load of possibly 
the same courses quarter after quarter can cause an educator to become numb. 
We would like to believe that as a full-time faculty we are capable of jetting to a 
conference here, or presenting a paper there, while at the same time creating new 
and exciting preparations each quarter for a class that we have previously 
taught. Unfortunately, this is not the case. Why should I exert all of that effort 
when I have a perfectly good preparation here? J low do I know it's good? Why 
it's worked for yearsl 

Exciting preparations as well as excited educators make for a better learning 
environment for both the student and educator alike. As part-time faculty, it is 
hard to remain excited about a job when you are constantly being treated as a 
second class citizen. Yes, part-time faculty are the "low men on the totem pole" 
so to speak,but instead of viewing them as the bottom of the heap, we need to 
value them as the foundation and main support of the pole that they are. 
Without part-time faculty, there would be a large number of uneducated 
students clamoring for the four or five sections that each full-time faculty 
member teaches. I believe the the two-year college will suffer a great loss in the 
quality of teaching if the part-time faculty member is continually looked down 
upon. Rather than worrying about how many sections a part-time faculty 
member has been assigned, \vc all n-ed to concentrate on the main reason why 
we became educators in the first place, and ha\'e chosen to dedicate our lives to 
excellence: The student. 

Trina Steward 
Instructor 

Communication Sk^ s 

Columbus State Community College 

Columbus, Ohio 43215 



My 



Reaction to Candice Johnson's Article: 
Professional Sense of Community 



Marc Green 



Candice Johnson sees the part-time faculty of a two-year college as a threat 
to its programs if that college isolates them and views them as inferior to the 
full-time faculty I believe that Ms. Johnson's view is quite accurate, and special 
care to avoid negative attitudes, political correctness, and other counter 
measures can go a long way toward making the part-timer seem more than "just 
an adjunct/' As an administrator responsible for interviewing, hiring, and 
e\'aluating over fifty part-time faculty, I think she has neglected to mention the 
essential factor that forces part-time faculty into that second class mold and that 
has a negative effect on programs. Until part-time faculty are paid on a par with 
their full-time colleagues, teaching and programs will suffer. 

During interviews with perspective part-time faculty, I regularly ask 
candidates a number of questions that focus on their past teaching and 
professional experiences. I also ask them why they are interested in this current 
position. My purpose, obviously, is to find a person suited to and qualified for 
the position. At the end of the interview, a number of them gracefully decline my 
offer when they learn the contract rate for the class or classes they would teach 
and the amount that full-time faculty receive. 

At my coUege, part-time faculty earn approximately three quarters of the 
amount made by full timers per class, and the differential is not just "fringe 
benefits." Their economic status is tmly second class, yet they are expected to 
deliver the same level of instruction as their counterparts. Many of these part- 
time faculty leach only "for love of the students" and "for love of the 
profession." In fact, many of them teach late mto the evenings and on weekends 
term after term to help maintain the integrity of a program. They are providing 
the instruction that often represents the majority of classes in a program or 
department. As experienced teachers and often times practicing professionals in 
a given discipline, these people deserve compensation which reflects their tme 
status, not the need to do more with less. 

Marc Green 
Assistant Dean 

Humanities and Sciences Division 
Cin. 'nnati Technical College 
Cincmnati, OH 45223 



I 



Thr Eiiitorini Boani of the OATYC Journal h '^oliiitiu\i writ I m }r>ponsc< (three or 
four para\iriiphii) to the que^tiojt: lit practice has the Transfer Module as 
adopted by Ohio Colleges been effective? The re>pon^e shouhi addrcsa one of the 
many po^sihU' per^pecdvc^. Here /s your chaucc to participate, and the Board 
enrourai^e^ you to do ^o. /\s detennuwd by the Board, the he>t /vs/jo/zs/vs loill he 
puNit^hed 1)1 the next edition'^ "l oruu}" section, deadline: September 17, 1993. 



^7 



mc 



r, - 



OATYC Journal Campus Solicitors 



Agricultural Technical Inslitute, Linda Houston 
Belmont Technical College, Rusty Stes'ens 

Bowling Green State University/Pirelands Branch, Ron«ild Willard 

Central Ohio Technical College, Scott Wilson 
Cincinnati Technical College, David C. Ballinger 
Clark State Community College, Kathy Kalinos 
Clermont College, Karen Williams 
Columbus State Community College, Rita Bova 
Cuyahoga Community College East, Thomas Morris 
Cuyahoga Community College Metro, Stanley Klosek 
Cuyahoga Community College West, Arthur Polen 

Edison State Community College, Mary Harris 

Hocking College, Elaine Dabelko 

Jefferson Technical College, Carolyn Leech 

Kent State University, Ashtabula Campus, Claud id Greenwood 
Kent State University, East Liverpool Campus, Danvin Smith 
Kent State University, Geauga Campus, Larry Jones 
Kent State University, Salem Campus, James Coone\' 
Kent State University, Stark County Campus, Judy Ohles 
Kent State University, Tuscarawus Campus, Agnes K. Swigart 
Kent Stale University, Trumbull Campus, Janet Crawford 

L-^keland Community College, Sallv Carr 

Lima Technical College, Will Wells ' 

Lorain County Community College, Marilyn Valentino 

Marion Technical College, Betty M. Dietsth 
Michael J. Owens College, Charles Ballard 
Muskingum Area Technical College, Catherine Gumming*^ 

N'orth Central Technical College, Bruce Sliney 
Northwest Technical College, James Nagel 

Ohio State Univer^^ity, Newark Campus, Robert Klingensmith 
Ohio University, Belmont Campus, Thomas Flynn 
Ohio University, Chillicothe Campus, J. Steven Phillips 

Raymond Wallers General and Technical College, James E. Cebula 
Rio Grande Community College, Raymond Boggs 

Sinclair Community College, Benjamin McKeever 
St^uthern State Community College, Kenneth Store 
Stark Technical College, Thenice Gall 

Terra Technical College, Kenneth Hahn 

Ti^ledi* Community and Technical College, Robert Somogye 

Uni\ ersitv (^f Akron Community and Technical College. Anna Maria Barnum 

L'niviTsity of Akron, Wayne College, Robert McElwee 

University of Cincinnati General and Technical College, I'atrick Knmpt 

Washington State Ci»mmiinity College, Joe Testermar 

"ioungstown Slate ( olk'ge ol Applied S ience and lechnology, 
\'u»let Bogges^ 



r, ■ 38 



The Jerry McClain Co., Inc. 

Custom homes, Northern 
Products log homes, residential 
remodeling, light commercial 
construction and residential and 
commercial condominums. 



Sharon Valley Apartments 

"Designed with the student in mind" 



Design - Quality - Service 




51 North Third Street 

Suite 701 
Newark, OH 43055 



Sharon Valley Apartments are 
located adjacent to the campus of 
The Ohio State University, 
Newark and the Central Ohio 
Technical College. 



Phone 
(614) 345-3700 



Phone 
(614) 345-3700 



39 



Annual OATYC Conference 

"Managing Our Own future: 
The Two-Year College in Ohio" 

University of Toledo Community and Technical College 
Toledo, Ohio 

Friday, Octobeir 22, 1993 

(proconference sessions and social gathering Thursday, Oct. 21) 

Presentation proposals are invited, espeddy for these topics: 

• Assessment 

• TQM 

• Curriculum of the future 
• Technical Education 

• Transfer 

• Developmental Education 

• Part-time and Adjunct Roles 

• Minorities In the Two-year College 
• The Comprehensive Community College 

Watch for additional announcements 

For further information, contact Carol Nelson-Burns. University of Toledo 
Community and Technical College, Scott Park Campus. Toledo Ohio 
43606-3309 (419)537-3318. 

Pleose plan to attend* 



40 



r, ^ 





OATYC Officere: 1992-93 

President: Linda Houston, Associate Professor of Communicalion Skills, Agricultural Technical 
Institute, Ohio State University, 1328 Dover Road, Wooster, OH 44691-8905 (21 6) 264-3911. 
President-Elect: Carol Nelson-Bums, Professor of English, University of Toledo /C&T College, Scott 
Park Campus, Toledo, OH 43606 (419) 537-3318. 

Treasurer RusmII K. Davis, III, Associate Professor of Business Management Technology, University 
of Akron Community and Technical CoUege, 304 East Buchtel Avenue, Akron, OH 44235 (216) 972-7391. 
Secretary: Anne Peterson, Associate Professor, Behavioral Sciences, Columbus State Community 
CoUege, 550 E. Spring St., Columbus, OH 43216 (614) 227-2400. 

Past President: Dave Humphreys, Professor of English, Cuyahoga Community College, Eastern 
Campus, 4250 Richmond Road, Highland Hills, OH 44122 (216) 987-2358. 

Board of Directors: 1992-93 
Kenneth Hahn, Director of Educational Services, Terra Technical College, 2830 Napolean Road, 
Fremont, OH 43420 (419) 334-3886. 

Chandra Jain, Instructor of Engineering, Lakeland Community College, 7700 Clocktower Drive, 
Mentor, OH 44060-7594 (216) 953-7000. 

Thomas Prcisseiv Professor of Philosophy, Sinclair Community College, 444 West Third Street, Dayton, 
OH 45402-1453 (513) 226-2500. 

Judith A. Woolten, Director of Writing, Kent Stale University, Salem Campus, 2609 Stale Ro«'.;e 45 
South, Salem, OH 44460-9412 (216) 332-8601. 



OATYC CAMPUS LIAISON LIST - 1992-93 



B*lmont Technical CoU»rge 
Jo Elicit Hopp 
(614) 695-9500 
Bowling Green State UniversityRrelands 
jo« O'Uushlin 
(419) 433-5560 
Central Ohio Technical College 
Scott WlJion 
(614)366-1351 
Cindnnjti Twchnjol CoUege 
JicnMaKotte 
(513)569-1618 
CUrk State Commumty CoUege 
Kjlbctiitc Kaiino* 
(513) 325W1 
Clermont College 
Ro^r J. Bjury 
(513)732-2990 
Columbus State Community College 
John Shi w key 
(614) 227-2453 
Cuyahogj Community CoUcge- 
Carcer Resources Institute 
Allic Dunham 
(216) 987-4046 
Cuyahoga Community Collpgc- Eastern 
Dave Humphrey* 
(216) 987-6000 
Cuyahoga Communitv College.- Metro 
Nancy Robettt-Harrington 
(216) 987-4000 
Cuyahoga Community College.- Western 
Arthur D. Polcn 
(216) 845-4000 
Edison Stale Community College 
Mary Hanis 
(513) 778-8600 
Hocking College 
Gary Boycr 
(614) 753-3591 
Jefferson Technical College 
Bonita Schaffner 
(614 ) 264-5591 
Kent State Univcrsity-Ashtabula 
Claudia Greenwood 
(216) 9M-3322 
Kent State Universitv-Easl Liverpool 
Darwin Smith 
(216)385-3805 
Kent State Univcrsity-Ce.^uga 
Larry Jone« 
(216) 285-2219 
Kent State University -Salem 
Tad Shura 



(216) 332-0361 



Kent Stale Univcrsity-Stark 

Judy Ohle« 

(216) 499-9600 
Kent State University -Trumbull 

Jai)«t Crawford 

(216) 847-0571 
Kent State University.Tuscarawas 

Agnes Swigait 

(216) 339-3391 
Lakeland Community College 

Cario* Tackrtt 

(216) 953-7342 
Lima Techrucal CoUege 

WiUWelU 

(419)221-1112 
Lorain County Community College 

Lou Saurez 

(216)365-4191 
Marion Technical College 

Nancy Glbon 

(614) 389^Wi36 
Miam University- Ha milt on 

Robert Baer 

(513) 863-8833 
Miami University-Middletoivn 

Rob Speckert 

(513) 424-4444 
Muskingum Area Technical College 

Cherie White 

(614) 454-2501 
North Central Technical College 

Bruce Sliney 

(419) 7S54800 
Northwest Technical College 

James Nagel 

(419)267-5511 
Ohio State University 
Agricultural Technical Institute 

Linda Houston 

(216) 264-3911 
Ohio State University- Lima 

Violet Meek 

(419)221-1112 
Ohio Slate University-Mansfield 

Charles Bird 

(419) 755^011 
Ohio State Universtty-Marion 

Francis Hazard 

(614)389-2361 
Ohio Stale University -Newark 

Robert Klingensmith 

(614)366-3321 
Ohio Uni vera. ty- Belmont 

Richard G. McMami 

(614) 695-1720 
Ohio University-Chlllicolhe 

J. Steyen Phillips 

(614) 77S-9500 



Ohio Umvcrsity-l ronton 
Eric Cuimingham 
(614)533-4600 
Ohio Univcrsity-LarKaster 
Joann« WoUord 
(614)654-6711 
Ohio University-Zanesville 
Craig Laub«nthai 
(614)654-6711 
Owens College 

Kathy Brubakcr 
(419) 423-6827 
Raymond Walters General Technical 
Larry Waldrop 
(513)745-5698 
Rio Grande Community College 
Sanfo:d Lane 
(614)245-5353 
Sinclair Community College 
Thomas M. Prelsaer 
(513) 226-2500 
Southern State Commurdty Colleg 
John Porter 
(513) 695-0307 
Sta.k re«:hnical College 
John Thornton 
(216) 494-6170 
Terra Technical College 
Kenneth Hahn 
(419)334-3886 
University of Akron 
Velma Poi cnkc 
(216) 375-;i20 
University of Aknon. Wayne College 
Robert McElwee 
(216)663-2010 
UmverMty ol Cmcinnati University College 
R. William Viltner 
(513) 475-4062 
University of Cinonnali Clermont College 
Roger J. Barry 
(513) 732.5200 
University of Toledo Community and 
Technical College 
Judy Hanneken 
(419) S37-3126 
Washmgton State Communitv College 
Joe Testtrman 
(614)374-8716 
\S'nght State Universitv-Lake Campus 
Arthur MoUticmo 
(419)586-2365 
Youngstown State University 
Robert Campbell 
(216)742-3312 



97 




00 




ERIC 



