DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 284 373 EC 192 711 



TITLE 



INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



American Council on Rural Special Education (ACRES) 
Conference Proceedings (6th, Tucson, Arizona, April 
22-25, 1986). 

American Council on Rural Special Education. 
Apr 86 

658p. ; Printed on colored paper. For fifth annual 
conference see, ED 25 413. 

Collected Works - Con. trence Proceedings (021) — 
Reports - Descriptive 141) 

MF03/PC27 Plus Postage. 

*Disabilities; Early Childhood Education; Elementary 
Secondary Education; *Gifted; Program Descriptions; 
*Rural Education; *Special Education; Teaching 
Methods 



ABSTRACT 

This proceedings contains summaries, handouts, or 
full papers of presentations. Sample titles and presentors include 
the following: "Project S.E.R.T. Special Education Training for 
Regular Educators of Native-Americans" (C. Foster); "Effect of 
Inservice Education Models on Team Problem-Solving" (K. Bunch and A. 
Bunch); "Handicapped Preschoolers in a Rural School: Issues in 
Placement" (I. Williams); "An On-the-Job Practicum 
Experience — Supervising Teachers in Rural Areas" (B. Ludlow et al); 
"Parents as Partners: Using the Portage Model of Early Intervention" 
(S. Holzman); "INREAL Model for Rural Reunification of Regular and 
Special Educators" (R. Edmiaston); "Rural Teacher Certification for 
Moderately and Severely Handicapped Students in Integrated School 
Programs" (J. Sebastian); "Cost Effective Rural Remediation Plan for 
the Developmentally Disabled" (R. Hedge et al); "Native American 
Training Programs in Arizona" (J. Schnorr et al); "Rural Special 
Education Preservice Field Experiences" (M. Wolfe and B. McConville); 
"Characters in Literature Provide Role Models for Rural Gifted and 
Talented Youth" (R. Daniels and L. Katzer); "Working Successfully 
with the Braille Reader: Strategies for Parents and Rural School 
Personnel" (C. Capper); "Off Campus Rural Preceptorships in 
Education" (S. Stuart); "Parents as Partners: Rural Intervention 
Model" (S. Waldrop). (DB) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

**************************** 



IN* 

^ SIXTH AK'NUAL NATIONAL RURAL SPECIAL EDUCATION CONFERE'lCE 
oo 

UJ Sponsored byj 

American Council on Rural Special Education 

(ACRES) 



April 22 - 25. 1986 



Holiday Inn/Holidome 
Tucson, Arizona 



0 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

OfficB ol Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL HESOUHCES INFORMATION 
# CENTER (ERIC) 

^This document has been reproduced as 
re<.eived from the person or organization 
originating it 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality. 

• Point* Ol view or opinions stated <n this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy. 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



ritSI COPY AVAILABLE 



ERIC 



Early Bird Sessions 
Tuesday, April ill 

9:00 - 12:00 noon 



Earlybird Session 
Tuesday, April 22 
9;0Q-12;0Q am 



Imogene Land & Kay Bull 
Oklahoma State University 
Stillwater, OK 74078 



The Adaptive Approach for Educational Methods 



G^ake It & Take It) 



The adaptive approach for meeting the needs of a wide range of students 
is a technique for individualizing instruction. To implement the adaptive approach 
it is necessary for teachers to develop or adapt the materials available to them. 
This workshop will show participants how to create and adapt materials to meet 
the needs of a wide range of students (IIR to G/T). This workshop will be of 
interest to both the elementary and secondary teachers in rural schools. 

Elementary teachers will view many sample, non-consumable materials 
adapted for teaching basic skills. Most of the materials are manipulative. 
A variety of learning centers will be on display. A participant will be able 
to copy the ideas or develop new ones at this workshop.. 

Secondary teachers will develop minicenters in a subject matter area. 
To do this they xt7ill be required to learn to write questions for the different 
levels of learning (Bloom* s taxonomy) or they can develop remedial drill and 
practice centers. A student packet to teach Bloom's Taxonomy will be available 
for secondary teachers. Since secondary teachers do not have the time to develop 
materials this packet can be used to teach students how to develop Bloom's unit 
for other students. This is an excellent experience for the secondary student. 
Sample learning activity formats utilizing folders, packet folders, sma^l 
notebooks and large envelopes will be on display. Secondary level teachers 
will develop sample activities to be used to teach secondary students development 
techniques. 

Secondary teachers, teachers of the gifted and elementary teachers should 
bring subject matter materials (books, workbooks, magazines, etc.) from their 
area of expertise to be used as adapted materials in the construction of centers. 
Folders, glue sticks, construction paper and other consumable supplies will be 



ERLC 



5 



Page 2 



furnished. A fee of three dollars will be collected for the supplies. 



ERIC 



6 



INREAL Parent Training 



The INREAL (INter-REActlve Learning) model Is a research 
based Intervention and prevention model for handicapped 
children. The INREAL model Is a nonstlgmatlzlng , naturalistic, 
child-centered approach which assists parents and educators 
In establishing Improved communication/Interaction with 
children. 

From Its Inception, INREAL has responded to Individual 
parent needs and requests In establishing Its parent training 
program. The objectives of the parent training program are: 

1) enhance parents' natural Interactions with their children, 

2) to Include parents of both handicapped and non-handicapped 
children, 3) clarify parents' understanding of child develop- 
ment and their child's needs, 4) help parents participate 
more effectively within the child's educational setting, 

5) refrain from treating parents of handicapped children as 
though they (the parents) are handicapped and 6) work with 
other parents of handicapped and non-handicapped children. 

The purpose of this workshop will be to present the 
basic tenets and theoretical background of the INREAL model. 
Participants will be trained in the use of specific strategies 
which will facilitate parent-child communication (interaction). 
Information will be provided to enhance the identified parents' 
natural parenting skills. 



Elizabeth Heubleiri, INREAL /Outreach 

Coordinator 
University of Colorado 
CDSS, Campus Box 409 
Boulder, CO 80309 



Earlybird Session 
Tuesday, April 22 

9:00-12:00 



EKLC 



7 



Irving Williams, Director 
Project Rural 
MS AD #62 

Abstract on Proposed Presentation Elmwood Rd 

"Parent and Professional Partnerships for Legislative Action" Pownal, ME Q4Q69 

ACRES National Conference 

This presentation would focus on the experiences of a parent/professional netvrork 
vMch has nobilized over the past decade to effect legislative action and public policy 
in the geographical, political and economically diverse rural state of Maine. Rather 
than being solely a hew to approach on legislative change, although practical suggestions 
wil3. be offered to participants, this workshop would propose to exanlne many of the 
underlying issues that confront parent/professional groups that emerge in the political 
process in a largely rural state. The presentation would cover key elements in the 
collaborative development of l e gislative strategies which r^ve affected change for 
preschool handicapped children in a state which has not previously legislated services 
before the age of five. Content areas would include the following tcpics for examina- 
tion/discussion : 

Parent/Professional Comnunication 

In the arena of legislative involvement conminication skills become very critical 
to successful collaborative efforts. Establishment of trust between parents and pro- 
fessionals in issues of advocacy will be examined. Quite often, parents are asked 
to testify for legislative comnittees or to take positions on bills in their roles as 
consumers of services. Understanding the demands this places on parents as well as 
looking at the facilitating roles that professionals need to play can lead to better 
working relationships as well as more successful legislative initiatives. 

Assessanent of Needs 

On occasion, parent and professional groups can find thansc?ves in disagreenent 
or confusion over how best to meet particular needs within the comnunity, needs that 
have legislative solutions. Conhtned needs assessment can lead to the development 
of legislative agendas and timetables that everyone can agree to. In instances when 
all parties agree to proposed solutions, unified needs assessment can still be of value 
in terms of building stronger group coalitions and inter-agency agreements. Group dynam- 
ics and organizational development theories when applied to needs assessments and con- 
flict resolution also gives insight into new ideas for parents and professionals 
work in unified advocacy groups. 

development and Implementation of Legislative Action Plans 

This section of the presentation would focus on real and practical strategies for groups 
working on political action plans. How to find and use a lobbyist; getting the most out 
of legislative training; working with a citizen legislature; forming coalitions; use of 
professional organizatlx>ns and making state govemnent work for you. Since the legisla- 
tive process in somewhat d-fferentto each state, general principles are aiplied to prob- 
lem .<»lving in this section, as well as having tne additional focus of being a partici- 
pant sharing time. 

As president of a statewide legislative advocacy group, the Association for Young 
Children with Special Needs, I feel that I have experiences and knowledge to share with 
others, particularly those \^ may be looking at forming legislative advocacy groups in 
rural states and are faced with the traditional barriers of distance, money, conrunica- 
tion, etc, which confront groups as they attempt to organize. 



Q 8 

ERIC 



Pat Burns, Facilitator 
1225 East 11th Place 
Casa Grande, AZ 85222 



PROPOSED ABSTRACT 



Early Bird Session: Parmts Sharing Oiallenges and Success Stories 



The proposed seminar will focus on issues important to parents of 
children with special needs. 

Parents, siblings, extended family members, professionals, parent 
trainers, an<\ individuals involved in providing support to 
parents are invited to attend. The proposed Early Bird Session 
will provide participants with an opportunity to share important 
issues, discuss conflicts, and share successful strategies. 

The session will be facilitated by Pat Burns, ACRES Parent- 
Professional Relationships Task Force Leader. First, each 
participant will write down on a small piece of paper an issue or 
concern currently being faced. The Facilitator and an assistant 
will sort these concerns by general topic. During this period of 
time, each participant will introdu'^e herself /himself . After 
introductions, the Facilitator will read each group of concerns. 
The entire group will discuss the concerns and also discuss 
strategies/practices that are successful. 

This session will be tape recorded, and will be transcribed after 
the session. The manuscript vjill be edited by the Facilitator 
and then made available to session participants. 



Earlybird Session Winston Egan, Helen Lacy, Iva Dene 

TuPQrlpv Adt-H 22 McCleary, Joan Sebastian 

Tuesday , Aprix ll University of Utah 

9:00-12:00 ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ 8/:il2 

CREATING, DEVELOPING, AND EVALUATING INTERACTIVE TELEVISION COURSES 
FOR RURAL/REHOTE SPECIAL EDUCATORS: A WORKSHOP FOR PRESERVICE AND INSERVICE 

TEACHER EDUCATORS 

The purpose of this presentation/workshop is to introduce inservice and 
preservice educators to the processes involved in creating, developing, airing 
and evaluating interactive television instruction for special educators. In 
addition the workshop presenters will report on research that has been 
conducted relative to the effectiveness of this approach in Tteeting the 
instructional needs of rural/remote regular and special educators. 

Our workshop objectives are as follows: (1) to introduce conference 
participants to the steps involved in actually creating an interactive 
television course; (2) to suggest strategies directly related to selecting an 
instructor, selecting the courses for development, determining instructional 
goals and objectives, developing instructional course formats, choosing 
support media, coordinating development activities with the production 
personnel^ changing session/program elements in response to student feedback, 
and developing "off line" communication systems, and (3) to identify 
approaches for evaluating the reception and mastery of the course content. 

Also the presenters will share the results of research that they have 
conducted relative to three separate "telecourses" that have been offered 
through the Department of Special Education and Instructional Media Services 
at the University of Utah. AnaJyses regarding program quality, teaching 
effectiveness, objective learning and other related factors will be shared 
with persons in attendance. 

The presenters also intend to share with the conference participants 
representative portions of program components via video tape recordinas. In 
these video segments they will be able to see various types of program 
segments including simulations, guest presenters, quiz corrections, 
audio/slide adaptations, character generator materials, etc. 

The practical implications of this presentation/workshop for preservice 
and inservice teacher educators- of rural/remote personnel are many. Upon 
completion of the workshop/presentation, conference participants will have a 
clear understanding of what is involved in developing, creating, and financing 
two-way interactive television programs for rural/remote educators. In 
addition, they will have some strategies for evaluating the effectiveness of 
any courses that may choose to develop and air for preservice or inservice 
speci.3l educators. They will also be sensitized to the telecommunications 
technology that is available for providing quality instruction to prospective 
and current special education personnel. 



er|c 10 



Earlyblrd Session 

Bonnie Jeem McGregor 

Tuesday, April 22 Ciurriculum Development Specialist 

Q nn 10 no National Rural Development Institute 

y:UU- 12:03 am Western Washington University 

Bellingham, WA 98225 



DEVELOPING CURRICULAR MODULES— A COMPETENCY -BASED APPROACH 



This training seaaion will focua on Metai ill Profile 
Competency -Baaed Inatruction. It will give an overview of 
the componenta of the MSP Competency-Baaed Inatruction 
Syatem, a ayatematic approach to deaigning inatruction. Tne 
componenta are the external eventa of inatruction needed ro 
enhance the ^internax' proceaa of learning. 

Moat prof esaional educator a know the "arf of 
inatruction and their aub3ect content, but few have been 
provided with the "acience" of inatruction. Thia approach 
focuaea on atudent akilla rather than aub^ect material or 
content and guaranteea to ahort^sn instructional preparation 
time . 

The following capacitiea will be diacuaaed and the 
capacities of most intereat to the participants will be 
covered in greater depth. 

1. Identify the components of an educational system. 

2. D?.f f erentiate ma^or approaches to education. 

3. Identify levels of educational outcomes and their 
purposes. 

4. Specify a goal . 

5. Write instructional objectives. 

6. Identify learning tasks. 

7. Classify learning tasks. 

8. Identify instructional techniques. 

9. Identify instructional resources. 

10. Identify types of assessment instruments. 

Workbooks containing further independent study will toe 
given to participants. 



li 

o 

ERIC 



state Education Agency Issues and Problem-Solving 

The purpose of this session Is for state education agency personnel to 
share what Is happening In their agency and state. The objectives are 
for participants: 1) to give a brief summary of trends In their 
respective states, 2) to Identify the major Issues faced by SEA 
personnel, and 3) to discuss problem-solving strategies. 

The focus Is on rural Issues and practical strategies. Possible topics 
suggested for discussion include: 1) provision of technical assistance, 
2) personnel recruitment, 3) vocational training in rural settings, 
4) provision of occupational and physical therapy services in non-urban 
areas, 6) comprehensive system of personnel development, 7) consortia 
building for service delivery, 8) secondary school programming, 
9) funding alternatives, and 10) use of a consultative model to deliver 
services in rural areas. 



Pete Biaggio, Consultant 
Nebraska Department of Education 
301 Centennial Mall, Box 94987 
Lincoln, NE 68509 



Earlybird Session 
Tuesday, April 22 
9:00 - 12:00 am 



4750S 



12 



Earlybird Session 
Tuesday. April 22 

1:30-4:30 pn 




Carlene Gobert 

Kentucky Department of Educati 
815 Capital Plaza Tower 
Frankfort, KY 40601 



REAL PRINCIPALS NEED PRIUE 



Purpose: Share informaton on Kentucky's training project aimed at 
providing principals with resources for meeting needs of 
handicapped students 

Objectives: 1. Participants will experience simulations of train 



activities. 

2. Participants will view a videotape highlighting prin- 
cipals' reactions to training activities. 

3. Participants will learn about Kentucky's model which 
provides a networking structure for principals who 
often work in rural areas with limited opportunities 
for sharing ideas/problems related to special educa- 
tion. 

4. Presenters will share project evaluation results in- 
cluding qualitative and quantitative procedures used 
by a third-party evaluator. 

5. Presenters will guide discussion of questions and 
sharing of related experiences by conference audience. 



11 . 



ABSTRACT 



J«I a*'^ "responsible for assuring appropriate education services 

J5L5i5 students; but this group has traditionally received 

limited training and/or skill building experiences addressing the 
spectrum of Issues related to programs and services for handicapped 
students. '^'^ 

Project PRIDE (Principals, Resources, Information and Direction for 
Excellence in Special Education) provides selected principals with 13 
days of training which is divided among 4 Training Institutes. Principals 
from the elementary level through the secondary level are Included. A 
train-to-train" model is utilized because of the large number of 
principals needing training. 

Most of the project's participants have represented small, rural 
Kentucky school districts. The project has demonstrated the value of 
structured networking for principals who often work in "Isolation" 
with few opportunities for sharing ideas or discussion of problems. 

The project provides principals an opportunity to develop leadership 
Skills, build an effective communication system for sharing resources 
and ideas related to serving handicapped students, and strengthen 
school -cornnunity relationships. 

Training topics include: 

Training Institute I Attitudes 

Parent Communications 

Training Institute II Developing Capable Young People 

Training Institute III Staff support teams. Group dynamics, and 

Leadership skills 

Training Institute IV Implementation of federal and state regula- 
tions regarding education of handicapped 
students 

Participants have highly rated the value of training, and third-party 
evaluation procedures (both quantitative and qualitative) indicate that 
the project has been successful in accomplishment of goals. 

Presentors will provide Information on the project's process/procedures 
and evaluation results. Participants will be actively involved in 
simulations of selected training activities. A question and answer 
and sharing time will be built into the pre?,entation time. 



15 . 

ERIC 



Presentor: Irving WLUiams 
Project RURAL 
Pownal, Maine 

Earlybird Session (207)688-4832 
Tuesday, April 22 
1:30-4:30 pm 



HANDICAPPED PRESCHOCLERS IN A RURAL SCHOOL: 
Issues in Placement 



16 



This presentatlDn will focus on the developnent of a model program which serves 
handicapped preschoolers in a rural (200 student) school district in southern Jfaine, 
and en|*asize the range of placement options \Mch exist in a state environnent of 
permLssive le gis l a t ion that encourages interagency coordination and coUaboration. 

Efforts to establish a services delivery system for special needs children in a 
state vMch lacks a mandate for services below the age of five (by October I5th) have 
been underwy in MEdne local education agencies and ccnmmity based programs over the 
past ten years. Past federally funded denonstraticxi pr o gia m s have focused on LEA 
initiatives for child find, screening and center based programniiigdielp ME, Project 
Malnestream) day care for special needs children (Project WELCXIE), and rural delivery 
strategies (Washington County). Preschool discretionary grants have expanded (if but 
topcrarily) on the services base and other coammity efforts, both traditional (U.C.P., 
state Ml/Ml, ccranmity mental health) and non-traditional program have evolved to fill 
the service and program needs of this population. 

However, these programs have tended to cluster around the three main population 
centers for the state, and serve very limited nuDters of children (about $8400 handi- 
capped children aged 3-5 have been identified in Maine and about 15% of them are 
served in school or center based progranmlng) . Therefore, issues of placement options 
become critical as one discusses the need for expanded services. 

k traditional view within Maine has regarded the public school, because of its 
high ccnnunity visibility and accessibility as the primary potential vehicle for 
delivery of services to young handicapped children, particularly in widely dispersed 
geographic locations. While this view is essentially correct in the assunption that the 
public school is the most accessible facility (even unorganized territories have access 
to schools and school services) it ignores factors of appropriateness of the service 
delivery site, social concerns and ccnnunity values, and the "readiness" of LEA's to in- 
volve themselves with preschool programs for handicaR)ed children. These are some of 
the major concerns that m^ be explored in the context of the development of one mDdel 
project in preschool special education. Project fOJEtAL, aid the further ananysis and 
dip:nission of placement consideration and options in a rural state. 

In the fall of 1983, Project RURAL was established as a demonstration site funded 
by the U.S. Department of Education, Handicapped Children's Early Education Programs. 
The project model vas based in part on an earlier and successful H.C.E.E.P. demonstration/ 
outraach project. Project Maine Stream. Both projects were established as model pro- 
grams in a state that until July, 1985 did not have any legislative directives for 
relnfcursenent of costs for the maintenance of special educatiai prograns for children 
belcw the age of five. Therefore, and most Ijnportantly, these pro-ams became guide- 
posts within the state plan for special education, which had alreacfy twice delayed the 
"start dates" for special education preschool services* 

The major thrust of RURAL has been to establish a low cost and effective model which 
relies on the i nt egration of school, home, and ccnnunity resources. In wxty instances, 
rural schools become the focus of connunity involvement and activity. This is certain- 
ly the case in Pcwnal, site of RURAL. Primarily a farming ccnnunity, with a population 
of 1,200 and a school (preschool grade 8) of 215. The school building is the only pub- 
lic facility in tcwn that has heat and running water in the winter months. It is the 
site for a variety of ccnnunity activities, from baton classes to Town Meeting. The 
building was erected in 1968, closing out several one room school houses. 



17 



page 2 



Of the identified obstacles to services for young handicapped children in this 
state, access to I'inaicial resources has been the greatest block to the establish- 
ment of special education services. Within caiminities that maintain tight fiscal 
restraints in spending on school budgets (vhich also mist pass voter approval at 
Town Meetings) goaerally only the hare essentials have been provided for. Without 
state matching funds being made available for the establishment of preschool programs » 
as well as the fact that Maine ranks 48th in per capita income, little state or local 
siqsport has been dononstrated in the past. 

At the state level, over the past decade, Maine has put a major effort into the 
establishuent of an interagency collaborative approach to serving preschool handi- 
capped children. Currently there exists a statewide system for the identification and 
referral of preschool handicapped children, but this system is limited in the ways it 
m^ provide direct services to children and their families. This statewide system of 
sixteen projects has been building at the local level interagency agreements and other 
collaborative efforts aimed at more effective service delivery. But all too often, 
needed services are not delivered, either because agencies don't exist to meet the 
need, or other barriers, such as geograpl^ prevail. Seme of the sixteen coordination 
sites cover as large as the state of Connecticut. Thus, obstacles at both the state 
and Ixxial level have been present as small districts have contenplated instituting pre- 
school handicapped programs. 

The success of Project FUFAL at the local level can be attributed by several factors. 
First, for a nunober of years the district has been involved in early education efforts. 
The district is one of a few in the state to have taken advantage of a little used pro- 
vision in the state finance law which permits the use of state education doUars for 
four year old programs. Thus, five years ago, Ptownal established a four afternoon per 
week preschool program \Mch was held in the afternoons utilizing the kindergarten room, 
teacher and aide, along with parent volunteers. In a connunity without any local 
nursery school, day care or Head Start centers, this program joas well received by parents 
wanting an organized play experience for their child prior to school entry. The program 
has consistently had both taxpayer and school board support at budget time. Another meas- 
ure of the programs* success is that over 95% of eligible children have attended in 
each year of operation. 

For the past three years of demonstration grant funding, the four year old program 
has provided the project with non-handica^pped children in order to maintain nainstreamed 
prograuiuLng for handicapped children. In wany other practical i«ays, the special needs 
project is "piggybacked" onto the local school's programs and services. As mentioned, 
the kindergarten staff and room are used, as well as naterials and equipment from that 
room. The transportation ^tem for older children is also utilized, with the preschoolers 
being picked up as kindergarteners are dropped off, and sharing afternoon rides with 
seventh and eighth graders. 

The other unique manner by Oiich the project utilizes local resources is in the area 
of school personnel. Regular education instructional staff are responsible in scab way 
for weekly instruction of the special needs preschoolers, as well as the nonhandicapped 
four year olds. Art, ^ilsic, and Physical Education staff are included in this process. 
In addition, the services of the district's specialist staff are used in the project, 
with the speech therapist, occupational therapist, and school counselor all giving a 
part of their contracted time to the preschool. 

This project is concluding its demonstration funding period at a Mhip ;^ien activities 
in the state, through the state planning grant effort, as well as ongoing activities within 
the Department of Education shift to meet the challenge of newly enacted permissive 
legislation. 

^ 18 

ERIC 



It is now recognized that the lack of preschool legislation over the past decade 
may actually have benefitted the mial state of MEiine. For one it has allowed the 
caaninity based coordination slXe system to develop independent of LEA'S, at the 
same time gaining recognition at the state level with the legislature and the State 
Department of Education. It has also allowed for a camunity base of services to 
develop even thcxagh limited, one that is milti-disciplinary in composition, and 
collaborative in approach to service delivery problems. 

There are still many problems that need to be addressed as this system develops 
and is refined through the legislative and regulatory process. However, where the 
real opportunity for change exists starts at the local level, where placement options 
are traditionally wrked out. Public schools based in rural areas are beset by the 
same problems that affect any service provider in the development and lnplementation 
of preschool handicapped programs. Personnel preparation, funding, geographical 
barriers, staff recruitment and retention are all comiDn, and seemingly unereiing pro- 
blems. Programs like Project RURAL make inroads into solving some of these inherent 
problems, hcwever it is usually because of the luplementation of special federal 
or state grant that change is laplemented, snmptlmes on a very tenporary basis. In 
Maine, traditionally Preschool DLscretlonary Grant prograne in LEA's have lasted for 
their tv© year funding periods, nirely any longer, since local districts have been 
reluctant to comnit the money nu;essary to run non-mandated program. Going beyond 
funding issues, \Mch will always be problematic in the public sector, the following 
issues need to be carafully examined as ccnmmities contemplate inplonenting new or 
revising already established preschool haalicapped prograne in LEA's. 

Programs developed in isolation of the preschool conm mity. 

The preschool ccnmmity no matter hew small, isolated or Invisible , observes 
every direction that public schools take in regards to preschool services. Educational 
day care programs. Head Start Centers, nursery schools all comnonly mistrust public 
school intentions in establishing early education prograne (see Caldwell). As a 
feature of its education reform act. South CaroLU-a has nandated that local schools 
coordinate early childhood programs and services with connunity providers, and that 
local ccnnunity advisory comnittees be consulted on the development of preschool 
programs \Mch will be based in public schools. 

Programpatic Difficulties for LEA based preschool programs - For many reasons 
including certification waivers, school consolidations and declining school enrollments, 
the problem of teacher misplacement has becone quite comnonplace in wany school dis- 
tricts. Since many teacher pr^aration programs, don't teach , Issues in early child 
development, special needs, or family systems, mai^ teachers who are currently teaching 
in early childhood programs are unprepared to do so. 

Another typical concern centers around philosophical approaches to teaching. While 
preschool teachers advocate the \*ole child approach to teaching following developmental 
theories, quite often their counterparts in the early elementary grades (who are often 
assigned to preschool teaching posts) find themselves labelled "cognitively oriented" 
and lJi|)osing typical exercises, blue ditto slieets, on a younger and younger population. 
Educational journals that have an early elementary focus are now just beginning to 
publish informative and practical articles on develcpnentally appropriate progranming 
i*. early childhood (see O'Connell). 



Sharon Klefer 

Child Development Resources 



"Facilitating the Development of Guidelines for Early Intervention Programs" 

As rural states move toward a full service mandate which addresses the 
needs of children birth to three, and as programs of early intervention 
spring up in states in which there is no mandated service, ^fuidelines for 
those programs become increasingly necessary. In Virginia, where 
early intervention programs have grown rapidly from 29 programs serving 801 
children in 1979 to almost 3,000 this year, guidelines which ensured 
accountable service delivery systems was a priority of the SEA and of 
the Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation. The presentors 
have been involved in the development of Early Intervention Guidelines 
and of a Process Model for an interagency, interdisciplinary, approach 
to the development of guidelines which can be replicated in other states. 
It is the intent of the presentors to review this Process Model, describe 
its implementation in Virginia, and discuss technical assistance available 
to other states. 

Organization of Presentation: 

I. Introduction of Panel Members and Roles 

II. Historical Perspective of Early Intervention Service Development in 
Virginia 

III. Rationale for Collaborative Approach 

IV. Review of the Process Model and Development of Early Intervention Guidebook 

V. Adaptability of the Process Model and Technical Assistance available 

VI. Summary and conclusions 

VII. Participant Discussion, questions and answers 
Objectives: 

Participants will 

Understand the collaborative approach to development of Early Intervention 
Program Guidelines 

Understand the Process Model, and its adaptability 

Understand the Organization and General Content of of the Virginia Guidebook 
for Early Intervention Programs 

Audio-visual needs: Overhead projector and screen 

Handouts: Process Model information and sample Guidebook pages 

Rural application and innovativeness: A collaborative approach for development of 
guidelines minimizes duplication of effort while maximizing comprehensive 
service delivery assurances in programs provided. The innovative Process model 
uses a statewide Task force involving direct service providers, program managers, 
state agencies, and consumers. This results in guidelines which are as practical 
and applicable for rural programs as for sophisticated and well equipped urban 
areas. It provides ownership of guidelines to all constituencies, including 
consumers, and results in a well defined and accessible service delivery system. 

20 



Earlybird Session 
Tuesday, April 22 

1:30-4; 30 pm 



1 



Presenters: Barbara Ludlow, Ed.D. 

Wilfred Wienke, Ed.D. 
Margaret Turner, M.A. 



Special Education Program 
504 Allen Hall 
West Virginia University 
Morgantown , WV 26506 



AN OH-THE-JOB PRACTICUM EXPERIENCE: 
SUPERVISING TEACHERS IN RURAL AREAS 



Teacher training programs in special education today 
find themselves face-to-face with a crucial need to prepare 
personnel for teaching positions in rural areas. A lack of 
appropriately trained special educators is typical of rural 
schools across the United States, where social, economic and 
geographic conditions cannot attract qualified teachers from 
utside the area and local residents do not have access to 
training programs (Helge, 1981; 1984). Many districts must 
issue emergency certificates to cope with personnel shortages 
a practice that threatens the quality of programs offered 
(Smith-Davis, 1985). This has led some states to seek 
alternative routes to teaching certification that involve on- 
the-job supervision (Pipho, 1986). 

West Virginia, a state where over 60% of all citizens 
reside in areas classified as rural (WVU, 1985), has seen in 
recent years severe shortages of teaching personnel in most 
areas of special education specialization. A survey of 
county school systems revealed that over two-thirds were 
experiencing difficulties recruiting and retaining special 
educators, especially for the low Incidence handicaps 
(Ludlow, 1985). To combat these shortages, the state has 
been forced to rely upon the issuance of temporary, out-of- 
field teaching permits to individuals who agree to enroll in 
training programs leading to teaching certification. 

The number of permits issued has grown dramatically in 
recent years. During the 1980-81 school year 572 permits 
were issued to teachers providing special education services. 
By the 1984-85 school year, this number had risen to 1,172 
permits issued (West Virginia DOE, 1985). The demand for 
certified teachers has. far surpassed the capacity of 
instituuions of higher education to provide them. 
Consequently, new approaches to problematic areas of training 
have been required in order to effectively address the 
profound shortage of certified special educators. 

West Virginia University, the state's landgrant 
institution and flagship university, has offered coursework 
at a number of off-campus sites through its 33 county service 
area for nearly a decade. The unavailability of practicum 
sites in the remote regions, however, has prevented some 



ERIC 



21 



2 



students from completing training programs and has 
discouraged many others from applying. In addition, teachers 
working in special education classrooms resented the need to 
take a leave of absence or to attend a summer practicum 
program to complete practicum requirements. But university 
educators were reluctant to waive practicum in light of the 
importance of supervised demonstration of teaching 
competencies to certification and licensing of teachers^ 

Yet studies suggest that local personnel who receive on- 
the-job training are those most likely to remain in special 
education in rural areas (Bina, 1981; Marrs, 1983). Many 
professional educators also believe that the most useful 
training for any teacher takes place in the employment 
setting (Grant, et al., 1979; Russell, 1971). The working 
teacher has an optimal setting for demonstrating and 
improving instructional skills when provided with approprate 
supervision and meaningful feedback (Russell, 1971). Tha 
West Virginia University Special Education Program, 
therefore, developed a model to provide a clinical practicum 
experience to practicing teachers in their own classrooms. 
This model was funded as a personnel preparaton project by 
the Office of Special Education and Rehabilitation Services 
in 1984. 

The Clinical Practicum Program is designed to provide an 
on-the-job practicum experience in which trainees employed as 
teachers may demonstrate competencies needed for state 
teaching certification in Mental Retardation^ Learning 
Disabilities, or Behavior Disorders. The experience consists 
of a six-credit hour course during the Fall or Spring 
semester? over a 12 week period, the student must demonstrate 
competencies to the satisfaction of a cooperating teacher 
assigned by the county school system and a faculty supervisor 
provided by the university. Clinical practicum experiences 
are offered to the eastern and southern counties of the 
service area in the Fall semester, and to the northern and 
western regions in the Spring to conserve travel time and 
avoid cancellatons due to winter weather hazards. 

A. APPLICATION AND ELIGIBILITY 

Students make application one semester prior to that in 
which they wish to enroll in the clinical practicum program. 
To be eligible for clinical practicum, they must meet these 
requirements : 

1. enrollment in a graduate degree or certification program 
at WVU? 

2. completion of all other required coursework for certifi- 
v:ation; 

3. prior experience of a supervised practicum in some area 
of education; 

4. at least twp years teaching experience in the area of 
specialization in which practicum io to be conducted; 



o 22 

ERIC 



5. employment in a classroom setting that meets state 
program standards for the area; 

6. authorization from superintendent and building, principal 
for the practicum to be conducted in the school setting? 

7. provision by the school district of a master cooperating 
teacher certified in the area of specialization; 

8. participation in the practicum orientation session. 

The practicum coordinator reviews the application and 
transcript to determine if all requirements have been 
satisfied, then contacts the county school system to schedule 
the practicum, and notifies the student of acceptance. 

B. SELECTION OF SUPERVISORY PERSONNEL 

The Coordinator selects a cooperating teac>^er and 
university supervisor for each student admitted to the 
Clinical Practicum Program. 

The county school system recommends a certified master 
teacher in their employ or contracts with another agency 
(school system, regional educational service agency, college, 
or private organization) to supply one. To be eligible to 
supervise practicum, the cooperating teacher must meet tha 
following criteria: 

1. possession of a valid West Virginia teaching certificate 
in the area of specialization in which the practicum is 
to be conducted; 

2m completion of a master's degree in special education in 
that area of specialization; 

3. teaching experience of at least t.iree academic years in 
that area of specialization; 

4. authorization from the superintendent and building 
principal to supervise the practicum student; 

5. participation in the practicum orientation session. 

The cooperating teacher is responsible for scheduling at 
least twelve (12) observations (approximately one visit per 
week) , lasting one to two hours in the practicum students 
classroom. The teacher will assist in the development of the 
Individualized Personnel Training Plan (IPTP), observe, 
evaluate and provide written feedback on lessons observed, 
and document the demonstration of all practicum competencies. 
This insures that student performance is assessed by a 
practicing teacher certified in the area of specialization 
who is also familiar with the constraints of the particular 
school system and geographic region. 

The coordinator also selects the university's supervisor 
from the pool of university adjunct and full-time faculty 
available for supervisory assignment in a given semester. To 
be eligible to supervise practicum, the university supervisor 
must meet the following criteria: 



23 



1. possession of at least a Master's degree in special 
education and certification in one or more areas of 
specialization ; 

2. classrom teaching experience of at least three academic 
years in one or more areas of specialization; 

3. prior supervisory experience. 

The university supervisor is responsible for scheduling at 
least six (6) observations (approximately one visit every 
other week), lasting one to two hours, in the practicum 
student s classroom. The supervisor will approve the IPTP, 
observe, evaluate and provide written feedback on lessons 
observed, offer suggestions to the student on practicum 
competency demonstration, and confer with the cooperating 
teacher concerning the student's progress at least three 
times (at the beginning, middle, and end), during the 
practicum. This insures that the practicum experience is 
monitored by a qualified university staff member trained in 
supervision and familiar with program requirements. 

C. ORIENTATION 

An orientation session is held immediately prior to the 
practicum experience for students, cooperating teacher, and 
suprvisors. At that time, the coordinator and assistant(s) 
describe procedures in the Practicum Handbook, explain what 
competency requirements must be demonstrated and evaluated 
during the practicum experience, instruct cooperating 
teachers and supervisors in observation and supervision 
techniques, and establish a schedule of observation visits. 
Students complete a preassessment on practicum competencies 
by rating themselves via a behavioral Q-Sorl: technique. 
Those competencies on which they rate themselves the weakest 
are incorporated into the IPTP, with activities designed to 
improve teaching skill that: must be completed during the 
practicum (see Figure 1) . 

D. OBSERVATIONS 

During scheduled observation visits, the practicum 
student presents a lesson plan for any activities to be 
observed. The cooperating teacher or university supervisor 
observes the lesson and makes a written record on the Daily 
Observation Form (see Figure 2), according to the following 
steps. 

1. review lesson plans 

2. record facts, not judgements on form 

3. describe events in sequence 

4. look for cause-and-ef feet relationships 

5. make appropriate comments on back of form or separate 
sheet ^ 



24 



Immediately following the lesson, observer and student 
discuss the lesson, using techniques of clinical supervision 
(Acheson & Gall, 1980): 

1. analyze: describe the performances in terms of obser- 
vable patterns; 

?• ii}i?5PF®Jt •*.co"'P^^® with objectives or program standards; 

3, decidfe: det^-rmlne changes to be made ahd the steps to 
make these changes; 

4, recommend: outline potential activities, strategies, 
and resources; 

5, summarize: use specific praise for performance and 
growth. 



In addition, the cooperating teacher documents the completion 
of specific teaching competencies (see Figure 3) as the 
student demonstrates each one, and assists the student in 
performing the tasks specified in the IPTP (see Figure 1) . 
The university supervisor oversees the student' s progress in 
completing these activities and provides assistance as 
needed • 



E. EVALUATIOU 



Upon completion of all competencies at the end of the 
practicum experience, the practicum student and both 
supervisory personnel evaluate the student's performance as 
well as the operation of the Clinical Practicum Program. 

1. Practicum Competency Rating 

Attainment of practicum competencies by each prac- 
ticum student is rated independently by the student and 
both supervisory personnel as strong, adequate, or weak. 
This information is used to assess the student's 
progress as well as for research analyzing the percent- 
ages of agreement on student proficiency across raters. 

2. Summary Evaluation 

The cooperating teacher and university suoervisor 
each complete a written summary evaluation on the 
practicum student, documenting special teaching 
strengths, areas that need further development, and 
skills appropriate to the grade level/area of excep- 
tionality (see Figure 4). The supervisor assigns a 
grade of Satisfactory, Unsatisfactory, Incomplete or 
Withdrawal. These forms become part of the student's 
permanent file and serve as a data base for recommenda- 
tions for future employment. 

3. Practicum Evaluation (Cooperating Teacher Form) 

The cooperating teacher rates the practicum as a 
meaningful learning experience, (see Figure 5). 
Supportive comments and constructive criticisms provide 
important feedback for program modification. 



25 



6 



4. Practicuin Evaluation (Practicum Student Form) 

The practicum student rates the practicum exper- 
ience and the effectivenss of supervisory personnel 
(see Figure 6) . Supportive comntents and constructive 
criticisms provide important feedback for program 
modification. 

F, PRELIMINARY RESULTS 

The pilot program was implemented in Spring 1985 with 25 
students currently employed as teachers enrolled in the 
clinical practicum program. Data from the evaluation surveys 
completed by cooperating teachers reveal that nearly all 
participants favored the program (see Figure 5), Additional 
data from the evaluation surveys completed by practicum 
students suggest that the overwhelming majority felt that the 
practicum was a meaningful learning experience (see Figure 
6) • 

To summarize the operational aspects of this on-the-job 
practicum, the following strengths and weaknesses have been 
identified : 

Strengths ; 

1. improvement of accessibility of special education train- 
ing programs to teachers in rural areas; 

2. involvement of school systems in teacher preparation; 

3. development of a local support system for rural special 
educators through a collegial model; and 

4. use of university personnel for technical assistance in 
rural classrooms. 

Weaknesses: 



EKLC 



1. expensiveness of travel, lodging costs for supervisory 
personnel; 

2. time and energy demands on university personnel (includ- 
ing long distance travel, unoccupied time between 
observations and overnight stays) ; 

3. limited direct contact with supervisory personnel in the 
classroom; and 

4. difficulties in demonstrating and objectively verifying 
all practicum competencies. 

Although it can be concluded that the Clinical Practicum 
Program is an effective model for supervising teachers on-- 
the-job in rural areas, a number of issues remain to be 
r€*solved: 

1. what classroom programs serve as adequate settings? 
(rural programs may have few students, mixed categorical 
areas, or individual training assignments that compli- 
cate demonstration of practicum competencies) . 

2. how can certified master teachers be found to supervise? 

26 



7 



(rural areas face a shortage of qualified, trained 
personnel in some areas of specialization) ; 

3, how can a schedule of observations be arranged to 
maximize direct supervisory contact and minimize travel 
time? (isolated rural sites and conflicting teaching 
schedules limit visits to two at most three students per 
day and travel between distant sites on rural access 
roads is time-consuming) ; 

4, how can a schedule of observations accomodate unplanned 
interruptions? (winter weather conditions and school 
emergencies may interfere with planned visits and 
require reschcedul ing at another date); 

5, what supervisory skills do cooperating teachers need and 
how can they be trained? (teachers cannot be required 
to take a course in supervision and many live too far 
from the university to receive training in a centralized 
location) ; 

6, how can competency validation procedures be rewritten to 
permit reliable documentation of proficiency? (tradi- 
tional procedures for assessing teaching skills rely on 
subjective judgement rather than objective evidence) . 

Formative and summative evaluation data from the pilot 
phase and the operational phases of the Clinical Practicum 
Program will be used in the decision-making process as 
modifications are designed and tested to address these and 
other issues. This development and evaluation process will 
insure that the program is tailored to best meet the training 
needs of teachers for an on-the-job practicum in rural areas. 
Preliminary findings and observations, however ^ indicate that 
providing on-the-job supervision promises to be an effective 
approach to the training of special educators in rural areas. 



27 



8 



REFERENCES 



Acheson, K. & Gall, M. (1980). Techniques in the clinical 
supervision of teachers , New York: Longman. 

Bina, M.J. (1981). Teacher moral in rural areas: Implica- 
tions for administrators regarding teacher burn-out and 
attrition. NRP Newsletter , 3:1, 2-3. 

Grant, G. et al. (Eds.). (1979). On competence . San 
Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 

Helge, D.I. (1981). Problems in implementing comprehensive 
special education programming in rural areas. 
Exceptional Children , 47 , 514-520. 

Helge, D.I. (1984) . The state-of-the-art of rural special 
education. Murray, KyI National Rural Research and 
Personnel Preparation Project. 

Ludlow, B.L. (1985) . Variables influencing special educa- 
tion teacher employment in rural areas. Rural Special 
Education Quarterly, 6 , 24-26. 

Marrs, L. W. (1983) . Involving citizens and agencies in 

rural communi ties^n cooperative programming tor handi- 
capped students. Murray, ky: National Rural Research 
and Personnel Preparation Project . 

Pipho, C. (1986). Quantity v Quality: States aim to improve 
teaching and teachers. Phi Delta Kappan, 67, 333-334. 

Russell, J.D. (1971). Assessment of teacher competencies. 
In J.E. Weigard (Ed.). Developing teacher competency. 
Englewood Cliffs, HJ: Prentice-Hall. 

Smith-Davis, J. (1985). Personnel supply and demand in 

special education. Counterpoint , December, 1985, 10. 

West Virginia Department of Education (1985). The Education 
of Exceptional Children in West Virginia ' s County School 
Districts, 1984-85, Selected Enrollment and Financial 
Information . Charleston, WV: Bureau of Learning 
Systems. 

West Virginia University. (1985). Census users technical 
report series. (Number 24). Morgantown, WV: West 
Virginia University. 



28 



Figure 1 



9 



ItlDIVIDUALIZED PERSONNEL TRAININ'. PLAN 



Competencies 

The following competencies must be demonstrated during the practicum 
experience: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. ~~ 



Plan of Action 

The student and supervisor will follow the plan of action outlined 
below: 

Competency Demonstration Procedure 



The plan has been developed and mutually agreed upon by: 

Date Practicum Student Cooperating Teacher University Supervisor 



29 



Figure 2 



10 



LESSON OBSERVATION FORM 



Student: Date: Observer 

Area: Lesson: 



PREPARATION 

Planning and Objectives 



Organization and Sequencing 



Instructional Materials 



Classroom Environment 



INSTRUCTION 
Motivation/Rapport 



Use of Instructional Materials 



Behavior Management 



Pupil Evaluation 



Practical Application 



PUPIL RESPONSE 
Participation 



Enthusiasm and Interest 



ERIC 



30 



Figure 3 



11 



COMPETENCY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE 



The Practicum requires the student to show mastery of a set of 
competencies. A variety of techniques may be used to assess this mastery. 
The techniques used are: (1) assessment of knowledge, (2) assessment of 
teacher performance, and (3) assessment of products. Examples of 
assessment procedures in each competency area is suggested here. 

Competencies Assessment Procedure 



A. PRETEACHING 



I. Special Ecucation Foundations 

a. identifies historical and current trends 

in services for exceptional individuals coursework 

b. states definition, incidence, and diagnostic 

criteria for categories of exceptionality coursework 

c. describes intellectual, social, emotional and 

physical characteristics of exceptionalities coursework 

d. discusses education, social and vocational 
services/programs for exceptional individuals coursework 

e. uses appropriate descriptive terminology in 

speech and writing coursework 



II. Assessment Techniques 

a. selects formal assessment instruments to collect 
data on academic performance 

develops informal assessment devices to 
diagnose pupil learning needs 
modifies assessment procedures to accommodate 
pupil needs and testing situations 
interprets data collected from various 
sources to plan instructional programs 
selects procedures to evaluate pupil 
progress and instructional effects 



b. 



d. 



e. 



Ill . Instructional Planning 

a. develops long-term objectives for pupils 
in cogni tive/af fective/psychomotor domains 

b. develops short-term objectives including 
measurable behavior/condi tions/cr i ter ia 

c. ta5k analyzes curriculum goals to determine 
instructional sequences 

d . wr i tes lesson plans to reflect individual 
pupil performance objectives 

e. uses a variety of methods and materials 
appropriate to pupil needs 



product/coursework 
product/cases tudy 
product/cases tudy 

product/cases tudy 
product/cases tudy 

lEP 
lEP 

lesson plan 
lesson plan 
lesson plan 



31 



Figure 3 (continued) 



12 



IV. Classroom Organization 

a. controls environmental conditions for pupil 
comfort and facilitation of learning 

b. arranges room to provide a variety of 
learning settings (centers/carrels/groups) 

c. plans and conducts individual and group 
activities simultaneously 

d. schedules and paces activities to make 
efficient use of teacher and pupil time 

e. uses supportive personnel effectively to 
facilitate instructional delivery 



B. 
V. 



VI 



c. 

VII, 



TEACHING 

Classroom Managemenv: 

a. positions pupils to minimize behavior problems 
and facilitate teacher-pupil interaction 

b. establishes classroom procedures and routines 
to develop self-discipline 

c. manages individual and group behaviors to 
provide a positive learning climate 

d. uses a variety of reinforcing events according 
to individual pupil preferences 

e. applies positive and negative contingencies 
immediately and consistently 

Instructional Programming 

a. gives instructions/directions to orient pupils 
to lesson objectives 

presents instruction in sequence so pupils 
respond with few mistakes 

uses questioning strategies to elicit pupil 
responses and discussion 

provides verbal and nonverbal feedback to 
pupils on performance 

provides sufficient practice for generalization/ 



b. 



c. 



observation 
observation 
observation 
observation 
product/example 

Behavior Management 
Plan 
on 



observat: 
observat: 
observat: 
observat: 
observation 



on 



on 



on 



observat 
observat 
observat 
observat 



e. 



maintenance of skills 



on 



on 



on 



on 



POSTTEACHING 

Instructional Evaluation 

a« identifies and analyzes errors to develop 
remedial strategies 

uses continuous assessment to measure pupil 
progress toward mastery of objectives 
analyzes pupil performance data to redefine 
objectives/redesign programs 
rates/assigns grades to pupils accurately 
and equitably from recorded data 
develops system to report progress to pupils, 
parents, and school personnel 



b. 



c. 



e. 



observation 

product 
product 
product 
product 
product 



EKLC 



32 



Figure 3 (continued) 



13 



D, OTHER PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES 
VIII • Interpersonal Communication 

a. communicates information/data at formal 
and informal meet ngs 

b. prepares formal and informal written 
diagnostic and evaluation reports 

c. provides consultation services to 
parents and professionals 

d. designs and conducts training for parents 
and professionals 



SBAT meeting 
product 
documentation 
documentation 



IX. Professional Development 

a. recognizes teaching strengths/weaknesses 
and has realistic expectations for self 
accepts and uses suggestions and criticisms 
from other professionals 

seeks assistance from personnel or references 
for self- improvement 



b. 



c. 



d. participates in professional activities 

(conferences, organizations , subscr i ptions) 

X. tlonteaching Responsibilities 

a. performs administrative tasks and nonteaching 
duties efficiently 

b. complies with school rules, policies and 
regulations 

c. dresses/behaves professionally according to 
setting and activity 

d. demonstrates regular and punctual attendance 
at assigned activities 

e. locates resources, makes referrals and 
coordinates services of other disciplines 



IPTP 

completion of 

practicum 
resource person 

contact 

documentation 

documentation 



principal/ 
supervisor 
documentation 

principal/ 
supervisor 
documentation 

principal/ 
supervisor 
documentation 

principal/ 
supervisor 
documentation 

resource 

personnel list 
developed 



EKLC 



33 



Figure 4 



14 



SUMMARY KVALUATIOtl 
UNIVERSITY SUPERVISOR 



Please answer the following questions: 

What special teaching skills have you observed in this practicum student? 



What teaching skills should this practicum student continue to develop? 



Do you think this practicum student is/will be successful in a teaching 
position at this grade level for this area of exceptionality? Explain. 



SIGNED : 

University Supervisor 



Practicum Student: 



Date: 



FINAL GRADE 
Unsatisfactory 

Satisfactory 

Wi thdr awa 1 

Incomplete 



34 



FRir 



15 



Figure 5 

EVALUATION DATA 
SPRING 85 CLINICAL PRACTICUM 

N = 18 

Cooperating Teachers Surve ^^ YES NO UNDEC 
PRACTICUM STUDENT 

1. Was the student properly prepared for practicum? 17 0 1 

2. Was s/he responsive to suggestions/criticisms? 15 1 2 

3. Did s/he demonstrate knowledge of special education? 18 0 0 

4. Did s/he demonstrate skill in instruction/management? 17 0 1 

5. Did s/he demonstrate professional attitude/behavior? 18 0 0 

6. Did the class benefit from contact with the student? 17 0 1 

PRACTICUM SUPERVISOR 

le Did the supervisor clearly explain your role? 15 1 2 

2. Did s/he have sufficient training/experience? 18 0 0 

3. was the number of observation visits made adequate? 15 3 0 

4. Was the length of time spent per observation 15 3 0 
sufficient? 

5. Did the supervisor have good rapport with the 15 0 3 
students? 

6. Did the supervisor/s observations agree with yours? 15 0 3 
UNIVERSITY PROCEDURES 

1. Did orientation prepare you for practicum? 13 3 2 

2. Did responsibilities make reasonable- demands on time? 13 4 1 

3. Did the Handbook clearly explain procedures? 14 2 2 

4. Did competencies reflect skills needed by teacher? 17 1 0 

5. Did observation forms accurately depict performance? 12 2 4 

6. Did evaluation forms fairly assess competencies? 14 0 4 

PRACTICUM EXPERIENCE 

1. Was the practicum a meaningful learning experience? 14 0 4 



If asked to serve as a cooperating teacher again, would you: 

1. accept under the present condition 14 

2. refuse under any circumstances 0 

3. accept only if alterations were made 4 



EKLC 



Figure 6 

EVALUATION DATA 
SPRING 85 CLINICAL PRACTICUM 



Practicuin Student Survey 



UNIVERSITY PROCEDURES 

1. Did orientation prepare you for practicum? 

Did responsibilities make reasonable demands on time? 
Did the handbook clearly explain procedures? 
Did competencies reflect skills needed by teachers? 
Did observation forms accurately depict your 
performance? 

Did evaluation forms fairly reflect your competency? 



2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

6. 



PRACTICUM EXPERIENCE 

1. Did coursework prepare you for practicum? 

were you assigned in the placement you requested? 
Did you engage in activities related to university 
requirements? 

Did you engage in activities related to career goals? 
Did practicum personnel contribute to professional 
growth? 

Was the practicum a meaningful learning experience? 



2. 
3. 

4. 
5. 

6. 



COOPERATING TEACHER 

1. Did s/he have sufficient training/experience to 
supervise? 

Did s/he model appropriate behavior and dress? 
Did s/he encourage initiative on your part? 
Did s/he listen receptively' to questions/comments? 
Did s/he review lesson plans before observation? 
Did s/he refer you to helpful resources & materials? 
Did s/he observe work with both individuals & groups? 
Did s/he provide feedback in conversation & writing? 
Did s/he use praise as well as constructive criticism? 
Did s/he suggest solutions for learning/behavior 
problems? 

Did s/he evaluate your progress on a regular basis? 
Did s/he confer with the university supervisor 
regularly? 

Did the cooperating teacher evaluate you fairly? 
Should the cooperating teacher continue working with 
students? 



2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10 

11 
12 

13 
14 



YES 
12 
15 
14 
16 
16 

16 



12 
16 
15 

16 
16 

13 



16 

16 
16 
16 
15 
15 
14 
16 
16 
16 

15 
12 

16 
13 



16 



N = 16 

NO 
3 
1 
1 
0 
0 



1 
0 

1 

0 
0 



0 
0 
0 

1 

0 
2 
0 
0 
0 

1 

1 

0 

1 



i 



UNDEC 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0 



3 
0 
0 

0 
0 



0 
0 
0 
0 

1 

0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
3 

0 
2 



I 



UNIVERSITY SUPERVISOR 

!• Did s/he have sufficient training/exoerience to 16 0 0 
supervise? 

2. Did s/he provide direction for practicuin activiteis? 15 0 1 

3. Did s/he assist in solving procedural problems? 15 1 o 

4. Did s/he announce observations in advance? 16 0 0 

5. Did s/he review lesson plans before observation? 15 1 0 

6. Did s/he refer you to helpful resources & materials? 14 l i 

7. Did s/he observe work with both individuals & groups? 15 i o 

8. Did s/he provide feedback in conversation & writing? 16 0 0 

9. Did s/he use praise as well as constructive criticism? 15 l o 

10 

11, Did s/he evaluation your progress on a regular basis? 16 0 0 



^ - MT ' W 1.0. V ^ J. J. f i 

10. Did s/he suggest solutions for learning/behavior 15 i 
problems? 

11. Did s/he evaluation your progress on a regular basis? 16 0 

12, Did s/he confer with the Cooperating Teacher regularly? 14 2 0 

13, Did the university supervisor evaluate you fairly? 16 0 1 
CD^r^' Should the university supervisor continu€^working with 15 1 0 
biylL students? Ob 



page A 



Comnmlty Awareness and Participation 

Into this category falls parent participation, connunity awareness and support for 
preschool progrduiuing and reliance and fanxLly protectiveness, family ^tens values my 
often be confusing or misleading to a public school teacher igho through lack of train- 
ing or exposure may be insensitive to these issues. In the qnaH faming connunity 
served by Project RURAL the families of the Initial students to be enroHed in the pro- 
ject were very sensitive to the early labelling iMch occurs when children are placed 
in specialized programnljig. 



Conclusions 

Placement options for childrai in rural areas will continue to focus on identi- 
fied service providers and or/public schools. In the Instance public schools be- 
come the primary service delivery site, caution must be exercised in respect to the 
develc^ment of programs that are sensitive to the needs of the individual child, parents 
and other service providers (formal/Informal) in the connunity. States which have the 
opportunity to address these issues throu^ the legislative or regulatory process 
should seriously co n si der building into service systems multi-disciplinaiy and connunity 
collaborative ^]proaches to preschool special education. The need for greater unifica- 
tion within the early childhood/early elementary connunity is evident and ongoing. 
Finally, effective advocacy for young special needs children takes into account the 
possibilities and real UMtations of the public school system as an effective ser- 
vice delivery site in the maintenance of least restrictive environnents, effective 
parent involvement and broadened societal and govemnental responsibility in pro- 
viding for very young special needs children. 



References 

Caldwell, Bettye, Day Care and the PUblic Schools, Educational Leadership, February, 1986. 

Elder, J., Magrab, P., Coordinating Services to Handicapped Children, Baltimore, 1980, 
Paul H. Brookes. 

O'Connell, J., Managing Small Group Instruction in an Integrated Preschool Setting, 
Teaching Exceptional Children, Spring, 1986. 



37 



BETTVE M. C\I.DWEIi 



{ 

Day Care and the Public Schools - 
Natural Allies, Natural Enemies 

A blending of early childhood and elementary programs — 

as in Litde Rock's Kramer Model — ^seems a logical way to benefit 

children, parents, and society. 




My personal interest in dav care 
began about 20 years ago at a 
lioie when any program of 
infimt stimulation ran agaiast the grain 
of theoretical ideas about proper up- 
bringing for young children. To some 
extent this was true e\'en if the mother 
was the "stimulator." It was especially 
true, howe%'er. if an\x)ne other than 
the mother were the agent of stimula- 
tion and enrichment. 

Our concern (Caldwell and Rich- 
mond 1964) was primarily direaed to 
. young children of poverty who were 
known to be growing up in somewhat 
chaodc &mily circumstances. As many 
of the mothers were minimally avail- 
able to their children, either physically 
or psychologically (Caldwell et al. 
1963). our interest was in developing 
an enrichment program that would in 
some way supplement the experi- 
ences available to children in their 
homes. Our idea was to have teachers 
and other specially trained caregivers 
work with the children for a few hours 
each day and introduce them to vari- 
ous developmental events intended to 
exdte and stimulate them. 

The idea of bringing' in&nis togeth- 
er in groups was totally unacceptable 
at that time. The common fear was that 
even short-term separation of infants 
from their mothers would be tanta- 
mount to creating ''institudonal** rear- 
ing conditions. The deleterious conse- 
quences of growing up in institutional 
care were constantly cited in the pro- 
fessional literature (see Bowlby 1952) 
and publicized in the popular press. 
Our proposal to develop such a pro- 
gram in Syracuse. New York, was 
turned down, but we were offered a 
loophole. The Children*s Bureau was 
willing to consider our request pro- 
vided we used as subjects only those 
children who were already receiving 
some sort of substitute care and that 
we would not reduce in any way the 
daily time they spent in con^aa with 
their own mothers. In short, we could 
condua our own projea with children 
who were alreadv in dav care (see 
Caldwell 1971). 

Our center sen-ed children from six 
months through hve years of age. It 



was alfiliated hrst with the Department 
of Pediatrics of the L'pstate Medical 
Center of the State Univenutx- of New 
York and later with the College of 
Home Economics of Syraoise Univer- 
sity. Although d)e resources of two 
great universities were behind it, it 
operated essentially in i.solation from 
the mainstream of either university. It 
also operated in Isolation from the 
public school .sy-stem into which most 
of the children graduated. 

\f/hile my professional concern cen- 
tered on preschool children, I was 
personally involved with the public 
schools, having a set of twins who 
entered kindergarten at precisely the 
time that our projea was "discovered" 
nationally. Occasionally I would be 
late picking them up from school, and 
Syracuse winters can be very cold. 
There I would find two forlorn twins 
widi icy hands and frozen cheeks. I 
can remember reaaing with horror to 
their not being allowed to wait inside 
to be picked up; when school was out, 
childien were expected to go home 
immediately. To me it seemed the 
most logical thing in the world to 
think diat their elementary school 
could have provided some sort of 
extended day care. It struck me as 
rather ironic that while I was working 
hard in one part of the city to provide 
both care and education for odier 
peoples children, no one was con- 
cerned about providing the care need- 
ed to supplement the education mine 
were receiving. 

Shordy thereafter I moved to Arkan- 
sas and took with me something of an 
obsession about the need to develop 
child care programs in the public 
school. This obsession was no longer 
based only on my perception of the 
need for such care as a service to 
families but also on my av^eness of 
the need to change die public concep- 
tion of what day care was or should be. 
Considered by many people as a ser- 
vice that provided only "care and pro- 
tection" for low-income children, 
child care was actually a comprehen- 
sive service that could and did provide 
education, access to medical care, and 
social services to large numbers of 



children from all levels of society. It 
was my conviaion that an alliance with 
public education would help to "legiti- 
mize" child care and help it gain re- 
spectability with parents, profession- 
als, and policymakers. Likewise, it was 
my hope that the provision of day care 
in a public school setting would make 
the elementary- educational program 
more relevant to mode*^ social 
realities. 

Natural Allies— 
The Kramer Model 

What developed from this obsession— 
with a great deal of help from Liule 
Rock School Distria officials, person- 
nel from the University of Arkansas, an 
interested granting agency (the Chil- 
dren's Bureau, shordy thereafter sub- 
sumed into the newly created Office of 
Child Development), and a favorable 
Zeitgeist— was the Kramer Model. 
From 1969 to 1978 the projea operat- 



''Continuity between 
early childhood 
and elementary 
educational 
programs should 
be as normal and 
routine as 
continuity between 
2nd and 3rd grades." 



FEBRt'ARy 1986 



ERIC 



39 



35 



ed essentially as described here. Some 
of* the major components are still in 
operation, although with slight pro- 
granunatic changes and major admin- 
istrative changes. 

Early Childhood-Elementary 
Continuity 

Continuity between early childhood 
and elementary educauonal programs 
should be as normal and routine as 
continuity between 2nd and 3rd 
grades. In most educational settings, 
however, this is definitely not the case. 
In ba, there Ls often a change in 
auspice (from private to public, or 
from one type of public funding, such 
as Head Start, to another); in location 
and size (from private home, church, 
or small-group center to large school); 
in educational philosophy and curric- 
ulum (from much free choice to a 
tiigh degree of structure and adult 
control); and in training background 
of the personnel. Not infirequendy 
there is distrust on the part of early 
childhood personnel of elementary 
personnel, and vice versa. Early child- 
hood teachers often accuse elemen- 
tary teachers of being concerned with 
subjects rather than children and of 
neglecting the "whole child"; elemen- 
tary teachers sometimes assume and 



^'Once we fully 
understand today's 
demographic 
realities, the 
question of Aether 
schools should 
provide day care 
will become totally 
obsolete." 



imply that their kinderganen col- 
leagues "just play" with the children 
and do not "really teach" them 
anything. 

If the transition is from anything 
other than a public school kindergar- 
ten, there is seldom any exchange of 
records. School personnel do not ap- 
pear to be particularly interested in 
knowing much about previous educa- 
tional experiences, and rarely do they 
send reports to teachers who previ- 
ously worked with the children. Thus 
the new teachers receive no benefits 
from the insights gained by their pre- 
decessors, and the former teachers 
have no opportunity to confirm or 
disconfirm their predictions about fu- 
ture educational progress of individ- 
ual children. 

By having both an early childhood 
and an elementary program in the 
same building— with teachers from 
both segments serving on all commit- 
tees, attending all meetings, and shar- 
ing the same lounge— we hoped to 
kindle a spirit of united effort direaed 
toward common goals. Although it 
took some time for this spirit to devel- 
op, it unquestionably became an im- 
portant feature of the Kramer Model. 

Educational Day Care 

The most important component of the 
Kramer Model was the conversion of 
the entire school to an "extended day 
school" That is, the school oflficially 
began at 6:45 a.m. and closed at 6.00 
P.M. year round The bells rang at the 
same time as in all the other elemen- 
tary schools widiin the Utde Rock 
School District, but the program oper- 
ated for the full day. The extra hours 
and days were funded out of the pro- 
gram grant Teachers at Kramer taught 
for the same number of hours and 
total days as all other teachers in the 
system (although they did have the 
opdon of applying for summer and 
holiday work for extra pay). 

Extra hours were covered by part- 
time and split-time staff, or, fbr the 
early childhood segment, by stagger- 
ing beginning and ending hours so 
that at least one certified teacher was 
on duty at all hours. In a situadon like 



this it is easy to let "natural" prefer- 
ences work themselves out instead of 
conforming to systemwide. work 
hours. That is, there were always one 
or two early risers who preferred to 
begin work at 7K)0, and there was 
always at least one person who pre- 
ferred to begin work at 9:30 and stay 
later in the afternoon. 

When day care in the public schools 
is discussed, concern usually is limited 



36 

ERLC 



40 




EDI O\T10\AL LEADKR.SHIP 



U) children ri)u.«hly in ihc age range t>t' 
hve or six lo ccn \xars. (\X'here kinder- 
ganens last only a half day, most wDrk- 
tng parents keep (heir children in a 
child care program until thev* reach 1st 
grade.) While this in itself Ls beneficial, 
i( does not provide the range of cover- 
age that many parents need. Tliat is, a 
^-oridng mother may have children 
aged seven, four, and t^'o. all of whom 
need dav care. In manv communities 



that can mean three child cire ar- 
rangements (t)ne schcK>l-age setting, 
one prcschix)!. and one infancy pro- 
gram) rather than one. The elegance 
of the Kramer extended care arrange- 
ment M^us that it accommodated chil- 
dren from 6 months to 12 >'ears of age 
in the same ph>-sical location. The 
convenience of this arrangement for 
working mothers Is truly remark- 
able — and quite rare. 




Taken in 1974 uiicn the Kramer Projea was five >'ears old. thU phMograph shows 'all of aV— 
• teachers and staff, rtsearcheri and scudcnw from age six months to 13 >*cafs— arranged on the Kramer 
School playground in t.inle Rock, .\rkansas 



Traditional .starting and ending 
times Tor public .school schedules, and 
dates for opening in the fall and clos- 
ing in the spring, are entirely anachro- 
nistic in today's world The times and 
dates we now have were not arbitrarily 
set; they were chosen to allow the 
schools to dovetail with the social 
realities of the children and Esunilies 
they served The hours allowed chil- 
dren to complete chores before and 
after school, and the dates corre- 
sponded to times when the children 
would be needed to help in die fields. 
It is unfortunate that we are so bound 
to custom that we have lost sight of the 
faa that the custom originally corre- 
sponded to demographic realities. 
Once we fiilly understand today s de- 
mographic realities, the question of 
whether schools should provide day 
care will become totally obsolete. 

Public SchooMJniversitjr 
Collaboration 

Other major features of the Kramer 
Model include having a university pro- 
fessor run the school and serve as its 
principal; establishing an advisory 
board to oversee scliool operation 
consisting of university and communi- 
ty personnel, in addition to represen 
utives of the Utde Rock School Dis 
tria; and establishing special work 
arrangements for Kramer teachers in 
volving both extra requirements (take 
a ceruin inservice course of work and 
the late-day shift) and special privi 
leges (having an aide in the class 
room) not available to other teachers 
in the system. Although many of the 
special arrangements required for 
Kramer went Jar beyond the day care 
situation, the same flexibility may well 
be necessary if a public school day 
care program is to be anything more 
than an appendage (o (he existing 
operation without any curricular or 
developmental relevance. 

One clear but often overlooked 
benefit of this university-public .school 
alliance was the constant presence in 
the school of student teachers and a 
few doaoral candidates. Not only did 
their presence confer status on the 
Kramer teachers, but their exdtement 



EKLC 



FEBRi.Mn- 1986 



37 



'It is foolish to try to 
distinguish between 
the services in terms of 
sliibboleths such as 
care versus education. 
In order for either 
service to be relevant to 
the needs of children 
and fsunilies, both 
components must 
be present" 



about the Kramer philosophy was con- 
Dgious. For example, it ^'as not un* 
common for a 5th grade teacher to 
complain to an early childhood teach- 
er that a mess *Vour** children made at 
the water fountain caused **our** chil- 
dren to slip down. To the students, all 
the children were far more likely to be 
perceived as "our" children, and the\' 
contributed to eliminating some of 
these exclusionary references. 

Eventhing possible was done to 
help the students '*think development 
tally/* For example, teachers had to 
spend some time with a class in each 
quadrant of the program — infoncv', 
early childhood, primary (grades 1-3), 
and intermediate (grades 4-6). Obvi- 
ously, they spent the greatest amount 
of time in the quadrant in which they 
expeaed or hoped to teach. Exchange 
times for teachers were also arranged 
so tiiat intermediate teachers occa- 
sionally taught for a morning in an 
infiancy or early childhood classrooin, 
and vice versa. After such exchanges 
elementary teachers were rarely heard 
to complain that the early childhood 
teachers "had it easy" or early child- 
hood teachers to criticize elenlentary 
teachers for not understanding and 
lo\ing the children enough. 

Natural Eneniles 

When people ask me what we learned 
at Kramer, I usually tell them we 
learned that it isn*t easy* Such an ar- 
rangment makes so much sense both 
sochdly and educationally that one 
could logically wonder why schools 



are organized any other way. And yet 
the two domains of child care and 
education arc also natural enemies. 



Conceptual and Philosophical 
Differences 

The first basis for the adversarial rela- 
tionship between day care and educa- 
tion relates to the concepts out of 
which each service pattern has grown 
and, if you will, to the way in which 
proponents of each service want the 
field to be identified. Having devel- 
oped largely from a social service ori- 
entation, day care has been known as a 
service that provides "care and protec- 
tion" for children. Schools, on the 
other hand, provide "education." Such 
sharp dichotomies represent a misun- 
derstanding of both services, for it is 
literally impossible to care for and 
protea young children without edu- 
cating them, and vice versa. The do- 
main of education already includes 
many services that might seem to fit 
more comfortably under the rubric of 
care and protection: school nurses, 
health programs, nutrition programs, 
hot lunches, vision and hearing 
screening, requirements for immuni- 
zation, and' so on. Likewise, during a 
large part of the day, every high-quali- 
ty day care program will provide edu- 
cational experiences that are similar if 
not identical to school "teaching pro- 
grams" for children of comparable 
age. Thus it is foolish to try to distin* 
guish between the services in terms of 
shibboleths such as care versus educa- 
tion. In order for either service to be 
relevant to the needs of children and 
Csunilies, both components must be 
present 

Another conceptual distinction al- 
ready mentioned is that day care is 
believed to be largely for "poor chil- 
dren from problem families," whereas 
public education is for "all children." 
There are now more families with 
young children whose mothers work 
outside the home than there are fam- 
ilies in which the mother is available 
fulkime as a caregiver. And because all 
families supplement parental care 
with some extra-family child care, we 
recognizt. that the nature of the family 
situation no longer defines day care — 
if, indeed, it ever did There are more 
commonalities between the fields than 
there are differences. 



Both Institutions Held in 
Low Esteem 

A .second reason for ihc animosity- that 
we sometimes find between represen- 
tatives of public education and day 
care is that, unfortunately, both institu- 
tioas are often held in low esteem. 
The current clamor for ''educational 
reform" clearly implies tliat somehow 
public education has "failed." Like- 
wise, day care has been denounced by 
conservatives as "weakening the fam- 
ily * and by liberals xs being a ''waste- 
land* of poor quality in which chil- 
dren's lives could be ruined Leaders 
of the day care mo\'enient have often 
bristled at suggestioas that an alliance 
between the field and education 
would be beneficial. A typically hostile 
objection might be, 'The schools have 
already* ruined the older kids; let's not 
help them do the same thing with the 
little ones." Natural resistance to such 
a union was increased by media ^re- 
ports of a national surplus of elemen- 
tary and secondary teachers and by the 
suggestion that such teachers could be 
diverted into the burgeoning day care 
field if it were part of public education 
and thereby comparably lucrative for 
teachers* Early childhood and day care 
personnel were legitimately offended 
at the implication that no special train- 
ing was necessary to work with young 
children. However, such an attitude on 
the part of professional educators was 
no diffierent from that often expressed 
by the general public and given as a 
reason for failing to provide higher 
salaries for early childhood personnel. 

The important point here is that the 
two fields, each of which had reason to 
doubt that it was held in esteem by the 
general public, took a stance against 
one another rather than forming what 
should have been a natural alliance. It 
was as though each sought to bolster 
its own self-esteem by asserting its 
independence from and superiority to 
the other. 

Mutual Need— The Bonding 
Agent 

The demographic realities of modern 
life have made this separatism and 
exclusivity on the pan of both day care 
and public education entirely obso- 
lete. Both fields have undergone tra- 
vail, and both are dealing with increas- 
ingly sophisticated consumers who 
legitimately advocate education that 



O 38 

ERIC 



42 



EmcxTiom Lk,\i)f.rship 



tits modem urban rather than outdat- 
ed rural patterns of family living, and 
day care that accepts it; responsibility 
to pro\ide developmentally appropri- 
ate education to young children. 

Representatives of both domains 
must learn to find su^ngdis and assets 
in one another. The biggest problems 
many people in the child care field 
face ace low salaries and poor working 
conditions. Teachers certified in early 
childhood who work in public schools 
make, on the average, $5,000 more per 
year (often for fiswer hours and da>'s) 
than certified teachers who work in 
child care. Likewise, the public 
schools are having to try to withstand 
the major inroads in their clientele by 
private schools. It is fascinating to note 
that the new private academies spring- 
ing up all over the country are not 
overlooking the profit potential associ- 
ated with the provision of child care. 
Almost without exceptton, such 
schools are providing extended day 
care and summer programs. Unless 
public schools offer comparable serv- 
ices, they cannot hope to hold a major 
share of the market And, though we 



might not want to admit it, marketing 
is as important for public education as 
it is for other produas and services. 

The inroads into support tor public 
education made bv' this increasing net- 
work of private schools have weak- 
ened the infrastructure of our educa- 
tional system. Likewise, allegations of 
sexual abuse and concerns about 
maintenance of healthful conditions in 
child care centers have generated in- 
creased concern about die quality and 
benefit of such programs. One might 
be tempted to suggest that attempts to 
unite the two domains are too late; the 
general public now sees bodi services 
as inadequate and fbwed 

But, of course, it is never too late to 
develop a service program that is in 
harmony with patterns of human 
need Because a blending of day care 
and education can meet the needs of 
children for developmental guidance 
and the needs of parents for effective 
supervision of their children more 
conveniently titan any other pattern of 
service, I predia that the two domains 
will move ever closer to one another. 
The resultant merger will be symbiotic 



for the two fields and beneficial to 
children, to their parents, and to 
socieiy.D 

References 

Bowlby, J. Maternal Care and Mental 
Health, Geneva, Switzerland* World 
Health Organization, 1952. 

Caldwell, B. M "Impaa of Interest In Early 
Cognitive Stimulation.** In Perspectives 
in Psycbopatbology, edited bv H. Ric, 
295-334. Chicago: Aldine-Athcrton, 
1971. 

Caldwell, B. M., L Hersher, E Upton, J. B. 
Richmond, G. Stem, E Eddy. R. Drach- 
man, and A Rothman. *'MotherIn£ant 
Interaction in Monomatric and Polyma- 
trie Families.** American Journal <f Or* 
tbqpsycbiatry 33 (1963): 653-«4. 

Caldwell, B, M., and J. B. Richmond "Pro- 
grammed Day Care for the Very Young 
Child A Preliminary l^eporC* Journal of 
Marriage and the Fcmtify 26 (1964): 
481-488. 



Bettye M. Caldwell is Oonaghey Distin- 
guished Professor of Education, University 
of Arkansas at Uttie Rode, UtUe Rode, AR 
72204. 



PROFESSIONALS ARE 
THE SOQRCE 
OF CHANGE . . 

Educational Reform absolutely requires translating research 
into practical strategies and breaking the tradition of isolation 
in teaching. 



TEACHERS 
HELPING 
TEACHERS 

' \ A Guklebook for the 

New ProfesskHial 
In Educatfon 
Provides a base for changing the 
"private practtoe** of teaching. 
Includes step-by*step processes for 
devek)ping Peer Support Systems. 
Gukles educators through the 
dedskMi to and the process of change 
Price: $2935 




EFFECTIVE TEACHING 
FACILITATORS' 
HANDBOOK 

Wbrkshops for Educatton Professtonals 

• Contains FIVE fully scripted 
workshops complete with overheads _ 
and copyable handouts that translate the current tech- 
graSe^iev^L^^ Into practical strategies for all 

• Designed to be presented to co-professtonals by 
teacher/administrator teams. Price: $49.95 



THE 
TEACHING 
[PRINCIPAL 

_ Handbook fbr 
_ Proactive Supervbton 

AT LAST! Instnjctk>nal Superviston has 
been translated for the administrator who 
understands that change only occurs 
within a supportive environment 
• Strategies whk:h facilitate acceptance 
of responsibility for instructk>nal 
inprovement by both teachers and 
administrators. 

Price: $2935 



Kit Marshall & Associates^ Inc. 

P.O. Box 392 

Cameron Park, CA 95682 

PROFESSIONAL EDUCATORS' 

PRESS. INC 

A division of 
Kit Marshall & Associates, Inc. 

"^tting the Word" Into the schoob 
through pubOcitions that are written for 
teachers and administrators who Bve 
I with the experience 

^ SMpping/Handtog • CiMbmta RciidM 
6X Sa lwTwYburofdgf mUed wtthteiSdayof 



FcBitUAinr 1986 




I 



Group Instruction 
in an Integrated 
Preschool Setting 



Joanne Curry O'Connell 




■ Integrating young handicapped children into regu- 
lar preschool classrooms represents the least restrictive 
environment for many preschool handicapped chil- 
dren (CConnell, 1984). Most regular preschool class- 
rooms can be considered ideal for handicapped chil- 
dren, since they are designed to allow each child to 
learn at his or her own developmental level and pace. 
Many classrooms are based upon the Piagetian theory 
of development (Piaget, 1976), whereby each child is 
encouraged to interact with the materials in the envi- 
ronment, as well as the other children, in order to 
acquire new developmental skills by trial and error and 
imitation. However, imless certain instructional alter- 
ations are made in the preschool classroom, many 
haridicappecf children may not benefit from the oppor- 
tuiuty to interact and learn with their nonhandicapped 
peers (Frederid-s, et al., 1978; Rogers-Warren, Rug- 
gles, Peterson, & Cooper, 1981; Snyder, ApoUoni, & 
Cooke, 1977). 

The teacher is a key variable in determining the 
success of handicapped children in regular preschool 
classrooms— & "facilitator" of child development who 
assists the pupils in theii* learning by providing correc- 
tive feedback and reinforcement for their attempts to 

iUiolyalaofi tj Anptim V. ddfofknk 

Copyright i9S6 The Cdundl for Exceptional ChUdrtn 



initiate new activities and learn new skills (Anasta- 
siow, 1978). 

Children who are developing normally will not 
e)q>erience difficulty with this instructional style and 
will be succes.^»ful through their own initiations, given 
minimal support. Handicapped children, however, 
often lack the ability to initiate their own activities 
within a large group setting. Without this key develop- 
mental ability learned at an early age, they may 
become isolated in the regular preschool classroom, 
thereby failing to develop at an appropriate rate, 
unless the teacher's instructional style is modified. 

INDIVIDUALIZED INSTRUCTION IN THE 
REGULAR PRESCHOOL SETTING 

Because children in the regular preschool setting are 
encouraged to initiate their own activities anvi develop 
at their own pace, individualized instructional objec- 
tives are not generally established. However, to teach 
handicapped children the specific skills they need to 
interact with the classroom materials without direct 
supervision, a structured, isolated, small group in- 
structional .session must be scheduled. Creatively 
modifying the traditional preschool schedule so that 
direct instructional time is provided for these children! 
can greatly enhance their success. ^ 



166 



Spring 1986 




What follows is a description of how one preschool, 
the Institute for Human Development at Northern 
Arizona University in Flagstaff, has successfully imple- 
mented these instructional modifications. Handi- 
capped children have been integrated into regular 
preschool environments for the last 3 years. The pro- 
gram model consists of enrolling 5 handicapped chil- 
dren in a preschool class along with 10 to 15 nonhandi- 
capped children, using mixed aged groupings of 3- to 
5-year-oIds. One full-time teacher and one full-time 
aide staff the classroom, although volunteers are ac- 
tively sought and in some instances parent participa- 
tion is a requirement of the child's placement into the 
preschool. 

Scheduling Small Group Instruction 

Our experience in working with regular chool 
teachers has shown that many preschool teac : . : ave 
good instructional skills, but because they a< . 'ied 



During the small group instruction session, the r. cher 
identifief the skill to be taught and the activity the diHd 
will participate in* 




TEACHING Exceptional Children 



8:45- 9KX) 
9:00-920 



9:50-10K)0 
10K)0-10-^ 
10:00-10:45 
10:45-11K)5 
11K)5-11:25 



to be facilitators of learning, they may not distinguish 
the need for an individual handicapped child to be 
taught certain kinds of skills in an isolated instruction* 
al setting in which extraneous stimuli competing for 
the chad's attention are eliminated. To aid the teacher 
in providing these children with the individualized 
instruction they need, a small group instructional 
session can be planned as a part of the normal day. 
Traditional preschool schedules are usually designed 
around the activities identified in the following sched- 
ule: 

Greet children and parents 
Large group circle time (days of the 
week, show and tell, etc.) 
9:20- 930 Free play (with table play activities, art, 
sanJ/water play) 
Transition time/bathroom 
Snack time 
Outdoor/motor play 
Free play 

Large group circle time (language activi* 
ties) 

11:25-11^0 Prepare to go home 

The only activity that is missing from a special 
education perspective is individualized instruction 
time. This is easily accomplished if the first half of the 
30-minute free play period from 9:20-9:50 is dp.5ignat- 
ed small group instruction time. 

The typical free play period is characterized by child- 
initiated activities vnih materials designed to promote 
fine motor, perceptual, language, cognitive, and cre- 
ative skills through coloring, painting, water and sand 
play, puzzles, beading, or similar activities. The func- 
tional skills developed through these activities are 
often the same skills needed by handicapped children. 
If this time period is desigruited a small group instruc- 
tion session instead of free play, the role of the teacher 
must change to one of structured direction. The teach- 
er identifies the skill to be taught and the activity in 
which the child wiU participate, the goal being to 



nCURE 1 
Small Group Iiistniction Session 





Monday 


Wednesday 


Friday 


9 


A B Puzzles 


A » Play Dou^ 


A » Painting 


z 

o 


B » Painting 


B » Puzzles 


B = Play Dough 


o 


C ^ Flay EXnigh 


C » Painting 


C = Puzzles 


A » 2 handicapped children; 5 nonhandicapped 
children 

B « 1 handicapped child; 5 nonhandicapped children 
C « 1 handicapped child; 6 nonhandicapped children 




Routines for hanJlIng materials are Uught during the 
puzzle play activity so that the handicapped children devel- 
op a consbtent pattern of response. . 



ameliorate skill deficits. The teacher must then struc- 
ture the session and direct the child— a role that is the 
antithesis of the facilitating, Piagetian model. 

Once the regular preschool teacher becomes cogni- 
zant of the role change required by a small group 
instruction session, he or she must address the follow- 
ing logistical problems: 

1. The nonhandicapped children do not exhibit skUl 
deficits; hence, directed instruction is restrictive for 
them. 

2. With only two adults available, splitting the group 
in half still results in two groups of 10 children , 
each — not a small number for instruction. 

3. It is difficult to provide one-to-one instruction for a 
child while nine other eager bodies watch and 
become restless. 

The play activities typically planned for this time 
period can be used creatively as vehicles for individ- 
ualized instruction. The major difference is that specif- 
ic skills at the appropriate instructional level must be 
identified for the handicapped children so that the 
materials to support the target skill development a^p 



available at the play area. 




168 



46 



Spring 1986 



TTie tnditional P«kIioo1 schedule is modified so that direct instnictional time is provided to handicapped children who can 
be fuccessfuUy integrated into the regular preschool environment and given maxunum opportunities to learn. 



Grouping for Individualized Play Activities 

A typical integrated preschool class of 20 children, four 
of them handicapped, can be divided into three 
groups, with seven children in two groups and six 
children in one group. Group assignments are not 
fixed, so groupings change daily or weekly depending 
upon the nature of the planned activities, the skills of 
the children, and whether or not a volunteer is avail- 
able to assist with the groups. In the example given 
here, the activities have been plaimed so that two 
adults can monitor the activities as well as provide 
some instruction. The nonhandicapped children are 
exceUent models and can assist with the handicapped 
children in the group. 

Figure 1 is an example of one week's planned 
activities for the small group instruction period. The 
group composition is designated by, "A/ "B/ or "C/' 
with the number of handicapped children in each 
group changing depending upon the nature of the 
activity and the degree of teacher instruction and 
feedback required for the handicapped children to 
succeed. During the 15-minute period, each handi- 
capped child should receive a minimum of five to ten 



opportunities to perform the response with teacher 
prompts and corrective feedback or reinforcement. 

Puzzle play. In the example, a group of children has 
been assigned to do puzzles (Group >^). The puzzles 
may range in difficulty from a 3-piece, sir iple-shaper^ 
noninlerlocking puzzle to a 12-piece, interlock^ ^ 
zle. Careful planning has ensured that a puzzie is 
available for the appropriate functioning level of each 
handicapped child. At the acquisition stage of learn- 
ing, the handicapped children should not be allowed 
to select their own materials. 

During the small group instruction session, strate- 
gies for manipulating materials (for example, those 
identified with the Monlessori preschool model) can 
be taught very effectively. All the children are taught 
to manipulate the materials in a standard fashion. For 
instance, in working with puzzles, the group is taught 
to iake the puzzle pieces out of their holes one at a time 
from left to right and place them above the puzzle 
board. Routines for handling the materials are taught 
so that the handicapped children develop a consistent 
pattern of response for interacting with each material 
and stimulus-response conditioning can occur. 



TEACHING Exceptional Children 



47 



169 




HGURE 2 
Physical Airangement of Classroom 



The nonhandicapped children quickly leam the des- 
ignated routines for handling the materials. While 
modeling appropriate "puzzle ' behavior for the group 
as a whole, the teacher can physically prompt the two 
children in Group A who are handicapped to complete 
the response. As the other children begin to put their 
puzzles back together, and perhaps start on new ones, 
the teacher provides instruction to the handicapped 
children through commands and prompts with correc- 
tive feedback and reinforcement. When the teacher 
leaves the table to check on the children who are 
painting, it is not at all uncommon to see a nonhandi- 
capped child imitate the teacher and remind the handi- 
capped children how to do the puzzle. 

Working with paint and play dough. Two other 
activities that have been selected for this instructional 
period are painting (Group B) and play dough (Group 
Q. These activities can promote development of fine 
motor skills such as hand-eye coordination, holding a 
brush, and squeezing and cutting the play dough. 
Once again, specific routines for using the materials 
should be developed. The aprons for painting should 
be kepi consistently in the same location. Children are 



directed to get an apron ^ind put it on before painting. 
They are also instructed to help each other get the 
aprons on and tied before anyone touches a brush. If 
only three easels are available, the paper can be 
divided down the middle (either physically separated 
or with a line) and two children will be able to paint at 
'^ach easel. 

Many nonhandicapped children will have had prior 
experience with paints and have no difficulty painting, 
but ii is likely that the handicapped children will need 
direction, ^ome handicapped children are hypotonic, 
if not actually physically handicapped. Therefore, the 
adult in charge of this group should pair each handi- 
capped child with a nonhandicapped child who is 
preferably older and who will talk to the handicapped 
child. We have found that some peers are very inter- 
ested and helpful in assisting handicapped children. 

Since the children stand up to perform this activity 
and the potential for extraneous movement is in- 
creased, a timer can be used to signal the beginning 
and end of this period. The children are instructed to 
paint until the timer rings. The adults can intermittent- 
ly reinforce the children's painting from any of the 
three activity areas to help keep them on task. 



O 170 

EKLC 



48 



Spring 1966 



The play dough activity is set up at a table for the 
seven diUdren in Group C. Because of the poor muscle 
tone of some handicapped children, homemade play 
dough is recommended because it is much softer and 
easier to manipulate than commercial play dough. 
Several containers are placed on the table contaixung 
scissors, knives, cookie cutters, and commercial mani- 
pulatives for the children to share. The handicapped 
diiki in this group may initially need to learn basic 
skills such as squeezing, rolling, and patting the 
dough into a pan. Teacher modeling and instructions 
are once again used to teach the handicapped child 
how to numipulate these materials, and the teacher 
should also instruct the handicapped child to watch 
the other children. The child may have to be prompted 
to look while the teacher is pointing at the next child 
rolling otxt a piece of dough. Imitation should be 
encouraged because handicapped children benefit 
most from this educatiorud envirorunent through de- 
vdoping an awareness of odier children's behavior. 

Organizing the Physical Space 

Three adults (teacher, aide, and volunteer) can man- 
age these three groups most easily. However, if only 
two adults are available, the three activities are still 
manageable. The handicapped children derive the 
following benefits from being assigned to different 
groups: 

1. They benefit from the models provided by their 
nonhandicapped peers. 

Z The nonhandicapped children can assist them in 
the appropriate use of the materials. 

3. The teacher or other adult provides the one or two 
handicapped children in the group with physical 
prompting while the nonhandicapped children are 
concurrently receiving most of their instruction 
through verbal directions. 

At the Institute for Human Development, we have 
found that we can physically arrange these play activi- 
ties so that they are within dose proximity to each 
other, with the handicapped children seated so that 
teacher management of skill instruction is possible. 
Figure 2 shows how the environment can be arranged 
so that two adults can monitor the three activities. 

The handicapped children are placed at the sides of 
the tables closest to the teacher so that if they attempt 
to leave, the teacher can quickly redirect them. Each 
handicapped child is placed with a group of nonhandi- 
capped peers who are appropriate models for correct 
behavior, and is seated or standing in close proximity 
to one of these peers. The adults move among activi- 
ties so that direct instruction can be provided to the 
handicapped children during the 15-minute period. 
The teacher and aide must be sure to focus their 
attention on the handicapped children at specific time 
intervals during the 15-minute period so that sufficient 



opportunities are provided for these children to re- 
spond to teacher prompts. 

CONCLUSION 

With the appropriate use of play activities for learning 
and the introduction of a period of direct instruction 
into the traditional preschool schedule, handicapped 
children can be successfully integrated into ^he regular 
preschool environment and given optimum opportu- 
nities to learn. 

The activities presented here were designed ^o bene- 
fit both handicapped and nonhandicapped children, 
and the groupings are such that two adults can man- 
age the instructional period. When a structured in- 
structional period of 15 minutes is targeted, the teacher 
provides needed attention to the handicapped chil- 
dren in the groups without fear of paying too little 
attention to the nonhandicapped children — a common 
concern of regular preschool teachers when they first 
introduce handicapped children into their classrooms. 

REFERENCES 

Anastasiow, N. J. (1978). Strategies and models for 
early childhood intervention programs in integrated 
settings. In M. J. Guralnick (Ed.), Early intervention 
and the integration of handicapped and nonlmndicapped 
children (pp. 115-145). Baltimore: University Park 
Press. 

Fredericks, H. D., Baldwin, V., Grove, D., Moore, W., 
Riggs, C, & Lyons, B. (1978). Integrating the moder- 
ately and severely handicapped preschool child into 
a normal day care setting. In M. J. Guralnick (Ed.), 
Early intervention and the integration of handicapped and 
nonhandicapped children (pp. 191-206). Baltimore: 
University Park Press. 

O'Connell, J. C. (1984). Preschool integration and its 
effect on the soda! interactions of handicapped and 
nonhandicapped children: A review. Journal of the 
Division for Early Childhood, 8, 36-48. 

Piaget, J. (1976). The grasp of consciousness: Action and 
concept in the young child. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Rogers- Warren, A., Ruggles, L., Peterson, N., & Coo- 
per, A. (1981). Playing and learning together: Pat- 
terns of social interaction in handicapped and non- 
handicapped children. Journal of the Division for Early 
Childhood, 3, 56-63. 

Snyder, L., Apolloni, T., & Cooke, T. P. (1977). 
Integrated settings at the e^riy childhood level: The 
role of nonretarded peers. Exceptional Children, 43, 
262-266. 



Joanne Curry O'Connell As$i<itaut Director for Re- 
search, at the Institute for Human Development, Fla\^staff, 
Arizona. 




TEACHING Exceptional Children 1 71 

49 



Five Ooraounity Sexvioes Boards serving ruretL Southwest Virginia joined 
together to create the Southwest Virginia Regional Oo-Operative. The 
C3Gnnunity Servioes Boards in Virginia oversee mental health azxl mentcLL 
retardation servioes on a local level. 

The Oo-Op oonpl^nents loced infant intervention programs, whidi provide 
home-based servioes for children fron birth to two (2) years of age vto have 
been idaitified as ment£LLly retarded, handiccqpped, developmentally del£Q^ed 
or hi^ risk. The nem regional program will provide hi^ tech professional 
servioes, physical therapy, oocipational therapy, speech therapy, and 
psychological servioes to the infant programs and local school systans. 
Servioes like these have been minimal in the past due to the region's 
rural nature. 

Hhe program serves thirteen (13) rural counties, from wytheville to 
Lee Oounty, and is a pilot project for the state of Virginia and is funded 
by a grant through DevelcExnental Disabilities. 

The OGnnunily Servioes Boards participating in this grant realize a 
need to esqoand servioes for develcpnenl-ally disabled infants axKl their families. 
The hic^ need for these servioes can be attributed to the nature of the area. 
The Southwest Virginia counties are part of CJentral Appalachia, a region vMch 
has made tremendous strides in recent years in himan service delivery, but still 
lacks access to many servioes ocnmon to other parts of the state and nation, liie 
area is characterized by mountainous terrain, with primary industries of mining, 
agriculture, and light manufacturing. The poverty level and educational levels 
of citizens may contribute to abnormally hi^ infant death rate, xumbers of children 
bom at risk of developnental disabilities, and premature births. 

Also being provided is inservioe training and sifsport for all infant 
intervention teadiers, as well as child find to locate those children in need 



of early intervention. 



Pamela "PJ" Davis 



ERIC 



50 



Big Stone Gap, VA 24219 




Earlyblrd ^ Lane Patrick, Valerie Van Allsburg 

Pinal County Special Education 

Tuesday, PO box 3125 Rural Station 

Casa Grande, AZ 85222 

1:30-4:30 pm 



1985 ACRES PRESENTATION ABSTRACT 



STRATEGIES FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF A 
COMMUNITY BASED PRE-EMPLOYMENT TRAINING PROGRAM 
FOR MENTALLY HANDICAPPED STUDENTS IN A RURAL COMMUNITY 



Session Leaders 

G. LANE PATRICK 
VALERIE S. VAN ALLSBURG 



51 



STRATEGIES FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF A 

COMMUNITY BASED PRE-EMPLOYMENT TRAINING PROGRAM 

FOR MENTALLY HANDICAPPED STUDENTS IN A RURAL COMMUNITY 



Pinal County Special Education is nestled among the cotton 
fields in rural Arizona. Communities utilizing the special 
services of Pinal County Special Education reach 20-30 miles 
away in all directions. Populations of these communities 
vary from 1500 to 18,000 in the largest adjacent community 
of Casa Grande. 



Pinal County Special Education is currently in its second 
year of its successful transition from school to community 
work program. 

The presentors of this progrcun would like to share an ever-' 
view of the already state-recognized-quality Vocatj.onal 
Program through utilization of slides and printed materials. 
This total program has served to help prepare, en* idvicablc 
and trainable mentally handicapped students for tha commu;iity 
pre-employment training progrcun, and includes a Stimulated 
Work Activity Training Program, Woodworking Vocational Shop, 
On-Campus Work Experience Progrcun, and finally the Community 
Based Work Activity Prograun. 



Information regarding establishment of the programs will 

be discussed and will include some of the financial aspects. 



52 



rural transportation, staff and student information, vocational 
evaluations and job trial philosophy. 

In presentj.ng the Student Pre-Employment Training Program 
the following aspects will be addressed: Community Awareness 
and Employer Contacts, the Job Training Process, Monitoring 
and Evaluation Process, Coordinating of Classroom Programing, 
Program Goals, and the Final Transition of "Aging Out" to 
the job site at age 22 and coordination and communication with 
all of those involved with that student. 

Handouts will include student description and job assignment, 
mon-i.toring forms, employer evaluations form, and program 
outline. Questions will be addressed by the session leaders 
following the presentation. 



53 



PROPOSAL TO PRESENT AT THE ACRES CONFERENCE 
APRIL 22 - 26, 1986 



SPECIAL APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM 

YELM COMMUNITY SCHOOLS 
HIGH SCHOOL SPECIAL EDUCATION PROGRAM 

PRESENTERS: ?5^y„?^88tad 

Yelm High School 
Yelm, WA 98597 

The Special Apprenticeship Program (SAP) provides specific learning 
disabled and mentally retarded students attending Yelm High School with 
vocational training and skill attainment opportunities to successfully make 
the transition between school and the workplace. This program has been 
developed to specifically meet the needs of students living in a rural area 
in western Washington who have little access to training and employment 
opportunities outside their immediate environment. The Special 
Apprenticeship Program provides an opportunity for the community and the 
school to work together to help increase the students' opportunity to find 
gainful employment once they leave the school setting. 

Workshop participants who attend the Special Apprenticeship Program 
session will be invited to learn about this program through lecture, video 
taped and slide presentation examples, discussion, handouts, and a question 
and answer exchange. Participants will be given an opportunity to focus on 
modifying the Special Apprenticeship Program to meet the particular needs 
of their rural school districts. They will find that the SAP is easily 
modified to meet the needs of individual students, budgetary restrictions, 
and community resources. 

The Special Apprenticeship Program is comprised of four basic 
courses and a student club: the pre-vocational course; the work adjustment 
course; the work experience course; the workplace math/consumer education 
course; and the Special Occupational Students (SOS) Club. The courses 
provide students with a basic understanding of work and a set of practical 
Dob skills that students learn to generalize to almost any work situation. 

The Pre-vocational course is the first in the series. This is a 
year long an entry level course that provides students with basic 
information about the world of work and skill mastery in the following 
areas: the responsibilities of accepting employment; the importance of 
attitude in the workplace; the need to follow a task to completion; the 
necessity of accepting supervision and authority from a superior; filling 
out forms and writing resumes; and how to successfully participate in a job 
interview. Students receive instruction in these areas through a variety 
of teaching methods including: pencil and paper activities; lectures; guest 
speakers from the community; movies; tapes; role play situations; and 
mini-practice sessions that allow the students to process and practice the 
information and skills they are learning. 

The Work Adjustment course is designed to give students a closely 
supervised practical opportunity to practice the skills they learned during 
the pre-vocational course. The goal of the Work Adjustment course is to 
provide students with an opportunity to practically apply and generalize 
the skills they learned during the Pre-vocational course. Students in the 



54 

o 

ERIC 



Work Adjustment course are placed in hour-long, closely supervised work 
situations in an around the campus. These work situations can range from 
the simple task of going to the office to deliver a message while following 
specific directions to helping the custodian clean a classroom. Students t 
progress from simple to complex tasks based on their skills and abilities. ^ 
Students also participate in class sessions that focus on advanced skill 
attainment and special needs and questions that arise as a result of the 
work placement. This course also provides an opportunity to identify any 
deficiencies that may exist in the student's work skills and then to review 
and remediate as necessary before the student actually enters the work 
force through the Work Placement course. 

The third component of the Special Apprenticeship Program is the 
Work Placement course. This two year course provides students with a 
two-hour actual work experience in the community. Students are placed in 
work assignments based on student interest, skill attainment, and job 
availability within the community. Before students are placed, a set of 
work performance goals are established by the student, employer and school 
special education Vocational Coordinator and the special education 
Vocational Assistant, student performance is then measured by the employer 
on a written evaluation form based on the work performance goals and by 
on-sight visitations by the Vocational Coordinator and Vocational 
Assistant. 

Students enrolled in the pre-vocational and work adjustment classes 
are alro automatically made members of the Special Occupational Students 
(SOS) Club. The SOS Club is a fully recognized student activity and is 
governed by the rules established by the student body of the school. The 
purpose of the SOS Club is to provide students with an opportunity to 
create and sell a product in a supervised environment. By doing so, 
students learn the nitty-gritty of running a business such as: the 
importance of quality control; how to determine if there is a need for the M 
product; how to sell a product; how to make change and keep a record of 
cash flow; and how to keep track of product inventory. Students also learn 
about the workings of government by actively participating in student 
government activities while representing SOS. 

The final course in the program is the workplace math/consumer 
education course. Students in this course learn the basic mathematics 
skills that they will need to successfully work and life in the community. 
Among these skills are: writing sales receipts; figuring percentages and 
fractional amounts; working with sales tax; comparison pricing; money 
skills; credit skills and interest rates; banking skills; and calculator 
skills. This IS a semester-long course that is usually taught during the 
sc -ond year of the program. 

^^^f^^^^P^"^^^ attend the Special Apprenticeship Program workshop 
will gain information and skills that will aid them in establishing a new 
vocational program or honing an existing program. The presenters' 
knowledge and enthusiasm for their subject will entertain and energize 
participants while at the same time providing them with the practical 
information they need to know to successfully implement a vocational 
program. 



i 

55 

o 

ERIC 



Learning Centers and Exhibits 
April 23-25, 1986 



SpecialNet 

Communication & Information 
for 

Special Education 

SpecialNet is the largest education-oriented compuior basdd communication network in 
the United States. SpecialNet offers special educators: 

• Special Education information at your fingertips, every day when you need it. 

• A nationwide network of educators, resource organizations, advocacy groups, 
parents, and others interested in special education. 

• Information to improve programs and professional skills. 

There are now more than 40 national bulletin boards along with over 50 active state 
bulletin boards. The most recent addition is the APPLE bulletin board managed by Dr. 
Alan Brightman of Apple Computer's Office of Special Education Programs. This 
bulletin board provides SpecialNet users with a unique opportunity to ask questions 
regarding the use of Apple and other computers in their district as well as make 
suggestions directly to Apple related to hardware and software needs. Other bulletin 
boards include: 

• RURAL serves as a source of sharing practices, programs, publications, and 
other resources for rural special education programs. This bulletin board is 
administered by the American Council on Rural Special Education (ACRES). 

• EMPLOYMENT provides a listing of employment opportunities throughout the 
country in special education. 

• RFP contains information on grants and contracts issued by federal agencies. 

A SpecialNet Communication Center has been set up for conference participants' 
access to SpecialNet. You are welcome to use the equipment to send a message, or 
check bulletin boards or your mail. Gary Snodgrass from SpecialNet will be available 
throughout the conference to answer any questions you may have, or to provide 
assistance using the system. 



National Systems Management, Inc. 
2021 K Street, N.W., Suite 315 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
202/296-1800 



56 



Earlybird Session 
Tuesday, April 22 
1:30-4:30 pm 



Project S.E.R.T. 

Special Education Training for Regular Educators of Native-Americ 



By 

. Dr. Carl G. Foster 




7 



The Navajo Nation is the largest American Indian 
Tribe in the United States. This Nation is located in 
the Southwest on a reservation equivalent in square 
mileage to the State of Virginia. A 1980 census 
determined low-socioeconomic population of 160,000 live 
in isolated camps and work in mining, agriculture or 
government service organizations. Four Reservation 
communities and five "border towns" are centers for the 
purchasing of goods and the acquiring of services. The 
Navajo philosophy, language and culture are practiced 
by Tribal members in every phase of daily living. 

Forty-eight thousand preschool through high school 
age Navajo children are educated in state supported 
schools, Bureau of Indian Affairs facilities, church 
sponsored programs or Tribally controlled sites. 
Academia is provided during a six-and-one-half-hour 
school day throughout 180 day school year. Of these 
school age children, it is estimated that 12,000 are 
eligible for special education. A significant number 
of these exceptional children have been identified and 
are receiving special education services. To promote 
the child's education, many are mainstreamed into the 
regular classroom. Theortically, this practice enables 
the exceptional student to receive academic and social 
environment, cooperatively implemented by the regular 



53 



and the special education personnel. Because of this 
cooperative education, it is assumed that the 
mainstreamed exceptional child is provided with an 
appropriate and a least restrictive environment. 

THE PBOCTAM 

The Bureau of Indian Affairs, of all the Tribe's 
educational choices, is the only institution charged by 
treaties with the education of the Navajo people. Five 
Agencies are strategically located throughout the 
reservation to expedite service which ensure the 
adherence to Federal/Tribal Trust agreements and promote 
instruction compatible with the child's culture, 
socio-economic need and learning style. The Chinle 
Agency is responsible for the education of 3,500 
kindergarten through high school age students. Ten 
schools are strategically located within the Agency's 
850 square mile boundary and offer a variety of 
programming. A teaching staff of 120 implement a 
pretest/posttest curriculum during a 

six-and-one-half-hour day throughout a 180 day school 
year. Twelve special education teachers and fifteen 
education aides instruct 230 exceptional students in 
eleven resource and two self-contained classrooms. A 
"related service" staff of a school psychologist, an 



2 

59 



educational diag^io-stician, a speech pathologist and two 
speech techniciai continuously service the special 
education classroc: . An Agency Special Education Office 
staff, co.3isting of a coordinator, a child find 
technician, a secretary and a budget technician, 
synchronize program offerings. 

For several years, the special education 
coordinator has had complaints from the regular and the 
special education faculty about the mainstreamed 
exceptional child. These complaints centered around the 
mainstreamed exceptional student placed into a 
restrictive and an inappropriate environment because of 
regular educators' limited' to no special education 
knowledge and skills. To determined whether these 
complaints were expressed by a few or shared "by the 
majority, the special education coordinator surveyed 1) 
regular educators' attitude toward teaching the 
mainstreamed exceptional child; 2). the number of 
mainstreamed exceptional students taught in the regular 
classrooms; and 3) if the regular educator desire 
training in special education. The survey showed that 
the average regular educator was exposed to at least one 
mainstreamed exceptional student daily. Also reported 
was that the educator felt inadequately prepared to 
effectively educate the nainstreamed exceptional child. 

3 

60 

o 

ERIC 



Overwhelming, regular educators indicated a desire for 
training which would augment effective classroom 
instruction of the mainstreamed exceptional child. 
Based on the survey's results. Project S.E.R.T. (Special 
Education for Regular Teachers) was implemented during 
the 1984-85 school year. The Chinle Agency, with funding 
from Central Office, Branch of Exceptional Education.,, 
trained .sixty kindergarten through high school regular 
educators. To ascertain trainee shifts in special 
education knowledge and skills, a pretest/posttest, no 
control group, experimental research design and a two 
tailed T-test, at an alpha of .05, were utilized. 

The Agency's 120 regular educators were surveyed 
using a questionnaire, (Appendix A). Ninety 
questionnaires were returned with- seventy-eight 
indicating an interest in training. And, of those 
desiring training, sixty were selected to participate 
in the Project. Requested demographic information 
revealed that the average trainee had been an educatoi 
8.22 years, a Bureau employee 9.22 years, an employee 
of Chinle Agency a mean of 7.43 years and 5 years in the 
present position. Thirty-eight trainees reported being 
elementary educators, three stated they were junior high 
school educators, thirteen indicated having 
responsibilities at the high school level an-: eight 



4 

ei 



indicated was having administrative duties. Also 
reported was that thirty were Native American, three 
were Black, one was Hispanic and twenty-seven were 
Anglo. 

To ascertain the level of special education 
knowledge and skills of the participants and to 
establish topical areas for training, a Project prepared 
100 stemed test was administered. (Appendix B). A mean 
of 66.76 and a standard deviation of 8.17 were computed. 
The test further indicated that trainees had minimal 
special education knowledge and skills in 1) P.L. 94-142 
and related mandates; 2) behavior management techniques; 
3) special education evaluation instruments and 
procedures; and 4) teaching methods. 

Throughout the Spring Semester, the University of 
Arizona, Department of Special Education faculty 
provided fifty-four hours of instruction, three days a 
month, at two centrally located schools. Seventeen 
hours of instruction was given in each of the four 
topical areas as determined by the pretest. Nine 
outside of class assignments evaluated information 
assimulation, - ' internalTy" validated the ' Project goal ,~ 
and was the foundation for adjustment in instruction. 
At the end of four months, the same test was again 
administered. A mean of 79.88 and a standard deviation 



62 



of 6.22 were computed. These data were statistically 
treated with an obtained T-score of 3.16 compared to a 
critical T-score of 1.96. 

Trainees evaluated the Project, university 
instructors and the special education topics. Also 
assessed was how much special education knowledge and 
skills were acquired, how much of it was implemented and 
if they recommended this training for other regular 
educators. (Appendix C) Reported was that the training 
was good and applicable to their job. Trainees felt the 
university instructors were very knowledgeable of topics 
presented and generally, good instructors. The majority 
indicated that all topics presented were helpful and 
that they had implemented what was learned. All felt 
that the training should be offered to more/all regular 
educators . 

CQNCLUSTON 

The Chinle Agency, like its four other Agency 
counter parts, mainstream 85 percent of its exceptional 
population. A 1983 survey of 120 regular educators, 
revealed that a signific;>nt number did not feel that 
they were ad^^quately equipped to instruct the 
exceptional child in the regular setting. Based on this 
information, 54 hours of instruction in special education 

6 

63 



knowledge and skills was provided to sixty regular 
educators. Investigation of this Training concluded 
that participants significantly shifted in special 
education knowledge and skills. Further ascertained was 
that information received from this training was 
implemented in the regular setting. The results of this 
training have been so encouraging that another Navajo 
Area Agency is requesting Training for its regular 
educators. 

Although the training of regular educators in 
special education knowledge and skills was limited to 
the Chinle Agency, these results can be considered ' to 
have impact on all Bureau schools. It seems that 
throughout the Bureau, the mainstreaming of exceptional 
students is common. However, Bureau regular educators 
may not have adequate special education knowledge and 
skills from which to promote the mainstreamed 
exceptional student's special education program purpose. 
And, because of inadequate regular educator's special 
education knowledge and skills, it can be argued that 
the mainstreamed exceptional student is being 
discriminated in the regular classroom setting because of 
his exceptionality and inappropriate t instruction. To 
ensure tHat alT Native"- American " mainstfeamod 
exceptional children, under the Bureau's charge, receive 



6^ 



an appropriate and a least restrictive environment 
regular educator training in special education knowledg 
and skills is paramount. 



65 



Appendix A 



y graduate hours completed 



Please check one > 

!• I would like training. 

2* I would not like training. 



Complete the following. 
3. I have taught for: 



years < 



4. I have been employed by the Bureau of Indian Affairs for: 

5. I have been employed by the Chlnle Agency for: years, 

6. I have been in this position for: 



years , 



years < 



7. Ify position is: 1) elementary teacher 2) juniir high teacher 3) high school 
teacher 4) supervisor 5) principal 6) other 

8. My ethnic origin is: 1) American-Indian 2) Black 3) Hispanic 4) Anglo 
5) other 



Please rank from 1 through 4 when you would like training. 
1. (most desired) 2. (desired) 3. (Acceptable) 



A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 



during school hours, 
in the evening (s). 
during the week-end. 
after school (3:00 - 6:00) 



(not desired) 



10. 



If training is conducted beyond my working day, I would like 



A. 
B. 
C. 



"Comp time". 
Overtime pay. 

Graduate credit to be Chinle Agency paid in lieu of comp and/or 
overtime pay. 



ERIC 



Appendix B 

An Evaluation of Classroom 
Teacher's Knowledge of Special 
Education Procedures 



T F 

T F 

r 

T F 



■ School 

I. TRUE FALSE 

Please CIRCLE the correct answer. 

1. P. L. 94-142 provides a free, appropriate and least restrictive 
environment for all exceptional children. 

2. Schools must be periodically screen all students for possible 
referral to special education 

^* ^^^^ special education student must be 

nainstreamed . 

4. Anybody can refer a student for special education. 

^* Saced.""^^*" referred for special education, he is automatically 

6. Schools can suspend or expell special education students only t f 
under specific conditions. ^ ^ ^ 

7. Parents/guardians do not have to be infonned that their child has 

been referred for special education. ^ p 

8. When a child is referred for special education, he/she can 
innediately receive instruction in the special education 
classroom. 

T F 

^' tfter^reSrwl^"^*^ education placement must occur within 45 days 

10. Parental/guardian written consent is not necessary to evaluate the 
child for special education. 

11. The evaluation of a potential special education student is in 
accordance with the child's need. 

12. Parents requesting not to have their child evaluated does not 
terminate the evaluation. 

13. The psychologist /psychometrist is the only person who can 
evaluate the potential special education student. 

14. If there la disagreement with the evaluation results, another 
evaluation can be requested. 

15. The multidlscipllnary committee meeting can be conducted with- 
out the parent/guardian being present. 

16. Under Bureau regulations, a school psychologist is the only 
evaluator who can diajaose for emotional disorders. 



F 



F 



F 



F 



ERIc 67 



F 



F 



Page -2- 

17. An I.E.P cac be written before the multldlsdplinary committee 
meeting. ^ 

18. The ©ultldisclpllnary committee can choose not to place the 
child into special education. ^ 

19. If a multldlsclpllnary committee member disagrees with the 
child's placement, he can do nothing about It. T 

20. To remove a child from special education, the school only needs 
to say that he Is no longer in need. X 

21. A special education student must be re-evaluated every three 
years. .j, 

22. If the multldlsclpllnary committee does not place the child into 
special education, a written statement must be filed with the 
special education office. X 

23. Information concerning special education must be written and 

spoken in the parent's primary language. X F 

24. If the parent Is a non-English speaker, the school provides an 
Interpreter every time they communicate. X F 

25. If the parent /guardian requests, an advocate must be provided by 

the school or by the special education office. X F 

26. Before an I.E.P. is written, the child must ba placed into 

special education. p 

27. The I.E.P. is written only by the special education teacher. X F 

28. I.E.P. goals do not have to be attained by the exceptional 

student. ^ p 

29. Regular teachers are not accountable for the mains treamed 

exceptional student's achievement in their classroom. X F 

30. A review of the child's placement must be conducted annually. X F 

31. I.E.P.s are only written in the Spring. X F 

32. Once an I.E.P. is written, it cannot be changed or adjusted. X F 

33. Student records ucuat be kept in a fire-proof vault. X F 

34. Under the Privacy Act of 1974, pictures of students cannot be 

taken without parental permission. X F 

35. The contents of a teacher* s grade book are not confidential. x F 

36. Parents have a right to review all school records of their child. T F 



o 6S 



EKLC 



Page -3- 

37. If a teacher publishes a student's name and his test score, he 
is violating the student's right to privacy. 

38. A school cannot release a student's records to another school 
without vrltten parental permission. 

39. Schools must remove documents from their records that parents 
disagree vlth«. 

40. A due-'process hearing can be requested by parent /school when 
there la an unresolved problem concerning the exceptional 
stiident . 

41. All teacher records of students are confidential. 

42. The due-i>rocess hearing officer can be an employee of the 
school or o£ the Agency. 

43. A written account of the due-process hearing must be kept aad 
be available upon request to the grieving parties. 

44. The school and the parent /guardian, once a due-process hearing 
request has been made, do not communicate to resolve the problem 
before the hearing. 

45. Special education students should be separated from the regular 
students. 

46. A due-process hearing officer's judgement cannot be appealed or 
taken to court. 

47. The classroom teacher is responsible for attaining the goal(s) 
on the I.E. P. he is assigned. 

48. All special education students are trouble. 

49. When we attend to a behavior, we reinforce it. 

50. All behaviors are measureable. 

51. Section 504, of the Rehabilitation Act, states that an exceptional 
child cannot be discriminated against for his exceptionality. 

52. If a parent /guardian decides not to agree to his child's 
special education placement, he/she can be overruled by the 
multidisclplinary committee. . 

53. Special education teachers must be certified in the special 
education classification of the majority of the exceptional 
students they are teaching. 

54. After the age of 18, the student's parents no longer have legal 
control of his special education program. 



63 



Fag6 -4- 



55. All building barriers must be removed which cause an inappropriate 

and restrictive environment for the exceptional student. t F 

II. MULTIFLE CHOICE 

• Please SELECT the most correct answer (s). Several questionb may i^ave 
numerous correct answers. 



56. The exceptional student Is protected by: 

1) P. L. 94-142. 

2) The Family Rights and Privacy Act of 1974. 

3) Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act. 

4) All of the above. 



57. Periodically, the school must screen all students for: 

1) vision. 

2) hearing. 

3) academic achievement. 

4) all of the above 

58. An exceptional student is malnstreamed because of the' 

1) appropriateness of the setting. 

2) least restrictive environment. 

3) the administrator says it must be done. 

4) all of the above. 



A student can be referred for special education by the: 

1) parent or guardian. 

2) educator. 

3) student. 

4) dormitory personnel • 

5) all of the above. 



60. When referring a student for special education, there must be: 

1) supporting documentation. 

2) parental consent. 

3) special education teacher approval. 

4) all of the above. 



61. Schools can suspend or expel special education students if: 

1) there is a school policy on discipline. 

2) they determine that the student's present setting is approoriate 
and least restrictive. 

3) the parents have been Informed of this action. 

4) all of the above. 



62. When a child has I; )en referred for special education: 

1) there must be parental consent. 

2) parents must be Informed and understand why a referral has been made. 
3; the special education teacher has to concur. 

4) all of the above. 



EKLC 



63. Once the child has been referred for special education, a decision to 
place or not to place is within: 

1) 25 days. 

2) 35 days. 

3) 45 days. ^ 

4) none of the above. / (J 



Before a child can be evaluated for special education services, 

1) there muat be a written parental consent. 

2) parents have to be notified of the evaluation and understand its 
purpose. 

3) parents must be present during the evaluation. 

4) all of the above. 

If a referred student is School/Office of Special Education determined 
not to be needing special education services, 

1) all documentation is returned to the per8on(s) referring the 
student . 

2) written notice is given indicating why the student will not be 
evaluated. 

3) no justification is necessary* 

4) all of the above. 

The evaluation of a potential special education student must include: 

1) vision. 

2) hearing. 

3) psychological . 

4) education. 

5) family history. 

6) all of the above. 

If necessary, the evaluation of a potential special education child 
can Include a: 

1) physical examination. 

2) speech & hearing examination. 

3) neurological examination. 
4y all of the above. 

Under P. L. 94-142, teachers can administer: 

1) vision tests. 

2) hearing tests. 

3) psychological tests. 

4) education tests. 

5) all of the above. 

If the parent or the multidiscipllnary committee disagrees with the 
evaluation results, he /they: 

1) can request another evaluation. 

2) must accept the evaluation results. 

3) car- appeal to the Principal. 

4) all of the above. 

A Multidiscipllnary Committee must be composed of, but not limited to: 

1) the student when appropriate. 

2) the parent /guardian^ 

3) an administrator. 

4) a special education teacher. 

5) a classroom tencher. 

6) a person who Interprets the evaluation results. 

7) all of the above. 



71 



Before the multldisclplliiary committee can proceed without the parent, 
they must ehov that the parent haa been notified: 

1) one time. 

2) two times. 

3) three times* 

The Multldlsclplinary Committee must: 

1) have the majority agree on placement of the student into special 
education. 

2) keep a written record of what took place during the meeting. 

3) inform all staff of what was discussed. 

4) all of the above. 

The ^biltldlsclplinary Coikimittee meeting's purpose is to: 

1) discuss what the evaluation results indicate. 

2) place the child into special education. 

3) not place the child into special education. 

4) all of the above. 

Before a child can be removed from special education: 

1) the school must feel that there is no longer a need. 

2) an evaluation must be done. 

3) the multldisclplinary committee must concur. 

4) all of the above. 

If the parent disagrees with the Multldisclplliiary Committee's d^scislon 
to place the child > 

1) disapproval is noted. 

2) the child is not placed into special education. 

3) a due-process hearing is automatically requested. 

4) all of the above. 

If a multldisclplinary committee member disagrees with the placement 
he: 

1) removes himself from the committee. 

2) voices his concerns and votes not to place. 

3) writes a minority opinion. 

4) all of the above. 

An Individualized Education Plan (lEP); 

1) is a yearly plan. 

2) has projected goals to be completed. 

3) has persons responsible for the goals. 

4) all of the above. 

Teachers must keep records on: 

1) when the I.E. P. goal was begun. 

2) when the I.E. P. goal was completed. 

3) how the goals was tested. 

4) student's results. 

5) all of the above. 

Schools must inform the parent /gtiardian of his/her child's I.E. P. 
progress: 

1) annually. 

2) bi-annually. 

3) quarterly. 

4) none of the above. t^r\ 




Special education students records are: 

1) labeled confidential. 

2) kept In a central location. 

3) separated from other student records. 

4) all of the above. 

A due-process hearing nuiat be: 

1) requested In writing. 

2) submitted to the Principal or Office of Special Education. 

3) filed within 10 days after the liq)asse has occurred. 

4) all of the above. 

Parents must be Informed of their due-process rights: 

1) annually. 

2) In their primary langxxage. 

3) in a written format. 

4) all of the above. 

During a due-process hearing, parties have a right to: 

1) have legal counsel present. 

2) call witnesses. 

3) cross examine. 

4) all of the above. 

A due-process hearing officer Is: 

1) a meoiber of the school. 

2) a representative of the Agency. 

3) from outside the Bureau. 

4) the Office of Special Education Coordinator. 

For a student to be classified as emotionally disturbed , he 

1) has an inability to learn which cannot be explained. 

2) cannot build satisfactory relationships. 

3) has continuous Inappropriate behavior. 

4) generally, is unhappy or depressed. 

5) all of the above. 

Student is classified as Trainable Mentally Retarded, If his IQ 
Is between: 



1) 


35 - 


55. 


2> 


30 - 


50. 


3) 


25 - 


45. 


4) 


40 - 


50. 



A student Is classified as Educable Mentally Handicapped if his IQ is' 
between: 

1) 50 - 60. 

2) 55 - 75. 

3) 45 - 75. 

4) 55 - 85. 

A learning disabled child has: 

1) a normal to above average IQ. 

2) difficulty learning. 

3) : possible reversal problem. 

4) cannot read. 



73 



A special education student's program can include: 

1) vocational training. 

2) physical education. 

3) hcaebound activities. 

4) all of the above. 

Specific learning disabled (SLD) students: 

1) have short attention spans. 

2) are hyperactive, 

3) well below grade level-academically. 

4) all of the above. 



74 



Appendix C 



GAINING IN SPECIAL EDUCATIOM OPHUQMIAIRE 
PlMM circla tbm most appropriate answer 

^* rixSiS' ^ education «as a) poor, b) average, c) good, 

2. Tbpic» preMoitKl m a), not appUcable, b) applicable to my job 
^' STSSiJLf ^^'^ P'— nt«« a) poor, b) average, c) good, 

** JiillSi? M *'^««^Pf^<^«r» a) not knowledgeable, b) know- 
ledgeable, c) very knowledgeable of their topics. 

S. Handouts, and etc. were a) not iqK»licable, b) applicable to my job 



6^ Tbpics which ww» most helpful to me were a) P. l. 94-142, b) behavior 

^* SfSS-f^."^**' *) "o knowledge, b) little 

knowledge, c) a gzMt deal of knowladye of special education. 



I T iiBpl^^aented very little, c) Implemented 

a TMat_deal of what I learned in uiLa course. -npxemenrea 

^' e Sa^Sf' '^"id not recomBr ^od this training for other non-special 

. 7 oislike the foUowings abc it the course; 
a) 
b) 
c) 
dl 

. r liked the followi... >. jxjut the course: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 



75 



PresenCors: KaCherlne S. Bunch, Ih.D, 
Director, Project BOLD 
Department of Curriculum 

and Instruction 
The University of 

Mississippi 
University, MS 38677 

Austin W. Bunch, Ph.D. 
Coordinator of Special 

Education 
School of Education 
The University of 

Mississippi 
University, MS 38677 



Effect of Inservlce Education Models 
on Team Problem-Solving 



Effectiveness Is a key term In American education 
In the 1980s. Two primary areas of concern are school 
effectiveness and teaching effectiveness. Within the 
two areas, well established data bases have accumulated 
(Gage, 1984). Educational researchers, such as Edmonds 
(1982), have suggested an Integration of these comple- 
mentary bodies of data. Taken together, research In 
both school effectiveness and teaching f f ectlven<?3s 
have provided Information In the searc. ior answers to 
the question: What can we do with the educational 
process, generally and specifically, to yield a better 
product ? 

Business and Industry have realized lor a long time 
that Institutional Improvement Is closely linked to 
Individual Improvement (Pratzner, 1984). Drucker 
(1977) saw effectiveness as the first of two crucial 
tasks to be performed within an organization. The 
second task was realization of potential through change 
or Innovation. As a broad plan of school Improvement, 
effectiveness research findings can be Implemented 
through staff development programs, the vehicle for 
Innovation and change. 

If teachers are to realize potential through change 
via staff development, consideration must be given to 
the motivational or affective variables related to 
change (Guskey, 1984; Leyser & Abrams, 1984; Rose & 
Medway, 1981). In the move toward overall effective- 
ness, Purkey and Smith (1982) suggested that attention 



76 



2 



be given to the attitudes as well as the interactions of 
the people involved* Some of the motivational charac- 
teristics that bear consideration are locus cf control, 
self -concept 9 and attitude. Houlihan (1983) postulated 
that school effectiveness cannot become a reality unless 
a hierarchy of social-affective variables is considered 
first • 



In the attempt to create more effective schools, 
Cuban (1983) has identified a negative result, the 
increase of s tandarization • The choice of a uniform 
curriculum, uniform materials, and uniform teaching 
methodology creates a dissonance within the reality that • 
children have variant learning needs • The variant 
learning needs of students are often perceived by class- 
room teachers as barriers to school effectiveness. The 
existence of these barriers has been documented in the 
literature related to service delivery for the 
handicapped (Hersh & Walker, 1983). 

What are the barriers? The first involves 
technical skills. Regular teachers perceive that they 
lack the competence to deal with variant learners 
(Alexander & Strain, 1978; Dodd, 1980; Salend, 1984; 
Shotel, lano, & McGettigan, 1972). This feeling of 
inadequacy persists despite the requirement of P .L • 
94-142 for in-service education. 

A second barrier to class room effectiveness is . 
related to the motivational characteristics that impact 
on teacher performance. The regular class teacher does 
not feel responsible for dealing with academically and 
socially different children. One reason for the lack of 
responsibility is that teachers have not been encouraged 
to take responsibility for students with assessment 
scores that fall more than one s tandard deviation below 
the mean. Students outside this demarcation were to be 
a special education responsibility . The easy avail- 
ability of special education services reinforced regular 
teachers for referring problem students rather than 
assuming responsibility for these students (Hersh & 
Walker, 1983). 

A third barrier to classroom effectivness for all 
children concerns in-service training. A problem that 
schools face is deciding how to conduct in-service 
programs that are time efficient, cost effective, and 
that achieve specified objectives (Leysei* & Abrams, 
1984)« In discussing service delivery systems, Stedman 



Statement of the Problem 




ERIC 



3 



(1983) stated that training "is poorly carried out at 
all levels" (p. 118). 

Significance of the Study 

Data from the U.S. Department of Education support 
the presence of variant learners within the class rooms 
of America '^s schools • Data were available from the 
state agency in which this study was conducted that 
provided a more dramatic index of the incidence of 
variant learners • 

A breakdown of the types of variant learners found 
in regular classrooms includes four groupings. One 
group of variant learners is the eligible special 
education students who are mainstreamed into regular 
classes. A second group includes students who because 
of academic or social problems were referred and 
evaluated for possible special education placement but 
who were not eligible and remain the responsibility of 
the regular classroom teacher. A third group includes 
those who upon reevaluation were no longer eligible for 
special education services and become the responsibility 
of regular education. A final group includes students 
who present problems for regular class teachers for 
non-specific behaviors or circumstances . 

Purpose 

If, as Bennis (1966) asserted, the health of an 
organization can be gauged by the effect of its 
problem-solving process, an innovative support system is 
needed for class room teachers to deal with a variety of 
student learning needs. 

The purpose of this study was to investigate the 
relationship between the implementation of a group 
problem-solving process known as the Behavior Action 
Team and the motivational characteristics of teachers. 
The aim of the Behavior Action Team process was to 
provide a means of assistance to teachers who were 
experiencing difficulty with student academic or social 
behavior problems in the regular classroom. This team 
process model was introduced to teachers through a four- 
phase in-service treatment . 

Limitations of the Study 

Threats to the internal validity of the study 
existed. The major limitation was the occurrence of 
other staff in-service programs during the time frame in 



EKLC 



which the present study was coaducted. A second 
limitation was the competing event of a teacher strike 
which occurred during two months of the study. A third 
limitation was related to the three month timeline for 
the ongoing in-service program of this study. A fourth 
limitation was that the groups were self -selected based 
on perceived need for referral. A fifth limitation was 
the loss of teacher respondents during the study . 

Delimitations of the Study 

The study was delimited to six rural school 
districts in one state. The participating schools 
served as field sites for a federal teacher training 
project of which the Behavior Action Teams were a 
component . 

Theoretical Basis 

An adaptation of the Guskey (1979) in-service 
education model was used in the present study. The 
model conceptualizes a sequence of events in which 
in-service training, new classroom procedures, and 
student outcomes impact upon teacher perceptions related 
to causality, self-concept and attitudes. 

Definition of Terms 

Behavior Action Team . This problem-solving team is 
a support group for helping classroom teachers deal with 
learning and behavior problems. The precedent for the 
Behavior Action Team is the Teacher Assistance Team 
(Chalfant, 1980). The Behavior Action Team is comprised 
of three elected classroom teachers one of whom is an 
intervention specialist. The referring teacher becomes 
a fourth member. Additional membership may include 
parents, students, and support personnel such as 
counselors. Usually, not more than five members meet. 
The meeting itself is a highly structured seven-step 
process through which the problem is identified, 
solutions are brains tormed , intervention procedures are 
planned, and a follow-up meeting is scheduled. 

Intervention specialist . The member of the 
Behavior Action Team who is a special educator who has 
received special training in learning and behavior 
management strategies . 

In-service . In-service is defined as "any planned 
program of learning opportunities afforded staff members 
of schools, for purposes of improving the performance. 



79 



of the ladlvldual In already asslgaed positions" 
(Harris, 1980» 21). 

Locus of control # HacDonald (1974) defined locus 
of control as " the extant to which persons perceive 
contingency relationships between their actions and 
their outcomes" (p« 169)* This notion of causality 
specific to a teacher population has been defined by 
Guskey (1979, 1984) as the extent to which teachers 
perceive themselves as responsible for students' 
successes or failures* 

Self *concep t # The construct of self-concept is 

"liking and respe^ct of oneself which has some realistic 

basis" (Grand all , 1974, p« 45). For teachers , 

self'concept is defined as "feelings of adequacy in 
teaching situations" (Guskey, 1979, 32). 

Teaching affect * Guskey (1979) defined this term 
as "attitudes toward teaching activities" (p. 32). 

Methodology 

Participants in this study were the teaching 
personnel o€ six rural schools* There were 208 initial 
participants and 134 participants in the final sample. 
During in-service treatment, the teachers' membership in 
one of three groups was self *-s elected* Group 1 was 
comprised of Behavior Action Team members within each of 
the six schools* Group 2 included teachers who 
requested assistance from the Team* Group 3 were those 
teachers who did not participate in the team process* 
These groups were the three levels of the independent 
variable of participation in the team process^ Other 
independent variables were demographic categories that 
included (a) gender, (b) years of teaching experience, 
(c) grade level taught, and (d) instructional responsi- 
bility (regular versus special education)* The depen- 
dent variables were the posttest results of measures of 
teacher attribution, self-concept and attitude* The 
concomitant variables, or covariates, were the pretest 
8 cores on the three ins t rumen ts that were used to 
measure motivational characteristics of teachers* 

Three instruments were used to gather data from the 
teacher sample* The first instrument, the Responsi - 
bility for Student Achievement Questionnaire ( RSA ) uged 
as ipsati ve/ranking technique to measure the perceived 
responsibility assumed by teachers for academic success 
or failure of students (Guskey, 1979)* 



SO 



The R+ subscale score of this questionnaire indicated 
the teacher's perceived responsibility for student 
success, while the R- subscale score indicated perceived 
responsibility for student failure. Reliability data, 
indicated by alpha coefficients, was shown to be 0.79 
for the R+ subscale and 0.88 for the R- subscale. Test- 
retest reliability, from September to June within one 
school year, revealed correlations of 0.72 and 0.78 
respectively for the R+ and R- subscales (Guskey, 1981). 
Criterion validity data revealed a correlation between 
students' final examination scores and the RSA to be 
0.613 which was significant at the .05 leveTTGuskey . 
1979). ^ 



A second instrument, the Teaching Self-Concept 
Scale , was used to measure the degree of adequacy felt 
by teachers for meeting specific teaching situations 
(Guskey, 1979). A summated rating using the Likert 
method is employed. Reliability was indicated by a 
Cronbach alpha of 0.84. Criterion validity was 
established at 0.612 (Guskey, 1979, 1984). 

The third instrument was the Affect Toward Teaching 
Scale. The purpose of this scale, which employed a 
summated rating using the Likert method, was the 
measurement of attitude toward activities used in 
teaching. Reliability was indicated by a Cronbach alpha 
of 0.85. A criterion validity coefficient showed a 
correlation of 0.397 between student final exam scores 
and teacher scores on the Affect Toward Teaching Scale . 
Although this correlation did not reach significance at 
the .05 level, the small number of subjects in the 
validation study precluded statistical significance 
(Gusfeey, 1979, 1984). 

A non-equivalent control group design was selected 
for this study. The three test instruments were 
o'dministared by the researcher prior to the beginning of 
the Behavior Action Team in-service training program. 
An ongoing series of in-service training activities 
relative to the Behavior Action Team process was held. 
A timeline was followed in completing each goal for 
in-service training required by the team process. The 
post measures were taken by the researcher at the end of 
the school year. Table 1 depicts the research 
procedures . 

Twenty null i rpotheses were tested in this study. 
Primary hypothasea 1 through 4 were tested using One-way 
Analysis of Covariance. Secondary hypotheses 5 through 



81 



Table 1 

Summary of Research Procedures 



Group 



Number of teachers (initial) 23 185 

Pretreatment measures 

Responsibility for Student 

Achievement XXX 

Teaching Self-Concept X XX 

Attitude toward Teaching X XX 

Treatments 



!• Six-hour in-ser\rice training 

in team problem*solving X 

2, One-^'hour in-ser\d.ce. Behavior 

Action Team X X 

3, One-half hour in-service 
training in Behavior Action 

Team process X 

4, One-hour in-service Behavior 

Action Team video X X 

Pes treatment measures 

Responsibility for Student 

Achievement X XX 

Teaching Self-Concept X XX 

Attitude toward Teaching X XX 

Number of teachers (final) 23 6 105 



82 



20 were tested using a Two-Way (a x b) Between-Subj ects 
Analysis of Vari'ince with weighted means. One of the 
hypotheses was rejected, and two were partially 
rejected. Nine of the hypotheses were retained. 
Statistical analysis was not warranted for eight of the 
hypotheses. In addition, small sample size prevented 
the inclusion of teacher Group 2 ia the statistical 
analysis . 

Hypothesis 2 received the strongest support for 
rejection. This hypothesis stated: There is no 
significant difference among the three teacher groups in 
perceived attribution of causality for academic failure 
of students. Statistical analysis revealed that teacher 
Group 1, the Behavior Action Team members, had a 
significantly higher adjusted post mean than members of 
Group 3, the teachers who did not request assistance 
from the Team. 

Hypothesis 8 stated: There is no significant 
difference in responsibility for student failure among 
teachers with 0 to 5 years, 6 to 10 years, 11 to 15 
years, and 16 or more years experience across the three 
teacher groups. This hypothesis was partially rejected. 
There was a significant difference in mean scores in 
favor of Group 1 in the main effect for groups. There 
were no differences in the means either for years of 
experience or for the interaction between group 
membership and experience . 

Hypothesis 12 stated: There is no significant 
difference in responsibility for student failure between 
regular and special education teachers across the three 
teacher groups. This hypothesis was partially rejected. 
A significant difference in means was found for teacher 
membership in Group 1, the Behavior Action Team, over 
Group 3, the no-referral group. There were no 
differences for either instructional responsibility 
(regular versus special education) cr for the interation 
effect . 

Overall, there were no significant differences 
found in the perceived responsibility assumed by 
teachers for the academic success of students, for 
self-concept of teaching ability, or for attitudes 
toward teaching. No differences were found for the 
demographic variables of years of teaching experience or 
for instructional responsibility. Statistical analysis 



83 



was not warranted for hypotheses related to gender or 
grade level taught. 

Comparative Studies 

The results of this study tended to aupport a 
relationship between teacher Involvement In a problem- 
solving group and responsibility assumed for student 
failure. This research finding adds to the body of 
knowledge related to In-servlce programs that have as 
their purpose to heighten ^eacher responsibility for 
variant learners In the regular classroom. 

This study provides an avenue for a classroom 
teacher to realize effectiveness nd to realize 
potential through change or Innovation. Yet, a majority 
of the participants chose not be Involved In the 
Innovation. The present study, should then be examined 
In terms of participant Involvement In an Innovation, 
the Behavior Action Team process. The final number of 
subjects In this study ws 134 teachers. Only 23 
teachers ejected to participate as Behavior Action team 
members. Only six chose to participate by requesting 
assistance from the Team. Quite unexpectedly, 105 
teachers chose not to be Involved with the Team. 
Studies by Woodman (1978/1979) and Guskey (1979) 
reported similar patterns of non-part Iclpat Ion by a 
large number of subjects when new or Innovative 
procedures were available . 

Lasley and Galloway (1983) urged that teachers 
assume new roles If greater effectlvenss was to occur. 
These researchers Identified a teacher-as-rlsk-taker 
role which would be acquired by learning problem-solving 
techniques. The 105 teachers In the present study would 
not be viewed In this risk-taking role. A question Is 
then raised by this study. Why do teachers make the 
decision not to participate In a process of change? 

Lortle (1975) enumerated on,i possible explanation 
for non-partlclpatlon. He concluded that teachers did 
not see changes In self as necessary to attainment of 
greater effectiveness. Jones and Hayes (1980) studied 
the stated versus actual needs. of teachers. It was 
found that self -percept Ions may not always be valid. 
Germain (1978) referred to the Importance of realistic 
self-perception as a guide In making choices. The 
possibility of Inaccurate self -percept Ion of needs can 
be linked to non-partlclpatlon In new procedures. 



84 



10 



Anothe.r conslderatloa to be made regarding non- 
par tlclpat ion In innovation is whether or not the 
in-service prograa is effective. Brimm and Tollett 
(1974) found that 73Z of survey respondents indicated 
that in-service was not relevant to their needs* In the 
case of the Behavior Action Team in-service program, the 
need was based on national, state, and local statistics 
that indicated the presence of variant learners in the 
regular classroom* The inference from this data base 
was that teachers needed additional or alternative 
techniques to deal with such students* 

Other elements have been associated with effective 
in-service programs* The Behavior Action Team 
incorporated a number of these elements* 

1 * Ski 11 development should be emphasized (Boote , 
1976; Joyce & Showers, 1980; Purkey & Smith, 1982; Wood 
& Thompson, 1980)* In the present study emphasis was 
placed upon problem-solving and team process skills* 

2* Administrative support and leadership 
strengthen staff development programs (Blietz & 
Courtnage, 1980; McLaughlin & Berman, 1977; Montague, 
1983/1984; Sweeney, 1982; Wang, Vaughan, & Dytman, 
1985)* In the Behavior Action Team in-service treat- 
ment, principals and assistant principals were in 
attendance; however, the principals did not actively 
participate in the Behavior Action Team meetings* The 
literature (Bridges, Doyle, & Mahan, 1968; Chalfant, 
1980) suggested that the principal could enhance group 
process by strong leadership support rather than through 
team membership* 

3* Contin ous in-service has been shown to be 
preferable to the one -shot approach (Hersh et al*, 1981; 
McLaughlin & Berman, 1977; Wang et al*, 1985). The 
Behavior Action Team in-service was a four-phase program 
that encompassed a three month time period 

4* The preference for on-site locati n of programs 
has been established (Brimm & Tollett, 197 ; Phi Delta 
Kappa, 1983; Willi ams, 1978)* Thr e e of tt. ^ rour 
sessions of the in-service in this study were conducted 
on-site * 

5* The type of activity used in the in-service 
presentation yields a positive or negati e effect* 
Preferred activities were active participation (Blietz & 
Courtnage, 1980; Boote, 1976), first-hand experience 
(Wood & Thompsc i, 1980), guided practice (Joyce & 



85 



Showers, 1980; Wade, 1984; Wood & Thompson, 1980), The 
in-service programs of this study utilized all of these 
preferred activities. 

It appears that the Behavior Action Team in-service 
programs incorporated essential elements that are 
consistent with effective practices* Yet, the non- 
participant group did not decide to utilize the inno- 
vation. 

Conclusions 



Based on the results and discussion of the 
findings, several conclusions were reached: 

1. A majority of teachers do not voluntarily 
choose to participate in problem-solving processes such 
as the Behavior Action Team. 

2. Team participation by teachers results in 
increased responsibility for the academic failure of 
students • 

3. Teachers who do not actively utilize innovative 
procedures with variant learners may require in-service 
regarding accurate perceptions of needs for use of 
innovative techniques prior to being instructed in the 
content or process of such techniques • 

Recommendations 

Based upon the findings of this research study, the 
following recommendations are made: 

1,. Participants in in-service education programs 
that focus on change or innovation need attention to 
prerequisite skills prior to implementation of the 
content phase of the in-service. Cunningham (1982) 
suggested a three -step process for change • First , 
information or experiences are introduced to change 
perceptions of self, others, and events. Second, the 
innovation is introduced. Third, on-going support is 
provided as the innovation is implemented. This 
recommendation is consistent with the hierachial system 
of Houlihan (1983) as it relates to the movement toward 
effective schools . Houlihan postulated that school 
effectiveness for all students cannot become a reality 
unless a hierarchy of social/affective variables is 
considered . 



88 



The lowest level of Houlihan's hierarchy deals with 
r^^lationships , the second with self-concept, the third 

^4.h attitudes, and the highest level with performance. 
Houlihan's three initial levels of variables are 
consistent with Cunningham's first step toward change • 
The results of the present study support the recommen- 
dation for attention to prerequisite motivational 
variables of teachers be f ore introducing content or 
information related to performance skills • 

2 . Involvement of the school adminis t rator during 
the in-service training and the initial implementation 
phase of a process such as the Behavior Action Team 
would encourage teacher participation and utilization of 
the process. It would also provide a prime opportunity 
for administrators and teachers to work together on 
curricul^^r and student matters. The combination of 
leadership, personnel , and curriculum/ instruction has 
been shown to be crucial in school effectiveness (Clark, 
Lotto, & McCarthy, 1980). 

3. Participation in and utilization of an innova- 
tive teacher collaboration effort such as the Behavior 
Action Team should receive credit toward staff develop- 
ment requirements. This incentive would perhaps 
encourage participation in innovation. 



87 



REFERENCKS 



Alexander^ C & Strain, ?• S, (1978). A review of 
educators ' r itudea toward handicapped children 
and the concv o f raaine t reaming • Psychology 
in the Schools 390-396, 

Bennis, W, (1966). ' .i^gl n g f)rganizations • New 
York: Mc6raw-H: ' ^ 

'*-»"z, J., & Cou .Tii; V > ^980). Inservice 
' 'dining for rtv . j-a e;«uc o rrs • Teacher 
. v c at ion and S p i ^lal EiMzatx oji > 2» 10-18 • 

BooLi^, S« (1970» Pr cipai and teacher percep- 
ti.os of special educ;? '>oi.' inservice programs for 
regular elementary te^^chi^rs (Doctoral dissertation, 
Tentple University, 1976,i . Dissertation Abstracts 
Int ernational , 37^^ lUk-llSk. 

Bridges, E., Doyle, W., & Mahan, D. (1968). Effects 
of hierarchial differentiation on group produc- 
tivity, efficiency, and risk taking. Adminis - 
trative Science Quarterly . 13 , 305-319, 

Brimm, J, L., & TolleLt, D. J. (1974). How do 
t8;^c?.ers feel about In-servicf education? 
E ducational Leadership . 31 , i21-525, 

Chalfant, J, C. (1980). A tea-her assistance 
n odel : In'^ s ervice training f o r teachers and 
administratcTn (U.S. Offici."of Education 
Grant No. 02G007801745) . Tucsl ? University 
of Arizona. 

Clai-k, D, L., Lotto, L. S., & McCarthy, M. M. 
(198C). Factota ass. jated with success in 
urban elementary schr.-Is. Phi Delta K appan, 
6i, 467-470. — 

Grand all , R, ( 1974) . The me^asu recent of self- 
esteem and related construct.. Tn J. P. 
Robinson & R. Shaver (Eds.), Measu res 
of social psych . loglv til attitudes ( pp , 45- 
67 ) . Ann Arbo :": Univ. ^^-sity o Michigan, 
Survey Researct Cent;tr, Institute for Social 
Research • 

Cuban, L. (1983). fectlve schools: A friendly but 
cautionary note. hi Delta Kappan , 64 , 695-696. 



83 



14 



Cunningham, W. G. (1982). Systematic planning for 
educational change . Palo Alto, CA: Mayfield. 

Dodd, J. (1980). Mains t reaming . English Journal , 
69, 51-55. 

Drucker, P. F. (1977). People and performance: The 
best of Pater Drucker on management . New York : 
Harper & Row. 

Edmonds, R. (1982). Programs of school improvement: 
An overview. Educational Leadership , 40, 4-11. 

Gage, N. L. (1984). What do we know about teaching 
effectiveness? Phi Delta Kappan , 66 , 87-93. 

Germain, R. B. (1978). Self-concept anc self-esteem 
reexamined • Psychology in the Schools , 15 , 
386-390. 

Guskey, T. R. (1979). Inservice (^jcation, classroom 
r^3ult?^, and teacher change (Doctoral dissertation, 

aive^iity of Chicago, 1979). Dissertation 
Abfl tracts International , 40 , 32 41 A. 

Gu&key, T. R. (.931). Measurement of the res.;)onsi- 
bilit;' teachevs assume for academic successes and 
lailures in the classroom* Journal of Teacher 
Eo catlm , ?2 , 44-51. 

Guskey, T. R. (1984). The influence of change in 
instructional ef f ectivf^ness upon the affective 
chai AC t eristics of te^^chers . American 
Educational R«^search Journal , 21 , 245-259 . 

Harris, B* M. (1980). Improving staff performance 
through in-service education . Boston: Allyn & 
Bacon . 

Kersh, R. H., C.tnine, D., Gall, M., Stockard, J., 
Carmack, M. A., & Gannon, P. (1981). The 
management of education professionals in 
ins tru e tionall;, effective schools ; Toward a 
researc i agend a . Eugene : University of Oregon , 
Center for S^ucational Policy and Management. 

Hersh, R. H., & Walker, H. M. (1983). Great 

expectations: Making schools effective for all 
students. Policjr Studies Review, 2, 147-188 . 



89 

o 

ERIC 



15 



Houlihan, G, T, (1983) • Using the right variable In 
measuring school ef f ectlveness • NASSP Bulletin , 
62, 9-15. 

Jones, L. J«, & Hayes, A. E. (1980). How valid are 
surveys of teacher needs? Educational Leader - 
ship , 37, 390-392, 

Joyce, B,, & Showers, B. (1980). Improving Inservlce 
training : The messages of research. Educational 
Leadership , 37 , 379-385. 

Lasley, T. J., & Gallowiy, M. (1983). Achieving 
professional status: A problem in what teachers 
believe. The Clearinghouse , 57 , 5-8. 

Leyser, Y., & Abrams, P. D. (1984). Changing 
attitudes of classroom teachers toward main- 
streaming through Inservlce training. The 
Clearinghouse , 57 , 250-255. 

Lortle, D. C. (1975). Schoolteacher; A socio - 
logical study . Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago . 

MacDonald, A. P. (1974). Internal-external locus 
of control. In J. P. Robinson & ?• R. Shaver 
(Eds.), Measures of social psychological 
attitudes (pp. 169-192). Ann Arbor : University 
of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute 
for Social Research. 

McLaughlin, M. W. , & Berman, P. (1977). Retooling 
staff development in a period of retrenchment. 
Educational Leadership , 35 , 191-194 . 

Montague, R. T. (1984). The perceptions of teachers 
and principals of the principal as an Instructional 
leader (Doctoral dissertation. University of La 
Verne, 1983). Dissertation Abstracts Inter - 
national , 45, 2943A. 

Phi Delta Kappa. (1983, March). I»xaervlce education; 
Practicqil applications of research; News letter 
of Phi Delta Kappa^s center on evaluation , 
development , and research , pp . 1-4 . 

Pratzner, F. C. (1984). Quality of school life: 
Foundations for Improvement. Educational 
Researcher , 13 , 20-25 . 



so 



ERIC 



Purkey, S, C,, & Smith, M. S. (1982), Effective 
schools — A review * Madison : University of 
Wisconsin, Wisconsin Center for Education Research, 

Rose, J, S,, & Medway, F. J, (1981), Measurement 
of teachers' beliefs In their control over 
student outcome • Journal of Educational 
Research , 74 , 185-190. 

Salend, S. J. (1984)« Factors contributing to 
the development of successful mains t reaming 
programs. Exceptional Children , 50 , 409-416. 

Shotel, J, R.» lano, R. P., & McGettlgan, J, F. 
(1972). Teacher attitudes associated with the 
Integration of handicapped children. Excep - 
tional- Children , 38 , 677-683. 

Stedman, D. J. (1983). How can special education 
be coordinated with other service systems? 
Policy Studies Review , 2, 113-130. 

Sweeney, J. (1982). Research synthesis on effective 
school leadership. Educational Leadership , 39, 
346-352. 

Wade, R, K. (1984). What makes a difference In 

Inservlce teacher education: A meta-analysis of 
Che research -(Doctoral dissertation. University 
'^f Massachusetts, 1984). Dissertation Abstracts 
International > 45 , 155A. 

Wang A. C, Vaughan, E. C, & Dytman, J. A. (1985). 
SK:iff development: A key ingredient of effective 
mains t reaming . Teaching Exceptional Children , 
1^, 112-121- " 

Williams, R, C. (1978). A political perspective on 
staff development. Teachers College Record , 
80, 95-106. ' 

Wood, F. H., & Thompson, S. R. (1930). Guidelines 
for better staff development . Educational 
Leadership , 37^, 374-378. 

Woodman , R. W. (1979). Effects of team development 
Intervention: A field experiment (Doctoral 
dissertation, Purdue University , 1978) . 
Dissertation Abrtracts International , 39 , 
5615A. 



91 



B.J. McGregor/L. Marrs 

National Rural Development, Ins witutn: 
Western Washington U., 3b9 Wilier na. 
Bellingham, WA 96225 



NATIONAL RURAL EDUC ION RESEARCH CONSORTIUM 



The National Rural Education Research Consortium vNf<cRC> 
was formed in 1984, in response to the U.S. Department or 
Education's Intra-Agency Committee on Rural Hciucation'a 
search to expand the data base of rural education researcn 
and identify a national rural educarion research agenca. Vhe 
Consortium is composed of rural scnooi Leacners and 
administrators p school board members » university faculty . ana 
state and local education agencies. Memoersnip in tne 
Consortium is FREE. 

The purpose of the Consortium is r.o facilirare ^he 
quality and quantity of rural education researcn. Tnis 
done by linking indiviauals with similar research mcarests 
and providing data oanKs of resources. Friese dara oaiiKs were 
conceived from a 1984 Consortium stuay • the firsr. 
comprehensive national effort z.o derive an empiricax data 
base for establishing rural ecii.»cation research priorities. 

The NRERC Data Base currently contains the foiiowinc 
five data banks, with other data banks under development. 

li A member profile data oank containing an abbreviatec vitci 
of all NRERC members. 

2. A research skills data bank listing members ' skills wmch 
they are willing to offer to a research proj^ect. 

3. A research interest data bank which links members with 
similar interests* 

4. A conference data bank containing lists ot members who 
usually attend particular national conferences to 
facilitate "piggy back" meetings. 

5. A sub3ect pool data bank containing profiles of scnoois, 
communities ana counties of potential research suD^ects 
and indexes by grade level and various categories, e.c:., 
ethnic minorities ana family income. This oanK was 
established to assist researchers in ootainmg qeoqracn.c 
genera lizabi 1 ity m their research projects or to oo*^ r. 
a needed population for tneir researcn. 



92 



EKLC 



These data banks and rheir potential use to rural 
education researcners and practioners will be snarea with 
participants as well as other Consortium projects. 

In addition, a study is currently oemg conducted oy me 
Consortium to identily ana prioritize actual < operational ^ 
research nypotheses and to seek comparative data amonc 
different individual roles, e.q., rural parents, rural 
administrators, rural teacner trainers, and rura^ ceacners. 
This study will assist the Consortium interest groups in 
estabiisninq researcn projects, the federal government in 
funding rural education research, and maiviauai researchers 
m selecting researcn projects. 

Participants will be encouraged to share thear input: 
regarding future directions of tne Consortium ana participate 
in the above stuay . Enclosea are a brochure fur* her 
explaining the NREftC ana a memoer profile form for memoersnip 
in the National Rurjl Education Research Consortium. 



93 



I 



10 
£0 00 



0 



Do you need us . . . 
We need you . . . 



P 



xz 
at 



> 

h 
in 



<QOEi 
Kg ^ 

<< 

0 

P 
< 

z 



TO PARTICIPATE IN THE 
NATIONAL RURAL EDUCATION 
RESEARCH CONSORTIUM 





84 



NRERC Data Bank 
National Rural Dc/elopment Institute 
School oi Education 
Western Washington University 
Bellingham, Washington 98225 



ERIC 



95 



OVERVe 

The NATIONAL RURAL EDUCATION 
RESEARCH CONSORTIUM is a collabo- 
rative team formed to facilitate the 
quality and quantity of rural education 
research. 



CONSORTIUM OBJECTIVES 

The primary goal of the Research Con- 
sortium is to facilitate i'jral education 
research by linl<ing rese.^ifchers with 
similar interests and providing data 
banks of resources. To m?et this goal, 
the Consortium has initiated the follow- 
ing. 

A. A National Rural Education Re- 
search Agenda was derived from 
a modified Delphi study complet- 
ed by over 500 rural school per- 
sonnel and others interested in 
rural education research. This 
Agenda prioritized needed rural 
education research and became 
the mechanism for linking in- 
dividuals by interest areas. (For 
example, all individuals interest- 
ed in volunteer training are linked 
together as are those interested 
in the effects of school board 
composition.) 

B. A National Rural Research Data 
Bank was instituted. The data 
bank is located within the 
National Rural Development 
Institute at Western Washington 
University. Consortium members 



ERIC 



9e 



may access the data bank by calling, writing 
or dialing an electronic bulletin board and 
receive periodic booklets containing data 
bank files. The following eight data banks 
are currently being developed. 

1. A profile data bank containing an alpha- 
betical listing of members' abbreviated 
vitae. 

2. An Interest data bank categorizing 
members according to the National 
Rural Education Research Agenda items. 

3. A skills data bank listing members' 
research skills which they are willing 
to offer to a research project. 

A conference data bank containing 
lists of members who usually attend 
particular conferences to facilitate 
"piggy back'.' meetings. 

5. A subject pool data bank which re- 
searchers can use for geographic 
generalizability of their research or 
to obtain a needed population. 

6. A needs data bank consisting of re- 
search requests from members who 
need assistance with their research 
projects. 

♦ 

7. A literature synthesis data bank on 
rural education projects and programs. 

8. A funding sources data bank idenii- 
fying federal, foundation, state and 
other funding opportunities for rural 
education research. 



Electronic bulletin boards on general 
issues involved in rural education and 
periodic mail bulletins of research 
progress and results are also planned. 

If you would like to become a member 
'^f the National Rural Education Research 
Consortium, be linked with researchers 
with similar interests and have access to 
the data banks, please complete the form 
below and return it to the National Rural 
Development Institute. There is no 
membership fee. 



NATIONAL RURAL EDUCATION 
RESEARCH CONSORTIUM (NRERC) 

Name: 



Institution: 



Address: 



City: 



State/Province: 



Zip: 



Phone: 



SpecialNet Code (if any): 

Check the appropriate item. 

I would like to become a member of 
the National Rural Education Re- 
search Consortium. Please send me 
the necessary forms. 

_ I do not wish to become a member 
of the Research Consortium at this 
time, but would like to be kept in- 
formed of its activities. 



97 I 



I^TICN^ RURAL EDUCATION RESEAHQl GUNSa<TlLM 



Member £Vofile 



Name: 



Institution: 

Address: 

City: 



For Office Use Chly 



State/Prov: 



Zip Code: 



Heme Phone: ( 



Bus mess Phone: ( 



) 



If SpecialNet User» code: 



Qirrent position and years of e3(perience in job positions : (Check 
your current position in the left colizm and >xrite in the nunber of 
years of experience you have had in each of the following professions 
in the right colum.) 



Current 
Position 



Years 

Exper ience 



Riblic school teacher 
Public school administrator 



Col lege or univers i ty facul ty member 

College or university administrator 

Local education agency official 

State education agency official 

Other: (Please list: ) 



Earned degr ees: (V\irite in degrees earned, institutions where the degrees 
were obtainecf and the s ta te/pr ovince of each of the ins t i tut ions . ) 

Degree Institution State/R: ovince 



38 



I¥ofes3ional experienc e: (Please sunnsarize in 50 words or less.) 



Areas of specialization in the last five years : (Please sunnarize in 50 
>MDrJs or less.) 



Recent publications and ^a: esentations : (Please sunnarize and attach up 

to five exaoples.) 



Research in progress and/or research interests : (Please sunnarize in 50 
vx>rds or less.) """" 



99 



Comninity activities : (Snnnarize participation in local, state and 

national activities in 50 words or less.) 



I usiially attend the following annual national confer ence (s ) : (Check 
all sppropriate.) 

Adult Education Research Association 
Aooerican Association for Mult and Continuing Education 

American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education 

American Association of School Adninistrators 

American Association of School Personnel Adninistrators 

American Council on Education 

American Council on ftiral ^jecial Education (ACKES) 

American Educational Research Association 

American Psychological Association 

____ Association for Childhood Education International 

Association for Children and Mults with Learning Disabilities 

Association for Sqpervision~Qirr iculun Development 

Association of Teacher Educators 
____ Council for Exceptional Qiildren 
National Alliance of Black School Educators 

National Association for the Education of Young Qiildren 

National Association of Elementary School ftrincipals 

National Association of Pupil Pei'sonnel Adninistrators 
National Association of Secondary School Principals 

National Association of State Directors of Special Education 

National Education Association of the Lhited States 
National Middle School Association 

National School Boards Association 

Rural Education Association 
Teacher Education Division of CEC 

Ihe Association for Persons with Severe Handicaps (lASH) 

Other (Please list full name of conference.) 



100 



Hie following nine categories (A- 1) r^esent general areas of rural 
education research. Within each category are mre specific it&rs re- 
lated to the cat^ory. Ihese itans will be used to link researchers 
with similar interests. Check any of the areas in \Khich you would 
be interested in participating ir. a research project , if your par- 
ticular research interest is not lAsted, write it in the "Other" 
space under the appropriate cat^ory. 

A. Rural School Effectiveness 

1. District col laboratioi/consolidat ions 

2. Service delivery systeais 

3. Leadership qualities 

4. Gurriculun outccmes 

5. aher: 



B. Governance and Finance 

1. Cost effective factors 

2. Effects of federal and state policies aiJi legal procedures 

3. Relationship of school expenditures to acnievement 
4. Alternate financing systons 

5. Certification requirements 

6. Other: 



C. Education Technology 

1. Availability of information services 

2. Staff training needs 

3. Goooputer-based instruction programs 

4. Other: 

D. Teaching Styles and Incentives 

1. Incentives for innovative programning 

2. Pay incentives 

3. Effectiveness of different teaching styles 
4. Other: 

E. Personnel Itaining Programs 

1. Inservice training 

2. IVeservice training 

3. Paraprofessional training 

4. Volunteer training 

5. Other: 



F. Personnel Recruitment and Retention 

1. Needed personnel rol^s by geographic areas 

2. Needs of preparation programs 
3. Other: 

G. School -Connunity Interaction 

1. School board cooposition 

2. GLiltural needs in curric\iliin 

3. Other: 



H. Career /Vocat ional Education 
^ Ir 'Bransitioii 

2. Indepenrient Living Skills 

3. Other: 



I. Rural vs. Non-Rural 

1. Student characteristics 

2. Non-schooling influences 

3. High school /col lege attendance/drop-out rates 

4. Other : 



101 



The following eleven areas (A-K) represen skills needed in conducting 
research. Please check any of the skills you wuld be willing to offer 
to menobers of a research project. 

A. Identifying funding sources 

B. VAriting grants 

C. Securing research subjects and. subjects' consent 

D. Developing a research design for: 
historical research 

experimental research 

descriptive researdi 

E. Constructing measurement instruxsnts for: 
^ performance assessment 

knowledge assessment 

attitude assessment 

^ F. Testing subjects 

G. Coding data 

H. Data analysis using: 

descriptive statistics 

bivariate/ANUVA statistics 

nultivariate statistics 

non-*parametric statistics 
I. Vfriting the research r^xjrt 

J. Disseminating the research findings 

K. Infiising the research findings in appropriate setting 

L. Other: (Please specify: ) 

In 200 words or lesSf suxxnarize your research experience with particu** 
lar reference to those items checked in Question #1U. 



102 



Che of the most iooportant aspects of this data bank will be the avail- 
ability of appropriate subject pools to meniDers of the Consortium* 
Ihese subject pools will consist of students, teachers and administra* 
tors of rural schools categorized by school and comunity profiles. 
For instance, if a team of researchers need sixth grade teachers 
in rural rooote areas with a school population under 300 for a re* 
sear ch pro j ect , they could check the Cbnsor t iun da ta bank and con* 
tact the appreciate individuals to seek their consent to partici* 
pate in the research project. 

To establish these subject pools vwe need your help. Individuals, 
like yourself, who are familiar with their local school systans are 
crucial in helping to identify appropriate subject pools throughout 
the country. It is not a time consuning task, but it is a vital one 
if we are going to facilitate rural educational research and use these 
research findings to improve practice. 

Please indicate vdiether you would be willing to help in this inportant 
educational research task. 

Yes 

No 



lhank you for your time in ccnpleting this form. Please return it to: 



National Pural Education Research Consort iun 
National Rural Developnoent Institute 
Vfes tern Washington Lhiversity 
Bellingham, Washington 98225 



103 



Dr. Dvenna Duncan 

Coordinator, Special Edi.if:«t ion 

Dr. June Canty-Lemke 
Coordinator, Secondary Education 

University of Portland 
School of Education 
5000 N. Willamette Blvd. 
Portland, OR 97203 



ERIC 



PROVIDING DUfiLITY SUMMER PRPICTICUM TO THE NON-TRPIDITIONAL 

fiND RETURNING STUDENT 

The major objective of this paper is to describe UP WlTH KIDS, a 
program by which a school of education can deliver a quality 
summer practicum experience for non-traditional students and at 
the same time provide an outreach community service. 

UP WITH KIDS 

UP WITH KIDS was designed initially to mc .'t the ever-pressing 
problem of providing optimal practicum experiences for non- 
traditional students who wish to attend methods courses during 
the summer session. This has been a particular on-going pr.-,bler,i 
at the University of Portland, an urban university, where a great 
many students wish to complete a special education credential 
program, or Master's Degree Standard certification program while 
continuing their regular employment as a regular or special 
education teacher. 

In an effort to provide for these students and not compromise 
the quality of the program delivered, UP WITH KIDS was developed. 
UP WITH KIDS is a completely mainstreamed, three week, 
integrative learning experience for school aged children, 
operated in the summer by the faculty of the University of 
Portland. The initial program in 1984 accepted 100 children (£5 
from the special education program, £5 from the gifted education 
program, and 50 from the regular education program). Tuition was 
set at 5i50 and scholarships were made available through several 
local, private foundations to allow for participation .-.f minor H-v 
and underprivil edged children. In order to achieve a cultural 
Ijalance, brochures describing the program were distributed tr, 
public and private schools in the targeted areas; brochures were 
also sent to pediatricians and childcare agencies. The program 
was conducted in an elementary school near the University. 

The children attended the program from 9:00 a.m. to 1£:00 p rn 
Monday through Thursday, and were instructed by teachers fr.-.rn the 
area who had been identified as outstanding in their subject area 
by University faculty. The University faculty members also 

assisted in the instruction of the children by demonstrating 
innovative teaching tech.'.iques and state of the art curricular 
materials. The college students attending the methods classes 

attended lecture sessions from 8:00 - 9:00 a.m. and from 1 : OO - 
4:00 p.m., and ware assigned to practice material covered with the 
children from 9:00 a.m. - 1£:00 p.m. 

104 



Each child enrolled in the program chose four classes tr. 
attend for 45 minutes per class each day. The choices wers made 
from the following offerings: working with computers; physicc^l 
education; drama; film-making; improving basic skills; music; and 
art. fill classes wre completely mainstreamed with children from 
the special education program, gifted program and regular 
programs, learning side by side; th3re was absolutely no attempt 
to identify or label the children according the ability groupings. 
Each child learned through the program to accept and appreciate 
his own strengths and weaknesses as well as those of his peers. 

Because of the overwhelming success of the 1984 program, both 
m the eyes of the college students and the community, there was a- 
two-fold expansion in 1985. fin UP WITH KIDS program wrs held 

again in Portland and focused upon the urban elementary aged 
child. This program emphasized multi-cultural and integrative 

education and was a model demonstration site for the University 
Consulting Teacher Model Program- fi second program took place in 
Redmond, Oregon, a small central Oregon community. This was held 
in connection with t\\B University of Portland's off-campus 
Master's Degree Rural Education Program. The Redmond program 

demonstrated the Rural Consultation Model and was open to 
students from K to 12th grade- Deati-e writing and -.cience were 
added to the course offerings for tha children- 

Because of the large applicant pool for the children in the 
program, the Portland program enrolled 1.-^8 children this year, and 
the Redmond program enrolled 117 student^3. The £5% handicapped, 
S5% gifted, and 50% regular education ratio was continued. 

For further information contact: 

Dr. Dvenna fi. Duncan 
Coordinator, Special Education 
(503) £83-7344 



Dr. June Canty-Lemke 
Coordinator, Secondary Educat ion 
<503) £83-7236 



University of Portland 
School of Education 
5000 N. Willamette Blvd. 
Portland, Oregon 97£03 



105 



Gail Raymond, Dean Macintosh 
University of South Carolina 
Box 57 

Columbia, SC 29208 

ABSTRACT 
Teacher Consultation Skills 

The purpose of this presentation is to describe the role of 
the teacher consultant. The presentation is designed for those 
special educations who will assist the regular classroom teacher 
in adapting materials and procedures to meet the needs of those 
students experiencing mild to moderate learning or behavior 
problems. Few teacher training programs provide indepth 
information about, or the development of, the skills needed in 
consultation, if there is such information available, far too 
often, the emphasis is on counseling, and not on consulting. 
This presentation is totally directed to consultation skills and 
the application of these skills. 

The design of the teacher conrultation model draws not only 
from the field of education, but also from business, medicine, 
mental health and the industrial professions. Professionals, 
such as business consultants, county demonstration agents, and 
grant preparation specialists have developed such skills. The 
need for consultation skills to bp developed for special 
educators is evident. If they do not have answers to questions 
asked, they must be able to know where to go and from whom to 
seek out alternative solutions. They often are called upon to 
work with difficult situations, to provide teachers and 
principals with infonaation needed, and to be the "expert in 



ERIC 



IQG 



residence". Usually these responsibilities are carried out with 
no professional training whatsoever. This presentation will 
provide knowledge and information in this area for the special 
education teacher. 

The teacher-consultation process presented involves three 
basic components: l) what To Do - the models, perspectives, 
methods, skills, and approaches to consultation; 2) How To Do It 
- The communication process; and 3) What To Say - Curricular and 
behavioral recommendations, planning, implementation, and 
evaluation. 

This presentation places the greatest stress and provides 
the bulk of the instructional materials on the area of 
consultation, communication, and the development of these skills. 
While these areas are the foundation for the consultation 
process, these are the very subjects that most teachers have had 
little or no exposure to and prior training in. For this reason, 
the emphasis must be placed hare. 



ERIC 



107 

2 



National Rural Independent Living Network 
Regional Workshop 
Seattle, Washington 
November 15-16, 1985 



CREATIVE USE OF LOCAL RESOURCES 



Bob Mobley, Executive Director /Administrator 
Wendell Foster Center, Inc. 
Owensboro , Kentucky 



109 



B. The Plan 



Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday 



20 


21 

Noon Lead- 
ership Mtg. 


22 

1) EstablJ 

2) Draft £ 
Civic C 

3) Establi 


23 

sh Theme/ S€ 
nd Print Vc 
lub Letter 1 
sh Mailing 


24 

t Goal/Acti 
lunteer Sol 
and Letter 
List 


25 

vities 
icitation 1 
to Companl 


26 

etter, 
es 


27 


28 

Noon Lead* 
ership Mtg. 


29 

Announce 
Leadership 
to Press 


30 

Mail Busi- 
ness Appeal 
Letters to 
Civic Clubs 


31 

Mail Busi- 
ness Appeal 
Letters to 
Companies 







Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday 



Second Month 













I 


2 


3 


4 

Noon Lead- 
ership Mtg. 


5 

Esta 
Geograph 


6 

blish 
ical List 


7 




9 


10 


11 

Noon Lead- 
ership Mtg. 


12 

Begin Me 
(now thrc 


13 

eting with 
ugh Busines 


lA 

Civic Clubs 
s Walk Week 


15 

) 


16 


17 


Id 

Noon Lead- 
ership Mtg. 


19 

Initiate 
(now thro 


20 

Fund Drive 
ugh Busines 


21 

Publicity 
s Walk Week 


22 

) 


23 


2A 


25 

Noon Lead- 
ership Mtg. 


26 

Begin Bl 


27 

ue Chip Lis 


28 

t Activitie 


29 

s 


36 



110 

o 

ERIC 



Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday 



1 


2 

Noon Lead- 
ership Mtg* 


3 


4 


5 

Mail Con- 
firmation 
Letter to 
Business 
Walkers 


6 

Mail Let- 
ter to 
Churches 


7 


8 


9 

Noon Lead- 
ership Mtg. 


10 

Mail Let- 
ters to all 
Business 
Owners 


Confirm 11 
List of 
People for 
Business 
Walk 


12 


13 

Organize 
Business 
Walk 
Packets 


14 


15 

Open House 
2:00-4:00 


16 

Noon Lead- 
ership Mtg. 


17 

Business 
Walk Send- 
off - Busi- 
ness Walk 


18 

Business 
Walk 
$ Press 
Release 


19 

Follow-Up 

$ Press 
Release 


20 

Follow-Up 

$ Press 
Release 


21 


22 


23 

Noon Lead- 
ership Mtg. 


24 

Late 

Follow-Up 


25 

Late 

Follow-Up 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 

Noon Lead- 
ership Mtg. 


31 

Wrap-Up 

1) Review i 

2) Plan vo] 

3) Make rec 
4> Close Be 


1 

esults 
unteer recc 
ommendatioi 
oks Decemb< 


2 

gnition 
LS for next 
iv 31 


3 

year 


ft 



111 




VOLU;; . £ER SOLICITA l I ul. 
BUSINESS WALK 




WENDELL FOSTER CENTER, INC. 

AC MR/DD ACCREDITED 
P.O. BOX 1668 - 815 TRIPLETT ST.. OWENSBORO. KY. 42302-1668 PHONE 502/683-4517 



WENDELL FOSTER CENTER FUND DRIVE BUSINESS WALK 



BOB MOBL£Y 
OFFICERS 

CtiMman. Board of Okoctort 

ALVIN W. RJCKARO 
Gfmai Eloaric Convany 

Vtoa CNaimtan 

RONALU L LOGSOON 

Audubon Aroa Community Sorvioot 

Sa cfota fy 

BARBARA BASKETT 
Parant 

Traasurar 

JOE TANNER 

State Parm insurance Company 

OtRECTORS: . 
DAVID AOtUSSOft 

Office of U.S. Sanaior Wandali H. Ford 

JAMES M. BROCXMAN 
Prescription Canter 

J WILLIAM CARNEAL 
Consultant Texas Gas Resources 

WHAYLON COLEMAN 
Owensboro Cnv Schools 

REX HARD150N 
Restdant 

HADLEY R. HARRINGTON 
Spaech Pathotogtst 

CARROLL E HOWARD M D 
"tysiaan 



•MICHAEL JARVIS. M.D 
Phv«iaan 

ANN MURPHY KINCHELOE 
Court Reponar 

KENNETH V. LAWSON. SR 
Reiirad 

MARK MAO OCX 

Ragu Foods, Incorporated 

LARRY R. MAYFlELD 

Central Bank & Trust Company 

JOHN MEDLEY. JR 
Quality Bears 

ADELLE MOBBERLY 
Parent 

RUTH STEELE 

MassiS'Clark Developmant Company 

THOMAS N THOMPSON 
Thompson Homes, incorporated 

WILLIAM THORPE 

Big Rivers Elearic Corporation 



Dear Friend of the Wendell Foster Center: 

The people of the Owensboro area have had a special commitment for the 
Wendell Foster Center. This has been shown in the form of money and 
volunteer services for the victims of cerebral palsy that are cared for 
and educated in the home-like atmosphere of the Center. 

The Wendell Foster Center is a private, non-profit facility dedicated 
to providing training and opportunity for its residents. The Center 
can continue to do its work only with loyal supporters. This year's 
theme is "Quest for Independence". 

The annual "Business Walk" will be held Tuesday, , 19 , 

Last year your firm provided "walkers" for this most necessary fund^ 
raising endeavor. Will you please help us again this year? 

For your information, we have listed the persons from your firm who 
participated last year. Our goal is to have at least 100 walkers — 
men and women. If you can prov; . more volunteers this year, we would 
be most appreciative. Many people, giving a couple of hours, make an 
easier, taster job for everyone. 

The walker's assignments will be arranged geographically so as to 
promote the task with efficiency and dispatch. As you know, the Foster 
Center Fund Drive Walk is well-structured and organized. Packets will 
be provided on the day of the walk and a fact sheet on the Center will 
be mailed to all volunteer walkers prior to the Business Walk, which 
will be kicked-off with a continental breakfast at the Center. 

We need two groups of volunteers, so if you or any of your staff persons 
cannot assist us on walk day, but would like to help we can use them 

for follow-up contacts on through , 19 

Please mail the enclosed post card no later than Friday, 

19 . 



Thank you for your kind support. 
Sincerely, 



Fund Drive Chairman 



Fund Drive Co-Chairman 



112 



ERIC 



-3b- 



Foster Center plans 
$180;000 expaiisiori 

2iS£5££?"^"*'^ " - facility '/operating expenses, al- 

Onicials at the Weiiddi Foster Coh "^"i? fmandal assistance wiO be 
ter have announced plans for a new in-'. ^l^V^"^ lower-income paUents; 

;dependcnl living fadlity. that could Maddoxsaid. 
double partidpatioo in the center's . He said construction of the facflity 

. present prograuL *• * . * ; : will be financed largely through the ; 

' Mark Maddox, chairman of the ceih . cpj)ter*s annual fund drive,* scheduled 

/ter '5 board of directors, unveiled ' for Aug. 28 to Sept 4. The center hopes 
plans for the $180,000 project the . to recdve at least $80,000 in donaUons. 
Owensboro Rotaiy Oub's wecddy lim- - The money raised during the fund 
dieon Wednesday. * **ve mU be added to %SOjm alread{y 

The new fadlity, to be constructed . earmarked for the project, Maddox 
on a lot near the intersecUon of Eighth * said. The center may take out a loan 
and Center streets, would provide liv-j to finance the rest of the project, he 
ing space for six patients and a fuD-'^ said. ' * ' 
time attendant, Maddox suid. Six otb- ' The facility, may open as eariy as 
er patients already live on their own next summer, Maddox said* and ap- 
in three houses near the center.* plications for living there will proba* 

The Wendell Foster Center is a pri* bly be available by next January^ A 
vate« 70-bed residential facility for team of doctors and counselors at the 
victims ofcerebral palsy. The center, • center will determine which appls- 
which operates on a non-profit basis, cants are best suited to Fiving on their 
offers 24-hour medical treatment and .own.hesaid.* 

patient counsding among Its many' The fadlity also may admit victims * 
services. of other aiilments, such as strokes.* to 

ParUdpants in the independent liv-.' ease their transition between hospital 
ing program will pay for most of the and home, hesaid.^i ^. ' 



-4a- 



113 



DELIVERY OF SPBECH-LANGDAGE PATHOLOGY AND AUDIOLOGY SERVICES IK RUPJO. AREAS 



A major part of any child's success in school is the ability to comr.iunicctc 
effectively. Adequate and appropriate communication skills are essential for n 
child's success in nearly all aspects of the school curriculum, e.g., reeding, * 
spelling, social studies, science, e"c. Children and youth who have speech, 
language, or hearing disorders constitute the largest number of handicapped 
children in a school district. 

In 1965 the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association established the 
Master's degree as the minimum level of professional education necessary to 
provide speech-lang' age pathology and audiology servf.cos. Unfortunately, 20 
years later only 24 states have adopted the Master's as the iriniuum level of 
preparation necessary for certification as a speech-language pathologist. Only 
21 states have certification for audiologists employed in the school. 

During the past 20 years there has been a considerable change in the 
complexity and severity of cases served by speech language pathologists and 
in the kinds of delivery of service models used. In the- 1960's caseloads v/ere 
made up primarily of children who had articulation disorders who v;ere seen in 
large groups. Today, over 50% of the cases have language disorders and art 
mu It ihandicapped and are served using a variety of innovative delivery models. 
Unfortuante ly, there are still individuals who believe that all children and 
youth served by a speech- language pathologists have articualtion disorders and 
can be served by unqualified individuals twice a week for 20 minutes. Some 
states that have the master's degree requirement for initial certification 
v/ant to reduce standards to the Bachelor's Degree on the belief that children 
and youth served in the schools in rural areas do not need services fror. a 
speech- language pathologist with a Master's degree. On the contrary, these 
prof ress iona 1 s need to be the be3t qualified because the do not have the 
support services available to collegues working in large school districts or 
in clinics and hospitals. An ASIIA study of bachelor's level speech-language 
pathologists in which they rated themselves on 3S competencies found then to 
rate themselves competent in only five of the 33 competencies. 

This session will provide participants with the following information: 

1. Skills, knowledge and practice activities of HA vs. HA sp cec h- 1 nn^uag e 
pathologist . 

2. Data comparing caseload size and m.ake-up bctv;Gcn 1961 and 19S1-S5. 

3. A comparision of traditional versus innovative delivery of servicc.*= models 
and program practices. 

4. Suggestions for delivery of speech- language pathology and audiology 
services in rural areas, e.g. use of supportive personnel, consu 1 tct ion, 
regular class programs, team teaching, etc. 

5. Data on current certification practices for speech- language pathologists 
and audiologists. 

The session wil be presented in an informal style to allow participants time 
to ask questions as various topics are discussed. Material will be presented 
using visual projections. 

Stan Dublinske, Director, State & Wednesday, April 

Regulatory Policy 



ERIC 



ASHA 

10801 Rockville Pike 
Rockville, MD 20852 




10:45 - 12:00 noon 



Wednesday, April 23 



Presenter: Rebecca K. Edmiaston, Ph.D. 



10:45 - 12:00 noon 



INREAL Implementation Coord. 
CDSS, Campus Box 409 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, CO 80309 



TITLE: INREAL Model for Rural Reunification 
of Regular and Special Educators 



Although rural areas are noted for their diversity, they face similar 
hurdles in providing effective educational services to handicapped children. 
The literature suggests the following issues regarding delivery of educa- 
tional services to handicapped students in rural areas: 



1. Rural areas have higher poverty levels than nonrural areas. 

2. Rural areas must provide greater percentages of local 
revenues for educational programing. 

3. Rural education systems serve greater percentages of at- 
risk and handicapped than nonrural areas. 

4. Rural educational services cost more than similar services 
in urban areas. 

5. Rural areas have difficulty in recruiting and retaining 
qualified educational personnel (Helge, 1984). 



Since the enactment of PL94.142, rural educators have grappled with 
the problems of creating the most f acilitative, least restrictive educa- 
tional environment for children with special needs. The effective imple- 
mentation of mainstreaming continues to be a problem for rural school 
districts as well as urban areas (Stainback^ Stainback, Courtnage & 
Jaben, 1985). A major reason for this failure is the lack of a unified 
educational service delivery system. This lack of unification can be 
readily seen in the following practices: 1) the dichotomy between 
preservice regular and special education creates the notion that handi- 
capped and nonhandicapped learn differently and require different 
instructional methods; therefore, regular educators feel ill prepared 
to provide instruction for children with learning problems, 2) educational 
service delivery is fragmented between regular and special education thus, 
causing a lack of educational continuity for special needs children, and 
3) little or no collaboration/consultation occurs between regular and 
special education. 

With the current thrust towards excellence in education for all 
students, regular and special educators must begin to pool their expertise, 
resources and research efforts to implement a unified educational service 
delivery system to meet the unique needs and characteristics of all 
students (Martin, 1978; Weiss, 1981; Reynolds & Rirch, 1982; Edmiaston, 
Heublein, & Weiss, 1983). The INREAL (INter-REActive Learning) mode 
for unification is designed to create a more meaningful alliance between 
special and regular educators in rural areas in order to provide effective 
education to handicapped and nonhandicapped children. 




ERIC 



HISTORY OF INREAL 



INREAL was originally funding In 1977 as an HCEEP demonstration 
Intervention and prevention program for preschool and kindergarten handi- 
capped, "at-risk" and nonhandlcapped children In urban and rural areas 
(Weiss » 1981). The primary goal of the project was to Improve the 
language and related learning skills of 3 to 5-year-old language handi- 
capped and bilingual (Spanish) children by a naturalistic, nonstlgma- 
tlzlng method In malnstreamed classrooms. This model was funded as an 
Innovative, demonstration program for the following reasons: 1) It was 
an early Intervention program; 2) It was a unification project which 
placed the speech-langauge pathologist In the regular classroom as j 
resource, auxiliary teacher; 3) the project was one of the few early 
Intervention projects that had an experimental research design; and 

4) the model was a strengths-based model rather than the traditional 
deficits model. 

Pre-test/post-test data found large and highly significant gains 
In communication skills In both INREAL preschool and klndgergarten 
groups. A three-year longitudinal study showed that children from the 
INREAL treatment group required significantly fewer special education 
services than those from control classrooms. In addition, the INREAL 
treatment yielded a highly significant reduction In the need for special 
education services even for children who were Identified as at-risk at 
the beginning of the study. Cost-effectiveness analysis showed an 
average saving of $2000 per child over the three year follow-up period 
for at-risk children from control classrooms; thus, INREAL treatment 
significantly reduced the costs of i^peclal education services. 

Since 1977, INREAL has been an outreach model program providing 
training and technical assistance at the preservlce and Inservlce levels. 
The original preschool model has been adapted for use In regular 
elementary classrooms In rural a\id urban areas (see INter-REActlve Learning). 

INREAL MODEL FOR RURAL REUNIFICATION 

The INREAL Rural Reunification model Is an Inservlce model whose 
primary aim Is to unify the efforts of regular and special education ir 
rural areas and thus decrease educational fragmentation for children. 
The INREAL model responds to current concerns regarding: 1) the realities 
of shrinking education financial support; 2) limited access to qualified 
professional staff; 3) improved learning experiences in the mainstream 
environment; 4) Increased referrals for special education services and 

5) decreased continuity between regular and special education. 

INREAL, a model developed from basic research on communication among 
children and between children and adults, facilitates linguistic, cognitive 
and social-emotional growth for at-risk, handicapped and nonhandlcapped 
cbxldren through a naturalistic child-centered approach rather than a 
traditional didactic approach to instruction. The INREAL model is based 
on the following assumptions: 1) all learners are capable of constructing 
their own knowledge; 2) effecting learning requires an interactive process; 



116 

2 



3) cotnmunlcatlon Is the medium for learning and language (spoken or written) 
Is the vehicle and 4) regular and special education systems must be unified 
to prevent fragmentation of student learning. Some of the model's key 
components include: 1) instructional methods based on the rules and 
principles chat govern genuine communication and conversation; 2) instruc- 
tional methods chat account for individual needs and facilitate collab- 
orative peer learning and 3) instructional methods with students that are 
a strengths-based approach, i.e., identifying the individual's strengths 
to facilitate meeting their needs* 

In INREAL classrooms learning is an interactive process. Success 
in school is directly linked to success in using language, INREAL is a 
communication-based program which employs a natural conversational 
approach in teacher-student interactions. In conversation, individuals 
intuitively follow certian rules or principles in order to make their, 
communication successful (Grice, 1975). INREAL educators apply these 
rules of conversation when interacting with their students (see Anatomy 
of a Conversation) . 

The focus of the interaction is always on the comprehension of 
meaning (intent) first, what is being said, and then on form, how it is 
said. By engaging in natural conversations and using INREAL reactive 
strategies with students, educators support the language learning process 
thus facilitating both linguistic, cognitive, and social/emotional growth 
of students. 

The learning environment created by the INREAL trained educator is 
readily responsive to the developmental learning level of the individual 
child whatever his/her age or handicapping condition. A match is made 
between the child's developmental level and the requirements of the task. 
Learning experiences thus draw from children's strengths rather than their 
deficits. By feeling successful as a learner, children become more 
active in the learning process md more willing to risk. 

In INREAL classrooms, learning becomes a collaborative enterprise. 
Cliildren's interests and personal experiences are brought into the class- 
room. The inclusion of child choice results in personal ownership and 
individual responsibility for learning. The educator is in a communi- 
cative interaction with children rather than a traditional didactic 
"teaching" mode. The educator shares the power of the classroom with 
students. Recognizing and respecting the competencies of each child 
encourages children to deal effectively with novel and challenging 
situations. 

In summary the INREAL model is based on a set of dynamic communi- 
cative and learning principles. The learning environment created by the 
INREAL educator is responsive to the individual/developmental needs of 
children regardless of age or handicapping condition. Thus, INREAL 
naturally lends itself to implementation in a mains treamed setting. 

INREAL TRAINING MODEL 

The INREAL Model for Rural Reunification provides individualized 
inservice training to regular and special education administrative, 
supervisory and direct service providers. The training process accounts 
for and supports educator change and growth over time. The INREAL model 



3 

117 



has been involved in the re-training of regular educators with special 
educators over the past five years. 

The INREAL Training Model provides intensive individualized training 
to both regular and special educators through the analysis of videotaped 
child-adult interactions. This interactional, rather than didactic, process 
utilizes the teacher's strengths to meet children's needs. The joint 
training process 1) increases the collaborative relationship between 
regular and special educators as ser\'ice providers, 2) increases the 
accountability of regular educators to students with disabilities, 3) 
increases ownership of mainstreaming programs by the local school(s) and 
4) increases the skills of regular educators to provide quality educa- 
tional programs for at-risk and handicapped students in the regular 
classroom setting. 

The INREAL Training Model for agency staff is somewhat unique in that 
INREAL/Outreach always wants to assure that someone on the agency staff 
is trained to the Certified Trainer level. This is critical for two 
reasons: 1) it is more cost-efficient for the agnecy to have training 
availabilty on-site and 2) the process of fully integrating the model in 
a service delivery program takes about two years and quality of follow-up 
is essential. When the agency has a local trainer, follow-up is, of 
course, most cost-effective and more continuous. The response of the 
INREAL Training Model has been remarkably positive because Trainees feel 
supported as they are making changes and because they find the information 
useful across all areas of their professional endeavors. 

The INREAL Rural Reunification Model addresses the hurdles faced by 
rural school systems in providing effective educational services to at- 
risk and handicapped students in mains treamed environments. The INREAL 
model has been used successfully by school systems to provide effective 
mainstreaming. The INREAL model has the training capability to support 
rural school systems in creating more effective mainstreaming environments. 



4 118 



REFERENCES 



Ed^niaston, R. , Heublein, E., Weiss, R. (1983). The Grand Junction 
Regular Education-INREAL Project (GRIP). 

Helge, D. (1984). The state of the art of rural special education. 
Exceptional Children , 50, 294-305. 

Martin, E. (1978). Preface. In M. Reynolds (Ed.) Futures of Education 
for Exceptional Students (pp. iii-vi) . Reston, VA:The Council for 
Exceptional Children. 

Reynolds, M.C. & Birch, J.W. (1982). Teaching Exceptional Children in 
All America's Schools (2nd edition). Reston, VA:The Council for 
Exceptional Children. 

Stainback, W. , Stainback, S., Courtnage, L. & Jaben, T. (1985). 

Facilitating mainstreaming by modifying the mainstream. Exceptional 
Children , 52, 144-152. 

Weiss, R.S. (1981). Irtervention for language handicapped and bilingual 
children. Journal of the Division for Early Childhood , 4, 40-51. 



119 



INter-REActive Learning (INREAL) 

INREAL is an HCEEP model demonstration intervention and prevention 
program for handicapped children. Experimental research has shown that INREAL 
significantly benefits children and significantly reduces costs of special 
education. Since 1977, INREAL has been an outreach model program providing 
training and technical assistance at the preservice and inservice levels. 
The original preschool model has been adapted for use in regular school 
classrooms, resource and pre-academic classrooms, and institutional settings 
for the severely multiply-handicapped. 

The INter-REActive Learning method is a nonstigmatizing, naturalistic 
child-centered approach. The "INter" is concerned with the relationships 
among all of the child's developmental areas, cognitive, communicative, 
social and motor. "iNter" is also concerned with the relationship of the 
child with the environment, i.e., adults, peers and the physical surroundings. 

The REActive part of INREAL describes an empathic, child-centered, and 
naturally conversational milieu. The use of nonverbal and verbal strategies 
enables the teacher or specialist to join the child at the child's level 
through genuine communication. By joining the child, the adult earns the 
right to become the child's developmental model and educator. 

The Learning component of the model is the result of a successful 
INter-REActive relationship between the cl;ild, the adult and the environ- 
ment. The educator is in a communicative interaction rather than a didactic 
"teaching" mode; the child and the adult are partners in facilitating 
growth. As the adult learns about the child, the child learns. 

The objective in using the INREAL model is to help the child 
communicate better. The premise of the INREAL model is that communication, 
and not correction, facilitates language, cognitive and social growth. 




UHAT IS INREAL? 



INREAL (INter REActlve Learnlnci Is a coinunl cati on-ba«(ed 
■ethod of learning. It Is a way to facilitate learning and 
language growth (oral and written) with handicapped people or 
nonhandi capped populations. The INREAL method can also be used 
In the learning or a second language. 

The INREAL philosophy of coBBunI cat 1 on Is based on the 
following preilses: 

- Coiiunlcatlon and language are learned because an Individual 
has a need to express soiething or has an Interest in what 
is going on. 

* Coiiunlcatlon and language are learned by interacting. 

* Coiiunlcatlon growth and learning occur best when feedback 
is non-*pun1 ti ve and non*]udgiental . 

- Coiiunlcatlon and learning are life-long processes. 

INREAL has identified seven strategies to use in natural 
conversations to facilitate learning and coiiunlcatlon: 

S.O.U.L. (Silence, Observation, Understanding, Listening), 
lirroring, self-talk, parallel talk, vocal/ianual lonitoring 
and reflecting, expansion, and lodeling. 

Several types of prograis have adopted all or part of the 
INREAL lodel: 

- Preschool Prograis (for handicapped heari ng-1 ipai red and 
nonhandi capped preschoolers) to facilitate language, 
cognitive ^nd social growth and developient. 

- Special Education Prograis to facilitate handicapped 
students (lild to profound) growth and developient of 
language, coiiunlcatlon, cognitive and social skills. 

- Regular Education Prograis to prevent language and learning 
problei with educati onal 1 y-at-r 1 sk children. 

English as a Second Language Prograis to facilitate the oral 
and written use of English by those just learning the 
1 anguage. 

- Parent Prograis for parents who want to support their own 
norial or handicapped child with language and coiiunlcatlon 
in the parenting process. 



EKLC 



(over) 



Residential Geriatric Prograis to Inprove the quality of 
Interactions between staff and residents. 

INREAL trainers can provide these services: 

Information about the comnunlcatlon process. 

Information about the INREAL approach to coanuni cation and 
how It nay fit Into existinq prograns. 

Training of educators, parents and staff In the INREAL 
process. 

Evaluation of training effectiveness. 

INREAL STAFF 7/85 



122 



The Anatoiy of a Conversation 

Successful conversations are necessary for i inpl ementi na 
coiinunication based education. Most people participate requiarlv 
in conversations without realizinq that there are rules and 
structure which underlie this common human behavior. Grice 
(1975) has described these conversational rules as "the 
cooperative principle- since as speakers and listeners we expect 
each other to observe them. Because conversational partners 
expect the rules to be observed, it is only when rules are " 
vio ated that they become apparent. Using conversation as the 
JfJ.rJ..!^'" necessitates becoming aware of the rules and- 

is .^'^ conversation. Some rules and expectations we have 
of each other as conversational partners are described below. 

1. You sincerely intend to communicate . 

2. You express behavior (verbal and/or nonverbal) that is 
meaningful to your partner. 

3. You or your partner introduces a topic to talk about. 

4. You listen and talk, taking turns. 

5. You comment on what the other person has said; the other 
person acknowledges or comments on what you have said. 

^' lit ?°I!u* "^H!"'"® *°P^^ of conversation until you 

tr. I ll^l Pf'"^^" finished or you ask permission 

to change the topic. 

7. You say what you think to be true. 

8. You don't say more than you need to say to have your 
listener understand. 

9. You attempt to make your meaning understood. 

10. You request information if you don't understand your 
partner's meaninq. ^ 

ISfoJmatioi^'^'^ ^""^ respond to nonverbal as well as verbal 

12. You allow your partner time to respond and you wait until 
your partner has finished his turnT 

13. You always learn somethinq you didn't know before. 



123 



(over) 



The essence of these principles is: 
-Mutual respect | 

-iiutual sharing | « Conmuni cati on 

-■utual understanding | 

Elizabeth Heublein. INREAL Prograa Coordinator, July, 1985. 



References: 

Goffian^ E. ^Replies and Responses. Language in g^ripfy , 1976, 5, 



^'^"IfS;''; ^ill^lnl Conversation. In d. Davidson and G. Harmon 
llyl'^' T^«e Logic of Grawaar. CA: Oickerson Publishing, 

Rowe, M. B. Pausing phenomena: Influence on the quality of 

203-224 journal of Psvchol i ncui c Research 1974, 3, 

'"''cilora3i"?e?;3resrj9?o: ^"P"'^^^^^^^ P*P«^ University of 



124 



Page 1 

Grand Junction Regular Education-INREAL Project (GRIP) 

1984 - 1987 ~ 

The purpose of the Grand Junction Regular Education-INREAL 
Project (GRIP) is to develop and evaluate a process model for 
unification of regular and special education in order to serve 
main streamed handicapped children more effectively and efficiently. 
The three year project will: 1) develop a unification plan for 
institutionalizing change in the kind of education services that are 
delivered to mainstreamed handicapped children and 2) develop a 
district training model for uniting special and regular education 
resources . 

Regular and special education administrative, supervisory and 
direct service personnel will be trained in the use of the 
INter-REActive Learning Model (INREAL). . INREAL, a 

communication-based process approach to facilitate learning with all 
students, is based on dynamic communicative and learning principles 
rather than on a traditional didactic academic curriculum. INREAL, 
originally an HCEEP model demonstration intervention and prevention 
program for handicapped children, has been adapted for use in regular 
elementary classrooms. Experimental research has shown that INREAL 
significantly benefits handicapped and nonhandicapped children and 
significantly reduces costs of special education. 

The INREAL model is based on the following assumptions: 1) all 
learners are capable of constructing their own knowledge, 2) 
effecting learning requires an interactive process 3) language is the 



125 

o 

ERIC 



Page 2 

primary medium of the educational experience and 4) regular and 
special education systems must be unified to prevent fragmentation of 
student learning. • INREAL model prepares educators to address not 
only "what to present" to handicapped and nonhandicapped learners but 
also "how to present it." 

GRIP will collaboratively organize the regular and special 
education unification process and evaluate its effectiveness by 
assessing the impact of the model on Mesa County Valley School 
District #51, Grand Junction, Colorado. Implications for preservice 
regular and special education will be derived from evaluation of the 
GRIP project. 



126 



Wednesday, April 23 
10:45 - 12:00 noon 

Presenters: Glenn 1. Latham 
Director, CEPH 
UCHP, UMC 68 
Utah State University 
Logan, Utah 84322 

Julia M. Burnham 
Coordinator, CEPH 
DCHP, UMC 68 
Utah State University 
Logan, Utah 84322 



Title: THE COOPERATIVE EXTENSION PROJECT FOR THE HANDICAPPED 

Since 1977, Utah State University, through a project sponsored 
by the Developmental Center for Handicapped Persons (formerly the 
Exceptional Child Center), and in cooperation with University Extension 
Service, has been developing a model by which the needs of handicapped 
individuals residing in rural areas can be served through the network 
of state and county Extension offices throughout the United States. In 
this presentation, service provider strategies, lessons that have been 
learned, successes and failures that have been realized, and suggested 
replication strategies vill be discussed. 

Though the services of the Cooperative Extension Project for 
the Handicapped are somewhat different now than they were at the outset, 
the model has proven to be an effective approach to serving the handicapped, 
and is presently linked with several other extension based programs 
throughout the United States, coast-to-coast and border-to-border. 

The presentation is supported by a variety of materials, including 
printed handout materials, directories, overhead transparencies, and 
thirty-five millimeter slides. 



127 



Wednesday, April 23 



1 



Presenter : 



Sara Holzman 
Portage Project 
CESA #5 

626 E. Sllfer Street 
Portage, WI 53901 



10:45 - 12:00 noon 



Title: 
PARENTS AS PARTNERS: 
USING THE PORTAGE MODEL OF EARLY INTERVENTION 



The Portage Model is an early intervention program for 
preschool children and their families. The model was conceived 
and designed in a rural area to serve children ages birth to 6 
years with developmental delays. The model's original purpose 
was to provide quality services in areas where scarcity of 
resources and distance pose obstacles. Since that time, the 
Portage Model of Early Intervention has been implemented with 
handicapped and non- handicapped preschoolers in both rural and 
urban settings across the U.S. and abroad. 

The Portage Project Model is a structured, data-based, 
individualized developmental program which utilizes parents to 
mediate an instructional program that meets the developmental and 
educational needs of their handicapped or economically 
disadvantaged preschool children. To implement the Portage 
Model, a home teacher conducts an instructional visit to the home 
one day per week for one and one-half hours. The purpose of the 
weekly home visit is to work with the parents on what to teach, 
how to reinforce, and how to observe and record behavior. The 
Project uses a modified precision teaching model relying upon 
modeling, reinforcing, corrective feedback, and written activity 
charts to provide parents with the necessary skills to 
effectively teach their own child. 

The staff has devised a curriculum guide, the Portage Guide 
to Early Education , and a guide for the parents, the Portage 
Parent Program , to be used as aids for instructional planning and 
implementation. Three to four behaviorally stated activity 
charts are written for each child each week. These charts are 
then used in the Portage home teaching procsss, which begins with 
obtaining post-baseline data on the previous week's activities 
and baseline data on new activities. The home teacher next 
dei!!onstrates the techniques for teaching the new activities, and 
the parent practices the activity with the child while the home 
teacher observes and provides encouragement. The parent and 
teacher then review activities and discuss new curriculum goals. 
The parent (s) and other family members carry out the activities 
throughout the week and are involved with planning the child's 
program. Evaluation is an on-going process with data recorded 
daily by the parents and weekly by the home teacher. An 
evaluation log is maintained on each child for data-based 
curriculum decisions and collection of long-term data. 




128 



During the home visit the home teacher includes informal 
activities and parent education activities. The purpose of the 
informal activities is to promote the generalization, maintenance 
and expansion of skills that both the parent and child have 
recently acquired. Activities are planned to resemble routine 
interactions between parent and child in order to promote 
generalization of parental and child skills learned during the 
Portage home teaching process. Informal activities are also used 
to assess the child's readiness for skills to be taught in future 
home visits. Siblings present during the home visit are invited 
to participate in these activities. 

The final part of a home visit is composed of parent 
education activities designed to permit the parent and teacher to 
plan curriculum activities, discuss information related to 
parenting, and share early intervention program information. In 
addition, during the parent education activities, the home 
teacher uses the Portage Project Family Action Plan to help the 
parent address their expressed needs using existing family and 
community resources. 




1 



ERIC 129 



THE m OF A H VISIT 




HiiO! PMENT, ME VISITOR, child 



Ti Activities directed at 
specific skill acquisition 
in all cohponent areas. 

1 The home teaching process 




/ CHILD/ SIBLINGS/ 
HOME VISITOR 

T! Activities to facilitate 

CREATIVE expression IN THE 
CHILD/ OPPORTUNITY FOR 
SPONTANEOUS TEACHING AND 
EXPANSION OF SKILL ACQUISI- 
TION THROUGH ■ 

T 



I I ni 



T/ 



I Through activities such as 

ART/ MUSIC/ CREATIVE MOVE- 
MENTS/ NATURE WALKS/ 
SNACKS/ ETC. 



TI Parents and home visitor 

WORK TOGETHER IN EXPANDING 
parent's KNOWLEDGE BASE 

and problem solving 
abilities 

This is accomplished byi 

1. planning weekly curri- 
CULUM activities 

2. sharing component in- 
formation 

3. sharing program infor- 
mation 

i developing strategies 

FOR dealing with FAMILY 

■concerns 



ERIC 



EMPHASIS IS PLACED ON THE HOHE AS A TEACHING ENVIMNMENT Ih 

Use of household objects as educational materials 
Daily activities as teaching experiences 



13i 



STRUCTURED ACTIVITIES 
25-35 MINUTES 



}bmi PARENT* HOME VISITOR* child 
HijAT: Activities directed at 

SPECIFIC SKILL ACQUISITION 
IN ALL COMPONENT AREAS. 

How; The home teaching process 



STRUCTURED ACTIVITIES 




DIRECT SKILL ACQUISITION FOR CHILDREN AND PARENTS 



The structured activities presented during the first part 
of the home visit provide learning opportunities for both 
the child and his parent. 



CHILD 

♦Structured activities help the child 
acquire new developmental skills in all 
areas of development, in a structured 
and systematic vay. 

*Structured activities are individual- 
ized to the needs of the child • 

*The presentation and techniques used 
with each structured activity are 
selected with the individual child in 
mind. 




PARENT 

♦structured activities help parents ac- 
quire new teaching and parenting skills 
in a structured and systematic way. 

♦Parents learn about: 

-presenting materials and getting the 
child to respond 

-reinforcement 

-correction procedures 

-observing behavior 
♦Parents are assisted in the use of the 
techniques through demonstrations by 
the home visitor. 



-4- 



132 



INFORMAL ACTIVITIES 
30-35 MINUTES 



INFORMAL ACTIVITIES 



Kho: parent, child, siblings, 
hone visitor 

What ; Activities to facilitate 
creative expression in the 
child, opportunity for 
spontaneous teaching and 

EXPAllSION OF SKILL ACQUISI- 
TION THROUGH • 

• MAINTENANCE 

• GENERALIZATION 

• READINESS 

• EXPOSURE 



How : Through activities such as 

ART, music, creative MOVE- 
MENTS, NATURE WALKS, 
SNACKS, ETC. 



A TRANSFER OF SKILLS 

The activities presented during the second part 
of the home visit are informal activities* These 
activities help the child and parent transfer skills 
acquired through the prescribed activities to the 
regular daily routine. 



CHIU 

* Informal activities help the child 
utilize developmental skills through: 
-maintenance 
-generalization 
*Informal activities provide the 
child with opportunities to use 
skills in novel situations and with 
a variety of materials, 
*Informal activities encourage the 
child to initiate and direct activities, 



PARENT 

* Informal activites aid the parent 

in generalizing acquired skills to in- 
formal settings. 

* Informal activities facilitate the 
parent's use of household objects as 
educational materials. 

*Parents are assisted in the transfer of 
skills by observing the home visitor 
use the skills. 




-5- 



133 



PARENT t FAMILY ACTIVITIES 
20-30 MINUTES 

Who: PARENT, HOME VISITOR 



PARENT & FAMILY ACTIVITIES 



Hhat ; Parents and home visitor 
work together in expanding 
parent's knowledge base 
and problem solving 
abilities 

How; This is accomplished by: 

1. PUNNING WEEKLY CURRI- 
CULUM ACTIVITIES 

2. SHARING COMPONENT 
FORMATION 

3. SHARING PR0GRA.1 INFOR- 
MATION 

1. DEVELOPING STRATEGIES 
FOR DEALING WITH FAMILY 

concern:* 



EXPANDING THE PARENT'S KNOWLEDGE 



The parent and family activities offer the Home Vistor 
an opportunity to eKpand the parent's knowledge base in 
many areas. These areas include curriculum planning, 
child development, and child management. While these 
activities do not have a direct and immediate impact on 
the child, hopefully, the information the parent acquires 
will reach the child through changes the parent makes 
in relating to him. 



PARENT 




ERIC 



*The parent and family activities help the parent under- 
stand their child better by learning what their child 
is ready to learn and targeting these skills. The 
parent also learns how to prepare meaningful activities 
to do with the child. 

♦The parent and family activities also help the parent 
understand the child's problem behavior and shows theni 
effective means tjo deal with the behavior. 

♦Parent and family activities also help parents realize the 
importance of regular health care including: 

- immunization 

- medical well-child checkups 

- dental checkups 

- providing well balanced nutritious meals 

♦Parent and family activities also help the parent address 
the needs/concerns that confront the family. This is ac- 
complished by helping the parent: 

- identify specific needs or difficulties 

- develop strategies for systematically confronting the 
problem 

- locate and utilize appropriate community resources 
to address the concern 



-6- 134 



Wedn*»<Jday, April 23 
10; 45 - 12:00 noon 



oguo colienle school 

11420 E. Limbcrbst • Tucson, AZ 85749 • 749-2235 
YEARBOOK I A RESOURCE ROOM ^.wtiE BUILDE?: 

r^^^^J^^^ pr«m«nt«tlon will out 1 in* th« building of a K-6th 

• «chool Hith an •nrollm.nt of 
ciiS^^Jr """^ f?^' •'=*'°°* l°«=-*««« in • .mail Arizona 

inC^Ci Ii'i '*„»'*«^-'^«=»'y^°^^ •XlllB will be laid out which can 
involv. all RMourc* Btudsnta to varying dvgrm. St»p by 
»t«p plana will ba givan to .how how aaaily thia can ba 
^T'l^^^l Vi.u.1. will .how th. aid. provides by 
siSiiSi'::,^*? •'•'P, i«»Pl-«nt tE. program! 

•Sf r • important banaf it Sf thi. 

bacaua. th. antir. .tud.nt body id.ntifi.. with th. 
book and r.iH,.ct. th. .tud.nt. involv«l in making it a 
rlTiiZr ^ T R«»ourc. Room .tud.nt. .njoy thi. attit^d. of 
laportanc. fro. th. on..t of th. y.ar whan 
«ib.cription b.gin to th. .nd of th. ^rhool'^JIIr S^^n 

-ctiviti.. .uch a. .alM, li.it.d photography, 
a fSw!' '=°^"'" **»»*g" ••l-ction to it«»li. ju.t 

.Kcit?n2*J!;??2'* pro j«rt in a .mall .chool district can b. an 
•Kclting buildiar of .chool .pirit which i. k.pt aliva .11 
ImL* ?!' *u *»»"^"» th. program .ra numarrous. On. 

tJ- ! \ * »P»cial aducaiion taachar i. forc«i into 

tnL^r^t?' 'fJu • ^•'^y profil. in t.rm« of 

iS2Ji?5?i2^ ■'=*'°°* population .nd b.com«s 

id.ntifx«i with a v.ry important total school proj.ct„ All 

«^JIJ"",.!5T »P»'=*f* aducation Bp.ciali.t. op.rat. in 
i«parat. littl. domain, .nd n.v.r bmiom. a p.rt of the 
mainatraam activitiw of the «:hool. 

.d-i J^'i' 4. i» Particulary appropriate for 

iSSlnn !-«=»'»'^»' -nd parant. who a"S int.r.»ted In 

JhSir^^e^ r:^* »*=*'°°^» importantly to 

^n»ir special education programs. 



Submitted by« Shari Stewart 

Tanque Verde Unified School District 
Agua Caliente School 
11<»50 E. Limber lost 
Tucson 9 Arizona 857^9 



Tanque Verde School District »13 

135 



Title: Research partnerships with Native Americans. . .Will the sneakers 
ever go away? 

Presenters: Lyle Frank, B.S. 

Bill Martin, Ed.D. 

Sam Minkler, M.Ed. 

Joanne C. O'Connell, Ph.D. 

Marilyn Johnson, Ph.D. (Facilitator) 

Address: Native American Research and Training Center 
Box 5630 

Northern Arizona University 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011 
(602) 523-4791 



ABSTRACT 

For decades. Native American people have been "researched", probed and 
Invaded by typically Anglo researchers Interested In documenting the 
mysteries of Native American culture. Popular lore reports that Native 
Americans are "tired of the anthropologists In sneakers who Invade the 
reservations during the summer and return to the sanctity of academla 
during the winter to write about the Indians". Native American people, 
however, are faced with tribal governments In transition. Federal 
policies of self-determinism have resulted In Increased efforts on the 
part of Indian people to become self-sufficient through tribal ly-based 
human service programs. Many tribes are now contracting education and 
health services from the Bureau of Indian Affairs and Indian Health 
• Services with the Intent of self-government and Improved service 
delivery. Tribes have only recently begun to actively address the needs 
of their handicapped population. Tribal governments are seeking 
assistance In defining the problems and Identifying systematic solutions. 
As with any marriage between research and service activities, discomfort 
pursues. Research with Native American people, however. Is particularly 
delicate because of a long history of distrust and the Invasion of privacy 
by the dominant society. The Northern Arizona University Native American 
Research and Training Center Is mandated to conduct research on the needs 
of disabled Native Americans. In the process of Implementing this 
mandate, liaisons have been created with Tribal governments and Indian 
people to cooperatively address the needs. Issues that will be discussed 
include: Native Americans as a part of the research team; tribal 
government structures and the approval process; securing local support for 
research projects; designing research projects and budgets for reservation 
settings; and discussion of three different tribal governments as they 
Interface with research projects. 



Wednesday, April 23 
10:45 - 12:00 noon 



13G 



Wednesday, April 23 



10:45 - 12:00 noon 



GLOBAL INTERACTIONS, INC. 
ORGANIZATIC^'f STRUCTURE 



Jerrie Ueberle, Sue Potts, 
Margaret Gardner, Ellen 
Gieszl, Betty Easley- 
Overbeck, Jeanne Clark 

Global Interactions, Inc. 

PO Box 23244 

Phoenix, Arizona 85063 



GLOBAL INTERACTIONS, INC., is a non-profit Foundation. A 
three mentjer Board of Directors r^resent the governing and 
management board. Hiey aire responsible for the planning 
and for directing the day to day operations of the Foundation. 



TOE BOARD OP DIRECTORS: 



Provides leadership and vision to the staff and constituents 
Ensures the financiatl viability of the Foundation through 

effective nonagement. 
Ensures that Global Interactions, Inc. operates with 

integrity and effectiveness. 
Establishes and uaintains domestic and international 

contacts with professionals, professional groups and 

other agencies that will open opportunities for world-wide 

ooninunicaticxi and understanding. 

POUR STAFF MEMBERS assist in carrying out the day to day 
operations of the Foundation. Hiey eire responsible for: 

1) developing and maintaining a caata base of 
prof^issionals, nationally and internationally 

2) managing of the exchanges, including invitations, 
correspondence, conmunications, receipt of deposits, 
billing and travel arrangements 

3) researching geographic and topical eireas for delegations 
that will further understanding and increase 
participation when abroad 

4) maintaining contacts with other organizatiais involved 
in domestic and international exchanges to promote 
the ccMitacts and shcure resources 

5) handling the routine procedures of the office 

6) maintaining current information on tlie International 
Bulletin Board 



ERIC 



137 



THE ADVISORY BOARD, represents a broad cross section of 
professions and businesses to include education, medicine, 
lav/, health, ooranunications, media and broadcasting, science, 
technology, resource development, computer technology, and 
management. 

The Advisory Board provides balance to the Board of 
Directors by assisting with decisions that keep Global 
Interactions, Inc. 's activities on the leading edge of what is 
occurring in the professiais and in exploring the 
opportunities for people to share the most current ard 
promising aspects of their work. 



THE DELEGATION LEADERS are professionals who have made an 
outstanding ocxitribution in their professional area. They 
are invited to lead a delegation of their colleagues based 
on their conmitment to the purpose of the exchange, choice 
of presentation topic, and their perscxial and professicxial 
experiences. Their agreement to lead a delegation is a 
OQnmitment to further the work of the Foundation by 
selecting colleagues who will pursue long-term relationships 
and mutual benefits between colleagues and counterparts. 

The delegate leader is responsible for the Exchange being 
successful and for promoting continuity from past to present 
and from present to future exchanges. 



THE DELEGATES AND THEIR OCXINTERPARTS are, ultimately, the 
ones who will make the most difference in achieving the 
purpose of the organizatiai. The delegates pay for the 
privilege of participating in the Exchanges. They bring to 
the Exchanges the best they have to offer, the promise of 
more opportunites to follow and the experience of 
understanding among their colleagues and counterparts. The 
deler^tes are the vital part of the organization because 
they will return to their jobs and be exaiiples to their 
fellow enployees. They will represent v*iat is possible 
through scientific, technical and educational exchanges for 
furthering worldwide conrtinicaticn and understanding. 



SPCNSORS AND GCNTRIBUTORS are individuals, organizations 
and conpanies viho believe in the vision and ocxicept Global 
Interactions, Inc., is conmitted to bring forth. Through 
financial contributions, volunteered time and promoting the 
Foundation their support enables the work to oxitinue. 



138 



Concurrent Sessions 
Wednesday, April 23 

1'30 - 2:30 PM 



139 



"Technology-based Solutions to Problems Faced by Rural Special Educators" 

Barbara L, Bowen, Ph.D. 
Program Director 
Educaticm A£fairs 



Microcomputer technology-together with the capabilities offered by telecomuunications and a wide 
variety of peripheral devices can be used by rural special educators to make teaching and learning 
more efiTective. This presentation will: 

Since 1983, The Apple Education Foundation/Education Affairs grant program has supported 
educators across the country to weave microcomputers into the fabric of learning and teaching in 
classroom settings. Fifty projects which have been supported nationwide. Of these, nine an 
projects in rural areas and six others address the students with special needs. 

• Describe several projects in rural schools which use microcomputers 
effectively to improve education in a variety of curriculum areas; 

"English Fluency via Computers" Yakima Tribal School, Zillah High School 
and Heritage College 

"A Computer Network for Gifted Science Students and Teaching 
Improvement in Rural Appalachia" 

Western Carolina University and 14 Rural North Carolina Schools 
"Speaking Graphically in Indian Languages" 

Humboldt State University and Four Rural School in Northwest California 

"Network- Assisted Instruction for Rural Districts" 

Chemeketa Community College and Four Rural Oregon High Schools 



Describe several projects v/ith special needs students that use 
microcomputers well to empower the learning and ftinctioning of 
these students; 

"Developing Writing and Word-Processing Skills Through Microcomputers and Access 
Technology: Tennessee School for the Blind and Vanderbilt University 

"Improving Lan^^age Competence in Deaf Students" 
Clarke Scha the Deaf and Smith College 

"CAI for Etea Jltiple-Handic2q)ped Youth in Rural Kentucky" 
Easusm Kentu^ Icy University and Madison County Schools 



A lif;t?ng of a database search of foundations which have supported educational technology projects 
will be made availrbHc to attendees. 



i-.zbara -own, .^rogr^m Director, 



Wednesday , April 23 



Education a: I airs 

A:.>ple Coia:;ute^.. 
^^•^65 Alvt:s Derive 
Cuoertlno. CA 95Q14 



1:30 - 2:30 pn 



1 



Janice Schnorr, Ph.D. 

Center for Excellence in Education 

Northern Arizona University 

C.U- Box 5774 

Flagstaff, Arizona 86011 

Marjorie Montague, Ph.D. 
Center for Excellence in Education 
Northern Arizona University 
CU-Box 5774 
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011 

Marilyn Johnson, Ph.D. 
Institute for Human Development 
Northern Arizona University 
C.U. Box 5774 
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011 



Title: Native American Training Programs in Arizona 

Bilingual/Multicultural Education (BME) represents a philosophy that schools 
should be oriented toward the cultural environment of all children and youth 
through programs designed to preserve and extend various languages and cultural 
alternatives. The newest educational term endorsed by the American Association for 
Colleges of Teacher Education (AACTE) and the National Council for the Accreditation 
of Teacher Education (NCATE) is multicultural education. 

Special education training programs across the United States have developed 
specialized workshops, courses and entire programs to meet the needs of bilingual 
students. Most of these programs focus on Hispanic (Spanish/English) populations 
because they are the most prevalent. Numerous studies have been conducted with 
these populations and much has been written regarding pertinent social and 
educational issues. Unfortunately, this data bank of information does not exist for 
less populous ethnic groups including Native Americans. 



. , Presenters: 
Wednesday, April 23 

1:30 - 2:30 pm 



141 



Bilingual/multicultural special education for Native Americans represents a 
unique ecological system that is not the same as bilingual/multicultural special 
education for Mexican Americans, Southeast Asians, and other populations of recent 
immigrants. The primary characteristics that distinguish Native Americans from 
other ethnic groups include the following: 

1. Native Americans are indigenous and many have strong attachments to their 
historical roots. 

2. Many Native Americans speak a Non-English language that has no orthographic 
component 

3. Relatively few Native Americans have oral and written language skills in both 
dieir native language and English. 

These characteristics require a unique approach to the training of special 
education teachers. A standard curriculum in bilingual/multicultural education 
would be insufficie^iL The Native American training programs at Northern Arizona 
University (NAU) reflect this philosophy. The programs include the Navajo Special 
Education Teacher Development Program (Navajo Special Education Program) and 
Pursuing Education And Knowledg for Service (Project PEAKS). This presentation 
will focus on: a) the Navajo Special Education Teacher Development Program at 
Northern Arizona University, b) a d'^scription of the Bilingual/Multicultural special 
education course developed for the Navajo Special Education Teacher Development 
Program , and c) Project PEAKS, another Native American Training Program at 
Northern Arizona University. 

Navajo Special Education Tt ^velopment Program 

The Navajo Special Education Program, initiated at Northern Arizona University in 
1980, is a continuation of the Navajo Tribe's effort to train a selected number of 
Navajo teachers in special education. Since 1979, the Navajo Tribal Government, in 
cooperation with Northern Arizona University, has been developing and utilizing a 
model to successfully meet the needs of handicapped children and youth on the 
Navajo Reservation. The Navajo Tribe has received funding from the U.S. 
Department of Education, Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, for 
this graduate level teacher training program. 

Over the past decade, a strong and positive relationship has developed between 
the Navajo Tribe and Northern Arizona University, first in the area of training Navajo 



142 



I 

EKLC 



3 

and non-Navajo individuals for elementary or secondary teaching certificates, and 
more recently, in providing specialized training in special education. Northern 
Arizona University provides a field-based onsite program in various locations on the 
reservation during the academic year and classes on its main campus in Ragstaff 
during the sunmier. ITie project provides tuition payments for participants during 
the academic year, and the Navajo Tribe provides scholarships during the summer 
sessions for program participants. 

Needs Addressed bv the Pmiect 

The fundamental needs for the NSETDP are: 

1) the large percentage of Navajo students placed in special education programs 

2) the critical shortage of qualified Navajo special educators 

There are over 61,000 Navajo students enrolled in four educational systems 
(Public, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Mission and Contract, and Headstart Preschool) on 
the Navajo Indian Reservation. Through surveys (written questionnaires and 
telephone conmiunications), monitoring site visits. State Department of Education 
publications (Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah), and studies performed by the Navajo 
Division of Education, Navajo Community College, and individual school districts, the 
number of Navajo students identified as receiving special education services is 4^00, 
representing 7 percent of the total Navajo student population. Projection of the 
unserved population however, might double this figure. 

Among the identified and potential Navajo special education students, learning 
disabilities was the major handicapping condition. The Navajo Tribe firmly believes 
that linguistic and cultural differences contribute to Navajo students being labeled 
learning disabled Next in prevalence to the learning disabilities category are speech 
impairment and mental retardation. Data from the survey of the special education 
population (NDOE/NCC-DCHD 1983) revealed that of all handicapped Navajo 
>oungsters, 49% are identified as Learning Disabled, 16% as Mentally Retarded, 15% 
as Speech Impaired, 10% as Visually Impaired, andlO% as Emotionally Handicapped, 
Hearing Impaired, Qrthopedically Handicapped, or other Health Impaired. 

The survey was a joint effort of special education assessment by the Navajo 
Tribe's Division of Education (NDOE) and the Navajo Conmiunity College's Dine Center 
for Human Development (NCC-DCHD). The survey substantiated that recruitment of 
Navajo/Native American special education teachers and ancillary personnel is a 
"moderate" to "severe" problem. Therefore, based on the NDOE and NCC-DCHD survey 



' 143 



results of Navajo special education students and personnel (1983), the NSETDP 
established the following goals:* 

1) Meet the unique needs of isolated, rural, bilingual/bicultural populations. 

2) Meet the underrepresentation of Navajo/Native Americans in the teacher and 
administrator special education positions. 

3) Meet the large numbers of unserved children, 

4) Meet the confusion between learning disabilities and linguistic and culturally 
different learning styles. 

The benefits to be gained by the NSETDP are: 

1) Over each three year period, 18-24 teachers would be certified in special 
education, thus reducing the special education personnel needs by 20 to 25 
percent 

2) Navajo professionals would be in a better position to avoid misdiagnosing and 
misplacing Navajo children in disability categories because of language and 
cultural differences. This is very important as Navajo language and culture 
are educational objectives of the Navajo Nation, especially since most Navajo 
handicapped students are bilingual and many start their education exclusively 
as Navajo speakers. Logic, rather than statistics alone, tells us that these 
children benefit more from instruction from teachers who understand the 
language and culture. 

3) The successful multicultural features of the program would serve as a model 
for other education agencies, particularly those concerned with Indian 
Education. 

The Navajo Tribe subcontracts with Northem Arizona University's Center for 
Excellence in Education for educational services, which include courses, instructors, 
and academic counseling. Personnel from the Center for Excellence in Education 
work closely with the Arizona State Department of Education and public school 
districts. 

The NSETDP begins with the view that Navajo/Native American degree holders 
abeady employed in education and/or related fields are excellent candidates for a 
Master's degree program leading to certification in essential specialities within the 



144 



5 

field of special education. This philosophy is further reinforced by the following 
observations (firom previous successful teacher training programs): 

1) Mature Navajo/Native American degree holders have akeady demonstrated 
both their academic ability and their employability and they are also more 
likely than non-Navajos to remain in employment on the reservation due to 
their natural integration witb the social and cultural environment 

2) Navajo professionals have the added advantages of not having to deal with the 
linguistic and cultural complications in both diagnostic and teaching areas. 

3) Navajo/Native American professionals can conmiunicate more effectively with 
Navajo parents on the critical issues of educational planning, parental 
involvement, and community support for programs. 

The Navajo Tribe has utilized the services of the BUENO Center for Multicultural 
Education, University of Colorado at Boulder, for evaluative and multicultural 
curriculum development purposes. The BUENO Center has provided external 
evaluation of the N^ETDP. 

The objectives of the NSETDP external evaluation are: 

1) To annually evaluate the degree of accomplishments of the project objectives. 

2) To evaluate progress in meeting the purpose of the project on an annual basis. 

3) To evaluate the impact of the project on the participants. 

4) To evaluate the effective use of the project's resources in attaining objectives. 

5) To evaluate impact of the project on relative programs serving handicapped 
Navajo children. 

6) To summarize and analyze all evaluation activities. 

The evaluation approach is one of formative-summative evaluation design, that 
is, the use of evaluation information for the improvement of operations and activities 
(formative evaluation), and the use of evaluation information that provides 
descriptive and quantitative data on the effectiveness and impact of project 
activities (summative evaluation). 



EKLC 



145 



6 

The courses that students complete for this program are similar to o*her special 
education courses offered; however, the content is modified to reflect the unique 
characteristics mentioned previously, A special course in bilingual/multicultural 
aspects of special education for Native Americans is offered as a part of the program. 
The rationale for course content is described in the following section of this 
presentation along with some examples of Native American comments regarding 
special education within some tribes. 

BME Course for Native Americans 

During the developmental phase of this course, pertinent issues related to 
meeting the needs of Navajo special education students were identified. Some of 
the issues included: 

1. Terminology 

2. Limited English Proficiency 

3. Legislation 

4. Cultural values 

5. Family 

6. Learning styles 

7. Professional resources 

Based on these issues, a course was developed by Janice Schnoir. The 
competencies of the course are listed below: 

1 . Demonstrates knowledge and understanding of the history and philosophy of 
special education and bilingual education. 

2. Identifies major issues in the U.S. Education/Special Education and Bilingual 
Education Interface. 

3. Demonstrates knowledge of P.L. 94-142 and Senate Bill 1 160 and awareness of 
related legislation judicial decisions. 

4. Demonstrates know^-dge of the cultural factors related to learning. 

5. Demonstrates knowledge of a variety of formal and informal assessment 
instruments for special education and bilingual evaluations. 

6. Demonstrates knowledge of selecting appropriate instructional strategies for 
remediation of bilingual special education students. 

146 

o 

ERIC 



7. Demonstrates awareness of community and agency resources. 

8. Seeks and shares professional materials and ideas. 

9- Demonstrates understanding of expectations and values held by peers, fellow 
students, paraprofessionals, parents, etc. regarding special education for 
handicapped individuals and specifically bilingual handicapped individuals. 

Since this course was specifically designed to meet the needs of special education 
teachers on the Reservation, the content focused on Navajo (1) attitudes toward the 
handicapped, (2) language used to explain handicapping problems, (3) assessment 
procedures for identifying handicapping conditions and (4) learning style 
preferences. This presentation will focus on the first two areas, Navajo attitudes 
toward the handicapped and the language used by Navajos to explain handicapping 
conditions. 

Navaio Attitudes Toward the Handicapped, LitUe information exists in the 
literature regarding Navajo attitudes toward the handicapped. A few individuals 
have explored Navajo beliefs regarding the causes of handicapping conditions. The 
noted causes typically relate to (1) a parent breaking a cultural ritual or code or (2) a 
curse cast through witchcraft Since insufficient written information was available 
for class discussion, a different tact was selected Students were required to explore 
parental attitudes and values in their respective communities. Each class member 
interviewed two Native American parents. One parent had a handicapped student in 
the immediate family; the other parent did not Interviews were conducted in the 
language which the parent preferred; some were conducted in English, some in 
Navajo and some in both. 

The interviews sampled a variety of information including (1) tribal affiliation, 
(2) age, (3) places of previous residences, (4) years of education, (5) commitment to 
traditional values, (6) knowledge of disabilities, (7) school responsibilities in relation 
to students who have disabilities, (8) perceptions of disability causality, (9) reactions 
to disabilities within families and (10) cultural or real stories concerning the 
treatment of individuals who have disabilities. The interview information was 
discussed in class. The purpose of the activity was to reject any one stereotype; 
instead, a model was developed that focused on a continuum of reactions that ranged 
from typical Anglo type reactions to traditional Navajo reactions. 

Anglo Type Reactions. Anglo type reactions were typically displayed by parents 
who had college degrees. Most of them were teachers or professionals employed by 



147 



the Tribal govemmenL Government employees tended to move more frequently 
and to live in towns or villages where a variety of specialized services were 
available^ These individuals recognized handicapped people; they had some insights 
into the medical causes of handicaps and they supported appropriate intervention 
models ( as advocated by PL 94-142). The most frequently mentioned causes of 
handicaps included drug abuse (marijuana and peyote) and alcohol abuse. During 
the past five years special programs have been established for children who have 
been diagnosed as fetal alcohol syndrome. 

Culture Switching Navajo Reactj^p^ This group included teachers, govemment 
employees and others who typically had at least a high school education* Again, 
these individuals easily recognized handicapped people; they had some insights into 
the medical causes of handicaps and they supported appropriate intervention 
models* In addition, these individuals periodically relied on cultural beliefs. Many 
individuals feel that modem medicine is limited and that traditional ceremonies 
have powerful effects. Several samples appear below. 

Mary had completed her undergraduate degree in special education and was 
enrolled as a full-time student in a graduate special education program. She was 
pregnant but confident that she could manage her studies and the baby. She 
returned to the Reservation to have her baby. Shortly, after the birth, the doctors 
indicated that the baby had some medical problems including a defective heart valve 
which required surgery. The surgery was successful but the baby still displayed 
other abnormal developmental signs. After approximately six months, Mary gave up 
on the medical doctors and took her baby to a medicine man. After several 
ceremonies, the baby improved and Mary was satisfied that the baby would be 
normal. 

Ella and Jim were driving to tovm when they happened across an accident. They 
went to the aid of the victims. When Ella approached one victim, she discovered that 
he was dead. Both Ella and Jim were upset at this discovery. According to Navajo 
culture, pregnant women should not view dead animals. Failure to follow this code 
results in serious ilhiess or death. The baby was normal at birth, but shortly after he 
became paralyzed. They sought medical assistance but no improvement occurred, so 
they took the baby to a medicine man. After three ceremonies, the child improved 
vastly. Today, this person is an adult and no symptoms of his paralysis arc evident. 

Traditional Nav^'o Reactions; This group included primarily Navajos who spoke 
Navajo and very little or no English. In addiaon, they tended to be older, had less 
formal education and lived in isolated areas of the Reservation. These individuals do 
not always understand what is meant by handicapped because the Navajo language 



148 



does not contain an equivalent tenn. Many recognize that some problems or 
handicaps are caused by alcoholism and intermarriage but they ascribe primary 
causes to breaking Navajo codes or rules. Some causes are listed below. 



If a mother puts one bag inside of another bag, she will have twins. 

If a mother views an ecUpse of the moon or sun, her child wUl be deformed. 

If a mother eats shrimp, her child will be bom lame. 

If a mother eats seafood(considered to be unclean), the baby wUl be bom without 
one of his limbs or with underdeveloped limbs. 

If a mother eats frog legs, her child wiU have a problem wittj his legs. 

If a mother attends a five or nine day sing, the chi! J wiU have problems. 

If a mother looks at certain reUgious sand paintings, the baby will be mentally 
and/or physically handicapped. 

If a mother attends a Yei-bi-chei ceremony, the chUd will have problems. 

If a mother sees dead animals, the chUd will have serious problems and may die. 

If a mother sees a dancer fall during a ceremony, her child v/ill have epileptic 
seizures. 

If a mother kills any animal or insect her child will have problems. 

If a mother thinks harmful thoughts about anyone, her child will have problems. 

If a mother uses a weaving comb with more than five points, the baby will have 
extra fingers. 

If a parent becomes inappropriately involved with a white person, the baby will 
be an albino. 

If the father yanks a fish hook out of a fish, the baby will have a cleft palate. 



143 



10 

If the father ropes cattle or horses, the umbilical cord will be wrapped around 
the baby's neck. 

If the father kills a snake, the baby will have a severe rash. 

If the father is careless about religious ceremonies, the baby will not be healthy and 
normal. 

The attitudes of various individuals were discussed. Group members agreed that 
as they work with parents in the future, it would not be appropriate to force Anglo 
values and beliefs, which in essence permeate PL 94-142, upon Navajos who are 
traditional. Instead, the group proposed to query parents during the Individual 
Education Process (lEP) regarding their attitudes and beliefs about their child. If the 
parents indicate traditional beliefs, the teachers will ask the parents if they know of 
any religious cure for the problem; if so, the teachers will encourage the parents to 
pursue this cure. The discussion of the religious cure is designed to be in harmony 
with nature which is the central tenet of Navajo existence. 

NavajQ TenninPlosy- Navajo is an Athabascan language that is highly descriptive 
and context dependent In some cases the same sequence of sounds can mean totally 
different things due to tonal differences. In addition the orthographic component of 
the language was only recently introduced into the educational curriculum. A 
bilingual curriculum is used in some schools but typically the curriculum is limited to 
the primary levels. Thus, some younger students are bilingual in written and oral 
communication modes. This, however, is not the predominent pattern for adults. 

Many adults are bilingual in the oral communication mode but most are unable 
to read the orthographic component because they did not receive instruction in 
it during their formal education. This pattern was evident amoung teachers enrolled 
in this class. Thirteen of eighteen teachers indicated good oral bilingual skills in 
English and Navajo. Of these, seven teachers indicated that they possessed some skill 
in reading and writing Navajo whereas the others possessed no skills at all. All 
teachers were employed on the Reservation and were frequently requested to serve 
as translators for the lEP. 

Numerous discussions regarding terminology were undertaken. During thee 
discussions it became evident that terminology varied considerably from one school 
district to another. The special education terminology list used was taken from a 
concept paper developed by the Dine Center for Human Development as part of the 
Communication Panel Media Development Project during January 1980. Samples of 

ERIC 



some of the tenns appear below (unfortunately the electronic reproduction used to 
produce this text lacks the capability of writing all the appropriate diacritical marks): 

Epilepsy 

Bitsoo'iilneehgo >aaninadiidaah doc nidadiitl'ish 
Danidiitsah doc bizhe^" ihaghaah doc nidadiitl'ish 
Bikee'doo' ei dine akot'ecgo ei t'aa'awolhi beech'eehdighaan 
Naa*anatlish doo nidadiitlish, aadoo lahda danidiitsxah doc 
bizhee* haaghaah. Bitsoc ' iilneehgo dah yaanidiidaah 

Trainable Mentally Retarded 

Taa bi*adaa akonidzin doo adaa*ahalye 
Nabidi'nitin yineeranigii doo t'aa bi 
Akonidzin doo adaa'ahanigii 

Bini' doo binitsekees baah dahaz'aanidi, t'aa bi adaa'akonidzin 
Doo adaa*ahalyaagi bee nabidi'nitin 

Teachers were also asked how they secured infoimed consent from the parents 
under a variety of scenarios. When parents spoke only Navajo, translators were 
used; written forms were not used Out of twenty-five teachers enrolled in the class, 
no one was able to locate any written documentation in Navajo that was used by 
schools on the Reservation. If the parents spoke English, the lEP proceeded 
according the the guidelines specificied in PL 94-142 and each respective district. 

These guideline were reviewed and teachers were encouraged to critically 

review the many forms. Semantic and syntactic analyses were conducted. Based on 
these analyses, many of the forms were rewritten. It was recommended that all 
forms for parents be re-evaluated to ensure that parents will be able to understand 
the contents of the forms. 

In summary, I would like to emphasize several points to remember when 
working with Native Americans. First of all, determine their beliefs regarding 
causality and cures for handicapping conditions; do not assuiae that their belief 
system is the same as yours. Incorporate their beliefs when feasible and offer Angle 
type solutions when aopropriate. Secondly, use translators but bf cognizant of 
translation inadequacies and syntactic and semantic complexity in written and oral 
communication. 

1 r: 



Project PEAKS - Graduate Training for Native Americans in Special Education 

Project PEAKS, Pursuing Education and Knowledge for Service, is a Master's level 
training program for Native Americans in Special Education. It is funded for a three 
year period by the Office of Special Education and Rehabilitation Services. Project 
PEAKS represents a coordinated effort between the NAU Native American Research 
and Training Center and the Center for Excellence in Education. 

Rural school districts located on or adjacent to reservations experience difficulty 
in hiring and retaining qualified Native American teachers. This program works 
with districts and tribes in identifying and training Native Americans from tribal 
communities. 

Students are identified via a cooperative effort with rural districts and tribes who 
need qualified special education teachers. These districts are asked to identify 
potential students want to teach special education in the district Individuals who 
have conmiunity ties and intend to remain in the community after training are given 
first priority. These teachers are contacted to determine their interest in the 
program. 

Students choose from two training options: (1) a certification training program, 
or (2) a Master's degree that includes certification. In addition to the training option, 
students select the schedule of training they wish to pursue: (1) summers only; or 
(2) sunmiers and academic year. The latter option expedites the training process 
and allows the individual to return to the conmiunity within a relatively short period 
of time. Students receive stipends to d'^^ray costs during training. 

Training programs lead toward certification in multiple areas of special education 
in order to meet rural school district needs for certified personnel for low incidence 
populations. All students participate in course work designed to improve their skills 
in relating to local conmiunity systems, interdisciplinary models of service consistent 
with local community values and the development of teaching techniques that 
correspond to specific community characteristics. 

Training focuses on preparation for teaching in rural reservation schools. 
Consideration is given to culturally distinct values and beliefs by tribal communities. 
Parent and community involvement in the education of handicapped Native 
American children encouraged. A course focusing on these issues is being 
developed. 



152 



In addition, Project PEAKS recognizes tliat student support is often the key factor 
in whether or not a student completes a program of studies. Students participating 
in Project PEAKS for the academic year have frequent opportunities to meet with the 
project director regarding their studies and other concerns. Students who attend 
summer sessions on the other hand, engage in an intense level of studies in a short 
period of time. The student support network in the summer has greater structure. 
Students, along with the project director, meet twice a week for an hour to resolve 
issues and concems and to identify university and community resources. 

Through Project PEAKS, we hope to train Native Americans in Special Education 
thereby reducing the critical shortage of qualified teachers on or near reservations. 



153 



CATHY GANGSTAD 

Staff Development Specialist & 

Curriculum Consultant 
Effective Orcja-^izational 
Development 

7122 Artondale Drive NW 
Gig Harbor^ Wastiington 98335 
(206) 858-319: (Residence) 
(206) 458-7777 ext. 24 (Work) 



THE THINGS THEY NEVER TOLD YOU ABOUT REPORTING CHILD ABOSE AND 
NEGLECT: WHAT EVERY EDUCATOR NEEDS TO KNOW 



The growing number of reported cases of suspected and actual 
child abuse and/or neglect impact today's professional educator in a 
very real way. Statistics tell us that one of every four girls and 
one of every seven boys will be sexually exploited by age eighteen. 
This translates into as many as six or seven sexually abused students 
in the average classroom. Statistics that include physically abused 
and neglected or maltreated children estimate that more than one 
million children are maltreated each year. Of these children^ 100^000 
to 200^000 are physically abused^ 100^000 to 250^000 are sexually 
abused^ and over 500^000 are neglected. Many professionals believe 
that these numbers are low estimates of the actual numbers of abused 
children. The more the professional educator increases his/her 
knowledge of child abuse and neglect^ the better prepared s/he will be 
to identify and aide the abused child who may be a member of the 
classroom. 

The issue of child abuse and neglect is an especially 
important one to the rural educator. Often ^ the rural educator will 
be unable to make use of support services that are frequently 
available to his/her urban counterpart. It may take a longer time for 
local child protection agency officials or law enforcement officers to 
investigate a report. The rural educator may also be expected to take 
a' more active part in the disclosure and evidence collecting procedure 
since s/he has immediate direct daily contact with the student. The 
result of these increased expectations is that the rural educator may 
often feel isolated and alone since there may be little professional 
and/or peer support before^ during and after the reporting process. 

Students in rural areas are effected by suspected child abuse 
and neglect differently than their rural peers. Support and therapy 
services are seldom within a few minutes drive of most rural 
locations. Depending on the size of the rural location ^ it may be 
difficult to keep matters of child abuse and/or neglect confidential. 
News travels fast in most rural communities. This is an especially 

- page 1 - 



Wednesday, April 23 
1:30 - 2:30 pm 



154 



important point for the educator to be aware of since confidentiality 
is vital in matters of abuse and neglect. A referral is only a 
request for an investigation, it is not an indictment or proof of 
guilt. 

There are a number of reasons that professional educators 
must, and do, become involved in the issue of child abuse and neglect. 
Perhaps the two most compelling reasons are teacher self-preservation 
and student survival. 

It is a fact that educators see and interact with children on 
a daily basis. In many cases, educators see children as much, if not 
more, than their parents see them. One study estimates that by the 
age of eighteen, students have spent 18,000 hours in school with 
teachers and other school personnel. (1) The school system provides a 
unique opportunity for educators to observe, compare, and contrast ' 
student behavior over an extended period of time. This continuum of 
behavioral observation is advantageous to the abused child allowing 
for the foundation of a solid data base of behavioral and academic 
functioning before, during and after the abusive incident occurs. 

The results of child abuse and/or neglect manifest themselves 
in ways that effect all students (those who are abused as well as 
those who are not abused) and educators daily. Abused students may 
exhibit signs and symptoms of abuse in a variety of ways within the 
classroom. Students may act out aggressively, seek an inordinate 
amount of attention from adults and peers, be verbally disruptive 
and/or abusive, withdraw from their peers, be truant, and/or begin to 
fall behind academically, all as a result of abuse and/or neglect. 
Many students from abusive or neglectful situations may be so 
concerned about what is happening at home, or what will happen when 
they get home, that they will be unable to concentrate on their school 
work. Such preoccupation has a direct impact on the student's ability 
to function socially and academically. 

Child abuse and/or neglect frequently has a severe impact on 
learning, causing significant learning problems and below grade-level 
functioning in key academic areas. Abuse and/or neglect can also be 
the source of student emotional and/or behavioral problems in and out 
of the classroom. Needless to say, the teacher who must deal with as 
much as one-third of his/her students who may be exhibiting such 
behaviors has his/her hands full. Even if the figures are as low as 
two or three students in every class, this still creates a classroom 
situation that IS potentially disruptive to the educational process. 

It is important for the professional educator to be prepared 
intellectually and emotionally to deal with the issue of abused 
children in the classroom because it is his/her responsibility to help 
students increase their academic functionino levels and successfully 
complete school. Building administrators and support personnel, should 
also increase their awareness since they are likely to become involved 
with the abused and/or neglected student who frequently breaks the 
rules or becomes so disruptive that s/he can no longer function as a 
productive member of the classroom. 

This perspective will help the professional educator increase 
his/her knowledge of the issue of child abuse and neglect by exploring 
the responsibilities and rights of the professional educator to report 
suspected child abuse and neglect as well as the basic signs and 
symptoms of abuse and neglect that often manifest themselves in 
observable classroom behaviors. 



ERIC 



REASONS FOR BECOMING INVOLVED 



There are a number of reasons for the professional educator to 
become involved in the issue of child abuse and neglect. To help 
built a common knowledge base it is important to acknowledge some of 
the reasons educators do and don't report or respond to cases of 
suspected child abuse. 



REASONS FOR NON- INVOLVEMENT 

Some educators do not report suspected cases of child abuse 
and neglect. It is important not to condemn these individuals, but to 
help them understand why they are not making the report as well as the 
importance and benefits to the child of making a report. Personal as 
well as legal reasons for reporting are discussed below. 

PERSONAL REASONS FOR NON- INVOLVEMENT 

There are a million and one reasons that someone does not 
report suspected child abuse and neglect. The idea of child abuse and 
neglect is repulsive. It is hard to understand how anyone would treat 
a child violently or neglectfully. In some cases, it seems easier to 
ignore the situation that to deal with it and the possible 
reprocussions that might result from filing a rep^'-t. Some educators 
do "not want to get involved" while others have a /ell-meaning desire 
"not to make things worse for the child". All these are actual 
reasons for not reporting, unfortunately, they do not abide by the law 
nor do they help the child. 

SOCIAL BIAS FACTORS FOR NON-REPORTING 

Many people still believe that child abuse and neglect is a 
problem that only happens in low socio-economic status homes or in 
homes where the parents are uneducated. Many communities still fail 
to acknowledge that child abuse and neglect exist within their 
boundaries. 

The simple truth is that child abuse and neglect, like mental 
retardation, can occur in any home regardless of the educational level 
of the parents or their socio-economic status. Doctors, lawyers, and 
educators have been guilty of abuse just like clerks, store managers, 
truck drivers, and lumberjacks. This stereo-typed image is often 
ingrained in rural communities that may not have resources to devote 
to community and parent education like larger more metropolitan school 
districts. 

Once the stereo-typed image of a poor, uneducated Ghild abuser 
has been dispelled, we can begin to work together to bring the issue 
of child abuse and neglect under control. 



- page 3 - 

156 



ORGANIZATIONAL FACTORS INFLUENCING NON-REPORTING 



Unfortunately^ many child protection agency caseworkers are 
overworked just like many educators are overworked. Many state 
budgets have been cut forcing fewer workers to handle an 
ever-increasing workload. The result of this situation is that child 
protection workers are forced to deal with child abuse cases on the 
basis of severity. The most severe cases are the ones that get 
immediate attention. This often causes the reporting educator to 
become frustrated with a system that seems unresponsive to student 
need. Reduced staff numbers^ along with the right to privacy of the 
accused perpetrator^ also makes the system seem unresponsive by 
impeding the flow of communication between agency and school district. 
It is important for the educator and child protection worker to learn 
to work cooperatively so that they can best meet the needs of the 
child. 

A second organizational factor that sometimes influences 
educators not to report is an unwritten school district policy that 
says "we don't have child abuse in this district, so don't report 
any". I believe that this attitude stems from the stereo-typed image 
that child abuse is a problem of the poor an uneducated. Educators 
can help to renounce this image by informing their peers and the 
community about the causes and frequency of child abuse. 



PERSONAL REASONS FOR INVOLVEMENT 

People enter the field of education for a variety of reasoni^ , 
One of the most often cited reasons is the desire to help children. 
Many educators feel a need and/or responsibility to help students in 
their classroom. Some educators believe that they must do everything 
possible to help end the pain and suffering of students who are abused 
or neglected. Others just have deep feelings of care and concern for 
other human beings who are in pain. 

Still other educators are caught up in the "messiah complex" 
syndrome believing that they can fix and/or cure all those in pain. 
As a result r they are compelled to become involved in the issue of 
child abuse and/or neglect. 

Many educators also become involved with abused and neglected 
children because they have a special empathy for the hurt felt by 
abused and/or neglected children. This empathy often results from the 
educator's personal experiences with abuse and/or neglect. S/he may 
know someone who was abused or s/he may have been abused as a child. 
Some educators will be very vocal about their reason for involvement 
while others may work quietly toward a resolution of the issue. 
Whatever their reason^ many educators feel a personal need to be 
involved in the issue of child abuse and/or neglect. 



LEGAL REASONS FOR INVOLVEMENT 

If the preceding practical and personal reasons aren't 
compelling enough to involve the professional educator in the issue of 
child abuse and neglect, all fifty states, the District of Columbia, 
and all US Territories require professional educators to protect the 

- page 4 - 



EKLC 



157 



students they serve by reporting suspected child abuse and/or neglect 
to the proper authorities. It is important for the professional 
educator to become familiar with the state laws and local policies 
mandating the reporting of suspected child abuse and neglect for 
his/her own state and local school district. In most states ^ lack of 
local policy and guidelines for reporting does not absolve the 
educator from his/her state mandated duty to report. 

While specific definitions and requirements for reporting 
suspected cases of child abuse and neglect vary from state to state ^ 
there are some common elements of legal definitions. In all states: 

- a child is someone under eighteen years of age 

- child abuse and/or neglect is non-accidental 

- the resulting injury is either physical or mental 

- the child is either negligently treated or maltreated 

- the injury is caused by a person who is legally 
responsible for the child's welfare... 

parent — guardian — baby-sitter — teacher 
(Someone to whom parental responsibility has 
been delegated to in a caretaker role, regardless 
of how temporary a time this responsibility has 
been given. ) 

- injury can also be the result of child-to-child abuse 
as in t>e case of rape or physical violence 

- adult developmental ly disabled persons who are unable to 
provide for their own protection are usually also 
protected under child abuse and neglect laws. 

Other common elements in state laws include; who must report; 
to whom a report must be made; and the content of the report. 



FEDERAL STATOTES/GOIDELINES 

There are three major federal documents that provide 
guidelines for the reporting of suspected child abuse and/or neglect. 



Federal Standards for Child Abuse & Neglect Prevention and 
Treatment Programs and Projects 

This document was generated by the National Center on 
Child Abuse and Neglect in 1973. It provides a set of standards 
of good practice for school systems and other child-service 
agencies regarding child abuse and neglect. This document 
provides guidelines for the following topics: 

- reporting procedures 

- treatment approaches 

- guidelines for achieving change 

- prevention programs 

- coordination of public and private programs 

This document can be especially helpful for school 
systems and agencies that do not have an established system for 

- page 5 - 



153 



dealing with the reporting and follow-up contacts of children 
who have been abused and/or neglected or for systems and 
agencies that are in the process -of revising and/or expanding 
their existing procedures. Appendix A of this document deals 
specifically with the educational system. 



Federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FFERPA) 

Passed in 1974, this Federal statute deals with the 
release of student school records. The purpose of this act was 
to protect confidential student information, including student 
academic, attendance, and health records, from indiscriminate 
review by those not directly related to or concerned with the 
student's welfare and school progress. The FFERPA requires a 
school obtain parental permission to release school records. 
This includes the release of records to other school districts. 

There are exceptions built into the FFERPA. If a 
"health or safety emergency" exists, parent permission does not 
need to be obtained before student records can be released. It 
is up to the school official, usually a building administrator 
or central office administrator, to determine whether or not 
suspected child abuse and/or neglect constitutes a "health or 
safety emergency" on a case-by-case basis. In states that limit 
the definition of child abuse and neglect to "child health 
and/or safety endangerment" suspected child abuse does 
constitute a "health and safety emergency" as defined by the 
FFERPA and records can be released without parent permission. 
Parental consent is not needed if school records are subpoenaed. 

Usually, the FFERPA does not have a bearing on 
information that is reported concerning suspected child abuse 
and/or neglect. Most reports are made based on the personal 
knowledge of the teacher and his/her personal working notes. 
These items are not part of the official school record that is 
covered under the FFERPA. 



Head Start Policy Manual 

This manual is the guideline and governing policy for 
all Head Start programs. It requires all Head Start programs to 
report incidents of suspected child abuse and/or neglect to the 
appropriate state or local authorities in accordance with the 
applicable state law. While it does not specifically apply to 
the school system, it does provide a useful and practical set of 
reporting guidelines and standards that are applicable to the 
school system setting. 



A SPECIFIC STATE STATUTE 

At this point, it may be useful to review the mandates of a 
specific state statute regarding the reporting of suspected child 
abuse and/or neglect. The value of reviewing a specific statute is to 
provide the reader with a basis for comparison and reference. Because 



- page 6 - 

159 



I am most familiar with the laws of Washington State^ I will use the 
Revised Code of Washington (R.C.W.) as an example. 



THE WASHINGTON STATE STATUTE 

R.C.W. 26.44.020 provides the legal definition of child abuse 
or neglect for the State of Washington. The statute defines child 
abuse and neglect as follows: 

"Child abuse or neglect shall mean the injury^ sexual abuse^ 
or negligent treatment or maltreatment of a child by a person who is 
legally responsible for the child's welfare under circumstances which 
indicate that the child's healthy welfare^ and safety is harmed 
thereby. " 



It further defines negligence in this way: 

"Negligent treatment or maltreatment shall mean an act or 
omission which evidences a serious disregard of consequences of such 
magnitude as to constitute a clear and present danger to the child's 
healthy welfare^ and safety," 



Needless to say^ these legal definitions can be interpreted in 
different ways. It is important for the professional educator to 
become familiar with the specific definitions of child abuse and 
neglect for his/hor state. By doing so^ s/he will better understand 
the parameters within which s/he must work. I recommend that when you 
are in doubt about reporting or not reporting child abuse you call 
your local child protection office and discuss the circumstances of 
your suspicions with a child protective service worker or law 
enforcement officer. After consulting with another professional who 
is familiar with the law and the signs and symptoms of child abuse 
and/or neglect^ you can jointly make a final determination whether to 
formally report or not to report your suspicions. 

A safe rule of thumb is: 

** When in doubts consult and report. ** 



DNIVERSAL GUIDELINES FOR THE REPORTING OF SUSPECTED ABUSE 

Just as there are common elements in the definition of child 
abuse and neglect between states ^ there are also common reporting 
practices that should be observed by professionals who have contact 
with children. It is important for educators to be aware of these 
reporting practices. This will help to simplify and expedite the 
reporting process for both the reporter and child protection workers. 



- page 7 - 



WHO SHOULD REPORT 



In the State of Washington^ as in most other states^ any 
person "who has reasonable cause to believe that a child or 
developmental ly disabled adult has suffered abuse or neglect^ may 
report r in good faiths such incidents to the child Protective Services 
or to law enforcement". For specific reporting requirements for your 
state refer to your state statutes. 

Those required by Washington State Law (R.C.W 26.44) to report 
suspected abuse and neglect include: 

- Professional School Personnel; including but not limited 
to, teachers, counselors , administrators , psychologists , 
support personnel/ child care facility personnel r and school 
nurses) . 

- Medical Practitioners: (licensed podiatrists , optometrists r 
chiropractors , registered or licensed nurses , dentists , 
osteopaths , surgeons , physicians ^ religious healing 
practitioners r psychiatrists , and dentists) . 

- Social Workers: (those providing social services to 
children^ adults ^ or families as an employee or agent of any 
public or private organization or institution. 

- Licensed Psychologists. 

- Registered Pharmacists. 

- Employees of the Department of Social and Health Services. 



Other persons / including friends , relatives and neighbors , who 
have reason to suspect that child abuse and/or neglect is occurring 
can also report their suspicions "in good faith" to the local child 
protection services office or local law enforcement agency. 



WHAT SHOULD BE REPORTED 

It is important to realize that reporting suspected child 
abuse means no more than requesting that an investigation be conducted 
into a suspected incident ot child abuse and/or neglect. Reporting 
does not mean that the suspected abuse is a proven fact/ rather it 
means that there is a qur^stion being raised about the state or 
condition of a child's well-being. No state requires the reporter to 
have proof that abuse or neglect has occurred before reporting. 

Reports concerning suspected child abuse or neglect may be 
made orally or in writing to child protection agency or the 
appropriate law enforcement agency. Reports should contain the 
following information: 

- the name, address and age of the child. 

- the name and address of the child's parent or guardians 
or other persons having custody of the child. 

- page 8 - 



EKLC 



161 



- the phone number of the parent or guardian, 

- the nature and extent of the injury or injuries ^ 
neglect, and/or sexual abuse. 

- any evidence of previous incidences of abuse or neglect 
including their nature and extent. 

- any other information which may be helpful in 
establishing the cause of the child's injury or injuries, 
neglect or death. 

* Especially important to report is any handicapping 
handicapping condition that may effect the child's 
ability to make a valid disclosure. 

- the identity of the perpetrator if known. 

By having this information readily at hand when you phone in a 
report to the correct local agency, you can help to make the referral 
process flow smoothly. Do not be concerned if you do not know the 
identity of the perpetrator. You may not know this unless the child 
has made a disclosure statement to you. It is the job of the child- 
protection agency and/or local law enforcement agency to determine who 
the perpetrator is and exactly what kind of abuse has been inflicted. 



WHEN TO REPORT 

Each state has different reporting timelines. It is 
especially important for educators and other child care professionals 
to be familiar with the reporting timelines for their state. Under 
the revisions to the child abuse law made during the 49th Legislative 
Session, professionals in Washington State who suspect child abuse or 
neglect are required to report their concerns "at the first 
opportunity, but in no case longer than forty-eight hours (48) after 
there is reasonable cause to believe that the child or adult has 
suffered abuse or neglect. (R.C.W. 26.44.030) For the specific time 
requirements of your state, call your local child protection agency. 

In Washington State, as in many other states, those who 
knowingly fail to make a report or cause a report to be made are 
guilty of a misdemeanor under Washington State Law. Consequently, 
professionals required by law to report suspected child abuse and 
neglect may face a fine of up to $5,000 or jail term. 



WHERE TO REPORT 

A report of suspected child abuse or neglect should be made to 
the child protection agency for your area or to the local law 
enforcement . agency where the child resides. The local law enforcement 
agency refers to the local police department, the prosecuting 
attorney, the State Patrol, the Director of Public Safety, or the 
Office of the Sheriff. 

In most states, this report can be made over the phone, in 
person, or by letter. Under Washington State law, you must make a 
written report (this can follow your oral report) . 

It is important to make sure that you are reporting suspected 
abuse or neglect to the correct authority. Confidentiality should be 
observed and maintained at all times when reporting suspected abuse or 

- page 9 - 

162 



neglect • This is especially true when reporting suspected sexual 
abuse. Remember^ a report is a request to investigate ^ it is not a 
conviction nor is it proof that abuse has taken place. For the sake 
of the child, and the parent, it is important to treat all suspected 
abuse reports with strict confidentiality. 



LOCAL (SCHOOL) POLICY 

Educators are also governed by local or district level 
policies governing the reporting of suspected child abuse and neglect. 
Every educator should be aware of his/her local policy regarding the 
reporting of child abuse and neglect. Many school districts have a 
specific policy statement and special reporting form that they require 
the reporting educator to file once s/he has cause to suspect that an 
abusive situation exists in the life of one of his/her students. 

If your school district does not have a specific policy 
regarding the reporting of suspected abuse and neglect, you may want 
to act as a catalyst and begin the policy making process by bringing 
the lack of policy to the attention of your supervisor or 
superintendent . 

An educator cannot be excused for failure to report suspected 
abuse by claiming that a speciiic district-level policy and/or 
reporting form was not available. State laws require educators report 
suspected abuse regardless of local policy or a lack thereof. 



GETTING THE INFORMATION TO EDUCATORS 

There are a variety of ways to pass information about child 
abuse and neglect along to staff members. My preference to to meet 
with groups of staff members, usually by building or working unit, and 
to present the information using a multi-media approach with as much 
teacher participation as possible. Such an approach allows educators 
to begin to build a support system within their building or working 
unit by laying a foundation of mutual trust, a common knowledge base 
and respect for each other. These factors are especially important 
when someone needs to make a report of suspected abuse and neglect. 
Often, just knowing that peers, and others we have daily contact with, 
understand what is going on and can listen intelligently will do much 
to relieve the apprehension associated with making a report. 



Copyrighted March 1986 
Cathy 0. Gangstad 



- page 10 - 



163 



Wednesday, April 23 



Presenters: Russell Hedge 
Co-Director 



1:30 - 2:30 pm 



John Simmons 
Co-Dlrec s.or 



Carolyn Martin 

Coordinator of Respite Care 



Willard L. Johnson 
Research Associate 



Infant & Early Childhood Intervention Program 
University of Kansas Affiliated Facility 
P.O. Box 738 
Parsons, KS 67357 



Cost-Ef f ective Rural Remediation Plan 
for the 
Developmentally Disabled 



The Kansas University Affiliated Facility (KUAF), at Parsons, it 
one of three UAF sites affiliated with the University of Kansas (the 
others are located in Lawerence and Kansas City). The KUAF receives 
federal funds for the purpose of providing exemplary services to 
developmentally disabled individuals as well as training for 
professionals seeking careers related to developmental disabilities. 
We will be discussing two of the programs included under the KUAF 
umbrella: the Infant and Early Childhood Intervention Program (lECIP) 
and the Respite Care Program. 

Infant and Early Childhood Intervention Program 

Developmentally delayed children create problems for their 
parents from the time of their birth. When the child has complex o: 
numerous medical problems does not start to walk or talk when he o: 
she is supposed to. has problems eating, etc., the parenting role 
changes, and parents need help and answers. 

E<!rly identification and intervention has been effective in 
iin[)vovir.z the progress and outcome for many DD children. If nothin- 
elsc^ ii involves the child with persons who know how to work wit!, t!- 
rhlld tu hell) him develop. According to Jordon. Hayden, Karnes, nnc 
Wood (1977). programs providing early educational and therapeutic 
programming to meet the needs of young handicapped children and thf-iv 
families are redu:ing the number of children who will need intensive 
or long term help. ...with early help, the sooner tlie better, these 
children can often function at higher levels than has been dreamed 
possible in prior years. 




ERIC 



Unfonanately. early Identification intervention programs are not 
readily avail'>ble in rural Kansas. There is not a homogeneous group 
of DD children. Distance and cost are formidable barriers to program 
development. Pare \ groups are hard to establish. Access to the 
variety of professionals needed to effectively manage and program a DD 
child is limited. The lECIP is an attempt to address these problems. 

The Infant & Early Childhood Intervention Program began as a 
interprofessional, interagency program between the KUAF and existing 
service agencies involved with developmental ly delayed children and 
their families, in a sparsely populated, rural areri, of Southeast 
Kansas. The program involved the child's physician, county Public 
Health nurses, social and rehabilitative services social workers, 
public and independent school personnel. Mental Health Department 
psychologists and counselors, and the child's parents. Initially, we 
informed and trained each other in regard to functions and roles. The 
KCAF educated Its sister agencies regarding the need to provide 
developmental ly delayed children appropriate medical and educational 
procedures and • therapies as soon after birth as possible. 

We decided each agency wouM act as a broker for children 
initially identified by that agency. In other words, the agency would 
direct the children to other needed services provided by its sister 
agencies. 

At first, KUAF staff were primarily Interested In initiating 
procedures for identifvlng developmental ly delayed or at risk Infants 
at birth, however, the other agencies expressed their concern with the 
needv of existing developmt itally delayed children in their 
communities wno were not receiving help. At that time, (approximately 
10 yrs. ago) in our region of the state, parents of even identifiable 
DD children), such as Downs Syndrome, were not informed of their 
child's problem until the ciiild was two to three years old. Then, the 
child was directed to a state institution. Thus, their was a need to 
provide services for children regardless of age. 

We fi!'i>r attempted a tra '^disciplinary training service 
mad«-:. Tlie remnants of this model continue In the ^ eas of behavioral 
mcinjagement . social work, self help, early speech and language 
trftir.iiig. and parent involvement. However, today, the basic system 
lias st>Li;ti workers doing social work, speech therapl-:ts training 
speech and language techniques, psychologist dealing with behavioral 
problffms, and so on. The main persons actually involved in the 
transdiscipl inary training are the child's parents. 

' ■ inemi Hes . Their rJie some IG basic ;v»*ni!sf's fii the ir.CTP. 
Tiiese as follows: 

1) When parents think there is something wrong with hio or her 
child, we will work with them to discover if there is a problem. 

2) Our purpose is not to diagnose or name the child's condition; 
uarit to determine where tlie cliild Is deve 1 opmen t a 1 1 y , identify 



165 



and eliminate factors impeding the child's ability lu develop, 
learn how to best teach the child, and take tlir clii M Toward 
developmental ly— we do not concern the parent with where the 
child should be. 

3) It is important to initiate remediation on a developmental 
problem as early in a child's life as possible. 

4) The child's parents are the authority on their child, and 
they are our peers; it is their responsibility to raise their 
child, not ours - we work with each other. 

5) The child's parents, their attitudes, and the environment 
have the long term, overriding effect on the child's development 
and eventual outcome. 

6) Parents do many things right for a special child without 
intervention . 

7) Parents are capable of training DD children in most areas of 
learning with direction and information from other experienced 
professionals . 

3) For continuity in long term learning, for contii-iity of 
programming, for intensive training, for maintf-.nanct and 
generalization of learned skills, and for an affordable 
program, we believe the child's parents are the best 
teachers the DD child will ever have. 

9) We never tell the parents we will teach their child; we do 
train the parents what and how to teach their own child. 

10) DD children have problems synthesizing the separate skills 
they are taught for effective application. 

11) The most important need of a special child is environmental 
adaptation - to train the child to exist and fiinrti<in in his home 
environment (home, grocery stores, restaiira.'il-* . i::n\ .-s theaters, 
churches, ere.) Next con:es rending, writing .':n«! 1 1 hn:et it-. 

12) The child's rate of progr-ess determines ou!- ••'•J-.* t i ves and 
i:"^ils; il ;;ii::os>»-'S ;iiid [prognosis r::'p ke;jt tr:?nt jjt. j ve. 

13) The child's improvement :s based on time ; th^ r*'!;oi:i:t of 
rime 5ri»er.l in one on one training experiences f\X t!ir- ( hi Id's 
l<-;!rniiiit -eve] is a crucial factor in determi n i .'i^ \::r iliiltl's 
progress . 

24) We are involved with the child for a Imv^ r« .-m; 
consequently, we emphasize continuity in progrannniiip. 

:r.) Learning should take place where it can w-i\i\i and 
generalized . 



188 



16) Programs which take the DD child away from the places and 
persons instrumental in the chlldS development are at 
best Ineffective and at worst destructive; such programs attempt 
to serve the DD child under the guise that professionals can do 
At better than the parents and with child being taught in 
situations limited in ti«e,and opportunities and separated from 
the natural environment— in some cases the parent is not even 
told what the child is being taught and parents are seldom 
involved in the training. 

De scription of lECIP Services 

The lECIP lb- an interdisciplinary approach serving the 
d^fvelopmental ly disabled population, primariiy ages 0 to 6 years. 
7he lECIP provides services in the areas of gross and fine 
perceptual-motor development, speech and language development, social 
work, and psychological services. The lECIP is available to the 
Southeast Kansas population at no charge to its clients. The lECIP 
is funded by the University of Kansas/Bureau of Child Research core 
grant and matching federal/state funds. The administrative cost of 
the program is approximately S200.00 per client, per year. This cost 
plus low travel to centrally located provision points for families 
makes the lECIP's parent training approach feasible and financially 
possible. 

The total population served by the lECIP is approximately 350 
children, adults and their fa«ilies- The program covers a region of 
15 southeast Kansas counties serving the families of children with 
disabilities. There are 18 provision points in specific cities in the 
region where weekly or bimonthly clinics are provided for the clients. 
Most of the clinics are held in county public health, mental health, 
social and rehabilitational agencies, and public/private schools. 
The lECIP team travels into the catchment areas to the designated 
provision points to serve the individual clients. In addition, when 
clients are ill, extremely young, or there are transportation 
problems, the lECIP staff provide services in their homes. This tends 
to alleviate the expense of travel that hinders center-based programs 
wi t!i lower social -economic clients. 

The lECIP model involves the development of parent competer.cies 
in implementation and evaluation of developmental ly/behavicral ly basei: 
intervention programs. Based on the principles of individualized 
programming, the trainer develops the godls. techniques, and materials 
for parental use. The program is geared to the age of the child, 
chronologically, physically, and emotionally. If a client is an 
infGnl. t!ip ;;:oo::,n! emphasizes motor and communication 
cevelopi:.t^:it. If the client is older, tho program directs itself 
toward sijI r-ht lij. communication, sensorimotor integration, and ^^ ho-jl 
readiness. Th.^ program also directs its effects toward aiding 
parents in handling the inappropriate disruptive behaviors of thei- 
chi Idren . 

Services delivered are specific tu the ulient's needs rji-u 
dii>abi 1 ities. The gross/fine perceptaa I ♦ mnt or L■o^l•l.u)nHn^ hrenky. W:-^ 



BEST copy AVAIUBLE 167 



specific needs into two areas of contact -* motor development and 
sensorimotor integration. Direct application of remediation is 
dependent under which level the client is functioning. The speech and 
language component encompasses the levels of pre-speech, and language 
receptive and expressive language, pre-academic readiness, and 
behavior management. The psychological component provides complete 
cognitive and adaptive behavior testing and instruction in behavioral 
management techniques for handling inappropriate and disruptive 
behaviors. The social work component offers parental counseling, 
behavior management techniques, respite v.are programs, and home-base 
intervention in crisis situations. The lECIP thus offers a full 
interdisciplinary approach to the rural-base environment through 
four components. 

The lECIP also Joins with the other support agencies in the 
catchment area to provide a comprehensive interagency network for 
complete programming to further meet the families needs. For 
example, if the client and family needs services from Social and 
Rehabilitational Services, an orthopedic doctor and 
psychological services, the lECIP contact might serve th: family 
in the role as contact for these professionals to provide these 
services. Other clients are referred from the interagency 
network to the lECIP. SRS, public health, and mental health 
make up over 45* of the lECIP's referral sources. Each 
professional service interacts with the lECIP to ensure that 
services necessary to the families are provided. Ste.^fings, 
consultations, and workshops are provided by the lECIP to 
continue and update the current services to the interagency 
network. 

The actual sequence of contact with the clients and their 
families usually occurs as illustrated in the following example. A 14 
month old cerebral palsied infant has been referred to the lECIP. 
First the intake information is taken by the secretary or 
professional. An appointment then is made at provision point closest 
to the client's home (or in the home itself, as explained earlier). 
This assessment session appointment is made with the professional in 
charge of managing the primary handicapping condition. The 
professional then becomes the case manager in charge of aligning the 
appropriate services necessary for the family. The initial 
assessment is the first block in building the foundation of education 
and therapy that the family will utilize in handling the client's 
disabilities. From the first contact, the case manager then decides 
what measure to take in the therapy and needs of the client. The 
client is maintained in therapy every one or two week period through 
the education of the parent. "Therapy" may be a misnomer, as parent 
education is the key to the lECIP. The individual therapist fosters 
the program that the parents utilize for their child. Thus the 
parent becomes the therapist. 

Contact between the therapist and the parents of the client is 
intense, with particular emphasis on educating the parents on the 
specific handicapping condition. The parent is the focal point of 
therapy. Children are not seen without their parents. The therapist 



168 



determines the nt?xt area objectives but the parents train the child. 
The therapy period (15-60 mins.) is spent assessing progress since the 
previous period, developing a structured prescription, and explaining 
and demonstrating techniques to be used by the parents until the next 
session. The techniques are modeled for the parent and she/he is 
shaped In their use. Before the ending the session, the parents are 
given a written plan to follow until the next session. 

The home environment becomes the tlierapy room. The parents thus 
become the client's therapist, case manager and advocate. By working 
with parents in this manner, we more than triple our managing case 
loads, thus increasing the number of clients in the catchment, without 
a concomitant increase In numbers of professionals. 

Respite Care Program 

In addition to the services provided by the lECIP, the UAF*s 
Respite Care Program offers another set of Important services to 
parents of handicapped children In Southeastern Kansas. The purpose 
of the KUAF Respite Care Program Is to provide those persons 
responsible for the care of devel opmental ly disabled *''vtduals with 
intermittent, brief periods of relief or time off fr^ ' .i. 'y 
demands and constant stress of caring for their dlsabJei child or 
adult. Respite care offers not only relief to the fairxly. provides 
for growth, development and normalizing experience or che isabled 
individual through Interaction with others In the immunity It is 
the Intent of the respite service program to reduce the nee< for 
institutional or other out-of-home placements, whll » strengl enlng the 
coping abilities of families and Improving the qua. ity of f ily life. 

Since 1982, the KUAF Respite Program has provl^'c<^ r> munlty-based 
respite In the rural counties of Southeast Kansas. substantial 
and rapid growth of the program demonstrates the neea for community- 
based respite and the ability of prof esslcnals In the field o? special 
education to recruit, train and place'volupteers In temporary 
caregiver roles. Consequently the families can have planned time for 
recreation or renewe' activities as well as time to attend to 
emergencies. The two types of respite offered through the program 
^ -e: 

Companion/sitter service - Trained persons provide care in 
the disabled client's home. 

Respite car ^ home - Trained persons provide care In their 
homes, whicn are state licensed. 

Recru: t.:;'»?Mt . Mass media campaigns are used to recruit potential 
providers ai.j inform families with disabled members about respite. 
Most of the campaign is conducted utilizing no-cost forms of 
advertising, such as public-service announcements through radio a:id 
television, b) news releases and feature stories In newspapers, c) 
Interviews cn radl talk shows, and d) presentations to community, 
church and school organizations. The only types of paid advertising 
UM-'tl to date e a) posters .-announcing t.Jie .-esplte servitt^s ry^r^ 



r, 169 



upcoming pinv iiin r -. riiniin/ worki^hops. b) brochu^e^^ scvibl^ii; Hit? 
program, ruul r) m;isii mailings to education, socia: rvic;^. h^Nilth 
care, and church personnel. 

Tr?ii:MMo . Providers must be at least 18 year^ of age and 
volunteer time to train in preparation for resp.tf The training 
provided through the KUAF Respite Program includ«s5 .n all -day workshop 
and "hands-on" training experiences. In addition, cnce a family 
requests respite and a provider agrees to provide the care, the 
provider is obligated to train with that family un^il the family ?nd 
provider are satisfied that the provider will be able to competently 
meet the care requirements for the disabled p'^rsjii. Additio-?l 
requirements include, health and security cle.a ancesr-, lelte 
of reference, and a screening interview conducted by the 
Respite Care Coordinator to determine the applicant's: 
willingness and ability to provide respite and c '^rer . .ki I 
levels. Potential providers are responsible for ubtaii. i,ri 
Cardio-Pulmonary-Resuscitatlon (CPR) Certification thr 
community agencies, already offering such training, (sucli as 
the American Red Cross). 

How the KUAF respite program workr . Parents arp asked to enroll 
their son/daughter in the program prior tc requer ting respite. This 
assures that the specific care needs of the disa)led individual are 
well known so providers can be adequately tr;=^ired. Once enrolled, the 
family calls the Respite Care Coordinator v'-'*^-ing the toll-free number) 
to request respite. The coordinator then .ontacts a provider and 
arranges for the service. After the placer }nt is agreed upon by the 
parents, provider and coordinator, a pre-placement visit is arranged 
in preparation for the respite. 

Following respite sessions, providers are reimbursed for their 
services and both the providers and the parents are asked to complete 
evaluations on the placement. Payments do not occur directly between 
families and providers. The provider submits a bill to the 
coordinator and receives payment through tie program. The program 
bills the fam: : y for the services based on le financial agreement 
(ietfri-njinp.l when the family enrolls. A sliding scale is used to 
determine f an i ] y f^^es for services. 

?rc.'!-.r;!fn f;,nd.lnE . The budget of che KUAF Respite Program consists 
of two conip'j:ur::ts- -organizational and direct-.service funding in regard 
to nigan ■ : f.:ndlng, the program is sponsored by the Kansas 

University Affiliated Facility at Parsons which supports the program 
in cooperation with the Parsons State Hospital and Training Center 
through the cuntribution of all organizational, administrative i-id 
supply cnstii. As for the direct service funding, donated monies and 
family [r^*^^- ft^y itTvices are used to pay for the direct costs of 
providing respite? to clients. This includes incentive foes to 
provider:, at a rate of S3, 00 per hour for 1-7 hours of respite or a 
f-at .ate of $25 for each 8-24 hour session and mileage reimbursement 
to providers who must travel out of their home community to provide 
respite. Providers art? self-employed, contracting with the program to 
provide s^^rvios. r^wr ..j^ not employees of the un:ve!s:ty. 

170 BEST COPY AVAlLABLt 



Start up funds for the program have been provided liy I'lf 
Frederick L. Girardeau Memorial Fund which is administereii thruugh the 
Univer'Tity of Kansas endowment fund. This trust fund was designated 
to support community-based services for developmental ly disitlj^rd 
individuals. In addition, respite services have been supportetl 
through the generous contributions of individuals, industry and 
community o ."^ganlzations, and family fees for services. 

Program growth & replication of services . Respit*? vices are 
now aval ] able for the famili(?s of developmental ly disabled individuals 
in six rural Kansas counties, with 21 sitter/companions providin-; 
respite for 42 disabled clients. The number of hours of respite" 
provided has increased from 60 hours in 1982 to 2,385 for 1985. 
The goal of the program is to make respite available in a nine' 
county area to any family with a handicapped member requesting 
the service. As each area is targeted for recruitment and 
fundraislng, the initial steps for implementing and supporting 
the program are replicated. 

Future Directions 

We plan to continue our lECEP service model in the future, but 
anticipate diversifying in some significant ways. Many of the 
diversifications will be designed to meet our responsibilities as a 
UaF: to develop "state of the art" services and to communicate our 
methods to a broad audience of individuals involved with handicapped 
children. In addition, there will be some changes related to the 
Rej^^plte Care Program. 

One activity we will undertake in the future involves a resi^.-arch 
project designed to compare the effectiveness of the parent-directed 
model we have developed to the more traditional therapy model used i:i 
the public schools. While only in the planning stages, the project 
will involve two studies, one invol ving speech services and one 
involving motor development. Public school speech and physical 
therapists will treat some children using the parent"direct<^»i niodpl 
and some using the traditional model. Outcome datft wi ■ : S,- : ei.rf-.- 
in order to determine which of the models appears mortf ^-fffctiv f^-. 

To demonstrate the repl icabi 2 ity of the service nuu.>:. i.^ 
planning to help inill.itL- similar services in a re^iu]] ,,f r.he stntr- 
which we currently do not serve. Therapists fxnd te?lci3^-I•^ ::! th<?.t 
region will be assisted in learning to provide parent- tliretrted 
services by lECIP staff. We feel that it is important to determine if 
the philosophy and methods which we have found so effective t::\n be 
used by other professionals. 

Based on the results we have achieved tc date, rmd ni! .:;:t : :.'.;'fd 
success in the two projects described above, we will be making ;in' 
effort to communicate the details of the parent-directt-d mridei to 
audiences on a state and national level. We intend to ntteiif! 
regional, and national conferences of professional or^au: ' m;- n 
discuss the meriti^ of tlio parent directed apprnac!i. Ii: ' ]\o f it . tv w»' 

■^'-■•^•.K^ 171 

o 



will bft videotaping examples of our sessions with the clients and 
their parents to Illustrate the procedures and styles we use in 
encouraging and teaching parents to work with their handicapped 
children. We are also considering the possibility of conducting 
training workshops for professionals attending conferences. In regard 
to professional Journals, we Intend to submit articles detailing the 
philosophy of the program, the procedures we use, and the results of 
the research project mentioned above. 

Along this "same theme, we feel a need to provide additional 
practicum opportunities for students studying speech and hearing, 
adaptive physical education, physical therapy, psychology, special 
education, etc. While we have done some such training In the past, we 
Intend the level to increase In the future (I.e., more students and 
1 onger practlca). 

Still In the planning stages Is a potential project designed to 
demonstrate the feasibility of a parent-training program for 
decreasing the risk of developmental delay among Infants conceived, 
born, and raised In poverty conditions In rural areas, such as 
Southeastern Kansas. The components of such a program would include: 
pre-natal Identification; professionals as parent trainers and 
consultants; parent-aides; parent-training classes; parent support 
group; community outings; parent competency demonstration. Ir. 
addition to our current staff, this project would involve the additioi: 
of six Parent-Aides and a Nurse who would serve as the Parent-aide 
supervisor and medical representative of the transdlscipl inary team. 

In regard to the Respite Care Program, we are seeking ^jreater 
levels of community financial support for the incentive reimbursements 
paid to providers. While administration of the program will continue 
to be provided through UAF funds, we will be seeking to raise enough 
donations from community, civic and church organizations. Industry, 
business and Individuals to cover the funds budgeted for provider 
payment. 

Finally, we plan to carefully review the current training proginn 
for respite providers. While most of the topic areas appefir 
appropriate, we would like to convert the training to a competency 
based model. This would help to insure that new providers do. hu^-t't:.. 
acquire the skills that we are attempting to re?ich. 

In summary then, we are quite encouraged by tlie succtrss uf our 
current programs and intend to continue them in much their l;ll•e^^^-nt 
form. Our plans for the future include at least one systeni.vf.: 
research project related to the effectiveness of the pare jt-d: j-t-rtr-c! 
approach, a replication of the service model in another region of i;> 
state, the pro\ ision of additional student practicum activities, 
increased dissemination activities, changes In tije respite provider 
training program, and the development of more community support for 
the provider payment portion of the Respite C'jre Program. 



172 



.lorden. J.. Hayden. A.. Karnes, M., & Wood (1977). Early childhood 
education for exceptional children . Reston, VA: Council for 
Exceptional Chi Idren. 



Wednesday, April 23 



Ruth Bragman, Joyce Couch Cole 
SERRC 

1236 North University Drive 
Plantation, FL 33322 



1:30 - 2:30 pm 



Improving Employer Effectiveness in Interviewing 
Handicapped/Disabled Applicants 



Ruth Bragman and Joyce Couch Cole 



One of the most important aspects of a secondary 
special education teacher and a rehabilitation counselor's 
Job is marketing handicapped/disabled individuals to 
potential employers. As special education and 
rehabilitation personnel know, success in job placements is 
one of the most difficult components of their position. 
Research with employers (Bragman & Cole, 1983; Cole it 
Bragman y 1?83> has shown placement of handicapped/disabled 
individuals is a difficuM task, primarily because employers 
are unaware of the problems inherent in different 
hand! capp i ng/^di sabi i ng conditions and, therefore, display a 
lack of confidence in the employment interview. Many times, 
potential employers become so involved in wondering about 
the non-job related concerns associated with the 
individual's handicap/disability that they totally overlook 
the applicant's job-related skills and abilities. For 
example, if an indiviual with epilepsy applies for a 
position, the employer may become mentally engrossed in a 
scenario such as the following: "Her lip just twitched. 
Does that mean she is going to have a "fit" in my office? 
What should I do i f she falls out of the chair? Whom shall 
I call?". In this situation, the employer is busy trying to 
sort through possible dilemmas, all the while asking the 



ERIC 




»t*ndArd inttrvitw questions, that he or she completely 
misses the fact that the interview^*- happens to be the most 
qualified applicant for the job. 

The purpose of this presentation is to provide special 
education and rehabilitation personnel with guidelines for 
preparing employers on how to conduct interviews with 
handicapped/disabled applicants. A five step process is 
described which can be used to increase employer 
effectiveness in interviewing disabled individuals, so that 
appropriate placement can be made. 

The five-steps include: (1) analyzing the written job 
description in respect to critical job requirements; (2) 
determining possible areas of concerns for an individual 
with a specific handicap; (3) matching the job requirments 
with the individual's abilities to determine if there are 
areas that may present problems; (4) developing questions 
for the individual that are Job related; (5) matching 
applicant and Job to ensure appropriate job placement. 

The step-by-step process described in this pr;»se. tat i on 
is intended to provide tangible^ straight-forward guidelines 
for employers in interviewing handicapped individuals. 
Because of the structured format special education and 
rehabilitation personnel will also find this process to be 
convenient tool when providing employer awareness and 
education and when preparing handicapped/disabled 
individuals for the interview and the job. 



EKLC 



175 



Wed,, April 23, 1986 
1:30 - 2:30 PM 



Every Question a Parent or Teacher Would Want to Ask A 

Pediatr ic ian 



Dr. Michael Cohen, presentor 
Or. Ed DeForrest, -facilitator 



The medical issues presentat i on was conducted in an in-formal, 
conversational manner. Dr. Michael Cohen o-f Tucson led the 
discussion, which addressed a series o-f questions raised by 
the preceding year's meeting oi the Health/Related Services 
Task Force. Mike responded to the questions asked by Ed, and 
solicited audience reaction to his observations. He 
presented slides and discussed a number o-f issues. Mike and 
Ed openly engaged and conversed with the group. 

A number o-f salient points were brought up, and which could 
•facrlitate health/related service/educator/parent 
relat ion ships. 

1. School districts, particulAr^y in rural areas, should 
identi-fy their principal iiealth care provider<s) and 
become acquainted wi th them. Designate a primary 
special education contact person at the school — a school 
health nurse, special education administrator, other — to 
work with the health care personnel. Get to know each 
other, establish routine and standard communication 
procedures. Socialize and get to know each other. 

Tell the heoilth care provider what you need, what is 
required, and what you can do -for them. 

2. Educators should not speak -for parents. Stop doing -for 
parents what they can and should do -for themselves. 
Help parents to cope— don't cope -for them. Relax. Meet 
with parents ahead o-f time. Prior to a PPT/PET meeting, 
share in-formation with parents ahead o-f time so they 
know what will be discussed, rather than coming in cold. 

Remember: as a school person your role is education; you 
are one o-f many intruders, but hope-fully a helping 
in-fluence in the array o-f those impacting the -family. 
Be sensitive, learn to -flex. Too o-ften the school 
assumes unknowingly or inadvertently a de-fensive role 
and establishes barriers by insisting on using its 
system. 



176 



Suggestion: in order to access medical in-format ion, ask 
parents to arrange an evening meeting -for you and them 
to visit their doctor. Doctors don't have to attend PPT 
and you will have a better picture o-f the problem and 
the -fami 1 v's needs. 

Don't use medical jargon in PPT meetings. Ask the 
physician or health care person to translate. For 
example, so-ft neurological signs is a help-ful clinical 
concept but not an educational term; when translated, 
it means that the child i» developmental ly below norm 
when compared to othe«*f> ai the same age and sex, etc. 
Interpretation o-f this and other phrases is not the 
role o-f the educator, b'^\ is the responsibility o-f 
the physician. 

Children are constantly developing and unfolding, 
whether they have a disabling condition or not. Thus 
the diagnosis changes, and should be viewed as a 
dev<B lopmental status report. 

Be cautious about diagnostic events and labels o-f 
hyperactivity. Some diagnoses have multiple causes, not 
all being physical. Each child has a unique 
personality; pediatricians trained in the past several 
years are aware o-f and use a new array o-f methodologies 
and approaches in assessment. Temperament, -family 
style, birth order, and other concepts are use-ful to the 
-family, school, and physiUan in working as a team. 

Physicians in many states are asked to sign oif -for 
occupational or physical therapy as related services. 
The physician is not trained as an OT or PT, and 
should not be asked to support more than his/her 
training and practice dictate. The trained OT or PT 
will better understand and be able to assess what each 
individual child may need in OT/PT services. 

Certain children with disabilities, such as a studen': in 
a wheelchair, have unique medical or clinical needs but 
can participate in a -full schedule o-f regular ciassroom 
instruction. Do not make presumptions about these 
students or base decisions on school convenience or 
school attitude when assisting these students and their 
•families. They are o-ften persons who, with the 
. :i tance o-f a personal care attendant, can participate 
.n regular school activity. 



177 



Wednesday, April 23 
1:30 - 2:30 pm 

Michael Cohen 

Clinical Association Professor 
Department of Pediatrics 
University of Arizona 
Tucson, AZ 85717 

Ed DeForrest (Facilitator) 
Director 

Spaulding Youth Center 
Box 189 

Til ton, NH 08901 



EVERY QUESTION A PARENT OR TEACHER SHOULD ASK A PEDIATRICIAN 

Dr. Michael Cohen is a pediatrician in Tucson involved in 
evaluation of special education students and in the 
implementation of PL 94-142. Dr. Cohen will discuss recent 
events in the developmental assessment of children and the 
procedures used in evaluation. He will also discuss how parents, 
teachers, and medical or health-related personnel can better 
communicate about the needs of children with disabilities and how 
to work together to provide maximal services to each child. 



173 



Wednesday, April 23 
1:30 - 2:30 pm 



PrMMtori Joan Sebastian 



217 Hilton tennion Hall 



Dept. of Spacial Education 

Univaraity of Utah 

Salt Uka City, UT 84112 



RURAL TEACHER CERTIFICATIOH FOR HODERATELY AHD SEVERELY HAHDICAPPED 
STUDEHTS IH IHTE6RATED SCHOOL PROGRAHS 

*Comualty-rafaranoad Taaohar Bducratlon in Rural Araaa* (CTER) 

PART I. PRESENTATIOH OVERVIEW 

In tha fall of 1969 tha Dapartaant of Spacial Education at the Univaraity 
of Utah bagan tha davalopaant of a aodal rural fiald*baaad cartification 
prograa for taachara of atudanta vith aodarata, mmwn, and aultipla 
handicaps. Tha purpoaa of aodal projact ia to dalivar a pra*aarvica 
cartification prograa on aita in four rural ragiona of tha atata. Utah's 
rural districts axparianca tha saaa paraonnal racruitaant and ratantion 
problaas aa othar ragiona of tha country. Tha problaa is aora mmymrm in 
ralationship to finding qualifiad taachara and spacializad aupport staff for 
lov incidanca and savaraly handicappad atudanta. 

Tha aajor coaponanta of tha projaot vara salactad to addraaa aavaral of 
tha paraonnal training naada typically found in rural parts of this stata. 
Utah 'a rural districts ara gaographically charactarizad by vast opan spacaa 
intarruptad by aultipla aountain rangaa. Host of thasa diatricta ara not 
cloaa to tha atata 'a draining institutions. In ordar to participate in a 
cartification prograa, individuala naad to travel great distancea to the 
neareat college ar univeraity caapua. Recruiting teachera to vork in saall 
rural coaaunitieu or very reaote locationa ia alao a difficult if not 
iapossible taak for the local special education directora. The coaponanta of 
this aodal (Figure 1) addraaa the iasuea of distance and recruitaent in the 
folloving three aajor project goala: 1. Rural adjunct faculty are identified 
and trained by project staff to deliver certification coursevork on*aite in 
each of the regiona; 2. Training aanuala and instructional aateriala vhich are 
congruent vith the caapua baaed certification prograa, and reflect the aervice 
needa of rural aoderate/aeverely handicapped atudanta have been developed for 
uae by the rural adjunct faculty; 3. Certification candidates for the project 
are recruited froa local rural coaaunities. 

The certification coapetencies of thia aodal eaphaaize the integration of 
atudanta vith aoderate to aevere handicapa into their coaaunity achools. 
Often, becauae of the saall nuabera of these students in rural coaaunities, 
they are bused to centralized facilitiea vhich are ataffed cooperatively by 
several districts. As teachera becoae trained in atrategiea that facilitate 
the integration of ctudenta, the aervice delivery patterns vill alao need to 
change. The project staff and univeraity paraonnal are vorking vith these 
rural diatricta to aaaiat thea in the developaent of nev prograaa vhich allov 
atudents to reaain in their coaaunity achoola. This project along vith 
several other projects in the state of Utah, are focuaing on ayateas change 
atrategiea in order to aaaiat diatricta in their reaponae to federal and 
advocate deaands for aervicea in the least reatrictive environaent. 



EKLC 



' 179 



Figure 1 



Community- referenced Teacher Education in Rural Areas (CTER) 
(Moderate to Severe Handicaps) 



CTER MODEL 






EVALUATE 


& REFINE 






MODEL COMPONENTS 






REVISE CTER 








REPLICATE 


CTER IH 


CUES AND SOUTHWEST 


REGIONS 



2 ISO 



PART II. MODEL COHPONENTS DESCRIBED 



Til* CDMuni.ty*i^f«rTOC«d Tnchvr E(l4ication in Rural krmhd \A) project 
hM a thrM yM* funding period. Modal davalopMnt activitiM bagan aarly in 
Octobar 196S, arid tha pilot tasting 'phaaa vill bagin during tha susaaar of 1986 
in tvo ragiona aZ tha atata**tha Rorthaaat and tha Southaaat (Pigura 2). Tha 
training aita in tha lorthaaat ragion ia in Vamal, 173 ailaa froa tha 
univaraity caapua; tha a ac o nd aita ia in Hoab, 239 nilaa avay. 

Tha thraa aajor coapcnanta of tha CTER pro^aot ara daacribac in tha 
follovini aactiona. Sinca tha projact ia in tha davalopaant phaaa data on tha 
affactivanaaa of procaduraa and atratagiaa ia not availabla at thirs tiaa» but 
vill ba forthcoaing in futura diaaaaination publicationa. 

Pg'PgRfnt If Salaction and training of rural adiunct faculty. 

Tvo individuala, ona aach froa tha Horthaaat and Southaaat ragiona, vara 
initially aalactad to participata in tha pilot phaaa of tha projact. 
Salaction vaa baaad on racoaaandatlona froa diatrict and ragional Spacial 
Education diractora aa vail aa projact ataff input. Savaral additional 
critaria vara uaad along vith thaaa racoaaandationa. It vav iapor ;int that 
thaaa individuala ba ab.la to provida auparviaion for tha cartification 
candidataa during aohool houra, tharafora diatricta and ragional cantara hava 
agraad to ralaaaa thaa for thaaa activitiaa. Both of thaaa individuala hava 
had auccaaaful axparianca vith aodarata and ac^varalv handicappad atudanta and 
ara currantly aarving in auparviaory and inaarvica rolaa in thair diatricta. 
During tha grant pariod funda ^ill ba pruvidad to tha diatricta in ordar to 
purchaaa tiaa and aaaiatanca froa tha adjunct faculty for aodal davalopaant 
activitiaa, inatruction and auparviaion. 

Tha rural adjunct faculty rcla ia a kay alaaant in tha auccaaa of thia 
projact. Through thifc poaition critical coaaunicationa vill ba aaintainad 
batvaan tha rural araaa and tha univaraity caapua. Rural adjunct 
raaponaibilitiaa includa: 

1. racruitaant of potantial cartification candidataa. Thia aay includad 
publicizing inforaation about tha projact through diatrict and coaaunity 
inforaation natvorka; providing adaiaaiona inforaation for intaraatad 
candidataa; facilitating tha adaiaaiona procaaa for tha dapartaant in tha 
rural location; providing initial acraaning inforaation on candidataa. 

2. taaching and/or facilitating cartification couraaa on*aita. Thaaa 
activitiaa includa arranging for tha claaa location and tiaa achadule; 
inforaing atudanta of ralavant couraa inforaation aach quarter, i.e., 
location, coat, tiaa, ; preparing aatariala; ordering texta and other 
needed aedia; ragiatering atudanta and coxlecting tuition; claaa 
preparation; aaaiating vith and facilitating on location, interactive 
inatructional televiaion couraa preaentationa; grading atudanta; and 
couraa evaluationa. 

3. liaiaon vith univaraity project ataff. Thia critical activity 
include a variety of reaponaibilitiea and often ia the aoat difficult to 
aaintain. Phone conferencea vill be acheduled on a regular baaia to 
facilitate coaaijinication. Other interactive technology auch aa 
electronic aail and interactive video conferencea vill ba utilized as 



3 




.SALT LAKE CITY 
UniVEliSITY OF UTAH 



Figure 2 



! UTAH SCHOOL i 
DISTRICTS 




ERIC 



182 



nMd»d. RuFAl adjunct ftculty vlll com to ctapua mt Ivist one* ffich 
ymr for triinino- Support for this trtinino ±m built into the grant, 
but vill ba providad by tha dia^ricta and -agiona in tha f utura. Projact 
atalf vill alao traval to tha training aitaa on a ragularly achadulad 
baaia. 

Thia coaponant includaa fiva daya of training, praparad by projact ataff 
and univaraity faculty, for tha rural adjunct inatructora. Thia training ia 
baing davalopad aa part of tha aodal projact and vill focua "hov to" taach 
univaraity couraaa, auparviaion, and off caapua prograa aanagaaant atratagiaa. 
A raviav of tha adult education litaratura auggaata a^varal kinda of 
atratagiaa prograaa can auccaaafully utiliza vhan vorking vith adult laarnera. 
Thia inforaation in addition to apacific couraa contant inforaation has bean 
utilized in tha training. Tha inatructor'a aanual for aach couraa and 
practice viJl aerve aa a "teaching guide" for the adjunct faculty folloving 
the initial training period. 

Coaponent 2. Training aanuala and inatructional Matariala 

The apacialization aequence for certification in the area of aoderata and 
aevere aental retardation/aultiple handicapa in the Departaent of Special 
Education includaa five apacialization content couraea 3 quarter houra each. 
The prograa alao requirea aixtaen quarter houra of practicua vith atudenta 
vith aoderata to aevere handicapa. Certification candidatea vho tve 1. jitad 
background and foraal inatruction in the general area of apecial tfducatxon aay 
alao need to take additional couraavork. Specialization couraevork training 
aanuala have been developed for uae by the adjunct faculty. Othar couraea 
needed by certification candidatea vill be provided on a contract baaii> 
through the Departaent of Special Education in cooperation vith "^he ac:;Jol 
diatricta. 

Tvo baaic foraata have been uaed in the atructuring of the rac aired 
couraea; 1) couraa vill be taught by rural adjunct faculty on aite in tha 
region, and 2) couraa vill be taught by the caapua profett^or over the inter- 
active Bicrovave video netvork. Special Education S51 (3) <5 ocial ar 
Educational laauaa in Mental Retardation and Special Edueatior 522 o/ 
TranadiaciPlinarv Approachaa to Education of Savaralv H anaicappad Studanta 
vill be taught by the adjunct faculty aeabar. Inatructional aanuala developed 
for theae couraea include aaaaion outlinea, diacuaaion topica, ^tructuraa for 
the course aaaignaenta, grading procedurea, and auppleaental readinga fcr the 
faculty aeaber. Theae couraea vhan taught on caapua tend to be pr^aented in a 
"lacture/perforaer" atyle (Crane, 1980) by inatructora vho poaaea.. a great 
deal of expertiae. For thia project theae couraea vere developed aa 
diacuaaion couraea, utilizing liaitad lacturea. The inatructional role of th > 
adjunct faculty aeaber ia that of a facilitator and diacuaaion leader. 

A raviav of the literature deacribing charactariatica of adult leax.i'^ra 
vaa uaed aa a foundation in the atructuring of theae couraea (aee referancaa). 
The certification candidatea in thia rural project are all individuala vho are 
older than the traditional univaraity atudent, aoat have college degreea and 
are currently teaching in other areaa. They bring to the learning aetting a 
vaalth of background knovledge and experience that reaaarchara auggeat needs 
to be integrated into the nev learning experience. Theae indivlJuala are 
activated to learn and are anxioua to apply nev inforaation. Adult learners 
alao have aany deaanda on their tiae; faaily concents, vorking environaanta, 
aocial activitiea^ and vith rural folka, traval bacoaea a deaand aa vail. 



183 



ActivitiM for thM« coursM focus on rel«v«nt contmt that c«n bm U0«d 
'toaoxrov* in thm claMrooa and/or vays n«v informtion and th«oriM can 
•ppliad to local rural apacial aducation concarna. Aaaignaanta vara brokan 
dovn into ahortar aora appllad actlvltlaar 1. a. ^ vaakly atudy/diacuaaion 
quaatlona; briaf auaaariaa of currant articlaa in aantal ratardation aharad 
vith tha claaa; papara that raquira daacriptiona of hov inforaation can ba 
appllad in currant taaching aituationa, ate. 

Tha intaraotiva vidao couraaa vill ba praaantad by tha on caapua 
profaaaor and facilitatad at tha aita by tha adjunct faculty aaabar. Tha rola 
of tha rural inatructor in thia caaa bacoaaa aora aupportiva and f acilitativa. 
Activitiaa includa laading diacuaaiona folloving tha 'airing* of tha caapua 
claaar aaaiating vith aaaignaanta, grading papara, coaaunicating vith on 
caapua inatructor, and aaaiating atudanta in tha application cf aaaignad 
activitiaa in thair claaarooaa. 

Tha aixtaan houra of pr^cticua vill occur in tha cartif ication candidataa 
ovn claaarooaa. Bacauaa of tha ahortaga of taachara, aoat of tha individuala 
in thia prograa ara vorking full tiaa in apacial aducation claaarooaa on 
'lattara of authorization* froa tha Stata Offica of Education. Tha rural 
adjunct inatructor aarvaa aa tha practicua auparviaor and aaaiata candidataa 
vith tha application of tha cartif ication coapatanciaa (aaa attachaant). 

Practicua obaarvation procaduraa ara conaiatant vith on caapua 
atratagiaa. A ayataaatic data collaotion atratagy along vith a bahaviorally 
anchorad rating acala ara baing uaad to aaaiat cartification candidataa in tha 
iaplaaantation of nav akilla. Salf avaluationa through tha uaa of vidao tapwa 
vill anhanca tha f aadback providad for individuala. 

Coaponant 3. Racruitaant and aalaction of loeal cartification candidataa 

Tha Dapartaant of Spacial Education haa in placa a aavaral atap 
adaiaaiona procadura that all atudanta auat coaplata. It vaa nacaaaary that 
dapartaantal atandarda for adaiaaiona ba utilizad for rural cartification 
candidataa aa vail. Adaiaaiona packata vara coapilad and diatributad to 
potantial applicanta. Part of tha procadura includaa a taating battary for 
baaic coapatanca in languaga, raading and aathaaatica. Arrangaaanta for 
taking tha taat off caapua in tha rural ragiona vara aada vith tha univaraity 
taating cantar. All candidataa vill ba acraanad according to dapartaantal 
atandarda. 

Inforaation about CTES and ita goala haa baan axtanaivaly diatributad 
throughout tha atata utilizing varioua inforaation natvorka. Tha Spacial 
Education directora in tha Northaaat and Southaaat ragiona hava baan contactad 
paraonally by tha Projact Diractor. Haatinga hava baan hald in aach ragion to 
daacriba tha prograa and adaiaaiona procaduraa to intaraatad individuals. 
Inforaation about tha projact haa baan diatributad throughout (^ach local 
achool diatrict and through tha local nava aadia. An articla daacribing vha 
projact vaa puMiahad in tha atata*vida CSPD Spacial Educator Navalattar. 
Approxiaataly thirty paopla vill ba involvad in tha training prograa aa tha 
projact bagina inatructional activitiaa in aach ragion during tha auaaar of 
1986. 

PART III. EVALUATIOH PUNS AHD CONCLUSIOHS 

Evaluation data for thia projact ara baing collactad froa aavaral 
aourcaa. All of tha training aanuala and inatructional aatariala vill ba 
avaluatad by tha adjunct faculty inatructora and tha atudanta. Folloving tha 



184 

6 



Spring quirtffr of 1987 this inforMtion vill bm used to rsviM ch« Mtwials 
for iaplsMntition in th« tvo othsr ruril rsgions of th« stits. Ouirs.»rly 
r»vi»v0 of pro0ra0 progrMS vill bm cospletad by project staff in tha proceas 
of axaainina both tha contant of th» coursM, Mnag^Mnt of tha prograa, and 
affsctivanMS of tha rural adjunct faculty. Thia inforaation vill ba uaad to 
provida apacifio aupport to aach of tha rural inatructora aa thay iaplaaant 
tha prograa in aach ragion. Modif icationa of aatariala and atratagiaa vill ba 
aada cooparativaly vith aach inatructor aa naadad. A ainiaua of ona alta 
viait vill ba aada aach quartar. Ragularly achadulad (aonthly) 
talaconfarancaa vill ba uaad to aaintain coaMiunication and provida auppozt for 
aach of tha rural adjunct faculty aaabara. 

Tha training for tha rural adjunct faculty vill ba avaluatad iaaadiataly 
folloving tha aaaaion and latar aa atratagiaa and nathoda ara iaplaaantad. 
Training affactivanaaa data vill ba auppliad by tha adjunct faculty and 
through obaarvation during quarterly raviava by tha projact ataff. Tha 
training vill ba raviaad baaad on tha data collactad during tha pilot phaaa of 
thia projact. Folloving thia raviaion, tha training vill ba praaantad to tha 
tvo nav adjunct faculty froa tha raaaining ragiona. 

Folloving tha grant pariod thara vill ba in placa procaduraa and trainad 
rural adjunct faculty to continue cartification activitiaa aa naadad by aach 
ragion. Tha Dapartaant of Special Education ia coaaittad to facilitate thia 
effort on an ongoing baaia to aaaiat diatricta vith aervice for atudenta vith 
Boderate and aavere handicapa. 



REFEBEHCES 



Apps. J.W. (1981). Th> adult l>irn»r on e««DU«! A Quld» for Inatructors and 
■d«lnl«tr«tor«. ChicaootFollett Publishino Co. 

Cran*. H. (1960). Fac* to fac*t A praomtic account of th* t*aching of 
adults. Unlvraltl— QuartTlv. ^ 356-369. 

Ebl*, K.E. (1976). Th> Craft of T»«chlnQ. San Francisco :Joa8*y- Bass. 

Gorhaa. J. (1969). Diff*r*ncM twtvMn t*achino adults and prs-adultst A 
closer look. Adult Education QuartTlv. 32, 194-209. 

Grabovski, S.H. and associatss (1961). Prsparino sducators of adults. San 
Francisco t Josssy-Bass. 

Xidd, J.R. (19S9). How adults Isarn. Msv York: Association Prsss. 

Knowlss, H.S. (1970). Ths sodsm nraetio of adult »ducation. Hew 
York : Association Prsss. 

KnovlM, H.S. (1976). Ths adult Isarnsrt A nMlcetsd soaciss (a>cond 
edition). Houston: Gulf Publishing Coapany. 

Knox, A.B. (1976). Haloino adults to laarn: Coneant omnmr. Washington 
D.C. :Clan». 

Lovall, B.R. (1960). Adult laarnino. Haw York:Halstad Press. 



186 



8 



Attachment 

Teacher Competencies in the Area of MSMR/MH 



p 



ERIC 



COHPETEIICIES FOR TEACHER TRAINING PROGRAH IN MODERATE AND SEVERE HANDICAPS 



COHPETENCy AREA 



I.Effectlve Service 
Delivery Hodels 



PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVES 



INDICATORS 



UHEN COMPLETED 



2. Advocacy 



tach trainee will demonstrate knowledge a.bumnanzatlon of current research on Completed as part 
of effect ve service delivery models the effectiveness of various service of course requlre- 
for Individuals with moderate and I models and formats for Infants, ments for Sp Ed 



severe handicaps. 



youth and adults with severe 
handicaps In an essay examination. 

b.Submlsslon of a review of the 
research In one of the following 
areas; preschool, educational, 
vocational, or residential services. 
: This review must (1) define current 
problem areas, (2| summarize recent 
research and evaluation reports in 
each area and (3) draw conclusions 
and make recommendations for future 
service development. 



551 and 532. 



Each trainee will complete one advocacy 

project prior to certification. This 
project must: 

ja.lnvolve parent or professionals 
worldng outside the University, 
|b.Focus on improving access to, or the 
quality of, community services for 
individuals with moderate and severe 
handicaps. 

This project may Include presentations, 
committee work through advocacy groups, 
or advocacy for an individual or 
family. 



Indicators of completion are: 
a.Pre-authori2at1on of project by the 

trainers* program supervisor, 
|b.Records of contacts and work sessions 
outlines of work sessions, or 
outlines of presentations, and 
c.A written summary of project results I 
Including recommendations for future | 
activity. j 



/Completed as part 
of course require- 
ments for Sp. Ed. 
557 and 558 



mmm urea 



j.KnwIede of 
Professionals snd 
Advocacy 
Organizations 



4. State/Federal 
Regulations 



5.Assess!nent 
Selection and 
^Administration 



Each trainee Mill demonstrate know- 
1edge-of professionals and advocacy 
organizations targeting individuals 
moderate or severe handicaps. 



PERFORHANCE OejECTIVES 



INDICATORS 



Summarization of principle mission 
and activities of each of the 
following organizations in a essay 
examination: 
Association for Retarded Citizens, 

2. Nationa1 Association for Autistic 
Children, 

3. Hational Cerebral Palsy Association 

4. Council for Exceptional Children, 

5. American Association on Hental 
Deficiency, 

6. The Association for Persons with 
Severe Handicaps. 



UIIEII COHPIETED 



Compietori as part 
.requirements of Sp.; 
Ed. 551 



Each trainee will d^inon^.rate knowledge! Completion of an essay examination on 
of Utah State and Federal regulations | the rules and regulations of PL 98-199 
governing evaluation, assessment, 
placement, due process, and maintenance, 
of confidential records for individual s] 
with moderate to severe handicaps in 
educational programs. 



Each trainee will select and administerpitten report summarizing results of 
assessment instruments appropriate for lassessment and specifying areas for 
development of annual goals'and short- jgoal development for each student, 
term objectives for at least two 
students with moderate or severe 
handicaps, 



Completed as part 
of the course re-, 
Iqulreinents for Sp. 
Ed. 553. 



As part of class 
requirements for 
Sp. Ed. 553 & 557. 



ERIC ISO 



19i 



COHPETEflCy AREA 



pehforhahce objectives 



6.IEP Development 



INDICATORS 



IIIIEII COMPLETED 



/.Curriculum 
Evaluation 



in'I!! dtr!li!!r^ T '^^'^ 4'^^^-«"tWf»tlo.. 01 laryet students a.As part of course 
students with moderate and severe | by the trainee's university super- requirements for 

visor and cooperating teacher. jsp. Ed. 55? & $58 
b.Submission of complete lEP for each 
student prior to application for 
certification. 



handicaps and participate in lEP 
meetings. Each lEP must include: 

a. Statement of current functioning, 

b. Annual goals specifying conditions, 
behaviors, and criteria for 
performance, 

c. Complett ".hort-term objectives 
specifyii^ conditions, behaviors, and 
criteria , performance, 

d. Strategies of evaluation, and 

e. Projected timelines for initiating J 
instruction for each annual goal, i 



Each trainee will complete a wriiten 
evaluation of curriculum guides 
designed for use with individuals with 
moderate or severe liandicaps. The 
focus of the evaluation will reflect | 
the trainee's age level preference 
(elementary or secondary) and will 
address the following issues: 

a. Comprehensiveness of domains and 
skill sequences, 

b. Approprlateness of behavioral 
objectives and task analysis, 

c. Potential use as an assessment, 

d. Attention to problems of general iza- ^ 
tion and maintenance, and 

adaptability for students with 
physical handicaps. 



Written report submitted to university 
supervisor. 



a.As part of 
requirements 
Cd. 553. 



course 
for Sp 



ERIC 



i 



192 



123 



COIIPETEIICY AREA 



PERFORHANCE OBJECTIVES 



IflDICATOIlS 



IIIIEII COHPLETED 



O.l.Each trainee will develop Instruc- jlraiiiees' will submit a coinplcte Ias part of course 



|0. Program 
Dcvelopnient 



tional programs in the following 
curricular areas: 
a.Reading/ilriting/Spelling, 
;b.Hath/l1oiiey/Tiiiie, 
'c.Self-help, 

(I.Social or leisure-recreation, 
e. Self-management, 

8.1.1 Trainees witli an elementary 
empliasis will develop programs in 
tlie following areas: 

a. Feeding, 

b. tanguage/Coinmunitcation, 

c. Hotor Development/Sensory Functions 
8.1.2. Trainees witli a secondary 

; empliasis will develop programs in 
each of the following areas: 

a. Vocational training, 

b, Coinmunity-ba$ed personal management, 
cCoimnunity-based leisure. 



instructional program for each area to {requirements for 
the university supervisor. |Sp. Ed. 553, 554, 

556, 557, and 558. 



8.2 All instructional programs sub- 
mitted by the trainee will include 
the following components; 
|a.A complete instructional objectives 
specifying conditions, behaviors, 
and criteria, 

b. Task analysis or instructional ; 
sequence, 

c. Insliructional examples, 

d. Criteria for student movement through 
program steps, 

le.Oelineation of instructional cues or 
prompting strategies, correction 
procedures, and reinforcement, 
f.Description of program materials, 
Ig.Oescription of instructional 

settings, and 
h.Oata collection procedures. 



ERIC 



m 



COHPETEIICY AREA 



9.Prograiii 
IiDplementation 



PERFORHANCE OBJECTIVES 



INDICATORS 



0. 3 Each trainee will submit instruc- 
tional programs which utilize at 
leasts of the following instruction- 
al procedures and programning 
strategics, 

a. Increasing prompt hierarchy, 

b. Decreasiiig prompt hierarchy, 

c. Time delay, 

d. Time advance, 

e. Cue redundancy, 

f. Forward chaining, 

g. Dackward chaining, 

h. Concurrent chaining, or 

1. Direct instruction sequence and 
general ease programming. 



HIIEH COHPLETED 



Each trainee will implement and report Isubmission of written report to 
the results of instructional programs juniversity supervisor, 
that they liave developed. Implemen- 
Itation will include: 
'a.Regular implementation of instruc- 
tional program with students enrolled! 
in the trainee's practicum placement, 

b. At least 20 consecutive instructional] 
sessions, 

c. Daily summary of student performance 
date, 

d. Appropriate program changes based 
on student performance data, and 

!e.Evaluation of the effectiveness of 
instructional techniques and proce- 
dures utilized by the trainee. 



As part of course 
requirements for 
Sp. Ed. 553, 554, 
and 557. 



ERIC 



186 



4 



18? 



COHPETEIICY AREA 



10. Instructlona 
Delivery 



PERFORMANCE OOJECTIVES 



11. Scheduling 



INDICATORS 



KIIEN COHPLETED 



instructional delivery will be eval- 
uated by university supervisor, 
Trainee performance in each instruc- 
tional group size must iieletcnnined 
appropriate on 3 consecutive 
observations. 



Eaci) trainee will demonstrate effective 
instructional delivery in individual, 
small group, and large group teaching 
situations. Instructional delivery in 
each situation should include: 

a. Sufficicnt rate of responding for 
each student, 

b. Dlstribution of trials across group 
members, 

c. Appropriate provision and fading of 
assistance, 

d. Appropriate strategies of behavior 
management, 

e. Based on written instructional 
program. ; 



Each trainee will develop a classroom jEach trainee will subnit a copy of 
schedule for a group of 8-12 students, jclassroom schedule ti university 
The schedule should; jsupe«'visor. This objective may be 

a. Be based on a summary of lEP jcompleted in assigned practica or 
objectives for all students enrolled jor slmiilation. 
in the class, 

b. Include systematic instruction on lEP: 
goals during eadi period of the 
school day, 

c. Includes student groupings that 
maximize rate of responding for 
each scheduled task, 

d. Maximize available instructional 
time, and 

|e.Sch&dule opportunities for aide or 
peer tutor observations with non- 
classroom training sites. 



|as part of course 
|requireiAcnts for 
Sp. Ed. 557 ti 558 



As part of course 
requirements for 
Sp. Ed. 554 or 557 



o 188 

ERIC 



18S 



COHPETEIICy AREA 


1 PERFORHANCE OBJECTIVES ; 


IHDICATORS 


I UIIEII COHPIETEO 


ISJransitlon ; 
Planning ; 


a. Expected outcomes of training and ; 
criteria for performance, | 

b. Description of training procedures, 

c. Oescription of system for monitoring ; 
performance, and ; 

d. On-going observations and feedback. 

1 . 
\ 1 

Each trainee will develop a comprehen- ; 
sive, written plan for the transition 
of moderately and severely handicapped 
students to subsequent service environ- 
ments (i.e. Pre-school to elementary, 
to middle school; middle school to high 
scliool; high school to adult services).; 
[he plan sliould include: ; 

a. Delineation of entry requirements or ; 
subsequent environmentsls), 

b. Description of needed services ; 
or resources for successful ; 
functioning, and ' 

c. Slcills required for successful ; 
functioning, 

d. Tlmelines and responsibilities for 
facilitating transaction activities. ; 


1 

The trainee will submit a written plan 1 
to the university supervisor. 

J 


Completed as part 
of course require- 
ments for Sp. Ed. ; 
553, 557 and 558 ; 

' i 
1 { 

1 

: 



20i 



ERIC 



200 



Wednesday, April 23 
1;30 - 2:30 pm 



PLANNING THE UNPLANNED CONFERENCE FOR PARENTS 

Roberta R. Daniels, Ph.D. 
Coordinator oi Program -For Gi-Fted, Talented, and Creative 
Arkansas State University 
Department ai Special Education Speech Pathology 
State University, AR 72467 

Ellen R. Elwell, M.S. 
Vocational Services Coordinator 
Andover, MA 04216 



Presentation Prepared -For Sixth Annual Rural 
Special Education Conference 
Tucson, Arizona 
April 22-25, 1986 



ERIC 




PLANNING THE UNPLANNED CONFERENCE FOR PARENTS 



Roberta R. Daniels - Arkansas State University 
Ellen R. Elwell - Vocational Services Coordinator, Andover, MA 

Constructive- parental involvement in the public schools is 
desired by all. We recognize that the relationship between 
parents and educators has undergone major transformation in the 
past twenty years. The time has passed when educators view 
parents as non-useful contributors in the educational powers. 
Increasingly parents are viewed as essential membrirs ai the 
educational team; not because laws dictate the partnership, but- 
because professionals in general and special education have found 
parents to be an asset in solving pressing educational problems. 
More meaningful parent infolvement is mandatory if we are to have 
a truly productive educational program for students. 

Complexities of teacher's task is no longer a Vcvlid excuse 
to prohibit parent involvement. In fact, it should be viewed as 
one of many reasons to include parents in the educational 
proceedings. We will undoubtedly increase our effectiveness as 
educato»-5 if we work in partnership with parents for the 
amelioration of the child's exceptionality. The overwhelming 
trend of current research supports parental involvement in many 
aspects of the instructional powers. This is evidenced by a 
quote over 13 years ago by Lopate and others in Review of 
Educational Research , 

203 



-2- 



Educational research indicates that when parents of 
school children are involved in the process o-f 
education, their children are likely to achieve 
better. This heightened achievement may be due to the 
lessening o-f distance between the goals o-f the school 
and goals o-f the home and to positive changes in 
teacher's attitudes resulting -from the greater sense o-f 
accountability when parents o-f their students are 
visible in the schools. The child may also achieve 
better because he has an increased sense o-f control 
over his own destiny when he sees his parents actively 
engaged in decision making in the school. 

The research is supported in every area o-f exceptionality (i.e. 
•favoring parental involvement). For example: Where extensive 
therapeutic processes were assumed to be too complex -for parents 
have shown great strides -for students with a variety o-f home- 
school interactions. It has been shown that parents trained in 
basic speech correction methods were able to significantly 
improve their child's speech patterns. Similar -findings 
involve: li.R., physically and neurological ly impaired, 
emotionally disturbed, learning disabled, and gi-fted. 

It becomes evident that our program e-f-forts may succeed only 
to the extent that parental support and cooperation exists and ii 
more than 907. o-f all school districts have conferences with 
parents. Skill and competency development are important. In 
order to make sure this happens, communication skills must be 
developed and parents must be accepted as partners. There are 
several factors involved which influence the success of 
conferencing with parents; all of which include: 



204 



- joint attendance o-f both parents 

- preplanning o-f the conference 

- good listening skills 

- recording essential data 

- summary o-F conference session 

- questions (clarifying and types) 

- evaluation (formal or informal) 

The type of parental involvement is important. Decide if it is 
for behavior modification or involvement in instructional 
process, etc. Key issues are important in both. For example in 
behavior modification basic principles must be made clear: 

- reinforcement is fundamental to all learning. 

- reinforcement must be scheduled in a systematic way. 

- reinforcement is effective only when it can be applied to 
specific observable behaviors. 

- reinforcement of desired behavior to extingui.n 
misbehavior 

- reinforcement is contingent upon the child's perception of 
its effectiveness and the child's maturity. 

- success is contingent upon the individual's desire to 
control their own behavior. 

Parents and children must know that is expected of them. 
The degree of general or specific procedures will depend upon 



205 



individuals. Follow up is required in the behavior modification 
process. Parental sincerity and adaptability are crucial 
•factors. 

Instriittional involvement is another type o-f direct 
intervention which involves parental cooperation. It involves 
both school and home and -formal and in-formal methods. 

In School 

- parapro-fessional 

- observations (structured and non structured) directed 
provides modeling opportunity 

At Home 

- encouragement o-f learning (positive interest) 

- involvement with homework (quality work) 

Enough background - Now to speci-fics. How do we build trust? 
Sharing 
Taking risks 

Establishing clear expectations 

Provide -feedback and reiri orcement 
Two major types o-f con-ferences we are involved in. We must be 
prepared for both. 



20G 



Planned and Unplanned 
Format 

Unpl ann 



yss Family and school background info. maybe 

yes Assessment information maybe 

most likely Goals S< expectations o-f parent -for child maybe 

yes Purpose o-f conference no 

yes Opportunity for questions no 

yes Discussion of assessment procedures no 

yes Restatement of needs or plans no 

yes Classroom/school schedules no 

yes School philosophy no 

yes Specified academic procedures discussed no 

yes Related services no 

yes Evaluation procedures no 



Obviously planned conferences would be our preference, 
however we must be prepared to contend with and interact with 
pafents at times other than during scheduled (preplanned) 
sessions. Specific types of unplanned conferences with parents 
maybe: telephone, non-educational settings, emotionally over 
wrought (shock, guilt, frustrated, grief), angry, garrulous, and 
during class time. Specific strategies we might develop for 
unplanned conference in order to enhance success might be as 
noted below: 

207 



Be able to assess their own beliefs and -feelings about 
parents and unplanned interactions they usually are more 
adapt at dealing with them. 

We must be able to accept parents as having a 
•facilitating role in the child's growth and development 
and being worthy o-f cooperative involvement for the 
child's benefit. 

Planned changes can occur through assistance of 
parents. They need to be exposed to appropriate 
conditions and contingencies and that we can engineer 
and effect such changes. 

Be able to redirect unplanned conferences through 
structure and guidance, i.e., be able to express 
emotions and perceptions truthfully - to be able to 
reschedule. 

Provide structure for the unplanned conference. Provide 
written guidelines for when unscheduled meetings are 
permitted (e.g., "drop in" sessions, calls at home or 
school, hours available). Structure needed here just 
like for lEP's. 

Effective communication skills necessary. Unscheduled 
conferences are likely to have a disproportionate number 
of angry, guilty, or discomposed parents so - we must 



203 



-7- 

be prepared to employ appropriate communication skills, 
e.g., verbal and non-verbal signals (value their 
perceptions - even i-f we disagree), address con-flict 
directly - in order to turn it into a joint problem 
solving session. 
7. Anticipate and plan -for unscheduled conferences. 

- maintain up to date -files on all students 

- ready access to local agencies 

- structured guidelines on how parents can assist 
students at home 

- being -familiar with con-flict resolution strategies 

In order to strengthen or enhance encounters with parents we 
must address not only the needs o-f parents, but their strengths 
as well. We must rely on and utilize parents as experts to serve 
on curriculum committees, parent advisory boards, -fund raising 
activities, and to develop parent to parent programs. We must 
keep in mind, we are all interested in the wel-fare o-f the 
exceptional children and youth. We must work together to achieve 
the highest levels o-f per-f ormance. 



203 



Wednesday, April 23 
1;30 - 2:30 pm 



John Stellern 
University of Wyoming 
Box 3374 

Laramie, WY 82Q71 



QUALITY INSERVICE 
TRAINING FOR RURAL EDUCATORS; 
A FUNCTIONAL ALTERNATIVE 



Target Audience: Teachers, Administrators, University 
State Department Personnel. 



Faculty, 



Providing quality inservice training for teachers and administrators 
from very low population density areas has always been a major concern. In 
the spring of 1977, the Special Education faculty members at the University 
of Wyoming decided to directly address the issue. 

Working jointly with the SDE, it was determined that a large number of 
Wyoming public school teachers were in need of a survey course in special 
education for re-certification purposes. Such a course was designed, and 
extensive efforts were begun to recruit and train potential instructors. 

During the summer of 1977, fourteen potential instructors were selected 
from Wyoming school districts, brought to the UW campus for eight weeks, and 
subjected to a rigorous training program. At the conclusion of those eight 
weeks, eight potential trainers met criteria mutually established by us and 
the SDE for Probational Course Instructor status. 

Each probationally endorsed instructor taught a survey course in 
special education in a selected rural Wyoming setting during the fall 
semester of 1977. Students in those classes. University faculty, and SDE 
personnel evaluated all instructors. Six of the eight instructors who 
taught the course in the fall of 1977 were endorsed as Extension Course 
Instructors for the spring of 1978. 

For the past seven years, this system has grown to include eleven 
instructors endorsed to offer University graduate credit covering a variety 
of courses for both the regular and special educator. Monitoring and 
evaluation of instruction continues to be a joint University and SDE effort. 
Feedback from students in these courses continues to be excellent. 

Our intent for the 1986 ACRES conference is to share step-by-step 
methodology for establishing a high quality statewide inservice effort 
directed to rural areas, systems for monitoring and evaluating these 
efforts, and strategies designed to continually upgrade instructional 
offerings. Emphasis will be placed on statewide inservice coverage and 
SDE/University cooperation. 



ERIC 



210 



Concurrent Sessions 
Wednesday^ April 23 

2:40 - 3:40 PM 



211 



Coeur d'Alene Public Schools 



SCHOOL DISTRICT NO. 271 



Pat Pickens, Linda Knowles, Julie 
Green 

Coeur d'Alene SD #271 

311 North 10th 

Coeur d'Alene, ID 83814 

ADMINISTRATIVE CENTER 

311 N. 10th Street 
Coeur d'Alene, idaho 83814 
Phone (208) 664-8241 



ABSTRACT OF PROPOSED PRESENTATION 



Apiaroaches To Secondary Transition in Rtiral Areas 

The delivery of appropriate ser.lce to severely handlcipped students as 
they make the transition from school to adult life has been ider.tifled as a major 
program goal by the Office of Special Education Programs In Washington, D.C. 
(will, 198a). 

The purpose of this presentation Is to provide information on a 
community-based model designed to provide transition services for the mUdly, 
moderately and severely handicapped individuals. The model prepares students to 
leave the school setting and enter the community work environment of rural 
North Idaho. Critical components of this program include: 



a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 



community-based work experience 
coramunily-based instruction 
social skdls training 
emplqyabUity skUls training 
parent Involvement 
sociai/sexual awareness classes 



g) peer-age tutoring program 



This program was selected by the Idaho State Department of Special Education 
In 1955, as the Exemplary Secondary Special Education Program for the state 
and is used as a model demonstration site. 

An overview of the transition model, program goals and objectives will be 
provided. Presentations will focus on a variety of currlcular processes utilized 
for school and community integration of high school level handicapped students. 
Procedures manuals, developed in response to requests from program visitors, 
will iTOvide an outline and explanation of the model's structure. 

Part of the session will address developmenr. of programs for the moderate 
to severely handicapped student population and wUl include a discussion of 
age-appropriate programs, community-based instruction, peer-age tutors, 
InrJividualized instruction and parental involvement necessary for support of 
pcogmm design and implementation. 

The second part of the presentation will address vocational issues and 
strategies pertinent to mildly handicapped learners. Emphasis will be placed on 
classroom objectives, activities and their relevance to work experience, 
assessment procedures and appUcatlon, development and maintenance of 
community work placements, interagency and employer involvement and 
transition to post-secondary vocational programs. 



ERIC 



212 



Wednesday, April 23 
2:40 - 3:40 pm 



Presentore: Bernice Epstein R.N.. M.S.N. 

Cooperative Extension Service 
Family and Consumer Resources 
University of Arizona 
Tucson* Arizona 85721 



TITLE: INSTANT HEALTH INFO: The Telephone Connection 

It is not an overstatement to declare that the residents of rural Arizona 
have more health problems and fewer resources to meet their needs than do 
those who reside in urban areas. Surveys showed that rural infant mortality 
rate was almost 50% higher than for urban areas. Also, rural Arizona has a 
higher accidental death rate, especially in motor vehicles, many of which are 
alcohol-related . 

Rural families also have more socio-economic problems; ten of the twelve 
rural Arizona counties have been shown to have a greater percent of their 
populations living in poverty than is true for the state as a whole. 

Portions cf all of Arizona's twelve rural counties have bean classified 
as medically underserved areas by both federal and state designation. In 
addition to the dearth of the health manpower, rural Arizona lacks certain 
health care facilities and other services taken for granted in urban areas. 

It was to respond to some of these needs that the Extension Serv ce began 
its INSTANT HEALTH INFO PROGRAM: statewide toll free telephone accest. to more 
than 350 brief (3 to 5 minutes) pre-recorded tapes on a wide range of health 
and safety topics. In addition to Extension Service funds, major financial 
support cam from the Flinn Foundation with some assistance from the Arizona 
Department of Health Services and the Western Health Systems Agency. The 
purpose was to demonstrate that a free telephone service was a cost effective 
and efficient way for rural Arizona residents to access health information. 

The goals of Instant Health Info were to have users be more knowledge- 
able, be better able to discuss problems with health providers, reduce health 
and safety hazards, recognize early warning signs of illness, and be more 
self-sufficient in home care. 

To measure the degree to which these objectives were met, a randomized 
telephone survey of users and non-users was conducted. Significantly more 
users were younger in age and came from lower-income families than non-users. 
The majority of the sample of respondents were female. Only small differences 
existed between users and non-usors in reported accessibility to and use of 
medical services. 



213 



The respondents vere almost svenly divided between urban and rural resi- 
dents. In actual calls made to the service, however, the usage by rural 
residents was much more dramatic. Although rural residents account for only 
one fourth of the state's population they made two thirds of all calls to the 
program. In gross numbers these calls totalled almost 50,000 in the two years 
the program operated. ' 

The majority of respondents (75%) reported using the service in connec- 
tion wxth a personal or friend's health concern. Another 25% were simply 
curious. Overall, 89% of the users were satisfied with the informational 
content of the tapes. As would be expected, satisfaction was greater for 
thoae who used the service frequently. Of those who were dissatisfied, the 
predominant opinion was that the tapes didn't contain enough informa':ion. 

There was overwhelming agreement (98%) that the taped information was 
exther very or moderately helpful. Those who had used the service most fre- 
quently were the most positive in their rating. 

Respondents were almost evenly divided in reporting whether they did 
anything differently after hearing and m tape. Differences were a function 
of the number of times respondents reported using the service. Respondents 
who had used IHI three or more times were most likely to report changing their 
behavior. Of those who reported no changed behavior, the largest percent had 
called only once. These differences were statistically significant. 

Among respondents who reported changing their behavior, most frequently 
mentioned was that they took some preventive action. The most frequently 
cxted changes concerned aspects of child care and lifestyle changes such as: 
increased exercise: lowered salt, cholesterol, sugar, and/or caloric intake; 
quit or cut down smoking; and used auu screen lotions. Other actions were as 
diverse as •n)ought a smoke ala td," "^ad a lung capacity test," and "got rid of 
our cat." " 



Even where no changes were specified, respondents frequently commented 
that the information eased their mind or confirmed their present actions as 
correct. Voluntary comments were almost all highly positive, but weren't 
analyzed. 

While the program intent was not to have the tapes take the place of a 
medical visit, it is apparent from the survey data thct the increased knowl- 
edge gained from the tapes encouraged respondents to modify their health 
behavior in this regard. Of those who reported x change, 17% went to a doctor 
sooner than planned - indicating perhaps the recognition of a possible early 
warning sign of illness. Fourteen percent reported they were more confident 
to treat minor illnesses or accidents at home with self-care. Another 16% 
felt more prepared to discuss their health concerns with health providers. 

Some of the features of the IHI program which jiade it attractive to 
callers were that the tapes were available in the evenings and for ten hours 
on weekends, the library included many health-related subjects such as child 
development, fcod safety, and family concerns including coping with stress, 
grief and dying. Eighteen of the tapes met the needs of children age 3-12 
while others dealt with the concerns of adolescents in the areas of drugs, 
rape, contraceptives and depression. These tapes consistently were among the 
most requested of all the tapes, surpassed only by one on weight control. 



ERIC 



2 214 



In order to increase usage of the service beyond what was available with 
free publicity, seven paid promotional methods were itiplemented in rural 
Arixona over a two year period of time. (Figure 1) Promotions wei- targeted 
to one, county at a time and only made in rural areas. Analysis of data 
indicate that the most effective ways to increase usage of the service were to 
get a brochure/directory into the home through newspaper inserts, mail or 
especially by distribution at school. Least effective were newspaper adver- 
tisements which instructed readers to call for a free directory. As a rule, 
counties with the lowest prior use showed the greatest gain from the promo- 
tion. (Figure 2) 

Newspaper promotions done on Tuesdays led to a greater response than 
promotions done on any other day. (Figure 3) 

Tuesdays may have been more productive than Wednesdays for newspaper 
promotion because of certain behaviors exhibited by women. Women are known to 
use health services more often than men. They also are most likely to manage 
household budgets and do the major food shopping. In Arizona weekly grocery 
store ads run on Wednesdays. It is possible that Wednesday's food ads were of 
greater concern to women than health promotion but on Tuesday with no food ad 
competition, women were more ready to respond to the health promotion in 
larger numbers. 

The costs of all promotional activities ranged from zero, when print 
space was donated, to 9.6 cents per unit delivered. The cost per new call, 
i.e.each call above the base rate plus a margin for error, ranged from zero to 
$4.56 with an average of $1.04 (Figure 4). Compared to paid promotion, free 
publicity was not found to be as effective a wpy to generate a response. 

An abbreviated version of IHI is being implemented in the two major 
metro areas of Phoenix and Tucson. Three fourths of Arizona's population live 
in these cities. The program name has been changed to "Dial Extension". 
Half of the tapes are the most requettetl of the IHI tapes plus some brand new 
topics. The other half of the tape library is made up of home, family and 
gardening messages. The service is free to callers in the two urban areas but 
outside callers must pay the toll costs. One new highlight will be the 
"Health Tape of the Month" which facilitates the rapid dissemination of topi- 
cal information. 

In addition to rural residents, other special populations were considered 
m the planning of the program although lack of funding precluded most of the 
adaptations needed to facilitate their access. One successful modification 
for the blind was made possible by Arizona Books for the Blind who made 40 
braille copies of the IHI directory. It took 24 pages of braille for each 
copy. These pages were covered and bound and distributed to every major 
library in the state. The program only paid for the duplication and binding 
costs, all the other services were contributed by volunteers. Had funding 
for the program continued, the Arizona State Library for the Blind and Physi- 
cally Handicapped would have made a master tape of the IHI brochure, listing 
first the categories of tapes and then the titles in each category. This tape 
would then be reproduced and given to the visually and physically handicapped 
whose hands could not hold or open a regular brochure. Using tone indexing, 
listeners would be able to fastforward the audio tape to the category of 
choice. They then could access IHI with their requests as any other caller 
did. 



' 215 

o 

ERIC 



Serving the hearing impaired was another plan which never was implemented 
but could have been without too much additional cost. 

Based on a 1981 Handicapped Needs Assessment by the Maricopa County 
Comnunxty College District. Arizona has 207.645 deaf and hearing imparied 
iSii'? SS":. T^\Ari2ona Council for the Deaf estimates that there are more 
than 2.000 deaf who already own TTY or TDD telecommunication devices for the 
deaf. These machines permit the deaf to communicate with each other but with 
almost no one else. This special population is desperately hungry to access 
the mainstream" world but such entry is often blocked because of their disa- 
bility. To overcome this problem it was planned that fifty of the most 
requested IHI tapes would be transcribed onto a separate set of audio 
cassettes with pulsated sounds of the message text instead of a voice. These 
pulsations would be transmitted over the telephone, from the TDD in the IHI 
center to the TDD in client's home. There, the message text would be printed 
on the TDD viewing screen or paper feed. A special listing of the available 

* * *° person who had or was considering the purchase of 

a TDD. They could then call the special WATS line set up for this purpose. 
When the program operators received a call on this line, they would know to 
use the special TDD tapes. 

Replication of the IHI telephone program is feasible for special popula- 
tions within or among states. Start up costs consist primarily of preparing 
scripts and recording the information on cassette tapes. Tape recorders of 
sufficient high quality to play the tapes over the telephone cost about $100 

-!L?"f "';Aj?*n.°°^* significant item is the cost of the wide-area telephone 
service or WATS line. 

Before the American Telephone and Telegraph Company was mandated to 

divest Itself of certain services the -wo statewide WATS lines used by IHI 

cost approximately $1500 per month. The telephone charges were based on a 

flat rate for 175 hours of usage per month. Additional hours of use cost 

§A/hour. After the break up of AT&T the flat rate was cancelled and an hourly 

J^ifn As a result the program telephone costs more than 

tlfllt' r.-?* Wisher the phone bill. In other words, 

the program could not afford its success. 

Recently, some of the alternate telephone systems have initiated special 
intrastate WATS rates which may be more reasonable. epeciai 

Even with the acute rise in the cost of the telephone service IHI still 
was a cost-effective way to get health and safety information to a large 
number of people. Excluding in-kind donations, primarily of time, the out-of- 
pocket cost was about two dollars per call. 

«i«ht^^,-ffrr* limited audience than the general public is targeted the costs 
might differ considerably. Certainly, promotional costs should be less since 
many of the potential users may be already identified and could be reached by 
direct mail Funding sources often times are available for demonstration 
?««d/n?^.* feasibility has been proved the problem of continued 

funding 18 trickier. It might be appropriate for several different programs 
to pool their resources and sponsor one telephone line into a central office 
for recorded information on diverse topics. In other parts of the country 
similar systems appear to have worked we0i 03pportunities for people to 



4 216 



access sports and similar information or to record their votes for or against 
a particular issue and have the cost charged to their own telephone bills are 
already available nationally. It is expected that this feature will be avail- 
able in Arizona within the next few years. 

Sociologists and other futurists have documented that we are already well 
into the "information age." While newer technologies eventually may overcome 
the use of telephones it is still an almost universally available and reason- 
ably affordable tool to provide accurate information in a timely and confi- 
dential manner to target audiences of any size for any purpose. 



Cooperative Extension Service 




The University of Arizona • College of Agriculture • Tucson, Arizona 85721 



Extension Home Economics 

INSTANT HEALTH INFO: The Telephone ConnectioA 



SfS«- 



7M— 



4ff— 



Sff* 



2i0« 



ADS Itmxar 



I iiui« ImaneslMntza?! scaooci j 

•OMPft* 'BORON 



FIGORC 1* OTCCn OF OffREISIIT TtPtS OP MMTION 




,liiSittS .I« Mr. .Slfpl* 
! 9mt9X U Mr. Sw1« 
SdMl MstrifaitfM 



I iMtrts li Utivlar itM^apcn 
• Ktiprf at fi Sigalar iiMip«ptrs 
[Ito PmdM 



EKLC 



none « - WAtt If ooMcncs or c bw mml c roraAnoN wtk md Hnmr oirFoocr 
nrcs OF pooHmoH 

The University of Arizona. College of Agriculture. U.S. Department of Agrigil^jgand Arizona Counties Cooperating 



4f0 — 



6 

200 — 



nmc 3 • iKsms tr our of or -mranptt 

•P-<,05 



c 
o 
s 

T 

z 
If 

0 

o 

L 
L 
K 
K 
S 



1 — 



•13 



.49 



I«0S 



1.21 



A.Si 



WMOUui Dunn- aw. * aov. naaLAR cuss maatM 
MMsm. aonoir sorrL. sowl. inHarR. mail hbhsfr. 

f IGWC 4 . AVEMIZ cmmi OU IT TTTC 



• r - 4.01 

lacs 



ERIC 



219 



Wednesday, April 23 
2:40-3:40 pm 



Presenters: 



Dr. Michael P. Wolfe 

Director, Center for Teacher Educati 

SUNY Plattsburgh 

Plattsburgh, New York 12901 



Dr. Barbara McConvllle 

Associate Professor, Special Educati 

SUNY Plattsburgh 

PUttsburgh, New York 12901 



TITLE: Rural Special Education Preservlce Field Experiences 



Rural and small -town life connotes more than any Census Bureau definition could 
possibly suggest. In a now famous Interview with a prominent magazine, the Mayor 
of the City of New York described the typical upstate New Yorker as "Pa" In his 
bib overalls and "Ma" in her calico dress riding In their pick-up truck to a nearby 
general store. 

While that picture might depict an occasional glimpse of .life in rural 
New York, it certainly is far from typical. Particularly, in those states which 
are dominated by urban populations, such as New York, the word "rural" is thought 
of as synonymous with "abject poor"; conjuring up images of postcard landscapes 
peopled by pleasant, but bittersweet remnants of the 1930s. 

This cavalier attitude toward rural .and small -town New York reflects a lack of 
appreciation for and sensitivity to the rural atmosphere. 

It is the purpose of this paper *o describe the reality of the North Country area 
of New York State and explain how a rural -located unit of the state university system, 
the State University of New York at Plattsburgh, prepares prospective teachers to 
meet the unique needs of this area through Its Rural Special Education Teacher 
Training Program. 

Characteristics of the Region: The North Country 

The four-county area of Clinton-Essex-Warren-Uashington Is large (4,568 square miles) 
but sparsely populated, having a population density of 49 people per square mile, 
one sixth that of New York State, even excluding New York City. The four-county 
area is situated in the northeast comer of the Adirondack Park (roughly six 
million acres of state and privately owned land), in which land use and development 
is highly restricted. The population Is predominately white (98X) with a median 
age of 29.3. 

Virtually every study or analysis of the region has pointed to the severely 
economically depressed nature of the area, which has the second lowest per capita 
income in the State. The 1984 Lake Champlain-Lake George Economic Development-- 
Regional Planning Board Report pointed out the problems confronting the region. 



1. a surplus of unskilled labor 

2. highly seasonable employment opportunities 

3. a declining number of operating farms and limited farm employment 
opportunities 

4. inadequate highway, rail, and air transportation 



220 



ERIC 



2 



5. water pollution 

6. Inadequate cultural facilities and opportunities 

7. an insufficient supply of developed industrial sites 

8. high transportation costs, which contributed to a high cost of living 

9. inadequate opportunity for post-baccalaureate education in the area 
(besides SUNY Plattsburgh, there are two small community colleges. 

Empire State College, a satellite unit of SUNY, and a small, private 
2-year college.) 

A map of- the four-county North Country area is appended to this paper. 



High unemployment, an unskilled labor force, and few employment opportunities for 
those entering the labor force characterize the region. The four-county area has 
had an average unemployment rate of over IIX, for the past three years, nearly 
SOX hlgiisr than either the statewide or national average for the same period of 
time (U.S. Dept. of Labor, 1984). The annual youth unemployment rate in the 
North Country runs at 33*. The per capita Income of the region ($5,483) is only 
61X of that of New York State and 62% of the national per capita Income (1980 Census). 
Roughly 27% of the families within the region have an annual Income below $10,000, 
and nearly 14X live below the poverty level. Social Security Income is received 
by over 31X of the population, a rate two and a half times the statewide rate, 
and 18X of the population subsists on public assistance, a rate four and a half 
times the statewide average excluding New York City (NYS Dept. of Conmerce. 1984) . 
In addition to these dismal economfc statistics, the population must contend with 
a climate which necessitates that homes be heated eight months a year, a high ^ 
rate of substandard housing, and a considerable distance to travel for basic W 
commodities and health care facilities. 

A 1980 SUNY Plattsburgh Upward Bound Program Purvey revealed that 40X of the 
region's high school students lived below the low-income guidelines for the 
U.S. Department of Education's TRIO programs, and that 85X of these area high 
school students came from homes where neither parent had earned a baccalaureate 
degree. Of the population over the age of 25 within Clinton County, nearly 6456 
have received a high school diploma. The average number of high school students 
accepted into post-secondary institutions consistently averages around 56X, while 
only 22.5X of high school graduates from low-income families go on to some form 
of higher education. 

Locatei^ in the center of the service area," the State University and BOCES (Board 
of Cooperative Educational Services) are within 60 miles of 39 small rural school 
districts. The New York Legislative Commission on Rural Resources (1985) identifies 
the Clinton-Essex-Warren-Washington County area of New York as suffering from a 
list of woes: 

- Lack of availability of quality teaching personnel due to low salaries 

- Limited programs and staff 

- Insufficient career guidance for students 

- Problems presented by geographic Isolation of large numbers of the rural 
population 

- Limited summer education ^ 

- Lack of state-of-the-art communications technology 9 

These regional characteristics provide the setting for the field-based special 
education program at SUNY Plattsburgh. 



ERIC 



221 



Field-Based Experiences in Teacher Education 

In the last fifteen years the goals of the field-based teacher education programs 
have changed significantly. The earliest stated goals pointed toward: socializing 
the prospective teacher into the school environment, improving the cognitive and 
affective performance of students, providing students with early field experiences 
to allow teacher education students to make more informed career choices, and to 
Improve the students success in student teaching. Such goal statements tended to 
view the student in the passive role, as someone on which the institutions are 
acting. Research assessing the achievement of such goals has shown the meagerness 
of teacher training institutions' success. 

As Zeichner (1980) points out in his review of the research, teacher education 
programs have not created significant changes in the pre-service teacher's 
perceptions of education. It instead indicates that the cooperating classroom 
teacher's attitude prevails over the attitudes of the students s/he supervises. 
Field-based experiences seem to entail a complicated set of both positive and 
negative consequences that are subtle In nature and are not under the complete 
control of the school nor the institution of higher education. 

As the field-based movement has developed there has been a significant shift 
toward: assessing the student's performance as a potential teacher, providing 
situations In which the student can practice and develop teaching skills 
(Elliot and Mays, 1979), and increasing students' confidence in student teaching. 
The clearest results of research oii, field-based programs comes from student survey 
data which shows that graduates of "field-based programs rate themselves significantly 
higher than do graduates of campus-based programs. Perhaps recent success results 
from a clearer understanding of ...the purposes of the field-based experience. 

Two recent publications seem to have f acused themsel ves on such purposes. First, 
The Nattona'l- Commission for Excellence in Teacher Education (1985) states that 
the list of goals for the professional education of teachers should include: 

1. Teaching students how to select appropriate content and concepts. 

2. Teaching students to understand how children think and learn. 

3. Teaching students to use a variety of teaching strategies. 

4. Allowing students to observe and analyze the performance of a 
variety of children. 

5. Giving students an understanding of how technology can be integrated 
into practice ensuring the development of higher order thinking, 
problem solving, conceptual and social learning. 

6. Providing the student an understanding of the conceptual relationships 
of ideas and facts they learn in their advanced academic courses. 

7. Permitting the student to participate in detailed analysis and 
criticism of their own and their peer's teaching. 

Of these goals, at least the last five can best be accomplished in a field-based 
setting. The first two reflect foundations elements which can be introduced in 
the college classroom and then applied in the field setting. A second source. 
Guidelines for Field-Based Experiences (AACTE, 1983), suggests that field-based 
experiences should: 



ERIC 



222 



1. Be carefully designed and supervised moving through stages of 
increasing responsibility. 

2. Allow prospective teachers to observe and practice instructional 
theory in environments which facilitate early feedback, evaluation, 
and modification. 

The remainder of this paper will illustrate how these goals are being implemented 
In a field-based special education program at SUNY Plattsburgh 



Field-Based Special Education Program, SUNY Plattsburgh 

Preservlce preparation for teacher education candidates In special education at 
SUNY Plattsburgh generally focuses Itsfield training In a sixty-five mile radius, 
utilizing approximately eight school districts therein for practicum sites. Each 
of these school systems Is affiliated with the nineteen-member regional collaborati 
of school districts, BOCES (Board of Cooperative Educational Services for Clinton. 
Essex, Warren, and Washington Counties). Each field experience Is designed 
specifically to enhance the on-campus coursework and Is monitored by university 
supervisors. The sites are selected to meet unique needs of students and to 
acquaint students with the unique features of the North Country schools and 
communities. 

The first practicum— a three credit experience with the normal progress learner- 
occurs within a thirty mile radius 'Of campus. A subsequent field experience with 
mentally retarded/developmental ly (llsabled adults occurs within twenty-five miles ^ 
Of campus, while the first special education six credit practicum experiences \ 
consists of placements within aislxty-flve mile radius of campus. Finally, the 
student teaching placement (twelve credits) Is arranged most frequently In an 
area 100 miles from campus. 

Supervision of preservlce students In all special education settings Is the 
responsibility of Special Education faculty, with the exception of the student 
teaching experience. All teacher education students are supervised by off campus 
or part-time supervisors. 



Program Advantages and Disadvantages 

Competefhcies and curriculum components which are included In the SUNY Plattsburgh 
special education teacher preparatory program reflect some of the enhancements as 
well as the limitations of Rural Special Education Teacher Training Programs as 
Identified by Marrs (1984). 

Specifically. SUNY Pittsburgh's rural-focused training consists of course-related 
content and experiences in the following areas described as program strengths. 

- student knowledge of advocacy groups regionally, statewide, and 
nationally 

- student knowledge of rural community services offered by private and 
public agencies 

- student knowledge of skills and arrangements necessary for independent 

and semi -Independent living i 

- student commitment to parent advocacy 

- program Involvement in recruitment opportunities 



223 



- program utilization of adjunct instructors from area agencies and 
public schools 

- student knowledge of working with rural families 

- student experiential training (on-site work, informal collaborations 
with personnel) 

• program inclusion of field personnel in skill analyses of students 

- student knowledge of regional collaborative delivery services, itinerant 
services, and a service delivery model for rural handicapped students, 
particularly those with low incidence handicaps 

• student knowledge of rural cultures, norms, mores, including socially 
acceptable behavior 

- program emphasis on generic skills for special education personnel 

• student experiences in management of certified and noncertified aides 
assigned to special education settings 

- student knowledge of leadership skills and strategies in the process of change 

- student knowledge of transportation limitations 

- student experiences with extended families 

- student development of annotated bibliographies for resources (human, 
technological, material) 

- student knowledge of support systems and mentors in rural school systems 
and communities 

- student knowledge of proposal development to management for improvement 
in services 

It is clear that numerous unique problems also affect this special education 
teacher preparatory program. 

- student housing in off-campus locations 

- sufficient number of practicum sites 

- distances of field sites from campus and from each other 

- other course responsibilities of students during practicum 

- transportation for students 

- indistinguishable curriculum for urban and rural settings 

- supervision by faculty 

- broad geographic area encompassing field site availability 

- multiple responsibilities of faculty 



Future Directions 

< 

Various studies supported by the U,S, Office of Special Education Programs (SEP) 
have generated data describing numerous issues relating to rural special education 
service delivery. Based on analyses of these studies, a comprehensive literature 
review, dialogue with state policymakers, and collaboration with regional peer 
professionals, the special education teacher preparatory program at SUNY Plattsburgh 
will continue the processes of developing a quality preservice model, committed 
to training competent future special educators who can work meaningfully and 
successfully with handicapped students in rural environments. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Bibliography 

Educating a profession: Profile of a beginning teacher. (1983). 

Washington, DC: American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education. 

Elliott, P. G. & Mays, R. (1979). Early field experiences in teacher education 
Phi Delta Kappa Fastback , 125. eaucanon. 

Helge D. (January, 1984). The state of the art of rural special education 
Exceptional Children . 50, (4), 294-305. 

Marrs, L. U. (January, 1984). A bandwagon without music: preparing rural 
special education. Exceptional Children . 50, (4), 334-342. 

National Commission on Excellence In Teacher Education. (1985). Nation at risk: 
Imperative for educational reform. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Education. 

Rural New York In transition. (January, 1985). New York State Legislative 
Commission on Rural Resources. State of New York. 

Zeichner, K. M. (1980). Are the effects of university teacher education washed 
out by school experience? Journal of Teacher Education . 32 (3), 7-11. 



226 



Wednesday, April 23 
2:40 - 3:40 pm 



Visual Problems in the Developmentally Disabled (D.D.): 
As a teacher/educator, what do I do? 



Landa J. Iverson, Ph.D. 
Acting Assistant Superintendent 
at Grafton State School/San Haven, North Dakota and 
Adjunct Professor, University of North Dakota 

and 

Kimberly Marion, B.S.W./L. 
Unit Director at Grafton State School/San Haven, North Dakota 



Proposal For: 

Acres Sixth Annual National Rural Special Education Conference 



227 



Iverson/Marion 

Abstract 

Visual problems are a major problem in the majority of developmentally 
disabled (D.D.) children. Oftentimes, the visual ' functioning is over- 
looked and ignored. As with other handicapping condition3, the functional 
vision of the child may be impaired as a result of a multi-handicapping 
condition or prescribed medications. More serious conditions cause Low 
Vision problems that can greatly impair the child's learning capabilities 
and success. 

As all educators in the rural area know, the accessibility to professional 
vision specialists is very limited. In the state of North Dakota, we 
have approximately (6) vision specialists that meet certification. 
Many counties are without these services. The handicapped students suffer 
or are usually classified into another diagnostic category, still with- 
out services. 

This session will give generic special education teachers some solid 
information as to how they can accomodate the visually impaired child. 
It will also give the teachers "clues" to a visual deficit that is 
undiagnosed. 

This presentation will explore some of the common causes of low-vision 
in children who are developmentally disabled. It will also include those 
high-incidence conditions that many D.D. children have that the Special 
Education teacher may be unaware the condition exists. Early de- 
tection techniques for teachers will be presented along with referral 
processes. 



228 



Iverson/Marion 

For the more common conditions with children who are mentally retarded,'-' 
epileptic, deaf-blind, and cerebral palsy, teaching approaches will be 
shared. Low Vision Aids and Equipment will also be demonstrated. 

By gaining knowledge in such a high-demand specialty area, these rural 
teachers will be able to contribute to the system and the children in 
it, in a more effective manner. Everyone benefits. 



223 



Wednesday, April 23 
2:40 - 3:40 pm 



CHARACTERS IN LITERATURE PRCVIDE ROLE MODELS 
FOR RURAL GIFTED AND TALENTED YOUTH 



ERIC 



Roberta R. Daniels, Ph.D. 
Coordinator o-f Program -for Gi-fted, Talented, and Creative 
Arkansas State University 
Department o-f Special Education S< Speech Pathology 
State University, AR 72467 



Lenn Katzer, M.S. 
Coordinator for Programs o-f Gi-fted 
Burlington, Kansas 66839 



Presentation prepared -for Sixth Annual Rural 
Special Education Con-ference 
Tucson, Arizona 
April 22-25, 1986 



230 



CHARACTERS IN LITERATURE PROVIDE ROLE MODELS FOR RURAL GIFTED AND TAI£NTED YOUTH. 



Students in rural areas need role models too! Opportunities for gifted 
students to interact with appropriate gifted role nodels may be aeverly 
limited when compared to the abundance of opportunities available to urban 
area students. A viable plan to provide appropriate role models for gifted 
students is to utilize characters in existing literature. The characters of 
Tony isadors in Who Really Killed Cock Robin. Claudia Kincaid from the 
Mixed"Ut> Files of_ Mrs. Basil p . Frankweiler , Lerpy Brown from Encyclopedia 
Brown, and Jessie Oliver Aarons, Jr. in Bridge to Terabithia provide differing 
types of role models for the gifted. 

Many of the characters portrayed in the literature provide positive 
traits that gifted students might wish to emulate. Other characters appear 
Shallow and supwrficial, yet provide meaningful opportunities for affective 
type discussions. Reading offers productive opportunities and an opportunity 
for gifted students to engage in meaningful self-directed learning, specific 
purposes are to provide assistance in the selection of books that respond to 
special capabilities and to promote the intellectual and affective growth 
of gifted students. 

The majority of the books that will be discussed are among the best 
books available in the contemporary literature for young students. Many of 
the books have gifted children as central characters. The books referred to 
are contemporary titles, not the older classics such as Alice in Wonderland 
or Elephant Child. These references frequently require an extensive 
background, outstanding imagination, a sense of humor, and an ability to sustain 
attention on several levels simultaneously. 

231 



Role Models in Literature 



2 



The selection of refc^rences noted are to be utilized as exanples only for 
guidance in reading and they may serve as a basis for making extrapolations to 
other contemporary efforts. A list of suggested readings will be provided 
for those attending the session along with a detailed discussion of a few 
selected readings, specific details will be provided on how to make these 
books relevant in the class discussions and other assignments for the gifted 
students • 



232 



Bridge to Terabithia bv Katherine Paterson (Crowell Co., New 
York , cl?77) is the winner o-f the John Newbery Award and Willia:T\ 
Allen White Award. This is the story o-f Jesse Oliver Arons, Jr. 
the only boy in a family -flanked by two older and two younger 
sisters, who live in the rural Virginia community o-f Lard Creek, 
They are a poor -family with dad commuting early every morning in 
his old pickup to Washington, D, C,, the only place he can -find 
work, and returning late at night, Jesse, the man o-f the house 
during the day, is saddled with the chores o-f milking Miss Bessie 
and doing gardening, wood chopping and the like. In order tc 
have time to himsel-f as an early riser, he uses his near dawn 
August time to practice running. His immediate goal in li-fe is 
to be the fastest runner at Lard Creek Elementary; a title he is 
certain to obtain since last year's champ has moved up 
educationally. 

His remaining free time is spent drawing — a love he cannot 
share with his family. At one point he tried to tell his dad 
that when he grew up he wanted to be an artist, which caused the 
following response: "What are they teaching in that damn 
school? Bunch of old ladies turning my son into some kind of 

A " 

« , , , 

Even though his dad had not finished, Jesse had gotten the 
message. It would remain his secret in the future not to be 
shared outside of school and with his favorite teacher. Miss 



233 

o 

ERIC 



Edmunds. Even though she must have been some kind a-f hippie 
("she never wore dresses"), she was without a dcubt the most 
talented music teacher Jesse had ever known. She had taken an 
interest in his art and encouraged him to keep drawing. It was 
these things with which he occupied his remaining summer vacation 
time. At least, until Leslie Burke and her -family moved in the 
old Perkins place down the road. The remainder of the story 
provides ample opportunities -for af-fective discussions. Ample 
time should be allowed to discuses not only death but careers, 
-Friends, and personal needs. 

A Mind in the Door bv Madeleine L'Engle 

Charles Mallace is an extremely bright first grade student. 
Though many thought from his appearance, that he was backward, he 
talked like a dictionary. On his first morning at school, in 
response to his teacher's query "I want each of you to tell me 
something about yourself," Charles Wallace replied "What Tm 
interested in right now are the farandolae and the 
mitochondria." When the looks became confused, Charles delved 
further to explain about DNA - RNA - symbiotic relationships, 
etc.? to the point where he. was interrupted by the teacher, who 
told him to stop making up silly things and showing off. 

Meg, his older sister, does not seem too surprised when 
Charles Wallace tells her he saw a dragon in their twin brothers' 



234 



vegetable gardenj, thinking perhaps his statement might be sn 
outgrowth Q-f the abuse he had taken so o-ften -from older boys at 
school . 

Meg eventually -follows her brother to the garden and then to 
the pasture, but no dragon is -found. Only strange -feathers and 
silver and gold lea-f-shaped sparkling scales. Dragons, No. 
Remains o-f an en.tity, a strange being -from another place? 

The book provides a stepping stone to discussions dealing 
with good and evil, -futuristic-science -fiction, and theology. 

60 Well, Stay Wel l, by Toeckey v'^ones (1979). New York: Harper 
and Row. 

Candy and her aristocratic parents live in A-frica. Beckyj, 
an A-frician native, makes -frisnds with Candy and yet is not 
allowed to 'isit or play with Candy. It is still a very timely 
story dealing with sex oriented role expectations, race relations 
and political power. Especially relevant -for the gi-fted is the 
a-ffective need "to better the world." Group discussions will be 
enhanced as gi-fted students try to relate to the ordeals that 
Candy experiences not only with her -family but with the people o-f 
a di-f-ferent country and color. 



235 



-4- 

O'Brien, R, C. (1°71). Mrs, Frisbv and the F:a.t5 MiriH , 

The story o-f the rodents that escaped -from the National 
Institute o-f Mental Health and how their -families survived 
provides exciting opportunities to discuss animal research. The 
questions posed by this provocative story go beyond the life of 
the highly intelligent rats and into discussions of morality and 
human purpose. Independence, cooperation, and work ethics are to 
be considered as they influence and shape social behavior and 
values. Questions reraain unanswered in the story and provide 
stimulus for affective discussions. 



238 



Selc^Cud Reference for lifted 



Dr. Roberta R. Daniels ARKANSAS STATE UNIVERSITY 

Mr. Lenn Katzer Coordinator Programs for Gifted, Burlington, KS 

Aardema, Vema. (197"). Who's in Rabbit's House ? Illus. by Leo Dillon and 
Diane Dillon. New York: Dial. 

Adamson, George. (1968). Finding 1 to 10. Illus. by author. London: Faber 
and Faber. 

« 

Alexander, Lloyd. (1978). The First Two Lives of Lukas-Kasha . New York: 
Dutton. 

Anderson, M. (1981). Forever Ahbra . New York: Atheneum. 

Anderson, Norman D. (1978). Investigating Science in the Swimming Pool and 
Ocean . Illus. by Steve Daniels. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Anderson, Norman D. (1975) . Investigating Science Using Your Whole Body . 
Illus. by author. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Armstrong, Louise. (1978) . How to Turn Up into Down into Up : A Child's 
Guide to Inflation . Depression , and Economic Recovery . Illus. by Bill 
Basso. New York: Harcourt. 

« 

Atkinson, Linda. (1978) . Mo ther Jones - The Most Dangerous Woman in America . 
New York: Crown. 

Babson, Walt. (1976). All Kinds of Codes . New York: Four Winds. 
Baird, M. (1974). A Lesson in Love . Boston: G. K. Hall. 

Barber, Richard. (1976). A Strong Land and a Sturdy : England in the Middle 
Ages . New York: Seabury. " " 

Berger, Melvin. (1970). Tools of Modem Biology . Illus. by Robert Smith. 
New York: Crowell. 

Bethancourt, T. (1977). The Mo rtal I nstruments . New York: Holiday House. 

Bierhorst, John. (ED. and trans). (1976). Black Rainbow : Legends of the 
Incas and Myths of Ancient Peru. Illus. by Jane Byers Bierhorst. New 
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 

Black, Algernon D. (1965). The First Book of Ethics . Illus. by Rick Schreiter. 
New York: Franklin Watts. 

Bums, Marilyn. (1976) . The Book of Think (Or How to Solve a Problem Twice 
Your Size). Illus. by Martha Weston. Boston: Little, Brown. 

Calvert, P. (1980). The Snowbi rd. New York: Scribner's. 



237 



Carroll, Sidney B. (1971). You Be chjB J udge , Illus. by John Richmond. Ni^w 
York: Lothrop, Lee and Shepard. 

Chase, Sara B. (1977). Moving to Win: The Physics of S ports . New York: 
Julian Messner. 

Cosman, Anna. (1979). How to Read and Write Poetry . Illus. by Nicholas 
Krenitsky. New York: Franklin Watts. 

Cresswell, H. (1978) . Absolute Zero : Being the Second Part of the Bagthorpe 
Saga . New York: Macmillan, 

Cresswell, H. (1984) . Bagthorpes Abroad : Being the Fifth Part of the Bagthorpe 
Saga . New York: Macmillan. 

Cresswell, H. (1980). Bagthorpes Unlimited : Being the Third Part of the 
Bagthorpes Saga . New York: Avon. 

Cresswell, H. (1979). Bagthorpes Vs. the World . New York: Macmillan. 

Cresswell, H. (1977). Ordinary Jack . New York: Macmillan. 

deTrevino, E. B. (1965). I^, Juan de Pareja . New York: Beil Books. 

Dobrin, Arnold. (1975) . I. Am a Stranger on the Earth : The Story of V ^rcent 
Van Gogh . New York: Fredrick Wame. 

Elliott, Donald. (1976). Alligators and Music . Illus. by Clinton Arrowood. 
Boston: Gambit. 

Engdahl, S. (1973). Beyond the TonKprrow Mountains . New York: Atheneuip 

Engdahl, S. (1970). Enchantress from the Stars . New York: Atheneum. 

Engdahl, S. (1971) . The Far Side of Evil. New York: Atheneum. 

Engdahl, S. (1972). This Star Shall Abide . New York: Atheneum. 

Fisher, Leonard Everett. (1978). Alphabet Art ; Thirteen ABC's from Around 
the World . Illus. by author. New York: Four Winds. 

Fitzgerald, J. D. (1967). The Great Brain . New York: Dial Press. 

Fitzgerald, J. D. (1973). The Great Brain at the Academy . New York: Dell. 

Fitzgerald, J. D. (1975). The Great Brain Does It Again . New York: Dial. 

Fitzgerald, J. D. (1975). The Great Brain Reforms . New York: Dell. 

Fitzgerald, J. D. (1975). Me and Mv Little Brain . New York: Dell. 

Fitzgerald, J. D. (1971). More Adventures of the Great Brain. New York: 
Dell. 



ERiC 238 



3 



Fitzgerald, J. D. (1975). Return of the Great Brain . New York: Dell. 

Fltzhugh, L. (1964). Harriet , the S£j^. New York: Harper & Row. 

Fltzhugh, L. (1974). Nobody's Family Is Going to Change . New York: Farrar, 
Straus & Glroux. 

Flxx, James F. (1978), Solve It! A Perplexing Profusion of Puzzles . New 
York: Doubleday. 

Garfield, Leon. (1967). Smith . Illus. by Anthony Maltland. New York: 
Pantheon. 

George, J. (1972).. Julie of the Wolves . New York: Harper & Row. 
George, J. (1959). My Side of the Mountain . New York: E. P. Dutton. 
George, J. (1979). The Summer of the Falcon . New York: Harper & Row. 
George, J. (1973). Who Really Killed Cock Robin ? New York: E. P. Dutton. 
Hamilton, V. (1976). Arllla Sundown . New York: Greenwlllow Books. 
Hamilton, V. (1980). Dust land . New York: Greenwlllow Books. 
Hamilton, V. (1980). The Gathering . New York: Greenwlllow Books. 
Hamilton, V. (1978). Justice and Her Brothers . New York: Greenwlllow Books. 
Hamilton, V. (1971). The Planet of Junior Brown . New York: Macmlllan. 
Hassler, J. (1981). 'Jemmy . New York: Atheneum. 

Henderson, Z. (1970). Pilgrimage : The Book of the People . New York: Avon. 

Henderson, Z. (1968). The People : No Different Flesh . New York: Avon. 

Holt, Michael. (1975). M-^ps , Tracks , end the Bridges of KSnlgsberg : 

A Book Abou t Networks . Illu3. by Wendy Watson. New York: Crowell. 

Johnston, N. (1983). Glory In the Flower. Ace. 

Johnston, N. (1981). Keeping Days . Ace. 

Jons t on, N. (1977). A Mustard Seed of Magic . New York: Atheneum. 
Johnston, N. (1977). Sanctuary Tree . New York: Atheneum. 

Knudson, R. (1975). Fox Running . New York: Harper & Row. 

Konecky, E. (1976). Allegra Maud Goldman . New York: Harper & Row. 
Konlgsburg, E. (1976). Father's Arcane Daughter . New York: Atheneum. 




ERIC 



Konigsburg, E, (1967), Fro m the Mlxed-up Files of Mrs , Basil Fra nkweiler . 
New York: Atheneum. " - 

Konigsburg, E, (1971), George , New York: Atheneum, 

Konigsburg, E, (1968), Jennifer , Hecate , Macbeth , William McKinley , and Me , 
Elizabeth * New York: Atheneum, 

Krumgold, J. (1967), Henry 3, New York: Atheneum. 

Latham, J. (1955). Carry On , Mr. Bowditch / Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 

LeGuin, U. (1976) . Very Far Away from Anywhere Else , New York: Atheneum. 

L'Engle, M. (1976), The Arm of the Starfish . New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux. 

L'Engle, M. (1976). Dragons on the Water . New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux. 

L'Engle, M. (1977), The Wind in the Door . New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux. 

L'Engle, M. (1962). A Wrinkle in Time . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 

Love, S. (1978), Melissa's Medley , New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 
Inc. 

McCaffrey, A» (1979). Dragondrums , New York: Atheneum. 

McCaffrey, A. (1977). Dragons inger . New York: Atheneum. 

McCaffrey, A. (1976). Dragonsong. " New York: Atheneum. 

Mathis, S. (1972), Teacup Full of Roses , New York: Viking Press, 

Meyer, Carolyn. (1977), Eskimos : Growing Up in a Changing Culture , Photog, 
by John McDonald. New York: Atheneum, 

Monjo, Ferdinand N, (1975), Letters to Horseface: Being the Story of Wolfgang 
Amadeus Mozart's Journey to Italy , 1769-1770 , When He Was a Bo^. of Fourteen, 
Illus, by Don Bolognese and Elaine Raphael, New York: Viking. 

Moore, Janet Gay lord, (1968), The Many Ways of Seeing : An Introduction to 
the Pleasures of Art. Cleveland: World, 

Neuf eld, John, (1968). Edgar Allan , New York: Phillips, 

Norman, James (pseud, James Norman Schmidt), (1975). Ancestral Voices : 
Decoding Ancient Languages , New York: Four Winds, 

O'Brien, Robert C, (1971), Mrs^ Frisby and the Rats of NIMH , Illus, by Zena 
Bernstein, New York: Atheneum, " 



240 



O'Brien, R. (1975). Z for Zachariah. New York: Atheneum. 

O'Dell, S. (1960). Island of the Blue Dolphins , Boston: Houghton-Mifflin. 

Oneal, Z. (1980). The Language of Goldfish . New York: Viking Press. 

Peterson, K. (1977). Bridge to Terabithia . New York: Avon. 

Paterson, K. (1980). Jacob Have I Loved . New York: Avon. 

Peterson, K. (1976). The Master Puppeteer . New York: Harper & Row. 

Paterson, K. (1974). Of Nightingales That Weep , New York: Harper & Row. 

Peyton, K. (1973). A Pattern of Roses , New York: Thoaas Y. Crowell. 

Peyton, K, (1971), Pennington's Last Term , New York: Thomas Y, Crowell. 

Plcard, B, (1965), One Is One , New York: Holt, Rlnehart & Winston, 

Raskin, E, (1980) , The Mysterious Disappearance of Leon (1 Mean Noel) . New 
York: Avon, 

Raskin, E, (1978). The Westing Game . New York: Avon, 

Renner, Al G, (1977) . How to Build £ Better Mousetrap Car - and Other Experl- 
mental Science Fun , Illus, by author. New York: Dodd, Mead. 

Renner, Al G. (1971), How to Make and Use a Mlcrolab , Illus, by author. 
New York: Putnam* s. 

Say, A, (1979). The Ink-keeper's Apprentice . New York: Harper & Row, 

Sobol, D. (1975) . Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Dead Eagles . Lodestar 
Books , 

Sobol , D . (1984) , Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Exploding Plumbing 
and Other Mysteries , New York: Scholastic, 

Sobol, D, (1977), Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Midnight Visitor . 
Lodestar Books, 

Sobol, D. (1965). Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Secret Pitch . 
Lodestar Books. 

Sobol, D. (1981). Encyclopedia Brown Carries On . New York: Scholastic. 

Sobol, D. (1966). Encyclopedia 3rox^ Finds the Clues . Lodestar Books. 

Sobol, D, (1967). Encyclopedia Brown Gets His Man . Lodestar Books, 

Sobol, D. (1963). Encyclopedia Brown , Boy Detective . New York: Thomas 
Nelson. 



241 



Sobol, D. (1973). Encyclopedia Brown Keeps the Pe ace . Lodestar Books. 
Sobol, D. (1970). Encyclopedia Brown S aves the Day, Lodestar Books. 
Sobol, D. (1972). Encyclopedia Brown Shows the Way . Lodestar Books. 
Sobol, D. (1977). Encyclopedia Brown Solves Them All . New York: Scholastic. 
Sobol, D. (1971) . Encyclopedia Brown Tracks Them Down . Lodestar Books. 
Viereck, P. (1965) . The Summer Was Lost . John Day. 
Wallace, A. (1971). Toby . Garden City, New York: Doubleday. 
Wells, R. (1980) . When No One Was Looking . New York: Dial. 
White, R. (1972). Deathwatch . New York: Doubleday. 

Wilson, Mike, and Scagell, Robin. (1978). Jet Journey . New York: Viking. 

Wojciechowska, M. (1964). The Shadow of a Bull . New York: Atheneum. 

Wolf 3, James Raymond. (1970). Secret Writing : The Craft of the Cryptographer . 
New York: McGraw-Hill. 



242 



Wednesday. April 23 "'^i^^^My"''' 

College of. Saint Rose 
//% o /n Western Avenue 

2:40 - 3:40 pm Albany, NY 12203 

Title: Funding, Operating and Surviving at Small Colleges 



A major problem facing small colleges is funding, 
especially when the education department is neither large 
nor concerned as integral to the existence of the college,. 
The purpose of this presentation would be to explore 
strategies, options and sources for funding as well as 
implementation strategics. Questions such as how do I get 
my faculty, administration to help me write a grant? 
Once I have the funds, how do I get the faculty to cooperate? 
The focus of these workshops will be on solving problems 
associated with acquiring fimds, operating grants, soliciting 
assistance, and being successful as a grant manager. 



243 



Wednesday, April 23 



2 : 40- 3 : 40 pm LEARNING WRAP-UPS 

Presenter: Sharon Auld 

HC 79, Box 28 
Gothenburg, NE 
69138 



A hands-on teaching tool developed to help children memorize basic math facts FAST 
and in a PUN way! Learning Wrap-l^) sets cone in Addition, subtraction. Multiplication 
and Division. Not just for the classroom but available to parents for great reinforce- 
ment and FUN at home. The simp lei ty and attraction of a Learning Wrap-Up board makes 
it suitable for all levels of development. The self -correcting feature on the back of 
the board helps build self-esteem and confidence. Wrap-ups utilize all learning senses — 
Visual, Auditory and Tactile with the simple ^ Step-System— SEE , SAY, WRAP-UP and WRITE. 
Just working with a Learning Wrap-Up improves small-muscle and eye-hand coordination 
which are essentials for many skills in life. 

This unique, durable plastic board was originally created and developed by Marion 
Stuart of Ogden, Utah. Marion taught in the classroom m years teaching slow learners 
with different learning disabilities. She created many teaching tools for her students 
but was most inpressed with the inmediata results woricing with a Wrap-Up. Pre- and 
post- testing scores after actual classroom application resulted in 100 to 300% improve- 
ment of basic math skills in just one weeks time ! Wrap-Ups are a SUPPLEMENTARY AID 
that fits into any existing math curriculum complete with Teacher's Manu-^J. and a VCR 
presentation . 

All who attend the Learning Wrap-Up presentation will receive a packet of information 
on how to obtain Learning Wrap-Ups and a free sample board to keep . The presenter 
will also demonstrate FUN activities and games using Learning Wrap-Ups. This simple 
teaching concept motivates children of all developmental levels in a FAST, FUN way 
through rote memorization of basic nath facts. 



244 



Send Orders to your i^epresentative: 
LEARNING WRAP-UPS 
Sharon Auld 
HC 79» Box 28 
Gothenburg, NE 69138 



SOLD TO^ 
Street 



School Order Form 
. SHIPPED TO 



Street 



City and State 



j;ity and State 



Customer Order No. 



Salesman 



Terms 



F.O.B. 
Gothenburg, NE 



Date 



Quantity 



Item 



Learning Wrap-ups 

Individual Sets 
Add 9 $6.95 
Subtract § $6.95 
Multiply 9 $6.95 
Divide @ $6.95 



Learning Wrap-ups 

Resource Set: 
16 set pack includes four 
sets EACH of add, subtract, 
multioly, and divide 




Learning Wrap-ups 
Classroom Set 
^2 set pack includes 15 
sets add, 6 sets subtract, 
15 sets multiply, and 6 sets 
divide. Also includes 
Teaching Booklet 

Learning Wrap-ups 

School Set 
100 set pack includes 
25 sees EACH of add, subtract, 
multiply, and divide. Also 
includes Teaching Booklet and 
a VCR Tape. 



Teaching Booklet only 

VCR Cinstructor Use Only) 



Price 



Anount 



$ 6.95 



$ 99.00 



$250.00 



$^99. 00 



$ 9.95 
12.95 



SHIPPING AND HANDLING, 
TOTAL AMOUNT DUE 



One set includes 10 boards 
numbered 1 through 10 of 
Che same function. 



245 



ABOUT THE CREATOR 
ANO DEVELOPER OF 
LEARNING WRAP-UPS 



Marlon Uolthuls Stuart 
graduated' f roi Heber State 
College In Ogden, Utah, with 
Bachelor and Haster of Science 
Degrees in Elementary Education, 
with an enphaslB In mathenatlcs. 

Marlon has taught In Utah 
Elementary Schools for 14 
years. 

Since 1983i Marlon has placed 
Nrap-Ups In school systems In 
California and Utah, with 
overwhelming results. 

The simple 4-step system 
makes memoriiing math 
facts fast and fun! 



SUITABLE FOR All 
leVBlSOFDBVElOPNENT 

-Spiciil Education > 
"The Slow liarnir 
-ThiGHtid 
-Junior High livil 
-ABE (Adult Biiic 
Educition) 





MP-lfS 




A "SUPPLEMENTARY" AID THAT 
FITS INTO ANY EXISTING 
MATH CURRICULUM! 



247 



SIMPLE . 

FOUR-STEP 

SYSTEM 



SEE 
SAY 

WRAP-UP 
WRITE 



CONTACT YOUR 
REPRESENTATIVE: 



SHARON AULD 
HG79 BOX 28 
GOTHENBURG NE 69i38 

—TO PLACE AN ORDER 

—TO ARRANGE IN-SERVICE 
WORKSHOPS FOR: 

*Teacher8 

*PTA Groups 

*Deparcaental 
Heads 

*Curriculua Planning 
Committees 

*Any Educational 
Interest Group 



-As an Exhibitor 




• 249 



ABSTRACT 

A Statewide Consortium for Special Education 
Paraprofessional Preservice Training in Kansas 

A project was recently awarded the Kansas State Department of Education 
to develop and refine a statewide network for the preservice training of 
special education paraprof essionals through the nineteen community 
colleges in Kansas. The primary purpose of this project is to assist in 
the communication effort necessary to allow each college to participate 
at the level indicated by the need for special education paraprofessional 
training in the geographic area served by the college. It is anticipated 
that 500 paraprofessionals will participate in the preservice programs 
offered by the colleges. 

The Division of Personnel Preparation, Special Education Program, U.S. 
Department of Education, has funded the project for an anticipated 
three-year period. These funds support a full-time project coordinator, 
Patricia P. Kells, and a full-time secretary. Project codirectors are 
Dr. Sam J. Newland, Director, Division of Community Colleges and 
Dr. Phyllis Kelly, Director of the Paraprofessional Training Program 
within the Special Education Administration Section of the Kansas State 
Department of Education. This shared administrative leadership greatly 
assists the implementation of the project. 



The proposed ACRES presentation will provide, through a lecture format, 
a general overview of the administrative organization of the project and 
the community college system within Kansas. A slide-tape will be used 
to present characteristics of four college programs. An opportunity for 
discussion among the participants and presenter will be provided as well 
as handout materials which delineate the competencies of the core 

curriculum. Pat Kells, Phyllis Kelly 

Kansas State Department of Education 
120 East 10th Street 



Concurrent Sessions 
Wednesday^ April 23 



4:00 - 5:00 pm 



251 



ERIC 



Wednesday, April 23 



A:00-5:09 pm 



Presenter: Sandra Stuart- Siddall 
California State University-Chico 



OFF CAMPUS RURAL PRECEPTORSHIPS IN EDUCATION 



INTRODUCTION 

An off campus rural preceptorship can be an effective way to teach 
subject matter, as well as encourage the student to seek employment in 
that setting. Many professional groups are imder-represented In rural 
areas: teachers, dentists, social workers, nurses, agricultural 
engineers, etc* 

THE NEGATIVES OF RURAL LIFE AND THE PROFESSIONAL 

Several negative personal factors can influence the decision of 
professionals relative to their seeking employment in a rural area* 
Among those factors are: Isolation from cultural and recreational 
activities, fewer employment opportmities for mates, housing shortages, 
restrictive weather conditions. Isolation from professional peer groups/ 
organizations, and less variety of employment settings to select from, 
difficulty in pursuing post-graduate work, non-competitive wages with 
the urban centers* 

THE POSITIVES OF RURAL LIFE FOR THE PROFESSIONAL 

There are other elements found in rural living and rural work 
conditions that can compensate for these personal disadvantages* A 
professional has a greater opportunity to develop a number of skills and 
talents that they may not have been motivated or challenged enough to do 
in an urban area; where resources are more vast, and colleagues are but 
a phone call away* Since the number of professionals working in a rural 
community is smaller, the professional that is there will find that 
he/she has more Job autonomy, independence and certainly more visibility* 
The relationships that one develops on a business level oftentimes extends 
into the day-to-day life, since during trips to the grocery, eating at the 
local cafe or going to church will most likely put you in contact with the 
same people that you do business with* Rural environments also promote a 
more relaxed pace of life* There is a time in all people's lives, when 
the adult who has been working for 10-20 years in a harried, hectic work 
environment who has to commute four hours a day Just to get to work and 
home again, stops and asks, "Why am I doing this?" Furthermore, they 
start evaluating whether they want to continue this so called "life-in- 
the-fast-lane" or get out of it, while physical and mental health is still 
intact* Rural communities have more esprit de corps, more feeling for 
group activities and a common good for all, in which the entire community 
works together on areas of concern or interest* 

FOSTERING STUDENTS' INTEREST IN WORKING IN A RURAL AREA 

A rural rotation of any academic discipline could have effects on 
correcting the maldistribution of professional people into rural areas* 
Precepting in its simplest form means to teach* It is the passing along 
of knowledge or skills from one person to another* In the early days. 



-1- 



ERIC 




when Institutions of hi^er education in this country were few, pre- 
cepting was conmonly used to acquire skills past secondary school. As 
the country developed, so did its institutes of higher learning. They 
in turn took on the responsibility of training more and more of Hie 
professions. Today we have two paths a person may select to travel 
down past high school. One is the now traditional college education and 
degree system. The other, a widely used and historical path, is the 
apprenticeship system. This system utilizes the expert in the field who 
supervises and trains an apprentice for a specified length of time. Most 
of the craft and building trades use this method. The college system 
gives a maximum amount of didactic information with very little hands-on 
experience • 1 

PRECEPTORSHIPS 

The use of clinical preceptors, considered an instructional innovation 
by some disciplines, is not new. In the fields of medicine, dentistry, 
veterinary medicine, pharmacology, architecture, osteopathic medicine, and 
the ministry, the most competent practitioners have long been used as 
mentors or preceptors to teach students via their own practices. 2 

Students can derive valuable benefits from working with a qualified 
clinical preceptor. The use of clinical preceptors provides mechanisms for 
quality student learning when an educational program has a large nuiober of 
students and a limited number of faculty. Important functions of clinical 
experiences in student learning are to attain role socialization and to gain 
competence and confidence in performing clinical skills. When using a 
qualified clinical preceptor, role socialization is enhanced since the 
student's role model is an active practitioner.^ 

Although the following examples deal with the discipline of nursing, I 
feel certain that the considerations and implications will hold true for 
any discipline. 

Specific benefits are derived from a practicing role model. One 
benefit is that preceptors, familiar with their own caseloads, are better 
prepared to choose appropriate clients for student learning. (Hall, 1977) 
Hall noted that, due to familiarity with their clients, preceptors can 
assign students to care for clients with health problems that meet specific 
student learning interests or nee<^s and can provide assistance to the 
student in managing the health problems with the clients unique needs in 
mind. However, even thou^ preceptors are more familiar with their clients. 
Hall found that both preceptor and student benefited and welcomed discussion 
of client assignments with faculty to make sure student and course 
objectives were being met.^ 



1 - Sandra Stuart-Siddall, Jean M. Haberlin. Preceptorships in Nursing 

Education. Maryland. Aspen Publication, 1983, pg. 89 (Bergeron) 

2 - Ibid, pg. 9 (Backenstose) 

3 - Ibid, pg. 10 (Backenstose) 

4 - Ibid, pg. 11 (Backenstose) 



-2- 




Faculty in some nursing programs have reported that student ex- 
perience with a clinical preceptor has helped to ease the impact of 
reality shock. These faculty found that exposure to an everyday 
practice of a clinical preceptor increased student awareness of frustra- 
tions experienced by nurses and allowed opportunity to discuss and work 
through conflicts within the setting. Preceptors help the students gain 
a feeling of where one can and cannot cut the comers on busy days so 
that health care is not compromised. ^ 

In short, the integration of preceptors in the clinical field ex- 
perience of collegiate students , can be a powerful means to bring the 
student in contact with the real world, and hopefully, resolve contra- 
dictions between the real versus the ideal worlds. 6 

SOME UNDERLYING CAUSES FOR PROFESSIONAL MALDISTRUBUTION 

A rural preceptorship addresses three underlying causes of professional 
maldistribution: a) the lack of awareness of the opportunities in rural 
areas - most people are unfamiliar with the demands, challenges, rewards 
of rural living and employment, because of their suburban/urban upbringing, 
b) There is a bias in education. The largest percentag. of higher educa- 
tion institutions are in metropolitan or suburban areas. Students are 
trained in and acculturated to the city, c) It Is difficult to relocate, 
to pack up and move to an unfamiliar area. Having worked and lived in a 
rural area if only for just a short time during a preceptorship, is a 
decided advantage In choosing a work setting, finding housing and establish- 
ing oneself in a new community. The rural preceptorship can be the catalyst 
that may turn the inclination toward rural living and employment into a 
reality. 

HOW TO UTILIZE A PRECEPTOR 
THE PROCESS 

The phases or steps used to establish a preceptorship are 
similar to those utilized by the nurse in establishing a thera- 
peutic relationship with a client. Wilson and Kneisl (1979) 
suggest the following three phases: 

1. beginning or orientation phase when contact is 
established 

2. middle or working phase when contact is maintained 

3. end of termination phase when contact is evaluated 
and terminated. 7 

Establishing the Relationship 

The goal of the first phase is to initiate contact with the 
preceptor. One of the first tasks is to clarify the purpose of 
the preceptorship and to identify the roles, responsibilities, 
and privileges of the preceptor, faculty, and student. Ideally, 



5 - Ibid, pg. 12 (Backenstose) 

6 - Ibid, pg. 37 (Backenstose) 
7- Ibid, pg. 39 (Gray) 

254 



written Information on the purpose of the preceptorshlp, ti e 
objectives of the clinical experience , and the expectations 
of the preceptor would be sent to the preceptor to review 
prior to the first conference with the faculty, at which time 
they could be elaborated upon. The first personal contact 
may be made at the agency to be utilized for the preceptor- 
ship* This may be done in a meeting in the preceptor's 
territory. Such a meeting may provide more security for a 
novice preceptor who may have misconceptions and fears about 
the experience. It also demonstrates an interest in the 
agency and its services and provides an opportunity for 
the faculty to become acquainted with the physical facilities, 
the philosophy and purposes of the agency, the services 
offered, the resources available, the role of the nurse in 
the setting, and other relevant aspects. 8 

One of the most Important steps in the first phase is 
to establish a trusting relationship with mutual understand- 
ing and respect between the faculty and preceptor. One of the 
ways to begin this process is to establish a common interest 
or bond. 

When possible, it is useful for the faculty to demonstrate 
their own expertise to establish mutual credibility. The pre- 
ceptors for their part must perceive themselves as contributing 
practical, reality-oriented perspectives to the student learning 
experience. 

In addition to the conference between the faculty and 
preceptor, a planning session with the student present may be 
held during the latter half of the meeting with the preceptor 
at the agency or at a subsequent time. Collaborative planning 
facilitates congruence between the requisite learning, the 
interests and needs of the student, and the available oppor- 
tunities in the clinical area.^ 

When mutual willingness is attained, an agreement or 
contract can be prepared. This may be a formal contract or a 
letter cf agreement delineating the responsibilities of each 
party. Dates and time frames should be specified so that each 
is aware of the expectations and time commitments. The faculty, 
student, and preceptor each retain a copy of the signed agree- 
ment. If a formal contract is required by the parent agency, 
university, or health facility, advanced planning is necessary, 
since it may take months to obtain the approval of the individuals 
responsible for legal decisions. 

Maintaining the Relationship 

Once the preceptorship is operational, the working phase 
begins. In this second phase, the educational plan is implemented, 
with student learning as the main goal. The focus is on assisting 



8 Ibid, pgs. 39-40 (Gray) 

9 Ibid, pg. 40 (Gray) 
10 Ibid, pg. 41 (Gray) 



-4- 




the student to meet the designated clinical objectives. The 
student learning objectives provide the guideline for the 
experience. Written behavioral objectives describing the 
learning activities will assist in planning. Implementing, 
and evaluating the learning experience. The objectives may 
include core objectives applicable to all students enrolled 
in the course, reflecting application of course content, as 
well as Individual student objectives that serve to individual- 
ize the experience to meet unique student interests and needs. 
The individual student objectives may be written by the student 
with Input from the faculty person. 

The role of the preceptor during the second phase is to 
serve as a resource person, role model, and consultant to the 
assigned student. Role modeling is an effective teaching tool 
during this phase. The preceptor is an excellent, expert 
clinician can demonstrate the application of nursing theory to 
nursing practice. The faculty person must provide opportunities 
to demonstrate the application of classroom theory in the 
clinical setting. Ideally, with assistance, the student will 
be able to integrate the theory from the educational setting 
into the real world. The insights that develop as a result of 
this synthesis may minimize future reality shock. The primary 
role of the student during the second phase is that of learner. 

The faculty person is responsible for clinical supervision 
to maintain quality control during the working phase of the 
process. Indirect supervision Is accomplished through periodic 
phone conversations with the preceptor, onsite agency visits, 
conversations with the student during regularly scheduled 
appointments, and student feedback In class and seminar. 
Written and oral assignments that demonstrate student under* 
standing and the application of pertinent concepts and skills 
will validate the application of theory in the clinical area. 

Occasionally during the second phase, problems may develop 
in the preceptorship. It may become evident that the planned 
clinica:'. experience is not effectively meeting the designated 
objectives, for whatever reasons. In this situation, the role 
of the faculty is to ensure a quality learning experience for 
the student. Continuous evaluation is necessary to prevent or 
detect problems. Interventions should include communication 
with both the preceptor and the student to collect data to 
validate or invalidate concerns, should share observations and 
concerns with a focus on student learning, and should utilize 
the problem-solving process to explore possible solutions. 

Terminating the Relationship 

The objective of the final phase is the termination of the 
preceptor contact in a mutually planned and satisfying manner. 
The first task is the evaluation of the clinical experience. A 



11 Ibid, pg. 41 (Gray) 

12 Ibid, pg. 42 (Gray) 



3' 




EKLC 



conference between the preceptor, student, and faculty affords 
an opportunity to discuss positive and negative aspects, to 
determine goal achievement in relation to the clinical objectives, 
to identify methods to Improve the experience, and to summarize 
the value of the experience for each participant. A part of the 
evaluation conference should be devoted to a debriefing session 
during which each person may review the experience from that 
person's own perspective. Sharing expectations, fears, insights, 
and learning is useful as each atteiiflpts to personalize the ex- 
perience and provide closure. 

The second task in the termination phase is to discuss future 
plans for the preceptorship. If plans are indefinite, the faculty 
person may solicit the preceptor's continued interest In serving 
as a preceptor and thus pave the way for future negotiations. If 
thfc agency is not needed in tbe immediate future, the facility per- 
son should inform the preceptor of that fact, express appreciation 
fot participating in the learning experience, and suggest the 
possibility of future use. 

In this connection, the faculty member must be awaie of the 
risks involved in sporadic use of preceptors. The preceptor may 
lose Interest in the preceptorship, may agree to serve as a pre- 
ceptor for another educational institution, or may feel rejected 
and unneeded by the faculty and affiliated program. 

A letter of appreciation should be sent by the faculty to 
the preceptor, acknowledging the contribution made with a copy to 
the preceptor's immediate supervisor. Other types of recognition 
may be a certificate awarded the preceptor, an appointment to a 
university advisory council or other approoriate body, or possibly 
an appointment to adjunct faculty status.'^^^ 

CONCERNS A^ID ISSUES 



The issue of control is faced by many faculty members involved 
in the preceptorship triad for the first time. Faculty have 
traditionally been socialized into the role of providing close 
and personal supervision of most clinical learning experiences. 
Many faculty receive gratification from nuturing the student in the 
clinical setting and take pride in how the student acquires new 
knowledge and skill with assistance from the faculty menier. A 
feeling on the part of facility meinbers of being needed and valued 
may result. Thus, the faculty may feel unrewarded and unneeded 
when faced with the fact that they are not directly and continuously 
involved in the clinical setting. They may experience symptoms 
typically associated with loss. 14 

Many opportunities for Input into the clinical experience 
present themselves during conferences with individual students, in 



13 Ibid, pg. 43 (Gray) 

14 Ibid, pg. 44 (Gray) 



Control 




class or seminar, and during onslte agency visits. Written feed- 
back on class assignments also provides opportunities for direct 
involvement. Process or tape recording assignments offer excellent 
means for participating in the nurse-client interactions of the 
student. Because there is less opportunity for demonstrating 
skills in the clinical setting, campus demonstrations, role play- 
ing, simulated games, and other strategies may be utilized to teach 
clinical skills and meet the need for "hands on" involvement. 

The use of preceptors may still pose a threat to some faculty. 
A reluctance to acknowledge the preceptor as being adequately 
qualified may be a first sign of conflict, regardless of how well 
the preceptor meets the objective criteria for selection. The 
feeling that no one is quite good enough for "my" student is 
coim&on. This may be similar to the dilemma faced by parents who 
must "let go" of their children and entrust part of their care to 
others. Evaluating one*s own needs and motivations and asking the 
question, "Whose need am I meeting?" can help to maintain a realistic 
perspective. 

While the preceptorship is in progress, the facility member may 
become critical of activities in the clinical area and feel that the 
facility member would have functioned more effectively than the pre- 
ceptor. This conclusion may be correct; however, the faculty member 
must approach the situation with a positive attitude and realize that 
learning occurs in a variety of situations and with many different 
methodologies, each offering advantages and disadvantages. The 
faculty task is to maintain the focus on learning outcomes. 

Where the facility perceives education as a mutual, interactive 
process, with the student assuming the main responsibility for learn- 
ing, there may be less need to control the situation. The use of a 
preceptor requires a relatively secure and mature educator. However, 
for some facility, the preceptorship process may be too frustrating, 
and acknowledgment of this fact may be the most effective solution. 

Potential Abuses 

Another concern is to prevent abuse in the preceptorship. Pre- 
ceptor abuse may be in terms of time or energy demands. The preceptor's 
prime commitment is to the employing institution; therefore, careful 
consideration must be given to the time and energy requirements imposed 
by the preceptorship. Thorough preplanning is essential to delineate 
the preceptor's roles and responsibilities and to provide a realistic 
focus for the learning activities. Time requirements should be explicitlv 
stated so that the preceptor is fully cognizant of the demands involved.^' 

Most preceptors and agency administrators perceive the experience 
as worth their time. They recognize that students make a valuable 
contribution by providing stimulation to the staff as concerns and 
questions are posed, new content and skills demonstrated, and resources 
shared. However, the client or consumer is the one who ultimately 



15 Ibid, pgs. 44-45 (Gray) 

16 Ibid, pgs. 45-46 (Gray) 

17 Ibid, pg. 46 (Gray) 



258 



benefits from the resulting hl^er standard of care that may be 
delivered. Preceptors are usually gratified by being perceived 
as expert clinicians who offer a reality-based learning experience. 
It Is also rewarding to witness student learning as the students 
apply theories In their Interactions with clients. Finally, 
recognition by the affiliated university may Improve the pre- 
ceptor's status among the preceptor's peers. 

Care must also be taken to prevent student abuse. Students 
may be put In the bind of trying to please two masters — each with 
different expectations. To prevent this, the learning plan must 
be planned and administered In a consistent, coordinated manner. 
For their part, the students may try to pit the faculty/ against 
the preceptor or assume a helpless, victim role to avoid 
responsibility. The faculty should work with the student to 
prevent this from occurring. 

Mutxial Trust and Respect 

It may be difficult for the faculty member to accept that 
another Individual may be as competent or more competent in a 
given clinical area and could be utilized as a vital adjunct to the 
typical learning experience Involving the faculty person, student, 
and client. Still, the educator cannot be expected to maintain 
excellent clinical skills In all nursing fields and may come to 
value the role of the clinician preceptor. 

The mutual sharing of knowledge and experience Is valuable 
and gratifying. Tlie preceptor may be Invited to participate In 
classroom activities through panel discussions, gtiest lectures, 
case conferences, and so on. Faculty may assist the agency by 
providing consultation, offering Inservlce education, sharing 
scarce resources, and so forth. Each may be appointed to 
advisory councils, serve on joint committees, or have joint 
appointments. In these ways, maximum effort should be made to 
bridge the gap and promote collaboration between nursing service 
and nursing education. Other Issues and concerns that may sur- 
face can be resolved on the basis of commitments from the faculty 
person, preceptor, and student. 

The faculty shoulif consider various ways to make the preceptor- 
ship experience as positive as possible for all Involved. These 
methods should include (1) thorough preplanning to capitalize on 
the T*;ost effective as of preceptor and st:udent time; (2) effective 
communicatloiJi with both preceptor and student to provide mutual 
understanding, continuity, and evaluation; and (3) respect for 
both as responsible adults. 20 



REFERENCE 

Wilson, H.S., & Kneisl, C.R. Psychiatric Nursing. Menlo Park, Calif. 

Addlson-Wesley, 1979. 
18 Ibid, pg. 46 (Gray) 



19 Ibid, pgs. 46-47 (Gray) 

20 Ibid, pg. 47 (Gray) 



-8- 




LEGAL AND POLICY ASPECTS 



At some point during the orientation, the legal aspects of 
the preceptorship should be addressed by the coordinator. Un- 
fortunately, at the present time, there are very fev specific, 
written legal guidelines governing the preceptor^student re- 
lationship. (Chapter 18, however, outlines some of the basic 
legal considerations that the preceptor should be aware of.) 

In addition, each facility will have specific policies and 
regulations applicable to students. These may be formal, written 
policies, or they may be flexible and Informal policies. In 
either case, the preceptor will need to discuss the legal aspect 
of the preceptorship with the agency administrator and become 
familiar with the relevant policies. Some preceptors may work 
with students who are licensed, practicing nurses returning to 
college to obtain a baccalaureate degree. However, it is 
iiiq>ortant to stress that even the most competent, experienced 
nurse is still operating as a "student" while in the facility. 
Thus, though the supervision necessary for this type of student 
may be minimal, the preceptor must always remain aware of the 
fact that the preceptor is still, in part, legally responsible for 
the student's actions. 

THE PRECEPTOR'S TEACHING ROLE 

During orientation, the program coordinator may wish to 
discuss briefly the teaching role as it applies to precepting. 
The preceptor's ability to create and maintain an atmosphere that 
allows and encourages independent, self-directed learning is 
crucial to the success of the preceptorship. The preceptor must 
feel comfortable in the role and confident as a teacher. In an 
effort to make the presentation of teaching techniques more 
systematic, the coordinator may wish to consider separately four 
aspects of the teaching role. The questions Included in the 
following discussion of these aspects provide a means of trans- 
lating teaching theory into specific preceptor behavior that can 
be objectively measured by both the student and preceptor (Simon, 



The four teaching aspects or roles are, for purposes of 
discussion, examined separately. In reality, it is not possible 
to make clear distinctions between them. Ideally, the preceptor 
will be adept at each, emphasizing one or more as circumstances 
dictate. 22 

The Preceptor As Role Model 

Role modeling is an extremely effective mode of teaching, 
yet it is one that the preceptor cannot "prepare for." The stu- 
dent learns by observing, analyzing, and questioning the preceptor* 
style of practice, interactions with clients and colleagues, and 
responses to a multitude of personal and professional demands. As 
a role model, the preceptor has the responsibility of maintaining a 
level of self-awareness that allows the preceptor to reflect on 



1976) . 



21 Ibid, pg. 56 (Haberlin) 

22 Ibid, pg. 57 (Haberlin) 



-9- 




behavior, inotlves, and feelings with the student. This pr( Ides 
the student with the rationale underlylag the preceptor's 
observable actions and decisions. In the self-qaestlonlng the 
precepuor may ask: 

- How many txmes did you meet with the studenc? Did 
you allow the student an exchange of feedback? 

- Did you feel there was open conmunl cation and trust 
between you and the student? 

- Did you offer support to the student? How? 

The Preceptor As Designer of Instruction 

For the preceptor, acting as a designer of Instruction may 
be the most unfamiliar teaching role. This role emphasizes the 
planning phase of the Instructional process and formalizes the 
function of structuring the teaching and learning experience. 
Each behavioral objective should be analyzed by the preceptor and 
student In an effort to determine the specific clinical activities 
that will lead to the fullflllment of the objectives. These 
clinical activities that will lead to the fulfillment of the 
objectives. These clinical activities will then constitute the 
plan to be Implemented and eventually evaluated. In this role, 
the following questions should be asked: 

- Did you and che student take the opportunity to 
discuss eac^i other's expectations for the learning 
experience? 

- Did you give the student an orientation? 

- Did you Introduce the student to the staff? 

~ Did you analyze, with the student, the meaning of 
the student's objectives? 

Were you able to provide or suggest useful and 
Interesting experiences to meet the student's 
obj ectlves? 

- Did you plan the educational experiences with the 
student? 

- Was there optimum use of the student's time? 

- Based on the agreed-upon objectives and the plan for 
Implementing the Instruction, did both you and the 
student participate in an ongoing evaluation of the 
student's progress? 



23 Ibid, pgs. 57-58 (Haberlin) 



-10- 




The Preceptor As Resource Person 



The student should be encouraged to use the most appropriate 
resource available, which. In many cases, will not be the pre- 
ceptor. Often, due to the availability of the preceptor, students 
do not take advantage of other resources. The preceptor should 
be used as a resource only when It Is determined that the preceptor 
is the most appropriate source of instruction in a particular know- 
ledge or skill area. The relevant questions here are: 

- Were you willing to share your expertise? 

- Did you take the time to demonstrate procedures, and 
so on, when appropriate? 

- Were you able to assist the student in finding other 
resources when appropriate? 

- Were the demonstrations and explanations clear to the 
student? How did you know?^^ 

The Preceptor As Supervisor 

The primary goal of clinical supervision is to increase the 
student's professional autonomy. The preceptor facilitates this 
process by creating conditions that encourage the student to take 
the initiative in examining and modifying the student's behavior 
or knowledge. Clinical supervision demands a relatively passive 
role for the preceptor and an active role for the student. The 
relevant questions in this role are: 

- Did you feel you provided appropriate supervision? 
Academic? Clinical? 

- Did you have weekly conferences with the student? 

- Did you share your viewpoint with the student, rather 
than impose it? 

- Did you encourage self-initiation, individuality, self- 
expression and self-evaluation? 

At the conclusion of the orientation, it is extremely impor- 
tant that the preceptor be encouraged to discuss any questions or 
concerns and, in general, to share expectations regarding the ex- 
perience. This will help iranensely in clarifying the material 
presented and in alleviating any apprehension the preceptor may be 
experiencing. Thus, the preceptor will leave the orientation hav- 
ing gained the confidence and knowledge necessary to implement the 
preceptorship program successfully. 



ERLC 



REFERENCE 

Simon, M.P.A. A role guide and resource book for clinical preceptors 
(U.S. MEW, Publication Number (HRA) 77-14). Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1976. 

24 Ibid, pgs. 58-59 (Haberlin) 

25 Ibid, pg. 59 (Haberlin) -11^ 



26 



ME RURAL CLINICAL NURSE PLACEMENT CENTER 



Results from a longitudinal study conducted by the Rural Clinical 
lurse Plac emen t Center indicates that exposure of student nurses to 
niral job roles and rural living conditions priov to graduating from 
:heir nursing programs does affect their choice to live and work in a 
rural environment favorably. This study which has been conducted for 
:en years » indicates a return rate to a rural area of 32Z of the par- 
licipants, who had a rural clinical rotation in a rural facility. 



-12- 

263 



Wednesday, April 23 
4;00-5:00 pm 

Presentor: L. Tobin 

ARMSI (Alaska Resources 
for the Moderately/Severely 
Impaired) 
2211 Area Drive 
Anchorage, Alaska 99508 
(907) 279-9675 



Title: TIME WELL SPENT — A Teacher Wellness Program 



TIME WELL SPENT SPECIAL EDITION FOR TEACHERS by Tobin is 
a weekly wellness planner for educators. This presentation will review 
many activities from this book and present a stress-management 
decision making model from a soon-to-be published second edition. 

TWS helps you Introduce healthier dally activit es into your 
lifestyle. Through better nutrition, relaxation exercises, 
and the addition of self-renewing activities throughout the day 
we prevent the extended build of tension. These energizing 
breaks and personal growth routines promote greater well-being 
and creativity on an hourly basis, energizing and relaxing as the 
demands of the day require. 

The unique design of this book places wellness Information 
and suggestions within a functional appointment planner. In this 
format, alongside your business appointments you can make your 
appointments with a healthier dally lifestyle. 

The decision making model will provide guidelines to help 
determine how potentially stressful upcoming events may be. 
This will elaborate upon five different levels of support that 
you can provide for yourself to help you to deal with stressful 
changes in "ife. 

(Published by: Jade Mist Press, Box 5229, Eugene, OR 97405 
$12.95 plus $1.00 p/h) 

Copies will be available following presentation at $11.00. 



o 264 

EKLC 



Wednesday, April 23 
4;00-5:00 pm 



Presentors: John M, Aiken, Director 



Project STEP 

SE KS Ed- Service Center 
2601 Gabriel 
Parsons, KS 67357 



Dave DeMoss, Executive Director 
SE KS Ed- Service Center 
P,0, Box 176 
Girard, KS 66743 



Betty M, Weithers 
Coord . , Special Ed . 
CoordwTitle VI-B, E,H,A, 
Special Education Adm. 
120 East Tenth 
Topeka, KS 66612 



Title: Developing Vocational Education Opportunities 

In Local Businesses 



One of the implied promises of public education is to 
prepare students for the world of work. Unfortunately, this 
promise is seldom realized for the majority of handicapped 
students. Recognizing this fact, southeast Kansas has initiated 
a cooperative project termed Secondary Transitional Education 
Program (STEP) that will result in increased vocational training 
opportunities and competitive employment options for handicapped 
students between the ages of 16-21 years. 

The purpose of the presentation will be to describe the 
goals and objectives of Project STEP, The presentation will 
focus on employer attitudes and a description of the project^s 
vocational training model. Time will be allocated at the f^^^ of 
the presentation to allow the presenters an opportunity to respond to 
questions , 

Project STEP is a Title VI-B, E,H. ' project and is a 
service of the Southeast Kansas Education Service Center, 
Project staff work with educational personnel from ANW, SEK, and 
Tri-County Special Education Cooperatives; USD 234, Port Scott; 
and the Special Purpose School of Parsons, State .ospital and 
Training Center, 

The project is designed to provide technical assj=;tance and 
training to local educational personnel ^hat will culm nate In 
the development of supported work-study training cites, " ne 
training of local personnel is provided primarily in the rorm of 
on-th<^-job experience as the project scaff assise them to Jevelop 
vocational training sites. Project staff are paired with 
identified educational staff in order to: (a) identify, jontact 



265 



ERIC 



and site visit prospective cooperative business sites; (b) 
negotiate training site agreements; (c) conduct complete job 
analysis of the business in order to develop curriculum training 
materials, schedules, and data management systems; and, (d) train 
and supervise educational staff that will teach at the 
cooperative site. 

The vocational training sites developed by the project are 
classrooms per se, however the classes are conducted within the 
business environment. Each supported work-study training site 
provides vocational opportunites for 1-6 students. The sites are 
termed supported because the educational staff provides all supervision 
and training of the students. The impetus behind this approach is to 
provide meaningful age appropriate vocational training for those 
students who need more structured highly supervised training 
experiences . 

As part of the schools tx^ansitional approach to vocational 
education, students are transported to the training sites during 
the school hours where they are taught job and related job 
skills. The companies cooperate with the schools by providing 
space, materials, eguipmenc and busine&s expertise. This unique 
cooperative arrangement allows schools the opportunity to expand 
exisiting vocational prentices and curriculum. It also allows 
the schools to maintain high visibility within the business 
sector, stay abreast o. current technological advances, establish 
liaison that may lead to future competitive employment options 
and determine curric tl\im needs based on the skills that were 
identified within the business environment. Furthermore, 
students receive & s appropriate vocational training which will 
increase the likelihood of their successful transition from 
school to adult ^' -fe. 



266 



VI -B GRANT 



Title: Secondary Transitional Education Program (STEP) 
Funding 

Source: Kansas State Department of Education 

Special Education Administration Section 

Agency: A service of the Southeast Kansas Education Service 
Center 

Personnel: John M. Aiken, project Director 

Peggy A. Malicoat, Project Coordinator 
Shelley Bird, Work-Study Coordinator 

Address: 2601 Gabriel 

Parsons, KS 67357 

(316) 421-6550 ext. 1872 or 1857 

Goal: 1) Establish small group vocational Instructional training 
opportunities In competitive employment settings. 

Summary: An initial business survey will be conducted in an effort to 
collect vocational information that will assist each educational 
agency to prioritize the selection of training sites, based on 
vocational training needs of handicapped students. After the agency 
has selected the most appropriate types of vocational training sites, 
project staff will assist each agency's designee to develop the 
community based training 8ite« The assietance to educational 
agencies will be: 1) the availability of staff to make personal 
contact with businesses in order to acquirs the businesses' cooperation 
in establishing a training site; and, 2) once business cooperation has 
been obtained, staff will assist in analyzing the businesses job 
skills in order to develop training procedures. 

Goal • 2) Promote, organize and conduct inservlce training activities 
related to the development, operation and Instructional 
requirements of community based training operations. 

Summary: Staff will be available to train school agency personnel 
via presentations, lectures, seminars and on-the-job training 
activities within the business setting in regard to techniques and 
procedures for establishing vocational trailing sites in the 
community. 



267 

o 

ERIC 



Wednesday, April 23 



Belinda Lovlngood, Pam Frasler, 



4:00-5:00 pm 



Melodie Hayashl 
CDMRC, EEU WJ-10 
University of Washington 
Seattle, WA 981^5 



The CAP Project: Using Computers to Serve Young Handicapped Children and 
Their Families in Their Natural Environments 

The Computer-Assisted Program (CAP) Project is an alternative 
intervention approach for xoung (ages 0-3 years) handicapped children and 
their families. The project combines computer technology and professional 
expertise to meet the needs of families without access to local early 
intervention programs. Many of these families live in rural or isolated 
areas, and lack access to either educational services for their young child or 
support services for themselves. CAP serves these families through the mail 
and phone calls. Parents assess their child. These results are matched to 
developmental 1 y appropriate activities through a computer program at the 
University of Washington. A home activity package is then sent to the family. 
Children are then reassessed and new activities are sent to parents at 3-month 
intervals. CAP also links parents to parent correspondents who provide 
informational and emotional support. 

In our presentation we will describe the project and share pre- and 
posttest data on the project to date. Data are collected for both the 
children and families in our center-based demonstration group and in our 
field-based group. 

Ue will focus on three features of the CAP project in our presentation. 
These are: 

1. The computer-assisted model 

2. The use of parents as data sources 

3. Teaching activities within the daily routine 

Relative to the very timely first feature of the CAP Project, we will 
describe hoM to integrate a computer system into an intervention or research 
project. Ue will, in a step*by-step manner, describe how we developed our 
computerized system which enables us to generate individualized educational 
and therapeutic activity packages based on regularly updated child assessment 



The CAP Project relies on parents as data sources for regular child 
assessments. This feature is of growing interest to professionals. Ue will 
describe our assessment and activity selection procedures. 

The educational focus of the CAP Project is a set of educational and 
therapeutic activi ties which can be implemented by the child's caregiver in 

routine daily i nteract i ons wi th the child such as diapering, mealtime, and 

bathing. Ue will present data on the implementation and effectiveness of 
activities developed for the CAP Project. Tl>':se data will include descriptive 
information on the activities themselves. Sample activities are being 
evaluated by the parents. Through a questionnaire, we are gathering 
information on their usefulness and effectiveness, families' enjoyment of the 
activity, modifications made by the family, and whether or not the activity 
fit into the family's daily routine. These data will be shared with the 
audi ence . 



data. 



EKLC 



Abstract 



The purpose of this presentation is to acquaint participants with a project designed 
to prepare teachers to serve students with behavioral disorders in a rural area. 
The objectives of the presentation are: 

1. To provide an example of a cooperative effort involving the state education 
agency, regional education agency, local education agency, and an institute 
of higher education to prepare teachers to provide services tc students with 
behavioral disorders. 

2. To provide participants with some strategies for training teachers in rural 
areas in ireas where recruitment is difficult. 

3. To provide evaluation data on the outcome of the project. 

One of the most underserved groups of handicapped students in Minnesota are those 
who have behavioral disorders. Due to the limited production of training programs. 
It is difficult for all schools to recruit such teachers, but particulaijy so in 
rural areas. Turnover of such teachers in rural areas is also high. The puv'pose 
of this project was to train a group of teachers already employed in a rural irea 
and to provide the training as close to their local districts as possible. 

The target area was a group of school districts served by the Educational Coopera- 
tive Service Unit #5 in Central Minnesota. This regional unit encompassed four 
special education cooperatives which served a total of 28 local school districts 
with school enrollments ranging from one district with slightly more than 250 stu- 
dents to one with over 5700. Twenty one school districts enrolled less than 1000 
students. The mean enrollment was slightly over 1000 students. 

A project was submitted to the Minnesota Department of Education for Discretionary 
funds from P.L. 94-142 and was approved. The roles of each agency were: 

1. Minnesota Department of Education: To provide funding to subsidize tuition 
of participants, travel expenses, and excess costs to the other agencies and 
to monitor the prtject. 

2. St. Cloud State University: To assess the competencies of the participants; 
Advise the necessary training components within the region, including the 
participants; provide management and evaluation services, and to recommend 
for licensure. 



4. 



Educ. Cooperative Service Unit #5: To provide management services, serve 
as fiscal agent, provide evaluation services, and to serve a liaison with 
special education cooperatives. 

Special Education Cooperatives: To Identify participants, arrange for re- 
lease time for participants when necessary, and to serve as liaison to local 
school districts. 



The target population consisted of teachers already licensed and teaching In some 
area of special education, mostly learning disabled. Courses were conducted by the 
university with the region by sending staff to the appropriate location. The train- 
ing program was enriched by providing additional workshops In specific skill areas 
which were deemed critical In rural areas. 



ERIC 



Wednesday, April 23 
4:00-5:00 pm 



269 



Stan Knox« Bonnie Carlson 
Department of Education 
St. Cloud State University 
St. Cloud, MN 56301 



Participants were Involved 1n two practlcum assignments. The first was a structured 
experience In their local school district which was focused upon maintaining behavloc^ 
ally disordered students In the regular school program. The second occurred during B 
the summer In a more restrictive setting.* ^ 

Evaluation data was collected In the following areas: 

1. Follow-up of participants completing the program and providing service. 

2. Follow-up of participants who did not complete program. 

3. Evaluation of project by participants, special education directors, and other 
school administrators. 

4. Evaluation of service provided by participants by school personal. 



270 



ERIC 



Pete Blagglo 

ACRES PRESENTATION PROPOSAL-RURAL AHRITION 



The presentation will report the development, findings, and practical implica- 
tions of a study conducted to identify the factors which result in rural spe- 
cial education teacher attrition. A survey was distributed statewide in 
September, 1985 to all (400) rural and urban Nebraska teachers who received 
their first special education teaching certificate in 1980. United States 
census data, published definitions, and rural retention ratios were used to 
classify special education teachers as rural or urban instructors. Teachers 
were questioned on their reasons for leaving or staying in the profession, 
undergraduate training experiences, delivery model orientation, type(s) of 
students they instructed, background, distance from home to work, demographic 
profile, and special education teaching endorsement(s) . 

The preliminary analysis of data indicates special education teachers consider 
peer and administrative support significant factors for both leaving or 
remaining in the field of special education. Of the teachers sampled, 95% 
considered peer support important while 97% indicated administrative support 
an important factor regardless of exceptionality taught, rural/urban nature of 
teaching assignment, and delivery model. Respondents ratings of undergraduate 
experiences indicate both strengths and weaknesses in university training 
programs. The most frequently mentioned strengths were theoretical 
background, and well trained knowledgeable instructors. Weaknesses frequently 
focused around lack of exposure to special education populations and parents. 
Respondents quantitative rankings ranged from "extremely poor" to "excellent" 
on a six point scale. Opinions were approximately split between "adequate" 
and "could use minor changes" when grouped 

In addition to examining the preliminary data in greater detail prior to the 
presentation in April, further data analysis will be directed toward respon- 
dent rural retention ratios, rural and urban employment characteristics, rela- 
tionships of delivery model to attrition, demographic characteristics of 
respondents, distance from home to teaching assignment, endorsement area(s) of 
teachers, and handicap(s) of students instructed. 

The final results of this study have practical rural implications for 
teachers, prospective teachers, administrators, and university personnel who 
prepare teachers for classroom instruction. What are the characteristics of 
rural special education teachers? Why do some special education teachers con- 
tinue to teach in rural areas while others do not? What should one look for 
when hiring a rural special education teacher? What may administrators do to 
increase the probability that a teacher will remain teaching in a rural 
school? How may the university better prepare rural special education 
.teachers? What should rural special education teaches be aware of when 
selecting to teach in a rural school? Findings from the study along with 
group participation during the presentation will assist in answering the many 
questions which exist pertaining to attrition of rural special education 
teachers . 



Wednesday, April 23 
4:00-5:00 pm 



Pete Biaggio, Ann Fritz 
301 Centennial Mall South 
Box 94987 

Lincoln, NE 68509-4987 



271 



nrnmA SECIML EDUCATION TE/CHER AHRITIOM STUDY 



^'^^ To i^rove the retention of rM>re8ke epeciel educetion pereonnel in a rural aetting. 

AUDIENCE Eeployera and teacher trainera of rural apeclal educaUon ataff (Acfcilnlatratora, 

Directora, etc.). 

•'^STION What factora influence apeclal education pereonnel attrition >..• rural areaa? 

SURVEY POPULATION All apeclel educetion pereonnel who received their flret Nebreaka Special Education 

Certiricetlon In 1980. 

SUB-QUESTIONS 

1. Are people raiaed In a rurel environaent nore likely to be teaching apeclal education In a rural area 
ar cer ^ yeara 7 

2. Doea the Undergraduate Unlveralty Progran Influence retention within e rurel achool diatrict? 

H^*,^" coMunity in which they teach «ore likely to reiiain teaching in a achool 
than thoaa who do not? la tne dietance from hoM to achool a factor? 

A, Doee rural echool retention differ between teachera who obtain liceneure froa rural aa coi^ared to urban 
univeraibieeY 

5. Does the rural teacher retention rete differ sAong veried delivery aodela, endoreeMnta hold, or typea 
of exceptionality taught by thoaa teachera? » 7^ » . 



6. Doea the rurel teacher retention rete differ between Educetionel Service Unite? 



. Doea the Mrital atatua, age end aex of the teacher influence the retention within e rural diatrict? 



. What 6chool and Coaaunity factora influence Special Education teecher retention? 

e. Size of echool 

b. School revsionalbllltlea with other than apeclal educetion 
atudenta and their faailiea 

c. Salary 

d. Facllitiee 

e. Availability of equipaant 

f . Age range of etudente taught 

g. Inatruction of ytudente with varying exceptionalitiea 

h. Aaount of paperwork 
1. Studant/teachaj ntio 
J. AdKlni4trative eupport 

Peer eupport 

Profeaaional Qfowth cpportunitiee 

a. Availability of related aervicea 

n. Itinerant neture of teaching poaltion 

o. Frien(t*e in coaaunity 

p. Relativea in coaaunity 

q. Statue in co*«iurdty 

r. CoaaL-nity focua on quality education 



272 

o 

ERIC 



Wednesday, April 23 
4:00-5:00 pm 



1 



Prsssntor: Collssn A. Capper 



Coordinator and Teacher 
Red Bird School 
Special Education Program 
Queendale Center 
Beverly, KV 40913 



( Doct or a 1 st udent , 

Peabody College of Vanderbilt 

University, Nashville, TN> 



Titles WORKING SUCCESSFULLY WITH THE BRAILLE READE<^: 
STRATEGIES FDR PARENTS AND RURAL SCHOOL PERSONNEL 

The purpose and goal of this workshop is to discuss, in an easy 
to understand manner, components of braille reading instruction that 
when properly applied, can lead to successful reading experiences for 
the beginning braille reader in bhe rural public school. My intended 
audience for this session are those persons »««ithout braille skills 
who work with the braille reader. This audience includes the family 
of the VI student, the regular classroom teacher, the resource room 
teacher who does not have a background in working with the VI 
student, teachr«r aides and volunteers. The presentation and 
materials will also be useful for the rural special education 
administrator to disseminate to her/his «^elevant staff. A working 
knowledge of the braille code is not a prerequisite nor a goal of the 
workshop. This presentation will describe one way in which a rural 
braille student can have more reading success while attending his/her 
local school. 

The continuum of services for e visually impaired (VI) student 
in urban areas include home-based se^ \^ices, residential schools for 
the VI, self-contained classrooms, resource rooms, itinerant services 
and the teacher-consultant model (Huebner, 1965). However, for the 
rural visually impaired child, Huebner states, "if only one or two 
visually impaired students reside in a particular school district, a 
full array of options is generally unavailable" (no pag9). For the 
rural VI student who does not attend a residential school the vision 
teacher may provide direct services a koaximum of four to five hours 
per week regardless of the model utilised. The remainder of the time 
is spent with other teachers, aide:: and parents who may not have any 
braille skills. 

For example, a VI student may have reading in the resource room 
with the special education teacher or aide who includes the student 
in a reading group with sighted peers and/or tutors him/her 
individually on specific braille skills. T ^ regular classroom 
teacher may hav^ the mainstr^eamed VI st'C::-v^nt for other academic 
artfA^ that require reading, such as science and social studies. The 
special education teacher may send home braille flashcards and 
sentences to the parents, with instructions to "drill your child on 
these words each day. " 




ERIC 



s 



It is th« rasponsibi 1 ity of thess untrained persons to carry out 
reading instruction with the VI student throughout the week. Because 
of their 'ack Qf training and experience with braille reading, these 
persons may unknowingly reinforce poor reading attitudes and 
techniques. They may not know or understand the good habits that are 
essential for the beginning braille reader. By understanding and 
utilizing the braille reading components presented here, the person 
with few or no braille skills can contribute to the rural VI 
student's mainstr^ success. 

The strategy 4iill b« discussing today are all included in 

the publication Ii • ^ * ^ual , r which you will be given a copy at the 
end of this sessior t he Mai^A , , can be used as a self-instruct ive 
review guide of today' session. However, for those who will not have 
the opportunity to see today's presentation, a certified teacher of 
the VI should be consulted to review each component and to 
demonstrate correct and incorrect braille reading techniques. This 
presentation assumes that a certified vision teacher will be 
available to provide feedback and direction on all the braille 
reading components. 

First today, I will discuss and demonstrate successful braille 
reading topics which include attitudes, expectations, materials, 
equipment, the braille code, reading strategies and braille 
mechanics. 

Secondly, you will be given a copy of, and practice in using The 
Checklist. The Checklist is an instrument that you can use to help 
you monitor your success in utilizing the topics of successful 
braille reading. 

Thirdly, I will distribute to you your own copies of The Manual . 
The Manual describes all the topics and methods we will discuss 
today. 

A final item on the agenda will be a time for you to ask 
questions or provide comments from your own experience. 

Attitudes 

Probah ly the most important aspect 01 assisting a braille reader 
is encouraging a positive attitude towards learning braille. 
Needless to say, the positive attitude has to begin with the person 
who is working with the VI student. Harley, Henderson and Truan 
(1979) state that "motivation cannot be overemphasized as a 
contributing factor in the acquisition of reading skills" (p. BS). 

Some specific steps in . ssuring a more positive attitude in the 
beginning braille reader incxude the following: 

1. Request braille labels from the certified vision teacher for 
the student's locker, books and other classroom items (Olson, 1979). 
The beginning braille reader should have his/her name in braille on 
the classroom desk. If the other students have an alphabet letter 
strip taped to their desks, the VI student should havf^^ the braille 
equivalent. M home, labels should be provided for the refrigerator, 
washer/dryer, stove, radio/stereo, bithtub, chairs, tables and beas 
(Olson, 19B1). The labels should be in Grade S braille and the print 
meaning written on each label. 



EKLC 



274 



3 



2. H«v(» thB child bring in materials related to his/her hobbies 
t.nd use them in the reading lesson (Olson, 1979). 

3. App'^oach the lesson as a read i no lesson rather than a 
braille lesson. Sav "It's time for our reading lesson now" rather 
than, "Let's work o\ braille." 

4. Nothing succeeds like success. Be sure the reading time 
ALWAYS ends on a positive note. The student should feel successful 
during each lesson. Consult the certified teacher of the VI 
immediately if the student seems to be struggling too much. 

II. Ex pec^ at i ons 

Your expectations of the child are also extremely important in 
facilitating a child's reading success. Ward and McCormick <1981) 
state that "to hold lower cfxpectat ions or to accept and condone 
poorer performance as satisfactory for a visually handicapped student 
is neither beneficial to the student nor helpful to the rest of the 
class and the attitudes they develop toward individuals with limited 
vision" (p. 440). Other authors have echoed this sentiment of 
appropriate expectations. "The student who is given 'sympathy 
grades' and allowed to get by with substandard work ^ull pay a 
tremendous price at some future time" <Willoughby, Lansing, Barber & 
Maurer, no date, p. 14). 

Even though expectations can be set too high, it may be assumed 
that most untrained persons who work with the VI student have 
expectations that are too low. The certified teacher of the VI can 
provide guidance in deciding what level of performance expectations 
are appropriate. 

Ill, Materials 

The resource room teacher, teacher aide and classroom teacher 
need to remember that nearly all of the materials used in the reading 
lesson for sighted students can be adapted for the braille reading 
student. However, Curry (1975) warns: "... teachers must avoid 
materials that include odd, unfamiliar language; are loaded with 
unusual or abstract concepts; have a built-in dependence on one 
modality (all visual or heavily auditory); fragment reading into 
isolated skills or depend heavily on circling items in workbooks 
rather than oral expression: are so individualized that there is 
little or no provision for oral exchange" (p. 925). Curry also 
suggests having cartons of objects available ". . . to replace the 
magazines used in the sighted class as sources of pictures and words 
for center and seat activities" (p. 231). 

Degler and Risko (1978) suggest that materials should be 
motivational for sensory impaired students. "Listening to stories, 
choral speaking and reading, creative drama, composing and reading 
language experience stories, playing language games and adding words 
to wordless books" (p. 924) are all stimulating activities. After 
the student has mastered the basics of braille, near the third grade 
reading level, variety will be important in the lesson. Orlansky 
(1977) suggests, ". . . avoid using one medium constantly, as this 
can be tiring. Vary reading activities by using braille or print. 



o 275 

EKLC 



4 



reading aloud, having group participation, and listening to records 
or tapes" (p. 87). 

The materials the braille reader will bring to each lesson will 
be varied. Many times the brail led materials will be "edited" 
meaning the printed word will be written above the braille 
configuration. Duplicate copies of braille flashcards and games to 
learn these words should be available so that both homn and school 
settings have copies, preventing the need for the studi to carry 
these materials from setting to setting. Even if the child does not 
have reading in the regular classroom, s/he could keep the words and 
materials at his/her desk to work on during free time. Lesson plans 
and materials that need to be brail led for the student should be 
given to the certified vision teacher at least one week before 
needed. 

IV. Equipment 

The student should have a braille writer, supply of paper and 
variable speed tape recorder placed in each potential reading setting 
including the home, resource room and regular classroom. The 
student^ s brail ler and braille paper should be near enough to his/her 
desk, (either stored in it or on a nearby shelf) for the student to 
be able to obtain it with ease. The student should have a ring 
binder to keep papers in order (Curry, 1975). 

Proper care of the equipment is very important. the dust cover 
should always be kept on the brail ler when it is not in use. Other 
classroom children as well as young siblings at home should be 
instructed of the equipment's importance as a learning tool for the 
VI student. Emphasis should be placed on the fact that the equipment 
is not to be played with and should be used only by the braille 
reading student. Initially explaining the equipment to students and 
siblings and allowing them to use the equipment with teacher/parent 
supervision may curb the curiosity of the students to play with the 
equipment later on. In addition, the VI student should be 
responsible for putting away and properly storing the equipment after 
use. 

V. What is Braille? 

You do not have to know the bt aille code to assist a braille 
reading student. As time passes hr^ ^ever, you may find yourself 
recognizing the meaning of some br lie characters. It i_s helpful to 
have a general understanding of the characteristics of the braille 
code. Orlansky (1977) gives an easily understood explanation. 

Braille is a system of touch reading which involves 
feeling raised dots. It was developed in 1829 by Louis Braille, 
a blind man. In English, Grade 2 braille, each letter of the 
alphabet has a different syn bol made with dots. In addition, 
there are many other braille symbols and abbreviations called 
contractions. Contractions, like shorthand, help save time and 
sp^ce. Frequently used word^:^ such as and, the, for, rn, and 
Hi and combinations of letters such as sh . th . ejd, er, ow, 
ina, and t ion have their own distinct symbols. Braille has many 



rul«s of usage. The same dots may have several different 
meanings, depending on hoM they are used. ^-or example, a dot 
2,4 sign <dots S and 4 of a 6 dot "cell") way mean cc, con, or 
a colon. fl dot 1,3.5,6 configuration may m«an z, or as . There 
are special forms of braiile that can be usi«d for music, 
mathematics, science and foreign language" <p. 41-3). 

VI. Reading Strategies 

Reading strategies for the braille %t< ient are probably a major 
concern for the person who is not proficient; with the braille code. 
However, Ward and McCormick (1981) state: 

. . . the same approaches that are used with sighted 
children are also effective in teaching reading to visually 
handicapped children. Language experience, phonic, linguistic, 
and eclectic approaches, individualized reading, basal readers 
and methods that use rebus materials, color coding, and i.t.a. 
have all been used to help low vision and blind children re id. 
fls with sighted children, no one of these approaches is clearly 
the most effective with all visually handicapped children (p. 
436). 

However, there are some specific points to remember about 
braille readings a) New words, as with sighted children, shculd be 
introduced in context. b) Asking the student to "sound out" a word 
s/he does not know is not appropriate. This is because the braille 
contractions, when sounded out, do not make up the entire word. For 
example the letter "b" by itself stands for the word but and imm 
stands for immediate. c) When a student comes to a word such as 
altogether ( alt in braille), the teacher cannot say, "what is the 
root word you see in this word?" Many suffixes, prefixes and root 
words are special conractions (Ward & McCormick). d) When the 
student does not know a word, let him/her say the letters in the 
word. Ask for the first sound in the word. Ask the student what 
the word could be and still make sense in the sentence. If the 
student still does not know the word, ask for the spelling of the 
word. In addition ask the child if there are any contractions in 
the word and what dot numbers make up the contraction. If the 
student still does not know the word, you may tell the child the 
word. The unknown word should then be written down. The list of 
words the student did not know in the lesson will then alert the 
teacher of the VI to areas of need. 

Blind students sometimes do not understand concepts that are 
used in certain reading materials. For example, the student may 
tell you what an elephant looks like, but really have no 
understanding of what an elephant really is. Deglor and Risko 
(1979) suggest motivating the student to think and talk about the 
reading. Orlansky, (1977) suggests to "always emphasize thinking. 
Such communication helps the child relate his/her own experiences to 
the material and helps you monitor comprehension" (p. 87). Olson 
(1981) lists "non-factual Questions for Checking Comprehension". 



277 



6 



(See Appendix) These questions are excellent for the teacher and 
parent to use with the braille reader to further develop 
comprehension skills. 

fit home, parents are often asked to listen to their children 
read, drill on sight words or review spelling words. Teachers 
should demonstrate proper techniques for these activitiess with the 
parent and child. This "hands-on" training using both participation 
and observation by the parent will not only significantly decrease 
frustration at home but leave both the parents and the child feeling 
successful. Tips especially for parents to remember when working 
with the braille reader include a) keeping the sessions fun and 
positive, b) not scolding if the child has trouble, c)making a game 
out of the activity, and d) keeping the sessions short (15-20 
minutes for beginning readers). It is important that the room be 
quiet wher the parents work with the child. 



Braille reading mechanics is the prime target area for 
consistency between the teacher of the VI student and other 
personnel who work with the child. It is very important that the 
child cultivate good habxts of braille reading mechanics from the 
very beginning of instruction. Harley et al. suggest that 
"mechanics should not be taught in a formal manner but ra*:her . . . 
the teacher should demonstrate, describe, and suggest techniques as 
applicable, and at the same time, maintain the focus of the les^jon 
on reading for meaning" (p. 76). Posture, positioning of materials 
and correct use of the hands and fingers are areas of braille 
mechanics that should receive extra attention in reading. The list 
of questions in The Checklist , located at the end of The Manual 



provides a detailed list of braille mechanics to be aware of during 
instruct ion. 

The Checklist 

To help the reading tutor remember and apply the components of 
successful braille reading. The Checklist was developed. This list 
includes simple shcrt answer, yes/no questions that pertain to all 
the components delineated in The Manual . The Checklist can be 
utilized in two ways. First, it can be used for initial, 
beginning-of-the-year self-checks by all those who work with the 
braille reader. fit the end of each reading session or lesson. The 
Checklist can be quickly completed. It is important to be alert to 
areas that should receive emphasis in the next lesson — whether it be 
in the use of the components or in the student's braille reading 
techniques. It is also important to share the completed Checklist 
with the certified teacher of the VI to provide her/him with 
comprehensive feedback regarding areas of need for the VI student as 
well as to draw attention to instructional needs of the readiing 
tutor. 



VII. Mechanics 



278 



ERIC 



Secondly, The Checklist , following an initial period of daily 
(for example £ weeks), can be utilized on a scheduled periodic 
s (for eKample once every 2 weeks) as a means of ensuring 
CO. nuity in programming. 

major underlying assumption of The Manual is the presence of 
the iVy,r,ortuni'(:y fot* the braille reader to attend his/her local 
public K 'i^ol, especially in the early elementary years. 
Understi-c) .r| and applying the successful braille reading components 
by all t:cir-- .3 working with the VI student can be one positive step 
in meetin«i a braille reader's needs in the rural public school 
setting. 



279 



a 



References 

Bourgeault, S. E. <ig69). Methods of teaching the blind; the 

Xanquaoe arts, Malaysia: Pmer ican Foundation for the Overseas 
Blind. 

Curry, R. Q. <ig75). Using LEfl to teach blind children to read. 

Reading Teacher , gg <3) , 272-9. 
Degler, L. S. ft Risko, V. J. <1979). Teaching reading to 

ma instr teamed sensory impaired children. Reading Teacher . 

3£<a>, 921-5. 

Harley, R. K. , Hond4.rson, F. M. ft T^-uan, M, B. <1979). The teaching 
of braille reading. Springfield, XL: Charles Thomas 
Publishers. 

Huebner, K. M- (1985). The challenges in providing appropriate 

edunational services to rural visually impaired children and 
their families. Rural Special Education Quarterly . 6(1), no 
page. 

Olson, M. R. (1979). Suggest ic/is for working with the remedial 

braille reader. Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness . 
Z3<a), 314 - 17. 

Olson, M. R. (19ai). Gu icelines and games for teaching efficient 

braille reading, Ne«^ York: American Foundation for the Blind. 
3rlansky, M. D. <1977). Mainstreaming the visually impaired child . 

Boston, Mfl: Teaching Resources. 
Ward, M. ft McCormick, S. (1961). Reading instruction for blind and 

l:)w vision children in the regular classroom. Reading Teacher . 

34<^>i 434 - 44. 
Milloughby, D. <Ed. ). <no date). Your school includes a blind 

student. Chateworth, Cfl: National Federation of the Blind. 



280 



li. 98-524 OF TITLE II 

RL D. PERKINS VOCATIONAL EDUCATION ACT 
1984 



GOAL 



FACILITATE TRANSITION PROM SCHOOL TO POST-SCHOOL EMPLOYMENT/CAREER OPPORTUNITIES 

t 

:ATI0NAL education and/or vocational REHABILITION SPECIAL EDUCATION 

(Diltjct Service) (RBimbursenent and/or consultant services) 

^uxuiiax Aiiuiiesu,, sDiiities, neeosi instruction/eqiupnent/facilities to meet the needs of the 

handicapped students in special education 



OOUNSELING/GUIDANCE/CAREER DEVELOFMEWT ACTIVITIES OONDUCTH) 
BY COUNSELORS TRAINET IN SPECIAL EDUCATICN SER^^CES 

t 

la sh^ill provide infonnation to handicaRjed 1) available opportunities in vocational education no later than beainnina 

students and programs of: 9th grade; and 

2) requirements for enrolhrent. 

t 

^ BOARD shall provide equal access to the full 1) Oocupationalli specific courses of 
range of vocational programs available study; 

to non-handicapped, including: 2) cooperative education; a«3 ^ within the least Ooordiiated by 

restrictive enviroiment ^ . . 
3) apprenticeship programs. Vocational Education 

and 

Special Education 



282 

281. 



ERIC 



QRGRNIZATiaaL PLAN (l-'86 to 6-'86) 
TO PREPARE FOR FJLL PROGRAM FOR '86 - '87 



1,1.F HftNDI C APPED FUNDING 

1. Fornulate zoster o£ identified handicapped students by grade level. 
Definition includes. "because of handicapped condition cannot svicceed 
in regular vocational education vdthout assistance" • 

2. Develop list of vocational oppo rt unities and requirenents for entry. 

3. Disseminate to 8th graders and parents. 

4. Set up Career Assessment/Interest/i^titude Evaluation Program on the 
CGRputer. 

5. Assess 9th, 10th, and 11th graders. 

6. Develop a Model IVEP vMch will include the profile of assessment 
information, the long/short range goals, and the suggested voca- 
tional courses. 

7. Organize system of incliKiing the IVEP in the Annual lEP Meeting 
schedules. 

8. Bnnphasize the promoting of entry into nontraditior ^ courses and new 
emerging courses for handicapped and for female students. 

9. Consult with teadiers and staff. 

10. Organize sources of placement possibilities (inclioding on/off canpus 
enployment) . Tt)BSB sources would include outside agencies vto work 
in the placement of the handicapped (such as Vocational Rehabilitation) . 
Also organize a system of tracking students (address xipdates within 
• a r^orting system vrtiich includes post-seccndary students) . 



2S3 

ERIC 



roPmS TOPIC; 1.1.F HANDICAPPED EIN3ING 



ERIC 



28^1 



CRITERIA 


GB1M7IVES 


mm 


1^ 
MDME 


BBGOKING 
DME 


DftlE 


ETOICN 
HEMOD 


1. GunmracTKM 


1.1 Provide Handicapped 
students/parents infoma- 
tion on vocational OFpo> 
Unities and lequiienients 

l.i Assesanent of handi- 


..1 Develop and dissan- 
nate printed infonia- 
ion 

.i vocational reocnnen- 
ations foe IVEP 


Identified han- 
dicapped student 
8th grade to 
entry into 9th- 
and parents 


8- '86 

1 


6 -'87 


l.l Copy of printed informtiai 
uu oocuDenLauon 01 giviiig to 
ttudents/parents (Ex. Using ve- 
licle of lEP Meeting) 


apped students inteiests/i 
ibilities/needs 


graders 






,.2 ccnpiter Profile of each 

JULViUUiU DbUQcIlv 


L.3 Ccnfeienoe with 
parents to agree on vo- 
cational goals 1 

( 


.3 Devekpent of IVEP 
Long/Short range goals) 
ilus scheduling of 
ppropriate vocational 
lasses 


9th -11th 
graders 






..3 IVEP Dooment (Ex. Using ve- 
iicle of lEP Meeting^ 


1.4 PioiDting entry of 
landicapped students and ( 
lemale students into ncn- 
laditional courses 


A &q»nding career 
ptions and equal oppor^ 
unities for handicappec 
nd f onale students 


9th - 12th 
graders 


« 


It 


..4 Copy of schedules plus do- 
^tation of grades in voca- 
:ional courses 


2. maxm 

IlHCriON 


2.1 Consultation with vo- i 
:aticnal teachers ooncenn 
Lng needs of handicapped < 
students 


!.l Providltti rpfiiilffl 
if IVEP and instruction- 
1 ncdifications/stra- 
egies (sequential steps 
edification of time 
ines/peer tutors/adapt- 
ngequipnent) 


7ui uul 

graders 

/ 


n 




1.1 Copy of IVEP given to VD- 
ational teachers plus docu- 
nentation of classroan visi- 
:atiQns/teadier conferences 


3. msmfmm 

RUCTION 


3.1 Provide Placement - : 
Hipiopent or post-seoon- 1 
jaiy opportunities for the 
liandics^ 


.1 Qiplopent place- 
ent on/off caipjs plus 
smner voiii programs 


Uth - 12th 
jradeiB 

Post-Secondary 


H 


H 


.1 Docunentation of plaoonents 
)lus coordination with other 
igencies 




3.2 Tracking of handi- 
:»pped students 


.2 Wah]]p oomiunica- 
ion with students/ 
nployers 


llth-12th 
iraders 

tost-Seoondary 


K 


n 


.2 Copy of written ccnnunica- 
don 




3.3 Articulation with vo- ■ 
^tioial teachers and 
staff 1 


.3lntegratiOT/ociiiiiuni- 
lation with all staff 
laters (verificatiori 
)f instructional stra- 
;egies 


Staff 


n 


H 

i 


.3 Dates of Coiferences/In- 
ervioe I4eetij>gs 



,5 



A SPECIAL CHILD 



From: Academic Therapy Publication 
Summer 1971 

/ know a very special child whose world is upside down. 

And often in his classroom, he wears a puzzled frown. 

He's criticized for tuning out, accused of never trying. 

He's nagged and scolded, begged, cajoled; most kids end up 
crying. 

But oftentimes he just gives up; each task will mean defeat. 

He sees a different symbol and hears a different beat. 

His No is On, for Was it's Saw, and How sure must be Who. 

And 6 plus 6 is 21, J 9's are 72. 

Tliis problem's labeled many things; it matters not the name. 

To plense his parents, teachers, peers, is this child's secret aim. 

Now that we know some ways to help, let's start today, and 
then. 

Through work and understanding love, we'll right his world 
again. 

Dee Shaffer 

Learning Disabilities Teacher 
Avery Street School 
South Windsor. Connecticut 



286 



Wednesday, April 23 



4:00-5:00 pm 



Marty Martinson 
Human Development Program 
University of Kentucky 
Lexington, KY 40506 



The Rural Perspective In Special 
Education Policy: The Assessment 
of Equity, Efficiency and Choice 



Proposal Abstract ; ACRES 

Evaluation of educational and related human service 
programs for persons with handicaps can provide Information 
pertinent to the more {general policy bases from which 
specific programs emerge. The principles of policy setting 
are based upon a philosophy which maximize three values: 
e^ulrZ., efficiency and choice . Implementation of services 
usually Involves attempts to measure the value of tV^ pollci"^'^ 
and assess their success or efficiency. However, such 
evaluation efforts commonly generate o-itcome data related to 
specific treatments. These data do not relat(<3 directly to 
the goals established for the particular policy Initiative. 
Discussion of "policy-relevant" evaluation and monitoring 
issues and procedures will be the Tl"=.ry focus of the 
presentation. 



ERIC 



2S7 



Navajo Parent Training at St, Michaels, Navajo Nation, Arizona - cont. 



Meetings with what was initially called supervisor/counsellors and 
is now called support/resource person rather than being deleaated as 
weekly or twice monthly have been set up at the discretion of the infant 
specialist. 

A pediatric physical therapist will be training parents in administer- 
ing the ^rolina Curriculum for Handicapped Infants and Infants at Risk- 
This asst sment will be appropriate for our mul tihandicapped infants- 
The Carol Curriculum for Handicapped Infants and Infants at Risk seems 
to come closest to meeting the needs of th9, infants/toddlers as well as 
the parents. 

An intens-^'ve trein.ng program ut:iizinq this instrument will be in- 
itiated in our project. This seems also to be synchronous with broaden- 
ing the resources that th^? parent will have at their fingertips. 

The second parent training model is in conjunction with the Associa- 
tion's seven (7) week surrmer program. Parents participate in direct 
course work, classroom pract; um and in-services. Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, provides an adjunct faculty and arants credit to- 
ward certification and/or undergraduate degree in special education. 

This summer training program is intended to meet the needs of parents, 
and those employed or wishing to become employed in paraorofessional 
positions in special education. Specific focus is in wcrkinc with persons 
with disabling conditions. 

Parents are involved in a daily lecture class during the eight (8) 
week summer program, NAU provides two (2) courses for credit dependina 
on the background of the participants, 

ESE 308 - Teacher Aide Practicum 

ESE 399 - Parent Training in Daily Living Skills 

The parents are assigned to a classroom so they may receive maximum 
exposure to conditions known to exist within the St. Michaels population 

Several weekend in-service training seminars are incorporated into 
the training program which covers the etiologies of mental retardation 
and their concomitants, 

St, Michaels provides the teaching facilities and practicum placement 
while NAU provides an adjunct facility to teach the class. 

The Association subcont*^acts with the Arizona Board of Regents for 
and on behalf of Northern Arizona University for the seven (7) week summer 
program. 

The Association receives excellent cooperation with the NAU faculty. 
Each summer the designated faculty advisor is responsible to submit a 
written evaluation to the Office of Indian Education Programs, Washington 
D,C., who funds the project. In addition, a professor of special education 
from Arizona State University provides OIEP with an outside evaluation. 
Site visits throughout the summer program are made by the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs Education Specialists, 



288 



(2) 



articulation: 

instructional strategies with all staff 
enployment needs of students with staff 
available ocxmunity agencies with staff and parents 
local district advisoiy ootinittee iiput and advice for 
sdiool program 

IMPLICftTIONS 

Raral areas ran iirplenent procedures of the Public Laws. Qrgani^iation of the 
procedures can be specifically outlined and direct inpleraentation can be conducted 
and followed through with by a Ooc^)erative Administrator. 

Organization - Goc^)erative and State Voc Bd 

Trial Irrplenentation - two high schools by Co-op Administrator 

Inplanentation of Full Program ('86-' 87) - five high schools utilizing Formula 

Funding oambinod in the Co-op in order to hire one Staff Member 
Tracking of Procedures - by Co-op Administrator with at least monthly school 

contacts edong with reports of hired Staff Member 
Evaluation - placement of students 

successful and alternative job choices 

refinement of Career Developnent ModelAfork Experience Program 
appropriate for each district 



Karen S. Newman 

Cochise County Educational Services 
December^ 1985 



289 



Conference Keynote Speaker - PAT MORRISSEY - April 24, 1986 



I had an awards banquet speech prepared. So, you are right here: An Awards 
Banquet Speech this morning! But before I get started I think I need to 
bring something to your attention. I've known Doris for, I don't 
know...aeven or nine years, something like that, and I've known ACRES for a 
long time, too, since it got started? and I do think that what you do is 
very important and you cei^tainly have brought impact. Doris sent me about 
fifty pounds of reports and papers to read in preparation for our visit this 
morning and there is one thing you all missed, but I feel if you knew about 
it you would, Doris at least — I'm referring to the International Flying 
Chicken Association. The International Flying Chicken Association has been 
around since 1939 and it is a group of people who have flying chickens, and 
they have contests. A chicken by the name of Laura-B has the record for the 
longest distance flown by a female chioken which is the length of a football 
field. Now if ACRES had been awary of that, I'm sure they would have 
arranged a special division in the Special Olympics for people who wanted to 
fly not only chickens but, Doris could have been involved in it and could 
have had silks for the chickens. I'm sura she could have gotten Purina to 
make up little packages of chicken feed yith ACRES' name on it and I realize 
that this is an oversight but I wanted to bring it to your attention that 
the flying chicken contest is in Ohio, on May 15, and if you want additional 
information I have it in my briefcase. 

I'm here for a variety of people: I'm here for myself, but I'm also here 
for Patti Guard and Lani Florian, and this is the first night I've had as a 
banquet speaker and about the 100th time that I've been asked to be a 
substitute. The first time I was asked to be a substitute was back in '74 
when I first finished my Ph.D. and I knew I didn't know it all, also my boss 
at the time said, "I have to go to Ohio State to give this presentation and 
it'll pay $200 and I oan't make it, so you go do it and they'll give you the 
money," and : said, "No, I can't do it. That's like asking for Henry 
Kissinger and getting the Under-Secretary of Foreign Affairs 1" And he said, 
"No it's not, it's like asking for Henry Kissinger and getting Mamie 
Eisenhower." So anyway, I asked a few of my friends who were experts on 
banquet speaking wha^ good advice they could give me and so I did a survey 
(I'm looking at the data): 15 said you have to be funny, 10 said you had to 
be brief, and all of them said don't try to be profound. I never thought 
those criteria would apply to this morning but it seems to me that the first 
is dependent upon th^ sense of humor of the audience, the second would have 
to be a stop watch with a second hand and alarm and a battery that's not 
eleven months old, and the third has to do with being up to your personal 
acceptance of the relative major of your ego strength. ..depending on the 
time of day. 



250 



Page 2 

Pat Morrissey 



I'd like tc comment (I can be serious, really), Vd lite to commeni; cn four 
things; 1- The nature of the rural condition; 2- Some differences between 
special ed. and rehabilitation that I'd lite to bring to your attention and 
their implications for serving disabled persons in rural communities; 3. A 
brief overview of OSERS' efforts in rural special ed- and rehab-j 4. 
Suggestions about ACRES' future- I think one of the things that affects 
those of us Utio are not rural vrtien we visit rurr.l programs, and even wLen I 
watched Dan Bather's special o^i rural America^ is that in rural America the 
first order of priorities are clearly defined: food, shelter, clothing, 
education, and jobs - that's all very important- And nobody gets lost on 
issues like my valise, VCR's, or the latest film. I :ihink that this is good, 
that in rural Am6:^lca, at least in this day and age, our priorities are 
addressed in proper perspective- The second thing I think one observes when 
we visit rural programs ia that the individual is valued in a rural 
community in two contexts, one, as a resource for' everybody else; and, as a 
friend to be assisted in a time of need— that too is very good- The third 
thing that I've observed is that pecple use effort, common sense, and 
experience to maka up for limited resources; that too is very good- And, 
the fourth thing that one sees over and over again is that sharing is a 
characteristic of rural communitieM in all types of settings and all types 
of situations?- I think that these are the strengths oZ rural communities 
and that they contribut3 to the development of effective programs for 
disabled people in spitt shortage? of funds or even in spite of shortages 
of people with specific sets of credentials- 

Now, I would like to comment on some differences between special ed- and 
rehabilitation, and I did not have sufficient time to develop thec^o as fully 
as I'd have liked because I thought I had until tonight, but now if you'd 
like to sit next to me at dinner maybe I'll have some other i<Jeas- The 
first category includes positive differences between special ed- and 
rehabilitation- PL 94-142 is an entitlement program, even if the label 
"entitlement" isn't used that's what it is- Every handicapped child is 
guaranteed a free public education, and education is guaranteed for every 
child in the Constitution, so there is no debate as to whether somebody will 
or won't get an education- The rehabilitation program, on the other hand, 
is an eligibility program, and in order to benefit from rehabilitation you 
have to be disabled or disability has to be an impairment to your ability to 
get a Job, and with rehabilitation it becomes likely that you will be able 
to get a Job- Now, if you meet all three of those requirements and, in 
addition, apply for Rehab.'s services, you will receive services- Under the 
Rehabilitation Act any disabled person who contacts a rehab- office is 
entitled to an evaluation- And, the counselor is the one who ultimately 



291 



Page 3 

Pat Morrlssey 



makes the decision from that evaluation Information as to whether the person 
meets those three criteria; so, there Is both substantive and subjective as 
well as state pressure, deciding who and what will get served If you are 
labeled "eligible" and you get services. If you are not labeled "eligible" 
you don't get served and In some states ^rtiere selection Is In effect, which 
means you're only served with limited money, you know you can't serve 
everybody so you set up an order of selection serving only the severely 
disabled first. In that case, you could be considered eligible, but because 
you aren't severely handicapped you will be put aside for awhile. And I 
think that obviously that difference, between being an entitlement program 
and an eligibility program. Impacts and frustrates people trying to serve 
kids ready to go to other environments outside of education. 

Another difference between special ed. and rehab. Is the decentralized 
nature of education and the centralized nature of the rehabilitation. There 
are many things attached to that difference. In education, as you all know, 
the federal contribution Is 911. School boards who voted on a state level 
have an Impact or global policy and have considerable bucks going In terms 
of a generalized education program on a local level. Rehabilitation, on the 
other hand. Is basically state programmed. Everybody who's a rehab, 
counselor Is a state employee; everybody who's a rehab, counselor In a 
district office Is an employee of the state, not an employee of his own 
elected local school board. On the funding side In special ed. It's about 
8^ to 9 ^/2% contribution by the Federal Government. In a rehabilitation 
program, contrast: the federal contribution is 80j, states are only required 
to put up 20%. Another difference Is the number of people served annually. 
There are about 4.3 million handicapped kids served each year and 1 million 
disabled adults served each year. So, if you figured you had about 1 
million leaving school every year, and the rehab, program serves a million 
kids and people and only a certain percentage of those are between 18 and 
25, you can figure out the odds of getting service if you Just look at it 
from the numbers perspective. PL 94-142 is rather prescriptive. It has 
requirements that everybody has to follow to be in compliance with the law. 
The Rehabilitation Act is also a federally driven mandate and has 
substantive requirements, but it is also administratively very flexible so 
that you have a situation where you have general policies from the Federal 
Government. PL 94-142 is much more prescriptive than the Federal 
Rehabilitation Act. 

The final difference that I'd like to mention is that I think in special ed. 
we've all made an Investment to be used. Parents, administrators, and 
teachers are a part of the process, although the teacher might get a big, 
big chunk of the burden after the plan is developed. The rehab, counselor 
la also under a tremendous amount of discretion and the rehab, counselor is 



292 



Page 4 

Pat Morrlssey 



like a burglar. In many states the rehab, counselor gets a poorly allotment 
which he or she spends on their pay slip, and how they spend it within state 
guidelines or bottom lines is left to their discretion. Their bottom line is 
obviously getting people out into the work force. In most Rehab. District 
Offices I've been in, everybody has a blackboard where he caa record what 
stage or status people are in within the system, and the bottom line is 
Closure 2 * Competitive or Out of Employment -> and so there are some 
different dynamics operating between being a special ed. teacher and being 
a rehab, counselor. 

In preparation for this evening's banquet, I also did a little analysis Just 
to show you that I wasn't in an armchair the whole time. I want to comment 
on some statistics that were published in '83 on rural rehabilitation. 
There is a Rehab Brief that was done in '83 which summarized two projects at 
the University of Arksmsas Rehabilitation and Training Center, and I think 
they still have copies of them around and I think there's a lot of value to 
the data that they report. But briefly, I think these are useful now. For 
instance, if you have to make a case for a program in your area 12.75% of 
non->farm rural population is disabled. In addition, 12.6% of the farm 
population is disabled, and 8 1/2 million disabled Americans live in all 
rural areas. These data are based on information collected in 1982. In the 
project they surveyed 450 disabled adults in rural areas in four states 
including Texas and Arkansas. The most frequently reported disabling 
conditions were: 25% of the people reported arthritis as a problem, 48% 
reported vision, and 41% reported mental health problems; these are for 
adults. The same adults were in their socio->economic status review and it 
is determined that the average income of 60% of these 450 disabled people 
was $6,000, 25% of the sample had less than $3*000 income annually, 12% of 
the 450 peop^ ^ v^orked full time, 8% worked part time, and 69% had never 
worked. Or question of whether or not they would use Vocational 

Rehabilitati services, 60% were aware of VR, 17% had applied for VR 
services, and 60% of those who did not apply were interested in obtaining 
servicess which seems to at least partially counter the argument that people 
don't want to seek services from anything that's considered social service 
or state programs. This sample also reported a series of problems that they 
encountered in their daily living. There were 14 items that I think were 
interesting and again, I think that we can get you copies of reports if you 
want to write to me: 38% of the sample reported physical and emotional 
problems which are the major concern, 34% had concerns about housing and 
yard work (These people all sound like they had a garden, I mean I would * 
like to have a garden. I had these tomato plants on my porch in graduate 
school and I became very friendly with the guys who lived behind us and they 



EKLC 



283 



Page 5 

Pat Morrlssey 



thought it was marijuana and that's why I p?.antecl it. When they saw the 
tomatoes I said, "Well, it's a hybrid you know."), 29% reported employment 
as a serious concern, 27% reported limited mobility, and the list goes down 
from there. People were concerned about school and driving; ability to 
communicate with others was rated about 26%^ 5% were concerned about special 
education, and 9% were concerned about thoir inappropriate behavior. The 
implications of this sort of hodge-podge of information I thiiik are easier 
for you to derive than me, these are Just some things I would like to share 
with you. 

I think that mobilization of community resources and the use of ingenuity is 
critical, particularly when you're serving disabled adults because you don't 
have an infra structure comparable to a school. You probably have one 
rehab, counselor and so it's a burden on you to be creat ve and marshall 
resources. This burden is even greater when serving disabled adults. I 
also think though that counselors have experience and training in 
mobilizing. If they get something inexpensive that's good for their client 
they're going to do that because that means that their total allotment goes 
further. So, I think that you need to identify rehab, counselors who can 
assis'v. In the survey I've reported on, of all the people who had applied 
for services throu^ Rehab. 90% were accepted. Now the sample was small but 
it certainly indicates that these people were eligible and ultimately did 
get service. 

I don't know this for a fact but I suspect that in a lot of cases rehab, 
counselors are from the communities where they grew up, which I think is a 
plus. Most of the people that I've talked to that were rehab, counselors, 
when asked, 'T^here do you come from?", they say, "Well, I come from here." 
I recommend that ACRES organize a Rural Job Bank for Counselors. If 
somebody from a rural area feels comfortable about living in a rural 
community they may want to try another rural community, and I think that 
also works to field advantage. The first question that I always get when I 
go anywhere in a rural area is, "Where are you from?", and that causes a lot 
of problems because I've lived in alrost all fifty states, and by accident 
my Dad retired in one place and I guess that was home. But, I think that if 
you cam't say, "Well, I'm from here," but you have to say from so-and-so and 
such-and-such and that also is a rural community, that may save you a couple 
of months in terms of building a relationship. I think if it's at all 
possible to mobilize community service clubs around Jobs for the disabled, 
with all these private industries popping up all over (technology being one 
area), I think that the country is "in" (with physical fitness and home-made 
stuff) and you need to promote that. I saw a woman on the plane yesterday 
that had three of the ugliest looking home-made bookshelves I've ever seen 
and she said, "I bought them at an antique auction." I mean there's a lot 
you can exploit. 



234 



Page 6 

Pat Morrissey 



The last point I want to make related to the comparisons of rehab, and 
special ed. is that regarding the world of work, which is the transition 
movement you may or may not know about, is a phenomenon that's occurred to 
a major extent because handicapped kids would grow up, some he*men (and I 
don't know what to do with these) and they looked around and they didn't see 
what they wanted, and so they promoted this idea of transition to work and 
community. Well, I think the same thing is true of rural special educators. 
As your kids grow up and you discover that their needs are different, I mean 
16, 17, 18, 19, and 20, you are going to (just as a natural course of 
events) go into a different kind of business transition, and that's not bad, 
I mean that is also good. 

Now, the OSERS has information about rural in the area of how to assist 
rural communities serving disabled people. Evidently since 1983, the 
Secretary of Education has had an annual report of Education and Rural 
Communities. Now, it's a rather bureaucratic document (I read it on the 
plane yesterday) but I read the section that has rehab, in it and special 
ed., and the National Institute of Handicapped Research, and what they do is 
literally require agencies to identify things that they are doxng to assist 
and develop rural communities. Now it doesn't have a lot of information for 
a project, but it has a contact person, the amount of federal money that is 
spent, and the types of programs that are being operated. I think it's a 
useful document to have. In rehabilitation we also have a $1.5 million 
Migrant Rehabilitation program. (I don't know that a state received grants 
this year but they're issued for 3 years and no less than $450,000.) One of 
the major concerns with us, and in our program, is that by the time one 
state's migrant program identifies, evaluates, and develops an 
individualized rehabilitation plan for a migrant, the migrant will move some 
place else, and there may or may not be a reciprocal grant. This program 
has been going on for, I would say, for at least .?^ince '76. 

Special ed. commitment to rural assistance to me is very impressive and I've 
got page after page of modules that have been developed to help special 
educators in rural areas as well as those that are in development, and I'll 
be glad to leave that with Doris. But, I think they are very valuable 
documents, and also it's my understanding that rural education is a priority 
of the Office of Special Education programs and that's not likely to change, 
I don't think. If I may be political. Congressman Pat Williams from Montana 
is very interested in rural areas and I would guess that the interest and 
then the commitment to programs in rural areas will increase, in time, 
because of his concern. I've worked with him on the Republican side for two 
and a half years and I know every piece of legislation we worked on. There 
was increased attention to rural communities even in the National Endowment 



295 



Page 7 

Pat Morrlsey 



for the Arts, the National Endowment for the Humanities, the authorization, 
and there was also increased attention to rural areas in the Rehabilitation 
Act. I think it's all positive but I think also on the rehabilitation side, 
I think we invest about $9.6 million of $22 million in money specifically in 
rural areas. 

Because of the way that the rehab, state systems have shut out, I'm not so 
sure that the special ed. initiatives identified that this rural initiative 
was the answer. I think it's Just important to roughly state an impact on 
what they're doing and that they are certainly a vehicle that you have to 
do, but Just because we've identified $9.6 million that it's living money 
specifically used for rural areas, there's no reason why you can't also zero 
in on the rest of it and use the independent living programs to reach more 
disabled people. 

Now let me make a few comments on ACRES in the future. What that suggests 
is probably none of my business either, but you might find you'll change 
your name. I know ACRES is great, but you know rehab, is not in there. 
Maybe, depending on your audience, you could have the "R" stand for "Rural" 
on some cases and "Rehabilitation" on others, but I think that that is 
something (if Jerry Fallwell can change his name to any foundation or 
federation) you mi^t want to plan for. I think ACRES has made an energetic 
and effective impact on special ed. and it's time to fully translate this 
success into dealing with Vocational Rehabilitation. 

There are many strategies that one could use to make this happen. The firat 
thing that you have to acquire in order to impact on rehabilitation is to 
understand how the system works in your state or at least in your district. 
That's a local matter. The second thing - your association I suspect 
already does have a very effective spokesperson for your progrpn in D.C. - 
is to develop a knowledge of different calendar3. The calendar of your 
State Legislature, the calendar of the U.S. Congress, the calendar of the 
Department of Education. I mean I found out three weeks ago that June 1st 
is the deadline for setting priorities for special ed. programs. Well, I am 
not an intrinsic bureaucrat, I»m not even an extrinsic bureaucrat, but you 
know I didn't know that that date was coming and evidently It was changed 
from last year to this year because they want to get all the information in 
the system earlier so that they can get grants and contracts out before 
September 30, but I think if you know that, then you know how to impact on 
the system. 



286 



Page 8 

Pat Morrissey 



Another thing that I think that you could do to make a mark on 
rehabilitation is to do an annual report. Even if you haven't invested 
heavily in rehabilitation at this point it probably would make some sen3e to 
do an annual report in which you gave emphasiff to transition effort, which 
will show or give examples of where people uave developed effective work 
programs. When people write annual reports they shouldn't get too worried 
about whether they're sufficiently representative, if they're totally valid 
for all kinds of purposes, but provide an honest answer. They should give a 
guesstimate on what you know, that they should label it as such, but I just 
think of how many Kids are being screwed in certain settings. What causes 
problems? Do they have successes and why do they work, and if the answer to 
the last question is because so-and-so really has their act together 2^ 
hours a day, then you ought to say that, because then you set up realistic 
expectations for the other guy who knows that if he wants to set up programs 
to get kids a Job in the community, he may have to teach him to drive, he 
may have to fix the car if it breaks down, and he may have to be available 
24 hours a day. Now, if he doesn't want to do the things at least you're 
being honest with him, 

I think another thing that's important is cooperation. Your organization, 
more than any other organization in the country, has made a serious 
investment in dissemination of ^rtiat works, I think you've got one cookbook 
after another and I think that that could be useful to people in other 
settings. You have a big problem to solve nationally or in the state or 
even in your local community. Form a collaboration with the guy who you 
know is working in rural there, and give them one of your resource panels, 
because some of ACRES information is basically good stuff, such that other 
people could benefit from it, whether they're in an urban ^etto or even in 
a suburb that has an incredible tax base, I'm repeating myself here, but I 
think that you need to really look into rehab, in addition to getting to 
know your local friendly rehab, counselor. Learn how your system works in 
your statft and take advantage of it. Many states have invested state 
dollars in the independent living programs and there are many more now than 
there were when the program was established in 1973f from 156 federally 
funded centers and I think the actual number now is about 500 to 600, 
Oklahoma for example, went from, I think, $600,000 state investment to a 
$3.2 million dollar investment in one year because they thought it was such 
a good idea. 

Let me tell you a little bit about some rehab, special interest categories 
with priorities that you might want to tap into that are directly linked to 
rehabilitation and rural communities. One is that we have recently funded a 
program for blind elderly. It's a $6.6 million dollar program and I think 



297 



Page 9 

Pat Morrlssey 



it's important you be aware of it. It was obvious that the data from ^rtiich 
I reported earlier indicated that there are a lot of people with vision 
problems in rural areas. Also, it indicated there were a lot of people in 
rural areas with disabili problems who are old folks, so I think that the 
rural communities would e..*tainly have large numbers that would benefit from 
programs specifically designed for blind elderly. The issue is supported 
work. Supported work is being seen as something that might serve the 
severely mentally retarded. But I think so many people have decided that 
it's a good idea that in essence the context is running much further by the 
time it is fully implemented. There are $5 million in ten projects right 
410W, these projects will be funded for 5 years, some of which are in rural 
states (e.g., Minnesota and Virginia). But in addition, there are $9 
million dollars in new state money that's going out this summer to help 
states plan to develop a statewide program for supporting employment. I 
know tha'^ the National Head Injury Foundation is interested in the cost of 
the supoorted employment and wants to, in fact, be able to access it. The 
chronically mentallr ill are already benefiting from supported employment, 
so I think to develop an awareness of supportive employment models (and 
there's also all kinds out there) will also put you at an advantage 
position. 

We also have a $2 million dollar recreational program, lOJl of that money 
being spent specifically and exclusively in rural communities, and I 
mentioned to you the migrant program and the Indian program. But all these 
programs that I mentioned are competitive so if you send in a good 
application you stand a chance of getting funded because I think that the 
competition is not that fierce, particularly for the migrants and the 
Indians. 

I really do appreciate this chance to share a few thoughts with you this 
morning, and what ycu do does make a difference. So my famous point: You 
convert the problems, the challenges via your rich human resources and have 
tremendous talent which transcends the meaning and the utility of the 
dollar< You shape programs for kids, not kids for programs. Where there's 
despair you offer hope, where there is hope you have offered a hand, and 
with your hand you teach self-respect, self-confidence, independence, and 
self-reliance. Where there is self-reliance you offer choices, choices that 
have changed the face of rural America. And, rural America is where those 
with disabilities and their able-bodied neighbors work together for the 
betterment of all. Thank you. 



298 



Concurrent Sessions 
Thursday^ April 24 

9:30 - 11:00 AM 



290 



rhursdry, April 24 
9:30- 11:00 am 

An Alternative to the Delivery of 
Itinerant Services to Rural & Remote Areas 

Sam Polen, Janice Polen 
033 Parks Hall 

Western Washington University 
Bellingham, WA 93225 

The delivery of health & other related services to rural and re- 
mote areas has been recognized as a problem for some time. Delivery 
systems such as block scheduling, development of medical models, 
& even bussing of students have been employed; and, in some instances 
have been successful. 

The most coimon of all these different delivery systems is the use 
of paraprofessional (aids) in the delivery of these services. Para- 
professionals have been used in many situations dealing with vision 
and hearing screening, immunization programs and as supplements to 
itinerent personell. 

This program will discuss the guidelines for the selection, train- 
ing and use of paraprofessional personell in rural & remote areas. 
Th? authors of this paper have been involved in the selection, train- 
ing & use of these personell in the delivery of speech and hearing 
services 15 years. 

The senior author has been involved in tr^iining Paraprofessional 
individuals from Southeastern Ohio (Appalachia) to Dawson Creek, B.C. 
Canada. It is the intent of the authors to present differing models 
of delivery of these services, to different geographic and demographic 
areas. 




Page 2 

Discussion service delivery will range from serving remote 
areas (San Juan Islands) to serving geographically prohibitive areas 
(Omak, Okanogan). Other models will be presented as well. 

Finally, a research report regarding the cost effectiveness and 
program efficiency will be presented. This study was conducted over 
a three year period (Title IV c) and has demonstrated better cost 
effectiveness and an alternative to some of the problems faced in the 
delivery of services to rural and remote areas. 



301 



Title; A Rurally Based Interaging Preservice Training and Service 
Delivery Model in Communication Disorders 

Author: William H. Meyer, Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point 
BACKGROUND 

In 1975, the Education For AH Handicapped Children Act (PL 94-142) 
was signed into federal law. As a result of this legislation, local 
school district's must make services available for all handicapped 
children who require special education and related services. If the 
local district does not directly provide the services, it must make them 
available at public expense and under the district's supervision and 
direction. The "contract arrangements", which have existed for years on 
an informal basis between local education agencies (LEAs) and training 
programs, now require written agreements where none existed before or 
added provisions in existing agreements in order for the local district 
to comply with the law and be eligible for reimbursement of costs. 

Because of the informal service agreements that historically 
existed between training programs and LEAs, many training programs lost 
a significant segment of their speech-language handicapped clinical 
population as LEAs began to make the program changes mandated by PL 94- 
142. More often than not, the LEAs began to assume full responsibility 
for serving these children rather than sharing it with the training 
programs as had been the situation in the past. 

STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 

As rurally based LEAs attempted to absorb the caseload of children 
with Exceptional Education Needs (EENs) in speech-language in those 
communities that also had communication disorders training programs 
significant problems arose for both areas. The LEAs were having 



302 



Author: W. H. Meyer, Ph.D. 



problems funding and finding qualified clinicians to add to their staff 
in speech-language to service the increased population. The population 
size grew for two reasons. First, the local schools were preparing to 
serve children that had previously been served through the training 
program's practica. Second, the schools were no longer permitted to 
have a waiting list of children needing special education services. The 
problem of finding qualified clinicians became (and remains) particular- 
ly acute in rural communities because these professionals often prefer 
to locate in metropolitan communities. 

The training program's primary problem was that it was no longer 
able to provide practicum experiences with school-aged children who 
displayed more than a very minor disorder of communication (i.e., nonEEN 
children). This condition caused further problems particularly for 
those student clinicians who were interested in becoming certified to 
work in the public schools. They arrived at their school practicum 
assignment and did not have any experience with the very population they 
were then expected to serve. Therefore, the clinician on site was 
expected to provide more supervisory time and support to help the unpre- 
pared student clinician cope with the complex caseload. The student 
clinician also did not normally have any previous practicum experience 
in preparing Individualized Education Programs (lEPs) which are also 
required of the LEA under PL 94-142. 

h SQLUIIQIi IQ mE £BQ&C<&tl 

Training programs must provide practicum experiences for their 
student clinicians which include school-aged children having an EEN in 
speech- langajSge (as well as perhaps other areas) and an opportunity to 

303 



ERIC 



Author: W. H. Meyer, Ph.D. 3 

work with children's lEPs. These practicum experiences should preceed 
placement at a school site. The training program cannot pass these 
early training responsibilities on to the LEA. Of course, to the degree 
that a training program works with children displaying an EEN, the LEA 
is also helped in meeting its obligation to PL 94-142. 

Recognizing the mutual benefits of cooperation between the two 
agencies in serving children with an EEN in speech-language, the 
training program and LEA in Stevens Point, Wisconsin, intiated a cooper- 
ative program in 1976. The necessary documents were drafted and agreed 
upon so that the practicum students in the training program could pro- 
vide services to EEN children, have involvement in developing these 
childrens' lEPs and participate in their mult idiscipl inary stafi gs. 
^ The services are provided at the training program to a varied caseload 
without charge to the family. The LtSA provides transportation for the 
children, pays a fee negotiated in the agreement, and provides one full- 
time clinician as liaison for the program and assignment to practicum 
supervisory duties in the trianing program. The LEA is reimbursed for 
this program through Wisconsin Chapter 115 as It Is for other programs 
of direct service. 

This session will provide an opportunity for the author to make the 
success of this program known a..d describe its organization and opera- 
tions. Copies of the actual agreements will be available for session 
part Iclpants . 

William Meyer 

University of Wisconsin - Stevens Pt 
2100 Main street 

I Stevens Pt, WI 54481 



EKLC 



304 



Present e-s: Anita Hodges 

Project Coordinator 
Project PAVE 

Family. Infant ana Prescnool Pr-oaram 
Western Carolina Center 
300 Enola Road 
Morganton, N. C. 28655 

Deda Helms 
Parent Trainer 
Project PftVE 

Farni ly, Infant and Prescnool Pr^ocrarn 
Western Carolina Center 
300 Enola Roi-^d 
Morganton. N. C. 28653 



Title: PROJECT PAVE (Parents ftre Volunteers wno Excel) 

Project PttVE (Parents flre Volunteers who ExceU is a soecial urcnecz of 
the Family. Infant and Preschool Program (FIPP) at Western Carolina Center, a 
reDional facility serving handicapoed persons in western Nortn Carolina, FIPP 
is the early intervention program component of Western Carolina Center. The 
Director of FIPP is Dr. Carl J. Dunst, who also serves as Proiect Director tor 
Project PftVE. Project PAVE is completing the third year of a tnree-year 
Personnel Preparation Grant through the Office of Soecial Education Programs 
in the U.S. Department of Education. 

The major purpose of Project PAVE has been to train parencs to function as 
support personnel in classrooms serving handicapped preschoolers. The parents 
receive training in three major areas: conducting classroom activities (e.g., 
group time and snack time), teaching children targeted behaviors \e. g,. cuo 
drinking and incidental teaching), and monitoring child progress in terms of 
attainment of targets. A trainer-of-trainers model is used by Proiect PAVE. 
Each parent participating in the training trained £ to 6n other oarents. A 
total of 166 parents and other volunteers have beer trained over the course of 
three years. These 166 parents and other volunteers provide services to over 
730 children in more than 55 classroom-based orograms. The orooranis sarvec: 
include parent operated preschool classes, community Dased parent -chi Id 
groups, developmental day care centers. Head Start programs. public schools 
and other sites which serve handicapped and nonhandicapped cniidren. 

Organization is the key word when implementirg the Project PAVE training 
model. In order for a volunteer to feel his time is being used wisely, it is 
beneficial to have a training program that is fast, easy, and efficient. The 
first step is to identify the training site, teachers wno are interesteo in 
participating, and potential volunteer trainers. The n^xt step im to train 
the volunteer trainer. After training tne volunteer trainer, otner parents 
are recruited as volunteers during a volunteer information meetinu, \A lime 
commit -nent is made and on-the-job training begins. 

Effective volunteers are well trained volunteers. A well trained 
volunteer is a person who can efficiently manane a classroom task in ft manner 
that benefits both children and staff. A key element to effective traminu is 
the use of performance checklists. 



1 

305 



Performance cnecklists represent a sirnole yet highly efficient rnetnod for 
training volunteers to perform in a manner thcit results in nian auaiitv 
programs. Performance checklists delineate the specific behaviors wnicn 
constitute the elements of quality intervention. Checklists arg no rnor^^ then 
task-analyses and criterion-referenced measurement scales tnst dc^taii tne 
steps that volunteers follow in carrying out specified clasfiroom activities 
(e. g. , snack t ime) . 

Performance • checklists for different types of classroom routines are 
purposively kept simple so that persons with different levels of parent inn 
skills, volunteers having different levels of formal education, av.d volunteers 
being asked to function in different support capacities and sett inns. can ail 
be trained to be effective classroom volunteers. The content of tr\e 
performance checklists, and the methods and strategies for training volunteers 
to carry out the routines, provide both structure and concreteness to wnat 
constitutes qualit*' performance. Performance checklists operationallv and 
behaviorally define what is expected, how to perform assigned duties. ana 
what constitutes expected outcomes. The simplicity of performance checklists 
make them useful in different settings and situations: with differe-it groups 
of individuals; for meeting the needs of individual children: and especi^ll/ 
useful as a method for training volunteers to function as supoort personnel in 
preschool settings. This training model has highly general izabie features an : 
wid'j-spread impact for training volunteers. 

Three types of routines and performance checklists are used in tr.:.ininc 
parents as support personnel to professional staff. The routinss are cf^j led 
classroom routines. teaching routines and child assessment checklists. 
Classroom routines correspond to activities typically included as part of tne 
classroom schedule (e.g., gv-oup time and snack/lunch time). Teaching rcMtmes 
are designed to enhance the parents competencies in skills in affectma tne 
behavior and development of the children they will be working with ^e. c.."^ sir- 
watch and incidental teaching). Child assessment checklists are designed to 
provide a means for the ongoing monitoring of the orogress of the chiiarer. 
being served. These routines also provide a basis for assessing the extent tc. 
which teaching routines had the impact intended. These routines are usca as 
training tools for parents in an on-the-job training fashion. The training 
method employed by Project PftVE occurs in an on-the-job manner where Veai- 
life" classroom situations are used as the context for training volunteers 1-5 
the skills necessary to become efficient caregivers. 

In summary, performance checklists provide an objective basis for r.otn 
deciding what constitutes quality performance and the"means wherebv QMalitv 
performance can be operationally and behaviorally defined as the abilitv to 
carry-ouc and implement routines. Performance checklists serve three rnaior 
functions: (a) they define for the parents what constitutes cuality care 
(operationally defined as the rrastery of the behaviors of the checklists), it:) 
they allow immediate feedback to be provided for parents regardinc now well 
they implemented the routines, and (c) they serve as measures of how well 
activities are being operated as planned. This metnod of trsining is expectec 
to occur both quickly and efficiently: and with high levels of oerformancf? 
maintained over long periods of time. With training occurina "on-the- ii-b ' a^nci 
with immediate feedback to volunteers, teachers and volunteers can "receive 
personal satisfaction with their efforts. The Project PftVE tv^ainanc metnod 
encourages Parent/professional partnershios which result m " orester 
communication between the respective partners. This will enable entnusiasm. 
interest and excitement to remain high and orovide a rewaramq exoenencfe t 
all involved. 



306 



TEflCHING ROUTINE! INCIDENTAL TEACHING 



Volunteer; 
Otoserver : 



Date 



Activity ... 

DID THE VOLUNTEERS 



1. Select a variety of toys and activities 
that are appropriate for the children and 
that the ch i 1 dren en j oy ? 












1 

1 


2. Allow each child to choose the toy he/she 

wants to Dlay with? 














3. Pay attention to what the child is doing 

\ *?• y • f iBf cofninen& f join tne act ivity)r •••••• 














A. Encourage the child to practice/continue 
















5. Get the child to elaborate on what he/she is 
doing (e.g., do something different with 
same materials, use words in combination, 
describe what doing in more detail) 
















6. Encourage the child to practice/ continue 














7. Smile or praise the child for his attempts 
or mastery of a new skill? Ensure that the 
activity is reinforcing and fun to the child? ... 















ERIC 



Did you complet* each of the following steps in training the volunteer using 
this teaching routine for incidental teaching? 

1. Review the steps in the teaching routine with the volunteer. 

2. Have the volunteer use the teaching routine to observe the volunteer 

trainer in the classroom. 

3. Discuss the implementation of the routine with the volunteer. 

4. Use the teaching routine to observe the volunteer implementing the 

routine. 

5. Review the steps of the teaching routine with the volunteer. 

Indicate in the blocks beside each step: 

««€Co«pleted Well) NI« (Needs Improvement) Nfta<Not Applicable) 

6. Discuss strategies for improving necessary steps with the volunteer. 

7. Continue to use this teaching routine as a training tool until the 

volunteer has completed all steps well. 

8. Maintain the volunteer's skill level by providing positive feedback 

as often as possible. 

9. Periodically use the teaching routine for determininp the need to 

reimplement training. 

307 

9/->" Figure 3. ftr example of a checklist training tool 



TEACHING ROUTIhE: SIT AND WATCH 



Volunteer: 



Observer: 



DID THE VOLUNTEER 



Date •••• 

Activity 



1. Demonstrate understanding of behaviors that 
are appropriate and inappropriate for indi- 
vidual children? 

iB. Consistentl y use sit and watch to handle 
disruptions when appropriate? 

3. Sit the child at the edge of the activity so 
that he is within view and can see or hear 
the activity? , 

4. Using a calm manner, tell the child (in words 
or signs that he understands) what he did 
wrong and what he should have done? 

5. Tell the child to sit and watch the other 
children playing nicely, sharing, taking 
turns, etc. ? \, 

6. Explain that when the child is ready, he may 
return to the activity? , 

7. Avoid making any eye contact or reference to 
the Dhild in sit and watch? 

8. Praise the child for rejoining the group? .... 

9. Invite the child to join the group after 1 or 
£ minutes if he did not return on his own? ... 



Did you co«Mlvte each of the following steps in training the volunteer using 
thi» routine for teaching? 



1. Review the steps in the teaching routine with the volunteer. 

2. Have the volunteer U5.e the teaching routine to observe the volunteer 

trainer in the classroom. 

3. Discuss the implementation of the routine with the volunteer. 

4. Use the teaching routine to observe the volunteer implementing the 

routine. 

5. Review the steps of the teaching routine with the volunteer. 

Indicate in the blocks beside each step: 

••(Completed Well) NI»(Needs laprovenent) NA»(Not Applicable) 

6. Discuss strategies for improving necessary steps with the volunteer. 

^- Continue to use this teaching routine as a traininp tool until the 

volunteer has completed all steps well. 
8. Maintain the volunteer's skill level by providing positive feedback 

as often as possible. 

pp9^- 9. Periodically use the teaching routine for determining the need to 

££>||]^ reimplement training. J 08 



CLASSROOH ROUTIhE: GROUP TIME 



Volunteers 
Observer: 



DID THE VOLUNTEERS 



Date 

Activity 



1. Prepare space and materials before children 
arrive at the area? 



Greet children as they arrive and get them 
started on th» activity or talk to thern until 
the rest of the children arrive? 



3. Give instructions using language the 
children understand? 



A. Encourage children to communicate to get 
materials, ask for help, talk about 
activity, etc? 



5. Answer children's questions appropriately? 



6- Encourage children to watch/talk to work with 
each other? 



7. Praise the good things the children do? 



8. Show enthusiasm amd make the activity fun for 
the chi Idren? ^ 



3- Try to get all the children involved in the 
activity? 



10. Tell children they had 3 more minutes with an 
activity? 



11. Encourage children to help with clean-up? 
12- Tell children where they go next? 







I 




! 


i 
I 

L 




f 
1 






i 
j 

- i 








( 




1 

i 















































































































Did you coMpl«te each of the following steps in training the volunteer using 
this classroon routine? 



ERIC 



Review 



Observe Volunteer 
Trainer 



Discuss 



Observe Volunteer 



Complete 
Blocks 



Discuss 
Strategies 



303 



Continue Trainino 



Maintain 
Skills 



Determine Need 
to Reimplement 



CLASSROOM ROUTINE: TRANSITIONS 



Volunteer: 
Observer: 



Date 

ftct ivity 

DID THE VOLUNTEER: 

1. Give a three minute warning that 

activity will end to the group of 
children or to manager of next activity? .... 



£. Give clear instructions for clean-up? .. 

3. Give clear instructions where to go 
next? 



4. Immediately send children who finish 
clean-up first to next activity? 



5. Usa t.-ansition as a teaching opportunity? 
6- Praise appropriate behavior? 



Did you complete each of the following steps in training the volunteer using 
this classrocM routine for transitions? 

1. Review the steps in the classroom routine with the volunteer. 

£. Have the volunteer use the classroom routine to observe the 

volunteer trainer in the classroom. 

3. Discuss the implementation of the routine with the volunteer. 

4. Use the classroom routine to observe the volunteer implement ino the 

routine. 

5. Review the steps of the classroom routine with the volunteer. 

Indicate in the blocks beside each step: 

««CCo«pleted Well) NI»(Needs ImproveMen^ ) m^iHat Applicable) 

6. Discuss strategies for improving necessary steps with the volunteer. 

7. Continue to use this classroom routine as a trainino tool until the 

volunteer has completed all steps well. 

8. Maintain the volunteer^s skill level by providing positive feedback 

as often as possible. 

Periodically use the classroom routine for determininq tne need to 
reimplement training. 



9 



310 



CHILD ASSESSMEhfT CHECKLISTS: SIT AND WATCH 



Volunteer: 
Observer: 



DID 
1. 

3« 
4. 



Date . 
Child 

THE CHILD: 

Attend to the caregiver's 5 warnings? ... 

Sit in chair on caregiver's cowwand? .... 

Reouire physical prompts to sit down? ... 

Remain in seat for at least 15 minutes? . 

Watch the activity in propress? 

Voluntarily rejoin the group or indicate 
he was ready? 

Play nicely when back with the group? ... 



tit rlTlfT^^'"' ^t'^ following steps in training the volunteer using 

the child assessment checklist for sit and watch? 

^- ''^y^^':* *he child assessment checklist witr, the 

volunteer? 

2. Have the volunteer use the child assessment checklist to oDserve 

the child during the sit and watch teachino routine^' 
Discuss the implementation of the checklist witn tne volunteer'- 
Discuss strategies for continuing the sit and water, teachino 
routine? Mi-mriu 

Continue to use the teaching routine until tne cnild has comoleted 
all steps in the child assessment checklist' 

Periodically use the cnild assessment checklist for determinino tne 
need to reimplement the teaching routine? 



4. 



3ii 



CLflSSROOM ROUTINE: SNftCK/LUNCH 



Volunteer: 
Observer: 



Date . . . . 

Activity 

DID THE VGLUMTEERs 



1. Assist children in washing hands before 






f - 

1 




£. Talk to the children at the table and 

encourage them to talk with one another? 






i 

1 




3. Encourage and demonstrate table manners? 








1 




4. Encourage independence in opening cartons, 
eating, drinking, pouring, cutting, cleaning 








1 

1 

1 


■ 


5. Offer help to children who need it^ 








1 




6. Praise the good things the children do*^ 










) 


7. Make snack/lunch enjoyable for the children? .... 













Did you coMplete each of the following steps in training the volunteer usinc 
this classroom routine for snack/lunch? 

I' Review the steps in the classroom routine with the volunteer, 

2. Have the volunteer use the classroom routine to observe tne 

volunteer trainer in the classroom. 

3. Discuss the implementation of the routine with the volunteer. 

4. Use the classroom routine to observe the volunteer 

implementing the routine. 
5. Review the steps of the classroom routine with the volunteer. 

Indicate in the blocks beside each step: 

♦«CCo«pleted Well) NI»(Needs Inprovement) NA=(Not Applicable) 

6. Discuss strategies for improving necessary steps with the volunteer. 

7. Continue to use this classroom routine as a training tool until 

the volunteer has completed all steps well. 
8. Maintain the volunteer^ s skill level by providing positive feedback 

as often as possible. 
9. Periodically use the classroom routine for determining tne need to 

reimplement training. 



312 



Presenter : Susan P. Waldrop 
Focus, Inc. 

2917 King St. , Suite C 
Jonesboro, AR 72401 



Title: PARENTS AS PARTNERS: A RURAL INTERVENTION MODEL 

The Rural Arkansas Parent Training Program coordinates the efforts of 
parents and teachers of children who receive special education services. 
The program trainers, responsible for this coordination, strive to improve 
the educational performance of each child diagnosed as hav.'ag a mild handicapping 
condition. They follow a set of procedures, described in this paper, which 
enables parents to provide their child with a structured program of reinforcement 
and instruction. 

THE FIRST MEETINGS, OR LET'S GET TOGETHER AND "RAP" 

Each parent of a child who is mildly handicapped learns of the RAP Program 
through materials from the teacher resource room. The parent (s) must give 
written permission to the program trainers to attend the scheduled lEP 
conference and to review the lEP goals and any evaluation results. For the* 
parents who agree to meet with them, the trainers explain the program briefly, 
the amount of time involved and offer the parents the opportunity to participate. 




-2- 



Later in the lEP Conference 





314 



-3- 



After listening to the description of the program, most parents decide to 
participate In the RAF training. At this point, the resource room teacher 
explains the child *s strengths and weaknesses, and the lEP is developed. 




Seorry NCCot toMao tkX a sumo ouoc 

UVKL. NC OOniNrr^ev^^tvtWiLSMllfOSMt 
0*CSilTUlfMRST)Mie|IUTKAT Ml UMS. OPI^T ^ 

>^'niMK Vest Mf«s svoulo ic m ims nut tCP? 





The teacher usually shows the parents 
an individualized instructional contract 
and relates that the contract is simply 
a piece of paper divided into from 12-20 
sections or boxes. Onto this form is 
written a guide for the child to tollow 
during his or her time in the resource 
room. All areas of the lEP are Included 
on the contract and the child is allowed 
to proceed at his or her own pace. 




-4- 

The first home visit involves interviewing the parents informally. This 
interview helps the trainers and the parents determine what the child needs 
to augment his or her education. 




During this visit parents often discuss general concerns. 




316 



-5- 



Parents also express their feelings of isolation 
and lack of support » either from local service 
agencies or from other parents of children 
who are mildly handicapped. 



Phase I 

In the first phase of the program, parents begin to reinforcement or reward 
their child *s resource room achievement. The trainers explain the procedure 
to the parents on the second visit to the home. The procedure: 





The, K^MoixAdd Koom tzachoA (ihzdu> thz 
acXlvlty to dztoAminz kou) loell thz 
ckitd hxi6 done,. 



317 



-6- 




A^tzA thz adtivAXy ha/> been ^ev-ie^oed, 
thz tzadhoA mJUi compZeXz a Student 

?K0QK2Mi Hzpo/U, 4ihom.ng: 

1. -tfie dote 

2. thz £eve£ accuAacy 

3. -the typz oi acJxvAXy 

4. tJoheXhzA the. oJUld 6hoaZd 



The dhAJid tkzn taku the. Stude^nt 
?/iog/ie^^ Rzpo/U home, to kU ok hen. 
poAznt^ that day a^teA /school. 




EKLC 




I|{ -the ^e4ou/Lce ^oom tzaaheji h(U 
eheefeed "y^'M^he ch^d -Ahoodd ge;t 
a ^etuoAd)^ >the pa/Leia;t6< 



2. 



318 



QAjve. the. chiZd a /lewoAd 
{u6aa£JLy a /^tiakeA] 
pKcuU^e. him on. heA ion. the. 
good vooxk, noting the. 
^ptQA^iio. activity and ^\ult 
glvz the. chiZd a hag on. a pat 
OK ^hou) thoAA ptexx^ijJie. 
phyildoZZy In lome. my. 



-7- 



"Wo," [thz duJLd should not geX a /lew'oAd], 
tilt poAzrvU: 

1. 6tatz tht ^^ituation in a ^^upponZivz 
my 

2. pnjCuUz kirn ok hoA ion, thz zHont 
madt 

3. indtdcUt that tliz ckUd can impKovz 
In thz iutxxAZ 

4. Vd NOT qIvz thz dUld a /lemnd 

5. VO NOT punuh thz akUd on, rmnZLon 
the, situation agcUn. 



, >Moi(K(0 Harp Mp 
0© MUCK ecmn j 





li tke, ckiZd dot6 not bn>inQ 
homo, the, ?n,0Qn,eM^ Repont, the, 
poAZYvU cannot give a xewand, 
oi aou/ue. In tkU uoay, the, 
pKOQnxm encouAxiQeji the ^tudent^^ 
Ke^pon^ibitLty . 



EKLC 



319 



-8- 



The trainers provide the parents with a packet containing all the 
information they need for this phase of the program. Included are: 

o A Daily Reinforcement Schedule 

o A Sample Daily Reinforcement Schedule 



MILY KltfORCCCNT SCNESUL£ 





Mm 




V«4 


Tkura 


ftitUX 


llMk 1 

>urfM ■■«««•• nym trm 












m Um uadMT dMch TO or 






















CQMOirrs 


M 1 








i 


Mi tin iMdMr dKk rUm ' «/ 










HM 41d y«y myaMT '^dliA 






9LL 













Tliur* 




Iftti s 

• pmms rtpon 
fixM tht iMClvrr 












ttd il« iMCfatr chKk VCS 
•r NOT 












Mm yoM ntfnai 













i itutet FTDcrtu npan 












Did UM itKktr clMck m 
or HJT 












Hm yoy mpoNdT 













o A Sample Student Progress Report 

o A Sample Student Contract 

o Guidelines for Implementation of Phase I 

o Stickers 

o Mi.gnets for attaching the Schedule to the refrigerator door. 



EKLC 



320 



The trainers explain the procedure thoroughly to the parents and emphasize 
recording the information accurately and daily. 



Oi«M liWwiuScirrTY Qocs 
JCUP UP vfiTl Hit PtMUtt 



iDAY. 



.us AKCWMO IF 



Phase II 

In the second phase of the RAP program, the parents help their child with 
contract activities. Each person has a different role in this phase. The 
resource room teacher supplies the trainers with a list of skills the child 
should acquire and indicates the one skill most needed. This skill is currently 
written into the child's contract. 




321 



The trainers choose activities which teach the skill enjoyably. These 
activities are checked out from the RAP Materials Center to the parents for a 
two-week period. 




The parents conduct at least 10 work sessions with the child during the 
two-week period. For these sessions the trainers provide the parents with a 
Contract Activity Schedule, including a goal and short-term objectives similar 
to those in the child's lEP. 



COHTMa ACTlVin SCHEDULf 



OmI} C i »*ts> »*6m A »m , 

t^^n ••^^ 



* ^ T p' 

W -M mik /^^^ ■ y < 

m% 



aau*t Mm 5f«Ag| 



Olqf 1 



• Dqr 2 

0»u 

UmI el Accunqr. 



■itofiifriiint 



UmI of teaincjr.^ 



-11- 




The trainers explain that no activity or task 
should require more than 20 minutes. They 
emphasize that for many activities the child 
will need direct assistance , for others 
li.*lted supervision, and some will merely 
need to be checked for accuracy. 





Same activ^ctiu need JUjmite.d ^ape/iu^^on. Some acZivitL2Ai^ jvutit need 

to chzckzd ^oK accuAjdcy, 



323 



-12- 



Before Phase II begins, the trainers provide the parents a list ol the 
steps to follow for each work session, as follows: 

VKQjpoAZ thz CLcZLyjAJty in advancz. Have cMxiyonA, pmcAJL, papeA, on, any 
medexl mcuttnAjoJU QoXhvizd and Kojody to ws^z. 




Vnjovidd a non-dut/iacting woAk aAza--asmy ^Kom fAilndom, teZ^vi^lon^, Kodlo^, 
OK othoA po44-cfa£e dUtAacXiorUi , 




Te/ich thz om chosen 6iiUjt acJxvAXy--don* t Qzt involved mjth othoA concepiA. 




-13- 



Alafee 4uAe youA akitd undeA^tandU 



ScafTTY, Mlrti GtM^U rmo All 
e SottMo Mofur ^Ouic chip oH ^ 

> ^»C wM^T^w rgE CmNtt TpTo wirf J 
s2;isAcnvrry. 




G^ue youA ckUd an oppoAXayuXy 
to cUik quUJtion^. 




PKov^de mompt^ on, cuei 1^ thty oaz mzde^d, faot don'.t ovoAdo It. 




I (J {/owA akiZd ^ do^g w;e£i:, don'-t Ajit^M.^2Az. 



EKLC 



325 




-14- 



Pnjoiuz youA ckLtd 
^o/i payJjig aXXzntion 




W/ien youA ckltd compleXu an acXAvity vokich l6 iS% on moKz accurate, n^as/ocuid 




C£o4e the, acXyivity by ptoci-cng youA cluJid. 




T/iij to u)o/ik with youA clUZd cut Iza^t th/itt day6 In a Axfvo, pfiQ^iznxihly ilva. 




327 



-16- 



li the, KuouAtz /loom tojickzK de.(Udz6 youA ckUd h<u dlUlauJUy ^tayinQ mXh 
an acZLvAXy, thz t/icUneM uUjU p^ov^t a timoji. At the. 6taAX oi thz 
acZioity, 4e;t thz tunoA ioK a ceAXcUn numfaeA oi minutu (dependcng on 
thz acZLvlty]. VouA akUd should complzXz thz aoXlvlty bzioKz thu beZi 
on thz tism/L AAjig6. 4fie oK /le dot6, Kmcvid thz civUd and g^ve loti 
oi pnduz. 




Parents are expected to oversee their child's dally progress on the 
Contract Activity Achedule, An example of recording the Information Is pro- 
vided below. Parents are to complete the ten separate day-<by^ay sections, 
with their comments. They also Indicate whether the child has mastered the 
goal and Is prepared for a new skill. 



EKLC 



Mit MUM tattm aUk Mm* • m« • lOlfe 

■*« I Mi ■ MM iM« 

1. HMIMU Um t m n H mtf MM Mil* MU Mm • Uu UH ttmmt 



9m • 



328 



-17- 



Durlng Phase II the trainers serve as go-betweens. They report the child's 
progress from the resource room teacher to the parent and from the parent to 
the teacher. They attempt to build a bridge for parent-teacher ccuuQunlcatlon. 




PHASE III 

During the third phase of the program, the parents begin to determine the 
skills their child needs, particularly the most Important one, from the Use 
provided by the resource room teacher • The trainers continue to write the goal 
and the objectives axid to supply activities from the RAP Materials Center. The 
parents Implement the activities according to the guidelines of Phase II and 
continue to Indicate whether the child has mastered the skill. 




-18. 




PHASE IV 

In Phase IV, the final part of the actual training program, the parents 
determine, provide, and implement their child's contract activities. Parents 
are entirely responsible for accurately assessing their child's needs and 



assembling the appropriate materials. 




-19- 



Of course, the trainers support the parents as much as necessary, but 
the primary task of the trainers now is to visit the home monthly to help 
plan the activities. Mini-workshops are held occasionally at the school 
to bring parents together, to exchange ideas, and to distribute materials 
from the RAP Materials Center. 



MINI -WORKSHOP 




ERIC 



331 



-20- 



PHASE V 

In the final phase, the parents, the teacher, and the trainers meet for the 
annual review and lEP conference, during which the parents will have much more 
information to contribute about their child's abilities, skills, and level of 
functioning. They will be active participants in developing the IE? for their 
child and will understand their child's progranuning needs. 

ANNUAL REVIEW CONFERENCE 




EKLC 



FOLLOW-UP 

During che summer months, the trair . offer their assistance, both in 
person and over the telephone: to any pax who has participated in the program < 
The crainers reinforce the parents' implementation of activities, distribute 
mar Is from the Mate :<::Lals Center, or visit the home to help assess the 
ch , progress. ^ " ■■ " ■ " ■^ ' 




f fiikL BCCM4C sue CMiV Do W 





ABourUmMfc 



-21^ 




These follow-up services keep the trainers in touch with the parents so that 
the children involved receive planned instruction throughout the summer. 

CONCLUSION 



The parents* role in the education of children is crucial if 
youngsters are to get the most from each school day. After parents 
complete the Rural Arkansas Parent Training Program, they should 
continue building the parent/ teacher/child team. In attempting to 
meet the needs of the learner with handicaps, no one has all the 
answers, and a team effort is essential for determining, in an 
exchange of information and ideas » the most effective methods of 
enhancing the child's educational experience. 

It is also important that RAP-*trained parents share their 
information with other caring parents whose concerns are similar to 
their own, assisting them to understand their rights, their 
children's needs, and instructional alternatives. Parent.*; who feel 
they are alone with their problems need and appreciate this information 
and encouragement. A significant extension of parental caring is 
responsible action, which, when combined with knowledge and community 
reinforcement, permits parents not only to open doors for their children 
but also to stand aside as they march through. 




ERIC 



Thursday, April 24 
9:30-11:00 am 



AMERICAN COUNCIL ON RURAL SPECIAL EOUCATION - TUCSON CONFERENCE, April 
i 586 

NAME OF PERSON: Frederica Bowden 

POSITION: consultant - special education, rehabilitation technology 
AOORESS: 1251 Redwood Court, Herndon, VA, 22070 
PHONE: (703) 435-7229 

TITLE OF PRESENTATION: Making Switches to Adapt Battery Operated Toys 
and Oevices ' 

LENGTH OF PRESENTATION: 1 1/2 or 2 hours 

TYPE OF PRESENTATION: hands on workshop 

PRIMARY NATURE OF PRESENTATION: practical 

SUMMARY/OESCRIPTION OF PRESENTATION: ' 

The goals of this hands-on workshop are to a) design and build a 
variety of switches including leaf, mercury, button and pillow 
switches to operate battery operated toys and uevices and b) to adapt 
battery operated toys and devices to use with the switches. Each 
workshop participant will learn about switches and learn how to make 
inci^^t Tt"^ workshop. A variety of . andouts on the subject, 

including additional resources For information will be provided. 

Switch-controlled battery operated toys ca, both increase the 
Tnt^ individual to interact with, and in turn, to control his 

environment. Both play an integral role in early childhood 
development. Individuals who do not have this ability may become 
passive which in turn may affect other aspects iheir lives and 
development. Much of an individual s early ir raction takes place in 
the form of play yet many toys cann.t be , ated by infants who 

have physical handicaps, in short they ar.. inaccessible. Other 
infants with mental handicaps may require toys which provide 

are'a;aoted't""''H*"'*''' T -ti-lation. Providing toys which 

are adapted to, and appropriate for the needs of individuals helps 
increase their motivation for other cognitive and motor activities. 

Although adapted toys are available from manufacturers and 
vendors, their price and the lack of opportunity to try them out 
before buying them may not make them a practical solution. An 
individual may need time to learn how to activate a switch or may need 

^''^f "^"^i"^-^ switches from inexpensive and readily 

available materials offers parents and professionals increased 
1;!^ H something most appropriate for the child and to 

make adaptations as necessary when the needs of the child change. 

AUOIO VISUAL OR OTHER MATERIALS REQUIREO: blackboard and a number of 
electrical outlets 



o 334 
ERIC ^ 



Thursday, April 24 



Presenters: Charlotte Ryan 

Minnesota Dept. of Education 
Special Education Section 
Capitol Square Building 
550 Cedar Street 
St. Paul, MN 55101 
(612) 297-3620 



Mark Wolak 

Director of Special Education 
Rum River Special Ed Co-op 
430 N.W. 8th 
Cambridge, MN 55008 
(612) 689-3600 



Title: Statewide Planning for Low Incidence 

Special Education Services in Minnesota 



"I've thought that a man (person) of tolerable 
abilities may work great changes if ne (she) 
first forms a good plan and makes execution of 
that same plan his (her) whole study and 
business." 

Benjamin Franklin 



I. Purpose 

Providing quality educational services in rural areas in the United States has 
always been a challenge as well as a frustration. It is an issue of creating 
change amidst often incredible logistical obstacles as well as the personal and 
political factors inherent in the change process itself. Because of the need 
for effective strategies, this paper will provide a means to explicate one 
approach to planned change^ as used in Minnesota. The authors will provide 
background information regarding the nature of Minnesota's ruralness, aspects of 
change, and the statement of need. 

Specifically tb'^ authors will describe a model for guiding leadership personnel 
in planning and implementing educational services and will discuss the 
rationale for planning to achieve the "ideal". This planning activity is 
evolutionary and dynamic, having grown frcxn past efforts to effect change. It 
is responsive to key aspects of Minnesota's socio-political and economic forces. 
By definition it is not complete, however, it does offer strategies to create 
change and our experiences may be useful to others who are attempting to move 
forward in providing education services. 



335 



II. Contextual Variables 



JuSt as with handicaE^>ed and other special populations, it is difficult to 
generalize about ruralness and rural school systems and communities. The U.S. 
Census Bureau defines "urban" as any community of more than 2500 persons. By 
this definition, everything else is classified as rural- Demographers establish 
criteria for Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSAs) and localities not 
meeting these criteria are considered "non-metropolitan." Neither conception 
can effectively account for the tronendous diversity that exists among rural 
comonunities and school districts in this country. There are great qualitative 
and quantitative differences that effect the availability of services and the 
development and iitplementation of policy and planning. In order to allow for 
useful interpretation of the model and process described in this paper an 
overview of Minnesota is provided so that the reader may better understand the 
context in vAiich this change strategy is employed. 

Minnesota is a rural state with roughly 80,000 square miles which are divided 
into 87 counties. Its population of approximately 4 million people is located 
in several population centers. The largest of these is the seven county 
metropolitan area vAiich includes the twin cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul. 
This area coitprises only about 5% of the land mass yet contains nearly fifty 
percent of the general population, ^^proximately 47% of the identified 
handicaK)ed children live in this population center. By various definitions of 
urban and rural, it may be said that approximately 76% of the Minnesota 
population lives in rural areas. The nature of this ruralness varies and may be 
characterized as agricultural, forested, and lake territory. 

The economy varies and depends heavily on agriculture, industry and tourism 
which are subject to fluctuations. Many of the larger non-metropolitan 
population centers have experienced both economic hardships and population 
declines due to industrial shifts. Duluth, for exanple, a city located 150 
miles northeast of the Twin Cities has had an uneitployment rate as high as 18% 
of the workforce. Besides the localized economic difficulties, the state has 
had wide-spread and erratic revenue fluctuations; events that have serious 
implications for heavily state funded school systems. 

In 1986, despite increasing pressures to consolidate, Minnesota still has 434 
school districts serving children K- through grade 12. Of these, 84% or 364 
districts serve school populations under 2500, with the median size being 698 
students. The delivery system in Minnesota is based on a categorical service 
model with statutory requirements that each child receive instruction from a 
teacher licensed in that child's primary disabiliy. It has been argued that 
this is basically an "urban" model that can only be successfully implemented in 
areas vihare the population density is sufficient to suEPort it. Whatever the 
truth, the reality suggests an ongoing tension within the existing system 
supported by an increasing struggle between "metro" and "non-metro" segments 
resulting in increased disunity. 



336 



-2- 



ERIC 



Like other states , Minnesota has a "regional" educational structure for 
providing some services. Unlike some states, however, these regional agencies 
(BCSU) have limited authority and no tax base. There are nine ECSUs in 
Minnesota and they vary tremendously in terms of the services provided. 
Although they were legislatively created, monbership is voluntary. E)espite the 
variability and lack of universal support approximately 96% of school districts 
belong to ECSUs and participate in a variety of services such as planning, 
cooperative purchasing and various special projects. 

In recent years the Minnesota Department of Education has made increasing use of 
the ECSUs as a vdiicle for the delivery of specialized s^rvicr^s such as 
personnel development, planning for students with emotional and behavioral 
problems and children with hearing, vision, physical and other low-incidence 
handicapping conditions. 

The state agency, located in St. Paul, provides fiscal and regulatory support to 
the 434 school districts. Minnesota is characterized as a state with a high 
degree of "local control" and this philosophical value system effects all 
activities that derive from central and regional agencies. 

Minnesota like other rural states is characterized by isolation, population 
sparsity and variable tax bases. Like its conterparts, these features combined 
with other "system" factors contribute to familiar rural problems such as 
difficulties in the recruitment and retention of staff, the delivery of 
specialized services, the securance of both capitol and operating funds and 
adherence to policies and mandates. 

Despite these commonalities, there is enough diversity across the state that 
planners and policymakers cannot generalize easily from region to region or even 
community to community when designing and planning for better services. 
Problems and solutions can best be developed by those affected most directly. 



III. IDevelopnnental Efforts 
Models Ent^loyed 

At the SEA and LEA levels in Minn^^sota, we have relied on several organizational 
development models to provide leadership personnel with "cognitive roadmaps" to 
create and understand change. One model, entitled the Johnson/Gadberry Special 
Education Program Design and Development Model (Johnson & Gadberry, 1981) was 
utilized for statewide planning for programs for emotional/behavior disordered 
students. Specific training in this model was provided to a cadre of regional 
leadership personnel who in turn systematically planned local programs. The 
Johnson/Gadberry Model provides leadership personnel with a conceptualization of 
the major parameters of a total special educaion program. This model can act as 
a "cognitive roadmap" to systematically design a special education program from 
beginning stages of 0iilosophy development to the final stages of overall progam 
evluation. An advantage of this model is its generic nature as an instrument 
providing a framework and process for program development rather than specific 
content. 




ERIC 



Understanding and creating organzational change was also aided with the use of 
the Technical Assistance Process Model (Johnson, 1975) • With the assistance of 
this model r change may be seen as a manageable, predictable, step-by-step 
process. There are time-specific stages that include Preliminary Negotiations, 
Needs Assessment, Targeting, Model Building, Goal Setting, Implementation and 
Evaluation and will provide a leader with an ongoing cognitive tool with which 
to initiate and manage change. 

Additionally, in parts of Minnesota, educational leadership personnel have 
utilized a model developed by Robert Terry, from the Hubert Humphrey Institute 
of Public Affairs, at the University of Minnesota, This model is a useful 
framework for understanding and analyzing organizational problems. Referred to 
as the "Diamond Model", this aE^)roach examines organizations against four 
seemingly simple concepts, mission, power, structure and resources. Most 
organizations, according to Tferry, tend to solve problems at too low a level and 
thus become stuck fighting over dollars, rules or job descriptions. The real 
problem most often is the lack of a clearly articulated an agreed upon 
"mission", (Terry, 1981). 

This notion is critical to our current efforts and widely recognized by other 
experts in the study of effective leadership. Warren Bennis, Professor of 
Mangement and Organization, at the University of Southern California, identifies 
successful leaders as those individuals v*io attract and pull people together 
through a catpelling vision; a set of focused intentions. (Dennis, 1984). 

These understandings facilitate the enpowerment of all members of an 
organzation. With a stated mission and vision all members within an organzation 
have focus, commitment and direction. 

This need for organizational mission was specifically identified in Rum River 
Special Education Cooperative, a multi district cooperative serving 8 public 
school districts (12,500 student population) in Central Minnesota. 
Geographically, this cooperative serves districts within an area approximately 
40 by 70 miles with the smallest district of 475 students to the largest 
district population of 3675 students. Resources, procedures and fihilosophies 
varied from district to district. The special education issues identified by 
parents, teachers and administrators were complex. Clearly, a mission statement 
for special education programs was needed. 

Rum River Cooperative initiated the Center for Constructive Change (OOC) model 
as the guide for mission development and strategic planning. Following this 
format, brainstorming of ideal indicators allows participants to think beyond 
probletns of today and to "idealize" the future of their business. Data from 
several training sessions confirm that initial problems identified by groups are 
primarily due to the lack of a clear mission, .^roblem solving without a clear 
mission only creates room for new issues and problems to develop. Thus, our 
strategy is clear. Focus the participants on their "vision" of the ideal 
organization based on their needs and expressed desires of primary constituents. 



33S 



IV, Need Statement 



There is a need for consistent leadership and focus in program development, 
CXirrently in Minnesota the availability of leadership personnel and leadership 
structures for low incidence programs varies from school system to school 
system. As a result, seme school districts participate in and receive services 
through large, sophisticated intermediate district delivery systems (metro) 
while others (primarily rural) have yet to achieve consistent services. 

There is a need for enhancing the skills of existing supervisory personnel. 
Professionals are often promoted from the teacher ranks because of meretorious 
performance, yet may be lacking in skills necessary for effective performance in 
their new role. A national survey of State Agency (SEA) and local Educational 
Agency (LEA) leadership personnel of programs for the severely handcapped 
reveals the primary background is training as a TMH teacher and relatively few 
have formal administrative or supervisory training (Wolak, 1981) , 
Organizational development and change require at least minimal understanding of 
the risks and benefits involved in the change process as well as strategies for 
creating change. Failure to recognize and relate to these issues can cause a 
good plan to meet resistence and eventual breakdown. 

There is also a need for mission. Presently, there is disagreenraent as to the 
"ideal outcomes" of particular projects and subsequent organizational directions 
to follow. The development of a shared vision or "internal cohesion" as Deal 
calls it, makes it easier for everyone to contribute to the development of a 
quality program, (Deal, 1983), 



V, Model Application 

Prior to undertaking the mission development process, the group leaders provide 
an explanation of the Diamond Model and its usefulness in conceptualizing 
organizational problems and change. Three phases provide the foundation for 
mission development as follows. 

The basic procedure is straightforward, A group process design, such as nominal 
group, is used to establish two key conponents, problem identification and 
indicators for ideal service. 

Initially participants generate a list of current problems. These problem 
statements are then correlated to each coitponent of the Diamond Model, e.g,, 
mission, power, structure and resources. Without lengthy discussion 
participants are guided into phase two. In the personal phase, the group 
brainstorms descriptive statements for the "ideal service system." This phase 
is often difficult due to the constraints people experience in th existing 
system. It is important for the group leader to facilitate freedom from these 
inhibitions and encourage participants to think in terms of the best they can 
imagine. 

The third phase involves a careful analysis of the discrepancy between the 
current situation and the desired ideal. The outcome of this process is 
twofold; to gain a thoughtful understanding of the relationship about what is 
missing and a realization that a clearer focus (mission) is needed. Careful 
work here sets the stage for the development of a written statement of 
"mission". 



-5- 339 



Mission is derived through the selection of the most critical aspects of the 
ideal indicators. The written statement is brief, specific and above all 
compelling. Brevity allows it to be reroembered. Specificity allows it to 
clearly communicate the outcane around which action mobilizes and people commit. 
For example, consider the difference in the stated mission of NASA "to put a man 
on the moon" versus the more general statement of "space exploration," (Kiefer & 
Senge, 1984) This difference is crucial, for it evokes emotion, passion and in 
some instances, fear. It is a vision that can be observably achieved or not 
achieved and therefore not ambiguous. It is compelling. 

For mission to happen, real action needs to follow. 

After the tentative mission statement is described, additional steps of the CCX; 
model are ccxnpleted. 

To form organizational benchmarks, many of the ideal indicator statements are 
appropriate for achieving mission. Participants differentiate which statanents 
are long term goals and v*iieh are intermediate or short term goals. This 
process continues for each ideal indicator statement resulting in lists of short 
term (1 year) benchmarks, intermediate (5 year) benchmarks, and long term (10 
year) benchmarks. 

Each benchmark generates one or more work plans with specific purpose statments. 
Work plans are time-specific lists of activities that document each employee or 
team of en5)loyees work towards achieving an organizational benchmark. Plans are 
written to document progress toward mission and can be modified as often as 
necessary. 

The strategic and long range plan for the organization consists of a cortpilation 
of all work plans written to achieve the organizational benchmarks. Although 
dynamic and requiring ongoing maintenance, this process documents progress 
"toward" the mission or the ideal and rewards employees through evidence of 
acconplishment and a sense of improvement. 

Discussion 

To date, this approach has proved effective in both organization and planning at 
LEA, SEA and regional levels. 

Its merit is based on several assumptions. These assumptions are: 

- people can and will create change 

- collaboration produces greater commitment and better outcomes 

- shared risk is better than individual risk 

- unity provides strength 

- people can identify an "ideal vision" 

- a shared vision keeps an organization on course 

- everyone in the organization is a planner 

The process as described has allowed individuals to create and manage change for 
the benefit of students. The rewards are great and include not only individual 
recognition and participation, but a real means to achieve and measure the 
desired outcomes. 

This model unlike most others takes a bold move forward by designing steps for 
positive end results rather than simply "problem solving" today's organizational 
issues. 



References 



Bennis, W.G. 

Deal, T.E. & Kennedy, A.A. (1983) . Culture and schcx)l performance. 
Educational Leadership, 40(5), 14-15. 

Deal, T.E. & Kennedy, A.A. (1982). Corporate Cultures; The rites and rituals 
of corporate life. Reading, Mass.; Addison-Wesley. 

Johnson, R.A. (1975). Inproving effectiveness of a school organization through 
coordinate status consultation, in C.A. Parker (Ed.), 
Psychological Consultation; Helping teachers meet special 
needs. Minneapolis, Minnesota: Leadership Training 
Institute/Special Education, University of Minnesota, 1975. 

John, R.A. 

Kiefer, C.F. and Senge, P.M. (1984). Metanoic organizations, m J.D. Adams 
(Bci.). Transforming Work (p. 69-84). Alexandria, Va.: 
Miles River Press. 

Terry, R.w. (1981) . Leadership and civil rights. Unpublished manuscript. 

University of Minnesota, Hubert H. Huirphrey Institute of Public 
Affairs, Minneapolis, Mn. 

Wolak, M. (1981) . A National study of state and local leadership of programs 
for severely handicapped. Unpublished master's thesis, 
St. Cloud State University, St. Cloud, Mn. 



341 



ERIC 



Debra Veit 

Project Coordinator 

Rural Special Education Grant 

University of Alaska, Anchorage 

School of Education 

3211 Providence Drive 

Anchorage, Alaska 99508 



Rural Special Education Pre-Service Delivery Model 



This presentation describes a federally funded Rural Special Education Grant 
awarded to the Special Education Program located at the University of Alaska, 
Anchorage. The project is designed to provide pre-service training in the area 
of special education to educators residing in rural and remote areas of Alaska. 
Although the State of Alaska can be considered unique, the service delivery 
system described here should be considered applicable for most rural and/or 
remote areas of the country. 

Areas of Alaska, as well as other states (i.e. Nevada, Utah) can be considered 
remote as well as rural. The State of Alaska, for example covers a land mass 
of 587,500 square miles, making it larger than California, Montana and Texas, 
while its population only slightly exceeds 450,000. Alaska can be compared to 
such places as Nevada with a land mass of 110,540 square miles, population of 
917,870 , which gives an average of 83 people per square mile, and to the Navajo 
reservation with its large land mass and small population. 

Most of Alaska's population resides in the Anchorage area, but there are 150 
communities with populations of less than 5,000 people. Approximately 40% of 
all Alaskans are located in communities, of less than 1000 people. Most of the 
rural communities are accessible only by light aircraft, as road systems to 
these areas are almost non-existent and distances between these villages are 
substanti al . 

The 53 local education agencies in Alaska serve approximately 6,415 children 
identified as learning disabled. Of this number, 1,925 students are native 
Alaskans and many more represent other minority groups. These students have 
special education needs compounded by bilingual and bi-cultural differences. 

Since many educators reside in rural and/or remote areas as described above, 
there are limited opportunities for professional development due to limited 
access to universities. The result of this isolation can be devastating to 
morale, competency, and job longevity. High attrition is a common phenomenon in 
rural and/or remote regions; personnel seldom remain longer than two years. 
Many elementary and secondary educators are not adequately trained in effective 
teaching techniques for the handicapped students who, because of P.L. 94-142 
and least restrictive environment considerations, will no doubt be placed in 
their classrooms for at least a portion of their day. 



342 



Page 2 



The Intent, then, of this project is to deliver university coursework related to 
meeting the special education needs of culturally different handicapped children 
and youth to off -campus graduate students who reside in rural and/or remote 
areas of Alaska. The target population includes graduate students currently 
employed as teachers, who are preparing for advancement, promotion, career 
emphasis changes, or teaching mainstreamed h iicapped students and due to 
geographical constraints are prevented from entering the traditional university 
on-campus setting. 

The objectives of this project are many-fold ar J include two phases of develop- 
ment. Phase I consists of the development of approximately 33 semester hours in 
core courses (introductory concepts, behavior management, task analysis, and 
individualization skills) and speci?lized coursework (theory, rural special 
education considerations, assessment, and intervention) followed by 
practica/field experiences. Attainment of competencies is accomplished through: 

a) lecture/discussion; 

b) audiovisual presentations; 

c) texts and additional printed material; 

d) resource speakers; 

e) examination; 

f) presentations of case studies; 

g) simulation and role playing activities; and, 

h) practicum experiences. 

Phase II of the project involves the delivery of coursework. This is to be 
accomplished via the Learn/Alaska Telecommunication System. This network con- 
sists of three types of communication technology. These are used separately and 
in conjunction with each other and include: 

a) audio-conferencing (speaker -telephone systems); 

b) instructional television (video cassette and statewide satellite televi- 
sion channel ); and, 

c) computer service (to delivery instruction and servt^ dS a "mail" 
exchange) . 

Currently, two courses are being offered to educators located in eleven dif- 
ferent areas of Alaska. The first course "The Exceptional Learner", an intro- 
duction to exceptionalities, is a computer assisted course. The text and 
accompanying computer program used for the course is Cartwright, G.P., 
Cartwright, C.A., and Ward, M.E. (1984), Educating Special Learners , Belmont, 
California: Wadsworth Publishing Company"^ The course consists of reading the 
text, viewing tho accompanying computer program, reading articles concerned with 
various issues related to handicapping conditions (which have been compiled in a 
Book of Readings), and viewing relevant movies. Evali'ation procedures include 
quizzes, a final exam, and article/film critiques. Although students have been 
provided with a course outline for reading and completing assignments, students 
can progress basically at their own rate attiinding to sections in any order they 
deem most a^ipropri ate. For example, the quizzes are arranged to follow certain 
chapters (i.e. chapter 1,2,3, - Quiz #1, chapters 4,5,6 - Quiz #2, etc). 



Page 3 



Students, then, can address any set of chapters in any order In addition 

In o^%"o'tK^'' '''' arranged'to co.pl i.^nt the 'coJ^se '^ e^served 

as an ntroduction to the course at the beginning of the semester one willMtP 
place in the middle of the semester and the third is schedu^ld fS^ eJj of 
the class to serve as a wrap-up and course evaluation. 

p5ur,'Ho!!2 '^°?!;" P''"^"^lJ' 5f"g taught is "An Overview of Rural Special 
Education'. The course is offered to teachers located in rural /remote areas ac 

Ja e?y 5? bac'k'S^Sund^l"''"'^ °" the Anchorage campus. StuSents'Sa e a w de" 
variety ot backgrounds from special education teachers reaular Pdnratinn 
teachers, to undergraduate seSior level students T^e'cSu^se outline ?sts the 

hindi canned ??uiJtc *° *° this special group of 

handicapped students. These services include: assessment IEP writinn 
training for para-professionals in carrying out programr and oroara^^ 

lev"er"? IJSn^S^Jiay^JeV^L'tSr'r'" "^P^-ations of schedul?ng.^ 

a) how to schedule a few teachers to travel to many places without havina 
to be gone from home every week - a sure path to burnoutr 

l'^?llrtl7er^^^^^^^ Village 

X'o"eHSj?iTllt"e? S5t1;^Sj8: ^''^^ """11^^ - at b..t 
d) meeting the needs of the student and village school. 

344 



ERIC 



Page 5 



Much still needs to be done to determine the best methods by which we keep the 
attrition rate as low as possible. That is one of the main objectives of thi« 
rural special education project. As we continue to deliver courses to 
rural/remote areas, we continue to compile suggestions to the solution of the 
project's service delivery model system. 

Suggestions to help keep attrition rates as low as possible that are oresently 
being studied include: 

a) having a strong facilitator at each site; 

b) having each site set a scheduled meeting time - not a meet as we find 
the time schedule; 

c) instructor and graduate students make unexpected phone calls to each 
student to check on progress and problems; 

d) instructor makes a site visit at the beginning of each semester; 

e) instructor brings books and materials to students during that initial 

VI S 1 u • 

As Project Coordinator, I fer^l enthusiastic about the prognosis for our project. 
This the first semester we cffered courses to the rural/remote areas, has 

S ^ deal. Our list of ideas on how to refine the system continues 
to grow. We are currently organizing two additional courses to be offered 
w??i """" ^""e "Organization and Manage.nent of 

luVll Jflllri^t «;3.:Theones of Learning Disabilities". These two courses 
will be offered in addition to the "Exceptional Learner" class and all will 
incorporate ideas and suggestions mentioned above. We feel we have a viable 

Snr'hnr^f.J^I;'®''^ f^'^^m- "l^^ anything new, the "bugs" need to be worked 
out, but with the continued support and flexibility of both students and 

llll[T.TVn lur.VllTr'ci: '° ''''"^''^ '''''''''' ^° 



DV310.1-5 



346 



ERIC 






L 



Gflfiy ta 
teaoR 

CounsooR 



December 20, 1985 



ACRES Conference 

359 Miller Hall 

Western Washington University 

Bellinqham, WA 98225 

Whiteriver Public Schools has developed what we feel is a unique 
approach to the vocational education of special need students. Our 
program is tailored to meet the needs of trainable mentally handicapped, 
educable mentally handicapped, and the learning disabled. We have 
various components, such as, a sheltered workshop producing wood 
Products for sale, a solar greenhouse raising and marketing house and 
garden plants, a vocational preparation class, work experience program, 
and a vocational evaluation program. 

Since the inception of our program more than five years ago we have 
had numerous inquiries into what our program is, how it got started, etc. 
We feel that your convention would give us a unique o^Dortunity to trans- 
mitt the details of our program rural educators on a functional basis. 

If granted the opportunity we would like to utilize a half an hour 
of your time to exhibit a video tape presentation to the audience and 
provide those interested with a descriptive pamphlet and an opportunity 
to ask any questions, 

J 

K./^. Edmondson, M 
Vbcational Evaluator 
Special Education Department 

KJE:vt 



ERIC 



347 

P.O. Ok 190 (UHuewffljM 05941 (602) 330- 




Thursday. April Ik 
9:30-11:00 aia 

MAINE SCHOOL ADMINISTRATIVE DISTRICT NO. 71 

; "'I ^iK'. ' ^ 8T0RER STREET, KENNEBUNK, MAINE 04043 

JS* N ~ TBLf PHONE (»7) MM172 

^ LEO G.MARTIN BARBARA PILLSBURY ROBERT LEWIA 

»Uri:itlNTKNDKNT SPECIAL EDUCATION BUSINESS MAN AGER 

^ — =_= ^' 



ABSTRACT 



The purpose of the presentation is to develop an awareness among 
educators of an easily transferable and mainly self-supporting 
secondary vocational education program for special needs 
students. It has a two-fold thrust: one, the extension of 
existing Cooperative Education programs by addina a special needs 
component and, two, the establishment of self-supporting student 
run businesses within a regular high school and its community; 
for example, a community business needs survey in 
Kennebunk/Kennebunkport, Maine found needs for a video-taping 
business (weddings, graduation, child identification, insurance, 
etc.), a horticultural/ landscaping business, a food service 
business (luncheons, catering, business meetings), a custom car 
care service (interior and exterior cleaning and preservation) , a 
towel rental business, a clothing repair and sales business, and 
a computerized accounting service. This is done without 
additional staff. 



Methodology is concrete, direct experience. Carefully sequenced 
Itemized performance objectives have been developed for each 
business. Gifted and talented and regular education students 
Dom the special needs students in the businesses and as members 
of the Board of Directors, forming a conglomerate 
experiencing and learning the free enterprise system. 



and 



The program is educationally significant because it allows for 
immediate transfer of theory into practice, provides a transition 
from school into the workplace, graduates students with 
marketable skills, and inspires entrepreneurship rather than 
dependency on sheltered workshops or welfare. 

It is significant to vocational special needs because of the 
educational significance stated above and because it is of minor 
cost, can become self-supporting, and is easily implemented. 

For information contact: 



of Schools 



Leo G. Martin 
Superintendent 
M.S.A.D. No. 71 
1 Storer Street 
Kennebunk, Maine 04043 
207-985-3172 - office 
207-967-2794 - home 
Box 8 

Kennebunkport , Maine 04046 



Barbara R. Pillsbury 
Director of Special Services 
M.S.A.D. No. 71 
1 Storer Street 
Kennebunk, Maine 04043 
207-985-7156 - office 
207-499-2246 - home 
Box 3 42 

Kennebunk, Maine 04043 



'8 FINEST RESORT AREA 



KENNEBUNK - KENNEBl^KPORT - KENNEBUNK BEACH - CAPE PORPOISE - GOOSE ROCKS BEACH 



Thursday, April24 
9:30-11:00 am 



Presenter - Joe Edmondson 

Alchesay High School 
Whiteriver Public Schools 
Whiteriver, Arizona 85941 



Title: VOCATIONAL TRAINING FOR THE HANDICAPPED 



This oresentation is intended to qive the soecial education teacher 
an ODDortunity to visit, via video taoe, the vocational oronram for soecial 
education students in Whiteriver, Arizona. This oroqram is now five years 
old. It includes a sheltered woodshop program , a talent development program , 
a horticulture solar greenhouse program , a work experience program , and 
vocational life skills component . The purpose of the presentation is to 
provide ideas for other schools and to answer inguiries regarding the 
various aspects of the program. Some of the products produced in the 
sheltered woodshop will be on display. 



^ , * Presenter: Jewell H. Makolin 

Thursday, April 24 ^51^ Carriage Hills Drive 



9:30-11:00 am 

'Lei^t They Drown In The Mainstream 



Westminster, Maryland 21157 



This presentation deals with three issues: 

(1) Making modificaf:ions in the least restrictive environment of regular 
high school classes to accommodate the learning needs of mildly handi*- 
capped students. 

(2) Assisting special education teachers to develop communication and 
affective skills which will assist them in the task of being a re- 
source person to regular education teachers. 

(3) Assisting the regular education teacher to develop attitudes, approaches 
and strategies to accommodate the learning needs of mildly handicapped 
students . 

Some background about our school system should be helpful to you in under- 
standing why this approach has been successful. We are a rural farm area located 
fifty miles northeast of Washington, twenty miles south of Gettysburg and twenty 
to forty miles northwest of Baltimore depending upon where you live. We are fast 
becoming the "bedroom" of Washington and Baltimore as small farms are being turned 
into housing developments. Farming is predicted to remain a major part of our 
economy but we are beginning to see the development of farm monopolies. Parts of 
our county are expected to remain rural because of their geographical distance from 
Washington and Baltimore. Our pupil population is about 20,000 and we serve over 
3,000 students in special education. Some students receive resource and consultant 
service; a few are in self contained special education classes. About six students 
are in nonpublic placements because their severe learning and emotional problems 
cause them to be unable to succeed in our local programs for the severely emotionally 
disturbed. Although we have one special school and several special education centers 
in regional elementary and middle schools, the bulk of our population is served in 
their home schools in resource rooms or with itinerant services. It is not unusual 
for a student to receive multiple services such as occupational therapy, physical 
therapy, resource special education services, or speech and language. In addition, 
we serve about one hundred and thirty students birth through age four in home and 
school programs . 

I hope this gives you some idea of where I'm coming from. I'm sure that there 
is no one in this room who does not know that 504, PL94-142, and PL98-'199 - all man- 
date that special education students must be served in the least restrictive en- 
vironment in which their educational needs can be met. How many of you also know 
that the Federal Registry, Volume 46 says that if modifications are needed for a 
handicapped child to be successful in the LRE, then these modifications must be 
delineated in the student's lEP? 

Just as our county is a mixture of rural and suburban living, so are our 
parents varied in interests, knowledge, and commitment. Until two and one half 
years ago we had approached the problem of mainstreaming by informing our special 
education teachers to meet with the mainstream teachers to determine the needed 
modifications and then to write these into the lEP. We had offered many courses 
and workshops in special education to regular education teachers. About two (2) 
years ago we received a letter from an attorney on behalf of the parents of a 
12th grade student with learning disabilities. They alleged that the regular 
education math teacher had refused to make modifications to accommodate their 
son's learning disability. Faced with a civil suit instead of a special education 
hearing, I was told to put out the fire. To make a long story short, we finally 
negotiated the case without going to court. 



Page 2 



In any situation like this, blame or responsibility must be assessed. I i 
felt that the responsibility fell mainly on the central Special Education office. 
Oh yes, we had notified the principals of this requirement, we had notified the 
special education teachers and the school ARD committees of this but regular 
education staff and principals are very busy. Special Education is only a small 
part of their total program and total concern. Special education teachers do not 
always know how to approach a peer and ask that peer to change their instructional 
approach for special education students. They felt very uncomfortable in this role. 
If the regular education teacher refused to make modifications, the special edu* 
cation teacher could do very little except report the refusal to the SARD committee. 

As would be expected, few special education teachers reported to their ARD 
peers or their administrators that a regular education teacher had refused to make 
modifications. Other special education teachers were willing to take a stance on 
this issue but they did it in such a demanding "holier than thou" way that they 
made things worse for themselves, the special education program, and especially, 
the student. 

It seemed that there was no other choice - we had to have a systematic county 
wide approach to promoting mains treaming. 
First, I made several assumptions. 

(1) If regular education teachers completely understood the law, they 
would comply. 

(2) Willingness on the part of the regular education teacher to comply 
would not guarantee success. Inservice would be needed. 

(3) This inservice would have to be "on going" because of teacher 
turn over. 

(4) This inservice was the responsibility of the county Special 

Education Department. a 

It was finally determined to develop a comprehensive checklist of modifications ' 
for the mainstream which could be utilized by regular education teachers. Good 
teaching is good teaching whether it is done by regular education or special 
education teachers. I studied the research regarding the components of good in- 
struction. I determined what teaching techniques used by special educators could 
also be used in regular education classes. I determined what teaching strategies 
traditionally used by regular education teachers could be effectively used in 
classes where special education students are mains treamed. I looked at the specific 
learning needs that students within each handicapping condition might exhibit. 

The next task was to do a task analysis of these strategies. Since we are 
very "gung ho" about computers in our county and since the terms "input" and "output" 
are part of special education jargon as well as computer jargon, it was decided to 
divide the strategies between these two categories. When this categorization was 
accomplished, the objectives were then refined to state exactly what was meant in 
the simplest possible way. 

The next step was to decide how to insure that every regular education teacher 
in the county got the message that they would be expected to work with the special 
education teachers in their building to determine modifications for each child they 
teach. What was the most effective way to present the inservice county wide? 

Coward, that I am, I was not about to inservice fifty to one hundred high 
school teachers in a large group. That statement is partly true and partly for 
laughs. However, the power of a group can often escalate a mildly negative position 
of an individual into a negative position wh^ch is quite powerful. In addition to 
this, in a smaller group more interaction can take place. Interaction, when positive, 
can assist individuals to look at issues differently. Therefore, an arrangement was 

{ 

351 



ERIC 



Page 3 



made with the principals to relinquish their October faculty meeting and instead 
request that teachers come to an inservice meeting after school or during their 
daily preparation periods. This allowed us to keep most of the groups to less 
than twelve. This was more work for me but also more effective. Keeping the 
groups small guaranteed that "give and take interaction" could take place. 

Let's take a look at our instrument. In the inservice with the regular 
education teacher go over item by item teaching strategies as T explain the 
instrument. My objective is to promote an awareness in them about some of the 
learning needs of handicapped students as well as other problems milvilly handi- 
capped students faced. My objectives for the teachers are: 

to become aware of the learning problems and characteristics 
of mildly handicapped students. 

(2) to become aware of the federal laws mandating that students must 
be served in the least restrictive environment whenever possible 
and that if modifications are needed these must be recorded in 
the student's lEP. 

(3) to look at the issue of fairness to all students. 

(4) to become aware of modifications and strategies which could be made 
in the mainstream. 

This form is completed by using the following process: 

The resource or itinerant special education teacher, using the 
assessment of the student, decides which modifications would be 
appropriate for the student in each subject area. This list is 
given to the regular education teacher who decides if the nature 
of the class is such that those modifications are appropriate. 
The regular and the special education teacher discuss and nego- 
tiate modifications which should be made for each student. These 
are presented to the ARD committee for discussion. The ARD committee 
can add or delete objectives. If the parents are present, they 
participate in determining these objectives in the same way they 
participate in determining other objectives. The modifications 
then become part of the lEP. 
In the interest of time and because you are special educators rather 
than regular educators I am not going to go over every item on our checklist 
but rather call your attention to certain ones. I would like to call your 
attention to a few specific modifications. Let's look at #1. We have found 
this a most effective strategy especially when copies are also provided to the 
special education teachers. It is a time saver and a great assist to the 
special education teachers when he/she is attempting to tutor a student. Number 
6 and 9 are also very effective. Volunteer students and parents can be very 
helpful in taping. Parents can tape at home. When there is a large amount of 
taping to be done we pay people to do this. #14 Most handicapped students in- 
cluding SLD ones are notorious for being disorganized. Perhaps the most im- 
portant thing we can do for any student handicapped or not is to help them develop 
organizational skills. #18 We recommend that if a student is allowed to tape a 
lesson that the recorder be put on the teacher's desk and that the teacher have 
control over when the tape is on. In addition many high school students have 
difficulty with appearing to be different if they use a tape recorder in class. 
Therefore the recorded tape is sent to the special education resource room and 
the student uses it there. We think that this will not be such a problem in the 
next few years because we have elementary and middle school students who have 
been using tapes for several years and they don't feel different because of this. 
In fact it has become the "in thing" to do. 



Page 4 



Item #21 We recommend that every teacher assign note takers for each class on 
a rotating basis. Pressurised paper is purchased and a copy of the lesson is 
sent to the special educaticjn teacher. This assists all students because 
another copy is available for those who are absent or just want to check their 
notes . 

Item #25 This provides an opportunity to list objectives or modifications not 
addressed in the other item^ to meet specific needs of individual students. 

Would you please take a few minutes and read the philosophy on which the 
output modifications are ba^ed? 

Let me tell you about l/arren. About 18 years ago before we knew much about 
students with learning disabilities, (I'm not sure we know much more now) a 
Student wac referred to the guidance department because he refused to turn in 
an/ written work on tests unless the task required only short answers. He 
reed anything and everything and could tell the teacher the latest thinking 
and research on most any subject but he was arrogant and belligerant when any- 
one tried to force him to write. He was not the favorite student of the staff - 
most likely because he made his teachers feel like '"failures" in their attempts 
to motivate this 145+ I.Q. student. Those days we called such students under- 
achievers. As counselor I started working with him on a regular basis. It took 
many counseling sessions before he confided, "I don't write because I can't 
write and I'd rather that the students and the teachers think I am lazy and 
stubborn than have them kno\/ that I am stupid." He was right that he had a 
severe disability in encoding the language. Eventually he accepted that he 
wasn't stupid - but it took a long time to undo the damage of 10 years of being 
acutely aware of his disability without understanding it. Unseen handicaps 
are always the most difficult to deal with, aren't they? 

From failure, this student eventually went to success. He learned to 
negotiate with his teachers - a basic skill all of us need. He was allowed to 
tape his homework instead of writing it, to carry a pocket dictionary, to tape 
his answers to essay tests. Teachers were more than willing to assist him with 
his written language skills when they understood his problem. 

The clincher is that this student graduated from a top eastern law school 
and is a successful attorney. He used his negotiating skills to get through and 
today he seldom writes more than his name - his secretary does everything else 
for him. This is a classic example of using strengths and circumventing 
weaknesses . 

Now this is an exceptional case but there are many other successful persons 
out there who still can't encode the language and who were dismal failures in 
school. 

Time does not allow me to go over each of these output modifications but I 
would like to show you a fev modifications we have made for math. These in- 
clude special rulers, addition and multiplication grids, and conversion charts 
for fractions and decimals. 

One of the things I am tuost asked by regular r*ducation teachers is: Is it 
fair to the other students to allow these modifications? My flip but sincere 
answer is. Is it fair to be bom handicapped? Someone has said that "there is 
nothing so unequal as equal education for unequal children", "there is nothing so 
unequal as equal education for unequal children. But I ask you, has life always 
been fair to you? It hasn't been to me. I'm sure that you will agree with me that 
life is often unfair - someti' es brutually so. 



353 



Page 5 



The quest for fairness is a ''pie in the sky" or "impossible dream" expected, 
I think, only by the immature dreamer. There is no way you can equalize 
educational opportunities for handicapped students or for all regular education 
students. No matter how many modifications we make, life will always be un- 
fair to the handicapped student, I suggest we forget about our quest for 
fairness and just do our best for all students! 



Student Name 

Subject Areas 

Mainstream Teachers 



Signature of Parent 



lEP OBJECTIVES FOR THE MAINSTREAM 

No input modifications are needed. 
No output modifications are needed. 



Input Modifications 

WHENEVER POSSIBLE THE FOLLOWING MODIFICATIONS WILL BE MADE: 

"^1. Provide a study guide or outline covering the objectives, key concepts, questions, course 

requirements when introducing a new chapter unit etc. 

2. Provide a study sheet with terms or racts needed for tests and quizzes. 

3. Provide a list of key words, concepts, etc. for the daily lesson. 

4. Provide daily summarization of lesson's key points, both oral and vis» al. 

^5. Assist in highlighting worksheets to indicate most critical information 

6. Tape important information for a specific unit or chapter so that the student can listen repeatedly 

on his own (student aide, parent, volunteer). 

/. Provide outline for lectures. 

8. Condense lengthy directions into steps, i.e. (1) (2) 

9. Combine tapes and worksheets. 

10. Post date when assignments and projects are due. Remind frequently. 

II.^Make sure printed work (ditto, mimeograph, etc.) is clear. 

12. Seat student in best place to promote listening skills. 

13. Assist student in paying attention to directions and explanations by 

14. Stress orgsriizational skills in class and assist student to organize himself for learning. 

15. Use and provfdie both verbal and visual input. 

16. Be cons<.io^JS of my rate of speech. Use concise statements or simplified vocabulary to ensure 

maximum undvvi standing. 

''^^ Restate oral directions for the group or have another student restate them. 

18. "Allow student to tape parts or all of the class. 

19. Assign a student aide, peer tutor or parent to: 

read aloud to student or group of students 

tape difficult reading matter 

summarize chapters of the textbook 

20. Assign student aide, peer tutor, or parent to review for test. 

21. Have a good note taker (student) make carbon copies of lectures, notes, etc. 



input Modifications 
(continued) 



Assign cooperative learning experiences (group work) where student is in homogeneous or 
heterogeneous group for: 

peer reading aloud and discussion of material 

group written answers to assignments 

discussion of materials concerned in lectures, audio*visual, etc. 

Use blacl( magic mariner to darken worksheets and other materials. 

Provide new vocabulary worksheets, study guide (those provided to students) to special educati 
teacher for pre-reading. 

Others not previously covered which relate to the specific handicap of the student: 

a use unglazed paper for visual impaired. 

b. stand where the student can read lips. 

c. work with assigned interpreter aioe to facilitate an effective 

instructional program. 

d. 

e. 

f. 



Output Modifications 

Philosophy: 

*^ In most subject areas, other than those English classes which teach basic writing skills, 
the purpose of written activities is to determine if the student knows the required infor- 
mation. Therefore, in these classes the handicapped student should not be penalized 
because he cannot put his knowledge on paper. Instead, he/she should be offered alter- 
nate ways of demonstrating her/his knowledge. This includes daily assignments, writ- 
ten projects and testing procedures. 

Example: In a World History class if you want to know whether a student, who is 
handicapped in the areas of written language, understands the significance 
of Marco Polo's visit to China, you circumvent his problem allowing 
him/her to give the answer in another way, i.e. — oy taping or telling the 
teacher or aide the answers. 

WHENEVER POSSIBLE THE FOLLOWING MODIFICATIONS WILL BE MADE: 

1. At times, assigning cooperative small group projects instead of individual competitive activities. 

2. Allow students to make models, draw or perform a demonstration to meet some class 

requirements. 

3. Provide some self pacing activities. 

4.*^ Allow more time to complete written assignments (I.e., In special education resource room or at 

home). 

V 

5. Allow tests to be taken in special education room. 



356 



Output Modifications 

(continued) 



6. Allow student to take tests by having it read to her/him by: 

special education teacher 

student volunteer 

parent volunteer 

»'7, Require fewer questions or problems to be completed '^r homework, seatwork. etc. but still give 
full credit, (i.e., 5 math problems instead of 8) 

8. Allow student to give short answers to questions on a written assignment such as single word or 
phrase answers. 

9. Allow student to tape homework. 

10. Allow student to tape reports instead of writing them. 

11. Allow print or cursive writing. 

12. Allow lower standards for acceptable handwriting quality. 

13. Allow student to use a spelling dictionary. 

14. Allow another student or student aide to proofread material to be handed in. 

15. Allow a student to use a calculator for drill practice or to check each problem as he/she works. 
10<^ Allow computation aids such as, special rulers, grids, graph paper, calculator, etc. 

17. Provide ample wait time when questioning. 

18. Provide a variety of projects or activities to fulfill course requirements which require a reduced 
amount of writing such as: 

a. 

b. 

c. 



19. ' Allow the student to audit the course (if the student has sufficient credits). Will be expected to 

meet the conditions under which regular education students audit. The modifications whic.i have 
been checked will be used to assist the student. 

20. Allow the student to receive a Pass/Fail Credit instead of a letter grade. 

Pass/Fail grades should be used on a limited basis, be the exception rather than the rule, and 
have the full agreement of the ARD team of which the regular education teacher is a voting 
member. An example of an effective use of this modification is the student who can understand 
most of the course content and meet many of the objectives of tho course but cannot achieve an 
average grade, even with allowable modifications. The student with a mild reading deficit uut a 
severe written language deficit is usually a good candidate for this arrangement. Such students 
usually receive D's, even though they are working up to or beyond the limitations of their learning 
disability. 

Students allowed Pass/Fail modifications are expected to maintain an acceptable attitude and 
do the work required to the best of his/her ability. 



357 



Thursday, April 24 

Presenters: Marsha Stipe 
9:30-11:00 am 412 s.E. Dorion 

Pendleton, OR 97801 

Sue Arkless 
412 S.E. Dorion 
Pendleton, OR 97801 



Title: THIS CHILD COMES WITH DIRECTIONS: MAINSTREAMING 
THE STUDENT WITH A HANDICAPPING CONDITION 
THROUGH TEACHER INSERVICE 



Since the advent of P.L. 94-142 special educators have struggled with the 
issue involved in mainstreaming handicapped students into regular classes. 
Handicapped students can be successfully mainstreamed if support is provided 
for regular classroom teachers. This presentation addresses this challenge. 
This is a model for inservice training of regular education teachers who 
have mainstreamed students in their classes. The presentation will include 
the roles and responsibilities of teaching staff, teaching techniques, 
training methods and materials used for the inservice. Procedures for 
program evaluation and follow-up of effectiveness will also be included. 

For the past five years this project has been implemented in a two county 
rural Oregon program for regular education teachers who have severely and 
profoundly hearing impaired students mainstreamed into their classrooms. 
The program has been supported by superintendents, principals, teachers and 
parents. Funding has been through local, state and special grants. The 
techniques and ideas presented can be applied to other populations of 
mainstreamed handicapped students. Teachers, administrators, parents and 
special education coordinators who have attended the inservice feel it has 
been an invaluable support to providing an appropriate education to their 
mainstreamed students. 

Participants will receive written copies of inservice content procedures and 
forms for recruiting participants, scheduling, evaluating and follow-up. The 
presenters will share ideas on applications for other handicapped 
populations. 



Thursday, April 24 
9:30-11:00 am 



Doris Helge 

American Council on Rural Special 

Education 
MH 359, Western Washington Universi 
Bellingham, WA 98225 



Models for Serving Rural Students 
with Low-Incidence Handicapping 
Conditions 



DORIS HELGE 



Abtlracl: Tradilianal models designed to 
provide o conlinuum af services la 
handicapped sludenls are inadequate for 
rural schools allempling to serve students 
Mfilh low-incidence disabililies. Because 
cf the tremendous diversity in rural 
schools and communities, there is no 
"one" rural service delivery model. This 
oiticle delineates /octors thot must be 
ooniidered ond voriobles that must be 
controlled by the rural service delivery 
Model plonner. Samples of success/ul 
slotetvide and local district models ore 
described. Koch model ivos de^tigned by 
monipulotion of voriobles such au 
slo/fing. transportation, and governance 
$yUBm$ a/te. consideration of district 
and community characteristics. 



DORIS HELCE is Director. Notional Hurai 
Aoeaorch Project. Murray State 
University. Murray. Kentucky. 



■ Historically, a niajuhty of rural aducatun 
have not voiced problems concerning serving 
mUdly and moderately handicapped students. 
Such students were typically not identified as 
handicapped in rural areas or were thought to ' 
have unusual learning needs but were served 
in the regular classroom. Thus, compared to 
their noiirural counterparts, rural mildly/mod- 
erately handicapped students have had mini- 
mal problems gaining the acceptance of regular 
classroom teachers and students. 

This situation partly reflects the rural norm 
of **taking care of one's own." as well as the 
fact that rural Americans inherently dislike the 
labeling of individuals. It is also partially at- 
tributable to the practical nature of rural edu- 
cators. They tend to **make do** when given 
inadequate resources (in this case, lack of 
special education classes). 

However, situations were more problematic 
when teachers were asked to serve sludeita 
with severe handicaps and those classified in 
other low-incidence categories. (In rural 
school systems, this typically includes stu- 
dents having hearing impairments, emotional/ 
behavioral disorders, blindness or other visual 
impairments, severe orthopedic disabilities or 
other health impairments, severe mental retar- 
dation, and those with multiple or severe handi* 
caps. However, in very small rural schools, a 
child with mild or moderate mental retarda* 
tioa may have a **low-incidence handicap.**) 

Rural schools did not have enough enroll* 
meiits Of children with low-lncidence disabil* 
ities to gain funding for segregated special 
education classrooms or teaching specialists. 
They typically also had no other available 
services or supportive staK. Thus, mainstream* 
ing students who needed tnajor adjustments in 
classroom curricula, materials, or activitiee 



■amUlisilcyidw 



aia 



was particularly difficult for regular classroom 
teachers with large numbers of uouhandi- 
capped students. 

Until Public Law 94-142 was in *'full imple- 
mentation." rural children having low-inci* 
dance handicaps were typically unserved, or at 
best, underaerved. A national study comparing 
rural special education services before and 
after the implementation of P.L 94-142 indi- 
cated that tremendous chaugt^^ occurred in 
services available to rural students with low- 
incidence handif.aps (Helge. 19«0). 

Data gathered for this study via ou-situ and 
telephone interviews indicated dramatic in- 
cieases in \hs percentages of low-incidence 
children identified and served. (The percent- 
age of change was 47% from 1975 to 1980.) 
This was particularly true with severely handi- 
capped populations. Before the implementa- 
tion of P.L. 94-142. many rural districts/coop- 
eratives had few special services for severely 
handicapped students. In fact, a majority of the 
districts/cooperatives were t^lacing such stu- 
dents in residential and private schools and 
agencies. By 1980. most sampled districts were 
trying to serve them in their home district/ 
cooperative. In spUe of this progress, the over* 
whelming maiority of the rural school systems 
involved in the sample reported that students 
with low-intidence handicaps were the most 
difficult population to serve. 

INAOEQUAQES OF TRADITIONAL 
SERVICE DEUVERY MODELS 

Traditional models of providing a continuum 
of services for students with handicapping 
conditions (i.e.. various adaptations of the 
classic Reynolds framework introduced in 
1962) have been vital to those planning special 
education services in nonrural settings. These 
models typically include levels of service such 
as those depicted below and recommend child 
placement based on an assessment of the level 
of severity of a handicap. 

Hospitals and treatment centers 
Hospital school . 
Residential school 
Spedlal day school 
Pull/part-time & spec:ial class 
Regular class/resource room 
Regular class witi) consultation 
Regular class (without consultation) 

Such models are much less appropriate for 
314 



rural school sy.stems. especially those located 
in remote geographic areas. For example, a 
district having two students with cerebral pal- 
sy located 250 miles from each other typically 
cannot cluster these students for services. 

Many of the levels of the traditional continu- 
um do not exist in rural areas. For example, 
many rural school systems historically sent 
their students with low-incidence handicaps 
to residential schools located outside their 
states because they had no in-state option. 
Liiiewise. special day schools do not exist in 
many rural areas. They are simply not a practi- 
cal alternative. 

Traditional continuum-of-services models 
also assume the existence of a greater number 
of staff than is typical in most rural schools. An 
adequate funding base for such staffing has 
also been assumed, although numerous studies 
have shown that this is certainly hot the rule in 
the majority of rural systems. 

Another inclination of those proposing spe- 
cial education service delivery models has 
been to identify "the" model for rural service 
delivery. For example, after the pasaage of P.L. 
94-142. special education cooperatives became 
widespread, allowing school districts to com- 
bine scarce resources so that they could pay for 
expensive specialized services and staff. 

The predominant spec ial education coopera* 
tive model involves hiring one or mora itiuer 
ant specialists who travel as needed to isolated 
students requiring specialized services. They 
provide services ranging from direct instruc- 
tion of children to training staff and consulting 
with parents. This type of structure has made 
services available to many previously un- 
served rural students with handicaps. 

However, cooperatives and itinerant staff 
shared among districts within a collaborative 
structure have not l)een a panacea. Even coop- 
eratives have frequently been unable to afford 
to hire a full-time itinerant staff member to 
serve only a few low-incidence handicapped 
students in widely scattered geographic ter- 
rain. Itinerant staff tend to be highly stressed 
prufessicmals, and attrition rates are high. 
Many itinerant personnel must be self-rein* 
forcers not only when traveling but also when 
housed in school buildings where their role is 
"different** and typically misunderstood. Pro- 
gram continuity is difficult, even under the 
best of arrangements, when a person with 
specialized training is only able to visit or train 
the local classroom teacher a few times per 

360 



yw. Finally, traditional itinerant service ar- 
rangements are not always an option. Distance 
between students and services, geographic bar- 
riers. and/or inclement weather frequently pro* 
bibit transportation of students or profession- 
els on a consistent basis. 

OONSIDBIATIONS FOR SERVICE 
DELIVERY PLANNING 

lust u urban models are not appropriate for 
niral schools, there is no "one" rural service 
delivery model for the great variety of rural 
school systems and their attendant subcul- 
tures. It cannot be assumed that a practice 
effective in remote Wyoming ranching territory 
will be viable on an isolated island, in part of a 
duster of New England seacoast towns, or in 
an agricultural migrant camp. Instead, service 
delivery models must be individually de- 
signed for the rural school system and subcul- 
ture in which they will be implemented. 

Each of the 15 factora discussed in the sec- 
tions that follow must be considered by those 
designing a service delivery system for stu- 
dents with low-incidence handicaps. Most im- 
portantly, the interrelationships between them 
must be assessed. For example, districts with 
equivalent population densities should plan in 
significantly different ways if one school sys- 
tem is surrounded by mountains with relative- 
ly untraversable roads all winter, while the 
other is located in a flat agricultural area with 
mild winters. 

Reialiooahlp of District Governance System 
to External Reeourcee 

A district that is administratively part of a 
cooperative or has access to a state's educa- 
tional service district typically has greater re* 
sources available to it than does a district 
where the majority of external resources must 
come from a centralized state educate k agen- 
cy (SEA). This is particularly true ^vhen the 
Isolated district is located a great distance from 
the SEA or when geographic or climatic barri- 
ers exist. 

Fopulatioii Sparalty 

The population per square mile Is sir^iiflcant 
for the model planner. Although a rural system 
is by definition relatively sparsely populated, 
services must be planned in a dramatically 

Bxcaptional Children 



different manner for small clustered townships 
than for schools located on remote islands, 
vast rangelands. or in the isolated bush villages 
of Alasica. This is important in determining 
whether students with similar learning needs 
are available to be clustered for services and in 
assessing proximity to services. 

Dietence From Student to Services Needed 

Assuming a service exists, the planner needs to 
know the distance from child to service loca- 
tion or from itinerant staff member to child. 
Knowledge of the actual travel time will assist 
in determining whether a service or profes- 
sional should be transported to the student or 
vice versa. 

Geographic Barriera 

Absolute distance from potential services to a 
student is frequently complicated by geograph- 
ic barriera such as mountains, untraversable 
roads, or the necessity of taking ferries or small 
planes. In some areas of the Northeast and 
Northwest, roads do not exist. Personnel must 
either travel by light plane or snowmobile, or 
even detour through Canada, to reach their 
rural district. Because the U.S. government 
owns and prohibits travel through large areas 
of several Western states, school personnel in 
these states must frequently travel an extra 2 or 
3 hours to reach their service destinations. 

Qlroatlc Barriera 

In areas with severe climates or seasonal prob- 
lems such as heavy spring flooding, it may be 
relatively unimportant (and highly frustrating) 
to planners that a qualified professional or 
program is located only an h^iur's distance 
from the child, ^laden^s with disabilities suf- 
fer when program continuity is frequently dis- 
rupted by weather-related problems. Adminis- 
tratore also experience difficulties with 
planning or implementing longitudinal goals 
for a child. 

Language Sv»<iken in the Community 

)ust as prinary languages sp juen by a handi- 
capped chiM must be ronsidh ad when design- 
ing ^ti lEP, the p imary language of the rural 
child and his or ler fa.nily also has relevance 
for selecting appropriate personnel, especially 

318 



36i 



itinerant staff who visit rural communities 
with lifestyles and cultures different from their 
own. It is also extremely important to the 
administrator who is considering clustering 
students for services. 

Cttkitral Diversity 

Besides the most readily recognized ethnic 
cultures with which service planners try not to 
Interfere (knowing that disrupting family life 
interferes with the effectiveness of services), 
unique rural subcultures must be considered. 
Research has cleariy indicated that some lEP 
requirements, though well intentioned. were 
written without extensive familiarity with var- 
ious rural cultures. Implementing the require* 
ment that written parental permission be ob- 
tained, for rxample. is particularly difficult in 
some rural-based cultures having no written 
language. 

Similarly, fsome rural-based s. ibculture& 
have no co«Toept of special education terms 
(e.g.. leami g disabilities). Some religious cul- 
tural mirorities also have beliefs and tradi- 
tions t^ are at variance with school tradi- 
tions, uch as religious holidays that conflict 
with a school calendar of services. Planners 
mu ' also be aware of unique community and 
priiunt expectations for the success of handi- 
>pped students. 

Handicapped students who belong to tran- 
sient rural subcultures (such as migrant and 
military populations) also provide unique 
::hallenges for the rural special education plan- 
ner. These include tracking children to ensure 
urogram continuity. 

■'■ r^i&tively nev . r.ivaion facing many 
special edr*u:il:c.i punners is the "boom 
<: bu$V* syndrout . prevalent in states with a 
priority of developing energy resources. Some 
special education administrators, faced with 
"overnight*' doubling of their special educa- 
tion population because of temporary influxes 
of workers, find that by the time they locate 
resources to provide services, their popula- 
tions have significantly decreased. 

Ecooottic Ufealyies of the Community 

Rural communities, particularly those with 
relatively nondiversified economies, tend to 
schedule their lives around the requiremerts 
they face as they attempt to make a V-ing. 
Service delivery planners should be aware of 



total community priorities and events that 
might influence or even interfere with service 
delivery. Examples include handicapped chil- 
dren who are absent from school during peak 
periods of agricultural, fishing, or timber "har- 
vesting" or during seasonal festivals in reeort 
communities. 

Community Communication and Power 
Structures 

The special education planner who ignores the 
existing communication and power structures 
of a rural community will probably not be 
required to plan such services for an extended 
period of time. Typically, informal systems mrm 
more potent than those that are formally out- 
lined. Informal rules often have sigaiflcant 
ramifications for serving students with disabii- 
ities. For exaiaple. they may affect such issues 
as who. in reality, assigns duties to the itiner- 
ant specialist, confidentiality of student data, 
and the perron to whom service deliverers f«el 
accountable. 

Ages of StudenU 

The planner should ascertain the eges of chil- 
dren to be served la the local district and in 
any adiacent communities or systems in which 
collaborative services aie being considered. 
The United States still has many one-room 
schoolhouses in which one teacher is responsi- 
ble for a wide range of ages. Studiea htwe 
shown that such a situation entails a great 
of stress associated with burnout. (DickaieoD, 
1960: Helge. 1961.) Thus it behooves the 
administrator to attempt to group students in 
similar aiH i groups if at all possible. Excep- 
tions, of c \ne, are made when developmental 
age is mou critical than chronological Mga. 

Typea anu Severity Levela of DiaabUitiee 

The level of severity ? disability frequently 
determines whether or ;.(>t a student can re- 
ceive services within the regular classroom 
setting. Some types of ^tandicapping condi- 
tions tend to be more prevalent in some rural 
subcultures than in others. The National Rurttl 
Project, in its 1978-1981 studies, for example, 
found that areas with colder temperatures tend 
to have more hearing-impaired children, and 
tiiat areas of poverty as well as migrant cul- 
tures tend to have greater concentratlona of 



362 



lawMty leM 



BMQtally ratardod children btcauie of inade- 

quite nutrition, health care, and prenatal care. 
Daaigning services for such unique groups of 
studenU requires specific actions by the plan- 



History of Special Educatioa Servkee 

Pist services to handicapped children in a 
particular service area are closely linlced not 
only to available funding and awareness of P.L 
04-142 regulations, but also to community atti- 
tudes. In rural communities, key power 
sources (whether the school board chair or the 
wealthy fanner who likes children and serves 
as a Janitor during the off-season) have perva- 
sive influences on school services. 

Rural citizens are typically unimpressed by 
what they are told they -have to do" for 
handicapped students. In contrast, they are 
highly motivated to provide appropriate serv- 
ices when the initiative is theirs. Adept admin- 
istrators understand and plan to use such in- 
herent rural community attributes, particularly 
when attempting changes. In rural communi- 
tlas having a unique ethnic heritage, it is 
pouible and important to plan new services 
that will be palatable to the native heHtage and 
as much as possible preserve the camn!uniry*s 
self-determination i identity. It is not sur- 
prising that isolate^ ai communities ^Lor^ 
only choice in the past has been to send taeir 
disabled students to communities or cities 
with dissimilar cultures have resisted 
change— and sometimes, special education as 
a concept. 

Qsnently Available Reeouicea 

While P L. 94-142 requires that appropriate 
services be available to each student in the 
least restrictive environment, the law does not 
state how such services are to be delivered. 
Oeapite their reputation for inflexibility, rural 
citizens have, out of necessity, long tended to 
be creative problem-solvers. The model plan- 
ner should assess all existing resources. The 
lesulting catalog of current resources should 
Include intra-school and external facilities, 
equipment, and so forth. The planner should 
then identify and take advantage of the **hid> 
den" resources endemic to rural America such 
M lis sense of volunteerism and community 
spirit. 

Bacaptioiial Children 



CoelEmdMM^ 

When feasible, the planner should assess costs 
of alternate systems of providing a given serv- 
ice. The fiscal realities of rural schools, depart* 
ments. and classroom budgets must be consid* 
erod. However, the planner will typically not 
be faced with evaluating moneta^ tradeoffs 
between equivalent alternatives. It is more 
likely that he or she will have to presenf a need 
and request funds from a supervisor, a cost* 
conscious rural school board, or a community 
organization. 

The administrator should be knowledgeable 
of budgetary accountability systems. Data gath- 
ering and subsequent presentations should 
consider cost efficiency in light of a varying 
range of potential effectiveness. The planner 
should address not only local per-pupil expen- 
diture vs. out-of-district placement costs, but 
funding alternatives. The planner should also 
be prepared to answer questions concerning 
the percentage of the local school district con- 
tribution for salaries, transportation, consul- 
tants, and equipment. 

Expertiae and Attltudea of Available 
Personnel 

The planner must not only note the grade 
levels and types of disabilities that existing 
personnel are prepared to serve, but also their 
flexibility in serving as a generalist (i.e.. teach- 
ing several types of disabilities) or as a special- 
is). Forma! as well as informal training must be 
considered, and attitudes of personnel toward 
serving children with various disabilities are 
equally important. The planner may need to 
structure staff development opportunities de- 
signed to guarantee that iitudents are served by 
personnel who respecJ them and are comfort- 
able with their specific disability. 

DEAUNG WITH INTERRELATIONSHIPS 
AND CX)MBINATIONS OF FACTORS 

The importance of understanding and consid- 
ering the interrelationships of all 15 of these 
factors cannot be overemphasized. Combina- 
tions of factors are critical and should be 
weighted more heavily than single-factor barri- 
ers to service delivery. 

It is difficult to design an effective service 
delivery model when a rural district has multi- 
ple cultures or when, for example, the disabled 
filuHenI resides in o sparsely populated area 

317 



363 



150 miles from essential services. The task is 
even more difficult when the student's culture 
differs significantly from that of the nearest 
service area, when service delivery is inhibited 
by geographic or climatic barriers, or when the 
community's power structure has low expecta* 
tlons for the success of such a student. 

The planner should identify which of the 15 
variables are problematic, selact those that 
appear to be most important, and address those 
variables first. Problems that can be quickly 
ameliorated (ag.. by linkage with technoiogi- 
cal or other resources available through the 
state or by gaining the understanding and 
support of the local power structure), should 
be. Usually, the planner can merely acknowl- 
edge factors that are unchangeable "givens," 
such as spring flooding, when designing the 
service delivery plan. 

Figure 1 illustrates the fact that planning 
becomes a more arduous task as tiiu number of 
problematic factors increases. As one factor is 
combined with another and the plannur spans 
out to each concentric circle of Figure 1 . it is 
Increasingly difficult to design an apinopriate 
service model. 



MODEL DEVELOPMENT 

After considering these factors, the planner is 
ready to develop a workable service delivery 
model There is no such thing as a pure model 
for rural special education service delivery. 
Rather, eclectic approaches are the rule, and 
numerous variables must be juggled (such as 
cost vs. intensity of need ur availability oi* 
alternate services). 

Technological advances are greatly improv- 
ing the options of the local rural district. For 
example, it is no longer necessary to choose 
between hiring a specialist or a generalist if a 
generallst can use satellite instruction (or some 
other technology) to supply specialized in- 
structional content. 

Variables of a service delivery model that 
must be manipulated so that the resulting 
eclectic model has a "fit" are as follows: 

Equipment 

Facilities 

Financial system 

Staff development program 

Transportation system 

StafRog for services 




364 



Givem Thai Can 
Be Hmblemolic* 



Voriablf»s Thai 
Con Be Munipoiulad* 



Appropriole Servke 
Delivery Model 



Govemanctt Sytlem 
r«: Bxlemal 
Ratourcot 

Population Sporsily 

Di$tanc9 From 
SludenI lo 
Services Needed 

Gaosraphic tkrrieri 

Ungutgat Spoken 
In Communily 

Cultural Dtverstly 

Economic Lifeslylet 
of Community 

Commimlcalion and 
Power Slruclures 

Ages of Students 

Oisobillties Served 

History of District 
Special Education 

Available Resources 

Cost Efficiency 

Expertise of 
Available Personnel 

Expertise and 
Attitudes of 
Existing Perstiiinel 



Equipment 

Facilities 

Financial 
System 

Stn/f Develop* 
meiit Hrrigmm 

Trtinsporfntinii 
System 

Staffing fnr 

Parent 
Involvement 
and Tr^tining 

Community 
Involvement 
and Sup(^rt 

Governance 
System 

Interagency 
(^tllaborution 



= I Student ■ Services I 



'Items italicized are illustrative. 



FIGURE 2. Consideration of ''givena** and manipulation of "varlablaa** allows the planner to create 
appropriate service model. 



Parent involvement and training 
Community involvement and support 
Governance system 
Interagency collaboration 

Exceptional Children 



Figure 2 illustrates the process of designing a 
rural service delivery model. Factors that can 
present planning problems but cannot be con- 
trolled by the model designer are termed *'gi- 



365 



vent." Factorii thut cho bti niaiiipulHhici hy the 
planner are labeled "variabJett.** The planner 
can create an appropriate service delivery 
model by recognizing givens and controlling 
variables. 

SAMPLES OF SUCCESSFUL SERVICE 
DEUVERY MODELS 

The reader is reminded thai low-iiicideiice 
disabilities vary greatly from district tci district 
because of population and environmental in- 
fluences. Thus, in one district, a given model 
may be used to serve students who um ceruhnii 
palsied or deaf. In another district, the model 
may be adapted to serve the only moderately 
retarded student In the district. 

Development of each of ihe suuressful mod- 
els described in this section involveti the rec- 
ognition of factors discussed in the section on 
considerations for service delivery planning. 
Each design highlights the manipulatiim of 
one or more of the ten variables listed, al- 
though none of the models controlled or 
changed all of them. 

An adroit planner would not directly "trans- 
port" any of the sample models, but would 
consider them illustrative of the ways in which 
factors can be recognized and/or variables ma- 
nipulated in order to create a subculture-spe- 
clAc model. Table 1 illustrates the variety of 
formats used by the sample models. 

SUte^Fimded Intermediate Education UniU 
(lEUs) 

This administrative structure uses regional 
specialists who provide technical assistance 
and consultation to local district personnel. 
Some lEUs are designed specifically to provide 
special education services, and some are de- 
signed to provide all specialized services that 
are difficult for small districts to provide (e.g.. 
comprehensive vocational education). Most 
lEUs are administratively part of the state 
department of education, although one state 
(Nebraska) specifically separates its lEU from 
the state education agency. 

lEU personnel generally provide services 
only to other professionals. This pattern is 
sometimes varied to demonstrate an effective 
technique or to train a professional to deliver 
the s'^rvice independently in the future. 

Although inservice activities are :tometlmes 
held across regions or on a statewide basis. 



most are specifically planned for u district or 
region. Some lEUs have centralized media and 
materials centers with extensive options for 
check-out. and some states incorporate mobile 
materials centers. Generic specialists (e.g., re- 
source room teachers) at the local level are 
sometimes supported by specialized regional 
consultants (i.e., those dealing with a specific 
type of exceptionality such as visual impair- 
ment). This type of model is responsive to 
rural remote districts when consultant respon- 
sibilities are aligned by geographic regions vs. 
an entire state. The planner adapting it for a 
particular district would want to ileslgn safe- 
guards so a generic specialist did not become 
too dependent on a regional specialist. This 
would prevent inadequate services or a lack of 
services in the absence of the regional 
specialist. 



Statewide Networks of 
lliiierant SpeclalisU 

The small rural state of New Hampshire has 
implemented a system to serve studenU with 
the low-incidence handicaps of hearing and 
visual impairments. This system is operated by 
contract with a private Arm that hires consul- 
Unts to provide services to blind and deaf 
students in remote rural areas with no special- 
ized local personriel. These consultants also 
train local personnel to deliver follow-up serv- 
ices until they return. Items from an extensive 
media and materials center ure tiikou to the 
local district for use when the consultants are 
absent, and are varied and updated as needed. 



Statewide Model to Provide Consulting 
Services for Teachers 

The rural state of Vermont was funded by the 
U.S. Office of Special Education Programs 
(SEP) to develop a trainer-of- trainers model 
addressing the needs of students with low- 
incidence handicaps. The model involves col- 
labortion between the University of Vermont, 
the state department of education, and local 
rural districts across the state. Teacher consul- 
tants, similar to master teachers, were trained 
by university faculty to train regular class 
teachers to mainstream and effectively work 
with low-incidence handicapped childisn. All 
teacher con^eultants became adjunct faculty of 
the university and teachers who were success- 

laaiMffy leM 



366 



Sample Model 



Sut^fuDd•d lEUi 

Statewide oetworkt of couultiog itioenoti 

Stilewide model to provide couultio| seivicei (or regnlir tejich- 
m 01 low-irtcidioce hiodicipped 

Stolewide l-tearn loodel re severtly luodicipped 

Stilewide model to provide sef>ices to cultunlly differeot 
itudeoti 

Local special education ;oopentivat 
NoncatetoricaJ retourte room 

Model identifying and utins poteolial rttouKx witHio id i«, 
iatid diftrict 

Model* incorponiing idvuced tachDologies 
Models using paraprofetsiooali 



-UAJuLl ^/ H I 



X 
X 



X 
X 

X 
X 



X 
X 
X 

X 
X 



X 
X 



X 
X 

X 
X 
X 



X 

X 



X 
X 



X 
X 
X 

X 

X 
X 



X 

X 



X 
X 



X 
X 



is 



ERIC 



36? 



fully trainod received university credits. 
Teacher consultants did not provide direct 
services unless It was necessary to deniuii- 
strate effective techniques. The model provid- 
ed for consistent availability uf consultants to 
the regular educators. 

Statewide Interdisciplinary Teem Model 

A contrast to the oneK)n*one model for training 
regular educators is Vermont's Interdisciplin- 
ary Team (1-Team) Model. It is organic spe- 
cifically to enhance services to more severely 
handicapped students. The concept involves 
local l-Teams, a regional educational specialist 
(ES). and a state l-Team. The lovels interface 
with each other. Each I-Team contains several 
specialists such as special educators and spe- 
cialists in communications, physical therapy, 
occupational therapy, medicine, engineering, 
and carpentry. 

The regional educational specialist is locally 
based and coordinates services for multihandi- 
capped students In a region. A local or slate 1- 
Teem member may be asked for assistance. 
The regional ES position reduces travel time 
required to deliver services including assess- 
ment; staffing to generate recommendations; 
training to teachers, parents, educational spe- 
cialists, and others; monitoring the implemen- 
tetion of recommetidations; and coordinating 
training and consultative services. 

Local I*Team members encourage parent 
support by home visits and by providing par- 
ent training. Parents participating in 1-Teani 
services also may attend formal class sessions 
taught by state l-Team members or university 
faculty. The state l-Team serves districts that 
lack a local team, and also provides technical 
assistance and training to all local 1-Teams 
needing such services. 

Statewide Model to Provide Services to 
Culturally Diflisrent Studente with Moderate 
and Severe Hendicapa 

Sparse populations of Eskimo, Indian, and 
Aleut fantilies scattered across the 5B6.0U0 
square miles of Alaska presented unique chal- 
lenges to those attempting to upgrade the 
statii's system for full implementation of P.L. 
94-142. The state's previous system placed 
students with severe and other low-incidence 
handicaps in urban residential schools or fos- 
ter care. Such a system grossly Interfered with 

saa 



the seif-determlaatlon of native families aqd 
with perpetuation of the culturil identity of 
remote Alaska villages. Problems also existed 
with continuity of local services because of the 
high personnel attrition rates of newcomen 
attemnui.^ to live and work with bush village 
cuhures. 

A statewide model entitled Alaska Re* 
sources for the Moderately/Severely Impaired 
(ARMSI) was designed to provide professional 
services and consultation to students and their 
teachers. The primary strength of the model la 
that services are offered within the local vil* 
lagea. The thesis of this model was that most 
local schools, with the proper degree of assist* 
ance, can provide an appropriate public educa* 
tion for most stqdents. 

ARMSI was initiated in 1981, and central* 
ized the coordination of all services for this 
massive state, although service delivery waa 
localized. ARMSI |}ecame the umbrella service 
agency and recruited experienced staff who 
previously worked with various fragmented 
service agencies. The 18 staff members thus 
have extensive experience working in Alaska 
bush villages and knowledge of h^Yt to work 
and communicate with viilagen. 

Staff serve as itinerant specialists und offer 
three basic types of H?.si.9$ance: (a) direct In- 
struction and other sosrvices to children and 
youth; (b) training of and consultation with 
school district staff; and tc) dissemination of 
Instructional materials and information. This 
assistance takes place during on-site visits to 
the villages 3 to 4 times per year. Personnel 
stay at a school or district for about 3 daya on 
each occasion. The visits are part of technical 
assistance agreemeuts designed by ARMSI and 
each local district. Because the itinerant edu- 
cators continue to work with the same children 
for several years, the project has the potential 
of bringing greater educational continuity. 
Longitudinal goals are mora hkely to be carried 
out. 

Cooperative Adminiatratlve Structurea at tiM 
Local Level 

P.L. 94-142 regulations specify that any LEA 
unable to qualify for a $7,500 allocation (baaed 
on the numt>er of handicapped children 
served) will receive no pass-through funds. 
This guideline obviously encourages the for- 
mation of consortium arrangements to provide 
special services, and these have typically been 

laeeery !••« 



363 



UtUd "tpecUil education coopenitlvat.'* 

Th« operttion of cooperatives U at varied as 
the 9B0graphic terraia and climatic conditions 
in which they exist. Pooling funds ihrough 
various kinds of administrative structures al- 
lows single districts that are part of a coopera- 
tive to better meet the needs of rural students 
with low-Incidence handicaps. Where geo* 
imphic distances and climatic variables are 
not unwieldy, districts can cooperatively hire 
a person to serve children who %vere previous- 
ly unserved or underaerved because a single 
district could not afford a full-time person to 
serva a few students. 

Districts can also cooperatively fund and 
host inservlce training addressing low-Inci- 
dence needs, and iointly fund relevant equip- 
ment, media, and materials. Districts located 
In close enough proximity frequently coopera- 
tively transport students and/or centralize di- 
agnostic or intervention services. 

Noacategorical ReeoiirQe Room Modal 

This model Is frequently called an Interrelated 
classroom or simply, a resource room. It Is 
typically used by local districts having tco few 
students with any particular disability to war- 
rant establishing a segregated class for children 
with mental retardation, learning disabilities, 
etc. The emphaais in variations of this model is 
on improving academic, behavioral, or psycho- 
motor deficits through individualizing a 
child's curriculum and '**her learning 
experiences. 

The types of disabilities servri' In each class- 
room vary tremendously from district to dis- 
trict. Students are typically malnstreamed Into 
regular classes whenever appropriate. In a co- 
operative, students are sometimes transported 
to a central location for the resource room, 
hiore frequently, the noncategorical service 
area is confined to one district o; building. 
This ensures greater access to regular classes 
and regular classroom teachers as students are 
malnstreamed. In fact, the atrcngest programs 
observed by the author have been those with 
the greatest interaction between thid noncate- 
gorical resource teecher and regular educators. 

One variable to be manipulated In this mod- 
el Is th« pArcentage of the roaource tc^^chf^i^'s 
time spent providing direct servicr. 
dents assigned to the resource room Si^d the 
percantage of time spent consulting with their 
regular classroom teachers. 

Ixotptional Children 



Some resource rooms serve students who are 
not classified as special education students so 
that the progrem will have less stigma and 
regular claas teachers will be more likely to use 
naterials available through the resource room. 
Thf) moat effective programs totally Individual- 
ize the Implementation of lEP goals, and ir^any 
resource rooms seldom Involve students actu- 
ally %vorking together. 

Some resource rooms heve aides funded by 
the district or by another program such as a 
government CETA }>n)grani. Others involve 
parents. communMy v^r.^unteers. or university 
practicum studentr. many rural resource 
room ta<»chers function independuntly. 

Model 111 Identify Scarce Reeourcea 

Several districts that were extremely Isolated 
from other districts and from state resources 
htive identified and optimally used every pos- 
sible resource within their community. They 
have found that using community personnel aa 
resoutces has created a side benefit of addi- 
tional community support for their schools. 

Although the model varlea from community 
to community, the following basic components 
are consistently present: 

1. Completion of a needs assessment at the 
total school and individual classroom level. 

2. Completion of a resource survey of all 
rjhool personnel. lisVrg skills and compe- 
tencies that could b«i shared with others, 
including children with low-incidence 
handicaps. Data on potential community 
and parent resources were an integral part 
of the resource base. Community facilities 
and equipment are included in the resource 
data bank. 

3. Use of a manual card-sorting or a computer- 
ized retrieval system to link identified re- 
sources and needs. This llnkuge may in- 
clude having one teacher, uncomfortable 
working with a student with a hearing im- 
pairment, view another teacher with skills 
in this area. It may also include using high 
school students in a child development 
class as **extra manpower** by having them 
assist a special education teacher with fol- 
low-up motor skill activities for students 
with severe physical impairments. Other 
schools have used unemployed certified 
teachers, retired teachers, and other com- 
munity members as volunteers in the class- 

aaa 



3G9 



room. Itolated resort communities lieve ac- 
tively recruited the assistance of iong*term 
visitors. Volunteers provide services rang* 
Ing from tutoring students to furnishing 
transportation. They reduce staff develop- 
ment costs b> jnanaging a classroom while a 
rher engages in inservice. peer observa- 
^ t or other r?.levant activities. 

egalitiec . '^^tocol of each model are 
I .t.jdualized io,.. e particular district In 
which the model was incorporated. However, 
in all cases, an evolving foundation of school 
resources was established. Community sup- 
port for the school was enhanced In uiic;h 
location because citizens became integrally 
involved in special education programming. 

Models Incorporating Advanced 
Technologies 

The use of advanced technology as a tool for 
serving remotely located students with low- 
incidence disabilities is rapidly growing in 
popularity. For example, a variety of systems 
has been used to send instructions to isolated 
educators inadequately trained to teach chil- 
dren with low-incidence handicaps. Model 
design ranges from consultant-teacher commu- 
nication by satellite to mobile inservice vans 
bearing computers programmed to teach spe- 
cific subject areas. Lest expensive models in- 
clude exchanges of videotapes and one/two- 
way television instruction. 

Technological approaches will be limited 
more by the imagination of the service planner 
than by the cost of equipment. Alternate types 
of advanced technologies are becoming in- 
creasingly available in agencies external to 
schools. Many districts have found human 
service agencies willing to collaborate in ser- 
vice delivery, especially when highly special- 
ized equipment is not used by the agency on a 
full-time basis. MIcewise, many rural busi- 
nesses have been willixig to share equipment. 
Adept administrators have been able to borrow 
equipment by emphasizing advantages lo local 
businesses, such as enhancement of their com- 
munity imaga and potential tax write-offs. 

Modeb Using Paraprofessionals 

Trained paraprofessionals are frequenlly used 
by rural school districts when ci tified person- 
nel are unavailable. Paraprofessionals support 
special and regular educators conducting 

U4 



classroom or therapy activities with a handi- 
capped student. Tutoring activities might 
range from academic or psychomotcir curricu- 
lum activities to counseling regarding Im- 
provement of social skills. Paraprofessionals 
might also conduct follow-through exercisea 
assigned by a speech, physical, or occupation- 
al therapist or assist with adaptive physical 
education exercises. 

An essential Ingredient In the effective de- 
sign of a paraprofessional model is appropriate 
training and careful observation of perform- 
ance. Trained paraprofessionels are frequently 
teamed with parent and community volun- 
teers. Paraprofessional personnel are usually 
paid staff members, although there have been 
instances in which they functioned on a volun- 
teer basis. Most rural paraprofessional pro- 
grams have assumed that paraprofessionals 
will function as generalists. Their specialized 
tasks are generally limited to supervised fol- 
low-through activities assigned by speech, oc- 
cupational, or physical therapists. 

SUMMARY 

Traditional models designed to provide a con- 
tinuum of services to handicapped students 
are inadequate for rural schools attempting to 
serve students with low-incidence handicaps. 
Because of the tremendous diversity in rural 
school systems, there is no **one** rural service 
delivery model. There are. however, a number 
of community and district charucterisUcs that 
a model designer must consider. The planner 
may then appropriately control variables such 
as usage of personnc* transportation systems, 
and community involvement to design an indi- 
vidualized model viable for the student, dis- 
trict, and community. 

REFERENCES 

Dlclwrson. D. Orienlstlon needs of newly hired 
teachers in rural Alaska. Doctoral distartation. 
University of Oregon. 1980. 

Helgo. 0. 1. National research Identifying problems 
in Implementing comprehensive special educs- 
tjon programming in rural areas. KxcuplionoJ ChiJ- 
dren. 1981. 47(7). 514-520. 

Halge. 0. 1. A nuiianoJ comparulive 5iudy regording 
rural specioJ educolion service dtlivtry systems 
bfl/ont on J o/ier pansogt of PL 94-142. Murray KY: 
Nstionat Rural Rasearch Projetit. Osniut for Inno- 
vation and Devalapmenl. 1980. 

Reynolds. M. A framework for coiiiiiderlng some 
issues in special education, t^xceplionol Cliildran. 
1978. 28(7). 367-370. 

laMMiy \WU 



370 



Adaptive P.E. Ideas and Activities 
For Use in the Rural Elementary School System 



Often in the rural school system there is not an adaptive p.e. specialist, 
physic?*! therapist, or occupational therapist on staff to provide service for 
childr^iti who have special motor needs yet the needs exist and should be addressed. 
This workshop is designed to give the classroom or physical education teacher a 
broad range of activities to help service children who fall in this catagory. 

Examples of children who could benefit from adaptive p.e. services include 
those with gross and fine motor difficulties, sensory integration problems, 
physically handicapped, perceptual -motor deficiencies, and those children who 
cannot participate successfully or safely in a regular p.e. program. This is 
not to ta' ^ the place of a formal motor skill evaluation. It is assumed that 
such an evaluation has already taken place. 

The activ^'ties in this workshop are exclusively for support purposes. 
Examples of activities and areas to be discussed include: 



I. Eye-hand coordination 

II. Vestibular Stimulation/Balance 

III. Fine-motor skills 

IV. Bilateral and general coordination 

V. Reaction speed 

VI. Tactile discrimination 

VII. Body awareness 

VIII. Locomotor skills 

IX. Rhythm and timing 

X. Space and direction 

XI. Motor planning 



This workshop will provide its participants with hands-on experience in 
this area of specialty. Handouts will be provided on the areas discussed as 
well as a variety of resources available. Comfortable active wear is recommended 
for participation. 

Children who have motor skill deficiencies very often have poor self-images 
and lack confidence in many areas. Upon completion of this workshop the part- 
icipants will have a better understanding of children within their school and 
how to provide service to meet their needs and build up their self-confidence. 
We all need love and security and if we as educators can provide it for our 
special children lets do it and help them to love themselves and feel good within 
their society! 



Thursday, April 24 
9:30-11:00 am 



Cindy Hodgeson 
Tanque Verde USD 
4201 N Melpomene Way 
Tucson, AZ 85749 



371 



Concurrent Sessions 
Thursday^ April 24 

11:20 - 12:20 pm 



Thursday, April 24 



11:20-12:20 pm 



Presenter: David E. Greenburg 

BxBcutive Director, CASE 
902 Werjt JH&i York Street 
Indiariapolis, Indiana 46223 
Phones 317/264-3403 
Specia INet : G^E • CEC 



Title: CEUTICAL SOOCRSS FPdOBS OF SPECIAL EDUCATION ADMINISTRATORS 

The purpose of this study ^^as to aprirically identify and describe 
critical success factors (CSFs) of local special education administrators and to 
determine the extait to which these factors differed across organizational and 
demograt^c variables. The study additionally determined the differences in 
critical success factors of a nominated group of effective administrators with a 
random sample of local speciad education administrators. 

Data analysis revealed the effective actoiinistrators placed greater value 
on the CSFs in terms of the criticalness to their attainment of success. 
Further anedysis indicated multiple districy r^resentatives found CSFs xtore 
difficult to attain levels of success than ui their single district 
counterparts. Analysis of the surv^ respondent variable setting indicated 
suburban adninistrators rated some items more critical and difficult than rural 
and urt>an types. Analysis of the variaU>le size revealed no specific pattern in 
terms of its impact on success. 

The findings clearly supported the premise that the efft^ctive 
administrators were more concerned about how they and their programs were to 
maintain and strive for exoelleice, as well as demonstrating oortpetence, than 
the randan respondents. Adiitionally, r^resentatives from multiple district 
programs face greater challenges with respect to achieving success on the 
identified CSFs. The variables organizational size and setting were of little 
significance with regard to the attainment of success of the critical success 
factors for the £u3ministrators. 

NOTE: This document is ocnprised of exoerpts from a report of the study 
pr^)ared by Drs. Lecxiard C. Burrello and David J. Zadnik. The more detailed 
report is available from the Council of Administrators of Special Education 
(CASE) . 



373 



THE PRDBUM 



The Council of Adaiinistrators of Special Eciication (CASE) Research 
Ccmnittee has undertaken a series of research efforts to initiate the 
development of a database of effective leadership practices in local special 
education administration. The purpose of this study (the second in the series) 
vas to empirically identify and describe critical success factors (CSPs) of 
local specicd education administrators and to determine the extent to which 
these success factors differed across organizaticml and demographic variables. 
Additioncdly, this study compared the responses of a nominated group of 
effective administrators with a randan saitple of loccd specicil education 
administrators . 

Specifically^ the study's intent was to ansv^r the following questions: 

(1) What are the critical success factors (CSPs) of local special education 
administrators (diief executive officers) who are responsible for the 
administration and supervision of programs? 

(2) Hew do criticcd success factors differ for local special education 
administrators across the variables of organizational structure ^ size^ and 
setting? 

(3) Hew do the criticcd success factors of a nominated group of effective local 
special education administrators differ fron those identified by a randan group 
of locad administrators? 



OONCEPTUMi HRAMEWDRK 

Sergiovanni (1984) asserts there are discriminating aspects at play 
which differentiate excellence fron competence in leadership and organizations. 
Conpetence he defines as "the mastery of certain predetermined^ essential 
fundamentals" (pg. 5). Leaders and organizations demonstrate oanpetenc- when 
they are performing up to standards and students are achieving to fnncl.v- al 
academic competence. Effective and efficient planning ^ organizing^ ai.;. 
coordinating school activities are functions of leadership which repra£:-:jint 
technical conpetence. Utilizing effective conflict management skills and 
providing clinical supervision are t^ao additional examples of ways leaders and 
organizations maintain the levels needed for oonpetent schooling. 

Sergiovanni (1984) ciiaracterizes five forces of leadership v*iich 
influence educational organizations. Force ^ herer is defined as "the means 
available to school personnel to bring about or preserve changes needed to 
improve schooling" (pg. 6). They are listed below: 

1. Techniccd forces are derived from sound management practices. 

2. Human forces are derived from harnessing available socicil and interpersonal 
resources . 

3. Educational forces are derived from expert knowledge about natters of 
education and schooling. 

4. Synbolic forces are derived from focusing the attention of others on mat^ 
ters of iiiportance to the organization. 

5. Cultured forces are derived from building a unique organizational culture. 

(pg. 6) 

' 374 



EKLC 



These forces, including theoretical constructs and educational exairoles 
each, are presented in the attachnd Figure 1 (Sergiovanni , 1984, p. 12) . He 
adiitionally nakes the following asse.tions about the relationships of these 
five forces. 

"1. Technical and hiinan leadership forces are generic and thus share identical 
qualities with ooopetent nanagenent and leadership wherever they are expressed. 
They are not, therefore, unique to the program and its enterprise regardless of 
iinjortant they may be. v ^ «»a oi. 

Bijcational, symbolic, and cultural leadership forces are situational and 
c..-t:extual, deriving their unique qualities fran specific natters of education 
< sctex>linq. These qualities differentiate educational leadership, 
V x;.' r..^.ioR, and administration fran nanagenent and leadership in general. 
, '.fcr..- hunan, and educational aspects of educational leadership forces 
»xe p a . to oonpetent schooling, and their absence contributes to 
.ne^f-.ect,iv?K>2,3. The strength of their presence along, however, is not 
.lurficKfnt to raring about excellence in schooling. 

4. Cultvrsl ard symbolic aspects of substantive leadership forces are essential 
to excuJence in schooling. Their absence, however, does not appear to 
negativ,>5iy i^ffect routine asnipetence." (pg. 9) 

To '^ure the leadership forces and requirements with respect to 
effective special education administrators and programs, a strategy known as the 
critical success factor method was applied. The nethod is a procedure for 
Identifying personal and organizational factors which can lead to effective and 
successful performance. It has traditionally been applied in business and 
industrial environments, although it does hold promise as a nethod for defining 
critical program areas for the special education administrator. It can be used 
for Identifying personal as veil as organizational factors which enhance 
suocesnful performance. 



MEMBCX) 

This research study canbined aspects of qualitative and quantitative 
research metiioJologies . The first activity entailed the identification of a 
grojfc) <if local spe education administrators considered by their peers to be 
effective in managing special education programs. The researcher, through phone 
contact ind nailed nominee forms, solicited the advice of "boundary spanners" to 
ncjffiinafcrj the effective reference group. "Boundary spanners" is a term used to 
indicu,! a group of professionals who, by reputation and position, span 
indiv a- lal r-^ference groups and nave a national as well as regional perspective 
on epaeiginy ^sues, teople, and programs decicated to special education. 
Boundary spanners for thi-^ study vere each state director of special education 
(N»50), each Council of Adninistrators of Special Education (CASE) state 
president (N»Z 5, each CASE Executive Conmittee nenber (N=15), each Regional 
Resource Center Director {N=6), and professors of university training programs 
in special education administration. The nominating process yielded a pool of 
250 efff Ive local special education administrators across the nation. 

Fifteen individuals fran the effective sample (3 groups of 5 each from 
u.'^ban, suburban, and rural settings) were selected for interview. The purpose 

^he interviews vas to identify a pool of critical success factors of local 
special education administrators while they manage their programs. The criteria 
for selecting the 15 interviewees fran the groip of 250 was as follows: 
(1) Individuals nominated by multiple boundary spanners were ranked by 



37s 



frequency of nomination. These individuals were considered to be priitary 
candidates • 

(2) The interviewee pool vas to include at least one representative fron each 
of the 6 regions in the nation and represent a range of organizationfid 
structures, sizes, and settings. 

(3) The willingness of a ncniinee to participate in the study and to share any 
evaluative data substantiating the nomination v«is also considered. 

Based on the above criteria , 17 individuals were selected to interview, with 14 
agreeing to peurt:icipate. 

Setnistructured interviews were conducted either face-to-face or by 
telephone with each individual on two separate occastions. During the first 
interview, each respondent was asked tc identify those general job-related areas 
of activity that "must go right" in order for hiin/her and the organization to be 
successful (critical success factors). Each CSF was then defined and described 
in behavioral terms. Additionally, each respondeit was asked to identify 
measures for each CSF. A measxire was defined as a means of assessing the status 
of each CSF. 

The purpose of ti*e second interview was to validate and verify the 
information gathered from the initial interview. Each respondent was asked to 
add, delete, or modify the list of critical success factors and corresponding 
measures. Changes and additions were then made to the existing list of CSFs and 
measiires >*iich resulted in a final draft of the critical success factor 
statements. 

Each respondent's listing of CSFs and measxires was coded by personal or 
organizational type for the puroose of sorting. The intent of the first sort 
was to classify the administrators* responses by thanes. One hundred fifty-one 
critical success factor statements were sorted into 11 general categories. The 
themes were (1) Personnel, (2) Cairrunication, (3) Regular education, (4) Public 
relations, (5) Innovation/ftisk taking, (6) Interpersonal, (7) Planning/Decision 
making, (8) Personal growth, (9) Techical, (10) Credibility/Accountability, and 
(11) Program effectiveness. 

A second sort on the critical success factor statements eliminated 
redundancies among items within each category. This sort reduced the list of 
critical success factors to 53 statements. These qualitative data were used to 
construct a survey instrument sent to the effective referaice group and to a 
rarv'^-in sample of special ediacation administrators. 

Another set of sorting activicies was conducted on the 53 survey itans 
before oonstructing the fined versicai of the mailed survey instruitent. Using 
Sergiovanni's (1984) framework of leadership forces, tne itens were initially 
classified by technical, human, educational, symbolic, and cultural diitiensions. 
Each survey item within these leadership forces wei^e then categorized by 
personcd or organizationfid type. 

For each survey statement, the respondent was to make two decisons. The 
first decision required the respondent to decide to what degree, on a five-point 
Likert-type scale, vas the statement a critical determinant of his/her success 
or the program's success. For the second decision, the respondent was to 
indicate how difficult it was for hinv/her and/or members of the organization to 
achieve success on that statement from the least difficult to nost difficult on 
a nine-point Likert-type scale. 



3 376 



The surveys were mailed to the remaining 236 effective local special 
education adninistrators and to the randan sanple of 496 special education 
adniiustrators. For the latter group, the researchers contacted The Council for 
Exceptional Children (CBC) officials and requested a randan sample of 450-500 
names be selected fran Uhited States members of the Council of Adninistrators of 
Special Btiication (CASE) mailing list. Every 7th CASE nenber was selected from 
the database yielding a pool of 483 individuals. 



FINDINGS 



^ Fran the effective reference group, 169 of the 236 naninees sent back 
corapi.eted surveys yielding a response rate of 71.9%. One effective naninee 
indicated he no longer was arployed in an adainistrative position in speical 
education %*iich lowered the effective reference group to 249 individuals. The 
surveys mailed to the randan sanple of CASE members yielded a response rate of 
25.1%, of vtoich 124 individuals sent back coipleted surveys indicating they were 
chief executive officers of local special education programs. This pool of 124 
survey respondents made up the randan group of the study. 

Analysis of variance was caiputed under three sets of conditions. 
First, an analysis vas conducted on clustered survey itans for the total survey 
population. The second set of calculations examined the clustered survey items 
by separating the effective responses from the randan responses. A third set of 
ocraputations ves conducted to determine the statistically significant 
differences for each survey item. 

The difficulty criterion for clustered items in terms of the total 
survey population indicated multiple district programs found CSPs itore difficult 
on which to achieve success than their single district counterparts. Six of the 
ten clusters yielded significantly higher means scores for mulltiple district 
representatives . 

The second set of analysis of variance calculations which caiputed 
randan and effective groi^js separately for the clustered itans indicated itore 
variance among the random respondents than the effective group. Seven of the 
twenty clusters yielded significant differences in itean scores with rei.pect to 
criticalness and difficulty for the respondent variable structure. Again, 
multiple district representatives rated clustered itans itore critical and 
difficult . 

^^'^ set ol calculations of analysis of variance, which focused cxi 
differences for each -arvey itan, initially identified 14 success factor 
statements v*iich yielded statistically significant differences fran effective 
and randan administrators. The results revealed that, in each case, effective 
administrators placed greater value on the CSFs in being critical to their 
attainment of success, A majority of these itans (9 of 14) were personal rr^^s 
with each of Sergiovanni's leadership forces represented by one or itore CSFs' 
fran the analysis. (See Table 7 attached) 

Further analysis by individual survey item supported earlier 

ccnputations which indicated that multiple district representatives found CSFs 
more difficult to attain levels of success. Table 8 (attached) displays thase 
CSFs found o be significant by the respond variable structure. 

* 377 



ERIC 



Analysis of the survey items for the respondent variable setting (see 
Table 9 attached) generally indicated that for the CSPs found to be significant 
(8 of the 53) r suburban administrators rated items more critical/difficult than 
rural or urban types. 

Analysis of the variable size indicated no specific pattern with respect 
to the criticalness criterion. Generadly, respondents r^resenting programs 
smaller in size had lowar nean scores than their larger program counterparts. 

Rankings vere also oo^^puted for the total survey population and within 
effective and randan groups to determine the leadership forces and individual 
survey items v*iich were considered to be most critical/difficult with regard to 
the achievement of personal and organizational success. The results clea^-ly 
indicated that both randan and effective administrators rated Hunan- 
Organizational items most critical and difficult to acconplish. The five 
highest ranking CSFs by criticalness and by difficulty for the entire survey 
population are displayed in attached Tables 10 and 11. 

The CSFs among the list of the five highest ranked items for the total 
population and for each respective group contained factors such as the 
establishment of rapport, oatmunication and ooordinatcxi with regular education 
personnel, demonstrating program efficacy and quality, managing conflict, and 
integrating special education into the school systai in terms of the planning, 
problem solving, and decision making structures of the district (s). 



DISCUSSION 

Data analysis reveeded that effective administrators overvrtielmingly 
valued the inportance of each factor with respect to its impact on personal and 
organizational success more than the randan respondents. An examination of 
leadership by ooiparing criticalness responses of survey items within the 
cultural and symbolic forces revealed a great disparity between randan and 
effective respondents. Five CSFs where effective respondents placed higher 
value on the criticalness criterion were items v*iich linked the systan to the 
purposes, meanings, and mission of the program (Symbolic-Cultural). This point 
is best illustrated in the critical success factor statonents which reflect 
symbolic leadership aspects that place value on the program being perceived as 
child centered, demonstrating instructional effectiveness, and projecting a 
positive self image. Clearly, the effective administrators were nore concerned 
about how they and their programs were to maintain excellence as well as 
demonstrating oontjetence. 

Simbolic l e ad er s tend to communicate their sense of purpose and vision 
by vords and symbols and provide others with opportunities to experience this 
vision (Bennis, 1983). Effective respondents placed greater value on the CSF 
where the administrator Aeader as symtx>l, portrays a sense of confidence and 
respectability vAiich facilitates the establishment of credibility and ra^wrt 
with key constituents. Here, the special education leader is able to 
connunicate v*iat must be done. This helps clarify the curent situation and 
induces oaradtment to the future. The discrepancy between effective and randan 
respondents for this CSF additionally illustrates the importance effective 
respondents placed on those strategic requirements of leadership. 

5 



37s 



Three Bciacational-Personal CSPs v«:e identified as nore critical to 
effective administrators. The effective respondents highly valued the 
importance of maintaining a knowledge base of curent and best practices and 
keeping abreast of the present literature and research, school law, and pending 
legislation, with the acquisition of sudi a knowledge base, administrators 
oould play active roles as resources to local, state, and federal law naking 
bodies on the matters of schooling and education. Random respondents placed 
less ertphasis on these factors which tended to deemphasize the critical role 
speci education leaders plan in public relations and securing necessary legal 
and legislative support. It would appear that effective leaders are much nore 
actively involed in maintaining levels of oompetence through these nechanisns by 
utilizing this expertise to improve relationships with key intenial and escternal 
publics. 

Rutian factors embody the utilizaion of available hiznan resources to 
bring about positive diange in school systems. The critical success factor 
statement which states that "the program must obtain a sufficient amount of 
influence and authority to be recognized as a significant force in the decision 
making structure of the entire educational system" clearly reflects the issue 
basic to the utilization of available social and human resources to inprove the 
quality of life for staff, parents, and studmts. This CSP was one of three 
Hurean factors which differentiated ^fective frcm randan administrators. Tha 
effective groip additionally placed more value on activities which are critical 
to building and maintaining the morale within the system through conflict 
management interventions and through coaniunication, coordination, and 
negotiation. Effective respondents better understood the role hunan forces 
played tx> ensure that special education became an integrated agent of the total 
educatic^r^ system. 

Finally, the technical skills of planning, inpl6w»Jitation, evaluation, 
etc. are not unique to the field of education yet are esseitiaa for coipetent 
management and leadership. Responses from each group on technical items suggest 
that the effective reference group was more intimate and sensitive to the power 
structure and politics of the system and ocmbined this awareiess with technical 
knwledge and expertise to influence the approval of proposals and ideas that 
benefitted special education. 

Each of the aforementioned CSP statements where significance was noted 
between effective and randcxn administrators involved the criterion vAiich 
determined how critical the item was to the survey respondents' success. 
Results of the CSFs in terms of difficulty revealed other interesting findings. 
With the exertion of one CSP, (although it was significant by criticalness) , 
effective and randcm adminstrators • responses indicated no difference with 
respect to the difficulty criterion. Significant differences, however, were 
noted on this criterion for the respondent variad^le structure. 

Pour of the five leadership forces were represented (Cultural forces 
were not) when determining statisticcilly significant mean scores between single 
and multiple district prograBie. Ten CSP statements were determined to be 
significant; and in each instance, multiple district program respondents felt 
the CSP to be more difficult on which to achieve success than single district 
representatives. Multiple district program administrators must learn to 
ccranunicate, coordinate, plan, and interact with a multiplicity of individuals, 
programs, and problenas with varying and diverse degrees of district philosophy, 

6 



EKLC 



373 



coitpetence, and excellence. An administrator faced with these contexts and 
conditions vgould obvously rate critical factors of his/her success more 
difficult to attain than single district administrators. 

Analysis of variance indicated little significant differences among CSFs 
for the respondent variable of setting and size. Multivariate conpsurisons were 
conducted to determine relationships betv^een/among the subgroups by setting. 
Where significant differences were noted, the analysis revealed generally that 
suburban r^resentatives found itenis more critical and difficult than rural and/ 
or urban types. Eight CSFs were found to be significant with seven of the CSFs 
reflecting significance with higher mean scores for suburban administrators. 

It is worth noting that in tenns of criticalness , rural administrators 
rated the need for maintaining support fran community groqps and parents and 
involving them in planning and information sharing substamtially lower. Helge 
(1984) identified parent involvement and oonntunication as one of several areas 
of concern vriiich rureil programs face due to the factors of distance and spars ity 
of population. This may account for the lower mean scores recorded by rural 
administrators for this CSF. 

The results of the analyses of survey respondents clearly indicate that 
stnscture, and to a lesser extent, size and setting, do affect leadership and 
organizational performance and behavior. Further analysis of each critical 
success factor and the tasks it inplies could lead to the identification of 
indicators vriiich affect difficulty or criticalness on the attainment of the 
success factor. These research activities would provide valiaable information as 
to the understanding of how context, size, and structure actually affect 
performance. Finally, it is assumed ever a period of time the efforts of 
specicd edu^^ation programs will change to meet the emerging demands as future 
issues and problan areas arise Further research is recomnnended bo maintain a 
current and dynamic perspective of the complex world of the local special 
education administrator. 



7 



3S0 



REFERENCES 



Bennis, W. (1983). The chief . New York: William Morrow. 

^'^r f ^9®' °- fl579). Lea^rship and change in soecial 
'^^"<=at^O"- Englewood Cliffs, New Jer sey: Prenl ice" TiTTT ^ ^ 

^^tlir'n?;'';* * McCarthy, M.M. (1980). Factors associated with 

success in urban elementary schools. PM Delta Kappan 61(7) 467-471 

'WJ:-, ???f?tr* iij?- ^^Ttice^ a^ir""^ theory Of the firm, 

'^R^°*39(5)!"li.m?'^''""^ information crisis. Harvard Bu siness 

^'?Sr'*?*;;ifJ'!*'^i''''"; Search for effective schools: 

The identification i analysis of schools that are instructional Iv 
en|pT|-r^ chTT^ Cam5nW -Harvard UnSjSr for 

Helge, p. (1984). The state of the art of rural special education 
Exceptional Children . 50(4), 294-305. eaucation. 

"'Sid''RS2: "* New York: Harper 

'^°S^^!;^*wV--'^^^^i- .^^'^^ executives dbfine their own data needs 
Harvard Business Review . 2, 81-93. 

"^I^Jcitiie^* i^tlVflr 1^' '^le °^ ^« Information systems 

Review 24' (l). 3-?3 ^"""^ ^^^^ors perspective. Sloan Managenent 

Sage, D. i Burrello, L.C. (1986). Policy and management is^jes in 
ISSSl^ e<i^c^tion. Englewood CI i77srijrn>^nlf|??SFll,%^ 

Sergiovanni , T (1984). Ten principles of quality leadership 
Educational Leadership . 39(5). 33Q-3?fi a leaaersnip. 

leadership 4 excellence in schooling. 
Educational Leadership. 41_( 5 ) 4-14 . ^ 

^nrl?;;?""?.* T. iCorbally, j.E. (eds.) (1984). Leaders hip and 
organizatio nal cuUure. Champaign, IL: UniversTIy-oTTlfTFois Pr^ss. 



CSF STATEMENTS BY LEAOCRSHIP rOUCE 

TECHMICAL-PERSOMAL 
Survey csr 



11 TP2 
19 TP3 



3S TPS 

42 TP« 
47 TP? 



•ctin, on it and u,i„, thii fo^j; J^^J, 

•«i«tJi, 7 « *n MKinq decisiqns in areas wh«r« « lacK of policy 



v«ly di.i9nos« th« •nvironnicnt 
intcr/ial and •xtvrnal Corcat 



th. .pprov.i Of propo..i.'.„5':3:ii^5:iri:„:j5? 5^:i:r:55?:?i^° 

.a«i„i.„.tor .... a.v.lop .„a ...rcU. e»ectlv. ti«. 



TECHNICAL— 0RGAHI2ATI0M*t 

10 Tor 



" Toa 

24 T03 

2« T04 

34 T05 

41 T0< 

41' TO? 



382 



HUHAN— PCKSONAL 

JdJ«l!?ri;i/!!2!!*'?Si« •'•■"^"'•'■or MTci.. .kill ,„d ti.in, to h.lp 

•avanca hia/har idaaa and propeaala throuqh tha organitation. 

•lonal ralationthipa with laawdiata auparordinatatal and bo#rda of adScation. 
SiHaSJ^rSonfl •«»-i''i«»-tor .u.t d.«>..trata .kill in ra.olvin, and/cr 



3 




13 


H92 


21 


HPS 


2f 


npi 


37 




44 


mi 


4f 




52 


HPS 



■OIUN— OMCAHXtATIOHAL 
I HOI 



17 HO} 



r:ia;?:«i;ip'S??s'J:,"u?iru:c«!on':n's'*Si'j • 

pataonnal. problamaT^S cS^cS"^?" »-.pon»xv. to buildin, laval' 

I!:th:?!tj'Jo"S:":i:,"n?:3':: nLSn-i" : ^-^iciant a-ount of influanc. and 



EOOCAtlONAL— PERSONAL 
S EPl 



23 EP2 



iSr.??:i:i,is-:n';^-.:?ors::':n°5 "pa-n-^.n-ru-f:?:?^?' - — 

Ia'S,;S!"iU :i ;::5i°So5ia"^?^"'«°' "-P i"for™.d of le,.l iaaue. and 

" "'^ fr'^"'"'--*^""-"-""-' .nd ..intain a .no-lad, 

tha.r potantial impact on aJIciil SdSM?!^; '""'-"ion and antici?at. 

>OaCATIONAL~Olt<;AN!ZATIONA]t. 
C EOI 



.s;p:?ri2-n^T?.Stm^^ 

oraa^Ti?ifr:::^rt.^^-rpr.^^5r 
:v\%js:ris^r':trx?a^i:':.-i^aS?"-n-d"js3:ijj!«' - — 

T.. .peci.l aducatio. p.o,r.. p.ovida outraach pro,ra»./.arvica. to par.nta. 



383 



. oample Discussion Plan 



Behavioral objectives 



Students will forecast the effects 
of a new industry on their 
conununity. 



Students will gather information. 



Student will share their inforniation 
with the class. 



Students will plan possible solutions 
to major problems. 



ERLC* 



■57S) 



Focusing Questions 



1, What are the important services vie 
receive in Patagonia? %? 
How can we label or group these ser^'-'ces? 
Why? 

2, How would we be affected by the m \es 
opening up in Patagonia? Why? 

1. Wliich of these effects could become 
problems? Why? 

2. How could we find out? 

3. How were these problem handled when 
the mines were open before? 

4. What questions should you ask? 



1, What did you find out? 

2. Wliat did the person(s) you contacted 
think was the major problem? \a)iUJiJ, 

1, Which probltm do you want to develop 
a plan for? Why? 



2. a) What is good about each plan? Wn'j 

b) What has been left out of the plans? 

c) Which parts of the different plans 
could go together? 7^.'u;'» 

d) What else do you need to know? How 
can you find out? 

3. a)Is this the logical sequence of 
steps? 

b) V\\it are ^ome problems that could 
occur? I ^ 



Support Procedures 



1. Write categories on board. 
Examples: schools, city government 
health and safety ;ervices, housing 
and merchandizing. 

2. Classify effects on board under 
categories, 



1. Marl choices on bo.:rd. 

2. Assign students to get informa- 
tion; Town Clerk, Clinv Adminis- 
trator, Scliool Administ dor. 

3. Assign stL ients to question 
older residents about this. 

4. Students list questions to be 
asked of their source in tfieir 
assigned group. Students contact 
sources and make appointments. 

1. Share in large group. 

2. Write major problems on board. 



1, Teacher selects 2 or 3 major 
problems to work on. 

Students get into 4-6 small groups 
and work on plans. 

2. Large group with small groups 
sharing plans, 



3. In 2-3 small groups, develop an 
outline of a plan. Teacher works 
with groups. 

t 

576 ■ 



jample Discussion Plan 



Behavioral Objectives 



S.udents will share their plans 
with appropriate personnel. 



Page 2 



Focusing Questions 



3.c) How would you handle those problems? 



Support Procedures 



Gather necessary information. 



la) Who would profit from your plan?WM' 

b) How could you communicate your plan? 

c) How would your audience judge your plan? 

2. Which way are you going to present your 
plan? w.^ 

3. a) How did your audience react? 

b) What problems did they anticipate 
with your plan? 

c) What suggestions' did they have? 

d) Would you do anything differently next 
time? Wl^ij? 



1. l^rge group. List ideas on 
board. 



2. Each small group chooses 
presentation method and pre- 
pares and carries out presen- 
tation. 

3. Share in large group. 



ERIC 



5?7 



578 



Friday, April 25 
9:10-10:10 am 



PROJECT "HALPE" 

Handlcappod Adult Leisure-Time and Physical Education Project 
BARREN RIVER REGIONAL MENTAL HEALTH AND MENTAL RETARDATION BOARD 

and 

WESTERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT 

Presents 
Project "HALPE" 

Director: 

Charles Daniel, Ed,D,, V/estem Kentucky University 
Adapted Physical Education and Therapeutic 
Recreation for Special Populations 

John Vokurka, Ph.D., Western Kentucky University 
Education for Exceptional Children 

Dean Gorman, Ph.D., University of Arkansas 
Adapted Physical Education 



Project "HALPE" is developing and implementing a model 
program in needed skills, knowledge and behavior necessary 
for successful participation of handicapped adolescents 
and institutionalized handicapped adults in adult leisure 
and recreational pursuits in community and family settings. 
The project has been shown in preparing for normalized 
community leisure and recreation pursuits. 



Er|c 579 



NEED 

Presently there Is a need for physical education and leisure 
recreation programs to train the millions of Institutionalized 
adults and millions of adolescents with disabilities that are 
school aged (sce>:/to become adults) In physical skills, knowledge 
and socially acceptable behaviors to participate in normal adult 
leisure-time activities in their communities. This project was 
started for adults, but it was recognized that the adults lack 
of training in schools (aged 3-21) caused the present need, so 
training was needed in schools. This program of normalized 
leisure and recreation should be Instructed to adolescents in 
Junior and high school^not after school. This model presently 
served handicapped adults in a variety of institutional settings 
and prepared handicapped adolescents in schools. Millions of 
dollars each year are spent nationally for recreational programs 
for handicapped adults and adolscents in work activity centers, 
3lieltered workshops and varied institutional settings, Inc .ig 
public school with the result that most of these adults and 
adolscents receive only instruction in group and children's 
activities and games. These group activities do not prepare the 
exceptional adult or adolescent to participate in "normal" adult 
l eisure-time activities in a family^ individual or community setting . 

The basic concept of normalization is that the handicapped 
adolescent and adult will receive training that allows each of the 
individuals to fully develop to his/her own ability in the skills 
and behaviors necessary to participate in normal adult living. 
VJhen the concept of normalization is applied to a handicapped 

580 

-2- 

O 

ERIC 



adult's participation in leisure and recreational activities it 
becomes clear that there is a need for programs to instruct the 
necessary skills, knowledge and behaviors for success in community 
and family settings. Project "HALPE" is based on the belief that 
only through an integrated program of skill, knowledge and 
behavior training can a handicapped adolescent and adult become 
seccessful in participating in community leisure and recreation. 
A 'oerson will usually not choose recreational and leisure 
activities unless he/she can successfully perform the skills, 
knowledge and behavior necessary to participate. Many handicapped 
adolescents and adults have received proper training in skills, 
knowledge and behaviors necessary for participation in work and 
daily living situations in the community, but the same concept 
has not been applied to training of exceptional individuals in the 
physical education, leisure and recreation skills, knowledge and 
behaviors necessary to participate in adult leisure and recreation 
activities. This- lack of physical instruction manifests itself 
in the lives of handicapped adults by limiting the types of 
leisure and recreational opportunities the handicapped adult may 
choose to participate in. "Man is only limited by the opportunities 
available to him!" Federal Law PL 9^-1^2 does not provide any 
help in solving this problem as money is presently being directed 
to research and program development for handicapped children and 
youth in the school age range of 3 to 21. Host school programs 
of physical education are not designed in a manner to provide 
ne 'pessary instruction in successful adult ' leisure and recreational 
activities for the handicapped, riany recreational and therapeutic 
recreation leaders are not trained in the area of motor skills 

581 

-3- 



development and behavior management as well as a knowledge of 
physical education that is quite often necessary to prepare 
handicapped adolescents and adults to successfully participate in 
community and family leisure and recreation settings. 

Handicapped adolescents and adults need more than Just rec- 
reational opportuniti-^s , they need instruction in physical skills, 
knowledge and behaviors necessary for successful participation in 
leisure and recreational programs. Handicapped adolescents sind 
adul s need "HALPE". 

SURVEY 

A four-year interview survey of 258 mentally and physically 

handicapped adults in individual residences, v;ork activity centers, 

sheltered workshops and institutional settings has indicated the 

lack of training In physical skills., knowledge and social behaviors 

necessary to participate in community, individual and family 

1 2 

leisure-time activities. * Dr. Gorman^s nhysical fitness data, 
that the handicapped adult had a fitness level of a first grader. 
This reinforces the need for the model not only in the handicapped 
adult programs but also public schools. 



1. Client Leisure-Time Survey, Davidson County, Handicapped 
Adult Leisure-Time Project, 1978, Nashville, TN, Charlie Daniel, 
Client Coordinator. 

2. "HALFE" Client Survey, Western Kentucky University, 
Bowling Green, IvY i; 80-81. 



-4- 



582 



The survey indicated that: 

1. 85% of the handicapped adults surveyed lacked training 
in the physical skill? and necessary fitness to be 
involved in most leisure-time and recreational pursuits. 

2. 9B% of the handicapped adults wanted to be involved in 
"normal adult" recreational pursuits but felt unprepared 
and out of place in the recreational setting. 

3. S5% of the handicapped adults had never been instructed 

in the physical and social skills necessary to participate 
in leisure-time and recreational activities alone or in 
a sma71 group. (Most experiences had been in "large 
group", mass activities with many handicapped adults 
at one time. ) 

^. 90^ of the handicapped adults had never participated 
in any activities except group bowling, basketball. 
Special Olympics and summer camps. Many of these adults 
even though able to be instructed in "normal adult 
recreation" vrere limited to group and children's games , 

5. Of the staff instructing the handicapped adults in 
physical and recreational activities, a few had minimal 
training in motor development and skills instruction in 
physical education, leisure and recreation. 

6. The staff voiced a need for training in the area of 
motor skills aind social development. 



"NORMAL" LEISURE-TIME AND RECREATIO.JAL ACTIVITIES 
A "noriiial adult" recreational and leisure-time activities is 
based upon individual or small group participation. However., the 
survey indicated that most handicapped adults are treated as 
children and r'?ceive no instruction in physical or social skills 
necessary for the individual to participate in "normal adult" 
recreational pursuits. The surveyed handicapped adults were 
relegated to group participation in children's activities, being 
taken in groups of 15 to 30 individuals to most of their recreational 
pursuits. The lack of physical and social skills instruction 
handicaps them, limiting the handicapped adults in the "types of 



583 



leisure-time activities in which they can participate in their leisure 
time away from the workshop or institutional setting.'' In reviewing 
public school programs little to no time was spent on training of 
fitness, sicills, knowledge and behaviors necessary for successful 
participation in normal community recreation during adult years. 

When observing the recreation programs at the work activity 
centers, instutions and half-way homes and schools the following 
was noted: 

1. There was a lack of skill and fitness instruction - most 
activities were group recreational in nature with no 
skills taught, even in games requiring skill. 

2. The handicapped adolescent or adults received no instruction 
or training in individual and family leisure-time activities. 

3. The staff or school notes played (not instructed) such 
group games as basketball and bowling even though few 
of the handicapped adults were able to perform the 
simplist and necessary skills to play successfully or 
enjoyably. The author watched 24 handicapped adults 
could dribble the ball and only two adults had the 
strength or skill to shoot the ball above the rim. No 
skills or fitness was instructed. 

4. There was total lack of any instruction in proper skills, 
knowledge or social behavior necessary for use in a 
Community, individual and family setting. 

5. Many of the staff or teachers expressed opinions that the 
handicapped adults could perform only on a very low 
level of physical and skill performance. 

6. The staff members' attitude toward their clients was one 
of adult to child. 

Handicapped adolescents and adults can be properly instructed 

in skills necessary to participate -in "normal ndult recreational 

activities", v;ith varying individual success. On-<^oing recreational 

programs for the handicapped adolescents and adults to be able to 

receive the necessary instruction in physical education and social 

skills and fitness needed to provide the opportunity and ability 



EKLC 



.6- 584 



and ability to be involved in adult leisure-time and recreational 
purs ui t s . There is no excuse for the massing; of hanicapped adults 
and the lack of proper instruction to meet their needs , 

HANDICAPPED ADULT LEISURE-TIME PROJECT "HALPE" 
V/estem Kentucky University's Physical Education and Recreation 
Department and Barren River Regional Mental Health and Mental 
Retardation Board have Joined together to develop the Handicapped 
Adult Leisure-Time Physical Education Pro,1ect ("HALPE^) , 

The project *s purpose is to develop and implement a total 
program of instruction and training in physical education, 
therapeutic re-.reatlon and leisure services that will enable the 
handicapped adolescent and adult to participate successfully in 
ADULT recreational end leisure-time activities. The "HALPE" 
program is in the active process of developing a total package of 
assess.nent tools, instruction methods, materials, program designs, 
and evaluation methods that can be replicated and 'implemented in 
workd centers, public schools, sheltered v/orkshops , and various 
other institutional settings for handicapped adolescents and adults 
across the natior. The "KALPE" program is designed to provide a 
total program of physical education, leisure and recreation that 
allows each exceptional adolescent and adult to be instructed in 
necessary skills, knowledge and behaviors to successfully 
participate in adult leisure-time and recreational activities on 
an individual, family and community basis. The model that would 
be more applicable and can be replicated or used in various and 
different circumstances. 



SIGNIFICANCE OP PROGRAM 



The handicapped adclescent and adult needs the physical 
skills, knowledge and social behaviors to participate In 
"normal" adult leisure-time and recreational activities. Every 
adult (handicapped or not) needs to have physical and social 
skills tc participate in leisure-time activities. The ability to 
recreate has a direct effect upon the adult having a mentally, 
physically and socially healthy life. "HALPE" Is the first 
program to attempt to Identify, classify, assess, develop and 
Implement a program of successful adult physical education and 
recreational Instruction for handicapped adolescents and adults. 

"HALFE" Is based on four Individual assessment tools, each 
being a progressive data gatherer. 

1. Parent/Guardian Leisure and Recreation Assessment 
(to Identify activities the handicapped adult may 
participate In with the family) 

2. Pundanental Fitness and Locomotor Skills for Leisure 
and Recreation Assessment (to Idnetlfy level of fitness 
and locomotor skills required for successful partici- 
pation In the community; Identify level of Dosslble 
participation) 

3. Leisure and Recreation Skill, Knowledge and Behavioral 
Assessment (an Individual task analysis of a leisure 
and recreation skills, Imowledge and behaviors for 
successful participation In commun,*^ ' y leisure and 
recreation (IRP) 

4. (IRP) Individual Recreation Plan and Community 
Placement (Each handicapped adult receives and IRP 
and upon successful completion of skills, knowledge 
and behavioral training the client is placed in a 
community setting.) 

The program is now in the fifth year of instruction and 

development. The project will provide a model pamphlet at the end 

of the year and is in search of qualified physical educators and 

recreators who would be interested in being trained and implementing 

5SG 



ERIC 



8 



IS important that teachers' informal attempts be acknowledaed and 
used as a basis upon which to build. The first step in initiat- 
ing a peer tutoring program is to inform teachers about the 
options available, the flexibility under which the programs can 
operate, the wide range of choices which ran be made, the tremen- 
dous advantages these programs can bring to students, and to help 
them identify their own efforts in the area. 

RESPONSIBILITIES OP THE PROGRAM COORDINATOR 

contact the various administrators involved 

contact teachers who are interested and willing to be 

involved 

choose and specify the goals of the program 

get permission from parents whose children will be in 

the program as either tutor or tutee, and keep the 
parents informed 

design curricula 

— - train the tutors 

monitor the tutoring situation 

evaluate the outcomes of the program 

to report back to administrators, faculty, and parents 

Many of the items on the list above have research evidence 
to support their importance. According to Niedermeyer (1976), it 
is imperative that program goals be specified, and specified in 
behavioral terms. Only by criteria such as these can a program 
be evaluated and said to be ultimately successful or unsuccessful 
/ iveral studies (See Feldman et al, 1976) have demonstrated 
the importance of training tutors. Tutors who are untrained may 
give tutees negative reinforcement, punish mistakes, and creneral- 
ly be unrewarding to the tutee. Further, continual moniroring of 
the program, encouragement to tutors, and praise for their ef- 
forts can keep programs running smoothly. 

The benefits peer tutoring programs offer to exceptional 
children are impressive. Perhaps the advantages o^ these 
programs have not been emphasized in this paper as fully as they 
deserve to be but any book on the subiect (See the suggested 
reading list) will more than amply demonstrate the positive gains 
to be made both academically and socially. Furthermore the 
programs offer both tutor and tutee experiences that should make 
mains t reaming easier. The advantages are undisputed and the 



490 



The standard school bus seat fire will 
reach 'flashover' in less than ZV2 minutes. 




-/ have witnessed the fire tests and am convinced that it is our responsibiiity 
9S public officials to implement these kinds of technological breakthroughs 
when they become commercially available." 



Paul T. Stewart 
Presldant 

National Association of State Directors of Pupil Transportation 



Recently, a series of fire tests were conducted using standard 
school bus seats. In the tests, the seats without the fire barrier 
material went to "flashover" at more than 1400»F In less than 3 Va 
minutes. 

Using the seats protected by the Unlguard* fire barrier, flash- 
over never occurred. The Unlguard fire barrier prevented the fire 
from Igniting the highfy flammable foam which is present In prac* 
tically every school bus seat. 

With the Unlguard fire barrier, you can buy precious time to get 
your school children off their bus when a fire occurs. The 
Unlguard fire barrier is the state-of-the-art In fire protectl . ioday 



The Unlguard fire barrier maizes It easy for you to Invest in a 
new, cost-effective way to Improve the health and safety of your 
children. Maice sure the Unlguard fire barrier Is protecting your 
school bus seats now. 

For more Information, call 212/930-6729 or write: 
Unlglass Industries 

Division of United Merchants and Manufacturers, Inc. 
1407 Broadway 
New Yoric, NY 10018 

(Unlguard* is a registered trademark of 
United Merchants and Manufacturers. Inc.) 



^Endorsed by the Combs, Bainbridga and 0*Callaghan Child Safety Research Center 





Are your children riding on school bus seats protected by 
4ne Unlguard® fire barrier? 



395 



ERLC 



the program across the nation. For more information, contact 
Dr. Charles Daniel, Department of Physical Education and Recreati 
Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green, Kentucky il2101: 
phone (502) 7^5-33^7. 



587 



Friday, April 25 
9:10-10:10 am 



CHILDREN CAN LEARN TO BE RESPONSIBLE 

Helen Beneke 

Consultant, Special Education Services 
Arrowhead Area Education Agency 5 
202 1st Ave. S.W. 
Pacahontas, Iowa 50574 

Content Category: Family Involvement 
Target Audience: Parents, teachers 
Presentation Time: One to two hours 
Audio-visual Equipment Needed: Overhead Projector 



588 



CKILDRSN CAN LEARN TO BE R2S?0:C3ISLS 

In every parent's heart is the unshakable faith in their 
chi.Td's goodness and an unflagging desire to be a successful 
parent. The whole experience of relating to and raising child- 
ren can be at the same time exhausting and delightful. Yet 
there are many things along the way that can be done to reduce 
the exhaustion and increase the delight. 

Children's behavior is overwhelmingly a product of learning 
The way we can change the behavior is for child and parent to 
learn better ways of dealing with the immediate living situation 
A parent must arrange home life conditions which will allow 
for a child to succeed. 

Parents do influence children probably more than anybody. 
They have, as part of their parental responsibility, the right 
to help their children learn to behave in ways they consider 
appropriate. Research is telling us that healthy, well balanced 
children value themselves and others are likely to come from 
homes in which the parents respect and care for the children, 
each other, and themselves; where thare are firm rules which 
are consistently enforced; and where there are high standards 
for behavior and performance which children are expected to 
live up to. - . 

It's the seemingly minor responsibilities and challenges 
which we give the children in the early years that pay off 



589 



handsomely at the age of sixteen and seventeen, when the adolescen 
exhibits responsible thinking and responsible behavior. A home 
needs to be a laboratory of life— a time for children to learn 
about themselves and others in the context of a loving home. 
In this way they can make mistakes^ learn from them, and continue 
to mature in a loving environment, 

A planning party, pow-wow, council meeting, or "time-out" 
is scheduled with, the agenda being the division of labor. Ask 
each child for his opinion and for his ideas. When a youngster 
is given the opportunity to be involved in decision making, 
he/she will be more committed to it (loyal to the cause). List 
all the chores and the frequency of the tasks (i,e,, dishes— 
twice a day, make beds — daily, vacuum living room rug — weekly). 
Decide who will do what. Charts will be made and posted on a 
convenient and noticeable location, Pre-school children should 
have a menu of chores and obtain spending money for doing work. 
Charts for pre-school children are also kept. It's important 
to teach young children how to do each task. It's wise to task- 
analyze each chore and if possible, draw pictures of steps. 
Standards of performance should be clearly stated. It is rec- 
ognized that pre-school children need much assistance with their 
responsibilities, but by mid-elementaty::yeaESViyoungsters need 
to work toward specific criteria. The standards should be de- 
signed by parents with imput from the children, A record of the 
criteria should be made. 



590 



It U a simple fact of hu^an nature that people do what 
they do in order to ,et ao.ethin, they wart (reward,. The con- 
troversy ra,es on re,ardin, ..oney in exchange for wor. completed, 
consider caUin, a ..oney »eetin, at which ti.e allowances are 
aisoussea. weekly allowances provide an opportunity for children 
to design budgets, record income and expenses, and plan lor 

large purchases, • ^ 

in addition to responsibilitit.s regarding children's worK, 
we as parents have an obligation to organize the household to 

-I,,- nr. Pickinq up is as important as 
facilitate the system working. PicKing u? 

major clean-ups. _ . 

parents also have an obligation to perpetuating family pr.ae. 
Ethnic traditions, specific family traditions, and others are 
worthwhile activities for parents to share with their children 
scrap boons, bulletin boards, calendars of coming events or notes 
of pride- on each child's calendar are important ways of cher- W 
ishing experiences. Bnco.urage your children .oi .eep journals 
or diaries of their thoughts. Hobbies can result in personaUzed 

gifts for others. 

Teaching children to be responsible extends beyond house- 
keeping to school-assigned homework. Suggestions are given for 
organizing time and tasks to facilitate developing study skills. 

Teaching children to be responsible is not only character- 
huilding, but also experiencing time-management and problem solv- 
ing Skills as well. Families experience co-operation and pr.de. 



591 



ERIC 



We need to let our children know without a doubt that we 
love them and at the same time provide the leadership and firm- 
ness which they* need in order to learn to be responsible and 
dependable* To do less would shortchange our children and shirk 
from our obligation .as a parent. We must never forget that the 
main objective of parenting is to prepare our children to be-- 
come self-sufficient, contributing adults, able to cope in a 
world in which success is measured by and depends on their will- 
ingness and ability to work and be respoQ^ibie. 



592 



.BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Bar t2, Wayne R. and Rasor, Richard Sunavine With Kids. New York: 
Ballantine Books, 1978. 

Spellinann, Charles M., Ph.D., and Rachel Williams, Pitching In . Sac-amento. 
CA.: Jalmar Press, 1981. ^ ' 

Winston, StepJianie, Getting Organized New York: Warner Books, 1978. 

Wright, Leah Pools. Mother's Surviva l Activities for Children . Anaheim Hills, 
• CA: Wright Way Enterprises, 1982 

Collins, Dwayne R. and Collins, Mjnrtle T. Survival Kit for Teache^rs (and Parents) 
Scott, Foresnian and Company, 1975 ^" ^ ^ 

Kiley, Dan. Kaeping Kid s out of -Krouble . New York: Warner Books, 1978. 

^^^'^ Practi cal Parenting Tips . Deephaven, MN.: Meadov;brook 

Fir6ss I 1980 • 

^^e^bi isSSf'Sy^''^'^""' ^^^^^ ^^'^^ Eugene, OR.: Harvest 

^^81*^°^ ^ Allowance! Fallbrook, CA.: Uving Skills Press, 

P^; 1982!^^'' ^ ^ides Watchinf> TV! Fallbrook, CA;: Uving Skills 

^"''^00'^°^ CA.: Uving Skills Press, 

^^82"?°^ '^^^ °^ ^""^ Clothes! Fallbrook, CA.: Uving Skills Press, 

!uul r!L!t^i;oi! """g^^k! (and schoolwork^ Fallbrook, CA.: Uving 
Berry, Joy Wilt. Clean Your Ro^! Fallbrook, CA.: Uving Skills Press, 1981. 



593 

o ■ 
ERIC 



CHILDREN CAN LEARN TO BE RESPONSIBLE 

« 

Helen Beneke 

Consultant, Special Education Ser/ices 
Arrowhead Area Education Agency V 
Pocahontas, Iowa 50574 

EXPERIENCE: 

First Grade Teacher (1964-66) 

Learning Disabilities- Teacher (1969-70) 

Teacher of Mentally Retarded (1970-73) 

SECDC Consulting Teacher (1972-73) 

Educational Strategist (1973-75) i 

Vacation Venture (teacher and director) (1974 and 1975) 

Human Relations Facilitator (1979-80) 

Special Education Consultant (1975 to present) 

Provided inservice training for teachers and parents (1972 to present) 
Kids on the Block Pxippeteer (1982 -to present) 



594 

o 

ERIC 



EKLC 



MAKE YOUR HOHE A NO -HASSLE CASTLE 

A* Write tasks down 
B* Organize tasks 

C* Agree when the chores will be done 

D* Allow as mtach agreed upon lee way as possible 

E* Have contingency plcu^is 

F* Be specific and concrete 

G* Information centers 

1* Hust be hard to Ignore 

2* Hust be within easy reach of everyone Krho uses It 
3* Hust be easy to addy remove i of change messa^^es 
4* Hust be the only Information center In the house 



H. Hall 



1 • Set up individual mailboxes 

2. Get lots of little folders for one big filing cabinet 
3* Give all magazines a "destruct date** 



595 



-1- 



MAKE YOUR HOME A NO -HASSLE CASTLE 



«.v,* J'^^ ?lfiL°^ hassles, and some- of the most irritating ones are often found 
right at home: dirty dishes in the kitchen, hairs in the bathroom lavatory, smelly kitty 
litter, the missing insurance fern that came in the mail last week. 

These small annoyances seem to cause disproportionately large upsets in 
life— resentment, hurt feelings, disappointment, and anger. 

^^^"''J villains are some seldom «^Tpressed, usually unresolved, and often 
invisible questions about how the family work is to be parceled out. Ignoring these 
problems is a sure cure for low blood pressure. 



Remember- 



they expect'JrrtJ»le\^:" """^ ^""^ ^^^^^ *° 

hand r..^ ^1 expectations, they feel smug while you, on the other 

hand, feel disappointed because you expected something quite different. 

vol -to ^ Comments about unmet expectations delivered after the fact are potentially 

;r^;"!u'""^?°^*"*"* ""^ ^^^^ ^ accusatory edge to your voice-aSd in tSe 
aftermath of the explosion the accused will feel misunderstood and misjudged. 

tfl h-«d 155"^*,^° "° *f!*^! ''^^^^r^' reairties of interpersonal life. But there are ways 
to head off the resentment and bitterness that can result when they are disregarded and 
Sim rl^t understand^what others expect from you and whit you ca^ fx^ct TrL 

SJatio^r and mechanisms for answering three very Important 



questlona: 

1# "Who's supposed to do what aroimd here?" 

2. "Who can tell whom to do what?" 

3. "How will we know if it's been well done?" 

In short, we'll take a closer look at everyone^s least favorite pastime: the art 

1. Clear up ambiguities In roles and expectations. 

2. State clearly what the job components ar.^. 

3. Tell everyone exactly when they must be performed. 

4. Provide criteria for evaluatir.ji the jobs that must be done. 

u ®" exactly what their name says they aret lists of the chores for 

jrtjich each family member is responsible. Their primary Jurpose, in factrL to ensSe 

Here are some pointers that will help you get the most from your own chore lists, 

v«u*L^i^v™^v,^°""*v/°°? P*°P^' memories than your experience might lead 

you to think. The problem is, they all remember somewhat different things. The best wav 

Svr^^SL^'?^*' ^T"^" ^"""^ °' --^^ and display w^t yL 

Sl't^*: ifaJayJ'" ^^^'^^^^^^ *° After a decent interval, fnl it, Zt 

ERIC 



2- 



B) LIST THEN ALL. It's tempting to list only the most significant or disagreeable 
^tasks. It's better to err on the side of recording too much than too little. People tend 
Pto focus on what's written and forget all. the other, lesser tasks that keep your ship 

afloat* It*s Important not to lose sight of the smaller jobs. 

C) AGREE HHEH THE CHORES WH^ BE DONE... Family members often have very different ideas 
about when things should be done. For example, on weekends George pauses for coffee at 
10:30 in ^^e morning rather than 10 o'clock because he prefers to get most of the 
morning's work done before taking a break. Sally would like to have her coffee at 10, but 
she waits for George so they can both have freshly made coffee. These arrangements work 
ouv beautifully as long as Sally and George understand WHY they have been make and agree 
that they're appropriate. 

If Sally didn't know or care about George's special dislike of taking a break when 
half of the morning's work remained, she would simply brew coffee at 10:00, the "proper" 
time . zr a break. At 10:30 George would sip warmed-over coffee and feel aggrieved. This 
works the same way in the household~make sure everyone knows why things must be dona on 
time, and publish the due dates with your list. 

D) ALLOW AS MUCH AGREED-UPON LEE WAT AS POSSIBLE. If it is Bob' s job to provide the 
dinner on Thursday, does he have the option of bringing hcxne a pizza in lieu of cooking? 
If so, what are the limitations, if any, to this option? The answer to a question like 
this defines lee way, or latitude, the responsible person will have in completing a 
chore. We have found it advisable to build as much lee way as is practicable into every 
job. 

Permission to the doers to use a variety of methods adds Interest to most jobs and 

Kivec them a measure of control over their fate. In addition, it says to them, "We 
nderstand your competence and respect yoiar value as an important member of this 
family^—a message not often delivered but really appreciated when it is. 

E) HAVE CONTINGENCY PLANS. Sometimes corcumstances will prevent even the most 
dedicateed family member from keeping his or her commitments. Unexpected illnesses, 
business or school trips and weekend vacations all raise the question, "Who will do 
so-and-so's work while he or she isn't here?" The crisis of grumbles and sharp words so 
often precipitated by having to take on "someone else' s work" can be prevented by a little 
forethought and a lot of "what-lfing". Here are s<^e suggestions: 

1. The absent person must take on three extra chores for two days before 
going or for three days after his return. 

2. Except in the case of sudden illness, the responsible party must see 
that his or her chores will be done by ether family members. 

3* Any basis for future trade-offs must be written down to avoid future 
arguments i 

4* If takers for chores cannot be found, report to Jlom or Dad for a 
non-negotiable command decision. 

5. Griping or complaining, or not doing the extra chores, will rate the 
same negative consequence as not doing your own origixial chores. 

^ F) BE SPECIFIC ANB CONCRETE. The chore list's most important function is 
^communication. While even the barest list can ensure that an important task will not be 
completely neglected, only specific, concrete and detailed lists convey what a 
satisfactory completion of the task ought to look like. This is neither as simple nor as 



EKLC 



obvious as it seems. 



You may sometimes find yourselves tempted to neglect the step of laying out your 

expectations in detail. You may see such kindergarten- teacher tactics spell out so 

* simple a task as setting the table?— as demeaning to your children. Besides, you may 
wonder, is it really worth the trouble, given, the other important things you have to do? 
If detailed chore descriptions .do nothing more than reduce your feelings of tired 
frustration 10 minutes a day, they will be worth all the effort you put into them. 

Another perennial problem around the house is what to do with the blizzard of 
paper that snows under every available surface and covers pieces of vital information. So 
in organizing your household it helps to establish an official information center and a 
definite routine for handling mail. Some suggestions: 

G) INFORMATIOM CENTERS. Messages are nothing more than carriers of information. Too 
often people confuse the meditm of the information (message form) with the message 
itself. That is why businesses are rife with pointless memos and meaningless accounting 
data. What an organized home needs is more and better inormation, not bigger and grander 
messages, a few minimum requirements include; 

1. It must be hard to ignore. Many people find it easy to overlook the place 
where they've been told something important will be waiting for them. Your information 
center should be prominently placed, yet not so decorous and formal that people are 
reltictant to touch it. 

2. It must be within easy reach of everyone who will use it. This is not so 
obvious as it appears. The center must be low enough to allow children to participate but 
high enough to preclude toddlers from swallowing thumbtacks, chalk, magnets or other 
hazards. Naturally, physically handicapped or infirm individuals ought not to be denied 
their right to live an orderly life as well. 

3^ It must be easy to add, remove or change messages. "Hot" messages and 
reminders have a way of piling up, and people must be encour iged to keep the information 
center current. 

4* It must be the only information center in the house. This doesn't mean that 
family members shouldn' t be encouraged to keep their own engagement calendars or bulletin 
boards; it simply means that all "official" information will be found only in one, 
authoritative place. 

What should your information center look like? Again, use whatever works best 
with your family, both from an aesthetic and a utilitarian standpoint. 

Papers of assorted sizes and shapes can be affixed to it using those little 
decorator magnets or magnetized clips. Blackboards have been used, but with mixed 
results, largely because messages must be entered with chalk and chalk has a way of 
breaking into tiny pieces that wander off to the comers of the hoxase. 

Magnetic boards are available, for that multimedia effect; as are newer, wipeable 
vinyl boards using special pens. We tend to shy away from methods, however, which require 
unique or costly apparatus. ISemember, the effectiveness of your center will be measured 
by swift, clear communication rather than awards for arts and crafts. 

Finally, no discussion of information centers would be complete without mentioning 
that great link between sonic vibrations and indelible memory, the telephone message pad. 
The lesson here is; have one. Preferably, it should be permanently fixed near the phone 
and have a supply of writing instruments nearby. 



593 



-4- 



H) MAIL. Most mail is the dandruff of life. It's not that we are xingrateful for all 
^ those helpful coupons, free samples and offers to subscribe to obsure, special magazines 
P (and heaven knows our creditors deserve -Uieir time to remind us of past bouts of 

proliferate abandon) , but we have always believed in the sound administrative maxim that a 
letter should be toiiched only once , picked up* for inspection and for immediate disposal to 
an action step; the wastebasket, a file,. or another person. 

The problem arose with those pieces of mail which were neither fish nor fowl 
deserving neither an honored place in the "bills to be paid" nor a summary heave-ho. ' They 
needed thought or fact gathering or mutual discussion. They were the flotsam that ended 
up on the dining room table, the drain board, etc. 

After our third disastrous attempt to atem this paper avalanche by teeth- gritting 
determination to "keep up with the mail", it dawned on us that we were somehow missing the 
point. We had simply underestimated the degree to which our home had been taken over by 
the "paper revolution". The mail was getting through all right, and it had flooded out 
all of our intentions. What we needed was a system to handle these invaders from the age 
of information. Here's the three-pronged attack we used: 

1. Set up individual mailboxes. How does your mail get to you in the first 
place? The post office puts it into a little box marked with your address, the same way 
incoming letters are sorted in office mail rooms. To replicate this simple system, we 
purchased or made a variety of desk organizers. The person whose chore it is to bring in 
the mail simply sorts the items into the appropriate mailbox (including a box for 
"resident") . 

Our absolute rule was that each mailbox had to emptied each day or on the day the 
^person returned from traveling. Mail that is continually left in the box and unclaimed 
^ resident" mail is dumped by our household postal inspector; as yet, there has been no 
apparent effect on the earth' s rotation. A tougher problem was what to do with all of 
those items that looked really valuable and interesting but pertained to no particular 
member of the family at the present time. This led us to our second innovation. 

2. Get lots of little folders for one big filing cabinet. Being fairly frugal, 
JtT*,; *° isiveat in too many capital improvements Just to lick the mail problem. 

we did find, however, that since our problem was lots of little, unrelated things all 
searching for a common roost, purchase of a good- sized filing cabinet was in order. In it 
we placed folders for each family member, along with general folders for recurring 
activities— entertainment, vacation, hobbines, as well as folders for essential family 
records, such as insurance, taxes, and auto mobile service. 

3. Give all magazines a "destruct date". Your dentist isn't the only person who 
offers visitors a three-year- old copy of Newsweek. Since much of our excess paper is in 
the fom of outdated magazines, we mutually decide how long a given publication should be 
kept. Any copy of that magazine found lying around with a date beyond this limit is 
either thrown away or put into the charitable contribution box, as appropriate. 

Issues to be kept permanently or for indefinite periods are treated like any other 
valuable resouce and placed in proper receptacles and put on the shelf. This has not only 
cleaned up toe clutter but has turned our trove of previously disorganized back issues 
into a considerable reference library. 

Helen Beneke 



ERJC 599 



Concurrent Sessions 
Friday^ April 25 

10:30 - 11:30 am 



600 



Friday, April 25 



10:30-11:30 am 

Nancy C. von Wald 
Fisher Foundation School 
740 E. Speedway 
Tucson, AZ 85719 
602/623-3046 



THE SLIN6ERLAND APPROACH TO TEACHING LANGUAGE ARTS 
TO SPECIFIC-LANGUAGE-DISABLED STUDENTS (DYSLEXIA) 

The Slingerland Approach is an adaptation of the 
Orton-Gillingham method developed in the 1920 's. Beth 
Slingerland developed this approach to use all three pathways 
to learning; auditory, visual and kinesthetic, it is a 
simultemeous, multi-sensory approach to teach reading, writing, 
spelling and concept building to dyslexic children and adults. 
The process is sequential and systematic. 

The Slingerland institute in Bellevue, Washington carries 
on Beth Slingerland 's work by informing the public on this 
special population, providing screening tests and training 
teachers and school administrators. 



601 



OUTLINE 



I. specific Language Disability 

a) definition 

b ) char acter i st ics 

c) prominent dyslexics 

d) improper labeling 

e) emotional aspects 

II. Slingerlamd institute 

a) purpose and goals 

b) summer school training 

III. The Dyslexic >s Brain 
a) current research 
IV. Learning Modalities 

a) auditory, visual and kinesthetic 

b) the learning pattern of a dyslexic 

V. Slingerland Screening Test 

a) explanation 

b) examples 

VI. The Slingerland Approach 
a) demonstration 



602 

o 

ERIC 



Specific Language Disability 

Dyslexia is a controversial term. There are the skeptics 
and the believers. The research, characteristics and causes 
vary. However, no one can argue the fact that the latin term 
dyslexia translates to "trouble with words." 

The Slingerland Institute defines dyslexics as those who 
have average to superior intelligence, neither brain-damaged 
nor primarily emotionally disturbed whose problems lie in the 
language area; reading, writing and spelling. It is not a 
matter of intelligence but specifically of mastering language. 
A government survey estimated 15% of the nation's population 
has some degree of dyslexia. 

Dyslexia is characterized by any combination of the 
following. There is a varying degree of severity, some 
dyslexics have several characteristics; others only a fei*. 

1. Reading difficulty 

2. Persistent spelling errors (especially misspelling 
the same word different ways) 

3. Poor eUaility to write down what was just seen or 
heard 

4. Badly cramped, scrawled or illegible handwriting 

5. Directional confusion 

6. Delayed mastery of spoken language 

7. Trouble finding the "right word" when speaking 

8. Inadequacy in written composition (poor sentence 
structure, poor understanding of the use of 
punctuation and capitals) 

9. Difficulty in understanding or remembering spoken 
directions 

10. Personal disorganization (losing or leaving 
possessions, ineUsility to stick to simple schedules, 
forgetting) 

11. Reversals, transpositions, inversions of letters 
within words 



603 



12. Poor eUalllty to associate sound and symbol 
automatically 

13. Difficulties In the language of learning math 

14. Similar problems eunong relatlveu 

The earlier the dyslexic child Is Identified the more 
effective remediation will be. These students will be able to 
work alongside their peers In the classroom and later In adult 
life. 

The dyslexic Is not a completely Impaired person. There 
have been many dyslexlcs; Einstein, Edison, Leonardo de Vinci, 
Hans Christian Anderson, Nelson Rockefeller, Bruce Jenner and 
Cher, to name a few. There are many "unknown" successful 
dyslexlcs as well. They have Identified their problem and 
concentrated on their strengths, with the correct educational 
help they have learned to overcome their weaknesses and develop 
good self -esteem. 

The dyslexic In the classroom appears normal except In 
the language area. He does not learn through conventional 
teaching techniques which are successful with the majority of 
children. The dyslexic appears creative, and may be especially 
good in art, music or drama. He is good in science and can be 
very athletic. As a result, the problem is often wrongly 
diagnosed euid misunderstood. The child may be leJseled lazy, 
careless, unmotivated, accused of not trying, and "could do 
better" is likely to appear on his report card. 

In our society emd in the classroom, words are seen and 
heard constantly. Instructions and announcements are just part 
of a dally routine to gather information. Those who lack the 
necessary language skills will experience great difficulty, 
will develop a grave feeling of inferiority, and may be teased 
by peers. Secondary emotional problems may occur, causing them 
to drop out of school or to become completely withdrawn. 

The Sllnqerland Institute 

The Sllngerland Institute is a non-profit, tax-exempt 
public corporation founded in 1977 to carry on the work of Beth 
H. Sllngerlemd. The Institute provides classroom teachers with 
the techniques, knowledge emd understanding necessary for 
identifying and teaching children with Specific Language 
Disability. 



604 



The Institute's primary emphasis has been its intensive 
summer or year-round teacher-training course. The course is 
organized emd taught by professional and certified directors. 
Courses are offered through public and private schools in 
cooperation with universities for graduate credit. 

Other Institute activities include: 

1. Consulting with school districts which are studying 
or Implementing a Slingerland progreun. 

2. Providing inservice follow-up for trained 
Slingerland teachers. 

3. Presenting orientation workshops for parents, 
teachers, administrators and others. 

4. Conducting emd encouraging research on the 
effectiveness of the Slingerland teacher training 
program, the Slingerland screening tests and the use 
of Slingerland techniques in the classroom. 

The Institute welcomes inquiries from school 
administrators, teachers, parents and others who desire more 
information edsout the approach or summer school teacher 
training sessions. Their address is; 

Slingerland Institute 
One Bellevue Center 
411 108th Avenue N.E. 
Bellevue, WA 98004 
(206) 453-1190 

Research on the Dyslexic 's Brain 

The precise cause of dyslexia is unknown. Neurologists 
are conducting research to determine if there are physiological 
differences between the brain of a dyslexic and a "normal" 
person. 

Dr. Frank Duffy of the Children's Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School in Boston has identified differences in 
electrical activity in brains of dyslexic and non-dyslexic 
children ages ten to twelve. Currently, he is studying at 
children ages five to six to determine if the condition can be 
detected before a child enters school. 



605 



Dr. Albert Galaburda of Boston's Beth Israel Hospital and 
Harvard Medical school, and Dr. Thomas Kemper of Boston 
University, have found the following through autopsy studies of 
dyslexics' brains: 

1. Cells normally organized precisely were in disarray. 

2. Bits of gray matter appear in sections ordinarily 
composed of white matter. 

3. One part of the left hemisphere was consideraOsly 
smaller than normal. The left hemisphere deals with 
lemguage. 

Other doctoro have found biological differences in the 
cortex of the brain's left hemisphere. 

There has been a suggestion that abnormally high levels 
of the male hormone, testosterone, in a fetus during brain 
fomation may delay nerve cells' migration to the left 
hemisphere. This may cause learning disabilities. This 
research may answer the question as to why dyslexia occurs more 
in males than in females, according to Dr. Geschwind, 
Galeddurda's colleague. 

There is no question that the condition is often 
inherited, although how the genetic transfer occurs is not 
known. 



Much has been leamed in the past 15 years, but many 
unsolved questions remain. 

Learning Modalities 

Miat happens to a child who is having language 
difficulties? Kany times he is passed on from grade to grade 
despite the fact he is not learning how to read or spell. This 
child gets further behind in his studies, yet the teachers and 
parents know he is bright. 

This child has perfect eyesight and good hearing, but the 
information obtained through these senses is not processed 
correctly. He can see words amd numbers on the board as 
clearly as other students. But, when that word is erased from 
the board, it is as if the word were erased from his mind. 
Maybe the child has difficulty writing what he has seen or 
heard. Perhaps he camnot always remember what was said to 
him. Sometimes he caurnot recall how to write a certain 
letter. These difficulties relate to poor perception — visual. 



606 



auditory or kinesthetic. A dyslexic will have one or more of 
these channels blocked. 

A child with poor visual perception has difficulty 
associating the symJaol he sees with the sound it represents. 
He may be confused in perceiving letters and sylleOsles of 
printed words in correct sequential order. Reversal, inversion 
and transposition of letters within words are seen. This child 
will not always be able to recall how a word looks for 
spelling. He may not always recognize words or numbers 
previously seen. This affects his reading abilities. 

A child who is weak auditorily probadaly was slow in 
learning to speak. There is no actual speech defect, but he 
may continue to mispronounce words because he is not aware of 
the exact sounds within them. He will have poor discrimination 
and will get confused between similar sounds such as /f/ and 
/th/. He will have difficulty expressing himself. He knows 
what to say and has the voceOsulary to say it, but the words 
will not come. He will stutter or become speechless. This 
child may not always recall what was said to him; thus, his 
ability to follow directions is hindered. 

Weaknesses may occur in the kinesthetic channel, first in 
speech and later in handwriting. The child may fail to recall 
the sequence of movement necessary for speech and/or letter 
formation. He may know what to say or even how to read and 
spell, but the lack of kinesthetic recall may interfere with 
fluency in speech or writing. This weakness is often 
associated with visual-memory or auditory-memory skills. 

Slingerland Testing 

The Slingerland Screening Tests reveal modality strengths 
and wealcnesses. Testing determines the severity of the 
language disability. There are several subtests, depending on 
the grade level. Subtests include: far-point copying, 
near-point copying, visual-recall and discrimination, 
visual-recall in association with kinesthetic motor 
performance, auditory-recall, auditory-visual association with 
kinesthetic motor performance and auditory discrimination. 

Each child is evaluated on an individual basis. It is 
not a standardized test. Dyslexia is determined according to 
many factors. This screening evaluation will suggest need for 
immediate consideration, placement and specialized instruction. 



607 



The Sllnqerland Approach To Teaching Language Arts 



The Sllngerland approach Is an alphabetlc-phonlc system. 
Teaching begins at the smallest unit of language (sounds) , and 
develops into the functional use of language (words) . The 
student is taught by seeing, hearing and feeling 
simultaneously. Through this simultaneous approach, the strong 
channels reinforce the weaker channels. The Slingerland 
Approach is highly structured and repetitious. 

The Sling arland daily format is divided into three parts; 
learning to wrice, auditory approach and visual approach, when 
learning to write, the child is taught the simultaneous 
association of a letter's appearance, its neune and sound, and 
its feel in speech and writing. This process develops an 
automatic recall and letter formation, in the auditory 
approach, the initial stimuli is auditory. Spelling and 
sentence writing are taught. The visual approach uses visual 
stimuli to teach decoding and reading. Regardless of what is 
being taught, all three cheumels are used simultaneously to 
help the child learn in his strongest modality. 

Using this approach, the child learns how to cope with 
his difficulties and how to achieve success at the same time. 
The goal is to mainstream these children back to regular 
classrooms after em average of two years of specialized 
instruction. Self-confidence is restored when the child begins 
to realize that he can read and spell as well as his friends. 



608 



TEE FORMAT FOR PIANNIHG 
DAILY PERIODS OP INSTRU^QN 



For WRITTEM WORK and for ^JU)INO 



LEARNING TO Write An Audltory^-VisuAl-KlnestheticHDOtor Approach 



1. Learning nev letters of the alphabet 

2. Reviewing letters already learned 

3. Learning capital letters 

!»• Learning hov to connect Cursive letter forms 



THE AUDITORY APPROACH 

A - ALRIABET CARDS 

Name or Sound is given as an 
initial auditory stimulus 



^ THE VISUAL APPROACH 

A - ALPHABET CARDS 

Card is exposed as an initial 
visual stimulus 



B - BLENDING 

Teaching and practice for 
encoding* 



B - UNLOCKING 

Teaching and practice for 
decoding 



Phonetic or* Green Flag vords> 
Non-phonetic , or Red Flag vords , 
Ambiguous, or Yellow Flag vords 
put to functional use vlths 

Suffixes, Phrases, Sentences. 
Rules (in intermediate grades) 



C - PREPARATION FOR READING 

PRACTICE with Words or 
Phrases 

1* Teacher names, children 
repeat (V-A-K Association) 

2. Teacher names; a child finds 
and names; the class repeats 
(A— A-V-K Association) 

3. Teacher asks child to find 
and name the vord or phrase 
that gives the meaning ex^ 
pressed by teacher 

( A - concept — A-V-K) 
^» A child reads the vord or 

phrase, and the class repeats 
(Y-A«-K Association) 



D - DICTATION 

Phrases — Sentences 

Paragraphs - (beginning in the 
Second Year of Primary) 



D - READING FROM THE BOOK 

Teacher structures part of the 
lesson for: 

1 . Phrasing 

2. Hbv to attack unfamiliar 
or unrecognized vords 

3 • Cone eptual 1 z ing 
k. Hov to study, etc. 



- T HE GOAL~INDEPEin)ENT WRITING ; 
Ansvering questions 
Prepositional vriting 
Creative expression 



EKLC 



E - THE G0AL~IND5PEnDENT READING : 

Material — at or belov instruc- 
tional level, or for individual in- 
dependent selection 



COPYRIGHT © 1970 
BETH H, SUNGESLAHD 



"DONT ACCEPT ANYONE'S VERDICT 
THAT YOU ARE LAZY, STUPID OR RETARDED" 

The author stands as proof that youngsters CAN overcome learning disabilities. 
By Vice President Nelson A, Rockefeller 



Tht»w wdtching the Puhlic BiOddcdSt- 
mg S««f vice pioyriim on "The Puzzle Chil* 
(li(?n ' Will mcluile d veiy iDterested Vice 
Pfe&iclent uf the Unitetl States. 

Foi I was uiie o\ the "puzzfe chil* 
tlien" niyvfit • a dyslexic, oi "reverse 
fe«Klei'' - dod I still hdvc d hdrd time 
ied€ling toddy. 

But dftei cupiiKi with this pioblem 
foi mure thdn 60 yedis. I hjve a message 
of encouidtieinent fui childien with 
learning disahilities and their parents. 

BdSed on my uwn expeiience. my 
message to dyslexic children is this: — 
Don't accept diiyone's verdict that you 
are lazy, stupid or retarded. You may 
veiy well be smarter than most other 
childien your age. 

- Ju^t rentemher that Wooilrow Wil> 
kuri. Albert Einstein and Leonardo da 
Vinci also hutJ tough problems with 
their reading. 

You can leain to cope with your 
piuhlein and turn your so-calle<J dis* 
ability into d iM^tive advantage. *- 

Dyslexia fuiced me to develop 
poweis of concentidtion that have been 
mvaliiahle throughout my caicer in 
business, jihilanthi otjy and public life. 

And I v(! done an enoiinoiis amount 
of ledffiiig jiid piihtic speaking, especially 
111 ftoliiicdf (MinptiHin^ fni Governor of 
''!w Yciik and PiesidiMii of the United 
dtes 

No one h.id evei heaid of dyslexia 
whiffi I cfi^covcit.il «is a f)oy. along af)Out 
ihf tftiid qiddc. tfidt leading was such a 
diftii:iilt ctuiit! ihdt I was in the bottom 
unr ttiiid of my cid&s. 

None ol the ediicdtiondl. medical and 
(i%ych(jlocjiCdl hetp avdtlable today foi 
dy%lexics was available in those days. 

Wr had no special teachers or tutois. 
ito sprcidl cidsses oi couives, no special 
methods of teachii>g — because nQbody 
uiidifi stood our pioblem. 

Along with an estimated three million 




• tuttftti fty V»ckt Olm^ttd 



Other children, I just struggled to under- 
stand words that seemed to garble before 
my eyes, numbers that came out back- 
wards, sentences that were fiard togiasp. 

And so I accepted the verdict of the 
IQ tests that t wasn't as bright as most 
of the rest of my class at the Lincoln 
School in New York City. 

Fortunately foi me. the school 
(though it never taught me to spell!) was 
an experiment« . Droyressive institution 
with the flexibility to let you develop 
your own interests and fdllow them. 

Moie to the point. I had a wise and 
understanding counselor in Dr. Otis W 
Caldwell, the headmaster. 

Don't worry/* he said, "just because 
you're in the lower third of the class. 
You've got the intelligence. If you just 
work harder and concentrate more, you 
can make it." 

So I learned,, through self discipline, 
19 concentrate, which in my opinion is 
(Essential for a dyslexic. 

While I could speak better French 
than the teacher, because I'd learned it 
IS a child, I couldn't conjugate the verbs; 
did flunk Spanish - but now can speak 
t fluently because I learned it by ear, 
atei, at the Berlitz School. 

My best subject was mathematics; 
understood concepts well beyond my 
graiJe level. But it took only one reversed 
number in a column of figures to cause 
lavoc. 

When I came close to flunking out 
in the ninth grade - because I didn't 
work very hard that year - I decided 
that I had better follow Dr. Caldwell's 
advice if I wanted to go to college. 

I even told my high-school girl friend 
that we would have to stop dating :so I 
could sper>d the time studying in ordei 
10 net into n;«rrmniirh 

AnO I made il Oy the SKin oi rhv 
teeth. I made it simply by working hard* 
er and longer than the rest - eventually 
learning to concentrate sufficiently to 
compensate for my dyslexia in reading. 

I adopted a regimen of getting up at 
5 A.M. to study and studying without 
fail. And thanks to my concentration 
and the very competitive nature 1 was 
born with, I found my academic per- 

mance yadually improving. _ 

In my treshman year* U^rtmouth, 
1 was even admitted to a* third*year 
physics course. And in the middle of my 
sophomore year, I received two A's and 
three B's for the first semester. My 
father's letters were filled with joy and 
astonishment. 

I owe a great debt to my professors 
and to President Ernest M. Hopkins. I 
had met Dr. Hopkins earlier and was so 
impressed that I made Dartmouth my 
goal. Most of all, however, I think I owe 
my academic improvement to my room- 
mate, Johnny French. 



Johnny and 1 were exact ofiposites. 
Hi* was reticent, and had the highest 
IQ in the class. To me. he was that 
maddening type who got straight A's 
with only occasional reference to books 
or classes. He was absolutely disgusted 
by my study habits - anybody who (jot 
up at 5 in the morning to hit the books 
was, well, peculiar. 

Inevitably. Johnny ma<le Phi Beta 
Kappa in our junior yeai. but my com* 
petitive instincts kept me going. We 
were both elected to senior fellowships 
and 1 made Phi Beta Kappa in my senior 
year. 

Johnny, of course, had the last word. 
He announced that he would never wear 
his PBK key again - that it had lost all 
meaning. 

Looking back over the years, f re- 
inember vividly the pain and moriifica 
tion I felt as a boy of 8. when 1 was 
assigned to read a shoit passage of 
Scriptuie at a community ves^ivi service 
during summer vacation m Maine jnii 
did a thoroughly miserable |0)) of it. 

I know what a dysle xic ( hild does 
through - the frustration of no( heing 
able to do what other children do irdSily. 
the humiliation of being thou(|ht not toii 
bright when such is not the case dt all. 

My personal discoveries as to whdl^^ 
required to cope with dyslexia could 
summarized in these acfrnonitions tcj t^^ 
individual dyslexic. 

C.l Accept the fact rnat you have a 
problem - don't just try to hide it. 

iri Refuse to feel sorry (or yourself. 

n Realize that you don't have an 
excuse - you have a chdilengo. 

CD Face th^ challenge. 

m Woik harder and learn mental 
discipline - the capacity (or total con- 
centration — and, 

r 1 Never ()uit. 

i'f it helps a dyslexic child lu know I 
went through the same thing . . . 

LT) But can conduct press confer 
ences today in three languages . . 

i~] And can read a speech on tele 
vision . . . 

I 1 (Though I may hove (o leherse 
it SIX times . . . 

\ A (With my scripc m large (vr>e . . . 

LU (And my sentences bioken intrj 
segments like these . . . 

(□ (And long words bruken into 
syllables) . . . 

CD And learned to read dii<l commu- 
nicate well enough to be elected Gov- 
ernor of New York (our times 

Q And to win Congressional con- 
firmation as Vice President of the United 
States . . . 

Then 1 hope the telling of my stor^ 
as a dyslexic could be an inspiration | 
the "puzzle children" - for that's wh2 
I really care about. 



Autftor: Nelson Rucktfener 
Rcprimad witf) permission from TV GUIDEC^Magazme 
Copyrigr)tCl976 by Trianglt Publications, inc.. Radnor. Ptnnsyiviinia 



ictobm 1985 



NCATetfay 



^DI50N, 



ROCKLTLLLE-R, 
RODIN, AND FMt 



READING 
PRObLLM 

A surprising number of historical giants 
may have something in conr mon with 
nonreaden in your classro'im. 



Andy Gci^er* non i 
Junior at the University 
of Hawafl, r em e ro ber i 
when reading was an 
exercise In ftilility-^a 
painful and energy-sapping experience 
U^he finally could no longer endore. - 
^^lien it came time to do a book 
report in high school* I tnmeo to short- 
cuts*** recalU Geiser. ''I^d read the 
title page, the baclc cover, the chapter 
headings. From there, Vd let my 
Imagination take over.** 

Such **wing*lt** techniques worked 
for Geiser, who maintained a B average 
through much of high school. But when 
hb parents sent him to a tough college 
prep school during his JunkM* year, his 
"grades first dipped, then dove— to D*s 
and Fs. 

""I guess things kind of caught up 
with me," he admits. went from 
being what teachers call a bright kid 
to a troubled kid to a lazy kid to a kid 
who was no longer motivated. I 
stopped caring.** 

Geiser turned 17 before he discov- 
ered that an undetected handicap— dys- 
lexia— accounted for hb frustration. 
Geiser also found that he wasn't alone. 

According to the National Institutes 
of Health, dyslexia causes some 15 per- 
cent of the nation's schoolchildren— 
primarily boys— to agonize over prim- 
cr^umble through textt>ooks, panic 
asked to read aloud, and dread 
s^ng bees. Many, like Geber, 
approach the end of their K-12 educa- 
tkMi before someone notices they*re 
working far below their potential and 
-I shot at a diagnosb. 

ERiC 



In some cases, diagnosb may prove 
to be the beginning of a new problem 
rather than the end to the old. 

''It's an outrage, Imt dyslexks are 
often labeled slow or even mentally 
retarded, when they're osually^of 
average or above avenge bitellfigence,'* 
exdaims Association member Mary 
Lee Enfield, coordinator of programs 
for children with learning dbabUitles 
In the Bkwmfaigton, Minn., schoob. 

*The psychological burdens of being 
mbunderstood,** adds Enfield, *show 
up hi behavkml pnMems later on. 
Think how it wooM feel to know that 
you're a bright person and then to 
fall— over and over agaia.** 

Ihe frustrations of dyslexia have 
neurok)gical roots. In foct, bMogkal 
common dft'WBinators among sufferm 
have recently come to light « medical 
dbcoverics reveal the dyslesdc's brain to 
be dlffTerent ondfer the microscope 
tnm the brains of non-language* 
dbabled people. 

The rcstttt? Nenrofogical abnormalh 
tks KramMe the language processing 
center of the brain and make chaos of 
the mental processes required for read- 
ing and writing. Dyskxks onderstand 
the language but have trouble with its 
printed symbols. They may revene let- 
ters, read »asd, orseeretfasrvdL 

Most researchers agree that dyslexia 
b bicurable, but not— and here lies the 
hope— untreatable. With the right 
instructton, enormous strides can be 
made. 

**Proper reconstructbe teaching— if 
begun eariy— can not only alleviate most 
of the handicap, but also prevent roost 
or all of the crippling mental and emo- 
tional damage that results from school 
failure," asserts David Gow, headmas- 
ter of the Gow School hi South Wales, 
N.Y.-.a preparatory school for dyslexk 
boys. 

J&son b a bright eight-year-old 
dyslexk who has trouble sitting 
still in hb third grade class at 
Hazelwood Elementary Ln Renton, 
Wash. Today he's at the board execut- 
ing a now familiar ritual. Chalk in 
hand, he sk>wly traces a targe letter H 
on the board. Hb arm movements are 
gradual but purposeful as he sounds 
the letter aloud. ^^H,** he pronounces 
triumphantly. 

Jason will learn all 26 letters 
through thb methodical approach to 
phonics. See. Hear FteL The empha- 
sb b on the senses, and each reinforces 



the other. Ihb multisensory tech* 
nlque — known as the Slingerlaod 
approach— guides students through thi 
alphabet to the point where they're 
l>lendlng sounds and reading words, 
sentences, paragraphs, even whole 
books. 

Jason b lucky, llie Renton school 
district b the former province of Beth 
SUngerland, a classroom teacher who 
:4oneered thb approach to teaching 
dyslexks 50 years ago, working with 
^ocatloo psychologist Anna Gilling- 
ham, who in turn teamed with 
neuropsychok>gi&l Samuel Orton. 

**Dr. Orton 's bask prindpk is that 
. you Iwgin with the smallest linguistk 
unit (the letter) because these kids do 
not work with whole words," explains 
Beveriy Wolf, a former Association 
member who kft the classroom to sen 
as dean of faculty at the SUngerland 
Institute near Renton. 

'^A multbensory spproach ensures 
that a child who's weak in« say, the 
vbual modalities b not stymied," Wolf 
adds. **We bring auditof7 kin- 
esthetk motor capacities into play at 
the same time— as 'reinforccrs.' V*hen 
we've Uught a few letters, we're read> 
to teach how to blend leners and how < 
speH.** 

Largely through word of mouth, tbe 
SUngerland approach has spread to 
schoob throughout the countr> , from 
Anchorage, Alaska, to Berlin, N.H. 
Some dbtricts, like Highland Park io 
Dallas, Texas, have found the techniqu 
so effective they've made profkiency 
in it a condition for hiring elementary 
school teachers. 

At Lancaster (N.H.) Elementary 
School. As5<Kiation member and 
English teacher Ceraldine Tetreauit b 
among nine or 10 teachers who apply 
the Slingerland method faithfully. 
Because early detection is critical, first 
graders take pre-reading screening 
tests to diagnose language disabilities. 

**The emphasis is on early interven- 
tion,'* Tetreauit explains. **Like most 
learning disorders, dyslexia must be 
spotted early. Our ability to help drop 
with each passing year.** 

Tetreauit rccalb her frustration 
with tr>in<; to teach fifth-grade lan- 
guage-disabled students before her 
training in the Slingerland approach: 
"^1 finally threw up my hands and 
said, 'I've done all I can for these stu- 
dents and I need to stop blaming my- 
self if some can't be taught."* 



611 



Tbt foltowiBg somiiicr* Tctrault 
complfted the mohbcmof7 tratning and 
mwmd to a sixth gndt dan in Che 
fan vhh so«M of the same studenu 
she d had the ve.rbefecv. 

to «t€ the protras 
of MidcBti that Pd ham coovioced 




ERIC 



IB Blaaafa«io«, Miaa^ the 
CMHBhMt to hdpiag djrslcikB 
ibtaafht to 

Ithei 

*-lV haric phOoMiifay of oar IC- 
ycar^ Prajact READ b ttet the foor 
miliar qntcoH or teadd^ readfaif are 
eqnUy vaBd,** oc^Wm Mary Lee 
EafMd, fo a rdioan i r. «We w.rfc 
again the sttt hhoni mil cfisttirtmnty 
mmmoa aimmptlaa that the whole* 
^nird sy ^cB detema a privOefed pod- 
tioo« Childrca with dyslexia seen to 
bO throuch that qrstca aad end up in 
the hottom rcadfaic (vmpa. Without 
praf«r interreatiau, they become new 

men oer^ of our aatiaa*s illiterate 
popi.tataoa.** 

Project READ cnploys Uraioed 
cia&6^roo0 tcachen to faitrodoce their 
pms to a s tiu ct uf t d bafiia(e 
approach that emphasises phonics. The 
prograa correatly extends from first 
thnMfh ninth grade, addressing the 
needs oT some 14M students. 

The READ focns b on mahlng stu- 
dents comfortahb with the ftmda* 
^xnub of langMge before they 
advance to polysyllaMcs and sentence 
^d paragraph constmction. By grade 
5 or 6« the majority are reading well 
enough so they doo*t suflcr In other 
object areas. 

Recent findings by the Johm 
Hopkins Medlcd School should 
fuve Enfield, Tetreauh, and other 
educators dedicated to helpfaif dyslexics 
a real sense of accoroplbhment«-and 
Hope. The Hopkins study of dyslexic 
S>oys who had attended the Gow 
r<hool in South Wahs, N.Y., between 
1940 and 1977 found that 67 per^*ent 
had graduated from college— with 32 
percent majorinf in the humanhies or 
scbnccs. More than 50 percent 
reported positive attitudes toward 
reading for pkasure« and 24 percent 
read more than 10 books a ycnr. 

These findings come as iw surprise 
to those who have bmnersed thenMlves 
hi the Iherature on dyslexia* Hbtory b 
Imvlly punctuated wtth the achieve- 
menu of men and women who as 
youngsters stniggbd to see the differ- 
ence between bndd. Thorns Edison 
b believed to have suffered considerable 
difficulty learning because of famgvage 
^ ,j)blems. Nelson RockefeDer i 



rized speeches because he found read- 
ing so diffkuH. According to the Ortoo 
Dyslexb Sodety, others bdieved to 
have suffered dyslexia iadnde 
Woodrow Wibon, Gen. Goorge Phttoo, 
Hans Christian Andcraen* Leonardo 
da Vhid, Bruce Jenner, Steve 
McQueen, and Augusta Rodfau 

David Gow, who's spent a Bfetfane 
teaching victims of thb mysterious mal- 
ady, condudet, ""The first thb^ public 
schoob have to realiie b that thb b a 
terrOdy common learning disorder. 
There are kids hi ahnost every dass* 
room who are bright and motivated 
and bursting with potential, but who 
are written off as laxy or bMMent...or 
faisolent. They're seen as last canes."* 

Teachers who take the thne to Men- 
toy and hdp these kids are nnding out 
Just how often the «lost cause* becomes 
a cause for cdebration. 



Resources 

The Onon Dyslexia Socieiv 
724 York Rd. 
Baltimore, Md. 21204 
(301)296-0232 

The Slinseriand Ifutituie 
I Bcllevur Cemer 
411 lOSth Ave. N E 
Bcllc%'ue. Washington 98004 
(206)453*1190 

Association for Children Learning 

Oi>abilitics 

4156 Ubrary Road 

Pittsburgh. Pa 15234 

(412)881*2253 

CouiKil for Exceptional Children 
1920 Association Dnve 
Resion. Va. 22091 
(703) 620-3660 

Classroom Surcrss for the Lrammj: Dis- 
Med, Suzanne H Stevem John F Blair, 
publisher (1406 Plaza Dr.. Winston-Salem. 
NC 27103). S8.95 paperback (314 pp.). a 
1984 book full of practical ideas for (he 
matnsiream teacher interested in helping 
(he learning-disabled Kudent 



Keys to Detection 

Teachers who recognize the symp- 
ttwrn of dyslexia "can prevent their 
studems from the psychological trauma 
of going through life with an un- 
diagnosed handicap,** stresses dyslexia 
activist Andy Geiser. 
The nmt common symptoms: 

1. Difficulty learning to read. 

2. Inability to write down even sim- 
ple thoughts. 

3. Problems with speech (late 1^- 
guage development, persistent baby talk, 
and poor articulation). A child who has 
not achieved clarity of speech by af 
seven or eight should be watched. 

4. Short attention span and general 
restlessness. 

5. Perceptual problems (confusing 
pui and bui, saw mi was, on and no, 
sung and snug). 

6. Difficulty understanding oral 
directions. 



7. Coordf .iation deficits, especially 
those involving small motor coordination 
(inabili'.y to cut along a doned line, 
inabil'ty to color within the confines of 
an ifiiicated area. difTiculty ty ing knots). 

8. Veak retention of material previ- 
ously ^earned. 

9. Reversal of symbols in reading, 
writing, and mathematics (Icncrs and 
numbers). 

10. Sequencing deficiencies (difTi- 
culty learning the days of the week or 
months of the year in order.) 

11. Awkwardness in self-expression. 

12. A high level of frustration; .i ten- 
dency to give up when learning. 

13. Difficulty in separating the 
essential from the trivial. 

14. Difficulty understanding abstrac- 
tions (e.g., reciting proverbs without 
comprehending their meaning). 

15. The most obvious symptom of 
all— /wr spelling, 

Sourea- Thtt (tow Scftool 



Reprinted from the October, 1985, issue of 
NEA TODAY, a publication of the National 
Ecff '.cation Association. 



612 



FISHER FOUNDATION SCHOOL 

740 East Speedway Boulevard, Tucson, Arizona 85719 
602/623-3046 




Does your child have difficulty in 
reading, wnting and spelling? 



BOAKH OF DIRECTORS 

Jonn S Cravcr 
F VV. Bill Fisner 
Helen V Fisher 
Thomas S. Hershey. MO 
C. John Lewis. MO 
Ann W. Nichols. PhO 
George Tolman. 00 



Govttnment agencies have estimated that 10% of 
all children have sone degree of Specific Language 
Disability, soaetines called dyslexia . Even though 
these children are intelligent, they have problems 
with language. They may not be able to learn to read 
or %n:ite in the ordinary school situation. 

Fisher School in Tucson works exclusively with 
children who have these language problems. Using 
special techniques, we teach them and they learn to 
read and write. They also study arithmetic, science 
and other subjects taught in regular schools. 

Teaching involves simultaneous use of all the 
learning senses: eyes (visual) , ears (auditory) , the 
speech organs and the arm movements associated with 
handwriting (kinesthetic) . 

The multi-sensory technique we use was 
developed by a neurologist. Dr. S. T. Orton, together 
with an educator, Anna Gillingham. It was adapted 
for classroom use by Beth Slingerland, a student of 
Gillingham. 

Small classes ensure that each student gets 
maximum personalized attention. A maximum of 40 
students are taught by three certified teachers with 
training in the multi-sensory approach. 

Fisher School is a non-profit organization. We 
do not compete with public or private schools, our 
goal is to give dyslexic students improved language 
skills so they can successfully re-enter regular 
school programs as soon as possible. 

Tuition is $3,500 per year, but some 
scholarship aid is available for students who cannot 
afford the full zunount. 

The School Director is Nancy von wald. Bill 
and Helen Fisher of Tucson established the school in 
1980. 



Q ~ Devoted to the teaching of children with Specific Language Disabilities 

ERIC 613 



A BIBLIOGRAPHY OF SUGGESTED READING TO OFFER BACKGROUND FOR 



UNDERSTANDING CHILDREN WITH SPECIF: C LANGUAGE DISABILITY (Dyslexia) 



Ansara, Alice (T972) "Language Therapy to Salvage the College Potential of 
Dyslexic Adolescents." Bulletin of the Orton Society . Inc. 

Ansara, Geschwind, et. al. (1981) Sex Differences In Dyslexia . Towson, 
Maryland: The Orton Society. 

Ballesteros, D. & Royal, N. (1980) "Slingerland SLD Instruction as a 
Voluntary Magnet Program." Bulletin of the Orton Society . 

Bannatyne, A. (1974) "Reading: An Auditory- Vocal Process." Bulle tin of the 
Orton Society . 

Bender, L. (1957) Review of Lecture - "Specific Reading Disability as a 
Maturatlonal Lag." Bulletin of the Orton Socelty . Vol. 7. 

Birch, H. (1962) "Dyslexia and the Maturation of Visual Function" Reading 
Disability , ed. by John Money. The Johns Hopkins Press 

Bryant, N. D. (1965) "Characteristics of Dyslexia and Their Remedial 
Implication." Exceptional children . Vol. 31, No. 4, December 

Bryant, T. ( 1978) "The Effect of Student Failure on Quality of Family L ife 
and Community Mental Health." The Bulletin of the Orton Society . Vol. 28 

Burrows, D. and Wolf, B. (1983) "Creativity and the Dyslexic Child: A 
Classroom View." Annuals of Dyslexia . Vol. 33 

Cclfee, R. (1983) "The Mind of the Dyslexic." Annals of Dyslexia . Vol. 3-3 

C?lv1n, W. and Ojemann, 6. (1980) Inside the Brain New American Library, NY 

Childs, S. B. and R. (1968) Sound Spelling Cambridge, MA: Educators 
Publishing Service, Inc. 

Cicci, R. (1980) "Written Language Disorders." Bulletin of the Orton Society 

Clemmens, R. (1965) "Obscure Causes of School Failure - A Pediatrict Point 
of View." The Orton Society Monograph 1 

Cole, E. (1949) "Specific Reading Disability." The American Journal of 
Ophthalmology . 34 ~ 

Cole, E. (1979) "Dyslexia: Implications for Diagnosis and Treatment." 
Bulletin of the Orton Society . Vol. XXIX 

Critchley, M. (1964) Developmental Dyslexia Springfield, IL: Charles Thomas 



(Cont.) 614 



(Bibliography, Cont.) 



2 



Critchley, H. (1974) "The Past, Present and Future of Developmental 
Dyslexia." Address given at the opening of the Orton Society's 25th 
meeting In Rochester, MN. The North Surrey Dyslexic Society's Bulletin 
Dyslexic Review , Staines, Middlesex, England 

DeHlrsch, K. (1984) Language and the Developing Child Monograph 4, Orton 
Dyslexia Society, Baltimore, MD 

Ddilrsch, K.; Jansky, J. and Langford, W. (1967) Predicting Reading Failures 
New York: Harper and Row 

Dinero, T., et. al. (1979) "The Sllngerland Screening Tests for Identifying 
Children 

with Specific Language Disability: Screening for Learning Disabilities in 
First Grade." Perceptual and Motor Skill a , vol. 49 No. 3, pgs. 971-978, 
December 

Duane, D. (1974) "A Neurologic Overview of Specific Language Disability for 
the Non-Neurologist." Bulletin of the Orton Society 

Duane, D. (1979) "Toward a Definition of Dyslexia: A Summary of Views." 
Bulletin of the Orton Society . Vol. XXIX 

Duffy, F. and Geschwind, N. eds (1985) Dyslexia: A Neuro Scientific approach 
to Clinical Evaluation Boston: Liggie, Brown, Co. 

Elsenberg, L. (1966) "The Spldemlology of Reading Retardation and a Program 
of Intervention." The Disabled Reader ed. by John Money. Baltimore: 
The Johns Hopkins Press 

Epstein, H. (1980) "Some Biological Basis of Cognitive Development." 
Bulletin of the Orton Society 

Epstein, H. (1985) "Multimodal Ityi Crossmodallty, and Dyslexia," Annals of 
Dyslexia . Vol . XXXV 

Epstein H. and Toepfer, C. (1978) "A Neurosclence Basis for Reorganizing 
Middle Grades Education." Educational Leadership , Vol. 35, No. 8 

Eustis, R. S. "Specific Reading Disability Information for Parents and 
Teachers." Orton Dyslexia Society Reprint No. 26 

Fulmer, S. (1980) Prereading Screening Procedures and Sllngerland Screening 
Tests Technical Manual Cambridge, MA: Educators Publishing service 

Fulmer, S. and R. (1983) "The Sllngerland Test: Reliability and Validity." 
Journal of Learning Disabilities , Vol. 16, No. 10 

Galaburda, A. (1985) "Developmental Dyslexia: A Review of the Biological 
Implications." Annals of Dyslexia , Vol. XXXV 

Gallagher, J. (1963) "Specific Language Disability (Dyslexia)" Bulletin of 
the Orton Society. Vol. XIII 



(Cont.) 

er|c ^"^5 



J-1 

3/86 



(Bibliography, Cont.) 3 



Geschwind, N. "Anatomical Evolution and the Human Brain." Bulletin of the 
Orton Society 

Geschwind, N. "Asymmetries of the Brain: New Developments." Bulletin of the 
Orton Society 

Geschwind, N. (1984) "The Brain of a Learning Disabled Individual." Annals 
of Dyslexia . Vol. XXXIV 

Geschwind, N. (1982) "Why Orton Was Right." Annals of Dyslexia , Vol. 32 

Gllllngham, A. (1968) "Education and Specific Language Disability: The 
Papers of Anna Gllllngham," compiled by Sally B. Chllds. The Orton 
Society Monograph 3 

Gllllngham, A. "Pedagogical Implications of Specific Language Disability." 
An Orton Society Reprint No. 4 

Gllllngham, A. and Stillman, B. (1960) Remedial Training for Children With 
Specific Disability In Reading, Spelling and Penmanship . Cambridge, MA: 
Educators Publishing Service Inc. 

Goldberg, H., (1965) "Neurological Aspects of Reading Problems." Pennsylvania 
Academy of Ophthamology and Otolaryngology, Transactions 

Goldberg, H. (1970) "Ocular Motility In Learning Disabilities." Journal of 
Learning Disabilities . Vol. 3, No. 3 

Goldberg, H. and Schlffman, G. (1972) Dyslexia New York: Grune and Stratton 

Gomez, N. (1971) "Neurological Approach to Specific Language Disability." 
Bulletin of the Orton Society , Vol. 21 

Health, Education and Welfare Advisory Connlttee on Dyslexia and Related 
Disorders (1969) Reading Disorders In the United States Public Health 
Service, National institutes or Keaitn, Betnesda, md 

Johnson, D. "The Language Continuum." An Orton Society Reprint No. 24 

Johnson, D. and Myklebust, H. (1967) Learning Disabilities New York and 
London: Grune and Stratton 

Johnson, D. and Myklebust, H. (1965) Learning Disorders , Vol. 1 ed. by 
Jerome Hellmuth, Seattle, Specific Child Publications 

Kavanagh, J. F. and Venezky, R., editors (1980) Orthography. Reading and 
Dyslexia Baltimore, MD: University Park Pres 

Lassen, N.; Ignvar, D. & Sklnhoj, P. (1978) "Brain Function and Blood Flow." 
Scientific American 

Liberman, I. (1971) "Speech and Lateralization of Language." Bulletin of 
the Orton Society . Vol. XXI 

(Cont.) 



(Bibliography, Cont.) 



4 



Liberman, I. (1973) "Segmentation of the Spoken Word and Reading Function." 
lulletln of the Orton Society . Vol. XXIII 

Masland, Richard (1967) "Brain Mechanlslsins Underlying the Language 
Function." Bulletin of the Orton Society . Vol. XVII 

Matejcek, Z. (1977) "Specific Learning Disabilities." Bulletin of the Orton 
Society . Vol. XXVII 

Moskowltz, B. (1978) "The Acquisition of Language." Scient ific American 
November 

Myklebust, H. (1978) Progress In Learning Disabilities . Vol. IV New York: 
Grune and Stratton 

Ollphant, G. (1972) "Auditory Perception and Reading Disability." Bulletin 
of the Orton Society . Vol. XXII 

Ollphant, G. (1972) Alphabet Alchemy and C-60 Cassettes. Cambridge. MA: 
Educators Publishing Service, Inc. 

Ollphant, G. (1976) "The Lens of Language." Bulletin of the Orton Society . 

f O I* • AA V 1 

Orton, J. (1966) "The Orton-GI 11 Ingham Approach." The Disabled Rea der, 
ed. by John Money, The John Hopkins Press ! 

Orton, S. (T937) Reading. Writing and Speech Problems In Childre n Cambridge. 
MA: W. W. Norton and Company 

Orton, S. (1966) Word Blindness In School Children , and other papers compiled 
by June L. Orton. The orton Society Monograph z 

Penfleld, W. and Roberts, L. (1959) Speech and Brain-Mechani sm Princeton: 
Princeton University Press — '■ 

Rablnovltch, R. (1962) "Dyslexia: Psychiatric Considerations." Reading 
Disability , ed. by John Money. Baltimore: The John Hopkins Press — ^ 

Rablnovltch, R. (1962) "Neuropsychlatric Considerations In Reading 
Retardation." The Reading Teacher . May 

Rawson, M. "Prognosis In Dyslexia." Orton Society Reprint No. 13 

Rawson, M. (1974) "The Self-Concept and the Cycle of Growth." Bulletin of 
the Orton Society 

Rome, H. (1971) "The Psychiatric Aspects of Dyslexia." Bulletin of the 
Orton Society — ' 

Rosner, S. (1968) "Ophthalmology, Optometry and Learning Difficulties." 
Journal of Learning Disabilities . Vol. 1, No. 8, August 

Saunders, R. (1962) "Dyslexia: Its Phenomenology." Reading Disab ility, ed. 
by John Money, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press 

J-1 

Q (Cont.) ^. 3/86 

ERIC 



(Bibliography, Cont.) 5 

Silver, A. (1961) "Diagnostic Consideration In Children with Readinq ^ 
Disability." Bulletin of the Orton Society . Vol. XI 

Simpson, E. (1979) Reversals Houghton Mifflin 

^^''' ^S^ocilty . Vol! niV°°^ ^^^^^^ °^ Dyslexia." Bulletin of the Orton 

S laden, B. (1974) "The Evolution of Human Capacity for Language." Bulletin 
Of the Orton Society 

^'^"ffiI^"^;o^v!"S^ Training in Some Prerequisite s for Beginning RMding 
Cambridge, MA: Educators publishing Service, Inc. ■ * 

Slingerland, B. (1971) A Multi-Sensory Approach to Language Ar ts for 
Specific Language Dis abiHty Children Kolc I . A liui^m lor Pn'm^^y 
reachers CaraDridge, MA: Educators Publishing Service, Inc. 

Slingerland, B. (1976) Basics in Scope and Sequence of a Mult i-Sensorv 

Approach to Language Arts t or Specific Langilage Disability Children Book 2 
A liuiqe tor Primary Teacher s Cambridge, Hi?: Educators Publishing 
Service, Inc. " 

Slingerland, B. ( 1981) A Multi-Sensorv Approach to Language Arts for 
1^!^^^ Language Dlsabilitv Children kU 'A . A d.J. ..,„...^,,y 
leachers Caraonage, ma: Educators Fublishing Service, Inc. i 

Slingerland, B. (1974) Screening Tests for Identifying Children With Sn edf ir 
Language Disabilities Uni^riU. MAr P^.....:7B..^4.kJ,3 .>,ririr-. Inc. 

Slingerland, B. (1976) Pre-Reading Screening Procedures . Cambridge, MA: 
Educators Publishing Service, Inc. — 

Slingerland, B. (1969) "Early Identification of Pre-School Children Who Might 
Academic Th erapy Quarterly . Sunaner. San Rafael, CA 

Slingerland, B. (1972) "Preventive Teaching Programs in the Classroom: A 
General Education Responsibility.- Bulletin of the Orton Society 

Slingerland, B. (1966) "Public School Programs for the Prevention of Specific 
Language Disability in Children.- Educat ional Therapy , ed. by Jerome 
Hellrauth. Seattle, WA: Special Chi ld Pub l ications ^ ^^^ome 

Slingerland, B. (1969) A P ragmatic Approach to the Evaluation of C hildren' ^ 

PgfQj-mances on Pre-Reading screeninrPfccedures Cambridge. MA: • 

Educators PUP iisning ilervice. Inc. 

Slingerland, B. (1983) Language Not Learning Disability Cambridge, MA: 
Educators Publishing Uervice, inc. — ^ '«a«:, n«. 

^*"*Pacif i'c Books^ Neurophysio lo gical Insights Into Teaching Palo Alto, CA: ^ 



(Cont.)6l8 



ERIC 



3/86 



(Bibliography, Cont.) 



6 



Stuart, M. (1966) "Specif ic Language Disabilities— What Are They?" Adademic 
Therapy Quarterly , Vol. 1, No. 3. San Rafael, CA 

Tarnopol, L. (1969) "Introduction to Children With Learning Disabilities." 
Learning Disabilities— Introduction to Educational Medical Management 
^pringrieid, il: uharles c. Tnomas 

Thompson, L. (1966) Reading Disability Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas 
(Excellent chapters on nistorlcal background and on the Orton Society.) 

Vellutino, F. R. (1981) Dyslexia; Theory and Research Cambridge, MA: 
M I T Press 

Wepman, J. (1962) "Dyslexia: Its Relationship to Language Acquisition and 
Concept Formation. " Reading Disability , ed. by John Money, Baltimore, 
MD: The Johns Hopkins Prsss 

Wepman, J. (1967) "The Modality Concept— Including a Statement of the 
Perceptual and Conceptual Levels of Learning." Perception and Reading , 
ed. by Helen K. Smith. From Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Convention 
of the International Reading Association, Newark, DE 

Whitsell, J. (1965) "Neurological Aspects of Reading Disorders." READING 
DISORDERS, ed. by Flower. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis Company 

Whitsell, J. (1967) "A Clinic Team Approach to Reading Problems: Role of the 
Neurologist." Perception and Reading . ed. by Helen K. Smith. From the 
Proceedings of tne Twelfth Annual Convention of the International Reading 
Association, Newark, DE 

Wood, M. (1976) "The Dyslexic In the General Classroom." Bulletin of the 
Orton Society . Vol. XXVI ~'- 



619 



RESEARCH ON SLINGERLAND INSTRUCT I ON 



Since 1960, the SUngerland Adaptation for classroom use of the Orton 
Gllllngham Approach has been used successfully In classrooms across the United 
States. During that time, school districts have studied the effectiveness of 
the approach 1r. their own - programs . Some Independent comparative studies-- 
both formal and Informal— have been conducted In recent years. 

The following points should be considered when evaluating research based upon 
the Slingerland Approach: 

The achievement of Specific Language Disability children should not be 
compared to those children without Specific Language Disability. The rate 
of achievement for SLD children and non-SLD children cannot be expected 
to be the same, even when some are receiving specific classroom 
instruction. 

Length of time in program is a factor in achievement. 

Teacher training and experience are factors in program evaluation. It 
takes two years of teaching under guidance to become an adequately trained 
SLO teacher. 

Children who receive the complete Slingerland approach which uses the 
whole format for instruction are likely to make better progress than those 
who receive parts of the format. 

Children's achievement may depend upon the following: 

individual degrees of disability 
intellectual abilities 
inner drive 
environmental factors 



A study of the South Huntington School District Slingerland program . (1980). 
BULts Regional office o+ Planning and Evaluation: Suffolk County, N.Y. 

Achievement testing results (1980). Department of Education: Cheshire, CT. 

Adelman, J. (1984). A remediation program for SLD adults using an adaptation 
of the Slingerland and Orton-Gll I Ingham approaches Unpublished Master's 
tnesis, 5an Jose state university: San Jose, CA. 

An evaluation of the Slingerland Approach to instruction as employed in the 

Ancnorage district schools . [W/) Northwest Regional Educational 

Laboratory: Portland, OR. 

Ballesteros, D. & Royal, N. (1981). S linger land-SLD Instruction as a winning 
voluntary magnet program. Bulletin of the Orton Society 31. 

Comparison of mean obtained achievement to mean anticipated achievement and to 
norm group achievement U966J. Highland park School District: Dallas. Tx. 

Cruntbley, L. (1985). First Grade Reading and Spelling Achievement in 

Sllnge/ 'land and Non-Sllngerland Classes. Doctoral Olssertatioh. Brigh am 
Toung University: Provo, UT. '. 6'"'0 

(Cont.) 



(Research on Sllngerland Instruction, ContO 



East, (1968). Excerpts from A study of the effectiveness of Specific 

Language Disability techniques on reading ability of potential Ty retarded 
readers > Dnpublisned manuscript: Renton, WA« 

Fruth, (1984), The comparison of scores attained by selected Armstrong 
students on standardlzeq tesfsT A Paper submitted In Partial ruifiMment 
of the Requirements in Educational Research. College of Notre Dame: 
Belmont 9 CA« 

Gibson, J. (t973). Effects of a mult1*sensory Instructional program on 
visual-perceptual learning and academic achievement in first grade 
students ^ Western Washington university: Beillngham, WA« 

Herman, B. (1972). A Study to Determine the Feasibility of a Multl-Sensory 
Approach Being Utilized with Dyslexic Children In the Renton Service Area 
and tne Administrative Aspects Associated witn tne Approach > MastePs 
Thesis, Seattle University. Seattle, WA« 

Litcher, J.H. & Robarge, (1979). First grade Intervention for reading 
achievement of high risk children. Bulletin of the Orton Society 29, 

Lovitt, T, & Hurlburt, M, (1974), Using behavior-analysis techniques to 
assess the relationship between phonics Instruction and oral reading. 
Journal of Special Education 8 1, 

Lovitt, T, & DeMler, M. (1984). An evaluation of the Sllngerland method with 
learning disabled youngsters. Journal of Learning Disabilities . 17 
267-272 • : 

McCulloch, (1985). The Sllngerland Approach: Is It effective In an SLD 
classroom? Master's thesis, Seattle Pacific University: Seattle, WA« 

Roantree, R. (1982). A comparison of the effectiveness of Sllngerland and 
conventional methods for Specific Language ulsabl I ity coi lege students > 
unpublished master's thesis. College of Rotre Dame: belmont, CA. 

Ruppert, E. & Strain, P. (1977). Comparing synthetic multi-sensory and 
multiple factor Instruction for disabled first grade readers. Reading 
Improvement, Fall 212-215. 

Simultaneous multi-sensory Instruction program assessment report ( 1983 ) . 
Anchorage School District: Anchorage, Ak. 

Smith, 6. & Hirsch, B. (1971). Activating A Program for the Dyslexic Child 
Within the Framework o^ the Public School. Doctoral Dissertation. United 
States International University: San Diego, CA. 

White, N. (1977). Individual test results: gifted-educational ly handicapped 
class. Unpublished study. San Francisco, CA. 

Wolf, B. (1984). Growth of Sllngerland trained SLD students as shown on the 
fourth grade and sixth grade California Achievement TesTs: Reading . 
unpuDiisned data: Bellevue, ' 
WA. 

Wolf, B. (1985) The effect of Sllngerland Instruction on the reading and 
language achievement of second grade children . Master's thesis, Seattle 
pacific University: Seattle, WA.. 

ERiC ^^1 



A SPECIAL CHILD 



From: Academic Therapy Publication 
Summer 1971 

/ know a very special child whose world is upside down. 

And often in his classroom, he wears a puzzled frown. 

lie's criticized for tuning out, accused of never trying, 

lie's nagged and scolded, begged, cajoled: most kids end up 
crying. 

But oftentimes he just gives up; each task will mean defeat. 

He sees a different symbol and hears a different beat. 

His No is On. for Was it's Saw, artd How sure must be Who. 

And 6 plus 6 is 21. J 9's are 72. 

Tliis problem's labeled many things; it matters not the name. 

To please his parents, teachers, peers, is this child's secret aim. 

Now that we know some ways to help, let's start today, and 
then. 

Tlirough work and understanding love, well right his world 
figain. 

Dee Shaffer 

Learning Duabilities Teacher 
Avery Street School 
South Windsor* Connecticut 



822 



ST. MICHAELS ASSOCIATION FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION. INC. 

F.O. m-XXXXX Box 100 

St Michaels. Arizona H651I 
Telephone (602) 871-4871. 4872. 4873 



Presenters: Velma K. Spencer 

St. Michaels Special Education 
P.O. Box #100 

Friday, April 25 Michaels, Arizona 86511 

Gene Thompson 

10- 30-11- 30 am St. Michaels Special Education 

P.O. Box #100 

St» Michaels, Arizona 86511 
NAVAJO PARENT TRAINING AT ST. MICHAELS, NAVAJO NATION ARIZONA 

Two (2) Navajo parent training models are currently In use at St. 
Michaels Association for Special Education, Inc. The Association Is 
located on the Navajo Reservation In Northeastern Arizona. Many parents 
live In rural. Isolated parts of the reservation which spans three (3) 
states (Arizona, New Mexico and Utah) covering an area of 25,000 square 
miles. The Navajo Nation Is a bilingual society, so education judgements 
must constantly be made with regards to language training emphasis. 

The first training model is to train Navajo speaking parents who 
have severely imperiled infants to become Infant specialists and advocates 
In a virtually unfocused area in the largest Indian population of this 
country where no other program provides services from birth through five 
(5) years of age. 

Parents at a variety of levels of competency participate In a care- 
fully designed training program geared to their needs. The content areas 
covered are behavioral observations, neuromotor development, psychosocial 
development and cognitive development. 

Theorists utilized are Brazelton, Spitz, Freud, Mahler, Erikson, 
Bowl by ^ Piaget, Sroufe, Kopp and the personal experience of the trainers. 

Supplementary readings, observation and videotapes reinforce the 
training sessions. Traditional management of development and how this 
relates to specific theorists are given extensive attention. 

The Denver Development Screening Test Is taught. Each parent screens 
at least five (5) infant/ toddlers using children from the community. 

Extensive training In individual Infant plan development using the 
Hawaiian Early Learning Program and the EMI Incorporating physical therapy, 
occupational therapy and speech/language therapy assessments are given. 
Each parent completes and sets Into action Individual Infant plans on at 
least three {3) Infant toddlers. 

Infant/toddlers and their parents and families have genetic workups 
and counselling. 

On going evaluation and participant feed back are most helpful In 
keeping the training program relevant and meaningful. Weekly Intramural 
seminars are put In place. 



623 



Navajo Parent Training at St. Michaels, Navajo Nation, Arizona - cont. 



Meetings with what was initially called supervisor/ counsellors and 
is now called support/ resource person rather than being deleaated as 
weekly or twice monthly have been set up at the discretion of the infant 
specialist. 

A pediatric physical therapist will be training parents in administer- 
ing the Carolina Curriculum for Handicapped Infants and Infants at Risk. 
This assessment will be appropriate for our multi handicapped infants. 
The Carolina Curriculum for Handicapped Infants and Infants at Risk seems 
to come closest to meeting the needs of the infants/ toddlers as well as 
the parents. 

An intensive training program utilizing this instrument will be in- 
itiated in our project. This seems also to be synchronous with broaden- 
ing the resources that the parent will have at their fingertips. 

The second parent training model is in conjunction with the Associa- 
tion's seven (7) week summer program. Parents participate in direct 
course work, classroom practicum'and in-services. Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, provides an adjunct faculty and grants credit to- 
ward certification and/or undergraduate degree in special education. 

This summer training program is intended to meet the needs of parents, 
and those employed or wishing to become employed in paraorofessional 
positions in special education. Specific focus is in workir.c with persons 
with disabling conditions. 

Parents are involved in a daily lecture class during the eight (8) 
week summer program. NAU provides two (2) courses for credit dependina 
on the background of the participants. 

ESE 308 - Teacher Aide Practicum 

ESE 399 - Parent Training in Daily Living Skills 

The parents are assigned to a classroom so they may receive maximum 
exposure to conditions known to exist within the St. Michaels population 

Several weekend in-service training seminars are incorporated into 
the training program which covers the etiologies of mental retardation 
and their concomitants. 

St. Michaels provides the teaching facilities and practicum placement 
while NAU provides an adjunct facility to teach the class. 

The Association subcontracts with the Arizona Board of Regents for 
and on behalf of Northern Arizona University for the seven (7) week summer 
program. 

The Association receives excellent cooperation with the NAU faculty. 
Each summer the designated faculty advisor is responsible to submit a 
written evaluation to the Office of Indian Education Programs, Washington 
D.C., who funds the project. In addition, a professor of special education 
from Arizona State University provides OIEP with an outside evaluation. 
Site visits throughout the summer program are made by the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs Education Specialists. 



624 



Friday, April 25 
10:30-11:30 am 



Presenters: Marsha Stipe 

412 S.E. Dorion 
Pendleton, OR 97801 



Jane Anne Warren 
412 S.E. Dorion 
Pendleton, OR 97801 



Title: QUALITY ASSURANCE THROUGH PEER REVIEW 
FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION SERVICES IN A 
RURAL COUNTY EDUCATION SERVICE DISTRICT 



The purpose of this presentation is to describe a procedure 'or quality 
assurance for special education in a rural setting. This model can be used 
with any direct instruction program. For the past eight years the Umatilla 
Education Service District has utilized it with speech and language services 
and then with audiology and hearing impaired services. The procedure began as 
a staff development tool. Staff were involved in selecting appropriate 
service criteria, establishing criterion standards for assessment and 
services, and determining the most appropriate diagnostic, intervention, and 
record keeping procedures. 

The content of the peer review involves two phases. Phase I includes a review 
of files to determine if there is compliance with state and federal laws, and 
whether appropriate diagnostic and intervention techniques have been utilized. 
The second phase utilizes peer observation. The direct instruction staff work 
in pairs observing each other in the field, reporting on and incorporating 
this observation into a professional growth for themselves. 

A.C.R.E.S. conference participants will be presented with a written overview 
of criterion setting, reviewing, summarizing and analyzing procedures. 
Included will be copies of the forms utilized in the case file review with 
sections on: 1) identifying information, 2) diagnostic information, 3) I.E. P. 
components, 4) treatment data, and 5) termination data. The participants will 
also receive copies of the peer observation checklists which focus on content 
of instruction, materials, behavior management, data, communications, and 
working environment. 

Overall, the participants will receive objective information and handouts that 
will assist them in evaluating and improving the quality of services provided 
to handicapped students in any direct service discipline. The use of this 
process can contribute to the appropriate development of essential program 
components and activities needed to provide a full range of services for 
students with handicapping conditions in the rural public school setting. 



625 



Friday, April 25 5^"^ ^^^^^ , , 

Cochise Cooperative Education Services 
118 South Arizona Street 
10:30-11:30 am Bisbee, AZ 85603 

NATURAL INTBGRmCW 
C5P 

VOCATIONAL EDUGATICW AMD SPEXILAL EDUCATION- 



PURPOSE 

An outline of the program planning and inplenentation procedures for Rural 
Educat i on Administrators covering the parti^ship of Vocational Education and 
Special Education. 

BACKGKXBD 

Hie passage of P.L. 94-142 established the procedures for planning and 
iitpleroenting Individual Education Programs (I.E. P.) for haiKJicapped Students. 
P.L. 98-524 (Carl Perkins Vocational Education Act) , \i*iich was passed in 1984^ 
establ ish ed procedures for evalviating^ plaining programs, ani iitplenenting 
Individual Voca tional Education Plans (I.V.E^P.) in order to facilitate the 
transition from school to post-school enploymei^t/career opportunities for 
vocational students. 

FOCUS 

All Students merit the time for individual vocational program planning vathin 
the process of being educated in our secondary schools. The handicafped and the 
disadvantagei (academic and eoononic) have received much of our direct program 
attention. Ttie Public Laws are new providing the possibility of our integrating 
our program planning procedures to actually bring direct benefit to all students. 

ORGANIZATI0N7AL PLAN - OBJECTIVES 

The ten (10) areas outlined on the Organizational Plan will be incorporated 
in tWD (2) of the five (5) small school districts (with hic^ school programs) 
in Oochise County by the County Educational Coordinator from January, 1986 
throu^ June, 1986. This will demonstrate and facilitiatc: the collaboration, 
comnunication, and cooperation for the refining of this program for use in all 
of the small hi^ school districts. 

FULL PROGRA^»^[NG PLAN 

Ihe Organizational Plan conponentis will flow into the Full Program Model 
\^ch includes: 

1. Guidance Function - information on vocationsd opportunities 

assessment of handiccgyed. . .IVEP 
conference with parents. . .lEP process 
promotdng entry int:o non-traditional programs 

2. Instruction Function - consultation with vocational teachers 

instructJjon strategies/modifications 
following IVEP conponents 

3. Placement/Tracking Function - placement opportunities (secondary and post- 

secondary 

tracking/documentation of selections and progress 



EKLC 



(2 



articulation; 

instructional strategies vdth all stcLEf 
enplo^inent needs of students vdth staff 
anmilab]je coiiHunity agencies with staff and parents 
local district advasory ocmnittee ii^ait and advice for 
school program 

IMPLICftnONS 

Rural areas can inplenent prooedmres of the Public Laws. Organization of the 
procedures can be ^ecif ically outlined and direct iirolenentation can be conducted 
and fbllowBd through with by a Coc^)erative Administrator. 

Organization - Cooperative and State Voc Ed 

Trial Dnplementation - two hi^ schools by Co-op Mministrator 

BDnplementation of Pull Program {'86-'87) - five hi^ schools utilizing Formula 

Funding oc m bi n ed in the Co-op in order to hire one Staff Marber 
Tradcing of Procedures - by Co-op Jidministrator with at least monthly school 

contacts along with reports of hired Staff Member 
Evaluation - placement of students 

successful and alternative job choices 

refinement of Career Development ModelAfork E}q)erience Program 
appropriate for each district 



Karen S. Newman 

Cochise County BducationcLL Services 
December, 1985 



627 

ERIC 



5 



When the individual takes action, a consequence will be 
attached to the action. This constitutes the -feedback loop 
•for the system and is an automatic response — it wi 1 1 happen 
in a -functioning system. The consequence may or may not be 
meaning-ful to the individual (use-ful input vs. noise) , but 
it serves as a -further "event" to be processed., thereby 
initiating the cycle again. 

Impl i cations o-f the Model -for Service Del i very 

As indicated earlier^ this model assumes the individual 
is the primary unit o-f analysis. To this end, the model 
serves to synthesize various theories o-f providing services 
to children with emotional problems. Stated brie-fly, the 
Acti on /Conseauence component o-f the model are obviously the 
domain o-f bahavi or i sti c approaches. The Conceptual 
Set/Perceptual Set component draws on elements o-f cognitive 
psychology, psychodynami c and other theories. A -further 
explanation o-f this aspect o-f the model is not the province 
o-f the current di scussi on . Rather, the i ntent here is to 
-focus on the responsibilities o-f the service providers in 
developing techniques (structuring Events) to maximize 
use-ful input and output to and -from the system and minimize 
noi se. 

In this conte;<t , the -f i rst responsi bi 1 i ty o-f the school 
is, o-f necessity, an examination o-f the Conceptual Sets o-f 
the personnel available to provide services. From the 
administrator's perspective., the emphasis has to be on 
available personnel. The in-formation available in the 
literature relating to the problems c-f providing services to 
this population would suggest that waiting -for specialized 
personnel, specialized programs and -funds to materialize 
will not be a very productive approach. One might conclude, 
there-fore, that the basis o-f service delivery is preparing 
the available personnel to bel i eve in their ability to 
assume a role in providing services to the child with 
emot i onal /behavi oral prob 1 ems. 

The mechanism -for achieving this attitudinal shi-ft 
(e.g, worfshops) would certainly vary with the system 
involved. Several new concepts must be integrated into the 
pro-f essi onal ' s Conceptual Set, however, by whatever means. 
By way o-f example, one can identi-fy two "myths" in regard to 
serving this population that produce a negative impact on 
delivery systems. First, educators have long been told that 
they are not quali-fied to serve children with emotional 
problems. Rural educators must assume responsibility -for the 
emotional health o-f the child as well as responsibility for 
the cognitive health o-f the child. The urban model o-f 
service delivery that results -from adequate supplies o-f 
specialized personnel has resulted in delineation o-f role 
boundaries that are not -feasible in rural environments. 
Second, rural educators must distance themselves -from models 
that attempt to de-f i ne a popul at i on by some presumed 
severity. Evidence suggests that this concept leads to 
underidenti-f ication. The principles inherent in the model 
discussed here are as applicable -for the epitome o-f the 



532 

o 

ERIC 



XES 12/! 



I 



OWPLINE - STAFF 



IBILITIES 



mxmm 



M STATE 
DEPTOF 
£D 



ooansE 

ODIMED 

oooro. 



COCHISE 
OOIMVOC 
PROJECT STAFF 



SUPT. OF 
IM)IVIDUAL 
DISTRICTS 



UDMDUAL 
DISTRICT 
SPE. ED, STAEP 



aCIVIDUAL 
DISTRICT 
VOC. ED. STAFF 



1, Written organization of 
prooedures 

2, Resource materials and 
State Norkstops 

3, Inservice by ADE - Voc 
Ed and Cxiiise County 
Educational Services 

4, Trial implementation iji 
2 districts 

5, liiplenentation of Full 
Program (ADE 
Fomula Funding- 
Co-op administers- 
Hires (1) Voc Staff 



6. Tracking of program 
Ooord4~)Supt's 
Voc Staff 4^ District Sthffs 

7. Evaluation - 
Placement of students 
Tracking of choices 
Employment skill needs 

8. Refinement of Career 
Development/Work Experi- 
ence Model 



629 



P.L. mU OF TITLE II 

CARL D. PERKINS VOCATIONAL EDUCATION ACT 
1984 

GOAL 

FACILITATE TRANSITION FROH SCHOOL TO POST-SCHOOL EMPLOVHENT/CAREER OPPORTUNITIES 

t 

VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND/OR VOCATIONAL REHABILITION SPECIAL EDUCATION 

(Dlnct Service) (Reinturseient and/or consultant eeivioes) 

Handlcapp<:1 students in vocational education shall .-eceive vocational Docunentatlon in the HX/IEP of any Bdapi:ation of curriculiW 

assesaient iDeteimine vocational interests, abUities, needs) instruction/equipnent/facilities to neet the needs of t)ie 

handicapped students k special education 



aXNSELING/GUIDANCE/CAREER DEUeiT ACTIVITIES mm 
BIT OOIMSELORS WM IN SPECIAL EDUCATION SERillCES 

t 

m shall provide infoonation to handicapped 1) available oppartunitieE in voa lonal education no later than beginning 
students and prcgrans of: 9th grade; and 

2) rei^enents for enmlkent. 

t 

STAITEBCft BD shall provide equal access to the full 1) Oocupationally specific courses of 
range of vocational prograns available study) 

to m^r^c^, incluling; ^ ^ S!!i!!/rl^, ^ ^ 

, , restrictive enviroinent vocational EiJiication 

3) apprenticeship programs. vuwuu.iajL^muuiuu.i 

Special Education 



63i 



QRGANIZKnCNAL PIAN (l-'86 to 6-'86) 
TO PREPARE FOR FULL PROGRAM FOR '86 - '87 



1,1,F mNDICAPPED FUNDING 

1. Itarnulate roster of idaitified handicapped students by grade level. 
Definition inclix3es...'TDecause of handicapped condition cannot succeed 
in regular vocational education withcwt assistance". 

2. Develcjp list of vocational opportunities and requiratients for entry. 

3. Disseminate to 8th graders and parents. 

4. Set vp Car ^ r Assesanent/Interest/J^titude Evalixation Program on the 
conputer. 

5. Assess 9th, 10th, and Uth graders. 

6. Develop a McxJel I7EP vdiich will include the profile of assesanent 
infonnation, the long/short range goals, and the suggested voca- 
tional courses. 

7. Organize system of including the IVEP in the Annual lEP Meeting 
schedules. 

8. EiUJhasize the promoting of entry into nontraditional courses and new 
emerging courses for handica^sped and for female students. 

• 9. Consult with teachers and staff. 

10. Organize sources of placement possibilities (including on/off canpus 
enployment) . These sources would include outside agencies v*io work 
in the placaient of the handicapped (sodi as Vocational Rehabilitation) . 
Also organize a system of tracking students (address updates within 
. a reporting system v*uch includes post-seccndary students) . 



632 



nMDDC TOKCi 1.1.F HNDICAPPID »jNDING 



CRIMA 


(WIVES 


(TOES 


mm 




ENDING 

m 


mmm 


iGunmiuoiGN 


l.I Provide Haii' japped 
Btiklsnts^paientt jjitana- 
doi en vocaticr ! qp^ 
Euities ard leqiiitDents 


.1 Develop and dlssen* 
nate printed infonia- 
ion 


Identified;")- 
dlcappedsu^t 
8th OTttk to 

entry into 9th- 
and^ts 


8- '86 

1 


6 -'87 


l.l Copy of printed infomatiai 
ind docmientatlon of giving to 
itudents/parents (&(. Using ve- 
licle of lEP Meeting) 


U AssesaiBnt of handl- : 
^ itudents inteiests/i 
iblUties/needfi 


^ vxatlonal reoamen' 
ations f or IVEP 


5tli"- 11th 
graders 


■ -n 


' "^J 


J ccnpiter Profile of each 
^dividual student 


L.3 Oonfeienoe with 
xuuits to agree on vo- 
sitioial goals 


J Developnent of BIEP 
Long/Short range goals) 
ilus scheduling of 
ppropriate vocational 
classes 


9th- nth 
graders 




N 


.3 m Document (Ex, Using ve- 
licld of lEP Meeting) 


1.4 Pmotlng entiy of 
iftillcapped students aid i 
lanals students into m- 
ladltional courses 


.4 Ei^andlng career 
ptiais and equal oppor 
unities for handicappec 
Id female students 


9th - 12th 
graders 


II 


N 


J Copy of schedules plus do- 
unentation of grades in vxa- 
ioial courses 


2. msnm 
nMcricN 


U Consultation with VD- 
aitional teachers cmoenH 

ing needs of hanUcapped i 
itudents 

1 

< 


.1 FiDviding results 

>i IVUr flin uiBuucuon* 

1 modificatlons/stra- 
egles (sajuential stepc 
Ddiflcation of tiie 
ines;^ tutors/ad^- 
ng ecjuipnent) 


9th -12th 
graders 

/ 




N 


!.lCc(yof Mfgiventovo- 
ational teachers plus docu- 
entation of classrocni visl- 
lations/teacher conferences 


1 

mm 


.1 Provide Plaoenient - : 
^lopent or post-seoon- 1 
lary cpportunities for the 
landlcifiped 


.iBipkyment place* 
ent on/off caipus plus 
Mier wDrk piogmis 


nth ■12th 
graders 

Post-Seoondary 


N 


M 


1.1 Docunsntation of plaoenients 
)lus ooordination with otl^ 
igendes 


.2 fading of handi- 
»pped students 


.2 Ebllwip connunica- 
Ion with students/ 
nplcyers 


nth - 12th 
iraders 

tost-Seoondary 


II 


H 


.2 Co(y of written camunica- 
don 


.3 Articulation with v> • 
xitional teachers and 
Jtaff 1 


jlntegration/coimmi- 
ation with all staff 
enters (verification 
)f instructional stra- 
legies 


Staff 


N 


It 

i 


.3 Dates of (!aiferenoes/In- 
eivioe Meetings 

1 



er!c 33 • G3'l 



Friday, April 25 



10:30-11:30 am 

Presenter: Loretta Ledford 

Darrii^ton Public Schools 
316?.6 Ben Store Road 
DarriDgton, Wi 98241 



III Portfi«rshlp Ulllh Tha Communlly 



Business people with tiieir varied talents should be considered a valuable 
resource in our ccxsiunities. All businessmen and women are former students. 
Most are parents or granc^parents and as such, tiiey have a personal inr^est 
in hew well the schools are educating their children or grandchildrai. The 
businesses are the major eaployers of our graduates— -four out of five jobs 
are still in the private sector; aid the coonunit/ residents know what kinds 
of jobs will be available and ^A\at types of skills are required to fill these 
jobs. Lastly 9 the coniunity businesses are ccanunity minded and are our 
coanunity leaders. 



^^ducators often dcxi*t know how to gain access to the businesses and 
what to ask for once they do; businesses are uncertain what they can con- 
tribute to tiie schools. Educators too frequently seek ocly additional fi- 
nancial si4>port instead of broad involvement. Businesses may not understand 
that they can't woric through ^hool management alone*-that all of the teachers 
must be involved. Educators are suspicious of allowing the "outsiders" to be- 
come too heavily involved in school affairs. These are probably the most 
coomonly-found problems separating the businesses from the school canvases. 
Neither group can lode for a "quick fix" but most realize that any partner- 
ship has to involve a patient effort to co-join the capabilities of both. 




635 



Witli the rapid pace of the 1980's, most will accept the fact that the 
schools, given a child for twelve years, can no longer train that person for 
a guaranteed life-long position. Sane estimate that reschooling oust occur 
every diree to five years for oost jobs. Today's graduating seniors may 
score hi^ on tested material with little relevancy ten years past graduation. 
Miat is It, then, that businesses ask of schools? 

Boployers list three areas as those of their greatest concern: 

1. Discipline in the formative years—and in the work place. Students 
should have learned Responsibility and tliey should carry records 
of hi^ attendance. 

2. Greater emphasis on basic skills, particularly the ability to read, 
write, and compute. 

3. Ability to adapt to rapid change in our increasingly-complicated 
society, and the ability to think! 

Also the businesses desire: 

4. Inclusions of parents and business- labor groups in the formulation 
of educational curriculum and policy. 

5. Effective prograns for the eight of ten students who never go on to 
college. 

6. Learning opportunities outside the classroom. 

7. Fair and realistic measurement of output in human rather than stat- 
istical form. 

8. Students' awareness of the almost unlimited career opportunities. 

Schools, on the otiier hand, migjht ask of businesses: 

1. A clear, definitive understanding of skills expected of the graduate 
seddng emplo^mient within the town. 

2. Ca migiic a t ion with the connunity with updated plans for future growth. 

3. Involvement witii school goal-setting plans, curriculun meetings, etc. 

4. School-industry job-placement programs. 

5. Occq[>ational resource persons to provide personal contact with stu- 
dents. 

6. Shared staffing or staff -exchange prograns betweei school and business. 

7. Use of retired persons in school as resources, tutors, aides. 

8. Help to equip every student leaving school with a marketable skill. 



636 



MUTUAL BENEFITS (Obvious or Not so Obvious) 

1. Students leam 

2. Businesses axe. appreciated 

3. QualiQr product is produced 

4. Public relations axe obvious 

5. Student maturity is increased 

6. Students* work is relevant 

7. Students learn responsibility 




goal takes 



8. 

9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 

13. 
14. 




Teachers' vx>ikload is reduced 

Talents are maxiniized 

McxJel is created for other schools 

Cost is mininrlzed 

Sunner ecoployment opportunltes 

exist 

Student energies are released 
Both groups join insight into what 
is taking place "behind the walls.' 



Prior to starting any partnership arranganent, there must be identification 
of those students who will be entering the work force. The plan is not to pay 
the students nor is it to create "tnake work" jobs, but to study the policies, 
practices, and procedures of che business so the students understand their 
possible future widi the company. 

Both grcxtps must be flexible and acccnmodating any plan must be evaluated 
periodically. There must be close and repeated contact between teachers and 
enployers, and release time frcm school and business will have to be provided 
for this. Finally, a contract should be drawn up listing specifically the 
expectations from both groups, with provision for either to withdraw if so de- 
sired. Ein*iasis must be made to the students that this is a supplanental plan 
to the regular classroom and is not in lieu of any other requirements. 

The business coalition will appoint a ccmnittee to r^jilarly monitor adop- 
ted plans and to innovatively surest new ideas; and the school should name a 
similar task force. Both groups meet, socialize, 0CM1UNICATE often. 

The foims following this page are those used in Darrington for their Ccm- 
Dwnity Resource Ttaining Program. The students are responsible for finding the 
trainer and making the initial agreenients; then the teacher talks with the em- 
ployer and together they outline the roles of students and adults. On the job, 
the student is observed often by the teacher from v^iom he gets the grade for 
the class, based \xpca work observed, work delivered, and the trainer's reccm- 
moidations. 



637 



- 3a - 



School Naae 



Date 

Distribution 
CRT 



Coord 
Supt. 



COIfWNmf RESOURCE TRAINING PROGRAM 
For All CRT's 
Training Agreenent 

The folloMing Coawnity Resource Trainer 

represent ing 



Principal 



(naae of business or firm) 
SE^ provide training in the basic skills, attitudes, and knowledse 

This training will be provided for the following student -learners:- ' 



on a daily basis while school is in session. — 

The Conunity Resource Trainer realizes that daily instruction and 
Sirt'oJ^^n'Ji"? the student-leamer is a nec^ssSJj'^S eJscStial 
Ijn« students' training may be terminated upon 

notification to the. Coordinator by the Community ResourceTrSner? 

my SSSii^w""'?'* Coordinator on 

SiltSStljr concerning the performance of the student- 

The Program Coordinator will assist the Conmlty Resource Trainer with 
" SJSi^Sl:^4^r**"f?f objective, of jS^SJnlJI^JlliJ^ 

The Community Resource Trainer shall at all times maintain a **uA^n* 



signed. 
Date 



(Trainer) 



Signed 



(Superintendent} 



Signed, 
Signed 



(Mncipai) 
(Coordinator) 



ERIC 



638 



student 



OARRINGTON HIGH SCHOOL 

COMMUNITY RESOURCE TRAINING AGREEMENT 
Date 



I AGREE TO ABIDE BY THE FOLLOWING CONDITIONS: 

1. To drop all emotivities M-iich interfere with my successful completion 
of education and training in the CRT program. 

2. To maintain proper personal appearance requirements of the course in 
which enrolled. 

3. To be in attendance as required unless excused by the CRT trainer. 

4. To maintain proper behavior so that learning can occur for myself and 
others. 

3. To maintaj.n proper business conduct at all times. 

£. To abide by any and all rules and regulations, practices , and procedures 
of the CRT program not specifically stated above. 

7. To provide my own transportation to and from my place and training. 

8. Not to use my transportation for any other purpose than to go directly 
to and from the place of training during school hours. 

I UNDERSTAND THAT ANY VIOLATION OF ANY PART OF THE ABOVE AGREEMENT MAY RESULT 
IN MY BEING DROPPED FROM THE CRT PROGRAM. 

STUDENT'S SIGNATURE 
COORDINATOR 



639 





Public Schools And You- 
Partners For Excellence 



2. 



SPSaFIC IDEAS TO DISCUSS. AOCEPT. REJECT. OR EXPAND ; 
OCMUNIIY AUARENESS DAY 

Speakers fron various volunteer groups present to a school assembly 
the role of tlieir organization and what meotership entails. Be sure 
to include your 



Direct a class in the Free-Enterprise systan, 

Conduct a walk-through job application including interviews 

Speak to the class about writing and marketing skills, importance and 
relevancy of math accuracy, etc. 

SPBCIALTy SPEAKERS 

Conduct a class on local history, growth of government lands and man- 
agement, key businesses' importance to the area. ..chamber members could 
put together a format to shew the growth of the town. 

CAREER AWARENESS DAY 

Introduce the students to their town. Student groups (or individuals) 
may tcur the forest service, mill, logging operation, kitchens, the man- 
agers offices, etc. Or, Individuals interested in a particular bus- 
iness may shadow'' a worker, ride a bus run or a train, go with an owner 
on a purchasing trip. . . 

Trade a job with a teacher. For a day or a week, the typist at the mill 
may trade jobs with the business teacher, or the writer for the Times 
mi^t teach a class while the journalism teacher writes for the news- 
paper... Line up related skills and switch positicxis awhile. 

With adult supervision, younger students may buy a fencepost sale or buy 
a young steer or host a local foods booth— any project native to the com- 
munity. They plan the project, do the necessary paperwork, and see it 
through to ccmpletion. 



Chamber of Commerce 



Clinic Guild 
Volunteer Firemen 
Search & Rescue 
Library Board 

School Aides and Comndttees 



PISA 

Rotary 

Lions 



School Board 



640 



ERIC 




-A School 'Parnt-CoHimunKr 



4. ENVriROlllENI^ AUMiENESS-^ 

Ths forest serviice and lqggii% industries od^ht supply students with 
seedlings to be planted and raised at home, thai transferred to stare, 
federal, or private timber lands. 

The garden club adght help a student at the grade school start plants 
in their greenhouse. Students could help sell in the plant shed. 

A project ccxald be started on donated use of land for a Christinas tree 
crop. 

Volunteers are needed to prcmote outdoor recreation and outdoor surviv- 
al. Hig^i school students could experience a week in the mountains with 
adult supervision; students earn elective credit and businessess get a 
great advertising boost. 

Students could design, build, and maintain a nature-study trail for 
visitors to town. 

COMMUNHY INVOLVEMENT 

I 

• Students in a particular course of study or with directed interests 
might be "adopted" by the businesses to see that they are escorted to 
a metropolitan area for first-hand insigiht, to talk with an eraployer- 
as-ccunselor, to provide answers. These same businesses might'wish to 
provide scholarship funds for training after graduation. 

A cultural awareness fund might be started by the towi to contribute 
to the music, art, and drama departments. This could provide for an 
annjal all-school (all-connunity?) trip to a playhouse, museun, or 
oxicert. 

Since attaidance is so important to the taraployer, the Chamber may host 
an annual breakfast to honor those students (and teachers) who have 
demonstrated perfect attendance for the year. Attendance mighr also 
be noted on the graduates diploma: 3 days missed/year, excellent! 

good, 

average. •• 
12 poor. 

A Rirger King franchise in Colunbia, S.C. provided publicity for the 
PEA meetijTgs. And for each student who brougltit a pa:cent in to e.t 
before the meeting, tite restaurant sent 15Z of the cost of the meal 
back to the school for its computer fund. 



3 



provided by social workers, psychologists and guidance 
counselors fell under the related services provision of the 
act. According to the Judge, to hold otherwise would mean that 
if a service is provided by a physician it is a medical service 
and therefore not a reimbursable service but when provided by a 
school nurse it is a related service and therefore 
reimbursable • 

On December 10, 1984 the Supreme Court denied 
certiorari to T,Q, v> Board of Eduoatloti ,^^ In T,Q, the 
school board allegedly agreed to an Individual Education Plan 
(lEP) under which an eleven-year-old boy was promised school 
district payment for psychotherapy at a special day school for 
the emotionally disturbed. The district court found the 
psychotherapy tOgbe a permissible related service. The circuit 
court affirmed. In this case the psychotherapy was actually 
provided by a MSW staff member under the supervision of a 
psychiatrist. 

A federal court did however, deny reimbursement for 
psychiatric services rendered by a licensed physician at a 
psychiatric hospital in the case of Darlene L. v, Ti Sfcafce Bd 
of Eduoatlon , ' 

As illustrated in the discussion above the boundary 
between a medical service and an educational service is often 
an elusive one. Courts, however, have been forced to define 
this boundary in several instances. The location of this 
boundary is of special significance to those working in rural 
and sparsely populated areas where access to comprehensive 
medical care is often restricted by time, distance, and 
weather. 

Clean intermittent catheterizaton (CIC) is a 
relatively uncomplicated procedure to empty the bladder. It can 
be learned by a layperson with less than an hour of training. 
After a child has reached the age of eight or nine, she can 
perform the maneuver herself. CIC has been ruled a related 
service in two significant cases, Xatra and Tokarftiy , 

Amber Tokarcik, a child of normal intelligence, 
required CIC every three or four hours due to complications of 
spina bifida. The Forest Hills School District denied the 
parents' request to provide the service on two counts. First, 
Pennsylvania state law did not require school nurses to perform 
catheterization. Secondly, the only "special education" that 
Amber received was adaptive P.E. and since CIC was not 
necessary for that activity, it could not be a related service. 

The district court, upheld on appeal, ruled that CIC 
was indeed a related service. The Appeals court held that 
contrary to the schools argument, special education under the 
EAHCA can include regular classroom instruction . 

Tatroy a case with a similar fact situation was 
argued before the Supreme Court. The high court affirmed the 
principle set forth in Tokarcik ; CIC can be a related service 
for a handicapped child. 

While the high court did not set down absolute 
guidelines for measuring the legali^ 7 of related services, it 
did nonetheless, provide some markers. First, the student must 
be considered handicapped under the Act. Secondly, the service 
must be needed during the time school is normally in sesoion. 
Finally, the service must be one that can be performed by 



544 



ERIC 



21 

someone other than a phxglclan. Considerable comment 
followed this decision. 

The complexities of the Just discussed areas of 
psychotherapy and medical services are often Included In a 
third disputed related service: resldontlal placement. The need 
for such placement Is often relatively rare In rural areas. 
Yety the expense^ the distances involved and the concerns of 
the family make It a service with which the administrator 
should be acquainted. • 

For example. In PapaQftda ^ a federal court ordered 
the state of Connecticut to pay the full cost of an emotionally 
disturbed child * s residential school pi acement^ including room, 
board and psychotherapy. Similarly, in tcuallfi a federal 
Appeals court found that a severely retarded child with 
concomitant emotional overlays was entitled to residential care 
and that such care was the responsibility of the state of 
Delawareggin a more complicated fact situation, Parka v. 
PavkQYlQ 9 an Appeals court held invalid a state law which 
forced parents to pay for a significant portion of a 
handicapped child* s residential care. 

Contrarywlse, a California court found that the Los 
Qatos School District was not liable for the residential 
placement and treatment within a hospital setting for an 
emotionally ill hl|^ school girl who was treated by a physician 
for schizophrenia. The court reasoned that the student was 
hospitalized primarily for mental problems and that such 
placement and treatment involving medical services were not 
allowable as related services under the EAHCA.^q 

In the case of Mngftng-le v, Jafferann^^ the COUrt 

agreed with the plaintiff school district that while the 
district was responsible for the day school educational program 
and related services of an emotionally disturbed child, it was 
not fiscally responsible for the hospitalization of the same 
child at a private psychiatric hospital because the 
hospitalization was for medical not educational reasons. 

A Georgia court found that psychiatric and 
residential services provided by a hospital were not related 
services under the EHCA for a teenager whose parents had 
unilaterally hospitalized him. The student* s hospitalization 
was for behavioral and emotional reasons. The court held that 
special academic instruction was neither needed nor provided 
for the boy. ^ 

Another federal court decision involving residential 
placement due to emotional disturbance is Chrifltopher T, v, San 
FranfilsQQ Onifled Snhnnl niatriot^^" In this class action 
suit, the parents of two emotionally disturbed boys, Douglas M. 
and Christopher S. alleged that they went through dependency 
hearings, believing that only by making their sons legal wards 
of the court could residential treatment costs be paid for by 
the state. 

The school district contended that the boys* 
placement was fundamentally for social and emotional reasons 
not educational, therefore the school district was not 
responsible for taltlon. The court ordered the district to 
assume costs associated with the residential placement; "That 
residential treatment such as that sought by Douglas and 
Christopher may be-avallable as a related service under the Act 
is indisputable."^* 

545 



5 



On May 89 1985 a consent Judgment was entered Into 
steaming from preliminary Injunction noted above. The 
Judgment stipulates, among other matters, that not only will 
the parents be reimbursed for room, board, and any tuition 
expenses, they will also be reliabursed for such related 
services as transportation and psychotherapy* 

A final subject of broad concern in rural special 
education revolves around establishing a class for a single 
handicapped child, especially If a suitable class exists only a 
short distance away. 

In the case of Plnkerton Move ^^ Charlotte 
Plnkerton, mother of 12 year old Andelena Plnkerton, brought 
suit to force the school board to create a self-contained LD 
class at Woolwlne Elementary School where the child would have 
attended except for her learning disability with an emotional 
overlay. The mother maintained that the Woolwlne program was 
necessary to Insure an appropriate educational placement for 
Andelena. 

The school board argued that It had an appropriate 
self-contained program at Stuart School which was approximately 
six miles further from the Plnkerton hoise than Woolwlne. The 
county school board's decision was based on the central 
location of Stuart School and budgeta;ry conslderr tlons. 

The court ruled that the special needs of a 
handicapped child had to be balanced against the competing 
Interest of economic necessity. The county did not have to 
provide a self contained LD program at Woolwlne. It did have to 
provide alternative transportation to the program at Stuart 
because of the extra time It irould have taken the girl to ride 
.the regular bu3 routes. 

Conclusion 

The topics and cases described above were part of a 
larger study describing and analyzing over twenty^f ederal court 
cases brought under the related services concept.^ From that 
study and the discussion above, a number of practical guidelines 
can be drawn for school administrators. 

1. The first is the most obvious. If a contemplated 
service Is specifically listed In the appropriate regalation^^ 
and the child Involved meets necessary criteria, then the service 
will be legally firm. 

2. Other services are permissible if they are required 
to assist a handicapped child to benefit from special education 
and may Includegartlst 1c, cultural programs, music therapy ,and 
dance therapy. ^ 

3« If a cont6::iplated service meets neither of the 
above criteria. It may be a related service under the Act if 
ieclared so by a federal court. This guideline is qualified 
because only a Supreme Court decision is binding upon the entire 
country* An Appeals court decision is binding only In Its 
circuit; It Is merely persuasive elsewhere. A district court 
decision is binding only in that district but may be persuasive 
in others. 

4. Decisions rendered at Judicial levels lower than 
the fv^deral oou^'ts may provide guidance outside their immediate 
Jurisdiction but do not speak with the authority of federal 
regulations or federal court opinions. Examples would Include 
chiropractic services or detoxification.^' 



EKLC 



546 



THECOMIIUNIIY 



THE SCHOOLS 



Students adg^t studjr individual businesses in deptii and then do a display 
project advertising the business and their product. These could be set 
up the uedc prior to graduation and be viewed during tlie week as well as 
as graduation ceranonies. Advertisements may go particularly to those 
busuiesses tAdch have supported the students throu^ resource training 
programs or scholarship funds. Thsoe businesses, in turn, could provLle 
bulletin board space at tiie work sites for the school calendar and up- 
coming events and acccnplishnents of die schools. 

Senior citizens (or any volunteers) could work with students within the 
class day at the school building to make arts and crafts to be sold prior 
to Christmas. With the same tdcen, cultural crafts and the art of con- 
struction is passed down to another generation. 

Fdiicattfon Sunday honors the schools, teachers, and students who are mem* 
bers of the congregation within that congregation on a chosen Sunday in 
spring. 

The Welcome Wagon is a fast- fading idea. In seme areas still, though, 
newcomers to town are greeted by a town representative and given sample 
products from merchants, a map of the town, a school brochure, copy of 
the local paper... The students, in conjuction with merchants and ccm- 
munity groups, could be the **Uelcomers." Names of new residents would 
be supplied by realties or phone-in friends. 

Still to promote the-down, the classes may each week exchange the res- 
ponsibility of decorating the signboard as one enters the town. This 
could be organized around a yearly theme. 

For ai^ grade level: students prepare a composite package of ideas re- 
preseitir^ die town's lifestyle. l\«o or three students are selected to 
present meir pr o gram to a nearby school , and two or three from the other 
school come to your district and explain at an assembly how their school 
and comunity operate. 

If the school is still the building for voters to use, die students might 
prepare a slide- tape show to repeat continuously on polling day. This 
is ample opportunity also for students to acquaint adults with their 
buildings or to share their lunchtime break with parents. 



C42 



MUCH CAN BE DONE IF THE SCHOOLS AND 
THE 0CM1UNITY CAN WORK TOGEIHER. 

Wm COOEIDINATION AND OOmUNICATION 
WE REALIZE THAT FOR ALMOST EVERYONE 
WHO NEEDS HELP, THERE IS SOMEONE WHO 
DESIRES TO HELP. 

TOGEIHER WE CAN— "GET BY WITH A LITILE 
HELP ETWM OUR FRIENDS!" 




EDUCATION IS TOO BIG 
FOR EACH OF US, 
BUT nor TOO BIG FOR ALL OF US. 



ERIC 



643 



Craig S. Sparks 
Michigan Department of 

Education 
Lansing, MI 48909 



PARENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE 



Ue are aware that parent/professional partnerships are a central feature 
of special education programming. Typically, we think of that parent/ 
professional partnership on a case*-by*case basis. An expansion of this 
concept on a district-wide basis can be of benefit to both the district 
administrators and the recipient community. A parent advisory committee (PAC) 
is a required organization for each intermediate school district in oar state. 
That requirement can be a boon or a disaster. The purpose of this presentation 
is to describe how to effectively organize a parent advisory committee, whether 
it is established by statute requirement or by a school district's own 
initiative. Additionally, ve will describe how to properly utilize a parent 
advisory committee and avoid pitfalls that could make it an albatross around 
the neck. 

The experience concerning parent advisory committees is drawn from several 
years of observation and involvement with parent advisory co;unittees from the 
rural areas of our state. That experience includes technical assistance on 
organization and maintenance to trouble shooting on seemingly impasse situations. 
In the rural portions of our state there are intermediate districts that are 
comprised of several counties; some of vur intermediates exceed the states of 
Maryland or Delaware in the geographic boundaries that they cover. Those 
districts have the responsibility of planning and assuring that special education 
services occur in accordance with statute and rule. In some cases they operate 
a^nost all special education programs and services. In other situations where 
the intermediate is not a major direct provider, it functions as a coordinator. 
From this background of service provision and assurance, applied over large 
rural (farm and nonfarm) areas, we have seen the efficacy of vigorous PACs. 

Organization and membership may vary according to the size or structure of 
the subject school district. An intermediate school district should have a 
representative of each local educational agency. Every effort should be made 
for representation of all disabilities. Efforts should be made to include 
recioient organizations as well. This is not to say: one district, one vote; 
one organization, one vote* one disability, one vote. In rural areas this 
concept would be most difficult to accomplish. In rural districts, we often 
find that a parent represents a local district, a particular disability and one 
or more recipient organizations. This le/»ds to a significant distinction. This 
is a parents* ADVISORY committee. Its purpose is to advise the district 
administrators or school board. It is not a DIRECTIVE body. (Parents wishing 
that ^pe of influence should seek election wo the school board). The parent 
advisory committee is, in a sense, the "pulse" of the recipient community. Its 
purpose is not merely to provide a format t:> air dissatisfaction. The due 
process procedures required by statute, or formalized mediation, provide the 
appropriate avenue for that. On the contrary, its purpose is to provide the 
district with a support group. It must be realized, however, that the 
identification of concerns and generic dissatisfaction can be the first step to 



triday, April 25 
10:30-31:30 am 



644 



Page 2 

a supportive PAC. In our state, district administrators have a mixed reaction to 
the efficacy of parent advisory commmlttees. Because of rule requirements, each 
Intermediate district must have a PAC. It Is not optional, it is a mandate. 
Some districts have supportive, active, and conscientious advisory committees. 
Other districts have difficulty m maintaining active memberships, ov are 
strapped with contentious adversary groups that uke on a watch dog role. 

To avoid the latter and assure the former, here are some clues to 
effective organization and operation: 

ASSIGN A SPECIFIC DIS TRICT STAFF PERSON TO BE ON THE LIAISON TO THE COMMITTEE 

So many of the difficulties we experience over the years come down to 
good old fashioned personality conflicts. It Is Important that the person 
assigned to this task Is skilled In working with group dynamics. Is 
personable, diplomatic and, when necessary, assertive. It Is helpful If the 
staff person assigned to the PAC Is truly an advocate; someone with a 
recipient rights orientation who Is empathlc with parents' concerns. 
If no such person Is on staff, recruit one. Actually, anyone can do It and do 
it well. They must have an understanding that being personable, diplomatic, 
and assertive will go a long way In helping form an effective PAC. Being 
comfortable with the ebb and flow of group dynamics and exhibiting an Interest 
In the parents expression of concern will add greatly to the staff person's 
credibility. Finally, the ability to be straight forward, even with awkward 
or difficult topics or positions, will almost Insure success of the PAC liaison. 
Obviously, the key to a successf PAC Is the assigned staff person. 
Regardless of the group's mission, its organization, or Its chairperson, 
success hinges on the assigned staff liaison. 

All Jobs usually have aspects to them we wish we could avoid. The staff 
assigned to the PAC not only has a sometimes difficult task, but one that 
takes them away from home or family In the evenings. Compensatory time or 
other perks help the staff person retain necessary enthusiasm. 

PROVIDE FINANCIAL SPPPORT FOR THE PAC 

Postage, secretarial support, mileage and. In some Instances, meals, 
should be budgeted by the district for the support of a parent advisory 
committee. Active and enthusiastic members will Incur expenses beyond those 
identified above. If a district Is well funded. It may consider affording 
(reimbursing) for babysitting. In rural areas, travel time alone Is extensive, 
particularly when It Is added to the time scheduled for the meetings, sitter 
fees add up quickly for many recipient families. 

DEVELOP TH E YEAKLY GOALS AND EACH MEETING'S AGENDA IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE 
ADVISORY COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON 

Yearly goals provide a necessary focus or direction. By leaving the 
goals and agenda development entirely up to the chairperson, the district 
promotes two results: the burnout of the chairperson, and a loss of district 
influence on the PAC. That loss of Influence does not necessarily refer to 
control. Loss of Influence Inhibits the ability of the district to keep the 
group vigorous and on task. 



645 



Page 3 



ESTABLISH TERMS OF MEMBERSHIPS OF SOME FEW YEARS IN DURATION (i,e,> 2-3 years) 
TO DEVELOP BOTH CONTINUITY AND A WELL INFQRMED^MMITTEE 

In rural areas we have found that PAC representatives become convenient 
and trusted contact persons concerning special education, who are accessible 
to neighbors and other local citizens. We can even recall instances of local 
district administrators phoning PAC representatives to learn their views on 
matters of concern. Because of the travel difficulty encountered in the rural 
areast attendance at meetings is often difficult, or trying at best. Terras of 
membership of one year do not provide enough opportunity for parents to 
establish attendance patterns. AdHtionally, it takes time to learn the 
Jargon and process that we "pro's" have evolved over the years. Membership 
terms of two or three years seem reasonable. 

ROTATE MEETING LOCATIONS TO SPREAD THE TRAVELING DIFFICULTIES EV ENLY AMONG 
THE MEMBERS ' " ' 

Typically, meetings are held in one location. Our experience shows that 
the meeting locations are most often convenient for the staff person liaison. 
The location of the !i:eeting place can quickly generate dissension. A regular 
established meeting place with occasional changes seems to be the best 
arrangement. Keep in mind not only distances and time factors in rural areas , 
but seasonal/cultural effects as well. Although our weather is often pleasant 
enough in November and March or April, many of our parents are reluctant to 
travel at night at those time. Deer movement, due to the rut in the faH, and 
the spring break-up in March, make automobile travel hazardous at night. 

REALIZE THAT THE MEMBERS WILL BE BRINGING A VARIETY OF GROUP MEETING 
"SOPHISTICATION" TO THE GROUP. KEEP EVERYONE INVOLVED, BUT NOT OVERWHELMED 

No, this is not a stereotypic slam on those living in rural areas. It is 
not the contention that those living in rural areas are unsophisticated. We 
all know that there are many varieties of sophistication. Operating a chain 
saw in the pulp woods requires a sophistication that city dwellers cannot 
comprehend. A sophistication in irrigation, fertilizer, and seed stock is 
necessary for the survival of our potato farmers, (a sophistication to which 
urbanites seem oblivious). A sophistication in addressing cultural nuances of 
native American communities or isolatf»d ethnic groups is often totally 
undeveloped in the urban types. A sophistication that many rural parents 
don't have is "group meeting" sophistication. Some parents bring to the PAC 
absolutely no previous experience in formal group processes. The other end 
of the continuum are those who have been chu?ch elders, road commission 
members, etc. Keeping everyone involved is a difficult task. Too often the 
"sophisticate" can ir*^ ivertently "take over". Assigning tasks to all (i.e., 
local survey of parent concerns) or assuring that everyone makes a remark 
concerning the topic at hand helps minimize a take over by the sophisticates. 



646 



Page 4 



ASSIST THE MEMBERS IN DEVELOPING REPORTS TO THEI R LOCAL BOARDS OF RECIPIENT 
ORGANIZATIONS 

If members represent LEAs, it Is a good strategy to ask them to request 
time on their local board's agenda In order to keep that board Informed of 
their activities and concerns. In a situation encompassing only one district, 
the PAC chairperson should make an annual report to that board. 

MEMBERSHIP MAINTENANCE BY-LAWS SHOULD BE FLEXIBLE ENOUGH TO ALLOW FOR US UAL 
ATTENDANCE DIFFICULTIES (WEATHER, FAMILY ILLNESS). YET DEMANDING ENOUGH TO 

ASSURE PAR TICIPATION U.g., attendance Is required at 757. of the year's 

meetings) 

Membership requirements are necessary. There must be a method of weeding 
out Inactive members, yet there must be flexibility to accommodate the effects 
of bad weather and dlfflc-jlt travel conditions In the rural areas. Parents In 
the urban southea&t comer of our state cannot comprehend postponing meetings 
because of mud . Sudden and complete spring thaws can render ordinary country 
gravel roads Into Impassable quagmires. 

KEEP THE COMMITTEE ACTIVE; REVIEWING PROGRAMS, STAFF PRESENTATIONS ON ANY 
NUMBER OF TOPICS (I.e., programming, new m^fchodfl. r^m^ miiroi>4iii «N 

Just what does a parent advisory committee do? Our state special 
education rules require the PAC to be Involved In the development and review 
of the district's annual plar. Keying off this, a district could utilize 
a PAC for advice on program matters, staffing levels and budget development 
priority. Information presentations by staff (concerning 94-142 funding, 
federal or state requirements, teacher shortages) keep the group Informed and 
alert to the problems the district must face. 

UTILIZE THE COMMITTEf FOR SUPPORT AND "NETWORKING" ON MILLAGE CAMPA IGNS AND 
PROGRAM EXPANSION (OR REDUCTION ; EFFORTS ' 



A PAC can assist a district la so many ways. Keep the PAC alert to 
the problems and concerns of the district. The PAC can provide advice on those 
problems from the reclpleL\t standpoint. The PAC can be a valuable ally when 
the district Is forced to change the location of programs or reduce certain 
numbers of programs due to population shifts or other changing needs. 

Our districts are provided a minimal statutory mlllage. It Is necessary 
to pursue additional mlllage nowadays to operate required programs. One 
district recently passed a renewal and an additional one and one-quarter 
mills. The superintendent of the district did not phone with news of the 
successful election- — the district's director of special education did not 
phone with the news of the successful election. At 8:30 a.m. the day 
following the election, the chairperson of the PAC phoned with the news! He 
had worked vigorously on the mlllage campaign, he was a poll watcher and a 
precinct organizer. He had absolutely no political/electoral experience prior 
to that mlllage election. That's the kind of support you can gain with an 
effective PAC. 



647 



Page 5 

SOLICIT AND CULTIVATE POTENTIAL MEMBERS TO ASSURE ENTHUSAISTIC CONTINUITY 



la the best of all worldsy whea PACs are operated eathusiastically aad 
effectively, turn over aad burnout still occur. It seems inevitable. In spite 
of our good efforts, and parents* good intentions, PACs are still sometimes 
strapped with cranky, obstinate, couater-*produr tive folks. Often they tire 
and Just drop out. At other times effective members resign because the cranky 
and obstinate folks persist. Sometimes wise district personnel already have a 
cadre of identified parents to tap to replace the resignee. All district 
staff should assist the assigned staff by identifying potential members. A 
**change of face" can have the effect of neutralizing the negative members. 
Resignations occur for positive reasons as well, and terms expire. 
Admittedly, we have encountered difficulty in very small and remote 
communities. The instance that comes to mind is a district with only three 
recipient families. .. .all of whom had absolutely no interest in participating. 
That has been the exception to the rule. 

A FINAL SUGGESTION 

A PAC can be established on an ad hoc, or interim (one issue) basis as an 
experiment. If deemed successful, the district could consider a more 
permanent organization. The gBi^ in community support can be well worth the 
effort. Try it, you might lik 



# # 



648 



Friday, April 25 
10:30-11:30 am 



Presentors: Thcnes A. Crowe, Fti.D 

Oeportment of GGmnunicative Disorders 
The University of Mississippi 
University, MS 38677 

Gloria D. Kellixn, Eh.D. 
Department of GGnnunicative Disorders 
Hie Uhiversity of Mississippi 
University, MB 38677 



Title: MEDIA-BAS^ GBNXJKTE TRK^^ONS FOR SPEBCH-USISUnSE 

PAracxiOGisTS IN r?uRftL scBcxXi SErmcs 

The Depeurtinent of Tcaniiiuj^Jcavive Disorders at the University of 
Mississippi is entering its seoox. iC^c of a three year personnel preparation 
grant awarded ly Hhe U.S. Office o' Edtacation. The grant project, "tfaster's 
Level Training for TVsaciierB of the comunicatively Handics^ped in Rural School 
Districts, is designed to upgrade Bachelor's level speech-language 
pathologists to the Master's degree level and to cross-train personnel from 
surplus teaching areas (i.e., English, histor^O into a Master's degree 
position in speech-language pethology. The grant students \*k) are currently 
being cross-trained oonfc fr^ school districts in vihich no apeech/language 
pathologists have beau avedlable to serve comnunicatively handicapped 
children; the grant stiy^ents vAio are upgrading their educaticnzil level have 
been serving only mil Uy impaired children in their respective school 
districts. Upon acaplerdai of their degrees, these students have agreed to 
serve at least three years post-graduate within rural school districts in 
Mississippi. 

The grant students, concurrent with their academic airollment, are 
working part-time in i^ural counties contiguous to the county in vhich the 
University of Mississippi is located. In this wey, the stxjdents do not have 
to relinquish their jobs in order to upgrade their professional training or to 
cross-train and qpeech-language-hearing services are being provided in their 
school districts simultaneous with their taraining. The primaury logistic 
problem in this type of arrangement is the provision of coursework at times 
and locations ^propriate for ocmniting, working students. Ihe grant students 
have been facilitated in this regard throu^ the use of videotaped graduate 
courses, a procedure vftiich allows for off-onpus course offerings at various 
times and locations within Ihe same semester. Tiiia technique has been in use 
in the Department of Comnunicative Disorders for e^proximately five years, 
primarily wiiai rural, part-time, off-canpus students. The following paper 
details the developnent, inplementation, and results to date of this media- 
based graduate training program. 



Television, as an instructional fooiBt, was introduced on the college 
caitpus in 1957 as TV College at Chicago Junior College v.xth over 7,000 



ERJC 649 



2 



students pazticipating. IXiring this same time, many educational tele\dsion 
stations were being developed \^ch provided a wide network far broadcast of 
pre and poet secondary courses. College courses from English Oarpceition to 
Coraputer Literacy have been taught by television with the most recent 
advanoemmt being the nationwide availability of college credit courses on 
Public Broadcast stations. The major developers of college courses via 
television have been ccnnunity or junior colleges vAiich have moved recently 
tchmrd more programndng for the non-^traditional stvident. 

Teaching by television has been demonstrated , to be an effective 
instructional method for college courses. Qiu and Sdiraimi (1967), Purdy 
(1978), and Stickell (1963) sunnerized the research on television as ocnpared 
to live voice instruction and indicated that, for college age students, 
learning gains by television are as great if not greater than learning gains 
made -flirough traditional live ^oice classroom instruction. Chu and Schraitm 
(1967) reviewed over 200 studies involving video learning and r^rted that in 
152 of the studies the students showed no significant differences in 
performance, vJiile in 22 of the studies the video groip made even greater 
gains. This means that in 87% of the studies television instruction was found 
to be as effective as face to face instruction. In a more recent study, Staith 
(1984) reported that there was no evidence to indicate that the anount of 
learning in college courses is different in a teleoourse than in a parallel 
on-canpus course. 

Research findings indicating the efficiency of teaching by television, 
cxxpled wilh eyidHioe of cost effectiveness, has created a renewed interest in 
media-based instruction. In the areas of speech-language pathology and 
audiology there are marxy videotapes ccninercially available on a variety of 
siibject arez^. Many educationcd. programs in speech and hearing use videotapes 
and television for instructional purposes? however, few prograitB have used it 
as tiie primary mode of instruction. 

Program Developient 

Stu^ of the academic needs of the non-traditional rural, off-canpus 
student led to the development, in 1981, of a teleoourse program throu^ the 
Department of Catnwnicative Disorders at The University of Mississippi. When 
requirements for certification to practice speech-language pathology in the 
public schools in Mississippi were upgraded to the master's degree, the denand 
for off-canpus offerings at all branch canpuses increased aqopreciably. Due to 
the need for accessible coursework for the rural practitioner, it was decided 
to pilot one class during the sunmer of 1981. Additional on-<arapus graduate 
courses in speech pathology and audiology were subsequently videote^ed for 
delayed broadcast at branch canpuses. Table 1 shows the developnent of video 
course offerings fran the Sunmer, 1981 throucpi the Fall, 1985. lb date, a 
total of eight courses have been offered: Articulation Disorders, Cleft 
Palate, Cerebral Palsy, Voice Disorders, Fluency Disorders, Aphasia, 
Diagnostic Procedures, Neuroanatomy, Clinical Audiology and Educational 
Audiology. One hundred and thirty-one students have successfully conpleted 
the video courses in three off-canpus locations. Vaor courses (Neuroanatory, 
Cleft Palate, Fluency Disorders and Voice Disorders) have been used three or 
nore times and account for anproximately 68 of the student units. 



650 



ERIC 



linerit in Videocfeurses by Acadonic Term and Location 



Academic Term 



« H " « , s s ^ s s 



» a» M CD 

:^ -a 1 s 



lasia 

Iculation Disorders j_7 
rebral Palsy j_2 
ift Palate j-2 



J-5 5 

7 



3 

•''"5 J-5 G-5 17 



iiical Axiiology j_7 
ignostic Prooedures 



J-6 



13 

J-8 j-8 16 



icational Aidiology 

G-9 19 

ency Disorders 

M T-6 14 

«>anatciry j.7 j.4 



oe Disorders j-4 



^2 j-7 J-8 21 



al by semester 2 4 7 14 6 5 9 19 8 17 13 16 11 131 



f^'^^'^^'^^'^'^^^'^'^^^ocatiac^. J = j^dcson Branch: T = l^ipelo Branch 



652 



ERIC 



4 



In order to develop a media-taped program of instruction, the first 
logistic st^ is to determine v4iich courses in a curriculvsn lend theneelves to 
video instruction. As a general rule, two types of courses are not 
appropriate for videotaping. First, oaurses that are clinical in nature 
rather than theoretical are not appropriate. These oxurses often involve 
de monst rations and observations that are difficult to tape adequately. 
Attaipts to do so frequently results in an "abstracting effect" of first-hand 
experience^ Secondly, small seminars that require student interaction, 
student respanae, and student presentation are not appropriate for video- 
taping. The spontaneity and creativity of stix3ent centered seminars are 
difficult to achieve throuc^ television. 

tl^e appropriate courses for videote^jing have been determined, 
off-cara£UB or branch student needs must be determined. This nay be done with 
the assistance of the continuing education division, throu^ state and 
regional speech and hearing associations, and through departmental 
advertisements and correspondence. 

The next and most essential step in establishing a media-based course 
is developing instructor interest. Since this type of teaciiing is usually 
done at off-canpus sites and to a non-traditional population, and requires 
modification of usual lecture methods, it represents work above and beyond an 
instructor's normal oourseload and teacSvLng preparation. There is also the 
problem of putting one's self-ooncqpt as a teacher on the line by recording 
lectures for review ty successive students and possibly by peers. Adequate 
release time and salary renumeration are perhaps the most effective incentives 
for enlisting faculty participation. 

Another step in developing a videotape instructional program is the 
establishment of cooperative liaiscais with the continuing education division 
and branch canpus programs. Agreements must be reached at the incqxtion of a 
videotape training program concerning: finances, logistics and 
accountability. Financial consideration includes vihat the instructor will be 
paid and how pay will be determined, v*o pays for the costs of videotaping the 
course, and v*io pays for incidental costs such as travel. Decisions mist be 
made as to viio assumes reqxxisibility for picik-ti> and delivery of tapes, 
"^ty^g ■ °^ class materials, proctoring of tests, advising students, and 
equlpmrat arrangements. Accountability must ed.so be established. Continuing 
Educaticxi or the department must assume ultimate responsibility for the 
quality and delivery of the courses throu^iout the academic term. 

VJhoi the details of liaison with the continuing education division 
have been resolved, the next step is to obtain administrative approval or 
^ course offerings throuc^i the Graduate School. This is usiaally a 
mere formality unless specific university policy limits off-canpus courses for 
degr ee-seeiking students or limits teacSiing load beyond a faculty mentser's 
full-time appointment. At the University of Mississippi, no such policy 
presCTtly exists, and Graduate School approval is ea^xedited by a laissez-faire 

relationship between the Graduate School and Continuing Education. The 

faculty menber should, however, clear all appropriate policy diannels prior to 
initiating v*iat coald eventually evolve into a non-traditional degree program. 



653 



ERIC 



The next step involviss collaboration with the university media center. 
The Ocmnonication and Resource Center at the Uiiversity of Mississippi handles 
the taping of oourses for branch offerings and vdU work with instructors on 
fonnat suggestions and use of special media tediniques. Two points sihould be 
resolved with the production staff prior to taping. First, it should be 
decided hour taping costs will be handled. At the University of Mississippir 
C3ontinulng Education is billed directly and the videotaping of a course for 
off-campus programs represents no expense to the department. Second, it 
should edao be resolved as to how videotaping will be done and any specific 
requirements r such as f\;: ing of laboratories, in the clinic, or filming of a 
slide presartation. At the University of Mississippi, filming is done in the 
regular classroom. Strai^t lecture foonats are the easiest to videotape in 
terms of unifonn quality and siitple logistics but variations in style of 
instruction can be acGOKmodated. 

Once a classroom that is accessible to videotaping has been arranged, 
courae presentation proceeds as usual. The videotaping rationales and 
procedures are e3q>lained to the on-caitpus students and they quickly become 
desensitized to the presence of the camera and crew which are kept as 
inxbtrusive as possible. The instructor is individually miked for sound and a 
table mike is used to record student questions and oonroents during lectures. 
Upon oonpletion of each lecture, the videotapes and supplemental instructional 
materials are forwarded to Continuing Education for same car next day delivery 
to the appropriate branch canpis sites. OffH3aiipus classes usually meet once 
per week, at ni^^, in order to acoorarodate wcsrking students and oonrauters. 

Personal interaction with students is considered an essential aspect 
of the videotfi^ course program. Prior to the presentation of the first 
videotaped lec±ure, a teleconference between instructor and students, or a 
personal visit ty the instrucAoc, is used to explsdn ooarsfi procedures and 
e3q)ec±ations and to answer any of Ihe students ' general questions or conc^ems . 
Thereaft e r, teleconferences are conducted prior to and, if necessary, 
following each weekly class meeting. In addition to the teleconferences, 
several personal visits are paid by the instructor to the branch classes each 
semester. These visits permit more lengthy discussion than is conducive to 
telecxxiferencing, and allow the instructor to administer special ocnpetency 
tests or demonstrate techniques. Stan(3ard lecture tests are administered 
cxxijunctive with on-canixas tests and are proctored by the branch program 
coordinators or other Continuing Education representatives. 

Program Evaluation 

During the four year iitplementation of this non-tradicional program, 
data have been collected as to the demonstrated and the perceived 
effectiveness of videotape instruction. Evaluation data are collected 
throu^: 

1. Becon3s of student oourse perfcantance — Boi'i < n and off- 
canpus oourse and ccnpetaicy grades have in general shown 
close alignment between on and off-canpus students. 



654 



2. Student ocurse evaluations — Student critiques are used 
to recognize logistic problems, instructional qualily or 
quality of presentation prcJblenB, merthodologioal problene, and 
attitudlnal responses to videotape oouraes. These responses 

y° i«jgrade quality of instruction, to ijiprove 
logistic parameters, and. In several instances to eliminate or 
revise course offerings. 

3. Feedback fnan Ocntinuing Education and fran the off-canpus 
branch coordinators — ihis feedback is essential in resolving 
logistic problems and in ensuring quality control. 

4. Instructor oomnents Frequently, the most useful 
fee^dc has oon» from the instructors Who are the first to 
"°03nia» the inajpropriateness of a course for videotape 
presentation. The Instructor is also helpful in specifying 
student variables that should be addressed in course 
presentation and evaluation. 

^i^J^^^I ^ evaluation of this program several variables have been 
identified as being laportant in determining the success of videot^ courses: 

1. An inferior classroom instructor will likely be an 
inferior videotex instructor. But reverse reasoning fihould 
be used with cautixxi. When any instructor videot^jes his 
course, he or she is putting ego on the line. Often, adequate 
fJK good class room live instruction will come across on tape 
ac lackluster, uninteresting, or simply difficult to 
ooinpreiiend. This is in part due to the anbiguous quality 
taoimas "camera presoice.'' Seme instructors naturally have 
ra^ort with a camera v4iile others do not or attenpt a forced 
ranjort that results in a stilted presentation. If the 
students do not enjoy the oourse presentation or perceive the 
course material to be xwn-stimulating, then leaminq mav be 
adversely affected. 

2. As previously mentioned, the co nt ent of a oourse directly 
bears on its suitability for videotaping. For exairole. 
Clinical Audiology was one of the original, and most in 
denand, courses offered at the University's Jackson Brandi. 
However, although student enrollment and denand were high, 
student and instructor critiques of the cciarse's effectiveness 
^'1^ "Pt hi^. Clinical audiology- involves nuch instructor 
demonstration and requires hands on experience from the 
student. Both of these requisites proved hard to effect on 
videot^. As a result, this course is no longer offered 
through videot^. 

3 . The abstraction and deperscaialization inherent in 
videotape instruction should be conpensated in several 
manners. First, instructor characteristics such as 
enthusiastic voice inflection, eye contact with the camera, 

655 



ERIC 



REFERENCES 



Abramson, M., Wilson, V., Yoshida, R. and Hagerty, G. 

"Parents' perceptions of their learning disabled child* 

educational performance. Learning Disability Quarterly, 

1983 (Sept.)r Vol. 6 (2), 184-194. 
Colangelo, N. and Dettman, D. A review of research on 

• parents and families of gifted children. Exceptional 

Children, 1983 (Sept.), Vol.. 50 {!), 20-27 
Cone, J., Delawyer, I. & Wolfe, V. Assessing parent 

participation: The parent family involvement index. 

Exceptional Children , 1985, Vol. 51 (5), 417-424. 



5G0 



7 



md logical, saquenoedi presantaticn of material should be 
targeted. Seocndly, l^e use of slides, characte:. -generators, 
suEplmntary handouts, and other methods of instructional 
wqpport not only add variety to the tape but often ccnpensate 
for the absence of live instructicn. 

4. Unless adequate and properly functioning equipnent ^ "ilways 
available, then videot«^ instructicn is inadequate and ir t^iate 
frcm^the outset. The two most essential pieces of ^ xtion 
equipnsnt arei a videcplayer monitor and a conference v .ione. 
CJourse presentation has bean more efficient \*wn this equipment is 
pttnanently located at the brandi site. Problems have especiaUy been 
encountered with transported or borrowed equipment. Setting xjp the 
aquipnnt each week cuts into class time and occasionally the 
equipment is found not to be fvinctional when once in place. 
Re^pcawiMlity ftar making sure proper and ftmctional equipment is 
available has been with Continuing Education. However, equipment will 
occasionally mlfimction, vftiich in turn directly affects the perceived 
quality of instruction. For teacher /student interaction to be 
raudnally effective, conference calls are placed for each class 
mseting. Ihis will allow the instructor to interact with the class as 
a }Jhoim vftdch gives a more traditional and personal feel to class 
discussion than relaying calls through a spo k esperson or individual 
teacher-student oalls. Time should be allowed at the beginning of the 
course for student instruction in the use of the videoteqpe and 
telsftene equipment, and each class menlDer should be checked cxrt on 
aquipiBnt use. This will minimize situations in which the instructor 
attempts to direct equipment operation long distance or to 
troubleshoot minor problems with equipment functioning over the 
tele[hone. 

5. The quality of student admitted to the videotape 
instruction program has been found to directly relate to the 
perceived success o£ thm courses. Ihe more poorly qualified 
students ^:pear to have difficulty assimilating videotaped 
instructicn and this has been reflected in their grades and in 
their course critiques. Ainission criteria should be no lower 
than for traditional cn-canpus students. 

6. Courses that have been evaluated positively have been those in 
which weekly teleconferencing was assiduously adhered to by the 
instructor. Personal instructor visits to the class, two - three 
times during the semester, are also viewed as determinants of 
videotape instruction effectiveness. 

7. Pexmnent coordinators located at the site of videotape course 
presentation can contribute to a program's success in a variety of 
%«ys. Thsy proctor tests, distribute class materials, keep reserved 
readings available to students, maintain and operate equipment, report 
any potential problems to the instructor, maintain admission records 
for tha branch program students, and function as general liaison among 
Ihe students, the instructor. Continuing Education, and the media 



EKLC 



65b 



8 



center. Unfortunately a ocxardinator is not always enplcyed at off- 
campus sites, puttixig more responsibility on the .■'jistructor or on 
Continuing Education. 

Advz^itages of a Media-Based Program 

IXiring the fcxir years media-*ased instruction has been used at the 
university of Mississippi, some of the advantages anC disadvantages of video 
course programs have become apparent. The video courses provide the student 
with accessibility to graduate credit ooursework without having to attend the 
main campus, often saving several hours in ocmnutir^ time. Another advantage 
tothe students has been the flexibility in class schedules with the 
opportunity to review class lectures several times if desired. According to 
student feedback, the major disadvantage has been the lack of interpersona: 
interaction with their teaciier. 

Advantages to the department and university are mainly financial in 
nature. The es^ansion of oourse offerings increases student credit hour 
produc tion which translates into increased revenue from fees and state 
appropriations. In addition, vSien a video course is offered for the second or 
third time, the institution costs are decreased to one-half the original cost 
whidh results in Ic^oer instructional cost per student credit hour produced. 
Hie disadvantages to the university relate to increased aAiinistrative costs 
and additional time eaqsended in coordinating the program and materials. 

A video course can mean increased salary for an instructor. Also, 
most instructors rqport an increased satisfaction with the teaching result, 
I«cbably due to the increased effbrts in class preparation. However, ther^ 
will be unccnpensated time ooranitted to such a program and the worry and 
problems involved in meeting the student ej^jectaUons, particularly at tiie 
ni^ class hour, will be viewed as a disadvantage by some instructors. 

The media-based graduate course work project is judged as having been 
sucotjsful to date as a means for meeting the academic needs of the non- 
traditional student. Hie program has brou^t increased visibility and student 
enrollment to the Department v*iile providing educational OEportunities to 
°P^^ and hearing personnel in niral settings. Future plans for media 
program developnent include seeking state and federal funding for the 
investigation of a video-*ased degree program for rural practitioners. 



65V 



Beferenoes 

Cliu, G. ana Schranm, W. (1967). Learning frcin television; What the 

research says. Stanfcard, C3^; institute far Oomunication Researdi 
Stanford University. 

Purdy, L. (1978). Teleoourse students: Haw well do they learn? Paper 

presented at American /Association of Coninunity axxl Junior Colleges 
Annual Conference, Atlanta. 

anith, J. (1984). An evaluation of teleoourse adiievement at Saddleback 

College. Tfechnological Horizons in Education Journal, Feb., 94-96. 

Stickell, D. W. (1963). A Critical Review of the Methodology and Results of 
Researdi Conparing Televised and B^oe-to-E^ce Instruction. 
Urfwblished dcx±aral dissertation, PennsylvaJiia State University, 
State College, PA, 1963. 



65S 



END 



J.S. DEPT. OF EDUCATION 

IFFICE OF EDUCATIONAL 

RESEARCH AND 
IMPROVEMENT (OERI) 

ERIC 



FILMED 



ERIC 





QBtm: 

Ordw Number:. 
Pb^jnm Numteri 





ORDER FORM* 



1390 8. K08TNER AVE., CHICAQO, ILUNOI8 60623 U.S.A. 1312) 522-4900 



BUI to: 



Ship to: 



OfdM not submitted on purchaso ortlori or accomp«nlod by 
a tofc, wrtii bo shlppod ao.D. 



Ordor will bo shlppod choapost way unloso othorwtso opoclflod. 

Othor: 



ORDERING TIPS 



To holp us spood your ordor to you, 
ploaso spoeify Exact Quantity, ordor by 
Catalog Numbor ^ind provido Doacrlptlon 
of Itoma Pur .^aood. 



IMPORTANT 



We cMuaoi be responsible tor In* 
correct sblpments doe to missing 
CMtmlog numbers on orders* 



MINIMUM ORDER 



Ordort loso than $16.00 must Includo pay 
mont In full, plus $2.60 for shipping. If 
chock Is not Includod, thoro Is a minimum 
billing of $16.00 plus shipping. No. C.O.D. 
ordors undor $16.00. 



Qty. 


Catalog Numbor 


Doacrlptlon of Itom 


UnH Prico 


Total Prtco 


















































( 






























































PLEASE NOTE: Wo rogrot that wo must aaaoaa a 15% re-atockino chargo on any roturnod morchandiao. 

Thia holpa offaot ro-packaging, accounting, Inapoctlon and damago coata. All raturna must bo authorlzod In Total 

advanco, and ahould Includo a writton oxplanation of tho roaaon for roturn. 





Please return this coupon to receive a free Stoelting Catalog. 



Stocking provides you with the most extensive line of test- 
ing and special education materials available from a single 
source. 

Our Special Education and Gifted Materials Catalog in- 
cludes mainstreaming and lEP materials* as well as re- 
mediation materials for the basic skills. You will also fmd 
enrichment programs for the gifted. 



Stocking's Catalog of Materials for the Speech, Hear* 
ing and Language-impaired includes testing and training 
materials for Syntax* Articulation, Aphasics and more! 

The Testing Materials Catalog includes materials for all 
age groups, to assess intelligence, personality, behavior 
and self-concept. It also includes materials for the vis- 
ually impaired. 



Name 



EKLC 



Organization 
Address 



I am Int9r9at9d In . 



.Testing Materials 



Title 



.Special Education and Gifted Materials 



Materials lor the Speech, Hearing and Language Impaired 



Concurrent Sessions 
Friday^ April 25 

9:10 - 10:10 am 



568 



Loreta Holder, Ph*D* 

Professor r Area of Special Education 

P.O. Box 2S92 

University, AL 35486 

Betty WbllSr OIR 

Primary Children's Medical Center 

691 Vine Street 

Salt Lake City, Utah 84107 

Martha Cook, Bd.D. 
RISE Program 
P.O. Box 2592 
University, AL 35486 



Title: THE RISE OOMPrJTERIZED CHECKLIST 
Introduction 

RISE is a ooraprehensive, center-based program serving motor ically 
in^ired/delayed infants ranging in age from birth to three years. The 
infants are typically diagnosed as having cerebral palsy, spina bifida, 
Down^s Syndrcroe, or developmental delay. Ihe program is located on the 
caiTipus of Itie University of \labama. Infants are provided ccnprehensive 
services in the areas of: gross motor, fine motor, social, self-help, 
cognitive, and language develc^nent. Bnphasis is placed on physical 
management, a system of positioning, handling, and facilitation techniques 
which enhance the overall development of the motorically inpaired/delayed 
infant. The RISE Computerized Checklist and Curriculum was developed as a 
resa t of 10 years of demonstration acti.dties using the physical management 
programs; and is a valuable tool for use in the rural pre-school programs, 
developmental centers, and school systems which raitet rely on the services 
of whe consulting therapist. 
Description 

The Rural Infant Stimulation Environment (RISE) Conputerized Checklist 
(HCC) was deveicr^ad to address the need for an assessment instrument that 
could be used to track the development of children vto are motorically iitpaired/ 
delayed and provide an efficient method for assessing special needs of these 
children. Specif icaxly, the. ROC was designed to be utilized with children 
who (a) have deficits in motoric functioning; (b) or have been diagnosed as 
developnentally delayed; and/or (c) exhibit hypotonia (low muscle tone), hypertonia 
(high muscle yne), and/or (d) atHK)rmal movement patterns (e.g., cerebral 
pals: : • The i<ISE Computerized Checklist is cross-referenced with a computerized 
curt^culun to supplement the assessnient instrunent with therapeutic classroom 
activities and objectives. 

TABLE 1 

RISE CHECKLIST - DEVELOPMEmAL 



AREAS AND ITEM COGENT 
Area of Development Number of Items 

♦Physical Management 17 

^Reflex Integration 12 

*Reflex Development 16 

**Qral Motor Development 11 

Total RCC Item Content 56 



*Section that must be adninistered by a registered occupational therapist 
or a licensed (rfiysical therapist. 

**Section that must be administered by a theraq?ist vAkj has had training in 
pre"-^)eech and feeding techniques (oral-itiotor development). 



Presenters: 

Friday, April 25 
9:10-10:10 am 



567 



Page 2 



The. ROC was developed to be used by therapists to provide 
qpeci£ic progranning information to parents, parsqprofiessionals, and 
professionals. The Physical Nanagment section provides information 
that includes: (a) positioning and handling techniques for children 
\A)o are rootorically impaired/delayed i (b) precautionary measures that 
should be observed with the children vAk> have specific types of 
handicapping conditions, e.g., epilepsy, hydrocephalus! and (c) 
equipment needed for children with specific types of handicacqping 
conditions. 

The Reflex Integration section is designed to assess those 
reflexes that are present at birth or appear within the early 
luonths of life in the non-^iandia$)ped infant. These reflexes 
topically are integrated into movement patterns that lead to 
higher level responses. 

The Reflex Development section is ccraposed of those reflexes 
described as righting reactions and equilibrium reactions. Normal 
developnent of these reflexes occurs at various stages from 1 month 
to 18 months of age. 

The Oral Motor section is designed to assess the child *s oral 
motor developnent and feeding patterns. Oral reflexes generally 
should be integrated and/or develc^ed by 7 months of age. 

The ROC is ccnputer-printed and contains scoring instructions 
for recording the assessment information. Many available assess- 
ment instrunents have been designed to be utilized in a subjective 
manner. In some rejects the ROC exhibits a degree of subjectivity; 
however, it is q)ecif icedly designed to provide a (.^eater degree of 
objectivity in the assessment of motor development of infants. 
Reliability 

An interrater reliability study o£ the reflex sections of the 
ROC was conducted by Taylor (1980), vrtK> utilized two motor specialists 
and a sample of 24 handicapped and six noii-handica{qped children. The 
ranges of resultant correlation coefficients for the various reflex 
sections indicated a significant degree of interrater reliability: 
(a) Reflex Integration (r « .75 - 1.00; median r » .96); (b) Oral 
Motor Development {r^ « T?4 - 1.00; median r « .?8); Interpretation 
of the results of Taylor's (1980) investigation led the test developer, 
to reconsider reflexes that were assessed on the original instru- 
ment. After reviewing the literature and consulting with numerous 
experts in the field of reflex testing, only those reflexes that 
were considered to be critical the normal develqgroent of the 
child by a concensus of experts and which were supported by 
significant interrater coefficients were retained for the present 
instrument. 

Qual if icat ions of the Examiner 

The RiysicaT Management, Reflex Integration, and Reflex 
Ddvelopment sections of the ROC should be administered by a 
motor specialist, i.e., occupational or ^diysical therapist vAio 
has have training in the neurodevelopmental treatment (NOT) approach. 
Training in NDfT is of paramount importance in order to ensure 
correct implementation of the De relqproentaLL Physical Management 
section of the curriculum, which is based heavily on the Neuro- 
developroental Tteatment approach. Reflexes are used as a general 
basis to objectively identify those abnormal responses 
associated with motoric impairments/delays and not as a direct 



563 



Page 3 



basis for treatnient. The therapist \A}o has a kncMledge of NDT 
and nomal and abnori;3l developnent can utilize the infomation 
derived from the reflex testing sections of the XC to individ- 
ualize develppnental [^ysical management programs for each 
child. 

The Oral llotor section should be adtaiinistered by a speech/ 
language pathologist vAio has had training in oral motor develop- 
ment. Prior to administering any portion of the ROCr the 
examiner should become familiar with the assessment procedures 
and materials. Several practice adndnistrations may be 
indicated for the examiner who has had limited e^qposure to 
this ^pe of assessment instrunent. 
RISE Curricular Units 

The RISE Gcxqputerized Curriculun is a collection of 
instructional units which correspond with each item on The 
RISE Gcnqputerized Checklist. The instructioned units are 
divided into four areas: Physical Management (PM)r 
Reflex Integration (RI); Reflex Development (RD); and 
Oral Motor (OM). The purpose of the units is to provide 
the teacher, paraprofessional or parent with systematic, 
develqproental guidelines for daily care and management 
of the motor ically delayed/impaired child. The instruc- 
tional units are interrelated and cannot be utilized in 
isolation. The qualified thereqpist must complete the RISE 
Ccnputerized Checklist on each child and select the 
appropriate units. The instructional units will serve as 
guidelines for program implementation by the teacher, para- 
professional or parent, ^leroentation of the RISE Computer- 
ized Curriculum cannot be viewed as a rigid, structured 
process. The individual needs of the child may necessitate 
alterations of the instructional unit by the qualified 
therapist. The therapist must frequently consult with 
the inplementor and monitor program implementation. In 
order to facilitate ccniminication, a glossary lists various 
terms of position and movement which are described in the 
instructional units* 

The RISE Ccnputerized Checklist should be reachiinistered 
at least every six months to assure tliat appropriate 
programming is provided. It must be remembered that the 
infants may make changes in motor develc^nent as intervention 
strategies are implemented^ As those changes occur, re- 
evaluation may be necessary more often. 

Since all of the units are designed to meet the individual- 
ized motoric needs specific to each child and can be easily 
addressed by an immediate caregiver (i.e., teacher, parent, 
other family member) vfho has had training in develq^mental 
physical management techniques, specific hands-on training 
must be provided to the caregivers (teachers, paraprofes- 
sionalSt etc.) to insure adequate implementation of the 
suggested intervention strategies. For example, the instructor 



569 



Page 4 



must be able to position and handle the child and affect 
muscle tone before attempting any movement activities. 

Although reflex assesssnnent is included as a means of further 
defining the movement patterns observed in infants/child- 
ren with motoric delays r the purpose for assessment is not to 
"treat" refley^^ but to inhibit those movement patterns 
that are stron^^y influenced by the presence- of such 
primitive responses* 

Activities presented are designed to allow the 
active participation of the child rather than to pre- 
scribe passive exercises to be done to the child. 
By inhibiting the abnomud movement patterns produced 
as the child uses abnormal muscle tone or delayed 
reflexes functionally, the child is able to actively 
participate without interference frcro these associated 
reactions. 
Replication 

Ihe HOC provides a practicad model foe replication 
in rural settings. The nature of the assesr^nt and 
programming process facilitates the transdisciplinary 
eqpproach. Additionally, the model is best utilized in 
rural areas yAiarB full tine physical, occi^ational and/ 
or speech ther2c>i8ts are unavailable* The role of the 
therzqpist is fourfold: to complete assessments, to 
select appropriated curricular units, to train personnel 
and finally, to rxmitor implementation* The classroom 
teacher, teacher aide and parent are responsible for 
daily implementation of physical management procedures* 
TJie implementation of this model maximizes direct 
service delivery and minimizes program costs* 



570 



Friday, April 25 



9:10-10:10 am 

Presenter: Jerry F, white 

Chief, Progreun Administration 

and Evaluation Branch 
Division of Special Education 
Maryland State Department of 

Education 
200 W. Baltimore Street 
Baltimore, MD 21201 



TITLE: SEA PREPARATION FOR SEP COMPLIANCE REVIEW: 
RECOMMENDATIONS/SUGGESTIONS 



Special Education Programs (SEP) , Office of Special Education and 
Rehabilitation Services, U,S, Department of Education, has recently 
designed a monitoring process which outlines how a comprehensive compliance 
review of State Education Agencies (SEAs) will be conducted. This presenta- 
tion will focus on how a State Education Agency, by working closely with 
SEP staff, should prepare for an onsite visit. Suggestions for gathering 
documents, utilizing SEA staff, scheduling visits to local school systems' 
special education programs and organizing the site visit will be shared. 



571 



An Independent Living Center for Western Montana 
1280 &Hith W Si. W. • Missoula, Montana 59801 • (406) 728-1630 • TTY / V 



An Alternative. Transportation Model For People With 
Severe DisaMlities Living In Rur^l America 



SUMMIT Independent Living Center provided a wide range of services for 
two-hundred severely disabled individuals a year in four rural counties of 
Western Montana. During the past year, the Center has developed a rural 
transportation program in Ravalli County. The program pays for driver and 
mileage reimbursement and is funded by the Ravalli County Government. This 
type of program is extremely cost-effective as it relies on the vehicles of 
the drivers or participants of the program. 

The Alternative Transportation Workshop will discuss the basic mechanics 
of the SUMMIT Independent Living Transportation Model including: 

1) Development of a Consumer Advisory Board 

2) Requesting County funding 

3) Insurance liability issues 

A) Training drivers to work with severely disabled individuals 

5) Other alternative rural transportation models 

The presentor Is Andy Winnegar, Director of SUMMIT Independent Living Center. 
He was formerly Director of New Vistas Independent Living Center in Santa Fe, 
New Mexico* serving ten rural counties. 

Andy Winnegar 

_ . , ^ mr SUMMOT Independent Living Center 

Friday, April 25 1280 South 3rd Street West 

Missoula, MT 59801 

9:10-10:10 am 



EKLC 



572 

fliCbmmunity 



Friday, April 25 
9:10-10:10 



am 



Mary Hoy, Jennifer Long 
N 119 Quadrangle 
Ames, Iowa 50011 



ABSTRACT 



Purpose/Objectives 



Tnis session has been developed to provide those in attendance with an 
introduction to The Rural Special Educators' Role in Child Abuse/Denial of 
Critical Care module developed by the presentors for the National Consortium 
of Universities Preparing Rural Educators, The module, developed for 
institutions preparing rural special educators, will be examined for potential 
inclusion in a variety of university teacher preparation courses. 

For each of the five objectives addressed in the module: 

1. Recognize symptoms of child abuse/denial of critical care, 

2. Understand the incidence of child abuse/denial of critical care 
of rural handicapped children, 

3. Identify factors contributing to child abuse/denial of critical 
care in rural handicapped populations, 

4. Demonstrate the ability to report a case of suspected child abuse/ 
denial of critical care, and 

5. Demonstrate a knowledge of supportive agencies in rural settings, 
the presentors will discuss the selected materials and methodologies. 



Preliminary child abuse data from Iowa will be examined for its implica- 
tions for rural spf»cial educators. Participants are encouraged to bring data 
from their individual states to examine. Interested participants wishing to 
obtain data for their state should contact the State Department of Human 
Services and request data by rural/urban settings and by handicapping condi- 
tion (Participants will be provided information from selected rural states 
gathered by the authors,). 



Rural Focus/Practical Implications 



573 



Friday, April 25 
9:10-10:10 am 



Name of presenter — 



Mary Uike, Resource 
Box 272, Patagon i a , 



Teacher, Patagonia El emtary School 
AZ Te 1 e : < 402) 394-2972 



Target audience 



teachers 



Abstract : The presenter will demonstrate 
on Taylor-'s Multiple Talent Approach. 



the development of a unit based 



Purpose of un i 1 1 A community and its residents have responsibilities to its 
menmbers to provide needs; all residents share in these responsibilities. 
An awareness of these shared responsibilities aids community members in 
working to meet these needs. 

Objective: Teacher of the gifted should provide opportunities for gifted 
students to become familiar with the responsibilities of a community and 
how those responsibilities are carried out. 

Focus and Immol i cat i ons: Taylor^s Multiple Talent Approach provides a vehicle 

for this kind of study in a gifted class in a rura 
1 area. Students can learn 

•about government from an eye-witness vantage point. All of the talent 
pas that Taylor suggests can be developed through this unit. Some \ 
ssible actlviti*»s to be discussed are trips to city councel, school board, 
and/or health service board meetings. Interview with board and council 
members are also beneficial in developing communication talent. 
Discussions and observations of rules governing governemen tal and service 
organizations will provide students with rules to communicate their own ideas, 
Looking for solutions to problems in the community w 

ill develop planning talent In the students. . Drecasting can be practiced by 
oducts developed and 

discussions of future problems and events. 



Members of 
f ami 1 i ar wi 



rural communities will also have an opportunity to become 
i th the gifted program and benefit from it. The benefits 
can be immediate; for example, some students may serve in a professional 
or volunteer capacity in the commuirity at a future time. 



57. 



8YHB0LIC— PERSONAL 
7 SPl 



i« S?7 

25 SP3 

3) SPl 

40 8P5 



th«n At th« primary decision Mkcrt of their programs* «taoii»ne« 

J!IJ •ducation adminlatrator must .ct as a model, faciUtater. and catal 

for itaff on program development activities* c*wMtcr. ana catai 

The special education administrator must demonstrate flexibility to a Must 
SrcCptiSUs?''"*"'"'"'^ "y^* baied iS'hU/Svr^"" 

The special education administrator ^ust oortrav a mens, .^^ 
with key individuals inside and outside whe organittttion. ^-ppu^i. 

I?L;S2S*;^*^"*^*^^''"/'*"i"*''^"^°' ""^ ^ personalis accountable for 
programs and personnel under his/her administration, 

SyMBOLXC**ORC AN I X ATXON AL 

iriff'^Ioi;^ education program must support the professional ethics of field 

:j'"i^Tir:K.^5!iJr?:j:r'^""^^'^"-' ^^^^ --.•^sj^:„?\4i:"ion- 

ISd 2?lt{2}s!!2"5;li''\?''^]i!* '."^ 5"*"^ quickly .nd positive, to suggestion, 
ana criticisms from other departments within the educational organisation. 

The special education program must be viewed as being in compliance, 

in^??!5i'Uurji?:t?;s":4^^^^^ • ^^'''^^ ^-'^ ^^^-^^ 

education program must be perceived ag being child centered bv 
SS3%J*^ individual stSdents .ven when ivSiliSirjeJo^cei 

and/or current program is insufficient. 

The special education program must demonstrate it is providing instructional Iv 
effective programs and- services and must be perceived m h.iiSg IUJu irld S^rth, 



4 


SOI 


14 


S02 


22 


503 


30 


804 


31 


SOS 


53 


S06 



CULTURAL— PERSONAL 



CPl The special education administrator must establish and communicate a sense 



CP2 



liJk'tlkiM S^^oJ^tiJf'illH^^'^' "ust .ngage in personal and professional 
risk taking by promoting and supporting innovative and experimental programmi 



programming « 

CULTURAL— one ANXZATIONAL 
12 COl 



20 C02 

2S C03 

4S C04 

' 48 COS 

SI C06 



bCVS2St?i-*^;iS*«'°!) PF09ram must proectively recruit potential employees 
by promoting and marketing the program's strengths «nd qualities, 

I?**?**!!*^^*^.?**"?*^'®" program must stimulate and footer the creativity 
staff by actively promoting and marketing their skTllI and tu"t.! ^ 

The special education program must eontiuoiifllv mmW w^.^t^w ^ 

di.trict. th. v.iu. .„5 nf.ctiv.„.n of p?:jrj:'i„d'°.::^?^:: 

The special education program must continually gain suooort from thm 

il!t.o»)lS ^^^^in?" oj9ani«tion's belief structure must be grounded it 
integrated principle of management, planninq, and decision makino wh«i 
special education is a vital and essential agent, *'here 



in an 



384 



rORCE 



FIGURE 1 

LEADERSHIP FORCES IN SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION 
THEORETICAL 



1* Ttchnical 


• 
• 
• 


Planning 

Time r^nagement ttchnologics 
Contin^tncy Itadtrihip 


• 


Planning, organising, coor- 
dinating, scheduling 


2. Humtn 


• 
• 
• 


Group coheiivencis 
Conflict MnAgtntnt 
NotivAtion theoriti 


• 
• 


Providing ::upport 
Encouraging growth and 
creativity 


3* educational 


• 
• 
• 


ProfeiiionAl knowledge base 
Educational progran design 
Teaching effectiveness 


• 

• 
• 


Diagnosing educational 
problems 

Developing curriculum 
Providing inservice 





4. Sywbolic 



Selective attention 

Purposin9 

Modeling 



Providing a unified vision 
Touring the programs 
Public speaking 



• Climate, clan, culture 

• Bonding motivation theory 

• Tightly structured values— 
loosely structured system 



• Articulating program purpose 
and mission 

• Socialising new members 

• Rewarding those wtio reflect 
the culture 



TABLE 7 



CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS FOUND SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT 
BETWEEN EFFECTIVE AND RANDOM GROUPS 



Leadership Force 
Technical 



Type* 
P 



Criterion 
Critical 



CSF Survey item and Number 



Technical 
Technical 

Human 
Human 
Human 

Educational 
Educational 
Educational 

Symbolic 
Symbol ic 
Symbol ic 
Symbol IC 

Cultural 



P 
P 

0 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 

0 

p 

0 
0 



Critical 
Critical 

Critical 

Critical 

Critical/ 

Difficult 

Critical 

Critical 

Critical 

Critical 
Critical 
Critical 
Critical 

Cricicil 



42— planning, implementing 

quality programs 
19— environmental scanning 
27— interpreting policy 

17— securing influence 4 authority 
37— aligning with business office 

52— manaqing conflict 

5— maintaining a knowledge base 
31 — informed of legal issues 
39— acting as a resource 

30— public relations 

33— portraying respectability 

31— child centered programs 

53— demonstrating efficacy 

12— recruiting personnel 



P ■ Personal 

0 ■ Or^nisational 



"385 



TABLE 8 



CKITlCALWesS 
L«a(3«rthip Porc« 



EPPCCTIVE CSPi POUND SIGNIPICANTLY DIPPERENt 
BY CHITICALNESS AND DIPPICULTt POR RcIpSIISeSt vSSl" STRUCTUHE 



Type* 



Subqroup with 
Higher X tcorci 



CSP Survey It«n and Number 



T«ehnical 
Technical 
T«ehnical 

HiMn 

Sywbolie 

Cultural 

tllPPICULTY 

Technical 
Technical 

Himan 

Educational 
Educat ion4l 
EducationJil 

Symbolic 
Symbolic 
Symbolic 
Symbolic 

* P ■ Personal 

0 ■ Organitational 



P 

P 
P 

P 

0 
0 



0 
0 



p 
p 
p 

p 

0 
0 
0 



Nultiple 
Multiple 
Single 

Multiple 

Multiple 

Single 



Multiple 
Multiple 

Multiple 

Hultiplr 
Mult iple 
Multiple 

Multiple 
Multiple 
Multiple 
Multiple 



11— keeping conitituenti informed 

47-.«x«rciiing time management 

35 — underitanding and uiing the power 

at.*ucture 
29— gaining support 

53— demonstrating efficacy 

51 — integration of special education 
program 



34— offering flexible programming 
1— providing accurate data 

9— promoting innovative programming 

5— maintaining knowledge base 
45— obtaining additional funds 
50— maintaining knowledge base of 

regular education 
25— demonstrating personal flexibility 
30— public relations 

35— perception as chiJd centered 
53— demonstrating efficacy 



TABLE 9 



EPFECTIVE CSFs FOUND TO BE SIGNIFICANT BY CRITICALNESS AND DIFFICULTY 
FOR THE RESPONDENT VAKIABLE SETTING 

CRITICALNESS 

^^P** ^ ^ Relationship cSP Survey Item and Number 



Educational 

Cultural 

Cultural 

Educational 

Human 

Symbolic 

Technical 

DIPPICULTY 
Human 



* P ■ Personal 

0 ■ Organizational 



P Suburbant Urban, Rural 

0 Suburban^ Urban 

0 Suburban^ Urban 

P Suburban^ Rural 

9 Suburbant Rural 

0 Suburban, Rural t Urban 

0 Rural i Suburban* Urban 

P Suburban t Rural 



5— maintaining knowledge base 
12 — recruitment 
20— promoting subordinates 
31''-informed of legal issues 

4— supporting ethics of staff 
53— dexonstrating efficacy 
43-*maintaining community support 



49— maintaining professional 

relationship with superordinati 



13 386 



TABLE 10 



HXCKEST RANKED CSFl Of SURVEt POPULATION 
BY CRSTIC^LNESS 

Rank Survey Critical Succtii Factor .T . ^ ^• 

Xttn • r«c*i«s Leadership Type*- 
Force 

i • The ipecial education program must establish 4*643 Human o 
rapport and a close worlcin? relationship with ® 
r^qular education and be responsive to buildino 
^«^vel personnel, problens, and concerns. 

^ " I?Ja?rSk?ll*?«*'"^''? ad«ini.trator muirdeiil^nl rs^r'^iwaln V 
skill in resolvinq and/or atanaqinq conflict. 

^ ^ education adminiitrator Must establish ™"5Go'"cuU«al V" 

and coMunicate a sense and direction which aVlows cuicurai p 

staff to develop a sense of worth and pride in 
their work. 

^ 53 The special education program nust deiBonatritrir r^i^S^boI ic o 

in providing instructionally effective programs 5>yTnooiic o 

and services and must be perceived as havinq merit 
and worth* 

5 31 The >ptcial education administrator musrkeep 47or"^ducit lonil p"' 

informed of legal issues and school law as thiy «c«tionai f 

........ P«rtain to special education and student affairs. 

• (scale l-5| lowest -ll ' 

•• P • Personal 

0 • Organisational 



TABLE 11 



HIGHEST RANKED CSFS Of SURREY POPULATION 
By OlFFICOLTy 

Rank Survey Critical Success Factor .r . ^ 

Item • ^ 4.eadersh^p T/pe 
Force 

^ program must continually ^SU^CuwCm i o*" 

gain support from the entire educational com- tu. rural o 

munity on the fact that equal educational oppor- 
tunity for soecial education students requires 
unequal resources. 

^ * J«DS?rinl f*'"^*'*^" progrim'murrwtiblilJI 6^500 ""Ji^wn V"" 

• f^°" working relationship with ^ 
regular education and be responsive to building 
P'^^^*"** concerns. 

The special education administrator must demoni' r^r'sducat ionll 
strata skill in obtaining additional funds to "ucational p 
'woport innovative programming. 

4 51 The entire education organisation's belief struc- ™32r"cul tu^il o 

tue must be grounded in an integrated principle of cultural o 
management* planning, and decision siaking where 
• ^^'•^ essential agent. 

5 17 T!**,!Pf*^**^ education program must obtain a suf^ 6^308 'o 

ficient amount of influence and authority to be ^ 
recognised ea a significant force in the decision 
making structure of the entire educational organi- 
sation. ^ 

• (smale 1-9| low* at • li * 



3 45 



387 

14 



Thursday. April 24 

1236 N University Dr. 

11:20-12:20 pm Plantation, FL 33322 



Hew Technology Supports th» Indl y i dual i zat i on o-f a Student's 

Educational Program 

By Ruth Bragman and Ann Bass 

On January 8, 1985, the Assistant Secretary -for Special 
Education and Rehabilitative Services, Mrs. Madeleine Uill, 
ao'dressed the Technical Assistance Parent Programs' 
Conference in Washington, DC. Mrs. Uill, by discussing the 
elimination o-f obstacles to the least restrictive 
environment, charged the conference attendees "...To seek 
ways to improve the e-f-forts to provide 'LRE' to handicapped 
students, ^.nd to increase the numbers o-f handicapped 
children and youth bene-fitting -from education in the least 
restrictive environment." 

Applications o-f advances in technology can play a 
critical role in supporting the appropriate placement o-f 
iiandlcapped students In the least restrictive environment. 
It is critical -for educators and parents to be knowledgeable 
about the advances in technology and resultant applications 
to the handicapped population. The conceptual model that 
will be presented wi 1 1 demonstrate the use o-f technology to 
maximize handicapped student potential. 

The conceptual model involves the consideration of the 
following factors: 

* Identification of comprehensive technology applications. 
These may be categorized as: sensory enhancers; keyboard 
adaptation and emulators; environmental controls and 



Er|c 388 



manipulators, Instructional us»s of technology and 
motivational devices. 

Student assessment/evaluation considerations. In 
addition to the traditional assessment and evaluation of 
students, the use of technology to faclliate maximization 
of handicapped student potential needs to be considered. 
Technological considerations need to augment the 
traditional evaluation and provide information about the 
student's ability to access and use technology. 
Selection of technological devices and software, within 
the general categories, that may be appropriate to meet 
the specific goals/objectives of the student. 
Identification of the operational charact^re^Ls^t 1 cs of 
selected devices and software this includes both the 
operational characteristics and the behavior 
characteristics that the device/software requires. For 
example, the ShadowA^ET by Scott Instruments, has the 
following operational characteristic -eplaces the 
computer keyboards as an input device, .-ecognlzes a 
specific sound and outputs a character, command or string 
of commands which the computer will accept. The 
behaviorlal critieria are: minimal motor control, speech 
or the ability to produce any group of repeatable sounds, 
memory of sound patterns. 

Matching of the assessment/evaluation information for a 
specific student with the appropriate technology to 
facilitates the achievement of the student's goals/ 



389 



Thursday, April 24 
11:20-12:20 pm 



Presenters: William L. Bainbridge, Ph.D. 



Director 

Public Priority Research Associates, Inc. 
5143 Longrifle Road 
Westerville, OH 43081 



Title: HBW TECHNOLOGY IN THE TRANSPORTATION OP HANDICAPPED POPILS 



Dr. Bainbridge described new technology in the transportation of handicapped 
pupils. In particular, the Schoolbus Alert Monitor (SAM) and i'he Unigard flame-resistant 
school bus seating material were described. Bainbridge described the development, 
application, implementation and evaluation of these and other technological advancements 
to provide safer transportation of handicapped pupils. 



3B0 



ERIC 




News Update 



Summer 1985 



' SCHOOLBUS ALERT MONITOR ' 



Serving Nearly 2000 People 



SAM Going System-wide in Franklin County 




Stephen C. Pleasnick 

Superintendent 
Franklin Co. 169 Bd, 



On May 16, the Franklin County 169 
Board authorized Superintendent Stephen 
G. Pleasnick to implement the Schoolbus 
Alert Monitor (SAM) systern-wide. Nearly 
2000 handicapped 
individuals in the 
Columbus, Ohio, 
area are going to 
be served by the 
SAM system this 
coming fall. 

**A$ a result of 
the 3-month pilot 
demonstration 
this past winter, 
we learned that 
SAM will save us a 
significant amount 
of money in trans- 
porting our handi- 
capped population,** stated Steve 
Pleasnick. The 169 Board superintendent 
added that the Schoolbus Alert Monitor 
system also will reduce the amount of time 
students must spend riding the bus as well 
as enhance public relations for the school 
district. 

SAM Being Piloted 
For the Deaf 
And the Blind 

In September, the Virginia School for the 
Deaf and Blind at Hampton will be pilot 
testing SAM on four of its buses. The school 
^_ serves 206 deaf 



and blind students 
in the Hampton/ 
Newport News 
area. 

••The Schoolbus 
Alert Monitor 
system has tre- 
mendous implica- 
tions for parents 
and students 
alike,** asserts Dr. 
Philip A. Belle- 
fleur, the schooPs 
SAM will encourage 




Dr. Philip A. Rell^eur 
Supt.. Virginia School 
for the Deaf and Blind 

superintendent. 



••However, the most important feature 
of this technological breakthrough is that 
SAM enhances the self-esteem of the handi- 
capped individuals themsdves. These peo- 
ple now have the responsibility of listening 
for the bus with the help of SAM each 
morning and are thus sble to take an active 
part in going to school,** Pleasnick asserts. 



Follow mg the pilot, the parents who par- 
ticipated were surveyed for their opinions 
about the program. Seventy-eight per cent 
said ••SAM helped improve transportation 
services** while a full 100 per cent reported 
that if they had the option they **would like 
to use the system again next year.** 



Schoolbus Alert Monitor Gaining 
Support from National Leaders 



(Continued on next pogej 



The Immediate Past President of the 
American Association of School 
Administrators saw SAM work at the 
AASA convention in Dallas this past 
March. He immediately got excited 
about the potential of the SAM system 
for his own district of Blue Springs, 
Missouri. After reviewing the system 
with the director of special education, 
the decision was made to launch a com- 
prehensive pilot program in Blue 
Springs. 

*•! think that as educational leaders 
we must be aware of new technology and 
as superintendents we need to support 
that which is good,*' states Dr. Gayle T. Bar- 
tow, Superintendent, Blue Springs R-4 
Schools and Immediate Past President of 
AASA. 

Dr. Bartow says he sees great interest in 
SAM throughout the country. He predicts 
that the Schoolbus Alert Monitor will be in 
most of the school districts in the United 
States and Canada in a very short period of 
time. 

Dr. M. Donald Thomas, one of the most 
highly respected and prolific authors ana ad- 
ministr tors in education today, also 
predicts *.hat ' 'SAM will soon become a stan- 
dard service for all school transporation 
systems.*' 

School district transportation has*always 
been a difficult problem, according to Dr. 
Thomas, who served as superintendent for 
the Salt Lake City, Utah, public schools for 
12 years. He adds that it is also a costly 
problem. 

••Now, as editor of the School Manage- 
ment Study Group Newsletter, 1 am often 
asked to examine and evaluate new school 
products that hold the potential to solve a 
broad range of education-related problems 




Dr. M. Donald Thomas 
President, School 
Mgt. Study Croup 



Dr. Cale T. Bartow 
Immediate Past 
President, AASA 



^ including that of transportation. Few 
have had the potential of producing f o many 
benefits as the Schoolbus Alert Monitor,** 
states Dr. Thomas. He recommends that 
school districts should establish test routes 
using SAM. He feels thay will soon be con- 
vinced that it is beneficial for all students 
who are transported to and from school 
because it saves money and time and makes 
riding on the bui a pleasant experience." 

Dr. Thomas cites several advantages of 
the SAM system: 

• It saves fuel and makes each bus run more 
economically. 

• Et saves time and gets the students to the 
from school more quickly. 

• It creates positive public relations for the 
school district. 

• It reduces potential weather hazards for 
studen' .. 

He concludes: "Field tests have pro- 
ducted positive results. Time and fuel have 
been saved. The response of students and 
families has been excellent. No mechanical 
problems have been encountered. SAM is a 
benefit for everyone — students, school 
districts, and families." 




Puhli.shed by Corabs. Bainbridge and OTalhighan Child Safety Research Center 

fiM Park Moadow Rd. Suite M. Westemlle. OH 4.10812872 •Telephone: 6U/891.«696 

391 



System Being Piloted in More than 12 States 



More ihan 40 school disincts throughout 
the United Siaies and Canada have taken 
steps 10 implement SAM. The following is a 
sample listing of school districts: 

• Indianapolis Public Schools 
Indianapolis, Indiana 

• Arlington County Schools 
Arlington. Virginia 

• Virginia School for the Deaf A Blind 
Hampton. Virginia 

• Upper Arlington Board 

of Education 
Upper Arlington, Ohio 

• Bibb County Board 

of Education 
Macon. Georgia 

• Gal!ia County Schools 
Gallipolis. Ohio 

• Mercer County Schools 
Princcion. West Virginia 

• Pike County Board of MR&DD 
Waverly, Ohio 



Deaf/Blind Pilot fconunuedj 

responsibility and independence for the 
deaf and blind students who often must r<;l'v 
on others to alert them when their bus is 
coming.'* Dr. Bdlefleur affirms. 

According to 
the school's prin- 
cipal in charge of 
the programs Tor 
the blind. Stewart 
T. Bowden. the 
deaf students will 
be able to monitor 
the location of 
their bus by view- 
ing the light 
display on their 
SAM receiver, 
while the blind will 
be able to monitor 
their bus by listening to their SAM receiver 
talk. 

••In addition to the fact that with SAM 
dea^ and blind students will be able to be 
responsible for getting themselves to 
school, the alert system will keep them from 
having to wait along busy roadways and 
during inclement weathei for thsir bus to 
arrive.** states Mr. Bowden. 




Stewart T. Bowden 
Principal fn-Charge 
of Programs for 
The Blind 



• Lewis-Palmer School Disirici »}S 
Monument, Colorado 

• Ross County Board of MR&DD 
Chillicothe. Ohio 

• Nebo School District 
Spanish Fork. Utah 

• Westerville City Schools 
Westerville. Ohio 

• William Floyd School District 
Mastic Beach, New York 



• Weber County School Disirici 
Ogden, Utah 

• Franklin County Board of MR&DD 
Columbus, Ohio 

• McLaughlin High School District 
Milton-Freewater. Oregon 

• Blue Springs Schools 
Blue Springs, Missouri 

• Ann Arbor Public Schools 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 



Schoolbus Altert Monitor Has 
Reduced Transportation Costs 



During the 3-month pilot of SAM in the 
Franklin County 169 Board system. 
Transportation Supervisor James D. Boyd 
issued the following progress report: 

"The system is working and is of significant 
benefit. The parents and guardians of 
students have a better feeling and attitude 
toward transportation. In my opinion, this 
is due to them having available on a daily 
basis information regarding location of the 
bus and the approximate time that their son 
or daughter will be picked up and dropped 
off. In addition, there is evidence that stu- 
dent riding time has decreased. The primary 
reason for this is that students and parents 
are waiting for the bus instead of the bus 
waiting for them. The route is definitely be- 
ing run more efficiently. 
The actual results of the pilot lesi validate 



validate that in- 
terim report. SAM 
cut transportation 
costs by a full 10 
per cent and re- 
duced by 25 per 
cent the time spent 
by 169 Board stu- 
dents riding to and 
from school. 




James D. Boyd 
Transit. Su/H*rvt\or 
Frank Iw Cutwtx 
169 tiuard 



••We found that 
SAM provides for 
a much more effi- 
cient delivery 

system for our handicapped students.*' 
states Jim Boyd. "The .system also is ea.sy to 
install and operate and, in fact, should 
work in almost any school district in the 
country,'* he concludes. 



SAM's Features 

ARlOOl/4001 Receiver 

• Voice synthesis receiver 

• Digital Addressed 

• 1 to 4 channel models 

• Non-volatile memor> . never needs batteries 

• Flashing Bus Route LED 

• Field programmable by SAM RPlOO transmitter 

• Repeat Function rejilays last stored message 

• Adjustable Volrjme 

• Telescoping Antenna 

• V\ approved 

• Made in U.S.A. 



ATlOOl Transmitter 

• Keyboard Programmable U\x Hun. 
Route and Stop numbers 

• Digital Display 

• Non-volatile memor> levcr needs 
batteries 

• Backlighted Keyboard 

• Adjustable Volume 

• Day/Night Switch 

• Made in U.S.A. 



EKLC 



392 



What Parents Have to Say about SAM 




Pam Mamuta 
Bus Driver 
Franklin Count v 
t6^8oartl 



Following the three-month pilot of SAM 
in Franklin County, the parents who par- 
ticipated in the program were asked by bus 
driver Pam Mamula to evaluate the alert 
system. 

"The parents love the SAM system and 
so do I/' states Psm Mamula. a 169 Board 
bus driver *ho took part in the SAM pilot. 
•'The parents know exactly when I'll be at 
their stop, and I save a lot of time on my 
route." she adds. 

The following are the comments made by 
the parents about the SAM system: 



We live back a long lane and it helps me k now when to leave to meet 
the bus. I think SAM was th^ best thing ever made. It has helped me 
and the bus driver, too. " 

"I. know when the bus is running late, laiso know if she's (driver) arriv- 
ing early. " 

"The system is so easy to use. We have a long driveway and we are 
unable to see the bus coming in either direction. We now don V have to 
stand 10 or 15 minutes out in the bad weather waiting on the bus. Hav- 
ing the system gives me a lot of peace of mind in case the bus is running 
late. 

"The days that it was not being used caused us problems. We depended 
on it to tell us when to have Jeff ready. We did not have to stand at the 
window watching. " 

"It is so nice to know about when the bus will arrive instead of wasting 
time walking around watching for the bus. Also, you don't have to 
have the child waiting in a coat for so long during winter weather. I 
loved SAM. it was really a help. " 



SAM Videotape Available 

A videotape depicting in a stcp-by-step manner the operation of the School- 
bus Alert Monitor system is now available. 

In the videotape prcsemation. officials from the Franklin County 169 Board 
and the Indianapolis Public Schools report on the results of their pilot 
demonst rations. 

The videotape also includes a discussion of the SAM system bv Dr. Gale T 
Bartow and Dr. M. Donald Thomas. 
For information about the SAM videotape, contact: 

Comhs. Bainhridire nnri OTnllnphan rhild Safety Resewrch Center 
611 Park Meadow Rd.. 

Suite M 
We.stemite Office Center 
Westemlle. OH 4msi ..>H72 

«14.891.r>fi«m 3^3 



"He (my son) doesn 't have to sit with a coat on. " 

''It helps to know if the bus is on schedule or run- 
ning late or early so children can be ready to board 
and cause less delay at each stop. This system 
helps my child be aware of the time she must be 
ready by hearing the preceding stops being 
announced. '* 

"The arrival time of the bus can vary from 30 to 
40 minutes especially in bad weather. SAM allows 
the children to wait until approximately five 
minutes before arrival to put on coats and watch 
for the bus. " 



by Regency 



TM 



Schoolbus Alert Monitor 

Equipped with state-of-the-art radio frequency 
technology, the newly developed Schoolbus Alert 
Monitor (SAM) is a computerized schoolbus alert 
and warning system. SAM's programmable trans- 
mitter sends out a coded signal for a particular 
bus route. A home. SAM's voke actually tells the 
parent and the pupil where the bus is located on a 
stop-by-stop basis. 




EKLC 



Massive Public Su ppnr. Frp^rt^H for SAM 



A few years ago, Margart M. Burley 
I became very active in the national effort to 
improve the quality of life for the handicap- 
ped. As a parent of a handicapped child, 
she was well aware of ihe problems as well 
as the opportunities facing the handicapped 
and their families. 

"One of the most serious problems fac- 
ing us is the excessively long bus rides 
forced upon the handicapped each school 
day," states Mrs. Burley. "In addition, 
we've got parents throughout this country 



waiting for 30 to 40 minutes every morning 
for the bus to come to pick up their han- 
dicapped children for school. In a very real 
sense, the long waiting period problem is as 
significant as the long bus ride problem," 
she asserts. 

Currently Executive Director of the 
MR/DD Legislation Coalition and Co- 
founder of the National Parent CHAIN, 
Mrs. Burley is convinced that parents, 
professionals and other groups involved in 
the national effort to help the handicapped 



Districts Considering SAM for All Students 



The Upper Arlington City Schools, a .sub- 
urban district bordering Columbus, Ohio, 
and the Gallia County Schools, a large rural 
district in the rolling hills of southeastern 
Ohio, are currently conducting pilot tests of 
the SAM system for their total handicapped 
and non-handicapped school population. 

"While we are impressed with what SAM 
will do to reduce both transportation costs 
and riding and waiting time on our han- 
dici iped roves, we see the Schoolbus Alert 
Moniior system providing significant health 
and safely benefits for the rest of our 
students as well," affirms Dr. L. Neil 
Johnson, Superintendent, Gallia County 
Schools. 

I "By reducing the exposure time to both 
f highway traffic and severe weather condi- 
tions, you are imi^roving by a very signifi- 
cani degree thi health and safety of the 
students in your school system," Dr. 
Johnson asserts. 

At the Upper Arlington City Schools, Ex- 
ecutive Director of Pupil Personnel Ser- 
vices, Charles M. Wilson, feels SAM may 
help alleviate parent concerns associated 
with the consolidation of some of the Ui>- 
per Ariington's elementary schools. 



"As a result of 
this consolidation, 
our buses have 
multiple runs," 
Dr. Wilson states. 
"We feel the 
Schoolbus Alert 
Monitor will 
reassure parents 
that their children 
are safe and secure 
on their way to 
and from school 
— particularly on 
bad-weather days," 




Dr. L. Neii Johnson 

Superintendent 
Gallia Co. Schools 

he adds. 



Dr. Wilson also serves as Executive 
Director of the National Association of 
Pupil Personnel Administrators. 

School officials in these two school 
districts agree that SAM is more than a con- 
venience when it comes to the regular 
school population which is forced to stand 
for long periods of time during inclement 
Areather conditions waiting for the school 
bus. For these children, SAM is almost a 
necessity. 



provide for them- 
selves are going lo 
embrace the 
Schoolbus Alert 
Monitor system 
with enthusiasm 
and commitment. 

**ln many 
school districts, 
handicapped chil- 
dren spend up 
two hours in th 
morning going to 
school and twc 
hours in the after- 




Margaret M. Burley 
Co-founder 
National Parent 
CHAIS 



noon coming home from school," states 
Mrs. Burley, "It is a very serious problem 
all over the nation," she affirms. 

According to Mrs. Burley, the Schoolbus 
Alert Monitor appears to be the solution to 
the long bus ride problem. In the next few 
months, she predicts the school officials ^re 
going to see a groundswell of local and na- 
tional support for the SAM system from 
parents of the handicapped residing in their 
districts. 



U.S. DOE Interested 
In the SAM System 

Mrs. Madeleine Will, Assistant Secretary 
for Special Education and Rehabilitative 
Services, U.S. Department of Education, 
has asked the Director, National Institute 
of Handicapped Research to take a serious 
look at the Schoolbus Alert Monitor 
system. 

In response to Assistant Secretary Will's 
request, Douglas A. Fenderson, Ph.D., 
Director, National Institute of Handicap- 
ped Research has offered to help announce 
the availability of SAM to potential users. 



TM 



Combs. Bainbridge and O'Callaghan. Inc 
611 Pack Meadow Rd. 

Suite M 
Westeiville Office Center 
Westeiville. OH 43081^2872 • 614/891-6696 



BULK RATE 
U.S. POSTAGE 
PAID 
INDIANAPOLIS. IN 
PERMIT NO. 2939 



32i 



ERIC 



Thursday, April 24 



11:20-12:20 pm 

Presentop: Linda L. Mahrer, Ph.D. 

Associate Professor & 
Extension Residential 
Housing Specialist 
108 Barre Hall 
Clemson University 
Clemson, SC 29634-0312 



HOUSING FOR INDEPENDENT LIVING 

"...four out of five Americans do become disabled, at least 
temporarily, during some portion of their lives. In this sense, 
being disabled Is something we all have in common - and is 
something we must learn to cope w1th."(Puteet, 1986, p. 29) 

During a time of disability, routine activities such as 
preparing meals, reaching kitchen cabinets, bathing, doing 
laundry, walking up or down stairs, or even getting in and out of 
one's car or home "are either difficult or impossible as a result 
of architectural barriers. Yet, if these barriers are removed or 
minimized, many people with disabling conditions can live 
independent, productive, and fulfilling lives. "(U.S. Department of 
Housing and Urban Development, 1984, p. ill) 

Independent living.. .it is a goal the achievement of which 
most people take for granted. Yet the place they call home often 
poses significant barriers to independent living. How can new 
homes be designed - and existing homes modified - to facilitate 
independent living for the able and disabled of all ages? What 
resources are available? How can educators, service providers, 
and families access these resources? Answers to these questions 
are particularly critical for rural areas, where agency offices 
may be miles away, and where an estimated 8.5 million people 
with disabilities live. (University of North Dakota, circa 1985) 

Rural schools are 67% of all schools in the U.S., and 1/3 of 
all students live in rural America. (National Rural Development 
Institute, 1985) Further, rural teachers must be trained to work 
with multiple age and ability levels at a time when rural schools 
are faced with acute personnel shortages. 
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

This paper demonstrates one successful approach of the United 
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Cooperative Extension 
Service in rural service delivery in South Carolina in 
facilitating housing for Independent living. It demonstrates how 
federal, state, and local agencies, as well as individuals, can 
cooperate to access, utilize, and extend information to help 
people with special needs, in this case - housing needs. 

An Extension home economist with housing education 
responsibilities received a renuest from the South Carolina 
Department of Vocational Rehabilitation for information on 
designing a remodeling plan for the kitchen in the department's 
Independent Living Skills Center. The center is a two section 
manufactured/mobile home where clientele are trained to be able to 



ERIC 



1 

3S6 



live independently upon completion of their rehabilitation 
training. They learn to overcome their disability in preparing 
meals, caring for clothing and the home, personal grooming, and 
meeting social needs. 

The home economist, who had considerable experience assisting 
handicapped and special -needs clients with information on clothing 
and home management, requested the assistance of the state 
Extension housing specialist at Clemson University (South 
Carolina's 1860 land grant university). Utilizing research and 
design data from numerous government agencies, universities, and 
corporations, the specialist and agent designed a kitchen 
remodeling plan accessible to people with varying abilities and 
disabilities. 

Utilizing a federal grant, and the plan developed by the 
Cooperative Extension Service (CES), the Vocational Rehabilitation 
Department implemented the remoileling and continues to use the 
facility for training programs. In addition, groups and 
individuals tour the facility for design ideas to implement in 
their own homes. Many of the features are appealing to people who 
have no disability. The Department of Vocational Rehabilitation 
is currently building a site-built, adapted home for use in its 
training programs. 

PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS IN RURAL EDUCATION 

The completion of this remodeled teaching facility was only 
the beginning of practical application, however. The Extension 
specialist developed a set of color slides showing the remodeled 
demonstration teaching kitchen, and wrote an Extension publication 
illustrating the adaptive design features utilized. 

Both the slides and publication are utilized in numerous 
rural (and urban) educational programs, in live and taped 
television shows reaching across South Carolina and five other 
states, and in classes of senior citizens attending a college week 
for senior citizens sponsored by the Parks, Recreation, and 
Tourism Management Department of Clemson University. The slide 
set was shown at a national inservice training conference of 
Extension housing specialists. Numerous colleges and 
universities, as well as Extension services in other states, have 
purchased or borrowed the slides and publication for use with 
students and residents of their state. 

In South Carolina, the Extension housing specialist has 
trained individual county Extension agents requesting such help, 
and plans state-wide inservice agent training. One-on-one design 
assistance to special-needs clientele has already been provided tO' 
adapt an existing home economics laboratory in a public school as 
well as the kitchen/laundry/bath/bedroom/living/dining area used 
for teaching and demonstrations at a rural county career center. 
A wheelchair-mobile Clemson University employee utilized Extension 
design recommendations in building her new accessible home. 
Numerous rural individuals seeking Extension assistance in 
planning new or remodeled homes have incorporated accessibility 
features. 

One county Extension home economics agent assisted a rural 



2 

397 



client about to become wheelchair-bound 1n designing adaptations 
for her kitchen, and procurred financial support for needed 
transportation adaptations from a local Extension Homemaker Club. 
For this, the agent and the Extension Service won editorial 
acclaim In the area newspaper. Feature news articles about 
housing adaptations appear In South Carolina newspapers as well as 
Clemson University news releases, and result In requests for 
assistance from South Carolina and neighboring states. 

In the business and the Industry community, members of the 
North Carolina/South Carolina chapter of the National Kitchen and 
Bath Association received an Illustrated lecture on the kitchen 
adaptations and, the next year, toured the adapted Vocational 
Rehabilitation facility. Members consider the adaptive features 
as parti culary marketable to the growing number of elderly who are 
planning new and remodeled homes for their retirement years. 
These experiences exemplify an agency-Industry-Extension 
partnership that draws on the strengths of each to benefit the 
public and consumer, rural as well as urban. 

Additional examples of application and diffusion In this 
rural state Include presentation of the topic as one part of a 
day-long "Senlorama" In three South Carolina rural counties, and 
presentation of a research/application report at a college 
research symposium attended by professionals, as well as 
graduate, and undergraduate students from three states. 
GROWING IMPLICATIONS 

As noted earlier, disability observes no age limitations. 
The rapidly growing number of Americans aged 65 and older create 
an ever-widening audience for special services. Further, the 
Increasing number of people living to age 85 and beyond 
underscores the value of providing service - Including education - 
regarding housing adaptations for independent living in their 
present communities and homes. Industry publications ( Builder , 
Professional Builder ) featured housing needs of the elderly and 
handicapped in several monthly Issues in 1985. They Identify 
housing for the elderly as a major market segment. Many U.S. 
elderly live in rural areas. They prefer to remain and, according 
to research, to live Independently as long as possible. The 
American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) notes that the key 
to continuing Independence is housing and environment which 
permits the elderly to manage their own daily living activities 
(1984). 

Once again, the Extension Service is responding to special 
needs. The same South Carolina housing specialist developed an 
educational slide set on "Housing for Independent Living" which 
(1) identifies key printed resources of government, academics, and 
Industry, and (2) illustrates details of several design 
adaptations to facilitate independent living regardless of age or 
ability. Even before the set was completed, Extension agents from 
four South Carolina counties requested it for use in programs that 
month . 
RURAL FOCUS 

The Cooperative Extension Service is present In the 50 states 



3 383 



and 3,150 counties of the U.S., and in 5 other countries. It 
includes Extension educator/agents at the county level, subject 
matter specialists at the land grant universities of each state, 
(the 1860 land grant universities as well as the 1890 universities 
in 16 southern states), and program leaders at the federal level. 
County agents extend their resources via community Extension 
Homemaker Clubs and 4-H clubs, and by the approximately 2.9 
million adult and teen volunteers (1984 data), many of whom are 
trained by county Extension agents. These volunteers in turn 
teach other citizens in their community. 

In February of 1983, the chairman of the President's Committee 
on Employment of the Handicapped, and the U.S. Secretary of 
Agriculture signed a Memorandum of Understanding to further the 
rehabilitation and placement of handicapped persons living in 
rural areas. The memorandum identifies the Cooperative Extension 
Service of USDA as lead agency for the Rural Handicapped Program, 
and focuses on two vital areas: 

"1. Identifying educational resources, training programs, 
accessible housing, in-home work programs, counseling 
and placement services, and informing handicapped 
persons of their availability. 
2. Encouraging USDA agencies to work with Governor's 
Committee's and local committees on Employment of 
the Handicapped and individual living centers in state- 
wide information and educational programs." (USDA 1985, 
p. 1) 

In addition to CES educational programs, many of USDA's 
services and programs include delivery of services for rural 
special needs audiences, as described in the 30 page, 1985 
publication, USDA Services for Rural Handicapped Persons (USDA 
Extension Service Program Aid No. 1373).. 
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR RURAL EDUCATION 

In addition to the practical applications for rural service 
delivery already described, several implications are evident. 

*The availability to rural educators and residents of 
educational proframs on housing adaptation could be disseminated 
via a statewide toll free telephone number such as currently 
provided by the South Carolina Handicapped Service Information 
System. 

*Community organizations (churches, service organizations, 4-H 
clubs. Boy and Girl Scouts), and individuals could receive 
training on adapting housing from county Extension agents. They 
could then volunteer their time, energy, and skills to teach 
and/or assist community members needing help. More and more 
Americans are volunteering time for community service, benefiting 
others while staying constructively engaged at all stages of the 
life cycle. Research data from 1984 indicate that about 2.9 
million volunteers worked with Cooperative Extension Agents, an 
average of 615 per county. Volunteers invested about 5 days for 
every day an Extension professional invested in working with 
volunteers. The value of volunteer time, more than $4.5 billion, 
far exceeded the total Extension Service budget of $860 million. 



(Steele, 1985) 

^Teacher education programs could Include workshops, field 
visits and lectures on adaptive housing design to enable rural 
teachers to know resources when needs arise. 

*Home builders associations and Industry groups could 
collaborate with service providers and educators to make ad9pt1ve 
design available In a11 new or remodeled housing, and Included In 
model building codes. Two home deve1opers/bu11ders have designed 
accessible homes, Including one for the whee1*cha1r bound. (Lemov, 
1986) California Incorporated new handicap-access standards Into 
Its state building code, effective September 15, 1985. 

^Manufactured home producers (for example, mobile, modular, 
kit producers) could Incorporate adaptive design In some or a11 of 
their models, making accessible housing available to moderate and 
low Income markets. Many of these manufacturers are located In 
rural states. A Columbus, Ohio-based modular home builder took a 
10-ton, one bedroom modular house, modified for the handicapped, 
to Washington, D.C. In 1985 for a 5 day display on the Mall. It 
was part of "Inspire '85", a symposium arranged by the President's 
Committee on the Employment of the Handicapped, and urged the 
federal government to establish uniform specifications for 
adaptable housing for the handicapped. (An estimated 30 million 
Americans are mobility-handicapped.) A cost efficient product was 
a theme In the manufacturer's effort and would be facilitated by 
planning In the groundwork for the changes to be engineered Into 
the building. Then, If and when adaptations are needed, 
modification costs would be no more than about $750 per unit. 
This Is critical to meet two needs: (1) the special -needs person 
whose Income does not enable them to become homeowners of even a 
modest site-built home, and (2) the landlord whose tenant(s) 
need(s) affordable adaptive housing. 

*Rural teacher Inservlce trainings could Include an Extension 
agent. Extension specialist, or Vocational Rehabilitation 
professional to assist teachers with accessibility Information for 
special- needs students and their families. 

*Rural educators with no training In adaptive housing design 
may request Cooperative Extension agents to be a guest speaker for 
either a class or a parent-teacher association meeting. Such a 
cooperative effort could be a support system to aid in retention 
of new rural teachers. 

The Cooperative Extension Service is described as the 
largest, most successful. Informal educational organization in the 
world. It is a nationwide system funded and guided by a 
partnership of federal, state, and local governments that delivers 
information to help people help themselves through the land grant 
university system. (Mounter, 1985) 

The Extension Service system has been replicated by other 
nations of the world. While today urban residents, too, utilize 
Information from the Extension Service, its stated mission when 
established in 1914 - to serve rural education needs - remains to 
the present. (Copeland, 1985) That USDA's Extension Service was 
in 1983 chosen as lead agency for the Rural Handicapped Program 



•it'O 



underscores the potential 1t offers to provide "Practical 
Approaches for Rural Service Delivery" - the focus of this 6th 
annual conference of the American Council on Rural Special 
Education. 

REPLICATION OF MODEL 

As a nationwide system of Informal education, the Cooperative 
Extension Service in each state makes available to other states 
and counties the educational materials they develop. Sharing is 
done via exchanges of ideas and materials at national meetings of 
county Extension agents, of state subject matter specialists such 
as housing specialists, of Extension administrators, of Extension 
Homemaker Club and 4-H Club members. As noted earlier, numerous 
county and state Extension personnel have borrowed or purchased 
copies of the adaptive housing materials described here. 

In addition, since the Extension Service Is funded 
cooperatively by the federal, state, and county governments, its 
information is in the public domain and thus available to anyone. 
Programs are available to people of all ages, regardless of race, 
color, sex, religion, national origin, or handicap. 
FUNDING 

The funding of the adapted kitchen described here was joint. 
The Cooperative Extension Service funded the agent and specialist 
giving design assistance, while the South Carolina Department of 
Vocational Rehabilitation funded the design implementation via a 
grant. 

Funding of educational programs on housing for Independent 
living could be facilitated by utilizing the personnel and 
educational materials of the Cooperative Extension Service in each 
state and/or county. Additional support for specific programs 
might be solicited via Extension Homemaker Clubs, community 
volunteers, teacher education programs, community service 
organizations, a state Department of Vocational Rehabilitation, 
the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP), U.S. ' 
Department of Education Clearinghouse on the Handicapped, National 
Rehabilitation Information Center, President's Committee on the 
Employment of the Handicapped, Disabled American Veterans, 
American Council of the Blind, Architectural and Transportation 
Barriers Compliance Board, and other national organizations 
identified in Selected Resource Guide on Accessible Environments 
for the Disabled (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, 1984) and USDA's Services for Rural Handicapped 
Persons. (1985) 
COST EFFECTIVENESS 

Utilizing the Cooperative Education Service is cost effective 
in that it Is a non-profit educational arm of USDA. Materials are 
available, by request, from a county Extension office, and 
additional expertise from academia. Industry, and government is 
often made available to Extension programs at no cost. 
Television, radio, and newspapers provide the public a medium for 
service delivery. The volunteer network of Extension Homemaker 
Club members, 4-H Club members, and adult and teen volunteers 
provides a dynamic multiplier effect in making educational 



hi 



Information avalUble at minimal cost. The national grass-roots 
network of Extension offices and professionals provides a ' 
nationwide source of research-based Information and program 
assistance. Housing for Independent living Is one practical 
example of educational programming available to rural sp'aclal 
needs audiences through the Cooperative Extension Service. 



902 



Selected Bibliography 



American National Standards Institute, Inc. American National 

Standard Specifications for Making Buildings and 

l-.ac 1 1 1 1 1 es Access i b I e to and Us ab I e by 

riandlcapped People . ANSI A 11^.1-1980. riew York, 

W.V.; 1980. ^ 

Anton, Frank. "Added Dimension." Builder , Vol. 8, No. 6, 

June 1985, p. 5. 
Copeland, J.B. Informal Educat i on Opportuni ty . Clemson, 

S.C.: Cooperative Education Service, July 1985. 
"Graying of America: Housing for 50 Plus." Professional 

Builder , Vol. 50, No. 11, September 1935, pp. 68-79. 
Harkness, 5aran P., and Groom, James N., Jr. Building With out 

Barriers for the Disabled . New York, N.Y.: 

blliboard Publications, 1976. 
Hubbard, Linda, ed. Housing Options for Older Americans . 

Was h i ngton , D.C.: American Association of Reti red 

Persons, 1984. 

"Insights from Walks in Orthopedic Shoes." The Greenville 

News . Greenville, S.C.: Jan. 16, 1986. 
Jackson, GoTHen. Housing Options for Older People . 

Col umbus, Ohio: Ohio State University, 1982 . 
Lemov, Penelope. "Barrier-Free, Stigma-Free." Builder, Vol. 

8, No. 7, July 1985. 
Making U.S. Homes Accessible to All . Builder , 

voi. 9, no. 1, January 1^86. 
Lorraine, Hiatt, Snyder. Housing for Older People . Ithaca, 

N.Y.: Cornell University, March 1974. 
Mahrer, Linda L. "Housing for Independent Living." 

Presentation at 1985 Research Symposium. Rock Hill, 

S.C.: Winthrop College, October 4, 1985. 
^ Kitchen Adaptations for the Physically Limited . HE 

circular 267. Ciemson, S.C.: Clanson University 

Cooperative Education Service, 1981. 
Mason, Wilhelmina. "Disabled Students Learn to Cook." 

Forecast for Home Economics . Jan. 1986, pp. 30-31. 
McCul lough, Heien E. and Farnham, Mary B. Kitchens for Women 

in Wheelchairs . H.E. Circular 84TI urbana, ii i.: 

un-Tversity of Illinois, November 1961. 
Moss, Mabel. "Devices for Assisting Physically Limited." 

Spartanburg, S.C.: Spartanburg Herald-Journal . 

Sept. 25, 1985. 
Mounter, Clyde T. "Institute for Volunteer Development: A 

Proposal." Clanson, S.C.: 1985. 
NRTA-AARP Program Department. Safe Living In Your Mobile 

Home . Washington, D.TTl National Retired Teachers 

Association-American Association of Retired Persons. 

1980. 

National Rural Development Institute. "Resolution Statement: 

National Rural Teacher Education Consortium." 

Bellingham, Wash.: October 11, 1985. 
Oglesby, Doris. Housing for the Handicapped and/or Elderly . 

H&E 3. Athens, Ga.: University of Georgia, Jan. 

1979. 

i 

8 

403 



Plowman, Faye T. Owner-Occupied Housing Satisfaction of the 

Elderly and Other Interrelated Factors . 

tiainesvi I ie. Pi.: university or Florida Cooperative 

Education Service, 1983. 
Puteet, Ke11y, and Chamberlain. "Understanding the Disabled 

Student." Forecast for Home Economics . Jan. 1986, 

pp. 28-29. '. ' 

Raper, Ann Trueblood, ed. National Continuing Care 

Directory . Glenvlew, Hi: ScoHTToresman and Co. 

American Association of Retired Persons, Washington, 

D.C., 1984. 

Schwab, Lois 0. Rehabilitation for Independent Living: A 

Selected Bib ilograp'Hyl Washington, b.C: 

Hresi dent's commlssTon on Employment of the 

Handicapped, Jan. 1980. 
Stoclcman, Leslie E., and Fletcher, June. "A Maturing Marlcet." 

Builder , Vol. 8, No. 6, June 1985, pp. 70-91. 
Sumichrast, Shafer, Sumichrast. Planning Your Retirement 

Housing . Glenview, IllTl bcott, Foresman and Co. 

American Association of Retired Persons, Washington, 

D.C., 1984. 

Steele, Sara. "Summary: Volunteers' View of Value." 

Implications of Volunteerism in Extension . 

Madison, wise: university or Wisconsin, Department 

of Continuing Education, 1985. 
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Current Population Reports. 

1980. ^ ^ 

U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. Safety for Older 

Consumers: Home Safety Checklist Washington, 

U.U.: Jan. i98b. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Extension Service. US DA 

Services for Rural Handicapped Perso ns. WasHTngton, 

u.C. : U.5. sovernment printing orfice, 1985. 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Housing 

for the Elderly . Washington, D.C.: U.S. 

Government Printing Office, 1985. 
^ Housing for the Elderly: A Selected Bibliography . 

Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government printing Office, 

July 1984. 

"HUD Ass-istance to the Elderly: Fact Sheet." 

Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 
May 1984. 

Low Rise Housing for Older People: Behavioral 

L'riteria for Design" Washington, D.C.: uTsT 

Government Printing Office, Sept. 1977. 
Mobile Homes: Alternative Housing for the 

HandmppeH^ Washington, D.C.: U.S. Goverment 

printing orfice, 1977. 
Selected Resource Guide on Accessible Environments 

for the Disabled. Washington, o.C: [HT. 

Government printing Office, Aug. 1984. 
Veterans' Administration. Department of Veteran's Benefits. 

Handbook for Design: Specially Adapted Housing . 

Washington, u.C: U.S. Government Printing Offi ce . 

1978. 



i04 



Universitj of North Dakota. "New-> Brief." Alumni Review , 
circa 198fi. 

Whirlpool Corporation. "Kitchen and Laundry Designs for 

Disabled Persons." Designs for Independent Living . 

Benton Harbor, Mich.: circa i^U4. 
Wysocki, Joseph L. Housing as We Grow Older . New Brunswick, 

11. J.: Cooperative Extension Service of the Northeast 

States, Rutgers University, 1982. 



405 
ic 



November 1985 



9 



OfMSON UIMVERSn-Y NEWS 



design 'cooks' 
wit| good ideas 



Plact a chair in front of your own. Sil 
down and pfMtnd you'rt a parapltik: 
( ryint to ramovo a hot cassarolo. 

At vou rtach ovor tho optn door you 
may find that fallini in tht ovm it oaswr 
than rMchiof tho caMtraltMftlv. 

Movt your chair to tho sMc and *— 
how difficult It if to itach utamtti at tht 
bottom. You mav as WON foritt ttttini to 
ihoM platM on tho ihtlvM obovo tho 
kitchon countaa. too. 

Mast, hold ont hand boMnd your back 
and try taking tho lid off a iar of indauoft 
or ttirrint cakt battar. 

Tho point to thto OMfCist is to makt 
you think about how — if you woro 
MddonJy incapaciuttd - you would itt 
along tn lust ont Itttio comar of a world 
built foe ptopW with fully functional arms 
and ftp. 

'Moit of ui Htyor think about wch a 
(opK and than unfortunatt. btcauio 
moit of us. at ont timt or anothar In our 
livts. txptritnct lomt kind of tamporary 
handicap from an accldtnt ^ iRntsa.** 
lays Linda Mahrar. Citmson cxtonsion 
Strvict rtsidantlal houUfy spoclallit In 
tht homo a c ono mi o dapartmant "If wo 
ltt lucky tnoufh to avoid diat fata> than 
wt havt to fact tht physical probltms 
that of tan comt with old 

Mahrtr is a grtat btlitvtr In dasifn 
ttchniquts that makt « homo moro 
accfssibit to thoio who art physkoUy 
timittd. Sht catb it '*univarsal daslpi.'' 
Many U thoat ttchniquts mm damw^ 
stratad in a kitchtn usod by tho S.C 
Dtpardntm of VocaUonit KahrtHllaUuii 
in wtst Columbia in a ptofram tc train 
clitnts for i n dap a nda nt llyii% Mahror 
dtsignad tht kitchtn at tht dtpartmtnfs 
rtqutst in tarty 1980. 

Tht acctssibk sink is tht ftaturt that 
lohr Sttvtra. an inda p tndn nc llvint 
profram adjustmant sptcialitt» likts most 
in tht kitchtn. 

Tht arta btntath tht shallow. nTit- 
drain sink is Mt opto to allow a 
whttlchair cook to roll a chak cloio. 
work tasihf at tht sink, and itach utansib 
on (ht i'-M bottom. Oram pipos and bowl 
art shitldtd to protoct lags from burm. 

Sttvtns plam to indudo tht f oatufM — 
along with tntiv rampa. wWanad hallwavs 
and a roIMn shoNor In tht homo ho and 
his wift art adaptini fpr «ccMa. Ho 
boon m a whatlchair sbiot an j 
accidant,ln^|ii;at:aiit|2^^ 



Ht also likts tht ovtn wHh tht ctntor 
shtif at tyt Itvtl and r door that optns 
%kd»wn, as wall as tht htatproof 
counttf top that pulls out btiow tht ovoa 
Controls for tht oooktop unit art 
plactd in front of tht unit for tasy accoit. 
A minor abovo tho cooking surfaco 
allows somaont in a chairio watch what 
» « cookiiy , a foaturo Stavtns says 
conytnitnt*" 

Tht kitchtn alio foaturts pull«ut 
boards M to 32 inchas abovo tht floor 
and work boards which can bo plactd 
ovtr optn drawtrs or across whttlchair 
arms to providt convonienc work sin^ 
facas. A board with circular cutouts holds 
mixing bowls so that both hands am frto 
for stirring. Pullet drawtrs in baso 
cabinati uit pagboards and hooks for 
vortical storagt and tasyacctss. 

Pantry shaWts that slam slightly 
downward at tht front allow storod 
cannad goods to foil forwaid for tasy 
rtacK Door pulls am largt tnough to 
allow ono to slip Ms tntiro hand rtwough 
the handit and am tasily gripptd 

Too spact at dit bottom of baso 
cabintts is to inchtf Mgh and tight inchts 
dttp. That allows room for a whttlchair 
foocrtst Baso fb\m» in tht co/nars 
ftatum doublt4iingad doors wHh no 
ctntarposttoUmitaccass wa laxysusaa 
Sinct tht kitchon'f construction. 
Mahmr has discovtrtd diat tho ac- 
ctssibWly ftaturas also apptal to ptopio 
who am not physically timittd. Stvtrat 
hundrad paopla havt visittd tho kitchtn. 
with many saying thty plan to ust soma 
of dit Idoas indioirown hvmas. 

Mahrar urgas buildan to incorporato 
unhmrsal dtsign Into thair housif« 
proltcts during construction, whan such 
foaturts am chtapar to biatall. 

''Soontrurlattrmostof us am going to 
bo stnior citixtns and if homts am built 
to bo acctssibit wo wilt find lift a lot 
tasiar whan wo gat to dw point that wo 
am physically limitad or havt loss ontfgy 
than whtn wo nam yeungar." sht san. , 
pointing out tfwt such ftaturas would add - 
to tht marktt vahw of a homo. 

"Actuali>\ any housing das%ntd for tht 
physically limitad can also htip maac tht 
naads of youn^ first-timo homo buyors 
who am having a hard timt btcomli« : 
homtowntfs bacMiso of high InMit^ 
raiai. Oaildai baing bafrto^fma^ housbw^ 
f^ ihi^mi^ ganli ' 



IP 





I 



> -xmrn 



bowls. rhisfaavM both hands frao for tiirrme' 



406 



Insights from walks 
in orthopedic shoes 

SEVERAL pound! o2 makeup. I cane and or- 
McslioetbdpedDUtPat^^^ 
^ojMrandihs 'Today" ah^^^ 
P«»^«i''«NwYorkpi«^ 
theekieriy.tyrnecdianltheirSgei. 
Disailsedaj an i^yaarHild woman, ihe tnveled 
tnwupit the counuy for J mootht, gathering in- 

nnjadttttliow the aged anM 
challennilM^ 

lot their tomes, the itores they patronize and the 
cluesin which they Ihie. 

/YflyJ« haw to cope: *e told the South Catt^ 
lina Hospital Aaodation's annual meeting in Colum- 
bia last week, "because that's the only response 
today." Om option Is new products thoughtfully 
Mivdiowaid the eldetiy's special needL%^ 
M as shnple as paclaging, dials and loi^ 
tobeusedbvpenooswhoaehandsaieURitedtv 
thritis; or shelves bi homes and stores that are i 



can 

led 



products. She Is confident corporate Amerida will 
react, partly because half of all Americans wlU be 

overStathe year XQOand largely because the eld- 
erly holdmuch of ihecountry'sMoBaryincon^^ 



.i.H.>wci,iwni4 imfC>imiiff.ita j.miit.i>in>io 

MUWeuOUMtiWliONfWtfAHl 



f 



mi 

MAKING Ui.HOM(S 
ACCESSIBUTOAU 



r 



htiiiMiMiwt,MdCifdM 
liidiMieitiiiitwiiwKtljL 

TkX'iviMitcNtilieCiiluihii, 
OliiiHhikilmdirkonehitttriD 
Nil<hoaoRe4eilnMnoiliilir 

jMie,n)iiiUkrilKlMi(«f(ito 
«i<lHr<».Di;iliiiil,putlH 

flM«tkillUMliilnitNirfai 
Milliliter, 

Tin occtiiinmilHfIn '15,1 
iim»oiiafKig|iilMtbrtliiFkii 
MCogyaineioiEnfkviMiit 
tiitlliflilbff(d.Ciiitfininib 
btioillierentiiaflKkiMtttlii 
CONiruOQNMGiM 




MiMddtiodgpiidioiNiotcMi- 

{32,000(011 «otiw*(. 

mimm m 





fctriiMivlmfciiptt^ 



CONIMXDriOMMGEi9 

iMimniiigitoatililidiiii' 

ImviicikMioiifariiliptitieliogi. 

^ ,Ate)Mnofb(dpM|l(ct,ilii 

iMHfiHiliiiftixpiinjcilrliail' 
2M(Mittiaintkitigiintli» 
. 30iioiiAfltijcMwiiiiUity- 
taieifpd)beciniliaiiBiM5 
iKwrnllniiebilmiiditltNt 
«Nitilt.BdjdiCiiitfi^ 

^ iCinitiiiNrpoatidMw 
bdb^Mditi^ 

ikDli»biNdMel«lii 
pmlopaw^iieduicceNlile 
liNHiliii(ttbeytiiiiiyo(iti 



■(liS,iloiiiejiD(mriiiBt» 
'lnl|lllOllKiDrlkewlMldlli^ 
boiiiidititiFliilesCroHiiii 



ntiiibriMtiiioe,pgttii|lntlie 
HociniiorbitlitvbiRbbbiiiMt 
iuiilioitlieinbbniiilwitaiat 
n^ulRtlliiQi 

11it(Mo(idvdD|iiiittDi 
tniiit'iiaaiMdiwibltoilii 
lnillii(iR]fiJiiiSoktUelii,IM'i 
KpovlNtfarciideiiln^^ 
in|iliitlliecwiniijginiilitciiiii 
tiii|niiid««liiRllKdHi|nlu 
beMnilMindioittiMMit 

Vide die Imieoii die Mil wu 
MepaiiDoiiiBiliiirttnii 
ciorttoioliliifioriiiuniilitiiidni 
Cilltoniiiilnidrlii(|iiii|editili# 
ioicodeiojadiiditoubiiiwliuidi- 
o^pniiimLTIiefivw^ 
viiicliitsiDioeAciSvteiDberlS, 



ilKMiif »l« 



CirdlDilffiiitiiUenlliii"d 
NitiiidodiinaiinkiiM'd. 

ci«,hiDdici^iottidile(ndMd« 
neeaeodiiiilnitiML 

CviililioiiiliewdiiifRKlici 
ilnilliiiMlindKrdiia 
pndeiipedtiraccmlliitii^lrtid 
i<hAiB|S«10pcRiiitgiii»,M. 
MflinjNt'iiiltitobejiiaiiiaiH 
>KMUe(MiiineiUleinqiiiK), 
CuiiiliMiioeoiliMrilltiijitiu 
die]fcnlKidi|iiedtouindlvjdiiil 
Itunt'iicceiiUlityiieedLllii^ 



veiid^inHNetodieliiiidj- 
Offed, dot ii,<l|muDdlbir Witt 
ndiH Hill oa upper donieniced 
jjjfiiielenior. 

liidieKiiii(i,do(myiintiit 
lii*eiiniinii)32iicliciei[iiice; 
liiilwiri,ldi(liaiiiiidhtiliiii)iittlim 
diffipinforwIiieldiiittiinivNDi^ 
Alia InetobilMenlije 1028 indiei 

HieKiit740periBitapM 
indilicidoicoitilliydernui 
sverildienVlleiiliiijDdiewiy 
hetp(tidtliiiiiHiie)f;repotui 
lliimtecliiiicildiKctorforilitCili- 
foniiiBiliniliidiiitirAMOciitioL 

Meaiiwl;ie,iniildyybiiilijtn 



nulled to feiptnniit More die code 

chiflia went i«oeiect,boo«a| Call' 

loniii'iSepiciiteiiltiliinlifpefn^^ 

byKperceu over Aiviit'L The niih 

topenntimwRleciiiiiiofbuUeri' 

wvimofdiecodediiip.Hov' 

(ver,[liiitogiiNMleidiitre|uiiton 

'«(pliiiii|tolioldlieiiiii|tiDdie 

:Mirllitiire"tocleiriipdKoMotter- 

.imndittlimbiideitiied'' 

K. McHihiilieeiieliiiiitiiiii. 

;Mr, wlied^^ 

%i|tiriit^iiijMdt(iiiltt 

; ' Liit]wM[|ilii.w(kii|wiili 

Vettfui'Adaioittntii»l«dkipiiiii< 

dNdi,deiloedi2,l{^yireto 

fotoijnnelioitteieitiro^ 

loot iididognii|«,fw4x mil lid> 

wiAbmdlitclKDnkinjniied 

AMcMiiipolieipermaoied 
tintdmviiimicodoiiiiRteRilin 
ttepnpintMtliit,M<Ktantelr, 
ntrkiidbppidpioplidoa'tiKiiiR- 
(ogMllMcntlilkiittbetggii 
honeonmlUcoipiiioldjutt 
nmnodftdHitidietntiitir. 

lli.liollll'lDemrpltject,d^ 
ii|iiedb|fhi(r-Aii)ericnSenjcei,Lit' 
il(tin.Colo..lM«lieclcliwxMble; 
tmtcdmiinil^biDilftomb 
dxSHWmib 

SnctiiWAitinicleoiidie 
pn)poKdlioiMnfljiAii|iil,Ui 
HoneliitlkldedemdiiRSSifjj. 
MilwpoieidillvyeaTliereluve 
lieeiiiioiileiiolir,liiiticonpleied 
lunieiiiioiyeimildilebvjenv. 



M MDR/imMIY|9e6 



408 




ERIC 



cene 



^ Ti>iSpflttwbyf9HtwMOoiirnol,W<jMiday,Stptwbtf25^ 

D 



Devices For Assisting PliwicalV Limited 



bMAKLMOK 



tanSliMlMiilili^lr M^tSSf « 





iM!Mniiii>i|rii.lvwr jij 
'jOKiniilipiiiM' 
iMUtiRiiitatiliitf 



tSaSSSkSXi^ "11 M>" Will NMlMii : MitttllitMlMMiltHir 



IVfllMMii iR Ml 

'iiikMaMMtllr 



,Si2l!*",«<Mi»ta ^ 

?tftK!S!«SwK i««>MNMmEi H^XSimmR 
I^JSLtiS^***^ MlHiliBHiKMllmliMm SNltte.Mv1^SnS 
'7i^2LkMi..h. »P"*(«!IN|Mt>tnlinWili» nrfiwaSUikiiiSitt»iN 

kJSSSSSfS^ todMlrUiptellMLElM KtMtk.KMlllllttNN^ft 

McMMMlMtttiKiiittcgh luM«ddp<l.l»|Hta.lllliW Utkmum^mii^Z 

^•■MnHtecMlwwdncl t5«lirti.«.i.ik«tte,fii 
pMakMiMioddNpiiionmM mitort'ii). jjtafem. ,d|M(w«i Wiiliw,lie*«iwira«iil»*wj|. 




ERIC 





f^HMt item a 
t; nt cart villi 
itorMi Un evt abo 
IvtaktaffMaaviDaitttaioaodtai 



birMarepokii«amaddtte 



art iaf aiyafmdMit 



if OM can i« Mt af wbttlGhair but 
a« Madito alt M chiin ar stoob with 




hava Umltatiaoi io 
ariagjiiB inyyp aeda 
pMi Ibbi ooalialt* tun 



' ' " Sprvte'lo dw 




jhilvHiMii. CmtaiB 

Mqr i> JiHi* « OM ad Hd < 
MachoMltetAitlMkMMMttriDa 





<'~'''BiM"JBl'*BlblH!lkt~ ~ ' 



mm 

tht h^MH. I 0 limil ■Mil I wi UMm tM ■■■i 



whd anoa bid: umrd* 
• i;jMth gi MiMd 
wMtaaaU: wxteo 
bbefc iiiiliaiaidif^ MHad rub- 
barliaiill.awMiSi5bbgMI;dotfwi- 
Udv<«iliibaM): 




ftHfm^ iprtadlBg 
NHr; OHi haDfcr 
jtkk-.dmtivakr: 



aMi are ataflaUa *lwinifti varioui neCafl 



varit bativ thiB 

Ui^ * M^fvtjnrinKor&Hogl^ Porta 



the flnfea vwdiBi iniv^if i&^MtfWii baODOiaf tba ia^ nrtla a dnvar and kan 

/f^^dtfl&toWaa^ 

MtaHdattMnto 




v ladtaa ia 

- M : 4- -A ^*t_ ♦.. 

. linniDOII^iBa.£IIBiHr 

vaflBD^ Jtt aaoHiB aHBBBATfeinKflBit aaifta > "'^^ HflB^-^^H^HBoaioBiBBoaNNi 
aoSnAfmatAlrnhH^ M by aaftmjat ar I wUhi aiBi hiaaa <r 

Xte DapvtiMBiaf ^baattoMf l^tebi^^ b)faatfaadav|6HiaatabttMuMB> 



fiiT fiafntrt itfltiMi^*Tt^ apiB|| i wjiy yicj^ a r wn notoi pio 

hfft WiMBw '' Viribii« M»« ^^ tPwr isaf DaflttadvlthartudahiBdiaafwnv 

naaiL A pan laiNr luiiaiau wnD nu ar 
ptaatiel BMy ate ba mad siaea it ii da- 

' ^ ' - ttaad. 

a wnancDnr, 



inftniiatMtaBMMKv 
BoeklWbmirtMMS 



Diagrtmt of Umi aid 
tMiis cafTiad aat Id tiia laiiabilitaliPQ 



BBwiio oa UNO wm ana una. 
ftrthaf 



Ovfiianhaithaiai 
i^Elaetrical apriiaacaa nidi as hot 



ma Utdwa are ta ba ftand la a b ookle t , plataLiaastcravan, fry pans* ate plaood 

"Ifacfaji BAdapto iiy aaa aartioi 

^. initadt** pmpred Mahrer. Sha baa tlai Io htjahtiwaybfrfaffpf tfHftatlfr^^wftMiana 

>^^9J^^^^^nbiliii^ remeofcotivcntionalheiiht. 

*?!!5f ^ . ^ . , Use plyiwod lap board with cut out 

**Umvmaldesi|D~adesignusmgfes- holestohold bowls, etc. 

4U 




ISoGMnON OP HOME lUUXB 



^1- - * i - 



11 



St Schf9fr# 



UjpflhffitVQt Cbniribuion 

Oabra A. MdMdl AiipciQit All DiMor 

IfM TofaK GfQphic Allltf 

Sim ni%t TVfiigi^ Inc4 Dnign Cdniu^ 

• _ * ^ i.»-t-- 

JtiM 1 AwIml AMOdol* y^^Uwr 

SiMOMS MoQfif ^OMoMn MonoQsf 

Midiod P. Splwilo^ Crcutaiwi Pirtaof 

' JoMpli Owfisyt Wflhfivv Monogv 

liMHoto^Comrohr 

TmiI CflpsH^ Vfnoof of OdiB KoominQ 

loiwiw M> 9Mm^ Aniiioni 10 <i» Comrdhr 

Slocy lynb, AccoMiino AniMtt 

Morion Moloo)f^ A c c o KwUm AniMoni 

Kom McSpoddM^ Ad Cmdoi MonoBtr 

•fHHi|f r« Mvm» Mowivng '^wOUCTon vOOtononr 

Od HkiglM|» AniMi ID tf« Nolionol AdvoMng 
Oiricior 



Ma HOMoOf CuttOMW SoHMco MonoQOf 

Cbriono P» SfowMV Konoo Conodc^ Evolyn V» 
Koyotf Kdtfiy Shorfit Jo m iii ShowocB* Joon 
WtidmoiHif Adnntfrofevo Aiioionft 

Curtto Si— n or » Ooip ^octsiing Anliiont 

PUBUSKCD BY HAMiEY.WOOO. NC 

- - • •••^-^ ^ « ■« - - 

frank AntoOf Vioo Pintiidini. Edtortol Oirtcior 
JohnIAqMfc<»Vic»ftoiidw»/Monulixto»9ttid 



Pttor a MMor, Vico PMdiott. Advming Sain 

EdUoftal ond Advovliring, (202) 737-071 7 
Orculalion, (609) 786-1819 



amoa IBSN 0744-1193) « publM noiMy by „ 
Wood. inc.. 655 I54t Sm. HW.. Sum 475. WMw^on. 
D.C 30005. lor 4« NoMnd AiiocMn of Homo Mm. 
Copi^1965byl fcj iJi».W wt l[c.C »w» w i Oi <i roiio d tt» 
ihoM ol 4i» omhen or pMom quQiid ond noeouortfy 
#ioM ol NAM> .iip»odbci io» m «liQlt or m poft prol4«od 

pouMMm. $25x Conodo. SUSMt di odwr coumtim. 

Sing^ copy pncdi S5. Steoviam ID NAM mwh 
bMart$t5piryoorondiak«i>oai«iiRfainh9duM.lntfio 
COM ol biMdv Mwten ol NAIH. 4io lb* oho 

coi>orioddioiUahi Ci ipio » tarUyoiiipto > » M .ybrinbig^ 
IQA Mlomofeon. «M| GfcUtaioiv auuet ».0. loc 1434. 
ftMw ru 0a077. Alo» Kb i»o«M MMkf l» d*«y ol 
fttfa— ,Socon*aD w pbooaip>dombdtegww.D.C.gri 
otoddboiwIw n twooK iT Oi Nj iw uo o . HooiotwwichMiQiol 
oddron 10 MOR. f.O. Bo« 1434. il»onoA. NJ. 08077. 
Mwnbvt 6i«MM ^lUcoM Audi 



ABOUT BUILDIKG 

Added Dimension 




urprise! All those baby 
boomers— yeSt every one <rf 
the 42 mfllkm Americans who 
eithjer have turned or wiD turn 
J8g years old during the 19808 
parents and srandparents» and to* 
^ether they mi^ have at least as much 
unpact on hoUsins aa the baby boomers. 

WhOe for the last five years the 
housing induflry as: a been 
more or less fiated on building houses 
for the younger generatioa. the number 
]^ older Amtticana, dme older than 65t 
has been e rowing twi» as fost as the 
.general ponuaim. At tni^^ baby 
boometa sdD dutimi^ ekMy, but 
sbnoat^O^igggjB^^ or one of every 
Americana, m 65 or'oUiS^bd 
every angfba&gO^^ 

Ready for more surprises? Onhr on e 

^in 20 anw*^ ^ CMn ^y Ihfft m tmrning 

homes, and relatively few, according 
to experts, w9Q3t..to mQse-in.viduheir 
children. 

An increasing percentage are capa* 
bte financial^ of bvuig independently. In 
the last 35 years the percratage of the 
elderiy popubtion wiA incomes below 
the poverty levd has fidlen firam 35 per* 
cent to le» than 15 percent About 40 
percent of dderly'Misdblds now have 
mcomes of more than $20,000, and 
about 75 percent own homea. 

ConMry to popubr wisdom, the el* 
derly are not floddng to the Sunbelt In 
fiict about one-quarter of the nation's el* 
derly live in nitnoiSt New York, Ohio and 
Penn^vania, O nhf one in .25 move from 
th dr home st atea, while abdufj^of 
ev ery sa oidfer Americans either 
put o r rflove"giSer than 200 miles T 
their preretirement homes. (Which 
means, as market consultant ^l^liam 
SmoDdn says in the Ug story in this issue 
on the retirement housing market, build- 
ers shouU be able to find "onx)rtunitie8 
in their own backyards.**) 

One common perception, however, 
is true: The homes the eUerly do own in 
many cases arcjULionger_suitable. 
They're tfinUg, and because HiB were 
built before 1940, too exp ensive to 
n^aiQtain. ' * 



Put all (rf that together and the po- 
tential for retirement housing seems 
most too good to be true. It has led 
Aaron Rose, head of retirement<enter 
consulting for the accounting firm of 
Laventhoi & Horwath, to say housing 
constnictxxi aimed at the eklerly soon 
win "go off the charts.'* More specifi- 
cafly he forecasts that buiMers, develop- j 
era and nonprofit groups win invest $33 ! 
bOBon in retirement communities in just i 
the next five years. I 

That doesn*t mean, of course, that - 
builders everywhere shoukl rush head- 
kxig into the retirement market, be- ' 
cause it is not without its pitfatts and . 
w e ak nes s es . For example, projects often { 
require services sudi as housekeeping, j 
food service, tr an sportatfon, social irfan- ! 
ning and medical care that most buflders ! 
aren*tusedtoprovkiing.Inadditkm,the 
elderiy are notcnwsly sfow dedskxi- • 
makers. Often they visit a project six to 
10 times before deddiog to rent or bi^. , 
So most projects move sbwly. 

RnaUy, theekleriy are not nK>b ile. 
Inagwen yearo nly9Dercentof ho use- ; 
holds he aded by someone over 6 5 \ 
c hange addresa versus 25 percent o l'the ' 
general popuiauon. i nat means that""'/ 
while this roiOet is broad it is not deep. JJ 

But even with those drawbacks the , 
refirement market hokb ml promise. It i 
has, as our story uys, suddenly "come 
of age*' and added another dimension to 
a total housing market that seems to me 
to have real balance for the first time in : 
at least 15 years. 

Since 1970 housing has been dan- 
gerously one-dimensional. In the early ^ 
1970s multifamily construction sus- { 
tained it; in the mxi-1970s and early- 1 
1980s starter housing was aU the rage: ' 
and in the late-1970s everybody was 
building move-up housing. Today, rental 
housing is holding its own. The first-time 
market is stiU strong. The traditional | 
move-up maricet is pkrking up steanu j 
Yuppies have created a new niche. And j/ 
now retirement housing is taking off. .All ! 
of which puts housing in the best possi- i 
ble position to deal with any unpleasant ; 
surprises in next year's economy. j 



ERld 



BUllOeR/JUNE 1985 5 



Thursday, April 24 



Bhoda Cunmlngs, Clebome Maddux 
University of Nevada 
College of Educatlcu 
Reno, NV 



11:20-12:20 pm 



LMrning Disabl«d Childrvnt Parental Expactations 
and Rural Sttrvica Delivery 



A diagnosis of learning disability frequently causes 
parents to ask immediately if their child is retarded or if 
he or she has normal intelligence. When assured that results 
of IQ testing placeif the child in the normal range, they 
often ask next if the child Mill be able to attend college. 
From our experiences Nith parents, particularly rural 
parents, believe that this is a critical moment for both 
parent and child) a moment nhich can have profound and 
lasting impact on the child's future education, and on the 
parents' -Attitude toward the child and his learning 
problems. 

Unfortunately, parents of LD children often focus too 
narrowly on tifo of the counselor's wordsi "normal 
intelligence". Many of these parents then seem to conclude 
that "It's too bad my child has a learning disability, but 
ho^ fortunate that his intelligence is normal and he can 
overcome it." 

Such an optimistic stance is obviously appropriate, and 
probably beneficial for some mildly affected learning 
disabled children. Learning disabilities, however, like all 
handicapping conditions, exist on a continuum from mild to 
severe. Some mildly affected inc^ivi duals may indeed be 
successful in college. Even a few extraordinary individuals 
with more serious learning disabilities may be successful if 
given comprehensive support. But school counselors and other 
professionals must guard against implying that all learning 
disabled individuals have a mild handicap which will not 
stand in the way of a college degree. 

Such a misconception is understandable. Since 
definitions of learning disability usually include the 
criteria of normal or above-normal intelligence, it is 
difficult for parents, and for some professionals to 
understand that the child may face certain lifetime problems 
and limitations. It goes without saying that parents who ask 
questions about the nature of the learning disability 
handicap should not be unduly alarmed. Neither should they 
b«* led to believe that the condition is a trivial one which 
will disappear as the child matures. Such prognoses, if 
unrealistic, may result in unrealistic parental 
expectations. We have seen these unrealistic expectations 
produce a variety of problems for the child, the parents, 
the school, and the field of learning disabilities. 

This presentation/discussion will be aimed at parents 
and professionals who work with parents. It will discuss the 
nature of the learning-disability handicap, the effects of 
unrealistic parental expectations held by many parents of 
learning disabled children, and the implications for rural 
service delivery including the importance of, and problems 
associated with development of excellent rural vocational 
options for learning disabled children which should be 
differentiated from programs for retarded students. 



413 



obJtctlvt». For txampit, tht ShudowAJET, as d»scrib»d 
pp»glou«ly, might thtpt-fopt b» svltcttd l-f th» objectives 
for * student who IacKs motor control, but hus the 
Ability to remember, produce And repeat speech sounds, 
includes interaction with & microcomputer. 

This presentation wi i? include specific examples o-f the 
use the model and will demonstrate how technology can play a 
critical role in maximizing the opportunity -for handicapped 
students to develop to their -full potential. In *dddltlon, 
the presentation will focus on how technology supports the 
interrelationship between the assessment/evaluation process 
and the instructional plan, thereby ensuring the appropriate 
placement in the student's least restrictive environment. 



414 



Thursday, April 24 



11:20-12:20 pm 



Presenters: Barbara Villa 
Box 508 

Whiteriver, AZ 



Uhiteriver Project 



I. 



Introduction: State of the Art 



A. Brief review of research from: 

1. Brain scans 

2. Split brain^ research 

3. Brain injury 

B. Neuropsychology's contribution to education 



II. Some educational programs based on split brain research: 



III. An Educational program from cognitive psychology 



A. Instrumental Enrichment overview 

B. Summary of research from Uhiteriver 

C. Strengths and possible problems with I.E. Program 



A. 



B.Y.U. 



B. Whiter iver 



C. 



Nisc. others 



IV. 



Conclusion: Future Directions 



415 



Thursday, April 24 
11:20-12:20 pm 



Presenters: Frank J. Nicasslo 

Child Development Program 
Umatilla Education Service Dist. 
P.O. Box 38 
Pendleton, OR 97801 

Nancy L. Withy combe 
Tum-A-Lum School 
Ferndale District # 10 
Rt. 3 Box 152H 
Mllton-Freewater, OR 97862 

Linda L. Brown 
Ferndale District # 10 
Rt. 3 Box 179 

Hllton-Freewater, OR 97862 

Title: REGULAR/SPECIAL EDUCATION INTEGRATION THROUGH COLLEGIAL PROBLEM 
SOLVING: WORK IN PROGRESS 

Presentors will describe the developmental history of an In-service 
effort aimed at creating a model to Integrate regular and special education 
services In a rural school setting. For twenty-one weeks during the 1984-85 
year, the four regular classroom teachers of the Tum-A-Lum School, and two 
specialists from the Unatllla Education Service District focused on 
collaborative problem Identification and solution. With administrative 
support, a plan was developed to expand use of the model within Ferndale 
District # 10. 

The model was formalized In a training manual entitled Collaborative 
Problem Solving for Regular and Special Educators In a Rural ScTiooi Setting. 
During 1985-19S6, "continuous, on-going mservlce" has been expanded to 
Include the staffs of the Tum-A-Lum School (75 Second and Third grade 
students) and Frultvale School (83 Kindergarten and First grade students) and 
now Involves «even regular teachers, one Instructional aide, the special 
education teacher/coordinator, and a specialist from the Education Service 
District. Over a 20-week period, participants will review assumptions about 
special education and collaborative problem solving In rural schools, learn a 
collaborative problem-solvlng/peer coaching model, develop a common vocabulary 
regarding effective school environments, and develop greater understanding of 
the "self-renewing" team/school concept and Its potential benefit to 
handicapped and non-handicapped students alike. 

ACRES Conference partlcpants will be presented with the perspectives 
of professional staff from both the Intermediate and local school districts. 
They will also receive a copy of chapter one of the training manual which 
provides sufficient structure to enable the Inltltal design of their own 
collaborative approach. 



416 



Thursday, April 24 
11:20-12:20 pm 



Phebe Schwartz and 

Caren Holloway 

Amerloan Council on Rural 

Special Education (ACRES) 
Western Washington University 
BelllnghaiB, Washington 98225 



mLUOl CRAIBS 
tor peace 



MlllloQ Qnmes - An Art/Social Studies/English Project 



Million Cranes is a peace project sponsored by Ploughsharesy an 
organization of Returned Peace Corps Volunteers. Volunteer groups of 
children fold one thousand peace cranes and send the lei of cranes to 
a world leader Involved in the nuclear arms race. The cranes bring a 
message of peace and hope for the removal of the threat of nuclear 
war* 

The Million Cranes Project can be InoLorporated into classroom 
curricula* The project Includes the art activity of folding the 
cranes, language art activities centered around reading a related 
story and writing letters to the world leaders, and social studies 
acllvltles such as studying the country of the world leader to whom 
the cranes will be sent* The culture of Japan Is also part of the 
Million Cranes Project, and could be part of a social studies lesson: 
the crane folding is an ancient Japanese art, and the story of the 
original one thousand peace cranes is about a young girl in Japan* 

The idea of the Million Cranes came from the story of a young girl, 
named Sadako, in Japan* She survived the bombing of Hiroshima, but 
ten years later died of radiation poisoning* Before her death, Sadako 
folded close to one thousand paper cranes-«accordlng to Japanese 
tradition, anyone who folds one thousand cranes will be granted one 
wish* Sadako*ii classmates finished the lei of cranesy and she was 
burled with one thousand* Children In Japan still fold one thousand 
cranes and place them on the statue of Sadako in Hlroshloa* 

Ploughshares would like to expand the Million Craves Project, 
especially In rural schools* The Million Cranes Project is suitable 
for regular and special education classrooms* A certain amount of 
manual dexterity is all that is needed* Adaptations for using the 
Cranes Project with special needs students are described later* 

To date, over five hundred groups in the U*S* have participated in the 
Million Cranes Project* The goal is to Involve one thousand groups, 
thereby producing one million cranes* 



417 



To partlolpate In the project each group will: 
^^ ad^pt a world leader 
2. fold 1000 origami oranea 
3* OOTmunloate with the world leader 

4* send the 1000 oranea to the leader with a message for peace 

5* send me additional crane to Ploughshares for a special lei 
to be presented at Hiroshima on August 6 of each year. 



418 



I* Aa an art activity 



Individual differences exist in learning style: some people are 
verbal, some are aural, some are kinesthetic, and some are 
visual. Art is a visual, non-verbal expression and therefore is 
a natural form of expression for certain individuals. Many 
children do not have a fully developed verbal form of expression 
and may find art to be more expressive. 

Many teachers would like to incorporate art activities into the 
academic curriculum to enhance the learning process. However, 
many people do not think of themselves as being artistically 
talented or do not have training in art, and so are hesitant to 
bring art activities to their classes. 

The folding of the paper cranes is a very simple art activity 
which produces a beautiful final product. Some mnual dexterity 
is needed in folding the cranes, but the steps can be broken down 
and performed as separate tasks which simplifies the procedure. 
The project is not recommended for children under age six or 
seven. 



II. As a l»i:^iguage arts project 

Language arts skills— reading, writing, spelling, grammar, 
punctuation, penmanship, etc.~can all be taught as separate 
units. However, composing essays, stories, and letters incor- 
porates all elements of language arts. The Million Cranes 
Project requires comfliunication with a world leader, and thus 
composing letters becomes an essential part of the project. 
Other language arts projects can be incorporated. But rather 
than being drill and practice activities, as spelling lists often 
are, the language arts activities have meaning for the students 
and may produce a result. Children have written to the class' 
adopted world leader and have received letters in return. 
Community or school newspapers have interviewed students and 
written articles about the project. The language arts can have a 
purpose communicating what the students are doing, and the 
students can see the importance of language arts skills. 



III. As a social studies activity 

The National Council of Social Studies (NCSS) has recommended 
that the curriculum in social studies Include participation in 
simulated or actual activities which demonstrate aspects of the 
coursework. The Million Cranes Project provides students with 
participation in current events; the geography, history, and 
culture of Japan: the geography, history, and culture of another 
country and communication xLth a leader in that country; and a 
chance to explore their own cultural/ethnic heritage and 
experience the multitude of cultures that make up the United 
States. 



419 

3 



Children today are concerned about the possibility of a nuclear 
var* The Million Cranes Project can* give students a constructive 
project working toward lessening the threat of war. As one 
participant In the project said, <*M king cranes does not prevent 
war« But aaklng cranes can sake friends 9 and friends do not make 
war»" 



Special adaptations for students with special needs 

The teacher will need to demonstrate to students how to fold the 
cranes* The demonstration must be both visual and verbal^-slmply 
telling someone to fold paper in half diagonally does not 
describe the procedure as well as a visual demonstration will. 
Large paper Is often easier to work with, although some children 
do bflitter with very small squares of paper* Remember^ heavier 
paper Is harder to fold crisply* Paper from magazines Is quite 
easy to fold, though It may be a bit slick* 

Some students may not be able to complei;e a crane* Consider one 
or more of the options listed below ao that all students will be 
able to participate in the crane pr/oject. 

Adaptatlonis are described only for limited vision and manual 
dexterity. A hearing Impaired student, for examplet would need 
to be shown how to fold a orarie aa any student would; the teacher 
lAy need to sign the verbal riirectlons for that studenty but no 
other adaptations would ntied to be made* In working with 
students with mental retard.itlony the ability to perform the 
steps sequentially may be dlfx'lcult, but this can be considered a 
dexterity limitation and addressed as such* 



A* Limited manual dexterity: 

In working with students with limited manual dexterity, 
think of eaoa fold as a separate task* An ^assembly line" 
approach can be set up, where each student is responsible 
for one fold only* Less dexterous students can accomplish 
one or two of the simpler folds, such m the initial task of 
folding the paper in half* More dexterous students can be 
responsible for the more complex folds where the neck and 
tall are formed* 

Remember that the weight of the paper and the size also 
contribute to the ease/difficulty of folding* Less 
dexterous students might fold large (10" square) paper, 
while more dexterous students could fold quite small cranes* 
When stringing different sized cranes in a lei, graduate the 
cranes from large on the bottom to small on the top* 



420 



Visually iBpairad: 



Students irith partial Tialon oan aoooapllah aiapler foldSf 
aa daaorlbad abova. Alaoy larga paper la often eaaler to 
fold than aaall aquarea. Paper that la irtilte on one aide 
and oolored on the other aide oan aaalat the partially 
sighted student In differentiating between the **lnalde** and 
the **outslde** of the orane. 

One or two of the alapler folda aay be all that aome 
profoundly Tlaually lapalred atudenta are able to 
aoooBpllsh. However 9 som blind students aay be able to 
fold a ooaplttte orane. Teaoh a non^alghted student to fold 
a orane both verbally and klneathetloally (through touoh). 
Have hlB/her touoh the paper after eaoh fold» and guide the 
atudent through folding aeveral oranea. 



421 



IDEAS FOR TEACHERS 



1* 1b*ita to the Bateasy or Consulate Office of Japan and the oountry 
of your adopted vorld leader for aateriala and information. 
Another potential aouroe of Information oould be the reproaenta- 
tive at the United Hations. 

2. Looate people in your oomnity either from Japan or the oountry 
of your world leader, or people who have visited these oountries. 
Don't forget to oheok with your students^ parents.' These people 
' can abov slides and lead discussions In your olass. 

3* College libraries often have ethnlo susio and art resources. 

4. Try to looate an enoyolopedia or dictiooary with last names and 
ethnic origlns««you may have students who are unable to trace 
their ethnic heritage. 

5* While studying Japan, bring an abacus to class. Explain the use 
of the abacus In arithmetic. Let students use the abacus for 
arithmetic problems. A simple abacus can be made using a frame 
of sticks nailed/tied together (or use a picture frame); then 
string large beads (buttons, bottle caps) in groups of nine 
across the fk*ame. Some students may want to make an abacus. 

6. Many libraries have children's books about other countries and 
stories tvom foreign countries. Two good books about Japan, for 
fourth to fifth grade students, are Miss Happiness and Miss 
Flower and Little Peach by Rumer Qodden. 



422 

o 

ERIC 



■mm 



SAHPaWMIT PIM 5th-6th grade nainstreBoeei dassr' 



Meek 



1 

Overriw 



2 

Japan 



3 

Japan 



MONDAY 



Pxeunt project 
of Nillion Cranes 
Read story of 
Sadako 



SS - Geography of 
Japan 

Hap and flag 



4 

Country of 

world 

leader 



5 

Country of 

world 

leader 



6 

Btbic 
origins 



lA/SS - Culture 
Discuss Japanese 
writing and art- 
show pictures of 
scrolls. Using 
long paper I ink, 
and watercolor 
brushes, let 
students experi- 
■ent and lake 
their own scrolls. 



lA-Initial letter 
to world leader 



SS - Historical 

overview 
lA - Story of 

country 



mam 



SS - Introduction 
to Ibrld tear II 

lA - Collect ways 
to say/write 
'peace* in other 
languages (library 
and hoMwork) 



LA - Read Japanese 
story in class 

SS - Political 
structure of 
Japan 



SS - Overview of 
Japanese history 



SS - Geography of 
country 
Nap and flag 



LA/SS - Culture of 
adopted country 
(food, arts, 
slides, etc) 



Students will research country (ies) or 
continents of origin-each will prepare 
short presentation, such as a dance, 
flag, story, nap, song, ceremony, etc. 



NEDNESDAY 



SS*Hrap up/ 
Discussion of 
Hiroshiaa 

LA - Continue 
froB yesterday 



LA/SS - Write to 
leader of Japan 
regarding class 
involvenent in 
Cranes Project 



LA/SS - Culture 
Haiku lesson- 
how to write, and 
let students write 
their own. 

Bring in suU bowls 
of rice and chop- 
sticks, let students 
try to eat. 

Review of social 
studies lessons. 



THURSDAY 



LA/SS-Nrite your 
opinion on NHII 
fron the viewpoint 
of different world 
leaders (give 
students a list 
of inportant 
leaders 



LA - Read Japanese 
story in class 



LA/SS - Quiz and/or 
short essay on sons 
aspect of Japan or 
Japanese history 



LA - Read story of 

that country 
SS - Political 

structure 



SS-Current events 
Learn about world 
leader-biography, 
influence, etc. 

Continue culture 



SS - Discuss that 
country's involve- 
nent in Ml, and 
the world view 
today (current ev.) 



LA/SS - Quiz and/or 
short essay on the 
country of world 
leader 



Students will give presentations - 
nay want to invite parents. 
Current events - U.S. and global 




FRIDAY 



Art - Denonstrate 
how to nake origani 
(begin with sinple 
shapes, nove on to 
cranes) 

Music of choice 



Art - Cranes 
Japanese nusic 



Art - Cranes 
Japanese nusic 



Art - Cranes 
Music of the 
country 



Art - Cranes 
Music 

Honework - students 
will bring to school 
on Non. list of 
countries of origin 



String cranes into 
lei 

Write letters to 
leader to send 
with cranes 




Concurrent Sessions 
Thursday^ April 24 

2:00 - 3:00 pm 



i2o 



Thursday, April 24 



2:00-3:00 pm 



Presenters: 

Richard A. Abramson, M.Ed. 
Maine School Admin. District #11 
GROHS, RFD #5A 
Gardiner, Maine 04345 



Title: Adolescent Suicide Prevention 

After experiencing six completed suicides fron' among 
persons under age 22, In an 18-month period, the MSAD #11 
staff began enlisting community support to develop a com- 
prehensive Suicide Prevention Program. This community- 
based program has over a three-year period disseminated 
5000 emergency help cards, conducted both district-wide 
and state-wide workshops for educators, developed a cur- 
riculum/resource gulde/ennotated bibliography for use in 
public schools, and trained and Implemented a volunteer 
24 hour crisis hotline. 

Since January, 1985, as a result of this community 
Suicide Prevention Program, only one completed suicide has 
resulted from this same age group. Ironically, the nunJoer 
of threats and/or attempts have gone up due to the believed 
Increased community awareness. 

This presentation seeks to enable Interested individ- 
uals the opportunity to explore ways in which their schools 
and communities can begin to reduce adolescent suicide. 
Emphasis is on little or no cost methods and materials tnat 
are usually readily adaptable to their own situations. 



Er|c 426 



Thursday, April 24 



Richard Medved, Ann Beth Deily, 



2:00-3:00 pm 



PROPOSAL ABSTRACT 



Philip Lyon 
College of Saint Rose 
432 Western Avenue 
Albany, NY 122Q3 



NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF STAFF DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAMS IN RURAL SCHOOLS 



The purpose of this project, supported by a grant firom the U,S, 
Department of Education, Is to help rural Chief School Officers (CSOs) 
to implement staff development programs which address the problems en- 
countered in meeting the educational needs of students with handicapping 
conditions in the mainstream. As part of their participation in this three 
year project four CSOs indicated an. interest in conducting a staff development 
needs assessment in order to develop a comprehensive five year staff development 
plan as mandated by the Board of Regents of the State of New York. 

The objectives of this research are to (l) examine needs assessment 
instrumentation used in rural settings, (2) examine staff development programs 
in rttral settings to determine significant features for rural eiducators, 
(3) to design a needs assessment instrument to be used in participating 
districts, Xh) to assist CSOs to plan staff development programs based upon 
the needs assessment data, and (5) determine if a relationship exists between 
staff development needs in serving handicapped children and other staff 
development needs* 

Currently, the developed Needs Assessment Instrument has been administered 
to 210 educators in three rural central schools in upstate New York. Two CSOs 
have incorporated the results in their five year staff development plans. The 
instrument is being administered to an additional 50 educators in the fourth 
participating district. Upon completion of the data analysis two more com- 
prehensive staff develoiment plans will be formulated. 

Implications and intended outcomes of this research include the availability 
to rural CSOs of a needs assessment model and accompanying instrumentation, and 
the nature and specifics of staff development needs of ruraJ. educators. Of 
particular interest is the question of whether inservice programs for regular 
classroom teachers in order to Improve their ability to service handicapped 
children is as necessary as has been previously assumed. From our initial data 
it appears that there are other issues and concerns in rural settings which may 
impede the ability of the educator to be effective in the delivery of ed- 
ucational services to handicapped children. 



Thursday, April 24 Wanda Radcllffe, Ghaski Lee, 

Vicki Smith, Louise Kaczmarck 
o nn o W®^' Virginia Department of Health 

2:00-3:00 pm ISQQ Washington St East 

nharl«>Rton. WV 253a5 



ABSTRACT 



The purpose of this presentation Is to share Ideas on the proposed Early 
Childhood State Planning Grant Mhlch Is to design a Coaprehenslve State Plan 
for Preschool Hand1cappe:3 In Hest Virginia. The state plan will create a 
coMprehenslve and coordinated delivery systea of special education and related 
services to preschool handicapped fro* birth through five years of age. This 
project has four mjor goals: 

. To Increase statewide awareness and assess the current status of the 
need for and expected benefits of coaprehensive services for preschool 
handicapped children. 

. To establish a statewide child tracking systea for preschool handicapped 
children in West Virginia. 

. To develop interagency oechanisas for the planning of a coaprehensive 
service systea for preschool handicapped education in Hest Virginia. 

This project which is subaitted by the Hest Virginia Departaent of 
Education will rely heavily on the active involveaent of the State Interagency 
Preschool Advisory Council which is aade up of parents and representatives 
of the various regional, state, and local agencies and organizations. 

This project is seen as a needed aechanisa for adequate assessaent of 
the status of existing services, resources, and needs; to continue stiaulating 
cooperative Interagency efforts aaong and between current service providers; 
for providing an increased awareness of existing and potential resources; 
and to foster efforts at achieving aaxiaua benefit with scarce fiscal resources. 
Hie benefits of the project will be integration and effective use of current 
services, priority setting for service extensions, iaproved prograa aanageaent, 
and coordinated quality service which will significantly iapact the quality 
of services for parent and preschool handicapped children in Hest Virginia. 



428 



Thursday, April 24 



Presenter: 



Ed Madrid 



BUlngual Ed 



Woodland Joint Unified 



2:00-3:00 pm 



School District 
526 Marshall Avenue 
Woodland, CA 95695 



Title: 



THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN 

SPECIAL EDUCATION AND BILINGUAL EDUCATION 



Schools In this country have only recently begun to address 
the needs of the limited English proficient child who is physically 
handicapped or emotionally disturbed. In this presentation I am 
going to talk about the legal and educational developments that 
have focused attention on this child and briefly describe some me- 
thods currently being used. One of the most critical issues that 
have arisen is the need for teachers trained both in bilingual 
education and special education. 

Bilingual Special Education programs » resources, and refer-- 
ences at the end of the presentation. 

Two groups of children are currently the fo^us of much educa- 
tional and legal controversy: minority language children and handi-* 
capped children. Laws, court decisions, and visible advocacy groups 
have brought the needs of these children to the public eye, high- 
lighting the failure of our public school system to serve them in 
appropriate programs. This issue is further complicated because 
some children both speak minority languages and are handicappe d. 
They require special education methods which are relatively undeveloped. 

Concern for these children is not a new phenomenon. Profession* 
als Involved in the education of minority children have been anxious 
about their assessment and corresponding placement for many years. 
Let's start with LEGISLATION AND LITIGATION. 

I am going to give you a brief overview of some of the critical 
happenings leading to present legislation and educational policies. 
Historically, these events span the confrontations of the mid-1950' s 
when the Inequities of our Institutions were laid bare and the respon- 
sive 1970 's when the efforts of our courts and educational systems were 
directed toward finding ways to ensure equality of opportunity for all 
children. 



429 



1 



The 1960*8 and 1970 's were particularly active for the liti- 
gation and legislation that have determined today's legal framework 
of educational programs for handicapped bilingual children. 

BROWN V. TOPEKA OF 1954 

Although it did not speak directly to the educational rights 
of either bilingual or handicapped children, the landmark Brown v. 
Board of Education of Topeka case of 1954 laid the foundation for 
much of this legal activity* In Brown , the U, S. Supreme Court 
ruled that the separation of schooling according to race is inher- 
ently unequal and does not meet the test of equal protection provi- 
ded in the Fourteenth Amendment to the !!• S« Constitution* The 
Brown decision later became the basis for federal mandates prohibit- 
ing discrimination against handicapped and LEP children. 

CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964 

This was the first major piece of federal legislation requir- 
ing that school districts receiving federal funding ensure nondis- 
crimination on the basis of race, color, or national origin* Later 
Interpretations of the Act by the U, S. Office for Civil Rights 
(e.g. OCR's May 25, 1970, Meaorandum, Fed. Regis., 35, 11595) led to 
the requirement that school districts provide special Instruction to 
bilingual students and guarantee that nondescrlminatory testing pro- 
cedures are used in their evaluations. 

BILINGUAL EDUCATION ACT OF 1?68 

Passage of the Bilingual Education Act of 1968 provided a 
legal way to address the needs of minority language children through 
bilingual instruction. Specifically, Section 702 of the act stated 
that: 

"In recognition of the special educational needs of the large 
number of children of limited English speaking ability in the United 
States, Congress hereby declares it to be the policy of the United 
States to provide financial assistance to local educational agencies 
to develop and carry out new and Imaginative elementary and secondary 
programs designed to meet these special educational ceed&." 

Through the Bilingual Education Act, monies ^ere provided for 
the establishment of bilingual instruction programs, development of 
bilingual curriculum and materials, and bilingual teacher training. 
Such monies provided legal encouragement for school districts to de- 
velop alternative educational programs for minority language students. 



430 



DIAMA V. CALIFORNIA OF 1970 



Plana v, California State Board of Education (1970) was a 
landmark case which has a significant Impact on language assess-* 
ment policies. Mexican American student classes for the mentally 
retarded had been placed on the basis of I.Q. scores derived from 
administration of the Blnet or WISC , 

An out-of-»court settlement of the Plana case called for a 
revision of placement procedures to Include testing In the home 
language. 

PIANA, COVARRUBIAS, ARREOLA, & GUADALUPE 

Besides Plana , other cases (Covarrublas . 1971; Arreola, 1968; 
Guadalupe . 1971) raised the Issue of the Inappropriate use of stan-* 
dardlzed Intelligence tests to place children In classes for the 
mentally retarded. 

VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION ACT OF 1973 

Following the trend of civil rights legislation, Congress 
passed the Vocational Rehabilitation Act to guarantee the civil 
rights of handicapped Individuals. This act declares: 

"No otherwise qualified handicapped Individual In the United 
States shall, solely by reason of his handicap, be excluded from 
participation In, be denied the benefits of, or be^ subjected to dis- 
crimination under any program or activity receiving' federal financial 
assistance." 

EQUAL EPUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES OF 1974 

By 1974, several states had enacted bilingual education legis- 
lation, federal courts had ordered the establishment of bilingual 
programs, and the United States Supreme Court had confirmed the author- 
ity of the government's Office for Civil Rights to enforce civil rights 
mandates. The Equal Educational Opportunities Act codified Into law 
the guarantee of equal education rights for language minority students 
and the legal principles declared by the Supreme Court In a landmark 
case, Lau v. Nichols . 

In perhaps Its strongest statement against discriminatory treat- 
ment by the public f^chools. Congress asserts In Section 1701 (1) of the 
Equal Educational Opportunities Act: 

"All children enrolled In public schools are entitled 
to equal educational opportunity without regard to 
race, color, sex, or national origin..." 



EKLC 



3 

431 



lAU V. NICHOLS OF 1974 



Appropriate placement s Perhaps the most influential litiga- 
tion affecting the provision of instruction for non-English speaking 
minorities is the Lau v^. Nichols 1974 decision. The plaintiffs were 
Chinese children in the San Francisco Unified School District who 
charged that they were functionally excluded from meaningful educa-* 
tlon because of their inability to speak or understand English , the 
language of instructlonc They sought relief from the unavailability 
of adequate programs and argued violations of Title VI of the 1964 
Civil Rights Act and the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. 
The District Court ruled against the plaintiff s, and the ruling was 
upheld by the Appellate Court. Upon further appeal , however , the U. 
S. Supreme Court reversed the decisions of the lower courts and de- 
clared that schools do have an obligation to provide specialized 
instruction to students whose limited English language ability pre- 
vents them from full participation in the classroom. 

The court also upheld the authotlty of the U. S. Department 
of Healthy Education and Welfare (HEH) to issue interpretations re- 
garding the applicability of Title VI prohibitions to LEP students. 
In a 1970 memorandum, HEW had required school districts to take affir- 
mative steps to overcome the English language "deficiencies" of limited 
English speaking students. 

P. L. 94-142 

This Act also known as Public Law 94-142 , is the major feder- 
al legislation mandating education for handlcapped'«chlldreny the 
right to a free public education, individualized programming, least 
restrictive environment, and due process requirements. 

In 1975, P. L. 94-142 was signed into law as a complete revi- 
sion of Part B of the Education of the Handicapped Act. Additionally, 
federal regulations prohibiting discrimination on the basis of handi- 
cap (Vocational Rehabilitation Act, Section 504, 1973) became effective 
in 1977. Both measures constituted landmark legislation for handicapped 
children since they required that these children be provided a free, 
appropriate public education. An understanding of these two measures 
is essential to anyone working with handicapped children, particularly 
minority language, handicapped children, since they in fact summarize 
the legal framework within which each district must operate. 

P.L. 94-142 is an education finance law. It provides a formula 
for allocating federal funds to states implementing programs for handi- 
capped children. 

P.L. 94-142 was a milestone in the struggle for the rights of 
all children to an education. As we have seen from this brief histori- 
cal review, recognition of the needs of linguistically different, han- 
dicapped children has not been easily attained. It has taken the 



432 

4 



advocacy of educators, lawmakers, attorneys, and parents to develop 
protective legislation that guarantees these children a free and 
appropriate education to meet their unique needs. P.L. 94-142 now 
mandates that all aspects of an educational plan (curriculum, assess*- 
menti and the IndividMl program) be tailored to the student's unique 
needs, including linguistic ability. In order to do this, the local 
district must provide the proper staff capable of supplying such 
services in the child's dominant language. 

RIGHTS OF LANGUAGE MINORITY CHILDREN 

Litigation has been crucial to the establishment of rights 
for language minority children. From Arreola, v. Board of Education 
(1968) to Jose P, v* Ambach (1979), the rights of these students 
have been expanded to require the consideration of linguistic and 
cultural factors in their evaluation for placement and in the actual 
provision of instruction. 

ASSESSMENT 

Many of the critical issues in special education for LEP stu- 
dents are related to the assessment process. As we have Just seen, 
considerable litigation and legislative attention has been devoted 
to the racial, cultural, and languages biases in traditional evalua- 
tions. Comprehensive, ongoing assessment provides the basis for 
initiating alternative teaching approaches in the regular education 
program or deciding to refer to special education services when the 
regular setting (bilingual or monolingual) cannot «ieet the needs of 
the exceptional student. It is critical to look at. assessment as 
an Important phase in providing appropriate instruction. The more 
we learn about the Individual, the more we can accommodate his or 
her unique characteristics in our program. Assessment finds its 
true usefulness in the education process as educators gain fresh 
perspectives about what they can do to make the necessary changes in 
the Instruction provided. 

Because assessment is such an important and complex factor 
in designing educational programs, the performance of traditional 
assessments of language minority students can become problematic 
and discouraging. All too often, traditional evaluation procedures 
result in little useful Information due to the inherent bias of the 
methods themselves. Biases can arise from (1) Inadequate representa- 
tion of language minority children in the test-item selection popula- 
tion, which results in questions that are biased culturally, experien- 
tially, and linguistically toward the majority groups, (2) Insufficient 
representation of minority students when normlng the Instrument, (3) 
problems during administration of the test (e.g. a lack of test sophi- 
tication on the part of the examinees, examiner ethnicity, etc., and 
(4) misinterpretation of the student's performance. Unfairness can 
never be entirely eliminated in these areas of test construction, con- 
tent, administration, and Interpretation; therefore, our Job is to 



' 433 



achieve tUe least biased test procedure possible. 

In atteiqitlng to do this, ve oust be cautious when using (1) 
translations and adaptations of Instruments that are as adequate 
as the original test In English because their content Is left large« 
ly unchanged, (2) untrained Interpreters who are Inadequately pre- 
pared to adnlnlster or Interpret assessment devices , and (3) poorly 
constructed native language Instruments that possess little or no 
statistical information to support their utility. 

All of the above-mentioned cautions should not overwhelm or 
discourage prospective educators , but rather help them avoid those 
low-quality procedures known to have contributed to mlscategorlza- 
tlon of language minority children In the past. Faulty methodology 
can lead to under-and overldentlf Icatlon, as well as Improper iden- 
tification, where we assume the child's handicap to be more or less 
severe than it actually is. 

When a student is referred to the special education service 
team for comprehensive assessment, the law provides that (1) parents 
must be notified in their native language and their consent granted 
to conduct a full psychoeducational assessment. (2) the assessment 
developed must be nonblased culturally, racially, sexually, and 
linguistically, and (3) the assessment must be multidimensional in 
nature. 

Districts In the process of formulating or revising their 
assessment procedures for language minority students might find the 
list of recommended bibliographic resources on teeing helpful to 
them in that process. I will provide you a copy of these resources 
at the end of presentation. 

PROGRAM MODELS 

Having children properly assigned to programs is fwdamental, 
but the practical challenge facing districts is formulating the sub- 
sequent educational programs and preparing the staff to deliver these 
programs. 

I will briefly discuss the development of Individual education 
programs (lEP's) for culturally and linguistically different students 
and the available program models that districts can use to deliver 
the services delineated in their IEP*s. 

A basic premise of the following discussion is that the lEP 
directs both the services received by exceptional students and the 
later evaluations of student performance and program success. 

A. The lEP is developed by a team or committee including: 

(1) A representative of the education agency 



6 434 



(2) The child's teacher 

(3) Parents 

(4) The child 

(5) Other Individuals, a speech therapist, therapist, 
social vorker, bilingual specialist, counselor and 

(6) A member of the evaluation team, usually a school 
psychologist. 

B. Present Level of Performance 

An lEP consists of several sections that together attempt to 
give an accurate picture of the child's current performance and the 
progress expected In one school year. A saiq>le of an lEP we use In 
Woodland, California Is avaUable In the hand-outs. 

The lEP Is a tool to ensure that the relevant services are 
supplied to exceptional children. 

Although both the bUlngual (or English as a second language) 
department and the special education department are responsible for 
exceptional bUlngual chUdren, the mijor accountability (both legal 
and ethical) lies with special education services. 

Bergln (1980) explains the division of responsibility for 
bilingual youngsters. 

"Minority language children are not necessarily exceptional 
or handicapped children. Although they may be entitled to bilingual 
or Engllsh-as-a-second-language program in order *to learn to their 
full capacity, such programs are not considered «iieclal education 
programs. However these aame children may also be handicapped or 
exceptional and thus entitled to both bilingual assistance and spe- 
cial education services. In either case, their linguistic abilities 
must be taken into account." 

Cooperative planning and consolidated efforts on the part of 
both departments lead to the most advantageous learning environment 
for the student. 

I will describe three models for service delivery based on 
different staffing patterns. 

MODEL #1 

Integrated Bilingual Special Education Model, in the most 
comprehensive and compact of the three models - the integrated bi- 
lingual special education model - one educator skilled in both 
fields delivers all services independently. This arrangement is 
the preferred delivery method since it is the most cost-effective 
and productive. It is especially advantageous when the district 



has sufficient numbers of exceptional bilingual students to require 
its isq>lementation or when the district elects to access such servi- 
ces because of the obvious benefits. 

MODEL #2 

Coordinated Services Model , This option calls for coiiq>rehen- 
sive servicing by credentlaled Instructors - a special educator and 
a blllngual/ESL educator. In this model . both Instructors should be 
knowledgeable In the foundations snd lAStructlonal techniques of 
each other's fields in order to comnunlcate effectively and form a 
unified team. The special educator has primary responsibility for 
service delivery and executes all areas of Instruction designated 
for English delivery. The bilingual educator directs the liqilementa- 
tion of all special education goals targeted for a bilingual or mono- 
lingual native language delivery. Ongoing coordination is necessary, 
but the schema permits Independent lnq)lementatlon because each instruc- 
tor is well-qualified for the task. 

The coordinated services model is advantageous frtien: 

(1) Bilingual teachers are available in the district for 
the target ethnollnguistlc minority group , 

(2) Teaming is an approach acceptable to the Instructors 
Involved y 

(3) Training is provided to both team members regarding 
the other's field prior to initiating services, 

(4) It is clearly not feasible to lBq>lement an Integrated 
program, by hiring a bilingual special educator, and 

(5) The parents desire that a blllngua]^ approach be used 
for their child. ^ 

The mi^or disadvantage of the coordinated services approach 
is its cumbersome design: The use of two credentlaied Instructors 
to serve one child is costly, both In the time required for planning 
and In the use of instructional personnel. 

MODEL #3 

Bilingual Support Model . This model represents the minimum 
service level, with a monolingual special educator responsible for 
all the Instruction provided. The special Instructor would l]q>le- 
ment all lEP objectives to be accomplished in English and oversee 
those Implemented by an aide In the native language. This scheme 
requires that the special educator receive training in order to 
underst^d the characteristics of bilingual children and to learn 
the specialized instructional strategies that facilitate learning. 
In turn, the aide is trained In special education techniques and 
and classroom management. Dally coordination is a necessity for 
this model to function properly. 

The bilingual support choice is advantageous when (1) there 
are too few bilingual students to be served to warrant a credentlal- 
ed bilingual Instructor, (2) the native language of the child is not 
that of the existing bilingual services in the district, and (3) the 
parents prefer the bulk of their child's educational program to be 
deliverd in English. 

436 




Special Education; 



and 

i_ 



Bilingual! Education 




437 

o 

ERIC 



CHRONOLOGY OF LEGISLATION AND UTIGATION 

1954: BfO¥im ¥,Bo§rd of RtucMtk)n of Top&k§, 347 US. 4B3. 74 S.Ct 906. M 
(1964). 

1964: Civil Rightt Act of 1964. Titit VL Section 601. 4Z U.S.CA. Section 2000d. 

1968: Elementary and Secondary Education Act Title VII (also knorni as the Bilingual 
Education Act). Sections 702 er seg, 20 U^.C A. Sections 680b er seq.: P.L 90-247. 
81 Stat 783 (JaaZ 1968). 

1 968: Afr90f9 k Board of Education No. 1 60 577 (1 968). 

1970: US. Office for Civil Rights. May 25. 1970. Interpretation of Civil Rights Act M 
/7ay/std& 11595. 

1970: Di&rm v. Sff Board of Education No. 3-70 37 RFP (1 970). 

1 971 : fiartftsyhania Association for Ratardad Childran v, Commonwaalth of Pannsylvania. 
344 F. Supp. .260. ED. Pa. (1971). 

1971 : Co^arrubias v. San Diago Unifiad School District No. 70-394-T. S.O. Calif. (1971). 

1972: Miils v. Board of Education of District of Columbia. 384 F. Supp. 866 (O.O.C. 1972). 

1972: Guadalupa Organization Inc. v. Tampa Elamantary School District Na 3 at aL US. 
District of Court of Arizona. 587 F. 2d 1022 (9th Cir. 1978). 

1 973: Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1 973. Section 504. 29 US.CA. Section 794: P.L 93- 
112 

1 974: Equal Educational Opportunities Act of 1 974. Section 204. 20 U.S.C A. Section 1 703. 

1974: Larry P. v. Rilas, 343 F. Supp. 1306. 502 F. 2d 963 (9th Cir. 1974). 

1974: Lau v. Nichols. 414 U.S. 56a 94 S. Ct 786. 39 LEd. 2d 1 (1974). 

1974: V/yatt v. Sticknay. 344 F. Supp. 387 (M.D. Ala. 1972): Affirmed Sub. Nom. Wyatt v. 
AdarhoU 503 F. 2d 1305 (5th Cir. 1974). 

1975: Education of All Handicapped Children Act of 1 975. 20 U.S.CA Sections 141 M420: 
P.L 94-141 

1977: Ragist 4Z Na 86. May 4. 1977. P.L 94-142 Regulations. 
1978: Gifted and Talented Children's Act of I97a Section 902: P L 95-561. 
1978: Lora ¥. Tha Board of Education New York. 456 F. Supp. 1211 (1978). 
1979: Josa P. v. AmbacK 79-C-270. New York (1979). 

1980: Patants in Action on Spacial Education (PASEJ. at al v. H/ ^non at aL appeal pend- 
ing (7th CirJ. 



438 



RESOURCES IN TESTING 

Assessment Instruments in Bi/inguat Education: A Descriptive Catalog of 342 Oral and Writ- 
ten Tests Center for Bilingual Education. Northwest Educational Laboratory, National Dis- 
semination and Assessment Center. California State University at Los Angeles. 5151 State 
University Drive. Los Angeles. CA 90032. 1 978. 

Bilingual Special Education Assessment Handbook (A). National Hi!?panic Center for 
Advanced Studies and Policy Analysis. 255 E. 14th Street. Oakland. CA f;4606. (415) 451- 
0511. 1982. 

Bilingual Testing and Assessment Proceedings of BABEL Workshop and Preliminary Find- 
ings Multilingual Assessment Program. BABEL Inc.. 255 E 14th Street. Oakland. CA 94606. 
(415) 451-051 1. 1971. Test-by-test summary of the discussion and conclusions reached dur- 
ing the workshop sessions. 

Communication Assessment of the Bilingual Bicultural Child: Issues and Guidelines Edited 
by Joaa Good Erickson and Donald R. Omark. Univer<tity Press. 300 N. Charles Street. 
Baltimore. MD 21201. (800) 638-7511. 1981. 

Culturally Appropriate Assessment. A Source Book for Practitioners. By Andrea Carroll. 
Gabriele Gurski. Kirsten Hinsdale, and Keren Mclntyre. California Regional Resource Center 
(CRRC). University of Southern California. 600 S. Commonwealth Avenue. Suite 1304. Los 
Angeles. CA 90005. (213) 381-5231. 1977. 

Educational Testing Service Test Collection. Test Collection. Educational Testing Service. 
Princeton. NJ 08541. 

Bibliographies for: 

Special Populations: 
American Indians 
English as a Second Language 
Spanish Speakers. Preschool-Grade 3 
Spanish Speakers. Grades 4-6 
Spanish Speakers. Grades 7 and Above 

Miscellaneous: 

Culture-Fair and Culture-Relevant Tests 

Piagetian Measures 

Other 



43d 



Evaluation Instruments for Bilingual Education: An Annotated Bibliography. Dissemination 
and Assessment Center for Bilingual Education, Education Service Center, Region XIII, 7703 N. 
Lamar Boulevard. Austin. TX 78752. 1977. 

Guide to Assessment Instruments for Limited English Speaking Students (A). By Barbara P. 
Fletcher, etaL Santillana Publishing Co.. 575 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY 10022. 1978. 

Initial Screening and Diagnostic Assessment of Students of Limited English Proficiency, Na- 
tional Dissemination and Assessment Center, California State University, Los Angeles, 5151 
State University Drive, Los Angeles, CA 90032. 1980. 

Manual for Identification of Limited-English Proficiency Students With Special Needs. By 
Alba M. Ambert, Jean Greenberg, and Sandra Pereira, Bilingual Multicultural Special Educa- 
tion Project, Massachusetts Department of Education, Division of Special Education, Bureau 
of Program Development and Evaluation, 31 St. James Avenue, Boston, MA 02116. March 
1980. 

Psychological Assessment for Hispanic Children. By Dr. Ricardo Figueroa, The National 
Hispanic Center, 255 E 14th Street, Oakland, CA 94606. 1982. (Topics covered are: Education 
and Hispanics, Culture and Testing, Adaptive Behavior and Culture, IQ and Intelligence, Cri- 
terion Reference Testing, The Law & Psychological Testing, Bilingual Children's Test Perfor- 
mance, Mental Abilities of Hispanic Children, Bilingual Special Education, and Bias in Testing 
Bilingual Children.) 

Resource Guide to Multicultural Tests and Materials. By Lorraine T. Cole and Trudy Snope, 
ASHA. September 1981, pp. 639-44. 

A Resource Manual for the Development and Evaluation of Special Programs for Exceptional 
Students. Vol 1113. Evaluating the Non-English Speaking Handicapped. FDLRS 
Clearinghouse/Information Center, Florida Department of Education, Bureau of Education for 
Exceptional Students. Knott Building, Tallahassee, FL 32301. (904) 488-1879 (Suncom 278- 
1879). 1982. 



Nancy Dew 

Coordinator of Services 
Illinois Resource Center 
April 1982: edited September 1982. 



440 



®(I)0(I)(I)G'@'^5"@^ 

INDIVIDUALIZED EDUCATION PROGRAM/TEAM MEETING 



Taam MMting D«tt 

L L 



ION 1 



LEGAL 
PUPIL NAME. 



Birth 
.Oatt. 



(la*t) 



(flrtt) 



(RiMdi* lnitt*l) 



SECTION 2 

PUPIL 
DATA 

(At ofmrndnt data) 



Addrut: 
Gradt_ 



LEPO HEP a 

Stx: 

□ Male 
□ Ftmait 



Cunrnt School of mtndanca: 
Rtftfring prion: 



. Primary langua^t: 

. Ethnicity: 



SECTION 3 

PARENT 
DATA 



Parant/Guardian Nama: 



Partnt 

Addran OYas 
Sama? DNo . 



(itrMt) 



(city) 



Homa Phona: 

Work Phona: 

Lioamad Childran's Home: 

Parant Languaga 

(other than Eng.) 



□ Yes 

□ No 



SECTION 4 

ELIQIBILITY 
AND TEST 
DATA 



lEP Taam Laval: 

□ School 

□ District 

□ County 

□ Joint 



Meeting Purpose 

□ Initial 

□ Annual Review 

□ Triermiel 

□ Other Review 



Primary Qassif ication : 

:-^ld speech <leaf hJt df/bl 

I oh. eed lif ohi . 

LH Elio: * □ Mod tried and documented 

□ Not due to cul/lang/absence □ discrepancy 

□ due to disorder in Psych, process 



.vh 
.mh 



SECTION 5 

PROGRAM 

COMMENDATION 



opptci use owLy 




Projected Duration of Program:, 

Extant of participation in 
raguler education program: 
% of day in regular 
classes 
.._ % in Special 

Education services 
Pete Wisi ewt a ief tp.Id. . 
Prtaef isst I w e JeeHew ^ 
OeteefTrlemiielCval. L 



.Date Program to Commence: 



Recommended Placements 

□ Regular Program 

□ Regular Program with modifications 

□ Designated Instruction and 
Services 

cify 



□ Resource Specialist Program. 
□Special Day Qass 

□ Other 



Transportation: 

□ Not required 

□ Regular Transportation 

□ Special Education 
Transportation 

□ Refer to District 
Level lEP Team 



SECTION 6 

EXTENDED SCHOOL 
YEAR7 

□Yea □No 



Interim action* if needed: 



Alterrtetives to meet district 
prescribed course of study 
arKJ/or to meet proficiency 
standards. OYes DNo 

If yes. attach separate sheet 



Pupil will follow school/district 
behavior and discipline standards: 
□ Yes □No 

If no, address as a goal 



SECTION 7 

TEAM MEMBERS 
PRESENT 



The following IndWidualized Education Program Taam membere were presem and affirm that proper 
procedures have been followed regarding assessment, due process, instructional planning, and program 
recommendation or dismissal in accordance with the provisions of California Administrative Code Title 5 
and California Education Code (members who do not agree or concur with the identification or educational 
program should attach a statement of reasons for disagreement and alternative recommendations). 



NemamHe Admlnistrator/Deaignaod L 
Current Teacher (2). 
PiranKs) (3). 

(4K, 



(5) . 

(6) _ 

(7) . 

(8) , 



SECTION 8 
PARENT CONSENT 
INDICATES: 



I Father □Pupil 
_ I Mother □Surrogete? 

□ Guardian 

□ Representative 

Parent Signaturafs): 



I 



I have received a copy and had my rights as a parent explained to me. 

1 consent to my child's pertidpetlon in the Special Education Program and/or related services recom- 
mended and undarsund that I may withdraw my consent at any time after oonsulution with a member 
of the Individualized Education Program Team and after submitting written notice to an administrator. 
I consent to all components of the Individualized Education Program, with the exception of any 
noted (ettached). I understand those components to whith I consent may be implemented so as not 
to delay providing iratruction and services to my child. 
I consent to the dismissel of my child from Special Education. 



Data: 



J- 



ERLC 



a»en«tiir«) 



CSlfffiatur*) 



COPIES: 



Education Ti 



/ Paranc-^IMK COPY / Special Educecion OHice / Ragulv EdiicMlofi Teacher / School 



441 



INDIVIDUALIZED EDUCATION PROGRAM/TEAM MEETING 

(Paei2) 



Pupil's Nmiw . 



LEVELS Or > E DUCATIONAL PERFORMANCE 
Rtading (R«co8nition/Cofnprth«nsion) 



lEPTMm 
MMtingdau. 



Math (RtMonii : ^'Calculation) 



Writtan Expratsion 



Communication (Exprassion/Comprahansion) 



Vocational/Pra-Vocational 



Haalth (Induda Madication. Glassas. ate.) 



Othar (Socto-amotional, ate.) 



ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATION /RATIONALE FOR PLACEMENT AND CONTINUATION IN PROGRAM 

□ Maati aligibility crltaria and naads mora acadamic support than a ragular dass with modifications can provide. 

□ Acadamic and bahavior aligibility critaria are both mat. Naads mora bahavioral and acadamic support than a regular 
datt with modifications can provfda. 



PHYSICAL EDUCATION; □ Regular □ Specially designed (desaibe below) 



COMMENT SECTION; 



(If • secondary pupil, attach plan for meeting district course of study requirements/or profidency 
standards. When appropriate* indude: considerations for Non-English speaking; transition into 
regular dau program). 



442 



TE-Speeiel Education Teeehtr / GREEN-Fertnt / YELLOW-Spaetel Education Office / PINK-Ragular Eduction Taecher / GOLDEN ROO-Schooi 



(£)(§) CD(E)(D(3'*@*©"w' 



PROGRAMA EDUCACIONAL INDIVIDUAL/JUNTA DE COMITE 



FMha dt la Junti 
MCemitT 
/ / 



HECaONI 

'•MMBRE LEGAL 
OELALUMNO 



|S«tynaoT~ 



FMhada 



•CCCI0N2 
OATOtOEL 



Domidlio. 
Grado 



Eicutia dt aiisttncia MtiMl. 



Escutia a 1« qut 
» daba atandar _ 



Ratidtnta da 

YSESRDSr DNo 



Idioma PrindfML 



Fanona qua hiio la rac o mandacton. 



SECaON3 

OATOSOEL 
PADRE 



Nombra dal Padra! 



Etalmitmo domidlio qua aldalpadra? DSf DNo 



Tarffono da caia: 

InitituciA) oon Ltoanctas da Ninoi: 

□ Sf ONo 
TalAonoda 

tralMjo: ; 



8ECaON4 

DATOS OE EXAMENES 
YOE ELEGIBILIDAO 



Nival dal Comit^ 
dallEP: 

□ Eacuala 

□ DIstrito 

□ Condado 

□ UniAi ' 



ProposltMda la 
Junta: 

□ Inie^ 

□ Examan Anual 

□ Examan da cada trat arvM 

□ Otro Examan 



Rauna la^critaria da altgibilidad para una 
Educacidn Etpadal: ^ ^ 



Primara dasificadon: 

□ Aprendiando □ Comunicativo 

□ f ftioo □ Savaro Codigo 

- 



SECaONE 

RECOMENOACIONES 
OEa^PBOGRAMA 



Ouraddn proyactada dal programa:___ 

Extamion da la partidpad&) an un programa 
da aducaddin ragular: ^ 

_ %dald(aandaiairagularis 

% an lanndoa da aducaci^ aspadal 

Fadu da avaluadon da cada tm aim 



f adia an qua oomanzar^ 
d programa: 



jL 



J- 



Colocadtfn Racomandada: 

□ Programa Ragular 

□ Programa Ragular con Modif icadonas 

□ Sarvidoi y Instruod&i 
Dasignadoa 



Transportaddn: 

□ No a$ nacasaria 

□ Transportad(6i Ragular 

□ Tramportadtfn da Education Etpadal 

□ Rafarir al Comiti lEP an d Nivd dal Distrito 



□ Programa da Raounoi 



□ Clata E^Mdd da Dia 



SECCION e 

E^TENaON DEL 
AN0ESC0LAR7 

D$t DHo 



Acdon intarmadia tt as 



Altamativai para latltfaoar los 
curm da aitudto pr^ito 
por al distrito y/o para 
satiffaoar las nor mas da pri^ 

DSf ONo 
Si tu rapuasu as sf. induya 
unahoja saparada. 



El astudiama saguiralasnormas 

da comporumlamoydisciplina 
dd distrito/ascuda. 

□Sr QNo 

Si su rapuasta as no, dirijasa 
a la pigina 2 dal lEP. 



SECD0N7 

MIEMBROSOELCOMIVE 
PRE.SENTES 



Los siguiantas miambros dal oomita dd programa aducadonal individud attuvtaron prasamas y af irmar6n 
qua los procadlmiantos apropiados ban sido saguidos con raspacto a la atfaluaci6n. procadimianto dabido. 
programa instructional y programa da colocacidh o dastitud<Sn da acuardo con dausulas admlnistrativas 
dd Cbdigo numaro 5 da California y Cddigo Educacional da California (miambros qua no astan da acuardo 
o qua no sa oonforman eon la idantifieacidn dal programa aducadonal dabaran adjunur un informa da 
dasacuardo con las razonas y las racomandadonas dtamativasl. 



Membra y Titulo Adminittrador/Nombrado { 1 L 
Maattro(al aetud (2L 
Padrafs) 13^^ 



<5L 
<8L 



SECCIONt 

CONSENTIMIENTO 
DEL PADRE INOICAOA: 



• Yoharadbidounaoopiaysamahanaxplicadomisdaracbotcomopadr«. 

• Yo doy ml eonsantimianto para qua mi hiio(a) partidpa an d progrma da Educacion Espadat y/o 
sanncios raladonados raoomandados y antiando qua yo puado ratirar mi eonsantimianto a cualquiar 
hora daspuas da habar oonsuttado con un miambro dal comita dd Programa da Educaci "vh Individual 
y daspuas da habar somatido un aviso ascrito a un administrador. 

• Yo consianto a todo los componantas dd Programa da Education Individual, con la excaption da 
cualquiara nombrado (incluyadol. Yo antiando qua asos componantas a los cjalas consianto puadan lar 
instrumanto para no tardar an provaar la instruccidn y sarvicios para mi hijo<a|. 



-Fadia. 



JL 



ERLC 



riTC— S9«cUt CdifcMloA TmcImt / OnCC»*-l^«fit / VCLLOW-Sp*clAl Cdueatiofi Offic* / PINK-a«ful«r Education TMciitf / OOLOCNflOP- Scnool 

443 



PROGRAMA EDUCACIONAL INDIVIDUAL/JUNTA DE COMITE 

FmIm dt F«dia d« la Junta ^ 

Nombra dal AhmNio Nadmtnto / / M Comit< lE P / / M 

NIVELES PE DESEMPENO EIHiCACl6wAL 
Lactura (Raoonodmiamo/Coffipramion) 

MatanUtica (Razonamiamo/Calcuiacion) 

Exprad^ Eicrlta 

Conninicaci^ (Expfnion/Comprami^) 

Profational/Pra-Vocadonal 

Salud 

Otro 



DETERMINACiOW/K iALtSlS DE ELEQIBiLIPAD PARA COLOCACION Y CONTINUACION EN EL PROGRAMA 



Rauna la critaria da alagibilidad y naoatita m« ayuda acadamica qua lo qua provaa una dasa f^\%f eon modlficaeionas. 

Crharia da alagibilMad acadamica y &i eomporumlamo ion apropiadot. Naoasita mS% ayuda an oomportamianto y 
mk ayuda acadamica qua lo qua una data ragular con modlftcadonat puada provaar. 

EPUCACION pfsiCA Ragular Disanada Espadalmanta (axpliqua abajo) 



SECCION DE COMENTARIQS (Si at alumno da tacundaria, adjunta al plan para compiatar lot raquiti'tot da graduadifn dat dfstrito. 

Cuando at apropiado induya: coritidaracionat por no hablar Ingln; trantidon a un programa da data 
ragular.) 



444 



WHITe-«PMltl education OfflM / QREEN-RaiuMr educBtlen TMcnar / VELLOW-Sehool / PlNK-ttrant / aOLOCNROD-SMctal Education Totel 




CS^ (R} (jJblo^ciaiTduc^ Serviceje^ 

SUPPLEMENTAL COMMENT/INFORMATION SHEET 



PUPIL'S NAME DATE 



BIRTH DATE ] SUPPLEMENT TO: □ lEP 

□ Rtftrral 

□ 



SUPPLEMENTAL COMMENTS/INFORMATION 



WHITE-SpKMl Education Ttachtr / GREEN-Fartm / YELLOW-Sp«ci«l Education Office / PINK-R«oul«r Ed. TtactMr / GOLOENROO-Scbool 

EEIc 445 



(Y) (S) (E) (S) (R) (j^lo^ecialjduci^ Wiccjeglon^ 



ttmm owtmi0m ommm owiiaiii oViiieMMveMM 



HOJA OE COMENTO/INFORMACION SUPLEMENTARIO 



NOMBRE DEL ALUMNO FECHA. 



FECHAOENACIMIENTO 8UPLEMENT0A: □ lEP 

□ R«ftrimi«nto 

□ 



COMENTOS/INFORMACION SUPLEMENTARIO 



Q ITE-S|Mci«l Education TMChtr / GREEN-P«rMt / YE LLOW-SpKial Education Off ic« / PINK-Rtgular Ed. Taachar / GOLDEN ROD-School 



npil'tNaiM. 



INDIVIDUALIZED EDUCATION PROGRAM/TEAM MEETING 
GOALS AND OBJECTIVES 

IEPTmiti 



Birthdita. 



MMting Dm 



1 L 



PRIORITIZED LEARNING GOAL: 



PROGRAM/SERVICE: 



SHORT 

TERM 

OBJECTIVE 



By L L 

tht pupil should: 



Asmtasurtd by: 
using 
_obstrvation of 
(othtr) 



Progrtu as of / i 



Objective: 

□ Met □ Not Met 



initial 



SHORT 

TERM 

OBJECTIVE 



/ 



/ 



By. 

the pupil should: 



As measured by: 
t*^ using 
._observation of 
(other) 



Progress as of / / 



Objective: 

□ Met □Not Met 



initial 



PRIORITIZED LEARNING GOAL: 



PROGRAM SERVICE: 



SHORT 


Bv / / 


Progress as of / / 


TERM 


the pupil should: 




OBJECTIVE 


As measured by: 

t««t, uti'ng 

observation of 


Objective: 

□ Met □Not Met 




rather^ 


initial 


SHORT 


by / / 


Prooress as of / / 


TERM 


the pupi! should: 




OBJECTIVE 


As measured by: 


Objective: 

□ Met □ Not Met 




_ test, using 

observation of 
(other) 


initial 



Annual Review Date. 



WHITE-Speciel EducMion TMcKer / GREEN-P«r«nt / YELLOW-Sp«ci«l Education Office / PlNK-ReQuI*' Education Taachar / GOLDEN ROD-School 

447 



PROGRAMA EDUCACIONAL IKDIVIDUAL/JUNTA 
METAS Y OBJETIVOS 



NombnM Akimno. 



META OE E8TUDI0 PRIORIZAOA: 



OSJETIVODE 
CORTEVIEMPO 



OBJETIVO DE 
CORTE TIEMPO 



tl alumno va a: 
Mtdido port 

txaman, uttndo 

obitrvacion dt 

(otro) 



Pira. 
•I alumno va a: 



1 L 



Madldopor: 

— axamtn, mando 
» obtarvadon da 

(otro) 



META DE ESTUDIOPRIORIZAOA: 



OBJETIVO DE 
CORTE TIEMPO 



OBJETIVO DE 
CORTE TIEMPO 



Pira_ 

al alumno va a: 



1 L 



Madtdo por: 

axaman, tisando 
, obsarvad^da 

— (otro) 



Para, 
al alumno va a: 



1 L 



Madido por: 

■ a)caman, utando 
otearvacion da 

(otro) 



META DE ESTUDIO PRIORIZAOA: 



OBJETIVO DE 
CORTE TIEMPO 



OBJETIVO DE 
CORTE TIEMPO 



1 L 



Para, 

al alumno va a: 
Madido por: 

axaman, usando 

_ obsarvacion da 

(otro) 



1 L 



Para^ 

al alumno va a: 
Madido por: 

axamen. usando 

obiarvacion da 

(otro) 



Facfiada 

Nacimiaiito 



1 L 



OE COMITE 



FwiM dt la Jiinti 
MComitf lEP 



448 



PROORAMA/SERVICIO: 
Prograto dasda / / 



Objttivo: 

^^Cumplido No Cumplido 



Prograso dcsda / / 
Obittivo: 

Cumplido No Cumplido 



PROGRAMA/SERVICIO 



Propraaodaada / / 

Objttivo: 

Cumplido No Cumplido 



Prograto datde / / 

Objetivo: 

Cumplido No Cumplido 



PROGRAM A/SERViaO 
Prograso dasda / / 



Objativo: 

Cumplido No Cumplido 



Prograso dasda 

Objativo: : 
Cumplido . 



-No Cumplido 



ERIC 



S«|umtd L2 iMtnietion (ESU 

- Oral Isnguagt (notptivt. •xprMtfvi) 

- W >idin o (word rttoct^. co wp f hu s ioftf 

- SP^fKno/wrWng (bM#d on oral iBnguaoa) 



BILINGUAL SUPPORT MODEL 

SPECIAL gPUCATION THACHEB (MooofciQuD 



• M«th InMuction k« L2 

— Bfd on concftt •xportanc t 

- BuMng Imomqo ft cognitivo dovtepmont togtthM' 
•J>thor EP OWtctl^ (MH^iolp, 

9ms/fino motor, vituol/audftory po rco p i kwO 




Cj^^f ASSISTANT (BKnou.0 

/. support to / 
I'anyof thoabova/ 




COORDINATED SERVICES MODEL 

SPECIAL BHJCATION TEAOCR Mpnofogurt 

• 8«|u«ioMt Lj kwlnietion CSU ^^^J^ ^lUNGUAL CLASSROOM TEACHER 

• Oaaign bitMvwition Pregram (contant ft Mqutnoa) 

• impl«nwtifiBKPObiwrtn^tobtAceoinpli«hKlhL2 /^V^ \ - "•noiwot, iMdinB, tpaHing 

- « y \ "nd writing in primary languaga 

• mstouction in L, 

• 0«»»WObjactiya»SpacifiadfofL, 




INTEGRATED BILINGUAL SPECIAL EDUCATION MODEL 

B«JNGOAL SPECIAL EDUCATION TEACHER 



ERIC 



• Comprahmlvo Unguagt 0«v»lopnwnt 




449 



Bilingual Special Ed 
Programs 



I 



AcoiM EMdf In t tfven U oti Project 

drome, cerebral piisy* Lowe's syn- 
drome, hydrocephaly, and fetal 
alcohol f3fndroiiie 

• LMguMgei: English and Keres 
(Aooma) 

• Cmkict 

Anodate Director of Education 
P*O.Box307 

fNieblo* New Mexico 87034 



BOingvaKPoitagvcw) 
Spcdal Cdocatloa Aotram 

• W«i«w: English and Portuguese 

^^wdlStrert School 
25 Lowdl Street 

C"nbri4ge, MasHchin^fb 02138 




nyrfcdhr Handicapped CUIdica 
• Aga/Gndt Grades 1-6 md 



• Hmittppmg 

handicapped. phyricJlyhmdk^ped 

• I^vVKEngbhandSpmbh 

• Cmtacfc 

Office of EducaHond EvaluaUon 
New York Qty BcMrd o( Education 
MCourt Street 
Brooklyn, New York 11201 
CSmua, 1973) 



. „^--i far Spwhh A««*ea« 
^lSdi««(REPSAC) 

ftve-ye«-oUb 

* OoSMunidpJSchoob 

SOOPileStrcet _ 
New Mexico 88101 

(Askins.1977) 



OmqnchcMivc Hcaftag IiiVaiRd 
Reception PkoiVaai (CHIRP) 

• HuiStmitt CoMiiKnK: Hearing im- 
paired 

• LnsH«cf:En^andSpanidi 

Office of Educational Evaluation 
New York Qty Board of Educatkm 

66 Court Street 
Brooklyn, New York 11201 

(Oxnun, 1973) 



and 



SerrkK 



!^:En^-aSp.nish 



(Lener, 



1975) 



ERIC 



•Atn^Cndt Uetk Krth to nine 
yean of age 

• Hmtt^png Coiubien: Severely 
mimuiliplyhMcficapped 

• £««M«a; English and Sjpanidt 

• GRtacfc 
IVujeil Dbccter 

%>cc»t EducaHon Department 
San Diego State University 
San EXego, Cilifemia 92110 
(Mcaardet^l978) 



A I lUfCll CO l^VTUOp vUlKUIUin 

for Fonr-Ycar-OM Handicapped 
Mcxkan AaMflcaa Oilldicii 

• Agt$Kjnk Ltvels: Four* and five- 
yur-okb 

• ^<M«a: English and Spanidi 

• ConkKt 
Southwest Educational 

Devdopment Laboratory 
211 LTlh Street 
Austfat Texas 78701 
(Evans^ 1974) 



^^^^^ 

• ^•W^- English and Spanirfi 



^^-ndS^h 



Bilingual Spcdal EdocaHon 
Career Orientation Plogram 

• Agts/Cndt LfKb; High school 

• LmgiMVi: English. Spanish. Pbr- 
tuguese. Haitian 

• Gmfocfc „ . 
Phjgram Development Speaalisl 

26 Gnnt Street 

Bostoa MassaAusetts 02108 



451 

ERIC 



•Aiit/Cmlt iMtk: BWh to nine 
ycanofage 

• Hmitt^pmg OmdUiom: Severely 
•ndmulHpiylundicapped 

• J^«V>«Va- English «td Spanish 

IVofetl Director 

Spedal EduoHon Dtepartment 
San Diego State Univenity 
San Diego, Cdlfbinia 92110 
(McaardetaL.197B) 



A Profcct to Develop Cunkulun 
for Foar>Ycar-Old Handicapped 
Mexican AoMfkaa difldren 

• Aga/Cndi Lads: Four- and five' 
year'Olds 

• HmfiM^nvCnHfiMims: Not specified 



• £««H«H.'En8lidi and Spanish 

• ConbKt 
Southwest Educational 

Development Laboratory 
211 L 7th Street 
Austin. Texas 78701 
(Evans. 1974) 



"W^Wf Ltodt: Grades l-u 
•J^^ Can^ Mentdly 

•^-l-Vs.- English and SpttUsh 
• Cankck 



fftofecfFaBUly 



Xinlc 



^«»»Wa;fogIirf,a-j- . 



P.O 



Box 4170 
^««*ck,Tex« 



?9409 



Bdingual Spedal Education 
Career OrlentaHon Program 

• Aps/Gf«fc LckIk High sehod 

• liwws: EngMsh. Spanish. Pbr- 
tuguese. Haitian 

• Cwtatfc . 
Pto^am Devdopmenl Speoalisl 

26 Court Street 

Bostoa Massachusetts 02108 



452 



ERIC 



Resources 



National Agendas 

The following agencies are active in disseminating information regarding current legal 
requirements and programmatic solutions for bilingual exceptional students. 

1. The Council for Exceptional Children 
1 920 Association Drive 
Reston. VA 22091 
(703) 620-3660 

Contact: Special Assistant to the Executive Director for Minority Concerns and 

Development 

Special Services: fact sheets, policy options papers, other special publications, and train- 
ing institutes 



2. National Association for Bilingual Education 
Room 405 

1201 Sixteenth Street N.W. 
Washington. DC 20036 
(202) 822-7870 

Contact: Special Education Special interest Group (SIG) Chairperson 

3. National Clearinghouse for Bilingual Education 
1300 Wilson Boulevard 

Suite B2-1 1 
Rosslyn. VA 2220l^ 
(800) 336-4560 

Contact: Resource Specialist for Bilingual Special Education 

Special Services: Specialized resource bibliography, computerized information searches 



ERIC 



453 



4. ERIC Clearinghouse on Handicapped and Gifted Children 
1920 Association Drive 

Reston. VA 22091 

Speciai Services: Information services, searches, special publications regareinj* 
exceptional bilingual students 

5. National Association of State Directors of Special Education (NASDSE) 
1201 Sixteenth Street N.W. 

Washington. DC 20036 
(202) 833-4218 

Specie/ Services: Speclalnet communication/information network 

6. U.S. Department of Education 

Division of Equity Training and Technical Assistance 
400 Maryland Avenue. S.W. 
Washington. DC 20202-6264 
(202) 245-8484 

7. Clearinghouse on the Handicapped 

Office of Special Education and Rehabilitation Services 

U.S. Dept. of Education 

330 C Street S.W.. Room 3106 

Washington. DC 20202 

(202) 245-0080 

Speciai Services: Information services 

B. Closer Look — National Information Center for the Handicapped 
Box 1492 

Washington. DC 20013 
(202) 833-4160 

Special Services: Information services 



State Agencies 

At the state level, districts should locate and contact: 

1) Director. Department of Special Education Services 
State Department of Education 

2) Director. Bilingual Education Services 

State Department of Education ^ 

3) Bilingual Special Education Training Programs 

O . College of Education. Special Education Deoartment at local colleaes and unlversitli 



References 



Abad. Victal. A Model for the Delivery 
of Mental Health Services to Spanish- 
Speaking MinoriHes." Amaiam Journal 
of Orlhopsychiairy. 44. no. 4 Ouly 1974): 
584-585. 

Abbott. Robert E. learning E)isabilities- 
They're All Around You." Paper pre- 
sented at the International Bilingual 
Bicultural Education Conference. 
May 1975. Chicago. Illinois. 

Ardniega. Tomis A. "Sociocultural Im- 
peratives in the Education of Young * 
Handicapped Children of Spanish- 
Speaking Background." In Early Ed- 
ucation m Spanish-Speaking CommuniHts. 
edited by Pascal Trohanis. New York: 
Walker and Company. 1978. 

Arreola v. Sania Ana Board of EducaHon 
(Orange County. California). No. 160 
577(1968). 

Askins. Billy, et al. Rtsponsivt Environment . 
Program for Spanhh American Children 
(REPSAC): Fourth Year Evaluation Study 
Washington. D.C: Bureai; of Education 
tor the Handicapped. 1972. ED III 
562. 

Ayala- Vazquez. Nancy "Bilingual Special 
Education: Ahora." In Bilingual Educa- 
tion, edited by Heman UFontaine et al. 
Wayne. New Jersey: Avery Publishing 
Group. 1978. 

Baca. Mario. "What's Going On in ihe 
Special Education Qassroomr' Teaching 



Exceptional Children 7, no. 1 (Fall 1974): 
25. 

Bergin. W.E., and Garfield. S.L. Handbook 
of Psnchotherapy and Behavior Change: An 
Empirical Analysis. New York: Wiley 
and Sons. Inc., 1971. 

Bemal, Ernest. "Gifted Modcan-American 
Children: An Ethnic-Scientific Per- 
spective." Paper presented at the an- 
nual meeting of the Americai. Educa- 
tional Research AssodaHon, 1974. 
Chicago. Illinois. 

Bilingual Education Act. 20. US.C 880 
(b). Enacted January 2. 1968. 

Bilingual Faculty Senate of the Boston 
Public Schools. Description of Bilingual 
Special Needs Teacher Competencies. Boston: 
Boston Public Schools, 1978. 

Birch. H. "Boldness and Judgment in 
Behavioral GeneHcs." In Science and the 
Concept of Race, edited by M. Mtad et al. 
New York: Columbia University ft-ess. 
1968. 

Blanco. George. "The Education Per- 
spective." In Bilingual Education: Current 
Perspectives. Arlington. Virginia: Center 
for Applied Linguistics. 1977. 

Broum v. Weinberger. Gvil Action No. 75- 
1068 (D.D.C. July 20. 1976). (Preli- 
minary injundion was issued under 
the name of Brown v. Matthews.) 

Bryden. Diane N. "Special Education 
and the Linguistically Different Child." 



ExctpHorud Oiikrtn 40 (May 1974): 
589-599. 

Cagel, William P. The Use of Communis 
Worktrs in a Spmish-Sptaking Communify. 
Los Angeles: Olive View Mental 
Health Center, 1977. 

CarrasquUlo, Angela. New DirtcHons for 
Special EdutaHon through a Bilingual Bi- 
ciJlural Approach. 1977. ED 139 173. 

Orter, John. Dit^nosHc Special Education Per- 
sonnet PteparaHon Program. Houston, 
Texas: The University of Houston at 
Qear Lake. 1978. 

OubTow, Veda, and Wilbur, Ronsie B. 
77k Deaf Child as a LingmHc Minority. 
Arlington, Virginia: Center for Applied 
Linguistics. 1975. ED 116 396. 

Gvil Rights Act, Sections CxOl and 602, 
78 Stat. 252, 42 US. Code 2000d, 
2000d-l, 1964. 

Cohen. R. "Principles of Preventive Men- 
tal Health Programs for Ethnic Minority 
Populations: The Acculturation of 

. Puerto Ricans to the United States." 
American Journal of Psjfchiatry 128 (1972): 
i529-1533. 

Coleman. JS. et al. Equatity of Educational 
Opportunity. Washington, D.Cj VS. 
Department of Health, Education, 
and Welfare. 1966. 

Cortei,. Lydia. "A Student's Reaction to 
Bilingual Special Education." Paper 
presented at the Annual International 
Convention, Council for Exceptional 
Children, April 1977, Atlanta, Georgia. 

Covarrubias v. Son Diego Unified School 
District (Southern California). No. 70- 
394-T (SD. Cal.. February 1971). 

Cruz, Sylvia, et al. "A Study of the Lan- 
guage Factor in Administering the 
MRT to Spanish-Speaking Students." 
Integrated Education 13 (1975): 34-44. 

Dabney. Margaret C. "Curriculum Build- 
ing and Implementation <n Mainstream 
Settings: Some Concepts and Proposi- 
tions." In Mainstream and the Minority 
Child, edited by Reginald L Jones. 



Reston, Virginia: Council for Excep- 
tional Children. 1976. 

DeAvila. Edward A, and Duncan. Sharon. 
Definition and Measurement: The East and 
Wcs/ of Bilingualism. Sacramento: Cali- 
fornia State Department of Education, 
1978. 

Diagnostic Special Education Personnel Pre- 
paration Program. Houston, Texas: The 
University of Houston at Qear Lake. 
1978. 

Diana v. California State Board of Education. 
No. C-70 37 RFP, District Court of 
Northern California (February 1970). 

Due Process and the Exceptional Child in Penn- 
sylvania. Philadelphia: Education Law 
Center. 1978. 

Education Amendments of 1974. VS. 
Congress. Public Law 93-380. 1974. 

Education of Handicapped Children Act. 
VS. Congress, Public Law 94-142, 
Part B. 1975. 

Ethnic Isolation of Mexican Americans in the 
Public Schools of the Southwest. Mexican 
American Education Study. Washing- 
ton, D.C.: VS. Commission on Gvil 
Rights, 1970. 

Evans. Joyce. A Project to Develop Curri- 
culum for Four-Year-Old Handicapped Chil- 
dren: Final Report. Volume 7. Austin. 
Texas: Southwest Educational De- 
velopment Laboratory, 1974. 

TTif Excluded Student. Mexican American 
Education Study. Washington. D.C.: 
VS. Commission on Gvil Rights, 1972. 

Feinberg, R.C.; Cuevas. G.J.; a. >u Perez. C. 
"Staff Development: The Selection and 
Training of Instructional Personnel for 
Bilingual Education Prc.^ams." In 
Bilingual Education for Latinos, edited by 
Leonard Valverde. Washington. D.C„- 
Association for Supervision ar d Curric- 
ulum Development. 1978. 

Filzpatrick. J. Puerto RJcan Americans: The 
Meaning of Migration to the Mainland. 
Englewood Giffs. New Jersey: Pren- 
tice-HaJI. 1971. 



456 



Four Comers Mental Retardation Proj* 
ect. TTre Training and Use of Indigenous 
Aides in a Sparsely Populaied, Economically 
Depressed Region. Boulder, Colorado: 
Western Interstate Commission for 
Higher Education, 1969. ED 032 162. 

Gerken, Kathryn Clark. ''Performance of 
Mexican American Children on Intelli- 
gence Tests.'' ExcepHjnal Oiilkren (March 
1978):43«-445. 

Gerry, Martin. Xultural Myopia: The 
Need for Corrective Lens." In Assess- 
ing Minority Croup Children, edited by 
Beeman N. Phillips. New York: Be- 
havioral PublicaHons, 1973. 

Gibson, Guadalupe. "An Approach to 
Identification. A P^ention of De* 
velopmental Difficulties among Mexi- 
can American * Children." American 
Journal of Orthopsychiatry 48 (1978): 
96-109. 

Cc raifcv I . and CMiz, Leroy. "Social 
Pc!icy ar^^-i Education Related to Lin* 
"^uistically and Culturally Different 
Jroups." oumal of Learning Disabilities 
10, no. 6 C ine-July 1977): 332-338. 

r onzalez, C stavo. language. Culture, 
md Exr ^tional Children." Exceptional 
Culdn (May 1974): 565-570. 

Giw June. Proceedings of a Workshop or. 
the PreparaHon of Personnel in Education r ' 
Bilingual HearingAmpaired Children, A^ 
0-4 San Antonio, Texas: Trinity \Jni 
versity, 1972. 

Guadalupe v. Temple School Disu 
August 1971, US. Districi Co J 
Arizona). 

Harber, Jean. The Bilingual Child with 
Learning Problems. 1976. ED 143 149. 

HEW Memorandum on 'Task Force 
Findings Specifying Rem' 'lies Avail* 
able for Eliminating Past ^Jucational 
Practices Ruled Unlawful under Lau v. 
Nichols." Washington, D.C.: Depart- 
ment of Health, Educatin g, and Wei* 
fare, 1975. 



Hickey, T "Bilingualism and the Measure- 
ment of Intelligence and Verbal Learn- 
ing Ability." Exceptional Children 39 
(1972): 24-28. 

Hill -Burnet, Jacquetta. '^ilingualism and 
Special Education.'' In Special Education: 
Needs-Costs^Methods of Financing, 1975. 
ED 106 985. 

InterAmerica Research Associates. A 
Bibliography of Preschool Bilingual Bi- 
cultural Materials for the Spanish-Speaking 
am Washington, D.Cj Office of 
Child Development (DHEW), 1977, 

Jensema, Carl. TTie Relationship behoeen 
Academic Achieoement and the Demographic 
Characteristics of HearingAmpaired Children 
and Youtk Series R, No. 2. Washington, 
D.C.* Gallaudet College, 1975. ED 131 
121, 

Johnson, Dale L et al. The Houston 
Parent-QJld Development Center. A 
Parent ^klucation Program for Mexi- 
can / merican Families." American 
Jour J of Orthopsychiatry 44, no. 1 
Oaiiuary 1974): 121-128. 

Jcrstad, D. "Psycholinguistic Learning 
Disabilities in Twenty Mexican Ameri- 
can Students." Journal of Learning Dis- 
atf/flies 4 (1971): 143-149. 

^<iine, Carl and Lee, Norma 'a Trans- 
cvUural Study of Dyslexia: Analysis of 
^Tiguage Di -- - .1 in 277 Chinese 
Otildren S; >ijtaneously Learning to 
Read and Write in English and Chinese.'' 
Journal of Special Education 6, no. 1 (Spring 
1971): 9-26. 

Lau V. Nichols. 414 US. 563 Oanuary 21, 
1974). 

Lesser, Saal D. Improving Bilingual Instruc- 
tion and Services in Special Schools. New 
Yoric: New York City Board of Educa- 
tion, 1975. ED 139 893. 

Luetke, Barbara. ''Questionnaire T^esults 
from Mexican American Parents of 
Hearing-Impaired Children in the 
United States." American Ann&ls of the 



Deaf III, no. 6 (December 1976): 

McOard, Donovan et al. "Early On: 
B^-havioral Assessment and EducaHon- 
Planning for Severely and Multiple 
iandicapped Children." In Early Ed- 
MuHon in Spmish-Speaking CommwiiHts, 
edited by Pascal Trohanis. New York; 
Walker and Company. 1978. 

Mercer. JJL The ^idemiology of Men- 
tal Retardation in an American City." 
In CumnI Issuts in Mental RtlardaHon: 
Stltdtd Papers from the J 970 Staff Deotlop- 
mtni Conferenas of Ihe President's Com- 
mittee on h^mtal Retardation. Washington. 
D.Cu US. '«jovemment Printing Office. 
1971. 

Mt cor. ).R. 1.Qu The Lethal Ubel." 
hi^it^trgy TodtBf 6 (September 1972): 
44 - , . 

Mercer, JJL Labeting the Mentally Retarded. 
Berkeley: Univenity of California 
Pr«ss, 1973. 

Mercer, jJR, SociowltHral Factors in the 
Educational Evaluation of Black and Chicano 
aUdren. 1972. ED 062 462. 

Mercer, JJL, and Lewis, Jf . System of 
Multicultural Pluralistic Assessment 
(SOMPA). New York: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1977. 

Meyersoa Marion D., and Green. 
Carolyn Banks. Minority Trainees on 
Speech Satellite Teams: A Manual of Or- 
ganiulion and Instruction. Fresno. Cali- 
fornia: California State University. 
1974. ED 107 022. 

Miranda, Manuel. Psychotherapy with Span- 
ish-Speaking: Issues in Research and Service 
Delivery. Spanish-Speaking Mental 
Health Research Center Monograph 
Number Three. Los Angeles: Spanish- 
Speaking Mental Health Research Cen- 
ter. University of California at Los 
Angeles. 1976. 

Molina. John. Approved Bilingual Education 
Programs: 1976-77. Washington. D.C.: 
Office of Bilingual Education. HEW. 
1976-77. 



Mullen. Frances A. Psychological Services to 
Spanish-Speaking Children in the Schools of 
Chicago. Paper presented at the Four- 
teenth Inter-America Congress on 
Psychology. April 1973. Sao Paulo. 
Brazil. 

MuUer. Mary C Itinerant Bilingual Ser- 
vices Program for Ttlle I Eligible CRMD 
Children. New York: New York City 
Board of EducaHon. 1975. ED 138 698. 

NatiOinal Advisory Council on Bilingual 
Education. The Fourtit Annual Report of 
the National Advisory Council on BHin- 
guat Education. Rosslyn, >^rginia: Inter- 
America Research Associates. 1979. 

National Center for Education Statistics. 
The Condition of Education: J 978 Editior. 
Edited by Mary Q. Golladay and Jay 
Noell. Washington. D.C.: U.S. Govern- 
ment PrinKng Office. 1978. 

Nelson. G. "Spedal Education Place- 
ment: The Federal Constitution and Its 
Implications." In The Legal and Educa- 
tional Consequences of the Intelligence Test- 
ing Movement: Hmdicapped and Minority 
Group (Mdren, edited by R. Harth. E 
Meyea and G. Nelson. Columbia. 
Missouri: The L' "ersity of Missouri 
Press. 1972. 

Newman. Lawrence. "Bilingual Educa- 
tion." Deaf American 25, 9 (May 1973): 
12-13. 

Oakland, Thomas. "Assessing Minority 
Group Children: Challenges for School 
Psychiatrists." In Assesang Minority 
Croup Children, edited by Beeman N. 
Phillips. New York: Behavioral Publi- 
cations. 1973. 

Office for Civa Rights. DHEW. 'Identifi- 
cation of Discrimination and Denial of 
Services on the Basis of National Ori- 
gin." Federal Register 35 (1970): 11595- 
11596. 

Operation Fail-Safe. Houston. Texas: 
Houston Independent School District. 
1979. 

Oxman, Wendy. Comprehensive Hearing Im- 
paired Reception Program. New York: New 



458 



York Gty Board of Education, 1975. 
ED 137 453. 

Padilk Eligio R., and Padilla. Amado M., 
eds. Trmscullural Psychiahy: An Hispanic 
Pmptctioe. Spanish-Speaking Mental 
Health Research Center Monograph 
Number Four. Los Angeles: Spanish- 
Speaking Mental Health Research 
Center, University of California at 
Los Angeles, 1977. 

Pmonnt! Preparation Bilingual Biculhtral 
Profesuonal Traimng Effort: Ciddtlines 
Draft. Paper prepared for submission 
to Texas Education Agency, Division 
of Special Education. San Antonio, 
Texas: Child Development Depart- 
ment, San Antonio College, 1978. 

Peters, Nathaniel A., and Stephenson, 
William Jr. "Parents as Partners in a 
Program for Children with Oral Lan- 
guage and Readiness Disabilities." 
Teaching Exceptional Children (Winter 
1979): 64-65. 

spirogram Changes Reflected in Title VII 
Proposed Regulations." FORUM 2. 
no. 7 (August 1979), p. 1. Rosslyn. 
Vir^nia: National Qearinghouse for 
Bilingual Education. 

Rich, Edward. "Bilingual Special Educa- 
tion: Meeting the Needs of the Non- 
English-Speaking Mentally Retarded 
Child." In Bilingual EJucalion. edited 
by Heman LaFontaine et al. Wayne, 
New Jersey: Avery Publishing Group, 
1978. 

Riley, John E. The Influence of Bilingualism 
on Tested Verbal Ability in Spanish. 1968. 
ED 026 935. 

Sabatino, David A. "Spedal Education 
and the Culturally Different Child: 
Implications for Assessment and In- 
tervention." Exceptional Children 39. 
7 (April 1973): 563-567. 

Sanua, Victor D. Bilingual Programs for 
Physically Handicapped Children. 1975. 
ED 137 448. 

Sayler, M.L. Parents: Active Partners in Ed- 
ucafion. Washington, D.C.: American 

O 

ERIC 



Association of iCndergarten and Nur- 
sery Educators, 1971. 

Singer. B.D. 'The Future*focused Role 
Image.'' In Leaning for Tomorrow: The Role 
of the Future in EducaKon. edited by A. 
Toffler. New York: Random House, 
1974. 

Spanish Dame Bilingual Bicultural Proj- 
ect. InstnuHomd Guide for the Home Tutor. 
Austin, Texas: Dissemination and 
Assessment Center for Bilingual Bi- 
cultural Education, 1974. 

Sfnoart et d v. Philips et d (D. Massachu- 
setts), Gvil AcHon No. 70.1199-F 
(October 1970). 

A Study of the State of Bilingual Materials 
Development and the Transition of Materials 
to the Qassroom: A Final Riport, Volume J. 
Submitted to the Office of Planning, 
Budget, and Evaluation (USOE). 
Arlington, Virginia: Development 
Associates, 1978. 

Trohanis, Pascal; Powers, Alice; and Hur- 
tado-PorHllo, Jose L IH. "A Selected 
Annotation of Resource Materials.'' 
In Early Education in Spanish-Speaking 
Communities, edited by Pascal Trohanis. 
New York: Walker and Company, 
1978. 

The Unfinished Education. Mexican Ameri- 
can Education Study. Washington, 
D.C.: VS. Commission on Civil Rights, 
1971. 

Vaughan, R.W. "Community, Courts, and 
Conditions of Special Education Today: 
Y/hyV Mental Retardation 11 (1973): 
43-46. 

Vocational Rehabilitation Act. U^. Con- 
gress, Public Law 93-112, Section 504, 
1973. 

Warren, Sue Allen, and Gariiner, David. 
'Teacher Nominations of Minority 
and Low SES Students for Special Ed- 
ucation." Education (Fall 1975): 57. 

Watson, Bill, and Van EiJen, Carlcne. 
"Bilingualism and Special Education." 
Journal of Learning Disabilities 10, no. 6 
Oune-July 1977): 331-332. 

459 



Williams. )ane Case. Improving Educational 
Opportunities for Mexican American Handi- 
capped Children. 1960. ED 081 326. 

Williams, Judy. Bilingual Expmenas of a 
Deaf Child. 1968. ED 030 092. 



Zigler. E.F. "Child Care in the 70's.'' 
Inequalilxf in Education. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: Harvard Center for 
Law and Education, Number 13, 
December, 1972. 



4G0 

O 

ERIC 



Thursday, April 24 



2:00-3:00 pm 



Presenters: Gerald Wright 

Northwest Missouri State 
Maryville, MO 64468 



University 



David Bauman, Bd.D. 
Northwest Missouri State 
Maryville, MO 64468 



University 



Dan Stevens 

Nazlini Boarding School 
Ganado, AZ 86^05 



Title: THE NO NAME NETWORK 



In the early 80's, the state of Missouri suffered a severe 
financial crisis. Some state agencies suffered mid-year budget cuts 
of up to )0% of their total annual operating budgets. These budget 
cuts caused agencies to stop and consider which of their services 
could be reduced or eliminated. Most agencies tried to retain full or 
reduced services to their more severely impaired clients. This 
decision caused many clients with mild to moderate handicaps to lose 
all or most of the services they had been receiving. 

Agencies also looked at tho range of services they offered in an 
attempt to see if some clients should or could be served by other 
agencies. Some clients were told they would have to obtain needed 
services from another agency. Receiving agencies then told the 
clients that their agency could not help them. The result was that 
clients were caught in a crossfire between two warring agencies which 
resulted in a denial of much needed services. 

Fortunately service providers in the field recognized what was 
happening to the people who were losing services. The local service 
providers sought desperately to provide tentative, makeshift services. 
This occurred all over the state of Missouri. The presentation 
focuses on just one of those networks and how it functions. 

Quite simply, the "No Name Network" came into being and continues 
to function through a syston of friendshtp.3 and overlapping membership 
on boards and organizations. This particular network is centered in 
Northwest Missouri State University (NWMSU). Chief service providers 
are students at the university who are able to meet some class 
requirements by doing volunteer work with the handicapped. Campus 
organizations are able to meet philanthropical requirements by 
providing services to the handicapped. 

Another group of students that have been instrumental to the 
process have been special education majors completing practicum and 
student teaching assignments in public schools and other agencies. 
These students provided services not just in northwest Missouri but to 
a limited extent also provided services in the states of Iowa, 
Nebraska, and Kansas. In general, the further the agency is from the 
campus at HWMSU, the more sporadic and less intensive the service. 

Last but not least is the consultant services provided by faculty 
members at NWMSU. Faculty members also provide independent 
evaluations for parents and school districts. A variety of NWMSU 



ERIC 




Page Two 



faculty members provide in service to local schools and in most cases 
are designated as disseminators of workshops, etc. sponsored by the 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE). 

The service area for NWMSU is located in the northwest and north 
central part of Missouri and is comprised of the following counties: 
Andrew, Atchison, Buchanan, Caldwell, Carroll, Clay, Clinton, Daviess, 
and Worth. The region is bounded on the north by the state of Iowa, 
while the counties of Platte, Clay, Ray, and Carroll are the 
southernmost within the region. The eastern boundary includes the 
counties of Mercer, Grundy, Livingston, and Carroll. The western 
boundary is the Missouri River which separates Missouri from Kansas 
and Nebraska. The region is approximately 200 miles by 110 miles at 
its greatest extremities. 

According to the 1982 census, the total population for the 
region, 246,553 people, represents 4.1^ of the population of Missouri. 
The regional population is ] .3% less than it was in 1970. This 
figures to an average population density of 52 people per square mile, 
^y 1990 it is expected that 9-1^ decline in population will occur 
although there are a number of growth centers within the region. The 
population within the region is not evenly distributed as Buchanan 
county contains nearly half of the regional population with 87,000 
while Worth county has the smallest population with 5,008 people. 

The economic picture for the region shows that 12.95? of the 
people are below the poverty level. This is somewhat higher than the 
rate for Missouri which is 11.4^. 

The region can best be characterized as rural with an 
agricultural emphasis. The current crisis in agriculture is 
accelerating the demise of the family farm» As the number of family 
farms diminish there is a migration of fara families to regional 
population centers as well as to the sunbelt. 

The region has a number of excellent highways yet many sections 
have inadequate roads. There is virtually no existing railroad 
system. 

The economic picture is not likely to change drastically because 
of the relatively high rates of unemployment, the population 
reduction, the relatively higher proportions of older people, fewer 
families to produce offsprings, and the general agricultural emphasis 
of the area. New industry is not likely to flood the region in view 
of the limited work force, the relatively limited highways for 
shipping and the relatively long distances to major metropolitan 
areas. Couple the decline in regional potential with the financial 
decline of the state in general and you see a reduction in services 
and a frantic interagency competition for the limited resources that 
are available. 

In conclusion we feel that the system utilized in Northwest 
Missouri could be duplicated by other interested parties anywhere. 
The system requires good faith by the various agency representatives 
and a desire to jjrovide services for needs that are being met. A 
university makes an excellent focal point for a network but other 
P;^oncies should be equally effective if agency personnel are able to 
bring creativity and imagination to the task. 



462 




463 



Thursday, April 24 i^LlTH^nc Schools 

932 S. First 

2:00-3:00 pm Biackwell, OK 74631 

CARL PERKINS ACT AIDS TRANSITION TO VOCATIONAL TRAINING 

PROGRAMS 

?i?S^ffi\ch^^^^^^^^ 'Ti'- '<^y County, Oklahoma. The area vocational 

schools AifLunh II ! students are from schools designated as rural 

aUenta'nce of 41 ?1 TnL ^' f/°'" ''"'^^ °f ^6*^' a vo tech 

schools ?t h«« tiln J Jl ^^"'y ^ ^'^°P'^'^ 3 consortium of small 

Jotwl^g! ^^-^ '^P'--ted in%?err;T98/"a;e Ih'^ 

Snxlh t.""/"''"" ? between Biackwell High School and Pioneer Area 

VoTech School administrators, counselors and teachers. 

^in \° a«^«'«t students by reinforcing skills being taught in vocational classes 
and provide alternative methods of testing. vocauonai classes 

cLnseUng. vocational assessment, preference testing and career 

lQth^nr«HT''^f J^'V""'.'""^' ''^'"'"^ in Biackwell High School for 9th and 
studenl. orien?ation for 8th grade 

e) To provide assistance in making transition to post school employment. 
A CTIVITIES 

d^recf'Te'rvices'To' th. ^ ""^'^'^"^^ ^ ^° Provide 

Qirect services to the students :n the vocational classes. Activities inri, 
tutoring, supervision of skill development and testing. Activitie include 

which if 'dSpH%'°?^'°"'l assessment system starting at the eighth grade level 
proper 'JocatS'trlrnin'g^.'^ ^^^'^"'^ "^^^^ ^^^-P-'^ — ^^'ices 'and slVeo. 

Pre vocational training is designed to provide ninth and tenth grade students with 

Er|c 467 



Page 2 



prerequisite skills which will enhance their success in vocational training as 
upperclasamen. The students learn interviewing techniques, appropriate social 
behaviors, and gain job experience in the school setting. Math and English 
curriculum is adapted to include vocational vocabulary and srriphasizes math 
operations which are necessary in real problem solving. 

An interagency network system is providing assistance to students to gain post 
school employment. The teacher and aid are monitoring the system. 

EVALUATION 

Data is being collected which indicates the students are feeling more successful in 
their vocational classes and are developing more positive attitudes toward vocational 
training. Information from administrators and teachers verifies the data. 



This presentation will describe the program and how it can be used in smaller 
districts through consortiums or cooperatives. Handouts of the model will be used. 
Information on funding through the Carl Perkins Act will be included. 



Jo Anne Davis 
Blackwell, Oklahoma 



ERIC 



463 



Thursday, April 24, 1986 
2:00 - 3:00 PM 



Presenter: JoAnne Davis 
Director of Special Education 
Blackwell Public Schools " 
Blackwell, OK 74631 



TITLE: CARL PERKINS ACT AIDS TRANSITION 
TO VOCATIONAL PROGRAMS 

Steps lor building a career education program are 
outlined in this paper. A career preparation class for 
ninth and tenth grade students is described. The 
objectives the Carl Perkins act are defined. This 
paper describes activities which are living implemented 
to achieve these objectives. A suggested model for 
adapting this program to the rural setting is provided. 



483 



Ten years ^fter the passage of P.L. 94-142 
ducators are skeptical of the effectiveness of 

secondary spec:>. 'sducation curriculum and programming. 
Traditional sucov -y curriculum is content oriented. 
In most vocatio,.^? programs at least seventh grade 
reading level is n .^d to comprehend the manuals. The 
academic achievement r?p has widened between most 
students and special d r . tion students. For most 
handicapped students, became a chasm. For those 

whc reading levels ha 7*^ lateaued at the fourth or 
fi£ grade level, sc : . . i?* in regular classes has 
beccv even more difi; ^ - J.a\- i : was in elementary 
schoc^ 

EDUCATG; CONCERNS 

Ma.. adents are iv.perie/tcing difficulty in 
passing \ : national courses bec-HUiie they can't read the 
manual. V/o; k samples may be ?:.ti5»factory but they are 
not the jnly criteria for succrrs^ful completion of the 
courses. Sach vocational course requires the use and 
understanding of a vocabulary t;;at is unfamiliar to 
students with learning problems. Frequent use of 
decimals and fractions in assignments made in 
vocational classes represent an insurmountable obstacle 
for students who can't solve written problems at the 
third grade level. Few handicapped students master 
long division rei;dily an2 many have difficulty with 
simple measurements. 

Specisil educators have expressed 
< / ^^appointmea' in the lack of success handicapped 
st^jidants have experienced :n cational programs 
generally and in vocational technical schools 
specii:icdlly. Blackwell special educators were among 
those who experienc d this disappoir.cment . For years 
complaints were expressed thvit vocational 
school did not have a learni.ig lab or aides to help 
handicapped students with skill practice. 

An occupation orientation class was offered to 
sophomore 3pe<2ial educa .ion s uients at the vocational 
school. The program was designed to acquaint students 
with the courses they would r ost likely be able to 
complete successfully as eleventh a\id twelfth graders. 
Realistically, few students moved fron* this class to 
others with success Some remained in the class for 
two or three years. Orientation was provided in four 
areas which had little rjpeal 'co female students. 

Although it was agreed vocv^.ional educators should 
be commended for thei - zealoi t^^^fort to avoid sex 
discrimination, it was the consensus of the Blackwell 
special educators that more varied prograun offerings 
would improve the enrollr -^t. Girls were not encouraged 
to enroll in the occupatit orientation class. 

The vocational teachs.rs received very little 
information about the students' levels of functioning. 



470 



Page 2 



Typically, their only contact with the special 
education instructor was at the lEP meeting. Often 
they couldn't attend those. Vocational assessment was 
non-existent. Career counseling was sketchy. Academic 
achievement scores and psychological testing were tha 
only information available. 

A matter of concern for both vocational and 
special educators was the lack of follow through 
services for lo*r achieving students after graduation. 
Both groups felt these students wouldn't make it in the 
world of work without some support. A survey ot ten 
former Blackwell students revealed only thirty percent 
were able to become employed on a somewhat ret ular 
basis. Fifty percent expressed a need for help in 
finding and retaining a job. 

Students and educators had found JTPA (CETA) 
services to be inconsistent. The frequent turnover in 
counselors and a lack of funds modified the 
effectiveness of the program in providing continuous 
supp-«rt for eligible clients. Although a vocational 
rehabilitation counselor was assigned to the area, few 
recent graduates were approved for services. 

Blackwell Schools did not provde any follow 
through services past high school. Students were 
contacted nhen JTPA funds became available. Otherwise, 
they were awarded the same diploma as the honor 
students, tiie superintendent shook their hand, and the 
special educators sail goodbye. 

I nterven-xons 

Speci-\ elmcaf^rs throughout the nation have 
struggled with the dilemma of developing a secondary 
curriculum that gives handicapped students the 
oppjrtunit,y to develop their -kills to their fullest 
poten ial ai i to be produv^cive citizei 3 in the 
commun_ty. The Blackwell scenario is duplicated in 
school districts throughout the country. Distance 
between the schools, poor communications between the 
two faculties, limited supportive services in the 
vocational school, low a^ iemir skills of special 
students \ho have h^d li>tle preparation for the 
vocational programs -uey enter, and no planned follow 
through services, are all factors which contribute to 
the dilemma. Addi .ionally, the students' poor social 
perception and lack of daily living skills complicate 
their adjustment in vocational classes. 

Special educaton have concluded that the answer 
to the secondary curriculum issue for handicapped 
students is career education. The United States Office 
of Education defines career education as "the totality 
of experiences through which one learns about and 
prepares co engage in work as a part of his or her way 
of living." Several educators would expand this 
definition a step farther and include personal social 



471 

o 

ERIC 



Page 3 



skills and daily living skills (Brolin and Kokaska, 
1979; Clark, 1979) • 

Diane Witnmer (1981) has suggested as students get 
older the school curriculum must be directed toward 
preparing the students with skills that are needed to 
achieve their future goals. She would add instruction 
and training in relationships and leisure activities to 
the vocational, . daily living skills, and personal 
social skills . She sees the typical high school 
curriculum as inconducive to meeting the needs of 
handicapped students. 

Wimmer endorses the Department of Defense 
Dependent Schools (DoDDS)-N plan, it is described as a 
functional learning model in which the teachers 
identify the skills in their curriculum which are 
functional. Those skills are related to essential 
tasks that are necessary in daily living in order to 
get along with others or to get or keep a job. The 
students' learning objectives are based on learning 
these skills through the ^-rontent curriculum. 

Others have also suggested models for career 
education using competency in skills as a framework. 
The Life Centered Career Education Model is a 
competency based program (Brolin, 1978). Skills 
identified as essential for success in adult daily 
living tasks were identified and categorized under 
three headings; Occupation Guidance and Preparation, 
Personal-Social Skills and Daily Living Skills. 

A developmental approach to career education has 
been suggested by Clark ( 1979 ) . Instruction is 
centered around four categories which are important to 
skill development. These are 1) values, attitudes, and 
habits; 2) human relationships; 3) occupational 
information; and 4) job acquisition and daily living 
skills. Specific goals and objectives are not 
developed in this model. 

COMPREHENSIVE CAREER EDUCATION 

Although different methods of instruction have 
been suggested, there appears to be a concensus that a 
comprehensive career education program should provide 
training in the following areas: 

a) Vocational skills 

b) Personal social skills 

c) Daily living skills 

d) Human relationships 

The forerunner to career education programs are 
the work study, or work experience programs 
(Sitlington, 1981). The work study plans were started 
as early as the 1920s and have been a component of 
secondary special education programs since that time. 
They were designed to place students in a real world 
work experience with supervisic it and support being 
provided by special educators. 



472 

o 

ERIC 



Page 4 



Intervention S trategies at Blackwell High S chool 

Blackweii special educators recognized the need 
for a career preparation program . A program was 
designed for ninth grade students which included 1) 
preyocational training, 2) personal social and daily 
living skills training, and 3) an opportunity to 
experience real work activities. The goal was to help 
students develop basic skills which would help thera 
find employment during the teenage years. (King and 
Davis 1983). 

Units of instruction the first year included: How 
to Get a Job; Child Care; Household Maintenance; and 
Yard and Garden Maintenance. On campus jobs were 
identified so students could interview and work at the 
jobs during class time under the instructor's 
supervision. Regular classroom teachers, custodians, 
secretaries, and administrators acted as employers and 
evaluated the students' performance of real job tasks 
assigned to them. The job tasks in the Child Care unit 
Included working with children in a day care center. 
Some students were employed following this unit and 
others were employed as a result of their experience in 
the Household Maintenance unit. 

Vocational assessment was an on going process 
during the course. Information from the informal 
assessment was used to plan extended activities to 
reinforce or develop skills further. Career 
counseling, which included career awareness and the 
development of social skills needed for specific jobs, 
was integrated into the curriculum. Training was 
provided to help students develop appropriate work 
attitudes ..nd behaviors. 

The progr.7jn closely paralleled the first three 
components of 1 le work experience model proposed by 
Thompson a. Wimmer (1976), as described by Sitlington 
(1981). Th^ work experience model is composed of five 
components. They are 1) prevocational experience; 2) 
job analyt;is; 3) in-school work experiences; 4) 
community placement; and 5) after graduation placement 
and follow up. The students showed an increased 
interest in vocational programs and the result was an 
increase in enrollment in the vocational technical high 
school. 

In addition to the career preparation class 
special educators increased their efforts to provide 
more support for the handicapped students by 
communicating more frequently with the vocational 
teachers . They also visited the vocational high 
school. Efforts were renewed to build a networking 
system with JTPA and Vocational Rehabilitation agencies 
so that follow through services could be established 
during and after high school. JTPA services could make 
it possible to implement the fourth component of the 
work experience model, community placement. Vocational 



473 



Page 5 



Rehabilitation services could aid the transition of 
qualified students to the world of work. 

Although the career preparation class had 
stimulated interest in vocational training, the special 
education team felt this was only an indication of what 
could be done to improve career awareness and skill 
acquisition for these studen It was felt that a 

comprehensive career education program was indicated. 
Information from former students could provide valuable 
input for the planning teaun. 

Former Students Survey 

A survey was conducted to discover the employment 
status of former students and to determine if those 
individuals wanted or needed help in finding jobs after 
graduation. Attitudes toward vocational programs were 
also assessed. 

The survey revealed seven of the ten former 
special education students had attended vocational high 
school. Six of the seven students indicated they 
enjoyed vocational training and learned useful skills. 
Only three students had been regularly employed. 
Fourteen different jobs had been held by the ten 
students. Fifty percent of the respondents indicated 
they needed and wanted help in job acquisition after 
high school. 

Based on the analysis of the factors which 
appeared to be blocking the successful transition of 
mildly handicapped students from special education 
classes to vocational classes to the world of work, the 
five following concerns were identified: 

1. The distance between schools resulted in poor 
communication between service providers. 

2. No supportive services were provided for slow 
students. 

3. A lack of understanding of the functioning levels 
of students resulted in unrealistic expectations 
for the handicapped. 

4. Students were not prepared for vocational 
programming, which made successful placement in 
some progreuns impossible. 

5. Follow through services after graduation were not 
provided. 

Clearly, a systematic plan for career preparation 
was nev^ded. 



474 



Page 6 



Implementation of a Career Education Program 

Although vocational educators made adjustments to 
accommodate handicapped students^ the responsibility to 
develop a comprehensive program had to be assumed by 
the home school district. Vocational awareness and 
assessment needs to begin at an early age^ long before 
students are eligible for vocational high school. 
(Sitlington, 1981) . The result of the career 
preparation class had demonstrated that students were 
receptive to vocational training at an earlier age and 
that calculation skills and vocabulary could be taught 
in content subject areas and would help prepare 
students for the academic portion of vocational 
classes . 

Because most of the identified concerns involved 
the ability levels of students ^ it seemed that special 
educators should ^ also take the initiative in 
implementing a career education program that would aid 
the transition from special eduction to vocational 
programs for the following reasons. The special 
education teachers: 

a) know the students personally 

b) are trained to evaluate and report functional 
levels. 

c) possess expertise in developing individual 
plans and assessments. 

d) are trained to adapt curriculum^ develop 
objectives and teach to them. 

Additionally^ special educators are child advocates and 
emphasize the development of the whole child as well as 
their academic achievement. 

Even though special educators may be seen as 
possessing the primary responsibility for initiating 
career education programs^ they seldom have a 
background in vocational education. Many vocational 
units they teach prepare students for jobs they will 
never fill (Land, 1984). The planning and development 
of appropriate vocational programs for handicappped 
students must include input from vocational educators. 

Informal skill assessment should be designed to 
assess skills m^eded for specific courses. Vocabulary 
and math skills should be identified and units 
developed to prepare students for specific vocational 
training. Personal social skills needed in particular 
vocational areas should be identified and taught to 
students who exhibit an aptitude in those fields. To 
develop specific appropriate activities for a 
comprehensive career education program ^ vocational and 
special educators must work as a team. 



475 



Page 7 



Needs had been identified and strategies planned. 
It was concluded tha'c a liason person was needed to 
work m the vocational school and the home high school. 
This person should be trained in testing, developing 
individual programs, have an understanding of 
vocational programming, and possess good communication 
skills. Such a position was impossible to fill from 
the existing financial structure of the school 
district. 



Carl Perkins Act 

The Carl Perkins Vocational Education Act, PL 98- 
524, became effective in July, 19i?Sc The act is 
intended to make vocational education programs 
accessible to all persons, including the handicapped. 
The funds are to be used for the excess costs of 
providing vocational' education to disadvantaged and 
handicapped individuals. School districts are awarded 
entitlements which are determined by a formula based on 
the number of students enrolled in vocational programs 
in each district. Each LEA must match the entitlements 
with local funds. They must maintain records to prove 
the total expenditures of the program reflect the 
excess cost of providing the vocational services to 
qualified students. 



Assurances 

In addition to the excess cost requirements 

superintendents must agree to other assurances. They 

include: ^ 

a) A proportionate eunount of the funds will be 
used for Limited English Proficiency students. 

b) Equal access to programs will be provided. 

c) Vocational orientation will be provided to 
students and parents prior to ninth grade 
enrollment. 

d) Funds will be used to meet the identified 
special needs of students. These services 
may include the adaption of curriculum, 
instruction, equipment, and facilities. 



e) 



assessment of the interests, abilities, and 
specific needs of students with respect to 
completing vocational education programs will 
be implemented. 



be implemented. 

f) Guidance, counseling, and career development 

activities will be conducted by professional 

trained counselors. These services will be designed 
to faciliate the transition from school to 

post-school employment and career opportunities. 



476 



Page 8 



Clyde Matthews, State Supervisor of Special 
Programs for the Oklahoma State Department of 
Vocational and Technical Education has provided 
suggestions for developing a system to assess the 
interests, abilities, and special needs of students. 
Also listed below are examples of special services that 
may be offered. School districts may join other 
districts in a cooperative agreement to provide these 
special services, counseling or assessment activities. 

Interest ; This requirement may be met by 
using the Microcomputer Interest Inventory which 
is a section of the VIEW program, or other 
interest tests to assess interests. 

Ability : The standard achievement tests or 
records of performance on standard achievement 
tests may be used to determine math and reading 
abilities. This, in conjunction with observation 
of "hands-on" activities in the shop or 
laboratory, can be used to determine vocational 
abilities to successfully coiiplete the vocational 
program. 

Special needs may be determined from the 
achievement tests, interest tests, and observation 
of "hands-on" activities. For those students who 
need work experience and/or economic assistance, 
the economic level of the family should be 
considered. The Work-Study program may be used to 
meet the economic need. 

These activities should take place before the 
total special needs are determined. The 
assessment requirement pertains to the vocational 
program in which the student has enrolled, and it 
applies to both disadvantaged and handicapped 
students (Matthews, 1985, p.2). 

Special services 

The Carl Perkins Act states "Each local education 
r.gency shall provide special services including 
adaptation of curriculum, instruction, equipment^ and 
facilities, designed to meet the needs established in 
this act." 

Special services may include individualized 
instruction as in a learning laboratory, remedial 
material, the usi^ of aides, computer-based 
instruction, and media including electronic media, 
for both disadvantaged and handicapped students. 
Special services may also include economic 
assistance for poverty-level students through 
work-study , cooperative education , or work 
experience (Matthews, 1985, p.2). 



477 



Page 9 



Definitions 

Handicapped as defined by P.L. 94-142 is accepted 
for the purposes of the Carl Perkins Act. 

Disadvantaged is described as academically 
disadvantaged. Following are the criteria for 
qualification under this category. A student who- 

1. Scores below the 25th percentile on a standardized 
achievement or aptitude tesc. 

2. Whose grades are below 2.0 on a 4.0 scale or 
fails to attain minimal academic competence. 

3. Is a dropout or identified as a potential dropout. 

4. Is in need of special services and assistance 
in order to enable the individual to succeed 
m vocational programs. 



Implementation of the Program 

*.v,^ c®J-f°'^!^®^hf°'^°°^^ implemented a support system in 
!?n^f«i °-.u"^! handicapped and disadvantaged 

students with the use of funds allocated by the Carl 
Perkins Act. In a student population of 456 students, 
l^uLtlt ' ^ ^flifi^d for services. 16 handicapped 
students were enrolled in vocational programs. 60 
students qualified for services under the academically 
disadvantaged criteria. 39 students received 

supportive services on a regular basis during the first 
semester of the program. 

The program was designed to address the situations 
which were perceived to be blocking the success of low 
achieving students' in vocational programs. A par" 
time special education teacher and a half time Sid^ 
provided direct services to students. The objectives 
for the program are the following: 
a) To function as a liason between Blackwell 



b) 



High School and Pioneer Area Vocational School 
teachers, counselors and administrators. 

To assist students by reinforcing skills 
being taught in vocational classes and provide 
alternative methods of testing. 



c) To provide vocational assessment, preference 
testing and career counseling. 



d) 



e) 



To provide pre-vocational training in Blackwell 
High School for 9th and 10th grade students 
and vocational education orientation for 8th 
grade students. 

To provide assistance in making transition to 
school employment. 



478 



ERIC 



Page 10 

ACTIVITIES 

1) The teacher travels to the vocational high 
school three mornings a week to provide 
direct services to the students in the 
vocational classes. Activities include 
tutoring, supe 'ision of skill development 
and testing. 

2) The aide provides tutoring in the home high 
. school to disadvantaged and handicapped 

students in vocational programs. She also 
assists the teacher in all other activities 
of the program. 

3) Acting as a liason between the -schools, the 
teacher provides information a out students' 
abilities and progress to the administrators, 
counselors, and teachers in both schools. 

4) Pre vocational training is designed to provide 
ninth and tenth grade students with training in 

K-""^*^ skills, daily living skills, human 
relationships and vocational skills. The students 
learn interviewing techniques, appropriate social 
behaviors, and gain job experience in the school 
setting. Math and English curriculum is adapted 
to include vocational vocabulary and emphasizes 
math operations which are necessary in real 
problem solving in vocational classes. 

5) Curriculum materials are being developed which 
will acquaint the students with vocabulary and 
calculation skills needed for specific vocational 
classes. These materials will be introduced in 
the spring after students complete pre-enrollment. 
They will be used again in the fall, introducing 
the new skills as they ar-; needed for the 
vocational class. These packets correlate with 
each vocational curriculum guide (Evans, 1986), 

6) Packets are being developed to provide informal 
assessment of skills identified as important to 
successful achievement in specific vocational 
areas. The results of this informal assessment 
will be used with results from other instruments 
to guide the students into appropriate career 
choices and preparation. 

7) An interagency network system is providing 
assistance to students to gain post school 
employment. The teacher and aid are monitoring 
the system. ^ 



479 



Page 11 



Evaluation 

Data is being collected which indicates 'he 
students . are feeling more successful in their 
vocational classes and are developing more positive 
attitudes toward vocational training. Information from 
administrators and teachers verifies the data. 

Model for Rural Areas 

Blackwell, Oklahoma may be considGred a rural 
area using the National Center for Education Statistics 
definition. The enrollment is below 2,500 students. 
Although the tax base is low, other factors which may 
act as deterrents to the implementation of innovative 
programs are not present. Doris helge (1981) found 
inhibiting factors in rural areas regarding compliance 
to P.L. 94-142 included cultural, geographic, climatic 
as well as socio economic factors. 

These factors could also be blocks to implementing 
transitional programs for the handicapped. Careful 
consideration of unique needs of each community must be 
considered when developing a new program. For small 
districts who may consider consortiums or cooperative 
programs to implement transitional programs, cultural 
differences may become major barriers. 

Oklahoma schools that generate less that $1000 are 
strongly encouraged to form cooperatives. This may be 
accomplished by joining other small districts or they 
may coop with a larger district. The Blackwell model 
could be adapted to either plan. 

Because funding provided by this act is limited, 
part time staff may be utilized to deliver services 
Part time aides in each district can save on 
transportation costs as well as represent subcultures 
of the districts. The use of insiders to deliver the 
program can be helpful in gaining community support. 

The certified person who fills the liason role is 
the key to the success of the program. The position 
can be filled by a certified teacher or counselor. 
Certification requirements, however, may not be as 
important as personal qualifications. The person 
filling this role should possess: 

1) Good communication skills 

2) Skills in individualizing instruction 

3) Skills in developing individualized curriculum 
materials 

4) Assessment skills 

5) An understanding of vocational educational 

6) An understanding of career education 



o 480 

ERIC 



Page 12 

7) a tolerance for ambiguity 

8) Enthusiasm for the project 

As manager of a cooperative program, the certified 

person's duties would include; 

1) Train aides in individualized instruction 

techniques, in. methods of working with students 
with learning problems, and in the administration 
of assessments. 



2) 



3) 



4) 



Develop a needs plan for each student based on 
skill assessment, educational achievement, and 
teacher observations, which can be followed by 
the aide in the home school. 

Develop a. plan for career awareness, orientation, 
and counseling based on the identified needs 
of each student. This plan would be implemented 
in the home high schools by counselors, special 
education or regular teachers assisted by the 
aides. ^ 

Consult with teachers in home high schools on 
vocational educational programs. Provided infor- 
mation on skills needed by students to function 
successfully in specific courses. Work as a team 
to develop career preparation activities or 
classes. 

5) Develop individual instructional packets and 
. informal assessment packets for each district. 
This may be accomplished before school starts in 
August or one day a week may be set aside for 
the project. The aides may assist with this 
activity and/or it could be a work study project 
or an m-school work experience for younger 
students. Special education or reading teachers 
could be included in the development of materials 
which they would use in their classrooms. 

^-h^ Creative scheduling can provide the best use of 
the staffs time for the benefit of the students, if 
each school can afford an aide only two days a week, 
they could be scheduled the days before tests ar4 
^^'■''r vocational school. Blackwell's 

?H ? f^-^^ scheduled in blocks of time rather 
tha.i the traditional hourly schedule. She spends three 
mornings per week at the vocational school while two 
mornings are spent in planning. 

Representatives from each school should be 
involved m planning a cooperative program. An 
advisory council would enhance communication and 
support for the program in the local communities. The 



4Si 



Page 13 



use of local people as aides and/or volunteers to tutor 
studsnts should increase the feeling of local 
involvement. 

Selection of a coordinator/liason teacher who 
possesses good communication skills as well as 
expertise in individualizing education^ and .na 
understanding of vocational and career education is 
imperative to the .immediate success of the program. 

The council and the teacher should identify local 
needs, student needs, and write objectives for the 
program. Activities should be planned to meet the 
objectives. A prograun evaluation should be d:=>veloped. 
The program should be implemented in phases with the 
greatest needs being addressed first. A timeline 
illustrating the phases and projected implementation 
dates would be an effective communication tool. 

Communication and cooperation between genercil 
educators and vocational educators, with financing made 
posible by the Carl D. Perkins Vocational-Educational 
Actr provides schools an opportunity to develop 
comprehensive career education programs for handicapped 
students. 



Selected References 



Brolin^ D.E. (1978). Life centered career education; 
a compentency based approach . Res ton VA: The 
Council for Exceptional Children. 

Brolin^ D.E. & Kokaska^ C.J. (1979). Career education 
for handicapped children and youth . Columbus OH: 
MerrTTIT 

Clark, G.M. (1979). Career education for the 

handicapped child in the elementary classroom . 
Denver : Love Publishing . 

Evans, L. (1986)^ Basic Occupation Orientation . 
Unpubl i shed manuscri p^^ " 

Helge, D.Ie (1981). Problems in implementing 

comprehensive special education programming in 
rural areas. Exceptional Children, 47, 514-520. 

King, T.C. & Davis J.G. (1983). Career preparation . 
Unpublished manuscript. 

Land, I.L. (1984). Handicapped students in 

Transition: Prevocational Training to Full 
Employment in a Rural Setting . Unpublished 
manuscript. 

Matthews, C.L. (1985). Implementing the Carl D. 

Perkins Vocational-Education Act. Unpublished 
manuscript. 

Sitlington, P.I. (1981). Vocational and special 
education in career programming for the mildly 
handicapped adolescent. Exceptional Children, 
47, 592-598. 

Thompson, L. & Wimmer, D. (1976). Organizational 

parameters in planning for a work/study program. 
In parameters of planning; The work-study 
coordinator . Lawerence: University of Kansas. 
Habilitation Personnel Training Project. 1976. 

Wimmer, D. (1981). Functional learning curricula in 
the secondary schools. Exceptional Child, 
47, 610-616. 



3 



Hobart and William Smith Colleaes' education program is 
largely based on cross age tutoring; undergraduates preparing to 
become teachers work in classrooms with small groups of children 
for three to four hours a week for two years prior to student 
teaching. They are closely supervised in the field and attend 
weekly seminars related to their teaching. 

2. Sex: The tutoring dyad can be composed of same sex chil- 
dren or children of different sexes. Most studies have not 
examined whether or not sex influences progress toward tutoring 
goals; one study reported that same sex dyads had better outcomes 
(Dahlen, 1973) however Ehly (1975) did not confirm this finding. 

3. Special Features: The special features which are of most 
interest to special educators are those which refer to areas of 
ftandicap. Handicapped children are most freouently found in the 
tutee role with normal children acting as tutors. There are 
programs, however, in which handicapped children take on the 
V^V""^ role. Osguthorpe et al (1984) reported using mentally 
retarded children as tutors for normal children. The retarded 
Children were very successful in teaching their tutees sian 
language. Handicapped individuals have also been used success- 
Boii^ ^?Qj5?°"r.^f!fu°"® another (Carlton, et al, 1985; Wacker s 
Berg, 1984). Furthermore, several studies report low achievino 
or learning disabled older children acting successfully as tutors 
to younger children (See Cloward, 1976). This situation is of 
particular interest because dramatic gains were reported for both 
tutor and tutee. 

4. Reward System: In some cases tutors have been paid for 
their teaching activities; in most cases the tutor is a volun- 
teer. There are, of course, many rewards other than monetary 
ones which can be given to tutors. Recognition in the form of 
teacher praise, certificates, badges, letters of thanks, and 
gifts such as stickers or small prizes have been used. Probably 
the more important rewa _re intrinsic to the situation itself, 
namely, the status the or acquires, the pleasures of having a 
close relationship with a younger child, and better knowledge of 
the subject area. . 

C. Program Focus 
The focus of a tutoring program can be roughly divided into 
two categories: instructional and social. Under the former, 
tutors have been used to help improve children's performance in 
spelling (Ehly & Larsen, 1976), reading (Harrison, Nelson, & 
Top?? i^' ^^^^l' ^"'^ arithmetic (Pierce, Stahlbrand, s Armstrong, 
1984) to name but a few. Any area of the instructional spectra 
can lend itself to tutoring. H^ctra 

_ Social and/or behavioral goals tend to be incidental to 
instructional goals, however, some programs have been planned 
specifically to increase positive social behaviors on the part of 
trie tutee. Some of the gains reported have been improved mot va- 

KieSt.SS i'q,^?^^' .^u"!^ attitudes toward school (Yamamoto & 
Klentschy, 1972) , and higher self concept scores (Ross, 1P72- 
Poole, 1971) . , . ^, 

484 



ERIC 



PEER TUTORING PROGPAi"! OPTIONS 



PROGRAM COORDINATOR 



Administrators 

Special Education 
Supervisors 
Teachers 
Psychologists 
Counselors 

Teachers 

Parents 

Housewives 

Senior Citizens 

Conmunity Menbers 

Researchers 

Students 

Other 



■ERIC 



HITOR 
CHARACTERISTICS 



Older than tutee 
Younger than tutee 
Peer 
Grade 

Kindergarten 
to 

College 
toe 

Boy 
Girl 

Special Features 

Disability 
Sensory 
Behavioral 
QiDtional 
Learning 
Ifcntal 

AchievenEnt 
High 
Middle 
Low 

Revards 



Extrinsic 
Intrinsic 



TOE 

aiMERisncs 



Aae 

Older than tutor 
Younger than tutee 
Peer 
Grade 

Kindergarten 
to 

College 
Sex 



Girl 

Special Features 

Disability 
Sensory 
Behavioral 
BiDtional 
Learnir.g 
Mental 

Achievement 
High 
Middle 
Low 



PROGRAM POniS 



INSTRUCTIONAL 



Reading 

Lanugauge Arts 

Listening Skills 

Graiiriar 

Arithmetic 
Counting 

to 
Algebra 

Writing Skills 

Spelling 

Languages 

Scienc'j 

Social Studies 



■SOCIAL/BMVIQRAL 



Attitudes 

Work habits 

Self concept 

Self esteem 

t^tivation 

Friendship 
behavior 

Tiine on task 



5 



III. ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF TUTORING PROGRAMS 

"^^^l^ ^ °^ anecdotal evidence, backed by 

research, which supports the use of peer tutoring proorams 

^«P°rt positive gains for tutor and tuS4 
1 and social areas; at the very worst they report 

Irlt r./'lJ^° r : '^^^ ''^^''^ °" following page sunanarizes 
g?SIms. advantages and disadvantages of peSr tutoring pro- 

With the impressive advantages to both tutor and tutee the 
question which obviously must be asked is: "Why aren" pee? 
^o^Sfi^J^ programs used more widely?- The answer stems fror a 
combination of factors which can be classified under the headinos 
knowledge, practical considerations, and teache? psycSo?ogy! ^ 

According to Jenkins and Jenkins (1981) there are two ma-ior 
f!?sr%h^r tutoring is not being used widely. ?hey suggil? 

til l ^^^^ ^^t""^ "^^y ^® ^ ^^^'^ °^ knowledge aboGt progJams and 
''J^"'- ?«^°"^ly' they believe that peer^ tutoring 
oHe^LJ^'JlSf P«5^«^^«^ " effective, especially in terms 

or teacher time. I would suggest a third factor: psycholoaical 

"Pe^ts intrinsic to the p?og?aSs JJSm- 

and Jenkins consider a lack of knowledge as only a 
s^flJoLnr^^^"^''^°"- V"^"^ t*^^^ the prograL have^had 

tefcierf h.S?^;^^^%''° available to most teachers, but that 
^o«^ f J? hesitate to set up such programs for mort practical, 
cost effective reasons. Teachers are already over burdened • thev 
lilt ^?iv°^^ scheduling instruction around special!? c^Uec- 

ting milk money, taking attendance, taking bus duty and cafeteria 
supervision, attending meetings, and keeping records! The amoSJ? 

^^.n,^^^-?^ •? ^^""^ ""^^'l^ """^^ ^« Invested'^in a peer tutoring p?S^ 
gram, if it is anything more than an informal one, is discourag- 

^looo""^"? addition, when the program is one which involves another 
niv fHn5?r tutoring) these problems are compounded . sim- 
ply finding time in which to meet and consult with another 
teacher can be difficult. This does noc begin to account for 
Se ydJf"'^^" coordinate, train, and monitor students. 

r « C situation is siiailar no the one which currently exists 

II ^""^^^^ Colleges in which student^ pLpaJing 

to be teachers can assume many of the practical responsibilities 
for the cooperating teachers. j."ij.ities 

n.,v,.hoto^^^' TT^?®''® ^""^ considerations which I will call teacher 

^ teacher is experienced in conducting peer 
!n!S programs he/she may feel an understandable lack of 

enthusiasm for, and confidence in, initiating one. Children arJ 
being released from classes, children for whom the teachi? is 
still responsible. Whether acting as tutor or tutee! ^helS 

^aken^out of%i''°"i"^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ the ihiJd iJ 

with h?S/hf5 T '^"sic special, the teacher has to contend 

SDer?in~ denying that child a pleasant 

experience. If the child is removed from an instructional period, 

487 



ERIC 



6 

ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF 
PEER TUTORING PROGRAMS* 



ADVANTAGES 



DISADVANTAGES 



Improvement in personcil behaviors: 
Attitudes, vgork habits , self concept , 
self esteem, motivation, friendship 
behaviors, persistence for both tutor 
and tutee 

Iitproved school performance in 
instructional subject, iitproved 
achievement test scores for both 
tutor and tutee 

Individualized attention for tutee 
including benefits of individual 
pacing, repetition, and curriculum 
design 

More thorough knowledge of subject 
area for tutor, provides review 
and repetition 

Cost-effective: provides 

individucLLized instruction without 
hiring more personnel 

Mainstreaming: children learn that 
being different is okay, gain 
insight into being handicapped 

Responsibility: tutor feels needed 
and useful in school, learns 
to contribute to cotmon good 

Friendship for both tutor and tutee — 
children learn to take care of each 
other 

Helps tutors enpathize with teachers, 
gives them scne experience in 
teaching 



Unless tutor is trained possible use 
of negative reinforcemant 



Loss of class time 



Unless goals are specified may be a 
vaste of time 



Takes time for teachers to initate 
and manage 



Teacher may feel threatened by loss 
of control 



*For a more detailed chart, see Lippit, P. Learning through Cross-age helping- 
Why and how. In V. Allen (Ed.) . Children as Teachers: ^ h^ry .r^LZZl^^L. 
storing. New York: Academic P ress, 1976. pp, 157-168 ^searcn on 



4SS 

EKLC 



lhal lL ni^t ° "P- "^^^ is concerned 

claL '4 whether tutor or tutee, may be loosing valuable 

ac?lvlt?ir' lessons and being left out of Important 

?««;^ • ^^i^ally' if a fifth grader does as good a iob in 

Ms/S? iof^^f ^ '^"''^^ " then the telcher may fee? 

his/her position as an expert is open to question. 

considerat?SSi"^''i°S °^ ""u^^^ factors, knowledge, practical 

! ^ ' ^"'^ psychology, can lead to considerable resis- 
Inlll ?nJ^ P^^"" tutoring programs. Furthermore, if teachers 
enter into a program unprepared for difficulties, the oroaram 
mc\y be discarded when problems arise. program 

IV. CRUCIAL FACTORS EFFECTING PROGRAM SUCCESS 

tufor.4n^^«i''^ recogni:!ed the difficulties in setting up a peer 
fb^^SLPfS!''^"'' what factors contribute to a progrlm's success? 
I believe the answer .ies in the program coordinator's hands. A 
list of the program coordinator's tasks can be found on the 
following page. It is the responsibility of the coordina?Sr ""tl 
dllega^ion. attended to, either directly or by 

• P°i"*^ ^° ^® considered applies -.rimarily to 

special education personnel. since the realon for setting up 
nJ^L,^r^^ ^^!u ^"^o^in*' programs is a desire to improve the 
SI^5°M^"°%°^ "•^^y programs are initiated by specia! 

In^M^^ ^^^^f?^""^ personnel connected with special JhildJin. 
Special education personnel are in a unique position since thev 

?hei? ^bu?ld?S/^"'^?^n"?^"%^^e^? ^° a^e rlsponsib?;i 

5 principal and their district or countv soecili 

Mons^°"Th^^T'^r^; ''^^ '^^^ ^^^^ ^° confusion and comp!?ca- 
wf?? 4 1 °^ contacting the various administrators who 

?i Involved, and to keep them informed about the program is 

the first responsiblity of the proaram coordinator! " 
^» K ?® building administiator can not be over 

emphasized. while the principal need not be direc?ly involved 
his/her support of the program is crucial to its succesr t4 
lies within the power of the building administrator ^SJos^^r a^d 
M^rr PFO?""-' help with scheduling, allow teacSers rILa2e 
time to run the program, and find space in which it can ODlratl 
Given a supportive administrator and a knowledgeabll coSrdina?o?' 
implementing a peer tutoring program should prive to be an excitl 
mg and advantageous experience to all those concerned 
«v«r^ S®""^"? initiating the program needs to be 

J ^^l^^, resistance with which program development 
may be met. He/she needs to be sympathetic to teachers' co^- 
llT^lk. Jhf ./r^^ ^^"^^^ ^^^^ knowledge and enthusiltm that c2n 
^^fffon K f issues. Many teachers do not have adequate in^r" 
Tnli^.i^^°;i tutorinq proqrams, have no way to fit their 

t?f?SoJe tridfn^?^^^^- picture, and are hesi^anJ^ 

tnerefore, to identify their own ^reaching in this way. T'here is 
little wonder then, that they approach th? idea with Caution! it 



489 



9 



costs can be kept to a minimum by working with volunteers. 
Finally, initiating and maintaining a cross age tutoring program 
can become an exciting venture for both the school and the com- 
munity involved. 



KEFERENCES 

.^•^* ^^'^'^ Children as Teachers; Theory and Resear ch on 
Tutoring. New York: Academic Press, 1976. 

Carlton, M.B. et al. The effects of an intraclass peer tutoring 
program on the sight-word recognition ability of students who 
are mildly mentally retarded. .Mental Retardation . 1 QBg . 23(2). 
pp. 74-78. ^ 

Cloward, R.D. Teenagers as tutors of low-achieving children: 
Impact on tutors and tutees. In V. Allen (Ed.) Children as 

Teachers; Theory a nd Research on Tutoring . New York: Academic 

Press, 1976. 

Dahlen, G.G. The effect of like ethnic gualities upon reading 

tutoring of third graders. U.S. Dept. of H.E.W. 1973 (ERIC 
Document Reproduction No. ED 048-133) . 

Ehly, S.W. & Larsen, S.C. Tutor and tutee characteristics as 
predictors of tutorial outcomes. Psychology in the Schools, 
1976, 8, PP348-349. 

Ehly, S.W. & Larsen, S.C. Peer Tutoring for Individualized In - 
struction . Boston: Allyn & Bacon, Inc. 1980. 

Ellson, D.G., et al. Programmed tutoring: A teaching aid and a 
research tool. Reading Research Quarterly . 1965, 1(1). 

Feldman, R.S., Devin-Sheehan, L. , s Allen, V.l. Children tutoring 
u5"i ^ critical review of research. In V. Allen (Ed.). 

Children as Teachers: Th eory and Research on Tutorin g. New 

York: Academic Press, 1976. 

Hamblin, j.a. & Hamblin, R.l. On teaching disadvantaged 
preschoolers to read: A successful experiment. American Educa- 
tional R esearch Journal. 1972, 9, pp. 209-216. '■ — 

Harrison, G.V. Structured tutoring: Antidote for low achievement. 
In V. Allen (Ed.) Children as Teachers: Theory and Research on 
Tutoring. New York: Academic Press, 1976. 

Jenkins, J.R. & Jenkins, L.M. Cross aa a and Peer Tutoring: HPip 
for Children with Learning Problems . Reston, Virginia: The 
Council for Exceptional Children, 1981. 

Mohan, M. Peer tuto ring as a technigue for the unmotivated, a 
research — report. Teacher Education Research Center, State 
University College, Fredonia, New York, March, 1972. 

Niedermeyer, F.C. A model for the development or selection of 
school-bised tutorial systems. In V. Allen (Ed.). Children as 
Teachers: Theory an d Research on Tutori ng. New York: Acade- 
mic Press, 1976. ~ 

Osguthorpe, R.T. et al. Handicapped children as tutors. 198-^-fl4 - 
final report. David 0. McKay Inst, of Education, Brlgham Young 
University, Provo, UT. June, 1984. 

491 



ERIC 



10 



Pierce, M.McN., Stahlbrand, K. , & Armstrong, S.B. Increasing 
Student P roductivity Through Peer Tutoring Programs , Austin, 
Texas : Pro-Ed , 1984. 

Poole, A. Final project report: Cross-age teaching (No. 68-06138- 
0) . Ontario-Montclair School District, Ontario, California. 
Poole-Young Associates, June 1971. 

Ross, S.P. A study to determine the effects of peer tutoring on 
the reading efficiency and self concept of disavantaged commu - 
nity college freshmen: A final report^ Port Worth, Texas: 
Tarrant County College District, 1972. (ERIC Document Repro- 
duction No. ED 081-415). 

Wacker, D.P. & Berg, W.K. Use of peer instruction to train a 
complex photocopying task to moderately and severely retarded 
adolescents. Analysis and Intervention in Developmen tal Disa- 
bilities^ 1984, 4(3) pp. 219-34: 

Yamamoto, J.Y. & Klentschy, M. An examination of intergrade 
tutoring experience on attitudinal development of inner city 
children. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Cali- 
fornia Educational Research Association, San Jose, Nov. 1972. 



RECOMMENDED READINGS 

Allen, V.L. (Ed»). Children as Teachers: Theory and Research on 
Tutoring . New York: Academic Press, 1976. 

Ehly, S.W. & Larsen, S.C. Peer Tutoring for Individualized 
Instruction . Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1980. 

Jenkins, J.R. & Jenkins, L.M. Cross age and Peer Tutoring: Help 
for Chi ldren with Learning Problems. Re s ton , Vi rgi ni a : The 
Council for Exceptional Children, 1981. 

Pierce, M. McN. , Stahlbrand, K. , & Armstrong, S.B. Increasing 
Student Productivity Through Peer Tutoring Programs , Austin, 
Texas : Pro-Ed , 1984. 



EKLC 



4S2 



Thursday, April 24 



Beth Franks 

Hobart & William Smith Colleges 
Geneva, NY 14456 



2:00-3:00 pm 



CROSS AGE TUTORING PROGRAMS 



I. INTRODUCTION: DESCRIPTION AND DEFINITIONS 



Tutoring is one of the oldest and most effective ways of 
teaching. It is used extensively in such prestigious institu- 
tions as Oxford and Cambridge; it is also used widely in rural 
schools to provide children with individualized instruction. 

Both cross age tutoring and peer tutoring refer to situa- 
tions in which one child is used to instruct another. Here, the 
operative word is 'used*. There are many informal interactions 
between children in which one child will teach another how to do 
something, for instance, iump rope or make paper snowf lakes. 
When a person external to the dyad initiates, directs, and main- 
tains the instructional situation, however, then a cross age or 
peer tutoring program is in effect. It should be emphasized that 
using one child to teach another does not exploit either tutor or 
tutee, in fact, quite the reverse. Impressive positive gains by 
both tutor and tutee are commonly reported. Furthermore, these 
gains are not limited to academic areas but extend to social, 
emotional, and behavioral ones. 

The terms cross age tutoring and peer tutoring are often 
used interchangeably. From an adult perspective most children 
are considered peers which may account for this. Strictly speak- 
ing, the terms do not mean the same thing. Cross age tutoring 
refers to a situation in which an older child teaches a youriger 
one, while peer tutoring indicates a situation in which one child 
teaches another of the same age. In the following paper the 
terms will used interchangeably, unless otherwise noted. 



Peer tutoring has many managerial advantages. The programs 
are flexible and adaptable, can accommodate to a wide range of 
conditions, and can be used by almost any teaching agency. Pro- 
grams can range in size from a single teaching dyad to those 
which operate on a state-wide basis fPierce, Stahlbrand, & Arm- 
strong, 1984). Programs can exist for very short periods of time, 
for example a week or two, or can span several years. They can 
run informally, consisting of a buddy system between two classes 
for field trips, or can operate in such a way that tutors con- 
struct curriculum and carry out their own lesson plans. In fact. 



II. RANGE OF PROGRAM OPTIONS 



ERIC 




2 



given the range of possibilities, it is probable that almost all 
teachers have at one time or another used peer tutoring to aug- 
ment their classroom instruction. 

Peer tutoring programs are composed of four main ingre- 
dients, namely, a program coordinator or supervisor, the tutors 
used in the program, the children being tutored, and the program 
focus. This latter category can be subdivided further into an 
instructional focus, and a social or behavioral one. An overview 
Of some of the available options is presented in the chart on 
^^^^4^?* should be noted that any combination of options is 

possible; in fact, one could construct a program by randomly 
Choosing items from each column. 

A. The Program Coordinator or Supervisor 
Cross age tutoring programs are initiated and maintained by 
someone outside the tutoring dyad. In educational settings this 
person is usually a classroom teacher working either by him/her- 
self or with other school personnel, however, proorams can be 
run by parents, housewives, senior citizens, researchers, or stu- 
dents. A further factor to note is that program coordinators may 
be paid or may volunteer for the position. 

Many programs are initiated by educational researchers in- 
terested in studying the effect peer tutoring has on pupil per- 
formance. Sponsored by a grant from The National Consortium of 
Universities Preparing Rural Special Educators, a special educa- 
tion course is being offered currently at Hobart and William 
Smith Colleges on cross age tutorina. As part of the course 
requirements, undergraduate students are designing, implementing, 
and evaluating cross age tutoring programs in local schools. In 
many ways this is an ideal situation. Because of the work done 
by the undergraduates, local teachers can delegate manv of the 
time consuming aspects of setting up and managing a program. tr 
exchange for time and effort, the students are acquiring know- 
ledge and skills which will serve them in their future profession. 

B. Tutor and Tutee Characteristics 

There are several ways that tutors and tutees can be des- 
cribed. The following represents a partial list of tutor and 
tutee characteristics: age and/or grade, sex, special features, 
achievement level, and reward system. 

1. Age: The age relationship of the tutoring dyad has mul- 
tiple possibilities. Tutor and tutees have ranged in age ^rom 
preschoolers (Hamblin & Hamblin, 1972) to adults (Ellson et al, 
1965) . The most common combination is between an older tutor and 
a younger tutee eg. between a fifth grader and a third qrader. 
Although much tutoring does take place at this level, the ages of 
both tutor and tutee can extend well beyond the elementary range. 
Vermont's tutoring program, for instance, uses high school stu- 
dents who take a high school course for credit in which they are 
trained and supervised in tutoring other students rPierce, Stahl- 
brand, & Armstrong, 1984) . 

494 



ERIC 



d^no/ ^Soum/^ S^ckooi S^M^/em^fU^nxl^^ 

Post Office Box 769 - Pinal Coanty Admimstration Building 
Florence. Arizona 8S232 

SHERRY FERGUSON Telephone: 602/868-5801, Ext. 565 ANNE WOLVEN 

Superintendent Cbief Deputy 

LAWRENCE E. MAZIN, ED.D. 
Associate Superintendent 



Prcscntor Lawrence E. Mazin, EdD. 
Thursday. April 24 ^^^^"^^ 

P. O. Box 769 

2:00-3:00 pm Florence, Arizona 85232 



Hiring and Firing: 
The Comprehensive Personnel System 



TTie Hiring and Firing seminar has been developed specifically by and for educational 
administrabxs and school boards functioning in rural areas who have difficulty in recruiting and 
retaming qualified teachers, administrators, and therapy services. 

Hiring and Firing is a unique seminar concept covering recruiting, screening, interviewing, 
selecting, retaining and terminating school personnel 

Hiring and Firing is a fast-paced, dynamic seminar. YouH receive vital and helpful 
mformation presented in a unique, stimulating and entertaining way. 

The results of attending Hiring and Firing will help you to: 

A. Hire more capable and productive people. 

B. Handle problem personnel guiddy, tactfully and effectively. 

C. Avoid cosdy, time-C(»suming and disruptive litigation. 

D. Keep and develop a qualified staff to help you meet the challenge of the 80's. 



495 



Concurrent Sessions 
Thursday^ April 24 

3:20 - 4:50 pm 



Presenters I Patricia Garrity Paurra 
398 Wilson Avenue 
Ambridge, PA I5OO3 

Deborah Forrest 

University of Arizona 

Division of Learning and Instruction 

Room 711 

Tucson, AZ 85717 



DEVELOPING UNITS FOR WIDE-RANGE 
ABILITIES IN THE REGULAR CLASSROOM 

Teachers in rural settings are often confronted with the dilemma of planning 
curriculum for students of varying abilities within the same classroom. They 
axe faced with remediation planning for those students who axe unable to 
maintain the pace of the regular curriculum and daily planning for the 
mainstream of their students. Yet there remains a third group that is very 
often overlooked — the gifted. Time constraints often preclude the adequate 
curricular differentiation demanded by all these groups. Unfortunately, 
there are usiaally no resource professionals to provide for the needs of the 
high and low groups. The purpose of this presentation is to provide a practical 
method for developing units appropriate for students of varying abilities 
within a single, regular classroom. 

Typically, the regular classroom is designed to fit the learning needs and 
styles of the average or middle-range stiodent. This leaves the low achiever lost 
and frustrated. At the same time, the high achiever is bored and unmotiva^ted. 
Ideally, the classroom should offer opportunities to keep each group interested 
and leaxning at an appropriate level, as well as iieeting the needs of the 
mainstream students. Vith thoughtful planning based on teaching models, this 
becomes an achievable goal. Accordin^c to Maker (1982), a teaching-learning^ 
model is a structural framework tha*. serves as a guide for developing specific 
educational activities and environments. In this case, three models will be 
integrated for the development of classroom activities that can be modified to 
fit various curricular needs and that can be easily adapted to meet the needs 
of individual teachers and programs. 

The first model to be considered is Bloom's Cognitive Taxonomy. This 
model is a cognitive one that assumes a hierarchical relationship among its 
components. In other words, each level depends upon all the levels below it. 
The Cognitive Taxonomy consists of six levels s knowledge;; comprehension; 
application; analysis; synthesis; and evaluation. Building upon this taxonomy 
allows for a variety of activities at different levels of ability within a 
single objective. 

A second consideration in planning activities for a wide range of abilities 
is the affective domain. Williams's Strategies for Thinking and Feeling provide 
a framework for^ addressing this concept. Williams suggests that the development 
of creative thinking and feeling processes should occur in a heterogeneous 
classroom, so that all children will derive benefits. The Williams model is a 
morphological model having three dimensions! the curriculum; teaching strategies; 
and student behaviors. Fluency, flexibility, originality and elaboration are 
developed, along with the feeling processes of curiousity, risk-taking, complexity, 



49V 



and imagination through traditional curricular material. In additior. Williams 
proposes 18 teaching strategies, including such things ast provocative 
questions; creative reading j analogies; and skills of search. 

Thirdly, many people feel that all children are talented in some area. It 
is important that all children feel successful in at least some part of their 
school curriculum. The Taylor Multiple Talent Approach is based upon this 
philosophy. The model suggests six talent areas: academic; creative; decision 
making; planning; forecasting; and communication. This approach provides a new 
way of looking at students that can faciliate servicing a wide range of abilities 
when combined with the models discussed previously. 

a.u. integration of Bloom's Taxonomy, Williams's Teaching Strategies for 

Thinking and Feeling and Taylor's Multiple Talent Approach becomes an avenue for 
accomodating the demands of various ability levels. For example, suppose the 
lesson objective is to introduce the concept of erosion. The first task facing 
the teacher is to lay out a plan following the six steps in Bloom's Cognitive 
Taxonomy. The activities might start with the reading of text material covering 
the topic and participation in a discussion about the material. The comprehension 
level could require a summary in writing of the material studied. At the 
application level, students might brainstorm ways to prevent erosion in their 
neighborhood. At the analysis stage, students could be asked to think about 
various aspects of erosion and erosion control in an attempt to see the relationships 
and the underlying structures. They might be directed to seek information about 
the ways of dealing with erosion in other countries. During the synthesis stage, 
students could be divided into groups and asked to devise a plan to control 
erosion. Finally, in the evaluation stage, the groups could critique the plans 
they have developed in the synthesis activity. The inclusion of elements from the 
other two models now becomes a relatively simple task. For example, Taylor's 
Multiple Talent Approach can be used to enhance the synthesis activity by drawing 
upon the principles for developing tal-snt in planning. Similarly, Williams's 
Strategies for Thinking and Feeling can be valuable during the analysis portion 
of the plan. By responding to provocative questions, pointing out discrepancies, 
and looking at attributes, students expand their thinking regarding the topic. 

As can be seen in this rough sketch of a lesson plan based on the three 
models, it is possible to plan for wide-range abilities within a group. In this 
plan, there is literally somettiing for everyone. Although the lower achievimr 
students may spend more time in the lower levels of the activity, there is 
both an invitation and a probability that they will profit from the higher levels 
as well. Similarly, high achieving students can rapidly traverse the levels of 
the lesson and not only learn the basic information, but also work in strength 
areas and with higher level thinking skills. 

The rural classroom often presents difficult, but not insurmountable, 
problems in serving students with wide-range abilities. Through thoughtful 
planning and the use of teaching models, it is possible to meet the differentiated 
needs of all the students. 



2. 

488 

o 

ERIC 



American Council On Rural Special Education 

Conference Presentation 
AprU 22-25, 1986 



Presenter: Dean A. Petersen, Coordinator 
Work Experience Project 
Arizona Department of Education 
Special Education Section 
1535 West Jefferson 
Phoenix, Arizona 85007 
Phone: (602) 255-3183 



Title: WORK EXPERIENCE: 30B PREPARATION FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION STUDENTS 
AN EXEMPLARY PROJECT: SEA AND LEA COOPERATION 

Backisround 

The Arizona Department of Education, Special Education Section, has the responsibility of 
monitoring special education programs in public and private agencies in relationship to 
federal and state laws and the implementation of relevant regulations. Included in the 
monitoring process, has been Work Experience and Vocational Education programs serving 
special education students. Up to this point, there has been no clearly defined guidelines 
to be utilized in this monitoring nor has the Department been in a position to provide 
appropriate technical assistance to districts requesting such support. As a result of these 
factors. Work Experience and Vocational programs for special education students have not 
received the attention and support they need. Specific areas of concern from both the 
SEA and LEA levels include: 1) adequate monitoring of program effectiveness; 2) mecha- 
nisms in place to assure a smooth transition from school to work; 3) system(s) to track 
students; and *) prevocat5onal programs/activities to fit along the continuum leading to 
employment preparation. 

An additional factor relevant to the consideration of the above mentioned programs and 
other employment preparation programs for the handicapped revolves around the cost of 
underemployed and unemployed handicapped persons. Approximately 50 to 80 percent of 
working age adults with disabilities are jobless (U. S. Commission on Civil Rights, 1983; 
U. S. Bureau of the Census, 1982). Without employment many individuals turn to 
community services with about eight percent (8%) of the Gross National Product being 
spent to provide such services. According to Madeleine Will, Office of Special Education 
and Rehabilitative Services, (OSERS) special education can do much to prevent this 
dependence and allow disabled individuals fuller community .partipation. As a result of 
these realities, OSERS hac responded to this need by establishing a national priority for 
improving the transition from school to working life for all individuals with disabilities. 
Work Experience programs and other services in vocational education /special needs can be 
an integral part of the foundation leading to this improved transition. Many leal districts 
in Arizona have attempted to provide these services, and have met with varying levels of 
success. 



cha236 



ids 



LEAs can best provide quality services to meet the various needs of the handicapped if 
statewide leadership and assistance is provided by the Department of Education. Included 
as part of this is the provision of program guidelines, implementation strategies, and 
training services to enhance local efforts. The Work Experience Project addresses these 
tiiree major areas of concern. In addition, efforts must be made to engender a more open 
communication network and a cooperative effort between Special Education and 
Vocational Education to maximize utilization of existing resources and ultimately best 
meet the needs of all students. 

Project Plan of Action 

The Work Experience Project has utilized the professional services of four existing staff 
members in the Special Education Section and the Assistance of the Vocational Specialist 
on loan from the Scottsdale Public School System. Additional individuals have been used 
as needed in consultative and advisory capacities. 

Initially, a comprehensive needs assessment was conducted to determine two major pieces 
of data: 1) What types of programs/services are presently available and how are they 
being delivered (specific logistical information); and 2) What are perceived needs of 
people in the field and how do they feel these concerns can best be addressed at the state 
•department level. A synthesis of all of this information (gathered using questionnaire and 
interview methods) was generated in written form and utilized for planning and develop- 
ment of future efforts. At this point, an Advisory Task Force was formed made up of 
LEA and SEA representatives from various programs (Work Experience, Vocational 
Education, etc.) and from representive geographic areas throughout the state, business 
and industry representatives, parents and other interested individuals. Their task was to 
consider the needs assessment data and provide additional information leading to 
suggested specific program guidelines, implementation strategies, and training services to 
be provided. In addition, the Task Force reviewed and provided feedback on any written 
materials generated from these efforts. Three meetings were held to accomplish these 
objectives. From this data collection and feedback process and considering other 
information from other sources (developed manuals, SEA guidelines, etc.), a manual was 
developed. This document contains information regarding program development, 
implementation, evaluation and necessary monitoring guidelines for LEAs and the state 
department to utilize in providing vocatio,>al/career related services to handicapped 
secondary students. 

As a result of the above efforts, a comprehensive in-service and training services program 
was designed and piloted with selected LEAs and with staff involved in the Special 
Education and Vocational Education Sections. Outside consultative resources were utilized 
to put together an effective package that can be used by SEA program specialists and 
LEA administrators and staff to enhance district-based program effectiveness, produc- 
tivity and compliance with legal requirements. It is intended that these materials and 
services could be utilized on an ongoing basis to provide a method for assisting districts to 
develop quality programs and allow the SEA to provide valuable and appropriate technical 
assistance and mcnitoring services. 

Work Experience Resource Manual 

The resource manual developed contains information addressing all aspects of program 
development and operation for work experience programs. Included is the following: 

A rationale for work experience programs which can be used toestabiish benefits 
to the school, students, and the community. 



cha236 

500 

EKLC 



A comprehensive career development model indicating the continuum of 
experiences and services needed for optimal preparation of students for the 
world of work. This section clearly shows where and how work experience fits 
into this continuum. 

Explanation of how a work experience program should operate covering from 
student selection to roles and responsibilities of various LEA staff and other 
individuals. 



ERIC 



Program standards for quality programs highlight the central concerns for 
monitoringandtechnicalassistance. This portion presentsboth existing statutes 
and State Board regulations, as well as those recommended standards which will 
be proposed in the near future to the State Board for adoption. 

Appendices covering related terms, resources/materials, sample forms, funding, 
and exemplary program models. 

Present Project Status 

During the period from April 1985 to January 1986, the Department of Education 
developed a resource manual to assist LEAs in developing and implementing work 
experience and related programs. In addition, program standards were developed and 
modifications proposed to the State Board Rules and Regulations relevant to work 
experience programs. As a result of this effort and the initial dissemination endeavor, the 
Special Education Section has received approximately 50 requests from LEAs for 
technical assistance in utilizing the resource manua! and providing these programs/ 
services to special education students. In addition, numerous requests have been received 
to provide training and in-service experiences through a sequence of courses utilizing the 
existing Project SELECT and other available avenues. Finally, the proposed Board Rules 
and Regulations, if approved, will require a phase-in approach coupled with assistance to 
LEAs to help in regards to compliance and related issues. 

Initially, efforts are being made to ensure that all LEAs have the opportunitv to receive 
the available technical assistance. This has been done via ALERT announcements and 
individual correspondence as necessary. A master calendar will be developed scheduling 
LEAs requesting assistance and coordinated with SEA staff and others involved. Training 
sessions are being conducted utilizing the Vocational Specialist, SEA staff and LEA peer 
consultants that have been previously identified and trained* All sessions are evaluated 
and revised as needed with a final package being developed for future use. Additionally, 
dissemination of all related materials is taking place at appropriate state, regional and 
national conferences and seminars. 

Secondly, a series of related courses has been developed through the project and through 
Project SELECT in such areas as vocational assessment, prevocational/vocational 
curriculum and job development and placement. This has been done using existing 
resources and, as needed, LEA consultants and other knowledgeable individuals. These 
efforts have resulted in comprehensive, formal curricula that can be used in a variety of 
ways. The three major state universities offering teacher preparation programs have been 
approached and assisted in implementing similar course offerings at a preservice, 
undergraduate and graduate level. Other post-secondary institutions will be contacted as 
appropriate and as time permits. 

Finally, assistance has been provided in obtaining the approval of the proposed State 
Board Rules and Regulations and in developing the necessary monitoring bulletins for 
distribution to LEAs. Plans will be designed to assist in the "phase-in" of the regulations 
relevant to compliance and monitoring functions. In addition, assistance will be provided 
to SEA staff relevant to funding proposals and other needs that might arise during the 
duration of the project which ends June 30, 1986. 

cha236 

9^ 501 



A summative report will be generated covering the entire project and include evaluative 
feedback to help determine future directions. It is hoped that the project will signifi- 
cantly impact services delivered to special education students and assist them in making 
the transition from school to work. LEAs will be provided program development and 
implementation consultation so as to be able to better utilize existing funds and resources 
to address these "real life" needs of the students they serve. 

Recommendations For Future Planning 

The importance of work experience and vocational education programs for special 
education students can not be overemphasized. If students are to develop the necessary 
life and employabiiity skills essential to be a contributing and productive citizen, the gap 
between school and work must be bridged. The accomplishments of this project due to the 
contributions of professionals throughout the state, have gone a long way in building this 
bridge and will surely assist individuals with handicaps in making the necessary transition 
from student to worker. 

The following recommendations are made to ensure the continuity of the efforts initiated 
during the project and to broaden the scope of potential impact these efforts might have. 

1. Strategies should be developed to ensure the maintenance of administrative 
support of these programs at both the SEA and LEA levels. 

2. The roles and responsibilities of both special education and vocational education 
staff must be clearly defined if true collaboration and cooperation is to occur 
and quality programs are to be developed. 

3. Modification of present funding mechanisms and/or the creation of new sources 
of monies must occur .to assist LEAs in program development and 
implementation. 

ADE should establish a staff position within Special Education to address Work 
Experience and related programs. 

5. All existing and new staff should be provided training opportunities to expand 
and enhanc^e their knowledge and skills in this area which will allow them to 
serve as "consultants" and providers of technical assistance. 

6. The content of the Work Experience Resource Manual should be reviewed on an 
annual basis and modifications made and addenda generated as needed. 

7. Each of the educational experiences and components of the presented Career 
Development Model needs to be addressed in a resource guide to assist LEAs in 
program development. 

8. The Special Education State Advisory Committee should function both as an 
advocate and monitor of programs statewide. 

9. In-service and preservice opportunities must be made available to all SEA and 
LEA personnel to aid in professional development and to impact the quality of 
services to students. 

10. It is imperative the ADE staff in Special Education and Vocational Education 
continue to establish collaboration and assume their rightful leadership role in 
modeling cooperation for LEAs. 



cha236 



502 



Work Experience Programs for Special Education Students 

HIGHLIGHTS 

o Project initiated jointly by Special Education Section and Vocational Education Division 
° bo°th areas"'*''^ "on-site" survey with administrative and instructional staff from 

° mIhL?^" "^^'^ ^ developing Work Experience Re.o..rr. 



o Contents of Manual include: 

1. Rationale and Benefits of Programs 

2. Career Development Model 

3. Program Implementation Strategies 
*. Program Standards 

5. Valuable and Usable Appendices 

o Comprehensive dissemination, technical assistance, and training package 

o Collaborative effort and spirit engendered between Special Education and 
Vocational Education. "Role Model- for LEAs. caucation and 

o Proposed State Board Rules and ReguJaiions 

1- Minimmn amounts of time in work environment 

2. Training Plan and Agreement for each student 

3. Related instruction in Ufe and employability skills 
Supervision and evaluation 



t:ga305 



503 



Arizona Department of Education 
Special Education Section 

WORK EXPERIENCE: JOB PREPARATION FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION STUDENTS 

Abstract 

Si?«rt?!".!r"w P^g^""^ and other services in vocational education can be an integral 
£^ents ii?!?'^!!"'^^^-"! '° «=hool to work for specfaf eduSffon 

S-n^ Slfsrjncrse^^S^^^^^^ 

p^^f^r^^STr^i J^r^^^^^^^ work Of education 

I^eloDment%nd developed contains information addressing all aspects of pro«^ram 
development and operation for work experience programs. Included is the following^ 

" to?he°ih^f°'/!'"\*''P"?u" P'-°g'^'"s *hich can be used to estabQsh benefits 
to the school, students, and the community. cncms 

" LSn^T'j'* development model indicating the continuum of 

world of work^^ f"*" "P''""^' preparation%f students for the 

" SiSrf ^I' °J ^""^ ^ ^'^P^rience program should operate covering from 

^dfwduah. °" responsibilities of various IeA stSrind' other 

■ ^^"dards for quaUty programs highUght the certral concerns for 

S S B^'"^?:^- Prescits botl. eiiSng sTtuSl 

available from state department staff and 5?rough a pee? Ion uhant cadr. Vt''" n ' 
successful programs for you and success for your students ^" "P^"" 

For more information and assistance contact: 



Arizona Department of Education 
Special Education Section 
1535 West Jefferson 
Phoenix, AZ 85007 
(602) 255-3183 
(800) 352-*558 

. 0 c«a«. 504 



Arizona Department of Education 
Special Education Section 



Work Experience Project 
SchooiA'acility Survey Summary 



Sulmutted by: 

Dean A. Petersen 
Vocational Specialist 
May I4» 1985 



INTRODUCTION 



l^r^-L^^^ Department of Education, Special Education Section has the 
fn^'S^lii ^° monitoring special education programs in public and private agencies 
m relationship to federal and state kws and the implementation of rllevant 
vStlJf^p^ monitoring process, has been Work Experience and 

K« Education programs serving special education students. Up to this point, 
J^! ni^I^"."K guidelines to be utilized in this monitoring nor has 

M^^trZZ^ -i" * position to provide appropriate technical assistance to 

districts requesting such support. As a result of these factors. Work Experience and 
vocational programs for special education students have not received the attention 

uTnu'di'^JiSSL"!*^* ^x*^ °* ^"""^ SEA and LEA levels 

1 mpnitormg of program effectivenss; 2) mechanisms in place to 

transition from school to work; 3) system(s) to track students; and 

lLni!!!J!it "'^ programs/activities to fit along the continuum leading to 
employment preparation. * 

An additional factor relevant to the consideration of the above mentioned programs 
^ct°«f Tl^""** preparation programs for the handicapped revolves around the 

S!i.„t * T**^"^*"^ unemployed handicapped persons. Approximately 50 to 80 
R^T ^? """^"^^ with disabilities are jobless (U.S. Commissio^, on Civil 

uT^l' I ' °* CeT^sus, 1982). Without employment many 

SJr.^I^" -^""' ^° community services with about eight percent of the Gross National 

'iT"!''^^ services. According to Madeleine WUl, Office of 
^t'^^'T ^1 Rehabilitative Services, special education can do mud. to 
prevent this dependence and allow disabled individuals fuller community 
participation. As a result of these realities, OSERS has responded to this need by 
establishing a national priority for improving the transition from school to working 
Me for all individuals with disabilities. Work Experience programs and other services 
lld^:=T"4' «^"«^°"/^P<^^ needs can be integral %art oTt^e foStJon 
ittSmStiH t't ^'"Pro^^d transition. Many local programs districts in Arizona have 
attempted to provide these services, and have met with varying levels of success. 

Agencies can better provide quality services to meet the various 
IWriS ifj^capped if statewide leadership and assistance is provided by the 
SS^^- ^^IS^"- I"<=^"ded as part of this is the proviSn of program 
SL w^' . strategies and training services ta enhance local efforts. 

addi J^?" "^"^ "'^j'^ °f concern. In 

^tZr^litJ^ V^l engender a more open communication network and a 

cooperative effort between Special Education and Vocational Education to maximize 
utilization of existing resources and ultimately best meet the needs of all students. 

SCHOOL/FACILITY SURVEY 

2Slii>V '!fP„ ^ undertaking was to perform a survey of school systems, 
facilities and programs throughout the state. An effort was made to visit districts 

?2Je?oDmlT«?.'^"^'?'" '^^""^^y °* '""^ '"^'^ and tSlt Slowed t^: 

surv.v • realistic perspective of the needs in the state. The purpose of the 
survey was to determine exactly what districts were doing in the areL of work 

1 506 



experience and vocational education for special education students; what they would 
like to be doing in this area; and to allow districts input into the outcome and/or 
product of the above mentioned project. To accomplish these objectives, an 
• interview was conducted on site with both the coordinators of Special Education and 
Vocational Education in most cases and staff people in each of these departments. In 
addition, a tour of facilities and programs was taken where time and scheduling 
permitted. For specific content/topic areas addressed in this survey, please see 
Attachment 1. I would like to take this opportunity to thank all of the administrative 
st^ and program personnel that contributed greatly of their time and knowledge to 
make this information gathering process so successful. Their openness and candor 
was very refreshing and truly made my visits enjoyable (See Attachment 2 for 
programs and districts visited). 



SUMMARY OF INPUT 



In summarizing the input received, data wUl not be identified by district, but rather 
will be synthesized into general topic areas. Specific district information is available 
upon request or preferably through direct contact with district representatives. This 
information is presented for cor^ideration and is not intended to be evaluative in any 
way. It is meant to provice direction to the project and to give districts an 
"ownership" in the final outcome. 

Topic Area ^1; Types of «rork Experience and Vocational Education Programs for 
the Handicapped. 

Districts surveyed provide a variety of services including: 

- Prevccational classroom instruction with emphasis on daily living skUls and fob 
readiness skills. ' 

- Vocational Assessment services both formal and inf ormaL In some instances this 
IS required in the sequence of vocational preparation (all ninth graders, etc) and 
in others it is based on multidisciplinary recommendation. 

- in school -work program -where placements are intemal within the district. Some 
-of these are ^een as ^pre" competitive community work experience. 

- On site work training programs giving student chance for exploration and skills 
training. This is usually done ior credit and can !» paid arunpaid. 

- On-the-job training (OJT) programs where district pays employer and/or 
student. This is a credit bearing class that typically did not require a concurrent 
related class. Frequently, students would have had to take some "employment 
preparation" course prior to placement. 

- Sheltered Work experiences provided either internally, externally or In 
cooperation with other districts, agencies or funding entities. Students typically 
receive credit, but not necessarily paid employment experience. These 
experiences are provided using subcontract work, projects or community-based 
volunteer opportunities. 

- On-the-job training and/or work experience programs combined with related 
class instruction in job readiness and independent living skUls. Delivered in 
similar fashion to regular cooperative education model. 



^ 507 



- Regular cooperative education programs accessed as is realistic. Frequently, 
this was very limited and usually involved the "higher functioning" students. This 
low level of partiapation was an expressed concern from both the vantage point 
of speaal education and vocational education. 

-Development and implementation of separate vocational education 
programs/courses for special education students. Most often, this was done for 
lower functioning students who could not function in the "mainstream." 

- Special Education students enrolled in regular vocational education courses. 
These experiences were most successful when assistance and support were 
provided. This was done using vocational aides/technicians or in some cases, a 
certified teacher. 

- There were several other programs and services being offered that were "off 
shoots" or modified examples of those provided above. Districts generally were 
attempting to provide a continuum of vocational/career services to assist 
students to reach a high level of preparation. Limitations to this effort included 
funding, staff, district/community resources, employment opportunities and 
many others. These concerns will be more appropriately dealt with on an 
individual basis with involved districts/programs. 

This was occuring on a very limited basis and was again usually with the hieher 
functioning students. * 

These programs served the entire spectrum of student disabUity groups. However 
the primary ^get groups were Trainable Mentally Handicapped (TMH), Educable 
l^ili "^**^<=aPP«<l ^I^MH) and Learning Disabled (LD) students. No students were 
excluded from participation and their involvement was either a required part of their 
educational experience or based on referral and recommendation. These programs 
served anywhere from as few as three or four students to as high as 175 in various 
program facets simUar to those described above. There surfaced a semantical 
problem in describing services offered as to what was termed "Work Experience." 
This varied from district to district. It was suggested that this confusion be clarified 
in whatever document or manual came from this effort. Overall, there are a number 
of very good programs statewide that are having a significant impact on preparine 
students for the world of work and independent living. 

Topic Area ^ Operational Procedure j!or Work Experience Programs 

Operationally, the "Work Experience" type programs functioned in a variety of ways. 
Some had no real set procedure and dealt with each student and/or situation on an 
individual basis. Others provided students with an orientation and sought parent 
approval and involvement. There were several programs that had an established 
continuum of services or plan that all students would progress through. Those 
districts where formal vocational evaluation services were available usually required 
or recommended that a student receive such an assessment prior to their 
participation. Several of the programs required that students enroll in a related class 
either concurrently or prioir to their participation in the Work Experience programs. 
Finally, several programs were run in a very similar fashion to a regular Cooperative 
Education program. This included training plans, employer contracts and so on as 
stipulated m the Arizona Ha ndbook for Cooperative Education . The majority of 
individuals interviewee lelt that the true Work Experience program for special 
education students ought to technicaUy operate like a "Co-op" program. This 

3 503 



ERIC 



particular issue wUl be addressed by the Advisory Task Force. In addition, it was 
suggested that a number of alternative program designs and operational strategies be 
offered in the document developed. 

Topic Area »3t Staff Involved in Work Experience and Vocational Education 
Programs for Special Education students. 

Vocational Education/Special Needs appears to be an area where districts are 
expending a great deal of effort and for the most part, have set as a priority for 
further development and refinement. In the districts and programs visited, there were 
a variety of personnel involved in tl^e deUvery of these services. This included the 
following: 



- Certified Special Education Instructors 

- Certified Vocational Education Instructors 

- Rehabilitation Counselors/Professionals 

- Educational Administrators 

- Psychologist 

- Occupational Therapist 

- Instructional Aides 

- Vocational Technicians 

- Guidance Counselors 

- Vocational Evaluators 

- Social Worker 



There was such a diversity of individuals involved that it is difficulty to draw any real 
staff impUcations and conclusions. However, it appeared that those programs where 
a specific person(s) had the responsibiUty of preparing and placement of students in 
work sitiations were the most effective. Staff felt that students were the most 
successful in regular vocational programs when direct assistance was provided to the 
instructor in-deaUng with the needs of the handicapped child. Finally, a concern was 
repressed when staff members involved had "to wear many hats" and did not have the 
■fame necessary to do effective Coordination of the work programs. It was suggested 
that this staffing issue be dealt with in the document to be developed. 

Topic Area //»: Relationship between Special Education and Vocational Education 

todiwduals interviewed were asked to evaluate the above relationship in their 
aistrict/program and to identify particular problems, concerns or positive attributes. 
GeneraUy, there was concern expressed in that the majority did not feel that these 
two program segments worked together as eff ectivEiy as was -needed. Some of the 
reasons for this included: 



- Administrative structure 

- Lack of established linkages 

- Special Students typically do very poorly 

- Safety concerns 

- "Water down" the programs 

- Personalities involved 

- Teacher load 

- Staff turnover 

- Perceptions of students 

- Other 



503 



S^Sd^te^^^^^ "^""'^''^ relationship was important and that they 

would Uke to make efforts to enhance the existing situation. A number of districts 
fe t they were workujg well together and that when necessary it w^bS^t to w^^^^^^ 
^s issue at the buUdmg level. Where the district level and building le7el sta« from 

things happening in the courses and programs. In-service and training targeting both 
FiSSl T "-^"^"I^^ded^and has been shown to be effective in severS disfncts. 
FinaUy, it was felt by all that the State Department could and should be of assistance 
and serve as a resource helping districts develop a productive relationship between 
vocational education and special education. ciauui^nip ueiwcen 

Topic Area if5z Program Needs and Ideal Model Program 

li^n! ^i'^ll^^M ^"^^^^ ^^"-^ 8i^«" the chance to "dream" and identify their 

Sofc?.^H ri*^ '"^^ ^^'^y conciseness, the identified 

voids and program components most frequently mentioned will simply be listed: 

Program Needs/Components 



Funds for program development 
Cooperation with community 
colleges 

Family involvement via a 
community worker 
Career awareness at lower grade 
levels 

Interface with business and 
industry 

Consultative model - Special Edu- 
cation to Vocational Education 
Labor market information 
Connection with other agencies: 
DYR, DD, etc. 

Independent living skills instruction 
Work stations in industry 



- Training for vocational education staff to 
work with Special Education students 

- Staff (aides) to assist in classrooms 

- Provide adequate coordination time for 
work instructor 

• Opportunities for placement of students 

- Cohesive "vocational" staff orientation 

- Adequate and specialized facilities 

- Assessment services: strong IVEP 
component 

- Appropriate training programs 

- Suitable curriculum materials 

- Vocational Counselors 

- Funds to provide incoitives for employers 

- On-campus work trial opportunities 

- Team teaching with vocational education 
and special education 

- Resolution of certification problems 

- Appropriate placement . in vocational 
education 

- Sheltered workshop for "lower" kids 

- Community involvement 

- Vocational (related) academics 

- Effective follow along 

- Supportive employment 

Topic Area ^6: Role of the Department of Education 

!lL.?ri^y^?"^ ^ '"'''^^ ^ was undertaken, it seemed essential to determine the 
nS? • f^?^''^"'' perception regarding the role the Department of Education should 
? vL°)u programming effort. Both administrative and instructional staff were 
given the opportunity to prioritize what they wanted the Department to df^h^^^^^ 
bSeSTth^'f '""^ adequately addressed. The suggestions' are pJLented^n^o^^^ 
based on the frequency that they were recommended by district representations. 



5iO 

EKLC 



Suggested Role/ Activity 



Technical assistance and training in vocational/work experience areas. Use district- 
based people as is (>ossible 

Flexible program standards and guidelines to assist in program development and 
refinement. Provision of ideal program model. 

Networking among programs Resource(s) clearinghouse 

Expand teacher consultant cadre concept (Project SUPPORT) 

Training Materials 

Provide information about exemplary programs 
Sponsor workshops and related seminars 
Glossary of terms 

Curriculum Development Assistance 

Program Handbook: Characteristics of good program 

Funding expansion 

Teacher Preservice input 

Certification problem resolution 

Adopt Competency-Based Vocational Education model to Special Needs students 

As can be seen from the above suggested department activities, technical assistance 
and training, workable program guidelines, networking/resource models, training 
materials and use of proven program experts and district-based personnel as 
appropriate are high priorities. This information should be very helpful in planning 
future endeavors by the State Department such that they can better meet 
district/program needs. It is only through such a continued, open communication 
network and exchange between the Department and LEAs that quality services for 
students can be maintained and expanded. 

The majority of districts contacted indicated that they would be willing to provide 
further input in the development of a "Resource Manual" and also that they would 
help in developing and field-testing training methods and materials to be utilized in 
future technical assistance efforts. In general, the districts/programs visited were 
very receptive and enthusiastic in provicing their input and suggestion. They are ail 
to be commended for their efforts on behalf of the students they serve. 

For the purposes of this initial summary, no conclusions or evaluative recommendations 
wUl be made at this time. It will be the task of the Advisory Task Force (Subcommittee 
of State Advisory Committee for Special Education) and the Special Education 
Section staff to consider the data and make suitable recommendations. In addition, 
the content of the "Resource Manual" will be based on the input received from 
the school districts and other agencies and programs. The ownership has to be 
theirs as it must be somethip.g that is practical and workable on a day-to-day basis. 



6 

511 

cfal05 



Career Development Model/Work Experience Program 
Self -Assessment Checklist 



Program Component 



A. Planning 

L A career development model and program components 
exist for the local education agency. 

The work experience program is part of the school's 
career development modeL (Components exist such as 
K-Si Community Awareness; Grade 8: Interest and 

ii,*- 9-^°= Pre-Vocational, 

Vocational Assessment, IVEP, Basic Related 
Acad'.ucs; Grades 10-12: Vocational Skill 
Preparation; Grades 9-1*: Skills Application/Work 
Experience Program; Grades 9-1*: Specialized 
Services Referral.) 

An advisory committee exxsts representing the work 
experience program as part of the total school career 
development program Gncludes representatives from 
regular vocational educ ation programs). 

The work experience advisory committee meets a 

T^^'I^Hm ^^^^ * ^'^'^ specific functions 

assigned, and meeting results are documented. 

ftirent groupa, rommunity-based organizations, and 
employers receive information concerning the^work 
experience and career d evelopment program. 

Recruitment. Identifiratt pn. and P!arPm#>nt 

Hilf/"''^"^ ^^^^ ^'■^ selected for each student are in 
conformity wit h his/her lEP/IVEP. ' 

2. Criteria for selection of students for the work 
experience program ar e well documented. 

3. A planned effort is made to appropriately place each 
5tudem into the least restrictive placement in the 
continuum of vocational services at the school district 
or agency. 



Yes 



Status 
No I N/A 



Priority 
Low High 
1 I 2 I 3 r» 15 



512 

csa364a 



ERIC 



LEA 



Schooli 



Site Coordinator: 
Telephone No. 



Career Development/fork Experience Program 
Improvement Plan 



P articipants in Plannin g Pf.vi>ca 
-Name ' Position 



Date of Plan 



Name 



Position 



Program 
Component 

(3-Mop 
priorities) 




Modifications to be Made 



Ci!a36<ie • 
ERiC0i3 



Staff 
Responsible 



Estimated 
Time Frame 




NeeiJed 
Arsistance/ 
Resources ' 



Estimated 
Cost of 
Modification 



14 



AGENDA ITEM NO. 



SUBJECT: 




SUBMITTED BY 



DATE: 



DATE: 



REVIE^VED BY: Management Team 

Dr. Jim Hartg raves. Deputy Superinten dent 

BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 



tion of Che program. Provided limited guidance to LEAs in implement 



a- 



"STAFF COMMENTS: 



STAFF RECOMMENDATION: 



ary 



ERIC 



R7-2-401 SPECIAL EDUCATION STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
AND STATE SUPPORTED INSTITUTIONS 

R7-2-A01 through 401 F. no change 
G. Woik Experience Program 

1. Each student enrolled in a special education work experience 
program shall have been declared eligible for and be receiving special 
education services and shall be at least 16 years of age. 

2. Afc-the-ti,e-of-Prior to placement in a special education work 
experience program, the student shall be-given-receive a vocational 
ev.i«.tie„-assessment which specifically assesses .peit«des.-i„.erests. 
«nd-speeia^-nee^-,»-,,,,,,,„,,,.,,^.^^^.p^^^^^^^^_ ^ student's Inr.^.c, 
skills, abilitie s, nee ds, work habir. and behavior. 

3. AS a resul. of the vocational ev,^n,.,enT- assessn.ent ■ a vocational 
Plan Shall be d.veloped.in written form. This plan shall describe the 
goals of the vork experience program inei«di„g-.he-p„.isie„-e,-„.,,^„,,,. 

ed«e..i<,„ai-«„ie»i«„-.„d-s«pervised-ieb-pi.ee«e„t-i„-rei«ie„-te-the 
»btttttes-,nc-needs-ef-the-fnd±ytd«at-st«dent.- and the ob1ecri..c ... 
each student's particip ation in the orof ^r.^ 

4. If-empteyaenfc-a work experience plac.m.nr is not available or 
participation is terminated, the handicapped student shall be provided 
T.^th a full-tine Instructional program. 

~ ^^"'^'^"^^•^^all be placed, in a ynrV ^.^ron^ent ... , 
of 225 minutes per week. This placen,.nr .h.1i .m,^^ 
and needs of the individual student docun,.n^.. ...p ,,^ ,He vo......^ 

assessment provided for in paragraph 2 nf ^ M s Subsection, 

~ - '^"^"^"S Pl«" and a^eemenr shall b. H.^.i .oped in wr.•^^»n 

l^I^^oi-each^tudent identifvlnp specific r„H . , , 

employer and other.- lnvm.. :^_The district .h.n . ,,,, , ,„ 



ERIC 



516 



parent has approved participation In a work envlronn.ent. The a^ r^Pm^nr 
shall outline the tasks to be learned and perform^H bv the ..turient 
the spec ific work experience placement. 

~ Students enrolled in the special edur.r^nn yprk Pvner^PnrP 
shall recel/e related instruction In Hfp and emnlov.MUtv skills .nH 
skills re lated to their work placement. 

^ M°"itorinff of a student's work expertenr e by the dtstrtcr ^n.,, 
experier.ce coordinator shall be done a mi n imum of one r e every nine 
weeks and shall Include aii employer ev a luation of ...tudent's perform^nra 

— g^'^^ special education work experience program shall be coordinated 
by a special education certified teacher .nH be- approved hv the Arizona 
Department of Education . Division of Special Edl.rpr^nn 



ERIC 



517 



Thursday, April 24 



3:20-^::50 pm 

Presentors: Dr. John Dorf 

Douglas County School District 
P.O. Box 1888 
Minden, NV 89423 

Dr • Janice Florey 

Douglas County School District 

P.O. Box 1888 

Minden, NV 89423 



IDENTIFICATION OF CULTURALLY DIFFERENT GIFTED STUDENTS 
MEXICAN AND AMERICAN INDIAN POPULATIONS 



The Douglas County School District, a rural school 
district in Western Nevada, consists of approximately 4,000 
students in grades K-12. Four percent of the school 
district population is made up of Mexican and American 
Indian children. Relatively few students from these 

cultural backgrounds have qualified for the district's 
Academically Talented (gifted) Program using traditional 
quantitative assessment tools. Therefore, during the 

1985-1986 school year, special attention and emphasis was 
given to the identification of culturally different students 
for the district's gifted program. Initially, the home life 
and cultural value systems of these two groups were 
investigated. To complement this research, characteristics 
of culturally different students were also explored. A 
comprehensive list of qualitative and quantitative measures 
were reviewed based on their "cultural fair" 
characteristics. After the literature was thoroughly 
reviewed and recorded, the identification philosophy was 
started with the staff at one elementary school where the 
project would begin as a "pilot program". 

The primary goal of this endeavor was to make classroom 
teachers more aware of how home background and value systems 
might affect a student's school performance. Teachers were 
in-serviced on characteristics of culturally different 
gifted students and the relationship of home and values 
orientation to those characteristics. Teachers were also 
schooled in the procedure that would be implemented in the 
referral and identification of culturally different 
students. Along with teachers and the building level 
administrator, additional support staff such as the Chapter 
One teacher and playground aides were also involved in the 
referral process. 

Working jointly with Dr. Mary Frasier , Associate 
Professor of Gifted Education at the University of Georgia, 
Drs. Dorf and Florey compiled a profile assessment data 
sheet which contained both quantitative and qualitative 
"gifted indicators". The assessment instruments tapped 



EKLC 



5lS 
1 



abilities of referral students in the cognitive, creative 
and affective realms. Scores from each measure were to be 
displayed graphically on the profile sheet for further 
analysis • 

The Frasier Identification Model is now in place and is 
used not only in the screening of potentially gifted 
students, but also in the curriculum planning for those 
students qualifying for the program. Formative evaluation 
techniques continue to reshape approaches to teacher 
in-service, the qualitative and quantitative analyses of 
student data and program delivery • 

Underidentif ication of culturally different gifted 
students is common not only in rural but in urban areas as 
well. The Douglas County School District has met the 
challenge in at tempting to identify and meet the 
intellectual needs of specific sub-populations through a 
modification of the current gifted identification procedure. 

Handouts that complement the presentation will include: 

1. Outline of profile used in student 
identification 

2. Annotated list of quantitative and 
qualitative test instruments that are 
geared for the identification of 
culturally different students. 

3. Compilation of research on learning 
characteristics and values of the two 
populations (bibliographic format ) 

4. In-service materials used with teachers 
and building principals 

5. Flowchart of Douglas County School District's 
Identification Model (culturally different). 



519 



Presenters: Cleborne D. Maddux, Ph.D. 

Associate Professor and Coordinator 
Instructional Computing and 
Technology 

Center for Excellence in Education 
Northern Arizona University 
Box 5774 

Flagstaff, Arizona 86011 

Rhoda E. Cummings, Ed.D. 

Assistant Professor 

Special Education and 

Educational Computing 

Division of Curriculum & Instruction 

College of Education 

University of Nevada Reno 

Reno, Nevada 89557 

Title: MICROCOMPUTERS IN SPECIAL EDUCATION: IMPLEMENTATION 

IN RURAL SETTINGS 

Seldom has an educational innovation been greeted with 
such unqualified, uncritical, and unfortunate enthusiasm as 
has educational computing. The pages of educational 
journals and popular magazines have been filled to capacity 
with articles heralding computing as the educational 
innovation of the century. Administrators and teachers have 
been frantically acquiring hardware and software. In fact, 
preliminary evidence from the most recent national survey 
reveals that a third of all students and a fourth of all 
teachers currently have access to more than one million 
instructional computers in schools (Becker, 1986). 
Educational Technology and Failure 

We are educational computing advocates and we believe 
that educational computing has great promise as an aid to 
learning. However, we fear that this new attempt to bring 
electronic technology into the classroom, like previous 
attempts, may fail. There is abundant historical precedent 
for such failure. Technology has been notoriously 
unsuccessful in education. From teaching machines to 
educational TV, technology has been successively embraced 
and then rejected by the educatxonal community. Even the 
potential power of educational TV was never realized, and 
the medium is now the object of worldwide disillusionment. 

Why has technology been so spectacularly unsuccessful 
in education? There are many reasons, not least of which is 
the fact that technological innovations are invariably 
developed for other purposes, and educators have thus been 
forced to attempt to adapt them for use in educational 
settings. However, we feel the main reason for failure is 
the past inability of educators to apply the technology to 
effectively help solve important educational problems, \ylhy 
this is so is complex. Certainly few would argue that 
education has lacked important problems! We have concluded 



EKLC 



5^0 



Page 2 

that we I as educators, have simply not used technological 
tools well. 

We fear that this same fate threatens educational 
computing. Computers in schools are poorly used. There are 
many reasons why this is so, including the scarcity of 
excellent educational software and the lack of good 
inservice and preservice education for teachers. The 
problem goes beyond these obvious deficiencies, however. 
Indeed, we believe these conditions are mere symptoms of a 
more basic misunderstanding about the nature and efficacy 
of computing in general. In short, we believe that many of 
our problems in educational computing stem from a great 
cultural myth. This myth holds that technology is valuable 
for its own sake . Educators who have embraced this myth 
believe that computers should be integrated into 
educational settings not because they can help solve an 
important educational problem, but merely because they are 
available . 

We find this analagous to Hillary's famous reply when 
asked why he had climbed Mount Everest. We have referred to 
the misguided belief that computers should be made part of 
schooling simply because "they are there", as the "Everest 
Syndrome" (Maddux,, 1984b). 
Type I and Type II Educational Computing 

We believe computers may hold more educational 
potential than any other of the technological innovations 
we have attempted to adapt for educational use. In fact, we 
believe their potential as learning tools is almost 
unlimited. Any tool can be misused, however, and the 
educational potential of computing may never be realized. 
Indeed, we believe that computing will not succeed unless 
educators change the ways computers are typically being 
used in schools. 

Computing is expensive. Part of the high cost of 
bringing computing into schools can be measured in dollars 
and cents. This price declines with time and technological 
improvements. The major part of the high cost, however, is 
a human cost. Administrators, teachers, and students have a 
finite amount of time, energy, and enthusiasm to invest in 
a new learning tool. An hour spent acquiring, assembling, 
or learning to use a computer is an hour unavailable for 
other educational purposes. The human cost of computing is 
high, will remain relatively high, and can only be 
justified if important rather than trivial goals can be met 
through computing. Past technologies have failed to justify 
this human cost and have fallen by the wayside. Educational 
computing shows every sign of following suit. 

Indeed, we believe we are just beginning to witness a 
great backlash of public opinion against the use of 
computers in schools. Recently, a flood of articles have 
appeared in the professional press condeming the 
educational computing movement as it presently axists 
(Chorover, 1984; Kelman, 1984; Maddux, 1984a; Poore & 
Hamblen, 1984; Shively, 1984? Zajonc, 1984), Similar 



521 

EKLC 



Page 3 

articles are appearing almost daily in the popular press. 
We believe this backlash is directly attributable to the 
poor use of computers in education. 

To understand our concern, it is necessary to examine 
the ways in which schools are using computers. We believe 
these uses fall into one of two categories, which we have 
termed Type I or Type II uses (Maddux, 1984a). Type I uses 
of computers in education simply make it easier, quicker, 
or more convenient to continue teaching in traditional 
ways. There is nothing wroncf with using a school computer 
for Type I uses, but because of the high cost of bringing 
computers into education, public and professional 
acceptance depends on providing more important educational 
advantages . 

Type II uses, on the other hand, make new and better 
teaching methods available. Unfortunately, Type I uses are 
today far more common than are Type II uses. We believe the 
shortage of Type II software is one of the principle 
reasons for the growing dissatisfaction with educational 
computing. 

Type I Computer Uses 

Type I uses have a number of characteristics in 
common: 

1. They tend to be aimed at helping the learner 
acquire a variety of rote skills such as math facts or 
sight vocabulary. Such software has been called drill and 
practice software and is typified by f lashcard-like 
programs . 

2. They are programmer-centered, rather than 
learner-centered. The software may be technically slick and 
elegantly programmed. However, the emphasis is on what the 
computer can be made to do, rather than on what the user 
can be empowered to accomplish. 

3. They typically provide minimal learner involvement, 
especially in a cognitive sense. The user is relatively 
passive, and may function almost as an observer rather than 
a participant or a director of the interaction. Most of the 
action goes on within the computer. We believe user 
passivity is the primary reason for the failure of 
educational television. Television viewing is a cognitively 
passive activity for most children. If it is not naturally 
so, it has become so through exposure to prime time network 
television fare. 

There are some advantages to the use of drill and 
practice software in special education, however. Such 
software can help provide the great amount of repetition 
needed by special education students. Then too, such drill 
can be provided without the necessity for correction by the 
teacher. For many special education students who have 
become sensitive to adult criticism, this can be a distinct 
advantage. 

Other Type I uses include educational administrative 
uses, computer managed instruction, and assessment uses. 
These can all be helpful and convenient, but they are 



522 



Page 4 

classified as Type I because all are designed to facilitate 
traditional teaching. We do not advise against their use, 
we merely believe they do not go far enough in tapping the 
full potential of educational computing and thereby 
justifying the cost of bringing computing into the 
schoolroom. We will provide a short discussion of these 
other Type I uses. 
Administrative Uses 

Educational administrative uses include a variety of 
office applications. Using word processing to compose and 
produce form letters to parents , using data base management 
to organize office files , or using electronic spread sheets 
to balance the budget or the attendance are examples. Such 
uses can streamline tedious administrative and secretarial 
chores and are of value , especially if their use releases 
teachers for more creative activities with students. We see 
at least three potential problems with this Type I 
application, ho we ve r . 

First r administrators or teachers may divert computer 
hardware and software from instructional to administrative 
uses. Second/ educators may erroneously assume that 
computerizing such routine tasks has somehow improved the 
quality of organizational activities themselves. Third, 
educators may yield to the temptation to computerize 
activities that require human affective qualities such as 
sympathy / empathy r clinical judgment/ etc. We have seen 
this happen repeatedly in special educa-tion and we have 
addressed this problem elsewhere (Maddux, in press). 
Computer Managed Instruction (CMI) 

This IS a fading star among computer applications / and 
one we believe is badly mis-named. CMI is actually a number 
of different applications used to organize student data, 
monitor student progress, control student progression 
through tutorials r etc. It is misnamed since humans / not 
computers r are managers, and since no actual instruction is 
included. We believe it is always a mistake to 
anthropomorphize r since it encourages the use of computers 
for tasks which should be reserved for people. 

CMI was more popular when instructional c:^ outing 
centered around the use of large mainframe cor ers. 
Microcomputers do not leni^. themselves to effi: c CMI 
applications. One of the few exceptions is the ,.rrent 
trend for school districts to purcha: software to aid in 
the preparation- of the legally mandated specia . education 
Individual Educ . :.on Plan (lEP). We have no real objection 
to such uses so i v\g as the procrams purchased are only 
intended to stx^ ■ ine the red t^- dissociated vt'ith lEP 
generation (sue , filling out rorms^ or keeping records 
of dateSf times^ Masses, etc). V-^ do object to those IE? 
programs which art- intended to injec-t 'computers .iato the 
actual diagnostic-remedial proce^i^, since w^ believe that 
this process requ ;es human affective quali ies-^ 
Assessment Uses 

Another Typv* I application is tue use cf c-. o.puters in 



523 



Page 5 



assessment. Our concerns about this type of application are 
identical to those discussed in the section dedicated to 
CMI. Such software is appropriate only if test 
interpretation and diagnosis are left to hiiman beings. The 
routine tasks associated with assessment can be 
appropriately accomplished by computer hardware and 
software f however. Calculating age from birthdates and 
converting raw scores to scaled scores are examples of such 
routine tasks , as are the calculation of averages for 
groups r and the generation of reports after they have been 
composed by human diagnosticians or psychologists. 
Type II Computer Uses 

Type II uses have characteristics that are nearly the 
reverse of Type I uses. Rather than concentrating on rote 
skillsr Type II uses generally focus on higher-level 
cognitive processes such as facilitating creative 
expression^ problem solving or language composition. In 
addition^ these uses are learner-centered, with emphasis on 
what the user can be empowered to achieve. With Type II 
uses, learner input is extensive and complex, with many 
Type II applications such as word processing or programming 
providing little more than a blank screen and a powerful 
means to fill in that screen with whatever the user 
desires. Obviously, such activity requires active 
involvement of the user, another characteristic of Type II 
software. 

Unfortunately, Type II applications are relatively 
scarce in education. Some promising uses that we believe 
fall* in this category include word processing, programming, 
and simulations. 
Word Processing 

Word processing is obviously a Type II application 
since it provides unique teaching and learning 
opportunities. Word processing is unique because it 
provides powerful and quick revising capability. Our 
experience with using word processing in the teaching of 
written composition indicates that the ease of revision 
encourages children to experiment and helps them learn to 
polish and perfect rough drafts. Spelling and grammar 
checkers are particularly advantageous to special education 
students with problems in these areas, since such software 
provides correction without adult intervention and 
condemnation. Then too, work processing gives special 
education students with writing problems another reason to 
learn to type well, a skill which can be very valuable to 
them both in school and out of school . 
Programming 

We believe programming to be a Type II application, 
although we do not have enough research to be sure about 
its value. This topic has been discussed extensively in the 
literature. Suffice it to say that we believe there are 
some good reasons to teach a bit of programming. On the 
other hand, we are appalled at the exaggerated claims we 



524 



Page 6 

hear being made concerning the value of programming skills 
for school children. We cannot ethically promise parents 
that the teaching of programming will result in increased 
income for th6ir children. Neither can be promise that 
problem-solving skill learned in programming will 
generalize to any other domain. Logo is an interesting 
programming language r but so'ne Logo advocates have been 
guilty of becoming proselytizing true believers who have 
promised far more than can be documented. We are Logo 
advocates ourselves ^ but we have watched the evolution of 
the Logo movement with alarm. We have addressed this topic r 
and the topic of why Logo should be taught in special 
education more extensively elsewhere (Maddux, 1984c). 

Suffice it to say at this time, that learning to 
program may be valuable for special education students for 
two powerful reasons. First r special education students are 
frequently rejected by their peers. Learning to control c. 
computer carries status in the eyes of peers and can 
improve the social status of a rejected , special education 
student who may even serve as a tutor to other , 
nonhandicapped children. Second f gaining control of the 
computer environment may lead to an improvement of the 
self -concept of a handicapped child f and may also lead to 
the realization that he or she can control his or her own 
destiny. (In other words , the child may become more 
inner-directed. ) 
Simulations 

Simulations make it possible for children to ha e 
experiences that are too dangerous , too expensive , or 
otherwise unavailable in schools. Unf ortunately , good 
simulations are rare. It is difficult to find expert 
programmers who are expert in child development and in the 
experience to be simulated. Computer simulations may be the 
most promising and, as yet, least implemented of 
educational applications . 

Other Type II uses include the use of p::osthet' aids 
such as communication boards or speech synthesi: . . jr 
children with communication problems , print to speech 
synthesizers for blind children, and special input devices 
for children with motor problems. 
Special Problems in Rural Settings 

Most of the problejns discussed in this paper apply 
equally to districts in urban or rural settings. Rural 
districts do have special problems , however. One of these 
problems relates to hardware acquisition and support. Rural 
districts should insist on competent support from computer 
stores before purchasing r and should obtain written 
assurances. If the vendor finds it necessary to take 
equipment back to the store for maintenance r he should 
agree to make "loaners" available. 

Another problem in rural settings is difficulty in 
obtaining competent teacher inservice. Administrators 
should lobby state departments of education to require an 
introductory course in educational computing for all 



525 



Page 7 

teachers- "i.n-training. Competent inservice should be 
contracted for from experts in educational computing, 
rather than experts in one or the other. 
Summary 

Educational computing is at risk. We have provided a 
brief discussion of problems and pitfalls # as well as our 
categorization system for educational computer 
applications. Type I applications are those that make it 
easy to continue teaching in traditional ways. Type II uses 
make new and better ways of teaching and learning 
available. Although there is nothing wrong with Type I 
applications # they are aimed at relatively trivial 
educational goals and problems. Type II applications must 
become more common in order to justify the cost of 
educational computing. Although educational computing is 
tremendously promising, we face the very real danger that 
misuse and misunderstanding will force this new and 
exciting field to follow in the footsteps of teaching 
machines and educational television. 



52G 



References 

Chorover, S. L. (1984, June). Cautions on computers in 

education. BYTE , 223-226. 
Kelman, P. ( 1984) . Computer literacy: A critical 

re-examination. Computers in the Schools , 1,(2), 3-18. 
Maddux, C. (1984a). Educational microcomputing: The need 

for research. Computers in the Schools , 1,(1), 35-41. 
Maddux, C. (1984b). Breaking the Everest syndrome in 

educational computing: An interview with Gregory Jackson 

and Judah L. Schwartz. Computers in the Schools , 1,(2), 

37-48. 

Maddux, C. (i984c). Using microcomputers with the learning 

disabled: Will the potential be realized? Educational 

Computer , 4(1), 31-32. 
Maddux, C. (in press). Microcomputers in education and 

counseling: Problems and cautions. Techniques : A journal 

for remedial education and counseling . 
Maddux, C. & Johnson, L. (in press). Computers in special 

education. New York: Haworth Press. 
Poore, J. & Hamblen, J. (1984). Why computer-based 

education is making slow progress. An analysis of costs 

and other impediments. The AEDS Journal , 17(3) , 42-52. 
Shively, J. (1984). Computer utilization in education: 

Problems and prerequisites. The AEDS Journal , 17( 3) , 

24-34. 

Weizenbaum, J. (1976). Computer power and human reason . New 
York: Freeman. 

Zajonc, A. (1984). Computer pedagogy? Questions concerning 
the new educational technology. Teacher's College 
Record, 85, 569-577. 



527 



Phillip B. Waldrop 
P.O. Bom 940 
Arkansas State Univ. 
State Uni versi ty , AR 
72467 

James E. Calder 
P.O. Box 940 
Arkansas State Univ. 
State University;, AR 
72467 

Title: A Systems Model -for Intervention with 
Chi 1 dr en with Emoti onal /Behavi oral 
Pr obi ems i n Rural Envi ronments 

A number o-f problems ej<ist in serving children with 
emotional problems in rural school environments. Wood and 
Lininger (1981) cited problems such as geographic and 
■financial barriers to serving low incidence handicapping 
conditions;, di-f-ficulty in recruiting and retaining quali-Fied 
personnel;, a lack o-f related services;, and cultural 
di-f-f erences. Beare and Lynch (1983) added lack o-f community 
support for services -for these children to the proolem list. 
In addition;, the label assigned to the child in terms o-f the 
•federal de-finition o-f those quali-fying as "seriously 
emotionally disturbed" serves to restrict the establishment 
o-f services (Beare;, 1983; Hoover;, 1984; Wood Lininger, 
1981). As a result;, this population o-f children is 
critically under i dent i -f i ed and underserved (Long;, 1983). 

In seeking solutions to this problem;, the general 
concensus would appear to be that models o-f service delivery 
that are used in urban environments (i.e.;, -full range o-f 
service delivery options) do not generalise well to rural 
environments (Beare;, 1981; Wood Zt Lininger, 1981). I-f rural 
districts are to provide suitable, cost e-f-fective programs;, 
clearly a model is needed that will lend structure to 
planning e-f-forts. The model proposed here t'ses a systems 
approach to serve this purpose. 

The recent literature related to working with children 
wi th emoti onal /behavi oral pr obi ems has re-f 1 ected an 
increased interest in a systems approach to intervention. 
Lerner (1973) has indicated the promise o-f this approach 
•foranalysing problems in special education. The advantages 
o-f the approach in terms o-f specifying various aspects of 
functional ability have long been recognized. As Egan and 
Cowan (1979) point out;, human service professions are 
especially in need of the explicitness derived from a 
systems approach since people working together tend to 
harbor differing implicit theories of what constitutes 
effective intervention. The major goal of this model, then, 
is to provide a basis for making explicit all of those 
implicit theories in operation in any given service deliverv 
situation. Before pursuing this goal further, however;, 



558 



consideration must be given to certain general principles of 
systems -functioning as they relate to the model. 

A system is composed o-f smaller components, or 
subsystems, interacting -nthin a boundary (Berrien, 1968). 
The nature of these interactions is o-f primary importance to 
the -functioning ability o-f the system. For the system to 
operate at peak e-f -f iciency, a high level o-f i nterrel atedness 
among components is necessary. Communication lines must be 
speci-fied and the exchange o-f in-formation must be -free and 
continuous among the components. Additionally, the type o-f 
in-formation exchanged is important. For any component to be 
use-ful to the system as a whole, that component must receive 
and respond to input and produce use-ful output. The 
use-fulness o-f the the output is determined by the degree to 
which the output -facilitates system -functioning. In-formation 
the system cannot use is called "noise" (Berrien, 1968). By 
delineating roles within the construct o-f the proposed 
model, the objective is to decrease the "noise" and increase 
-f unction i ng e-f -f ect i veness. 

The part i cul ar model proposed here emphasi zes the 
individual as the primary unit o-f analysis. That is, 
analysis o-f the system begins with the child component. Once 
the needs o-f the child are identi-fied, one can then proceed 
with identi-fying the other components (available resources) 
and preparing these components to provide the proper 
supportive environment -for the child. Figure 1. contains a 
schematic representation o-f this system. Be-fore discussing 
the per-formance o-f this system, an outline o-f the -functions 
o-f the individual components would be in order. 
Bi ol oQi cal Component 

This component re-fers to the biological characteristics 
o-f the individual. Speci -f i cal 1 y , everyone has a certain 
capability to behave in certain ways. For example, a 
particular level o-f intellectual ability is necessary -for 
the individual to be able to -function abstractly and -free 
hi msel -f /hersel -f -from concrete events in the environment. 
This allows the person to play an internal "what i -f " game. 
That is, the person may make decisions and predictions about 
possible behaviors and their consequences be-fore actually 
committing the behavior, thereby avoiding possible negative 
-feedback -from the environment. In short, there is a -finite 
amount o-f material to work with and a unique capabi 1 i ty to 
per-form in certain ways. 
Conceptual Set 

Conceptual Set is a term borrowed -from the work t 
Kephart (1973). This theory was concerned, in the main, with 
the way individuals develop the ability to process 
in-formation. Basically, we proceed -from the need to 
concretely and motorically explore and assimilate 
i n-f ormat i on about speci -f i c events i n our envi ronment to a 
stage o-f -forming generalizations about our environment and 
how i t works. Thi s -formation o-f a "set " i mpl i es a system o-f 
gentfral i zations by which we will judge the environment and 
our subsequent actions. Therefore, Conceptual Set can be 



529 



B 1 0I_0(5 I C Al_ 
CARABILITY 




EVENT 



ARRECTI VE 
AROUSAL 



ACT I ON 



I 



CONSEQUENCE 



Fig. 1. 



ERIC 



de-fined as the collection o-f an individual's concepts about 
the world and his/her relationship to the world- 
Percept ual Set/Event 

This term re-fers to our ongoing processes -for 
evaluating individual events in out environment against what 
we know to be true in our Conceptual Set. Harvey;, Hunt^ and 
Schroeder (1961) re-fer to this as a process o-f "conceptual 
con-fir mat ion" and "conceptual re-futation. " In addi tion^, this 
component o-f the system con tains the perceptual processes 
necessary to receive in-formation and attach meaning to the 
i n-f ormat i on. 

While a discussion o-f the perceptual processes is 
beyond the scope o-f the present discussion^, the evaluative 
process as de-fined by Harvey ;, et. al . '1961) is o-f central 
i mportance. Conceptual con-f i rmat i on occurs when an event 
happens in the environment to con-firm a concept the 
i ndi vi dual bel i eves to be true. Conceptual re-f utati on is 
de-fined as an event happening in the environment to re-fute a 
rone eat the i ndi vi dual bel i eves to be true. A key poi nt to 
remember is that this does re-fers not to absolute truths, 
but tc concepts the i ndi vi dual believes to be true. 

In terms o-f de-fining interventions -for children with 
emotional problems, this point o-f inter-face with the 
environment will be the -focus o-f the present discussion. It 
is the point o-f "goodness o-f -fit" re-ferred to by Beare 
(1983) in discussing intervention procedures -for these 
children in a rural environment. The primary consideration 
here is to ensure that in-formation exchange between the 
individual and the environment is such that "noise" in the 
system is diminished. 
A-F-fective Arousal 

This component o-f the system represents the emot ion 
generated as a result o-f the oerson/envi r onment 
transactions. Since a living svstem is in constant 
interaction with the environment;, this emotion is created 
constantly during the day. In order to experience positive 
growth and maintain -functional integrity, a system must 
learn to use this energy in the most e-f-ficient manner 
possible. If it does not, system "burnout" will be the 
resul t . 
Act i on 

Once energy i s created wi thi n the system, the energy 
must "go somewhere." That is, the system will automatically 
take the steps necessary to disburse the energy and raturn 
to equilibrium. The nature o-f the action taken can vary 
great 1 y al ong a mal adapt i ve/adapti ve conti nuum. But 
regardless o-f the type o-f outcome^ the individual will do 
something to release the energy created and return to an "at 
rest" state to await -further input. Additionally, it is at 
this point that the individual's response to the st i mulus 
event becomes known to the envi ronment - Be-fore thi s poi nt , 
responses are private and not available -for environmental 
Judgement . 
Consequence 



531 



6 



"normal" student as they are -For the child with 
emoti cnal /behavi oral problems. Therefore, one can think in 
terms of a true range ot severity of problems within a 
district rather than one small segment. This also has 
implications -for the prevention o-f serious emotional 
probl ems . 

In terms o-f providing -for this attitude shi-ft, perhaps 
much could be accomplished by switching the -focus o-f 
discussions o-f the problems encountered in rural 
environments to the bene-fits -found in rural environments. 
Huebner, McLeskey, and Cummings (1984) have indicated that 
school psych o 1 ogi sts i dent i -f y several advantages to wor ki ng 
in rural environments. Among these are close contacts and 
good working relationships with teachers, administrators and 
parents;, diversity o-f roles, autonomy and environments that 
are rel a5<ed, stabl e^, nonbureaucrati c ;, and sen si ti ve to 
individual needs. Jerrel 1 (1984) -found that the greater role 
-flexibility opportunities that school psychologists -found in 
th ese environments resulted in increased job satis-f action 
and length o-f time remaining in the position. Surely these 
advantages are open to educators as well i-f they are 
oriented to availing themselves o-f the advantages. 

The second component o-f preparati on must -f ocus on 
increasing the skills needed by the available personnel to 
-fill a variety o-f roles (Buktenica ?< Beare, 1983). In the 
model presented here, communication skills are central to 
the success o-f service delivery e-f-forts. This is true both 
in training educators -for acceptable interactions with 
probl em children and in training pro-f essi onal s -for 
acceptable interaction with each other about problem 
children. The basis o-f a systems approach is the making 
explicit o-f implicit concepts about service delivery. 

The most -frequent structure -for servi ce deli very -for 
these children in rural environments appears to be some torm 
on mul ti di sci pi i nary team. The composition o-f this team 
varies -from program to program;, depending on the type o-f 
pro-f essi onals available. To the extent that individuals with 
specialized knowledge regarding children with 

emoti onal /behavi oral problems are not available on a regular 
enough basi s to be trul y -f uncti onal members o-f the team, a 
district must plan -for training large segments (i-f not all) 
o-f the educational sta-f-f to assume these roles. Much o-f the 
debate regard i ng who is qual i-fied to do what is rendered 
moot in this situation. The child's problems are still there- 
and must be deal t wi th . Gi ven the contenti on o-f Wood and 
Lininger (1981) that central i 2 at i on o-f services is not 
necessarily the best option -for these children (i. e. , they 
should be kept as close to home as possible), one can see 
the need -for -focusing ef -forts on building the strongest 
possible team in the local district. At any rate;, this 
writer agrees with Hoover (1984) that the child's regular 
class teacher is and will continue to be the most central 
person in the process. It is here that training e-f-forts must 
be focused. 



533 



In summary, providing adequate services to children 
with emotional /behavioral problems in rural environments 
depends on the most ef-fective and e-f-ficient utilization o-f 
the resources available. In accomplishing 'ihiS;, the 
individual child is seen as the basic unit o-f analysis. That 
is, the child^s needs will ej;ist regardless o-f the services 
<or lack o-f services) available and his/her -funct-onal 
ability within the environment will depend on the support 
the environment can provide. When one begins -from th- ^ 
point, the task becomes one o-f meeting those needs with what 
is available. The only certainty in the process is that i-f 
the needs are not met;, the child will create within the 
school personnel the anK i eti es and -f rust rat i on s he/she is 
experiencing and the -functional integrity o-f the system and 
all o-f its components will be compromised. The result o-f 
thisj, ultimately, is that the child is excluded -from the 
system and this cannot be allowed to ej;ist as an acceptable 
conclusion to the problem. 



B34 



Bi bl i ography 



Bearsj, P. (1981). Mai nstreami ng approach -for behaviorally 
disordered secondary students in a rural school 
district. Behavi oral Pi sorders , -t 209- 

218. 

Bearej, P. ^ Lynch., E. (1983). Rural area emotional diisturb- 

ance service delivery: Problems and -future directions. 
Behavi oral Disorders i. 8(2);, 113-119. 

Berrien, F. (1968) . General and social systems. New 

Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press. 

Buktenica. N. , Z< Beare,. P. (1981) Multidiscipl inary approach 
to rural service del i very: A transact i onal perspecti ve. 
(ERIC Document Reproducti on Servi ce No. ED 248 632) 

Egan, G. , Cowan, M. (1979). People in systems; A model 
-for devel opment in the human seryi ce pro-f essi ons and 
education. Monterey California: Brooks/Cole Pub- 
lishing Co. 

Harvey, Q. , Hunt, D. , Schroder, H. (1961). Conceptual 

systems and personal i tv orqani zat i on . New York: John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc. 

Hoover. J. (1984>. Behavioral intervention Program -for 

remediating mild emoti onal /behavi oral problems in rural 
county elementary schools. Educat i on . 104 . 287-290. 

Huebner, E. , McLeskey, J., ?< Cummings, J. (1984). Opportun- 
-for school psychologists in rural school settings. 
Psychology in the Schools , 21 . 325-328. 

Jerrell, J. (1984). Boundary-spanning -functions served by 
."Ural school psychologists. Journal o-f School 
PsycholoGV , 22, 259-271. 

Kephart, N. (1973). Developmental sequences. In S. Sapir Z< 
A. Nitzburg (Eds.), Chi 1 dr en wi th learni nq pr obi ems. 
New York: Brunner /Mazel Publishers, 318-334. 

Lerner, J. (1973). Systems analysis and special education. 
The Journal o-f Special Education. 7, 15-26. 

Long, K. (1983). Emotionally disturbed children as an under — 
detected and underserved publ i c school popul .=^t i on : 
Reasons and recommendati ons. Behavi oral Di sorders . 
9(1), 46-54. 

Wood, F. , ?< Lininger, R. (1981). Services to seriously be- 
havi oral 1 y di sordered /emoti onal 1 y di sturbed students i n 
rural communities. In Proqrammi nq -for emoti onal 1 y d i s 

K O r 



turbed students in rural public schools: Con-Ference 
Proceedi nqs, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction No. ED 239 785) 



53G 



Thursday, April 24 



3:20-4:50 pm PROGRAM ABSTRACT 

EXTENDED RESOURCE PROGRAM 

John Beard 
Humboldt Unified SD 
PO Drawer A 
Dewey, AZ 86327 



The Extended Resource Program is designed to meet the needs 
of those special education students who require a more restrictive 
environment in order to successfully achieve in school • Through 
a self-contained, highly structured modality that is academically 
oriented, this prograon provides an academic and emotional atmo- 
sphere conducive to meeting the needs of these exceptional students. 

The objectives of the program are: 

1. To facilitate the child's social/emptional adjustment to 
the school and classroom. 

2. To develop and maintain a positive self-esteem, 

3. To develop and maintain a sense of responsibility for 
behavior. 

4. To de^ '^p and maintain a realistic approach to everyday 
problems and concerns. 

5. To develop and maintain a satisfactory standard of social 
behavior. 

6. To develop realistic goals and objectives. 

This program may be utilized for any special education stud- 
ent currently enrolled at the middle school. Through observations, 
evaluations and recommendations of the student's current special 
education teacher, this prograun's teacher and a Child Study Team, 
a student may be admitted to this program based upon their con- 
clusions. 

Once admitted to the program, the student's placement is for 
four weeks, during which time progress is evaluated, programs 
implemented and recommendations are made in keeping with the 
concept of LRE. Placement in the program does not necessarily 
exclude the child from continued involvement in industrial arts, 
home economics, physical education or other appropriate electives. 

The premise of this program is a level-based system, whereby 
as the student moves upward, expectations increase and the amount 
of time in a less restrictive environment increases. A student 
must successfully complete a minimum four week placement and 
receive the teacher's recommendation before moving to the first 
level. From this point, each successive level is attained only 
when specified criteria are satisfied. Beginning with the first 
acquisition and continuing through successive levels, one hour 
of instruction out of the program is granted to the student and 
criteria for behavior and performance increases, thereby placing 
more responsibility on the student for his success. The ultimate 
goal of the program is the student's return to the Least Restric- 
tive Environment. 



537 



Thursday, April 24 



Jim Parks, Facilitator 
University of Arizona 
Special Education Administration 
Tucson, AZ 85721 



3:20-4:50 pm 



A panel of university students with disabilities will discuss problems 
they have c^fkcountered at the university, and will also discuss solutions 
and 8 trateg** PS that can be effective. 

Question/ans or time will allow the audience to participate in this 
workshop. 



EKLC 



533 



Thursday, April 24 
3:20-4:50 pm 



PRESENTER: Darryl P. Doss 
Pr i nc i pal 

Puerco Junior High 
P.O. Box 68 

Sandere, Arizona 86512 



TITLE: Rural Special Education Administrator — 

Autonomous Job or Double Duty? 



Rural special education administration deserves to be 
managed with quality personnel and serious intent of 
purpose. My message to you today is a very stern one. In 
essence, you must very carefully assess your current program 
honestly with foresight and fortitude. Many rural special 
education programs appear to lack serious commitment and 
know-how on an administrative level. Multifarious reasons 
could be purported, but I wish only to discuss briefly some 
major reasons that must be corrected. 



1. Public school actni n i strators in general are 
not qualified to administer a building or district special 
education program. Sol u t i on : Start now to advocate the 
requirements of an administrative credential in the area of 
special education and assignment of a special education 
educator to the position of special education director. 

2. Child study and mul t i -di sc i pi i nary 
conferences are in need of modification and restructuring so 
to more fully benefit the student and the referring teacher. 
Solution: Research better models for child study and 
multi-disciplinary team dynamics which allow for a better 
professional assessment and intervention of a student ^s 
needs. 



3. A formal and ongoing process of inservice 
development for all personnel responsible for special 
education services is often lacking. Solution: Begin now 
to coordinate efforts with your school psychologist, speech 
therapist, occupational therapist and school nurse for the 
purpose of establishing inservice sessions designed to 
orientate and inform teachers and administrators about 
current research and development in the profession. This 
data should include technicalities concerning te^^^^ and 
interpretations as they relate to the special education 
student. 



During this one-half hour session I have tried to raise 
some concerns that are ser i ous wi th i n the administration of 
rural special education in our nation^s public schools. Not 

o 533 
ERIC 



all rural special education programs obviously are inclined 
to the concerns upon which I have elaborated. Regardless, I 
feel we must perpetuate a constant vigil for qualify and 
competent administrative management. Mismanagement of the 
lives of young people who are subject to our knowledgei 
instruction and decisions would be a travesty that might 
well be irreconcilable and permanently damaging, or at best, 
awkward. The categorical classifications created for the 
purpose of aiding our children through their educational 
process must not erroneously label a child nor cause that 
child less educational opportunities because of it. 

Public school administrators must become more cognizant 
and responsible of their role in special education. This in 
part means attending staff ings, affirming legal mandates, 
effectively monitoring programs, assisting in placements, 
aiding instruction, and inservicing special education 
teachers. The recommendation of a special education 
director to work in collaboration with a school 
administrator will do much to strengthen rural special 
education, command regular classroom teachers^ respect and 
spread its positive impaxt in rural schools. Anything short 
of these goals is sheer negligence and insulting to the 
children of our rural special education delivery system. 



540 



I 



PRESENTER: Darryl P. Doss 
Pr inci pal 

Puerco Junior High 
P.O. Box 68 

Sanders, Arizona 86512 



School Board 



Super i ntendent 



I 



Spec i a1 Educat i on Di rector 



Elementary Principal Intermediate Principal High School Principal 



Elementary Program Intermediate Program High School Program 



541 



Steven A. Eaatz Ph.D. 
Department of Education 
Valparaiso University 
Valparaiso, IN 46383 
(219) - 464-5474 



Related Services - Complex, Confusing, and Changing; 

The administrator who assumes responsibility for 
special education matters must make a number of difficult 
decisions. One of the most complex and confusing decision areas 
Is that of related services. Decisions about related services are 
time consuming, can Involve large sums of money and carry a 
probability of protracted legal action. 

Despite the Inclusion of the concept of related 
services In the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 
1976 , pages of regulations^, and a spate^of court decisions 
reaching all the way to the Supreme Court , a readily 
accessible and universally applicable standard has yet to evolve. 

The school administrator who Is aware of the statutory 
language on "related services", the cases brought under the 
concept as well as the guidelines which can be derived from those 
two sources Is In a stronger position to make the crucial 
decisions necessary about this complex, confusing and changing 
mandate. 

The purpose of this paper Is fourfold. First, the 
general statutory parameters of related services will be 
explored. Next several cases, primarily from rural areas, will be 
described to Illustrate the complexity of related services In 
relation to psychotherapy, medical services, residential 
treatment and establishing a class for a single handicapped 
child. 

The concept of related services Is woven Into the very 
fabric of the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (EAHCA). 
The Act's pivotal phrase, a "free and appropriate public 
education" (PAPE), Is defined In terms of related services.^ 

This law Is lengthy as well as complex. Twenty-four 
pages are devoted to It In the Onltftd states Code^ Implementing 
regulations cover another fourty-four pages In the Federal 
Ref tstet*. The definition of "related services" specifies a 
dozen different services for handicapped children when 
appropriate: 

The term "related services" means 
transportation, and such developmental, 
corrective, and other supportive services 
(Including speech pathology and audlology, 
psychological services, physical and 
occupational therapy, recreation, and medical 
and counseling services, except that such 
medical services shall be for diagnostic and 
evaluative purposes only) as may be lequlred 
to assist handicapped children to benefit 
from special education and Includes the early 
Identification and assessment of handicapping 
conditions In children. 



542 



2 



Many^more services have been contemplated than those listed 
above. Even Congress realized that the definition was less 
than perfect. 

The list of related services Is not 
exhaustive and may include other 
developmental , corrective! or supportive 
services (such as artistic and cultural 
programSf and artf muslc^ and dance 
therapy), If they are required to assist a 
handicapped child to benefit from special 
education. 

Such attempts at clarification not withstanding, ^The 
provision of related services by public educational agencies Is 
nearly everywhere scatteredf haphazard and problematic.** 
According to a National Needs Project report: 

Few aspects of Public Law 94-142 or the 
subsequently promulgated regulations have 
created more controversy than references to 
the provision of related services for 
handicapped children. 

That such controvtsray should arise Is understandable, for 
despite Its length and Involved definitions and regulations, 
the EAHCA Is hardly a model of legislative clarity. In fact, 
many times It provides only minimal assistance In actual 
situations to either school administrators or judges who must 
attempt to ascertain the requirements of the law. 

An example of such minimal assistance can be found In the 
Matter of "A* Pamjiy. In this case, the Montana Supreme 
Court undertook to determine If psychotherapy was a related 
service. The court discovered that, "The word 'psychotherapy* 
Is not speclf^gally mentioned In the federal statutes or 
regulations." The justices, therefore, turned to Webster « a 
Seventh New flolleglate Djotlonanv (1965) for a definition. 
They subsequently determined that In this case psychotherapy 
could be considered a related service. 

Psychiatric care was litigated In several other 
Important decisions In addition to the one just quoted. There 
are several reasons why school districts find themselves In 
court over this Issue. The definition of what constitutes 
psychotherapy can vary greatly from state to state. Some states 
limit the delivery of psychotherapy to only licensed physicians 
(psychiatrists), while In other states the service may be 
provided by psychologists, social workers, and others. 

Secondly, psychotherapy is usually very expensive . 
Both parents and school districts are often reluctant to assume 
such a financial burden. Finally, there Is an ongoing dispute 
whether such a service Is a bona fide educational one for which 
the dljtrlct Is liable or whether It Is, In reality, a medical 
service for which the district would not be liable unless It Is 
for diagnostic and evaluative purposes only. For all these 
reasons psychiatric services Is an aspect of related services 
that rural educators cannot afford to Ignore. 

A federal judge In Max v. Thomnann^^ ruled that 
psychotherapy and similar psychological services that can be 



543 



6 



5. If a state rule or regulation Is more restrictive 
than those found In the EAHCA, then the federal rule prevails. 

6. If the district agreed to the lEP then It Is liable 
for the services described therein. 

?• If parents reject a proposed lEP and then 
unilaterally place a child Into a private setting, reimbursement 
may be available to the parents should the private setting prove 
the most appropriate. 

8. The district Is almost certainly liable for all 
costs associated with an Institutional placement unless It can be 
proven that the child so placed Is not handicapped or that the 
placement (a psychiatric hospital, for example) Is for medical 
rather than educational purposes. 

9. "Psychotherapy* will probably be considered a 
related service by the courts unless one of the following 
conditions Is met: 

a. It was arranged for unilaterally by the family 

b. It Is directly provided by a physician 
(psychiatrist) during a hospitalization 
(Institutionalization) for other than educational 
reasons. 

c. It Is not an Integral part of the program at a 
placement made for educational reasons. 

10. If a service Is necessary so that a child can 
attend school and If that service can be provided by a school 
nurse or layperson with minimal training then It Is likely that 
said service will be declared a permissible related service. 

11* The courts will not countenance the school 
district "passing the buck* to other state agencies or to parents 
In an attempt to avoid their clear responsibility to provide 
related services to handicapped children. 

12. Except for those Instances In which the child^s 
health or safety might be compromised the courts will not permit 
suit to be brought until the plaintiff exhausts administrative 
appeals as provided for In the Act* 

13* Courts will, however, permit suit to be brought^lf 
the pursuit of administrative appeals will clearly be futile. 

14. It Is doubtful that parents who go to court 
seeking access to related services or who challenge particular 
programs or placements will be awarded attorneys* ^.fees. 

15. Courts recognize that since Rowley a free and 
appropriate education does not mean that the district must 
provide the best education or that the child's potential must be 
maximized by Including particular related services. 

Given these conclusions, how can the administrator In 
a rural area best provide for related services? Following pre 
som€^ suggestions* 

Before the administrator agrees to have a related 
service written Into an lEP she should be sure that the school 
district has a plan In place to provide such a service. In order 
to formulate a successful plan, the administrator must be aware 
of all funding sources. These sources might Include county, state 
and federal sources* Belonging to several professional groups and 
maintaining links with authoritative persons In the statehouse as 
well as the county courthouse and the local health csre facility 
are three ways to stay current with funding and ser^'lce options. 

Secondly, state of the art technology can also be 
helpful. Adaptations for the personal computer for the visually 

o 547 



7 



Impaired, bearing Impaired and physically handicapped can make 
Instruction In .he LEA a reality. Thti local access channel of the 
cable company Is often underutilized. Therefore the channel can 
be used for student Instruction as well as teacher Inset Ice. 
SpeclalNet with Its rural bulletin boara Is an excellentf 
accessible resource . 

Rural areas have a rich history of 'olunteer workf 
Tapping Into this resource may mean that related services can be 
provided by trained volunteers under the supervision of an 
Itinerant specialist. 

Fourthly! the administrator needs to be an advocate. 
Positive changes for delivery of related services* especially 
funding* can be achieved through legislation. This mears 
developing contacts with state legislators, advocacy groups and 
parent groups. Since It Is likely that local chapters of national 
advocacy groups will not exist, the administrator's task may be 
either to put parents In touch with the appropriate agency and/or 
to form a "generic** local parents organization Including a number 
of handicaps. 

Finally, It Is obvious that Inter-dlstrlct 
co-operatives and regional Intermediate units have had notable 
success In providing special education assistance In rural areas. 
In reality, however, these groups are often tenuous due to petty 
politics, superintendents* egos, and school board bickering. 

Although related services are a confusing, complex, 
and changing concept there are guidelines which the prudent rural 
administrator can follow to make a plausible and defen^^lble 
decision. There Is no guarantee, of course, that a federal court 
will ultimately find that decision either as plausible or as 
defensible as did the administrator. 



EKLC 



548 



8 



Endnotaa 

1. In Cl6ven<rer Oak Rid^ye ^^n hool Board 774 F. 2d 514 (6th 
Clr. 1984} the court ordered the state of Tennessee to fund 
placement for a severely emotionally disturbed teen-ager at a 
Texas facility costing $88,000 per year. The staff of an instate 
facility ($55f OOO/year) favored by the LEA, declared their 
institution not suitable. 

2. Public Law 94-142. 

3. for example, 20 DSC 1401 (17) and the Pedarai ??ftyi5ifrer of 
August 23f 1977. 

4. Irving Indep. School niat, v. Tatro, 104 S. Ct. 3372 (1984); 
Pj^tftfttawftV Bnftrd of EdtinatHon v. T,Q,, 205 S. Ct. 592 (1984), 

cert, denied, 738 F. 2d 420 (1984); gathering D, v, Hawa^j 
Dept,of Eduoatton^ 105 S. Ct. 2360 (1984) cert, denied, 727 F 2d 
809; Tokflrr^llc v. gnreat H-fll Sohool Plat,, 102 S. Ct. 3508 

(1982), cert, denied, 665 F. 2d 443 (1981). 

5. A free and appropriate education means: 

Special education and related services which (A) have 
been provided at public expense, under public 
supervision and direction, and without charge; (B) meet 
the standards of the State educational agency; (C) 
include an appropriate preschool, elementary or 
secondary school education in the State involved; and 
(D) are provided in conformity with the individualized 
education program required under section 614 (a) (5). 
Sec 602 (18). 

6. 20 DSC 1401 (17). 

7. for example: music therapy can be a related service, EHLR 
502:129 Cal. July 25, 1980; detoxification has been ruled a 
related service, 3 EHLR 501:123, Mass 1979; chiropractic 
treatment, visual therapy, counseling for parents have all been 
litigated; (see Malakoff, Ed., Sohooia and the taw of the 
Handicapped, Washington, D.C. National School Boards Association 
1981). 

8. Federal Reylater August 23» 1977 p. 42480. 

9. Trott, D. Focus on Snenlal Ediinatlon Legal Prantlftea ^. 1981, 1. 

10. GroseniCk, Huntze, et. al. National Weeds Analysis in Behavior 
Disorders; Psychotherapy as a Related 5^ervlne, University of 
Missouri, Columbia: Project on National Needs Analysis in Behavior 
Disorders, May, 1982. 



11. 602 r 2d 157 (1979). 



543 



12. at 165. 

13. see n. 6. 

14. 592 F. Supp 1450 (N.D. Ill 1984). 

15. see n. 4. 

16. 738 F. 2d 425 (3rd Clr. 1984);576 F. Supp (D. MJ 1983). 

17. 568 F. Supp 1340 (N.D. Ill 1983). 

18. see n. 4. 

19. Ibid. 

20. 3 Ed Law Rept 806. 

21. Tha Snarl al Eduoatop. 1, 1985. p. 10. 

22. see, for example, Fearen, V. ^Catlieterization-School District 
Mandates Expanded Under 94-142." 3 Ed Law Rep. 8O3-8O9. 

2^.PaDaeoda v. Shate of nnnn. 528 F. Supp. 68 (D. Conn. 1981). 

24. irriialle v. Waw Paatle Cltv Snhool Diatrlot. 642 F. 2d 687 (3rd 
Clr. 1931). 

25. 536 F. Supp. 296 (N.D. 111. 1982). 

26. Loa Qatoa .Inint Hninn High Sohnol Plat, v. E. n r>e at. al . 
1984-1985 EHLR DEC. 556:281 (N.D. Cal. 1984). 

27. see also Ahem v. ICeene. 593 F. Supp. 902. (D. DE. 1984) 

28. 556 F. Supp. 404 (D.D.C. 1983). 

29. Wanriftll H. V. Mnnanlel . 1984-85 EHLR DEC 556:172. 

30. 553 F. Supp. 1107 (D.C. Cal. 1982). 

31. at 1118. 

32. 1984-85 EHLR DEC 556;427. 

33. 509 F. Supp. 107 (W.D. Va 1981) 

34. Eaatz, S. "A Description and Analysis of Federal Court 
Decisions Issued Under the Related Services Provisions of the 
Education for All Handicapped Children Act." (unpublished doctoral 
dissertation. University of Minnesota, 1985). 

35. 20 use 1401 (17). 

36. Pariaral Reyjatar August 23, 1977, p. 42480. 

37. see n. 7* 



10 



38. Bupllnfton Sch ool Cftmmlttee v. Dept. of Edunat<Qn f 105 S.Ct. 
1966; Hooker, C. "Court Upholds Reimbursement for Unilaterally 
Obtained Private Special Education." (Ed Law Rept., In press). 

39. for example, Chriatopher T. (n. 30). 

40. Cot v. Brown 498 P. Supp 823 (D.D.C. 1980). 

41. Smith V. Rohinaon, 104 S. Ct. 3457 (1984); EHLR Analysis 1984; 
SA-22; Valente, W. "Smith v. RQhjn5>on-Confiis<ftn Clarified?" 22 Ed 
Law Rept. 693-697. 

42. Rowley v. Board of Rriiinatlon of Hanrlok Hudson rentral Snhnol 
Plat. . 102 S. Ct. 3034 (1982). 



43. Issues of the National Rural Raaeareh Mftwalefctep have useful 
Ideas, In particular Winter 1981, 2(2) and Fall 1982 4(1). 



Cheryl Koleslen, Virginia Fish 
Special Touch Preschool 
558 East 2nd, Box 1191 
"Family Support Groups ; id Activities" Powell, WV 82435 



Special Touch Preschool serves children birth through 5 
years of age in Region 1, which is the largest human service 
region in the State of Uyoming. The area encompasses 12694 
square miles and has a total population of approximately 
90,000. At the present time the region serves a population 
of 110 handicapped children in homebound programs or at four 
centers located throughout the region. 

The parent program is one of the priorities of the region 
utilizing the services of one full time outreach worker and 
one part time worker. Parent activities include two annual 
orientation programs in each center, parent support groups, 
a monthly newsletter for parents, an annual newsletter for 
parents and members of the community, ongoing parenting 
classes, home visits, and home goals on each child^s 
individual educational plan. Parents also comprise a 
minimum of one third of the board of directors. In addition 
parents are involved in the center in a variety of 
activities including fund raising, classroom participation, 
field trips, parent library, making public presentations and 
contributions to the newsletter. Parents are also active in 
attending workshops, participating in an annual legislative 
dinner, touring state facilities which may offer future 
placement, special Olympics, and classes in such areas as 
sign language. 

All of these acitivities have built a core of communication 
and positive relations with the parents in our program. 
Homebound programs utilize parents as teachers of their 
children and parents are encouraged to observe and 
participate in classrooms. Despite the fact that many 
parents live a great distance from any center, participation 
has been very strong. 

Uithin the framework of a one hour workshop, we would like 
to discuss and share techniques and processes to encourage 
parent participation, develop positive communication lines 
and strengthen parent involvement. The program will i nc ude 
ideas applicable to a variety of programs and demonstrate 
the use of a variety of professionals 

The workshop will include a thirty minute presentation of 
materials and techniques followed by discussion and 
interaction to provide individuals wit^ constr jctivc ideas 
to apply to their own unique situations. Information be 
provided all par t i c i patan ts including sample communications 
to parents, parent group organization techniques, sir. pie 
interest surveys for parents and sample evaluation forms. 



BEST COHt AVAILABLt 



g arth £d uca tlon t PrcsraTas for Outdoo r learn in 

Earth Education is the process of helping people live more harnion- 

iously and joyously with the Earth an'i its life. The two hour Earth 

Education Interest Session will focus on the following objectives! 

(1) Ecological concepts are too important to be left to chance 
lessons, talks or activities. 

(?) Earth edvcation should be a part of every school curriculum, 
youth pr ^ram and adult organi^^ition, 

(3) Feellrgs for the natural world corabined with increased under- 
standings about natural systems form the foundation for 
positive iriVironmental action. 

(4) S:'cth e.l jdtion is a serious task, but getting to knew the 
earth sh Jld be a lifelong adventure full of wonder and joy. 

FoTlowi: <5 the introduction of these objectives, participants will 

act'jally be involved in an hour long outdoor activity that deir.on- 

--".rates hew to utilize our ma •;erials . This particular activity focuses 

on p rceptual and sensory a areness. 

The session will onclucr with a slide show of a coir,plete program 
'eveloped by the Insti + ute, a look at other prograrrs ?.vailable, how 
to --plenient the programs and a question/answer period. .Vaterials 
will V. ? availabl-j t xamine, take home, and purchase. 

Our prograrr.s and iv -".es are ^^^'.'^ , sensory, hands-on, and 
de^l with bringing ,..^i\-act cont^ipts into the concrete. Using this 
approach we ha • ' aen able to reach special populations as well as 
the ••noryr.al" s*v;ent. 

In :r,any ways oui* programs and activities are -asier to iTipleiuent in 
rural ireas tran ii urban settings, ^'any rur il schools are sur- 
r:u::?ei by natural settings that =ir9 rarely ..tilized all the 
l*irr.l: f t:. is ~p.^n\ in the b^.'llicX'^d school ?^rea. Cur -rC'-^^r.: ;-.?3 
.-.;d • .ilvl .cs ^j? f^r tst-cht^rs-- ;?:Sl-.-..-nt . = ; i -an -h.^n .:• ?i 



Presenter: Dr. Thomas P. Lombardi 

Dept. of Special Education 
West Virginia University 
Morgantownr WV 26506 



Contributors to Research: 

Annette Johnson 

Denise Morley 

Doni ta Randolph 

Rhonda Stout 

Graduate Students 

Dept. of Special Education 

West Virginia University 

Morgantown^ WV 26506 



Title: PARENTS' OPINIONS OF AND POTENTIAL 

INVOLVEMENT IN RURAL SPECIAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



Thursday, April IL 
3:20-4:50 pm 



554 



EKLC 



Abstract 



Parents of special needs students were sent a 12 item 
questionnaire to determine their assessment of special 
education programs and teachers as well as their willingness 
and preference for training. There was a 39% rate of return 
with 851 parents responding. The results indicated greater 
satisfaction with teachers than programs. Seventy-two 
percent of the parents desired training with preference given 
to skills which will aid academic development (e.g., study 
habits) rather than non-academic development (e.g., improving 
the child's self concept). Differences from this trend were 
noted when categorical analyses were considered. 



Parent action has, over the years, tremendously 
influenced the availability of special education programs for 
special needs students. The results of their involvement 
have seen many court victories and much legislation passed. 
Without question, the passage of Public Law 94-142, the 
Education of All Handicapped Children Act, has become a 
milestone in the annals of public education. For the first 
time, federal law mandates education and training services 
for all special need students from ages 3 to 21 unless there 
is a conflicting state law. Many states have gone beyond 
this age ranee. Some requirre special education programs 
from birth; others have extended them to age 25. Key 
features of all these educational mandates revolve around the 
parent's right to have input into the educational process 
from identification of special needs to evaluation that these 
special needs are being met. Less pronounced are the 
parent's responsibilities in the educational process 
(Colongelo & Dettman, 1983). 

Many parents feel they would like to become more active 
in the educational process, but are unsure exactly how their 
special needs child is functioning at school (Abramson, 
Voshida, Wilson, and Hagerty, 1983; Colongelo and Dettman, 
1983). In a recent study. Cone, Delawyer, and Wolfe (1985) 
reported on three types of involvements for parents of 
special needs students accor^'iing to the teachers. They are 
participati ,m in the special education process, contact with 
the teacher and transporting their child to and from school. 

Implications from these studies pose some interesting 
questions for investigation. Are parents willing to attend 
training programs so that they can eventually become more 
involved in their special child's program? If yes, what type 
• of training would they like to receive? Are they satisfied 
with their child's special education program? Are they 
satisfied with their ^.hild's special education teachers? Are 
their relative differences of opinion as a result of the age 
of the special needs student, length of time he has been in 
special education, and/or the category for his 
exceptionality? 

The answer to these and related questions served as the 
foundation for a survey to assess parent's perceptions of and 
willingness to participate in rural school programs for their 
special needs children. 

THE SURVEY 

This survey was conducted during the second semester of 
the 1984-85 school year at West Virginia University. Its 
major purpose was to aid rural school districts in 
determining the percentage of parents of special education 
students who desire parent training, the preference for the 
type of training, and the parents' overall perceptions of the 
special education program. 

In order to assess variance in parental opinions, the 
survey items asked for the age of the student, type of 
exceptionality and the number of years he/she has received 
special education services. Except for age, the 12 questions 




556 



utilized the combination of a yes*no format and a 5 scale 
Likert rating. Parents were given suggested training 
programs to choose from but were also allowed to offer their 
own suggestions (see Table 1). 

There were four school districts from West Virginia 
participating in the survey. They were all rural but 
included both a small college and university town. Special 
education directors chose the population the questionnaires 
were sent to as well as the method of dispersal. Two 
counties sent questionnaires to all parents of special 
education students. The other two counties used a random 
selection. The questionnaires were sent by the following two 
methods; 1, they were sent home and returned by the 
students, or; 2. they were mailed to the homes by the county 
special personnel and returned by stamped, self-addressed 
envelopes. 

There was a 39% rate of returns with 851 parents 
responding from the 2183 questionnaires sent. The mean age 
of the students represented was 11 years. Of the 851 
students, 36% were specific learning disabled, 22% had speech 
or language disorders, 20% were gifted, 7% were considered 
multiply handicapped, 6% were educable mentally impaired, 4% 
were behaviorally disordered, 1.5% were trainable mentally 
impaired, 1% were hearing disordered, .7% were physically 
handicapped, .7% were profoundly mentally impaired and .6% 
were visually impaired. 

Fifty-five percent were enrolled in elementary programs 
and 45% were enrolled in secondary programs. The mean number 
of years receiving special education services was 3.5 years. 
RESULTS ^ 
Rating of the overall program 

The programs representing all categories of 
exceptionalities were rated as excellent or good with good 
being the most frequent response, with recognition of the 
low incidence in certain categories, such as the visually 
impaired, and hearing disordered, the strength of certain 
categorical ratings would have to be broadly interpreted 
(Table 2) . For example, 11% of the parents of the hearing 
disordered rated the program poor. However, this poor rating 
was from one parent's perception. 

TABLE 2 

Program (Percentage) Ratings. By Categories 



Excellent Good Average Fai r Poor 



EKLC 



Learning Disabilities 


38% 


49% 


8% 


2% 


2% 


Behavior Disorders 


38% 


54% 


4% 


0% 


4% 


Educable Mentally Impaired 


24% 


52% 


13% 


9% 


2% 


Trainable ^tentally Impaired 


27% 


27% 


36% 


9% 


0% 


Profoundly Mentally Impaired 


17% 


33% 


33% 


17% 


0% 


Gifted 


21% 


55% 


13% 


6% 


4% 


Visually Impaired 


40% 


40% 


0% 


20% 


0% 


Hearing Disordered 


22% 


68% 


0% 


0% 


11% 


Speech & Language Disorders 


36% 


46% 


13% 


3% 


2% 


Physically Handicapped 


50% 


50% 


0% 


0% 


0% 


Mul tiple Hand i capped 


47% 


35% 


14% 


5% 


0% 



55V 



The teachers received more excellent ratings than good, 
as a result their rating was higher than the overall program 
rating. There was no significant difference between the 
number of years the children were in special education and 
the rating of the program. The majority of the responses 
were above average for all years in the program. There was 
no significant difference between the number of years in 
special education and the rating of the teachers. The 
majority still rated the teachers higher overall than the 
programs. Ninety percent of the parents indicated they 
understood the forms and terminology used during the 
Placement Advisory Committee (PAC) meeting. Eighty-one 
percent of the parents felt comfortable confiding in their 
child's teacher about personal events that could affect their 
child's school performance. Many parents felt they had 
sufficient communication with the teachers. Still the 
majority felt communication should be increased. 
Training Preference 

There was a slight decline in interest in parent 
training with increased number of years their child was in 
special education. Seventy-two percent of the parents were 
interested and willing to participate in parent training 
programs. Approximately 76% of the parents who had children 
12 or younger desired training; 63% who had childr ;»n over 12 
desired training. The parents' priorities for training were 
as follows: 52% improving study habits, 43% aiding academic 
growth, 36% improving child's self concept, 26% managing 
child's behavior, 4% indicated another preference other than 
the above mentioned. Approximately 52% felt they would like 
to talk to teachers more; 48% did not feel it was needed. 
Specific data on desire and preference for parent training 
based upon categories of exceptionalities can be seen in 
Table 3 below. Many parents checked more than one training 
preference. 



TABLE 3 

Training (Percentage) Preference By Categories 











Aiding 


Inproving 


Improving 










Managing 


Academic 


Child's 


Study 




Category 


No 


Yes 


Behavior 


Growth 


Self -Concept 


Habits 


Other 


Learning Disabll* 




66Z 


26Z 


36Z 


29Z 


65Z 


AZ 


ities 
















Behavior Disorders 


21Z 


79Z 


65Z 


35Z • 


61Z 


A8Z 


OZ 


Educable Mentally 


39Z 


61Z 


20Z 


36Z 


AAZ 


56Z 


OZ 


Impaired 
















Trainable Mentally 


OZ 


lOOZ 


A2Z 


A2Z 


58Z 


A2Z 


25Z. 


Impaired 
















Profoundly Mentally 
Impaired 


17Z 


83Z 


80Z 


20Z 


20Z 


20Z 


OZ 


Gifted 


2AZ 


76Z 


12Z 


69Z 


3/Z 


36Z 


3Z 


Visually Impaired 


OZ 


lOOZ 


OZ 


60Z 


OZ 


SOZ 


OZ 


Hearing Disorders 


38Z 


62Z 


OZ 


AOZ 


60Z 


60Z 


OZ 


Speech & Language 
Impaired 


26Z 


7AZ 


3U 


37Z 


A3Z 


51Z 


AZ 


Physically Handi- 


AOZ 


60Z 


OZ 


33Z 


67Z 


33Z 


OZ 


capped 
















Multiple Handi- 


2AZ 


76Z 


28:: 


33Z 


26Z 


56Z 


2Z 


capped 








TOTAL Z 


28Z 


72Z 


26Z 


AAZ 


36Z 


52Z 


AZ 



Er|c 558 



COMCmSIONS 

The following implications and interpretations were 
derived based on a statistical analysis o£ the data obtained 
- in the survey.. They are suggested as aids to those concerned 
with determining needs and p-irameters for parent training and 
possible modifications for current programs. 

When the child has been in special education for a long 
tme, it appears that the parents may actually become slightly 
less interested in being involved with their child's program. 
This trend has been manifested in at least one other study 
(Cone, 1985). Perhaps this trend will be altered as school 
programs offer parent training when the child is first placed 
in special education. Periodic assessment of parental 
training needs should be conducted in order to update parent 
training programs and prevent parent burn-out. 

Many parents are more interested in training programs 
that pertain directly to academic rather than nonacademics 
topics, such as improving study habits rather than improving 
the self concept. This finding is indeed interesting since 
few commercial parent training packages and workbooks give 
direct instruction on how parents can aid academic skill 
development. It is important to note that specific 
categorical priorities were not always consistent with this 
trend. For example, managing behavior was the number one 
priority of parents of children with behavior disorders. 

The parents expressed satisfaction with the teachers of 
all exceptionalities. However, some felt their 
communications with teachers should be increased. It would 
seem important for teachers to have good communication skills 
and strategies. 

The parents seem to undersicand the forms and terminology 
as well as the procedures used at the Placement Advisory 
Committee (PAC) meetinq. They are satisfied with the 
programs since the majority rated them above average. Major 
modification of the overall current programs for these four 
rural county school systems does not seem to be indicated at 
this time. What is needed are opportunities^ for parents to 
receive training in the areas of preference they feel are 
important. 

Similiar surveys of parents* opinions and potential 
involvement in special education programs should probably be 
conducted in all of our school systems. Similar information 
obtained could provide the foundation for a home-school 
partnership for supporting quality special education. 



559 

o 

ERIC 



Table 1 
rarent Questionnaire 



1. What is your child^s age?^ 



2. What is your child *8 special education classification? (check ope) 

Learni.ig Disabled Behavior Disorder Educable Mentally Impaired 

Trainable Mentally IMpaired Profoundly Mentally Impaired 

Gifted Visually Impaired Hearing Disorder 

Speech and/or Language Impaired Physically Handicapped 

^Multiple Handicapped 

3. What type of specie * ation s.^rvice configuration does your child receive? 

self-contained a r -source room regular class with 

other (specify) consultation 

4. Approxomiately how long has child been getting special education 
services? 

5. During the Placement Advisory Committee Meeting were you given an 
adequate explanation of special needs your child has? 

YZS NO 

6. 0\'erall, how would you rate the special education services your child 
receives? 

Excellent Good Average Fair Poor 

7. Do you think it would be helpful if you could talk to your child's 
teacher more? 

^YES NO 

8. Do you feel comfortable telling your child's teacher about personal 
events that may affect your child's school performance? 

YES NO 

9. Do you understand the forms and terms used by your child's teacher 
whenever he/she discusses education plans for your child? 

^YES NO 

10. If we were able to offer some parent training programs to aid you in 
being more active in your child's program, would you be willing to 
attend? 

^YES NO 

11. If yes, which of the following ^ou?d you feel is the most important to 
offer parent training. 

managing child's behavior aiding academic growth 

improving child's self concept improving study habits 

other : 

12. How would you rate your child's teachers overall? 
Excellent Good Average Fair Poor 




TABLE 2 

Program (Percentage) Ratings By Categories 





Excellent 


Good 


Average 


Fair 


Poor 


Learning Disabilities 


38% 


49% 


8% 


2% 


2% 


Behavior Disorders 


38% 


54% 


4% 


0% 


4% 


Educable Mentally Impaired 


24% 


52% 


13% 


9% 


2% 


Trainable Mentally Impaired 


27% 


27% 


36% 


9% 


0% 


Profoundly Mentally Impaired 


17% 


33% 


33% 


1.7% 


0% 


Gifted 


21% 


55% 


13% 


6% 


4% 


Visually Impaired 


40% 


40% 


0% 


20% 


0% 


Hearing Disordered 


22% 


68% 


0% 


0% 


11% 


Speech & Language Disorders 


36% 


46% 


13% 


3% 


2% 


Physically Handicapped 


50% 


50% 


0% 


0% 


0% 


Multiple Handicapped 


47% 


35% 


14% 


5% 


0% 



562 

o 

ERIC 



TABLE 3 

Training (Percentage) Preference By Categories 



Aiding Inproving .roproving 
Managing Academic Child's Study 
Category No Yes Behavior Growth Self -Concept Habits Other 



j^earnxng u±s3iD±x 






262 


ities 








Behavior Disorders 


21Z 


79Z 


65Z 


Educable Mentally 


39Z 


61Z 


20Z 


Impaired 








Trainable Mentally 


OZ 


lOOZ 


42Z 


Impaired 








Profoundly Mentially 


17Z 


83Z 


807. 


Impaired 


Gifted 


24Z 


76Z 


12Z 


Visually Impaired 


OZ 


lOOZ 


OZ 


Hearing Disorders 


38Z 


62Z 


OZ 


Speech & Language 


26Z 


74Z 


31Z 


Impaired 


Physically Handi- 


40Z 


607. 


OZ 


capped 








Multiple Handi- 


24Z 


767. 


28Z 


capped 








TOTAL Z 


28Z 


72Z 


26Z 



36Z 


29% 


65% 


4% 


35Z 


61% 


48% 


0% 


36Z 


44% 


56% 


0% 


42Z 


58% 


42% 


25% 


20Z 


20% 


20% 


0% 


69Z 


37% 


36% 


5% 


60Z 


0% 


60% 


0% 


40Z 


60% 


60% 


0% 


37% 


43% 


51% 


4% 


33Z 


67% 


33% 


0% 


33% 


26% 


56% 


2% 


44% 


36% 


52% 


4% 



i 



ERIC 



