DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 421 210 



PS 026 623 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Couse, Leslie J. 

Read with Me: The Use of Cultural Role Models in Children's 
Literature . 

1998-04-00 

1 9p . ; Paper presented at a Poster Session at the Annual 
Conference of the National Head Start Association (25th, 
Seattle, WA, April 20-25, 1998) . 

Reports - Research (143) -- Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; Annotated Bibliographies; Black 
Culture; ^Childrens Literature; Cultural Awareness; Cultural 
Education; Cultural Maintenance; *Cultural Relevance; 
Culturally Relevant Education; Emergent Literacy; Hispanic 
American Culture; *01der Adults; *Role Models; *Stereotypes ; 
Young Children 

African Americans; *Age Bias; Latinos; Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 



This study examined the portrayal of the elderly within 
African American, Latino, and Native American cultures in picture books for 
children ages 3 to 8 years. Thirty books were selected from libraries and 
book stores and examined using guidelines from three sources: (1) "Ageism in 

Literature Analysis," a 15-item rating scale; (2) "Stereotypes Worksheet" 
from the National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) 
Anti-Bias Curriculum; and (3) "Ten Items for Analyzing Children's Books for 
Sexism and Racism." The results indicated that the Ageism scores from the 
"Ageism in Literature Analysis" form ranged from 1.93 to 3.0 (fair to good) . 
The NAEYC "Stereotype Worksheet" and the "Ten Items" form resulted in few 
biases found in the children's books. An annotated bibliography notes biases, 
positive portrayals, and the ageism score for each book. The screening 
process used by the reviewer and the need to update the NAEYC worksheet could 
have influenced the results. The need for more children's literature 
containing cultural role models for older Native and Hispanic Americans is 
discussed, for example the particular lack of materials depicting 
contemporary Native Americans. Difficulties in using the forms for picture 
books are discussed. (Includes the forms used to evaluate the books. Contains 
9 references.) (KB) 



***************************************************************************** 
* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

from the original document . 



* 



ED 421 210 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

JS^This document has been reproduced as 
^received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Read with Me: 

The Use of Cultural Role Models in Children’s Literature 





Presented by 

Leslie J. Couse, M.S.Ed., M.S.P.A 



Doctoral Student and Teaching Assistant 
Department of Child & Family Studies 
Syracuse University 



Poster Session Presentation 

April 23, 1998 



\ 

PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

-LesWJX.. 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) I 



at the 



National Head Start Association Conference 
Seattle, Washington 
April 20-25, 1998 



2 



Read with Me: 

The Use of Cultural Role Models in Children's Literature 

Literature Review 

The Children's Literacy Initiative reports that 55% of all urban children and 33% of all 
children entering kindergarten are labeled 'at-risk educationally'. These 'at-risk' children 
are remedial the day they enter first grade, and it is difficult for them to undo this label. 
African American, Latino and Native American children have lower rates of educational 
attainment than whites (Children's Defense Fund, 1996) and therefore, maybe at higher 
risk. One possible way to minimize the risk is to expose children to print early in their 
lives. 

Children who are read to and exposed to print early in their lives have been found to have 
greater success in future schooling. Early childhood classrooms are becoming 
increasingly diverse. Consequently, children need props in their classroom that provide 
positive images of their culture. Children's literature can be a vehicle for positive 
cultural images. The book selection in the early childhood classroom is a crucial part of 
the cultural appropriateness of the curriculum. Cultural relevance of the classroom 
contributes to the continuity between the home and school environment, thereby giving 
children consistent messages. 

Children receive messages from the environment and people around them daily. These 
messages may include stereotypes or limitations associated with belonging to a racial or 
ethnic group. Ethnic identity, one's sense of belonging to an ethnic group and the 
perceptions and feelings associated with being a part of the group, is separate from 
personal identity. Both are related and may influence each other (Morrison & Rogers, 
1996). Consequently, a child's personal identity is shaped by the experiences s/he has 




3 



based upon belonging to an ethnic group. Books support children's development and 
lead to activities that can improve their social relations and help them achieve 
independence (Beaty, 1994). The presence of positive role models in children's literature 
can contribute to a child's ethnic identity. One such role model may be the elderly. 

The elderly in American society are regarded as having little worth. A study of classic 
children's literature (Ansello, 1977) found that the negative aspects of aging were 
prevalent in the way elderly characters were portrayed. Terms like old, sad and poor 
were used to describe these characters. Preschool children have been found to exhibit 
negative attitudes and use ageist language to describe the elderly (Dallman & Power, 
1997; McGuire, 1993). 

However, the elderly within the African, Latino, and Native American cultures are 
regarded as a resource to the young and are seen as having knowledge. They are valued 
within the culture (Strong & DeVault, 1995). 

Children's literature is a powerful tool for shaping children's understanding of the world 
around them. The provision of quality children's literature, with the elderly as positive 
role models in the African American, Latino, and Native American cultures, is a means 
of enhancing the early childhood curriculum to improve literacy for all young children. 



Method 

Picture books for children ages 3-8 years were selected from local libraries and book 
stores. A children's literature review examining the depiction’s of the role of the elderly 
within African American, Latino and Native American cultures was conducted. Three 
tools were used to analyze each book. The first was the Ageism in Literature Analysis 




4 



2 



form (Dodson & Hause, 1981). Each book was reviewed employing the form. The 
fifteen items were tallied and averaged yielding an Ageism Score (A). 

The second tool, the NAEYC Anti-Bias Curriculum (Derman-Sparks, 1989) Stereotypes 
Worksheet, listing common stereotypes of African-American, Latino, and Native 
American males and females was administered. The final tool Ten Items for Analyzing 
Children ’s Books for Sexism and Racism was used to review each book for stereotypes. 

Results 

Each book was carefully read and then reviewed with the Ageism in Literature Analysis 
Form. Each of the items were scored on the following scale: 1 = poor 2 = fair 3 - good. 
Scores were totaled to reach a composite total score. Not all fifteen items were able to be 
scored, as per the instructions, due to the limited nature of picture books. Some of the 
items were not found to be relative to children’s picture books. Typically item #6 and 
#7, dealing with occupation were not addressed in the story line. Some scores are not 
reflective of fifteen items therefore, an average score was developed based upon the 
actual point total divided by the number of items scored. An average Ageism Score (A) 
is listed in the annotated bibliography. The Ageism scores ranged from fair to good 
(1.93-3.0). The results of this review follow in the form of an annotated bibliography of 
children's literature. 



The review using the Stereotypes Worksheet from the NAEYC Anti-Bias Curriculum and 
The Ten Items for Analyzing Children 's Books for Sexism and Racism resulted in few 
biases found. Biases are noted in the annotated bibliography. Positive portrayals were 
typically found and are so noted. 



9 




5 



3 



Ageism in Literature Analysis Form 



Title: 

Author. 

Publisher: Copyright: 

Grade Level: 



Circle the number you feel is appropriate for each item. It is not necessary to answer all items. J = poor, 2 = fair, 3 = good. 



1 . The older character plays a vital role in the story. 


1 


2 


3 


2. The older character’s personality is fully developed. 


1 


2 


3 


3. The older character is self-reliant as opposed to being 
dependent. 


1 


2 


3 


4. The older character’s physical appearance is fully 
described. 


1 


2 


3 


5. Stereotypic adjectives such as old, sad, and poor are not 
frequently or exclusively use in this book to refer to older 
people. 


1 


2 


3 


6. The older diameter’s occupation is fully defined. 


1 


2 


3 


7. The older character’s occupation is a meaningful one. 


1 


2 


3 


8 . If not employed, the older character is engaged in 
worthwhile activities. 


1 


2 


3 


9. The older character is not engaged in stereotypic roles of 
his/her ethnic or racial group. 


1 


2 


3 


10. The older character is from outside the family unit. 


1 


2 


3 


1 1 . The older person is a three dimensional character. 


1 


2 


3 


12. If illustrated, the illustrations are appropriate for the 
time and setting of the story. 


1 


2 


3 


13. If illustrated, the older character is illustrated in social 
communication with a variety of age groups. 


1 


2 


3 


14. If illustrated, all characters are pictured realistically. 


1 


2 


3 


15. Overall analysis of the book, in terms of portrayal of 
elderly persons. 


1 


2 


3 



Comments: 



Tally: 



Name of Reviewer: 



Date: 



Anita E. Dodson & Judith B. Hause. Ageism in Literature: An analysis Kit for Teachers and Librarians. (1981). Teaching and 
Learning About Aging Project. Acton -Boxborough Regional Schools, Acton, MA. 




6 



4 



Stereotypes Worksheet 



Stereotypes of Afro-Americans 



Male Stereotypes 
Shuffling, eye-rolling, fearful, superstitious comic 
Gentle, self-sacrificing older man 
of Athletic super-jock 
Smooth talking con man 
Super-stud 

Stupid but comical, little boy 
Rough, dangerous criminal 
Loudly-dressed, happy-go-lucky buffoon 
Exotic primitive 



Female Stereotypes 

Big-bosomed “mammy,” loyal to whites 
Big, bossy mother or maid-commander 
the household 
Sexy temptress 
Stupid, but sweet, little girl 
Tragic mulatto 



Stereotypes of Latinos 



Male Stereotypes 
Sombrero-wearing, serape-clad, sandaled man or boy 
Taking a siesta near a cactus or an overburdened burro 
Ignorant, cheerful, lazy peon 
Sneaky, knife wielding, mustached bandit 
Humble, big-eyed, poor-but-honest boy 
Teenage gang member 

Macho boaster and supreme-commander of household 
Occupational Stereotypes 



Female Stereotypes 

Hard working, poor submissive, 

self-sacrificing religious mother 
of many 

Sweet, small, shy, gentle girl 
Sexy, loud fiery woman (who often 

prefers a white man to Latino men) 
Undereducated, submissive, nice girl 
with marriage as a life goal 



Impoverished migrant workers (most Latinos actually live in cities) 
Unemployed barrio dwellers 



Male Stereotypes 



Stereotypes of Native Americans 

Female Stereotypes 



Savage, bloodthirsty “native” 

Stoic, loyal follower 
Drunken, mean thief 
Drunken comic 
Hunter, tracker 
Noble, child of nature 
Wise old chief 
Evil medicine man 

Brave boy, endowed by nature with special “Indian” qualities 



Heavyset, workhorse “squaw” 

“Indian princess” (depicted with 

European features and often in 
love with a white man for whom 
she is willing to sacrifice her 
life) 



Occupational Stereotypes 



Hunters Unemployed loafers 

Cattle thieves Craftspeople 
Warriors 



Anti-Bias Curriculum : Tools for Empowering Young Children. © 1989 by National Association for the Education of Young 
Children, pp. 143-145. 




7 



5 



Ten Quick Ways to Analyze Children’s Books for 
Sexism and Racism 



1. Check the Illustrations 

a. Look for Stereotypes. A stereo type is an over simplified generalization 
about a particular group, race, or sex, which usually carries derogatory 
implications. 

b. Look for Tokenism. If there are minority characters in the illustrations, 
do they look just like whites except for being tinted or colored in? Do 
they all look alike, or are they depicted as genuine individuals with 
distinctive features? 

2. Check the Story Line 

a. Standard for Success. Does it take “white” behavior standard for a 
minority person to “get ahead”? Is “making it” in the dominant white 
society projected as the only ideal? In friendships between white and third 
world children, is it the third world child who does most of the 
understanding and forgiving? 

b. Resolution of Problems. How are problems presented, conceived, and 
resolved in the story? Are minority children considered to be “the 
problem”? 

c. Role of Women. Are the achievements of girls and women based on their 
own initiative and intelligence, or are they due to their good looks or their 
relationship with the boys? Could the same story be told if the sex roles 
were reversed? 



3. Look at Lifestyles. Are third world persons and their setting depicted in 
such a way that they contrast unfavorably with the unstated norm of white, 
middle-class suburbia? If the illustrations and text attempt to depict another 
culture, do they go beyond over-simplifications and offer genuine insights into 
another lifestyle? 

4. Weigh the Relationships Between People. Do whites in the story possess 
the power, take the leadership, and make the important decisions? Do 
minorities and females function in supporting, subservient roles? 




8 



6 



5. Note the Heroes. For many years, books showed only “safe” minority 
heroes- those who avoided serious conflict with the white establishment of 
their time. Ask the question: “Whose interest is a particular hero really 
serving? The interests of the hero’s own people? Or the interests of white 
people? 

6. Consider the Effects on a Child’s Self-Image. Are norms established which 
limit any child’s aspirations and self-concepts? What effect can it have on 
minority children to be continuously bombarded with images of the color 
white as the ultimate in beauty, cleanliness, virtue, etc., and the color black as 
evil, dirty, menacing, etc.? Are males performing all of the brave and 
important deeds? 

7. Consider the Author’s or Illustrator’s Background. Analyze the 
biographical material on the jacket or back of the book. What qualifies the 
author to deal with this theme? 

8. Check the Author’s Perspective. No author can be entirely objective. All 
authors write from a cultural as well as from a personal context. Does the 
direction of the author’s perspective substantially weaken or strengthen the 
value of his/her written work. 

9. Watch for Loaded Words. A word is leaded when it has offensive 
overtones. Examples: savage, primitive, conniving, lazy, superstitious, 
treacherous, wily, crafty, inscrutable, docile, and backward. Look for sexist 
language. Examples: generic use of he/him/man. 

10. Look at the Copyright Date. Books on minority themes - usually hastily 
conceived - suddenly began appearing in the mid and late 1960’s. They were 
followed by a growing number of “minority experience” books to meet the 
new demand, but these books were still written by white authors. They reflect 
a white point of view. 



Anti-Bias Curriculum: Tools for Empowering Young Children. © 1989 by National Association 
for the Education of Young Children, pp. 143-145. 




9 



7 



Native American Stories 



Annotated Bibliography 



Bruchac, J. (1994). A boy called Slow. New York: Philomel Books. 

A boy of the Hunkpapa band of Lakota Sioux was given the childhood name. Slow. His actions were slow and 
measured. His father. Returns Again, was a great warrior, as were his fathers before him. Slow had to prove himself to 
earn an adult name. He finally had a chance to ride in battle against the Crow, where he earned the name. Sitting Bull. 
The voices of the forefathers sent his name through his father. A = 2.6 

Brother eagle, sister sky: A message from Chief Seattle . (1991). New York: Dial books. 

Based upon a message of Chief Seattle, one of the most respected Chiefs of the Northwest Nations, given at a 
ceremony to sign papers for the government to buy Indian lands. Parents, grandparents and ancestors have passed on 
to their children the belief that the land and all the creatures that inhabit it are sacred. The Earth does not belong to the 
Indians, they belong to the Earth. Seattle challenges us to love and take care of the Earth as they have and pass that 
tradition on to our children. Detailed pen and ink drawings of Susan Jeffers add deeper meaning to the story. Jeffers 
consults with Native Americans about her work and has illustrated numerous books about them A = 2.77 
Erdrich, H. E. (1993). Maria Tallchief . Autin, TX: Steck-Vaughn. 

Maria Tallchief came from the American Indian tribe called, Osage. Her father was full-blood Osage and her mother 
was white. Her Osage grandmother lived with her and taught her the Osage ways. She was very proud of her native 
ancestry. Maria loved to dance. She and her sister, Marjorie, became famous ballet dancers. The Osage honored her 
in a special ceremony. They gave her an honor name, selected by her Grandmother, Wa-Xthe-Thonba, which means 
Woman of Two Standards or of Two Worlds. This story provides a very positive contemporary role model for 
children. The grandmother plays a vital role in transmitting culture and values to Maria This story is par of a series 
documenting the lives of Native Americans who have made important contributions. A = 2.88 

Goble, P. (1990). Iktomi Stories (see titles below) . New York: Orchard Books. 

Iktomi is a native elder. He is known as a trickster and is enjoyed by both children and adults. His stories are used to 
teach Native ways. He is always choosing the wrong things and getting into trouble. Amusing subtitles enhance the 
story and help teach the underlying meaning. Illustrations add contemporary humor. Goble lives in Utah and has 
studied native Americans for many years. 

Iktomi and the ducks 

Iktomi sets out to find his horse dressed in his best clothes. He becomes hungry, so he tricks some ducks and roasts 
them His foolishness gets him stuck and he looses the duck dinner to a fox. A = 2.20 




10 



8 



Iktomi and the big rock 



Dctomi dresses lavishly to set out for a parade. The hot sun forces him to take off his blanket and give it to the boulder. 
Later it becomes cold and starts to rain. Iktomi takes back his blanket for shelter The boulder chases him. Because of 
his foolishness, his beautiful clothes are ruined. A = Z2 
Iktomi and the berries . 

Dctomi sets out to hunt prairie dogs to prepare a feast for his people so they will think he is generous. He becomes 
hungry and spies some berries at the bottom of the lake. He is unable to stay down long enough to gather them so he 
ties a boulder to his neck. He finds no berries and almost drowns. Lying on the side of the lake he looks up to see the 
berries hanging on the tree above him. He is so angry, he beats the berries into the water and the ducks eat them. A=2.2 
Goble, P. (1993). Beyond the ridge New York: Aladdin Books. 

A story from the Plains Indian people about death. A grandmother is called ‘beyond the ridge* by her mother to join 
her ancestors in the spirit world. The grandmother is very concerned for her children and grandchildren she has left 
behind because they are so sad. She wants them to know she is alright. This story illustrates the caring between 
generations that is transmitted through story telling. A = 2.64 

Hirschi, R (1992). Seva’s song . Seattle: Sasquatch Books. 

A contemporary child’s story of nature and life in the Northwest for the S’Kalallam people. The story is told from the 
memory of a time when Grandmother and Grandfather were young and S’Klallam words were always around. 
S’Klallam words are used to in the text to describe the season’s of the year. Watercolor illustrations enhance the 
almost poetic story. A = 2.66 

Lewis, P. O. (1997). Frog gift Hillsboro, Oregon: Beyond Words Pub., Inc 
Based upon mythic traditions of the Haida, Tlingit, and other native peoples of the Pacific Northwest An Indian girl is 
summoned to the world beneath the lake when all the frogs disappear. She is questioned by “Grandmother” about the 
disappearance of her children. The Grandmother is portrayed as having wisdom and oversight of the children. A = 2.23 
Longfellow, H. W. (1983). Hiawatha New York: Puffin Pied Piper Books. 

This picture book concentrates on the boyhood of Hiawatha Taken from the famous poem, “The Song of Hiawatha”. 
Hiawatha is nursed by his grandmother, Nokomis, the daughter of the moon. She taught him the lessons of life about 
his forefathers and a love of animals. Susan Jeffers detailed illustrations bring the story to life. Jeffers consults with 
Native Americans about her work and has illustrated numerous books about them A = 2.66 




ii 



9 



McDermott, G. (1974). Arrow to the sun. New York; The Viking Press. 



An adaptation of a Pueblo Indian tale. A young boy sets out to find his father on the ‘Trail of Life*. The wise arrow 
maker made the boy into an arrow and sent him to the sun. The boy passed the trials set before him to prove his father 
was the sun. He returned to Earth to bring his father’s spirit to the ‘World of Men’ . This illustrates the belief of Father 
Sun and Mother Earth that give life to the Pueblo people. McDermott has worked on several books and films 
exploring folklore and mythology. A = 2.21 

Yolen,J. (1990). Sky dogs . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Pub. 

The author uses several legends of the coming of horses to the Blackfeet people to create the story. Sky Dogs. An old 
man tells how he came to be called, “He-who-loves-horses”. As a motherless child of the Piegan, a band of the 
Blackfeet people, a small boy watches large animals, the chief calls ‘Sky Dogs’, bring sick Kutani people into camp. 

He learns to care for the horses from his new Kutani mother. The coming of horses changed the lives of the great 
Piegan people, who became known as the people of many horses. They became the masters of the plains. The old 
man is depicted as having knowledge that he passes on to those younger. His wisdom has value to help his people 
make horses an important part of life. Yolen has published over a hundred books and has won several awards. A = 2.71 

Latino American Stories 

Bunting, E. (1994). A day’s work. New York: Clarion Books. 

A story of the challenges faced by Mexican immigrant families and their supportive extended family network. 
Francisco, a young Mexican-American boy, helps his Spanish speaking Grandfather (Abuelo), find work as a gardener. 
They work together pulling weeds only to discover, Francisco’s lie that they were experienced gardeners did not pay 
off. Abuelo teaches Francisco an important lesson about honesty and hard work which results in steady work for them. 
Vivid watered or illustrations enhance the story line. This story dispels common Latino stereotypes with the message 
of honesty, hard work and generational interdependence. A = 2.85 

Castaneda, O. (1993). Abuela’ s weave. New York: Lee & Low Books, Inc 
Young Esperanza weaves beside Abuela (grandmother) tirelessly. They are preparing to sell their wares at a special 
festival. Abuela has a birthmark on her face that scares people off. Therefore, Esperanza must sell the weavings on 
her own. Abuela stays near to watch over her. Together they help each other. Colorful acrylic illustrations enhance 
the story line. Castaneda writings focus on his birthplace, Guatemala. A = 2.71 

Hurwitz, J. (1993). New shoes for Silvia . New York: Morrow Junior Books 
A package from America brings new red shoes for Silvia, who lives in another America. Grandma says they are as red 




12 



10 



as a watermelon, but they are too big! Silvia uses her imagination to play with her shoes till she is big enough to 
proudly wear them. The passage of time is depicted through Silvia’s mother’s pregnancy. Grandma is depicted as a 
supportive extended family member who lives with them Story provides a vehicle for discussion about family that 
may live far away. Watercolor illustrations enhance the story line. Hurwitz is an award winning author for several 
children’s books and has worked as a children’s librarian for several years in New York City. A = 1.93 

James, B. (1990). The dream stair. New York: Harper Row, Pub. 

A young girl is comforted to sleep by these words of her Grandmother, “This candle keeps you safe in the dark, safe in 
my heart. Go up the stair, go down the stair, and tell me about it in the morning.” She climbs the stairs to the attic in 
her dreams to play with angels and then descends to play in the dark warm basement till morning. The grandmother is 
portrayed as transmitting security and coping skills by a tradition of being ever present through the candle. She is 
available and ready to listen when her granddaughter awakes. The story teaches self-reliance. The author graduated 
from the University of Utah and has published four books. The illustrations reflect a rich southwestern heritage. 

A = 2.25 

Jones, R (1995). Great Aunt Martha. New York: Dutton Children's Books. 

A young girl is not excited that her Great Aunt Martha is coming to visit. She must be quiet so Great Aunt Martha can 
get her rest, until Great Aunt Martha says, “It’s too quiet, let’s have some fun!” The story relates changes in family 
routine that may be unsettling for children, when relatives come to visit. Dispels the stereotype of the elderly being 
boring; it depicts older relatives as being fun. Colorful illustrations successfully depict anticipation, frustration, 
boredom, and joy of the family. Jones is the author of several children’s books. A = 2.6 

Mora, P. (1992). A birthday basket for Tia . New York: Macmillan Pub. Co. 

Cecilia excitedly prepares for Great Aunt Tia’s 90 th birthday. What can she give her? She thinks of all the special 
things she does with Great Aunt Tia and puts together a special gift for her. This story highlights the special 
relationship between a child and an older person. Mora, the author, grew up in El Paso, Texas. She draws on her 
childhood experiences in the Mexican-American Community. A = 2.64 

Schertle, A. (1989). William and Grandpa . New York: Lothrop, Lee, & Shepard Books. 

William discovers at his annual summer visit with Grandpa that he knows the same song William learned at school. 
They also share shadow jumping, star gazing and hot chocolate as William learns he will be as big as Grandpa someday 
and share these things with his grandchildren. The Grandfather is portrayed as sensitive, caring, and as having time to 
play with William The positive sharing of intergenerational relationships is highlighted The author was bom and still 
resides in Los Angeles. She holds a Bachelors degree in Education. A = 2.79 




13 



n 



Williams, V. (1982). A chair for mv mother . New York: Green Willow Books. 



A young girl, her waitress mother, and grandmother live and work together to save money to buy a comfortable chair to 
replace the ones that burned in the fire. A story of family resilience, community support, and love. A positive 
portrayal of a poor single parent/extended family in an urban setting. Williams was bom in California and is a graduate 
of Black Mountain College in North Carolina. A = 2. 77 

African-American Stories 

Buckley, H. (1994). Grandfather and L New York: Lanthrop, Lee & Shepard. 

A small boy tells how he loves to be with his Grandfather because he never hurries. This predictable book highlights 
the gift of time that the elderly give to children. This book provides a positive role model for African American males. 
Buckley is a graduate of Syracuse and Columbia Universities. She teaches writing for children at Syracuse University. 
A =2.79 

DeFelice, C. (1997). Willy’s silly Grandma . New York: Orchard Books. 

Willy thinks his superstitious Grandma is silly until he becomes scared and she is there to comfort him. Validates the 
knowledge of less schooled elders whose primary source of knowledge is what is passed on through the generations. 
Deals with magic and superstition found in some rural culture. Abstract illustrations lend to the feeling of being a part 
of Willy’s imagination. A = 2 

English, K (1996> Big wind coming . Morton Grove, HI: Albert Whitman & Co. 

Sarah Ann lives with her grandparents, parents, and brother on a farm. The family works together to prepare for a big 
hurricane. Grandma reminds them that God controls the storm, all they can do is get ready. Grandma and Grandpa 
will plant new pecan and peach trees as they start to rebuild. Depicts an extended family living together in a rural 
coastal setting. A=2.7$ 

Flournoy, V. (1995). Tanya’s reunion . New York: Dial Books for Young Children. 

Tanya travels with her Grandmother back to the family homestead to get ready for a family reunion. She learns of her 
Grandmother’s life and family history in Virginia, as the family gathers heirlooms from slavery and share cropping to 
tell the family history. Grandma provides reassurance to Tanya in an unfamiliar house. Vivid watercolors artfully 
depict the story. This book is based on the author’s memory of her first visit to a relative’ s farm. Flournoy has 
written several award winning children’s books. A = 2.93 




14 



12 



Howard, E. F. (1991). Aunt Flossie's hats (and crab cakes later). New York: Clarion Books. 

Sarah and Susan love to visit Great Aunt Flossie. Her house is full of wonderful things, especially hatboxes. Aunt 
Flossie tells them a story that happened long ago with each hat they play with . Aunt Flossie makes local history come 
alive and passes on family history to the girly. Vivid oil painting illustrations make the story come alive. Howard is a 
children’s librarian. A trip, when her 98 year old aunt lost her best hat, inspired the story. A = 2.93 
Johnson, A. (1990). When I am old with you. New York: Orchard Books. 

A young boy imagines the fun he will have with is Grandfather when he is old with him. They will go fishing, rock on 
the porch and eat bacon for breakfast; all of their favorite things that they do together now. Vivid watercolor 
illustrations depict the grandfather in a mentoring relationship with the young boy. This book provides a positive role 
model for African American males. This is the author’s third book. A = 2.57 

Johnson, D. (1991). What kind of baby-sitter is this? New York: Macmillian Pub. Co. 

Kevin hates baby-sitters until his Mom leaves him with ‘Aunt Lovey Pritchard’. She watches baseball, collects 
baseball card, and read with Kevin. The story depicts a single parent family with Mother attending school. Vivid 
pictures enhance the story line. Johnson is a freelance author and illustrator. This is her third book. A = 2.8 
Kroll, V. (1995). Sweet Magnolia Watertown, MA: Charlesbridge Pub. 

Denise makes her long awaited visit, to Grandma in the Louisiana bayou. There she helps Grandma, a wildlife 
rehabilitator, heal and set free a baby bird. Important lessons of life are passed on from Grandmother to Denise. Both 
the text and the detailed illustrations are rich with references to southern life and Cajun culture. Grandmother provides 
a positive role model in an uncommon profession. Teaches respect for living things and wonderment about life. A=3 
Pinkney, G. J. (1994). The Sunday outing . New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 

Ernestine loves to listen to her great Aunt Odessa tell stories about Great Uncle Ariah, the trainman Together, they 
love to watch the trains. Ernestine longs to ride a train. Aunt Odessa helps her find a way when kinfolk invite her out 
of town. A story of how family tradition is passed on and a girl’s dream realized through the support of her family. 

The author draws upon her childhood memories for her books. She collaborates with her husband, the illustrator. 

A = 2.43 



ERJC 



15 



13 



Discussion 

When the ‘Ten Items for Analyzing Children’s Books for Sexism and Racism” was used 
to review each of the books, positive portrayals were typically found. The reason the 
books reviewed present positive portrayals could be due to the way they were 
prescreened by the reviewer. The reviewer looked for the presence of an elder role model 
along with quality illustrations. The titles selected were predominantly current (within 
the last ten years), which may indicate an improvement in children’s literature away from 
cultural stereotypes. The Stereotypes Worksheet was developed in 1989 and may need to 
be updated to reflect more current trends and biases. The prescreening along with the 
currency of the Stereotypes Worksheet may contribute to the positive results found. 

The Ageism in Literature Analysis Form was found to have limitations when applying it 
to picture books. Due to the limited nature of picture book stories, and the fact that most 
of the older characters were family members, some of the items were not found to be 
relative to children’s picture books. Another limitation found in applying this tool, is that 
the tool rates self-reliance as high and dependence as low. Many of the books portray 
older and younger family members as being interdependent upon each other. 
Intergenerationally the family members help one another. The elder shares their 
knowledge and skill while the child or other family members give affection, a sense of 
purpose, or their skill to the elder. Interdependence is typically viewed as a family 
strength, yet on this scale it was viewed as a limitation. 

Cultural role models were found in children’ literature for Latinos, African Americans, 




16 



14 



and Native Americans. The availability of this type of literature was most easily found 
for African-Americans. For the purposes of this review, there was a more than adequate 
sample. Books were available, but not as easily found, depicting Latino Americans. 
There were a very limited number of books available depicting Native Americans. Most 
of those found were legends put into print. The author was unable to find books 
depicting contemporary Native Americans, in children’s literature. The search was 
conducted through local libraries and bookstores. This represents a serious gap in 
availability of quality children’s literature depicting Native Americans. 

Conclusions: 

Children’s literature varies in both content and quality. A careful review of literature by 
early childhood professionals is needed to assure an appropriate selection for the 
classroom. This study provides a beginning. 

The author recommends further research be conducted of children’s literature depicting 
Native Americans. This would serve to determine whether the need is to develop quality 
children’s literature depicting Native Americans or whether the lack of availability is due 
to bias or lack of knowledge of those who supply books in geographic areas such as 
librarians, teachers and bookstore owners. Or thirdly, whether legends put into print is a 
culturally appropriate representation of Native Americans and contemporary children’s 
books are not needed. 

The development of quality children’s literature with cultural role models is 
recommended for all three cultural groups identified. However, based upon this study, 
the need is strongest for Native-Americans. It is appropriate to expand the annotated 
bibliography and make it available to early childhood professionals for enhancing the 



curriculum. Children's literature is a powerful tool for shaping children's understanding 
of the world around them. The provision of quality children's literature, with the elderly 
as positive role models in the African American, Latino, and Native American cultures, is 
a means of enhancing the early childhood curriculum to improve literacy for all young 
children. 




18 



16 



References 



Beaty, J. (1994). Picture book storv telling . New York: Harcourt Brace & Co. 

Children's Defense Fund (1996). The State of America's Children Yearbook. 
Washington, DC: Children's Defense Fund. 

Dallman, M. E . & Power, S. (1997). Forever friends: An intergenerational 
program. Young Children, 52 (2), 64-68. 

Decker Collins, N. L. & Schaeffer, M. (1997). Look, listen, and learn to read. 
Young Children 52 (5), 65-68. 

Derman-Sparks, L. & A.B.C. Task Force (1989). Anti-Bias Curriculum: Tools 
for empowering young children. Washington, DC: National Association for the 
Education of Young Children. 

Garcia, E. (1997). The education of Hispanics in early childhood: Of roots and 
wings. Young Children. 52 (3), 5- 14. 

McGuire, S. (1993). Promoting positive attitudes toward aging. Childhood 
Education 69 (4), 204-210. 

Moon, M. &Katz, L. (1996, May). Children's Literacy Initiative . Papers 
presented at the Head Start Education Coordinators Training Meeting, Philadelphia, PA. 

Morrison, J. W. & Rodgers, L. (1996). Being responsive to the needs of 
children from dual heritage backgrounds. Young Children. 52 (1), 29-33. 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: Read With Me: The Use of Cultural Role Models in Children's Literature 



Author(s): Leslie J. 
Corporate Source: 



Couse, MSEd, MSPA 

Publication Date: 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample slicker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 

affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to an Level 2A documents affixed to alt Level 2B documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE ANO 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE. AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY. 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 










£ 


Cp 




<<$ 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 



Level 1 Level 2A Level 2B 



i t t 







Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival 
media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. 



Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination In microfiche and In electronic media 
for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 



Check here for Level 29 release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination In microfiche only 



Documents will be processed as Indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce Is granted, but no box Is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 
here,-* 
please 



§31 



I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above . Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 



Signature: 



Drgan&afoiv^ddfess: / Tetephone: o oici 

Syracuse University, Dept Child &Family Studi(f ^ a ^ 3 ~ 3 ' 



201 Slocum Hall. Syracuse. NY 13244 



Printed Name/Position/Title: 

Leslie J. Couse. Doctoral Student 



j rniKPflm ai 1 hnv <;yH. pHii 5/8/98 



^5-443-2562 



(over) 



ERLC 25th Annual National Head Start Association Conference, Seattle Washington 4/20-25/98 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: KAREN SMITH 

ACQUISITIONS COORDINATOR 
ERIC/EECE 

CHILDREN’S RESEARCH CENTER 
51 GERTY DRIVE 

CHAMPAIGN, ILLINOIS 61820-7469 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 

ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
1100 West Street, 2 nd Floor 
Laurel, Maryland 20707-3598 

Telephone: 301-497-4080 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-953-0263 
e-mail: ericfac@ineted.gov 
WWW: http://ericfac.piccard.csc.com 

y : -088 (Rev. 9/97) 

I lyK EVIOUS VERSIONS OF THIS FORM ARE OBSOLETE. 



