Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, 45{3), 
66-74). 


Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing 

Timothy G. Weih, Ph.D. 

University of Northern Iowa, USA 
2005 


Abstract 

This article describes an investigation with a class of seventh graders to determine what impact 
the study of traditional literature would have on their narrative writing. The classroom teacher 
emphasized the narrative structure of the traditional literature genre by prompting his students to 
respond both orally and in writing with their thoughts about the settings, characters, plot 
development, and themes inherent in Native American Folktales. Following literature 
discussions, the seventh graders developed outlines for their individualized narrative stories 
representing Native American folklore using story maps. After the students developed four story 
maps each, they selected the one they l ik ed the best and developed it into a complete narrative 
story. Qualitative data analysis employing the constant comparative method was employed to 
determine the study outcomes. The study findings and implications for literacy instruction are 
discussed. 

Keywords 

Adolescent Literacy-Identity of Text, Identity of the Reader; Reader Response; Response 
Theory; Critical Literacy; Popular Culture; Cultural Identity; Creative Writing; Narrative 
Writing; Middle School/Level Education; Native American Literature; Culture and Traditional 
Influence in Literature; Qualitative Methodology: Text Structure; Literature Circles; Literature 
Discussion 

Introduction 

Written responses to texts can take many forms (Altieri, 1995; Vacca & Newton, 1995). 
These responses are often viewed as a higher-level interaction with books that reconstructs 
reading images and meaning into personalized thoughts on paper. Student response to literature 
can serve as a springboard for extended writing activities that follow the format or genre 
structure of a written work. Reader’s draw on their concept of narratives when writing stories 
and this concept can be enhanced through teaching practices that influence students to think 
about the structure of the text. 

Research has demonstrated that when readers make connections from their lives to that of 
the characters in a book, reading comprehension is increased (Cochran-Smith, 1984; Sipe, 2000). 
These responses are revealed when the reader takes direct or indirect personal life experiences 
outside the book and applies them to make sense to what is happening in the book during the act 
of reading. 

Philosophical responses are conveyed when the reader writes about his deepest 
convictions on the theme directly suggested by the book. Through an open-ended response to 
literature, a reader can share his values, criticisms, fears, and joys as they relate in a transactional 
response to the book (Rosenblatt, 1995). Louise Rosenblatt described this phenomenon in her 
literary criticism about the evocation of the poem, she wrote, “The poem cannot be equated 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, 45{3), 
66-74). 


solely with either the text or the experience of a reader... What each reader makes of the text is, 
indeed, for him the poem, in the sense that this is his only direct perception of it” (Rosenblatt, 
1978, p. 105). 

The Reader, the Text, The Poem: The Transactional Theory of the Literary Work, by 
Louise Rosenblatt, published in 1978, contributed probably the clearest and most influential 
theoretical framework for “the poem.” She makes it clear that the poem is not something that is 
non-existent unless experienced and that it is not recreated in every experience. She writes: 

The assumption that recognition of the reader’s activity in evoking the poem inevitably 
implies that any reading is as valid as any other. Any such view would of course lead to 
critical chaos. But nothing in my insistence on the reader’s activity necessitates such a 
conclusion, (p. 104-105) 

She argues that the poem refers to the relationship between the reader and the text, and that the 
text is responsible for the guidance of the relationship. 

Variations of text can have an influence on the reader’s response (Altieri, 1996; 

Reissman, 1994; Wi lk inson & Kido, 1997). Research in response theory has resulted in a wealth 
of instructional strategies that invite students to draw on and explore a range of meaning -making 
influences (Karolides, 1997; Wollman-Bonilla & Werchadlo, 1999). Students’ written responses 
to text communicate their understanding of the text and the complexity of their thinking (Jewel 
& Pratt, 1999). Text structure and instructional focus have suggested a relationship in students’ 
responses to literature (Many & Wiseman, 1992). 

This article describes an investigation with a class of seventh graders who listened to 
their teacher read aloud from four Native American folktales. The teacher emphasized the 
narrative structure of the traditional literature genre by asking his students to respond both orally 
and in writing with their thoughts about the settings, characters, plot development, and themes 
inherent in each traditional story. Following literature discussions, the seventh graders developed 
outlines for their own narrative stories about Native Americans using story maps. After the 
students developed four story maps each, they chose the one they liked the best and developed it 
into a complete narrative story. They concluded by sharing their individual stories in small 
groups. 

The purpose of the inquiry was to determine what impact the study of traditional 
literature, the Native American folktales, would have on the seventh graders’ writing. The aim 
was to support the students in writing a well-crafted and rich narrative story. While some 
research has suggested that when students are exposed to many different written genres their 
writing improves, yet, students frequently do not receive the support that would prepare them for 
composing a text type of a specific genre (Eckhoff, 1983; Pappas & Pettegrew, 1998). 

Methods 

The Setting 

The setting for the study was a university laboratory school that served as an attendance 
center for approximately 531 students living within a Midwestern metropolitan area of 
approximately 100,000. The school was chosen because it was representative of the population 
of the surrounding community. From this school, Jon’s (all names are pseudonyms) seventh 
grade classroom was selected for the investigation because it represented a cross section of the 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, 45{3), 
66-74). 


children in the city where the study took place. Jon was interested in being a participant in the 
study, and he was curious to discover what the outcomes of the inquiry would reveal. During the 
study, Jon’s classroom consisted of 12 boys and 9 girls that were from families representing 
several ethnic groups including: 14 Caucasian, 5 African American, and 2 Indian. Of these 
students, two qualified as low socioeconomic status and were also identified as having learning 
disabilities related to reading and writing. One student was identified as being academically 
gifted. Jon’s language arts program was framed around the following units: a mythology unit, 
short story unit, a novel unit on civil rights, a research unit on world cultures, a speech unit 
connected with a state speech contest, and a World War II unit focused on the Holocaust. Jon 
engaged his students in literature circles, individual reading, small group cooperative learning, 
and note taking instruction. He preferred to teach skills and strategies within the context of the 
reading and writing activities that he planned for his students. He implemented a writing process 
in his instruction that engaged students following a pre-writing, draft, revise, edit, and publishing 
sequence. He taught a six-trait writing model that included instruction and assessment. Jon said 
that his students spent about 25% of their time in class writing, and that he also read aloud to his 
students. 

Procedures 

Study activities with the students took place for one hour, two times per week for 6 
weeks in Jon ’s seventh grade classroom. In brief, Jon read aloud to his seventh graders from a 
Native American folktale and invited them to respond orally to the book before, during, and after 
reading. Following the reading and discussion, the students completed a story map for a self- 
created narrative story, identifying the characters, setting, problem, three main events, the 
solution, and a theme or moral. Following this activity, the seventh graders discussed their maps 
together in small groups. The above described procedures were followed for three more folktale 
read alouds. After the students had a total of four self-created story maps, they selected one to 
develop into a complete narrative story. 

The four books chosen for the study were: Coyote: A Trickster Tale from the American 
Southwest (McDermott, 1994), The First Strawberries: A Cherokee Story (Bruchac, 1993), The 
Legend of the Bluebonnet: An old tale of Texas (dePaola, 1983), and Crazy Horse’s Vision 
(Bruchac, 2000). Although Crazy Horse’s Vision could classify as an episodical biography, it 
also holds many thematic elements typically found in folktales such as a quest for identity, a 
display of courage, and sacrifice. These books were chosen because they have well defined 
events; demonstrate character development, clearly described settings, and quality illustrations 
that help to enhance understanding of the text. 

Coyote: A Trickster Tale from the American Southwest (McDermott, 1994) was chosen 
for the first lesson. This book is an adaptation of a Zuni folktale. It is an amusing, uncomplicated 
read aloud, with brilliantly colored, full-page illustrations that add high interest. Coyote, the 
main character, decides he wants to fly with the crows. They humor him, give him feathers, and 
tolerate his off-key singing and out-of-step dancing, until he begins to boast and order them 
about. Then, as coyote struggles in midair, they take back their feathers one-by-one, and he 
plummets to the earth. His tail catches fire, and he roles in the dirt. To this day he is the color of 
dust, and his tail has a burnt, black tip. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, 45{3), 
66-74). 


The story is clear and uncomplicated. It has animals as main characters taking on human 
characteristics, something common in many Native American folktales. It also involves the 
crows as tricksters, another frequently encountered ingredient found in traditional literature. 

The second book chosen for the study was The Legend of the Bluebonnet: An Old Tale of 
Texas (dePaola, 1983). This book is a retelling of an old Comanche folktale that explains how 
the bluebonnet, the state flower of Texas, came to be in existence. It relates the story of She- 
Who-Is-Alone, an orphaned Indian girl raised by her tribe during a time of drought and famine. 
This young girl is the sole remaining member of her family. The other members all died in the 
famine. The tribe calls upon the Shaman to commune with the Great Spirits to divine what it is 
the People must do to regain harmony with nature. The Shaman states that a “great sacrifice” 
needs to be made. She-Who-Is-Alone thinks this directive is meant for her, so she sacrifices her 
most valued possession, her warrior doll, made by her deceased family. Because of her act, the 
Great Spirits bring rain and the drought and famine are ended, and Bluebonnets quickly sprout 
and bloom as a sign of the Great Spirits’ acceptance. 

In addition to possessing the qualities that would help to build comprehension of the 
folktale genre, this book holds the potential to provoke deep, insightful, and emotional responses 
from students. The main character demonstrates unusual sensitivity to the well being of others 
through an incredible selfless act. 

The third book selected for the study was The First Strawberries: A Cherokee Story 
(Bruchac, 1993). A simple, uncomplicated Cherokee folktale about the Sun’s healing of marital 
discord by a gift of ripe strawberries that magically grow at the feet of an angry woman as she 
flees her husband’s harsh words, thus halting her departure long enough for him to catch up and 
make amends. The book has full-page, beautiful illustrations that enhance the meaning from the 
text and also helps to build an understanding of historic Native American culture by depicting 
homes, dress, utensils, and activities. The message of friendship, kindness, and forgiveness holds 
an important message meaningful to both young and older students. 

The fourth and last book chosen for the study was Crazy Ftorse’s Vision (Bruchac, 2000). 
This is a folktale of Crazy Horse’s boyhood. As a youth. Crazy Horse (then known as Curly) 
witnesses U.S. Army soldiers attack his people. Troubled, he embarks on a vision quest and sees 
a figure on horseback riding untouched through a storm of lightening, hail, and bullets. His father 
interprets the vision, telling him that the man on the horse is the man he will become and that he 
is destined to defend his people. His father also tells him that if he keeps nothing for himself, no 
arrow or bullet will hurt him. Because of his vision. Curly received the name of his father, 
Tashunka Witco, which in English is Crazy Horse. 

This book was selected because of its historical significance and the relationship it holds 
to Native American studies in elementary curriculum. Students will admire and appreciate 
Curly’s (Crazy Horse’s) acts of bravery, leadership, and selflessness as a young boy. The story 
line is straight forward and uncomplicated and the full-page illustrations help to enhance the text 
by recreating the action of the story. 

Data Collection 

The study combined multiple methods of data collection to achieve a better 
understanding of the phenomena under investigation and to increase the validity of the findings 
(Maykut & Morehouse, 1994). Study data included videotaped reading, writing, and discussion 
events; student-created story maps and completed narrative stories; and journals from the 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, 45{3), 
66-74). 


students, teacher, and researcher. Specifically, I videotaped each session with the students, asked 
questions from the seventh graders to gain understanding, and recorded observational and 
interpretive notes in a journal. 

Results and Discussion 

Oral and Written Responses to the Literature 

When students are encouraged to respond spontaneously to literature through discussion 
and supported in their response by the teacher, they can come to think of literature as something 
everyone can enjoy and understand (Rosenblatt, 1995). Teachers and students should feel 
comfortable enough to interpret meaning held within literature. The following prompts were 
used to encourage students to talk about their thoughts, feelings, and opinions of the folktales the 
teacher was reading aloud. 

• What are your thoughts about this book? 

• What feelings did you experience while listening to the book? 

• What was your favorite part? 

• What did this book remind you of in your own life? 

• What special meaning or message did the story hold for you? 

• After listening to this book, what ideas do you have for your own story? 

Not only were these prompts meant to stimulate valuable discussion, but also to enhance 
reading comprehension and possibly to help generate creative writing ideas for the seventh 
graders as they discussed the books together. However, when Jon posed these prompts, he was 
met with an uncomfortable silence, and then only a few students offered an oral response. Jon 
reflects upon this classroom experience and reveals some insight into seventh grade student 
behavior in the following data excerpt from his journal. 

The seventh grade students really don ’t like to answer the question about what feelings 
they are experiencing when they heard the story. I picked up on this early and have since 
dropped it from the prompt routine. Seventh graders don ’t seem to want to talk about 
their own personal feelings in such an open public environment. I think they fear the 
negative effects of possible peer interactions. There are some kids in the class who will 
pick on others for being honest about feelings and emotions. The sad truth of this is that 
students at this level will not respond even if they have something to say. 

Rosenblatt (1995) realized this hindrance to open discussion with students when she stated, 
“There is no special formula for giving students the assurance to speak out” (p. 67). This is 
especially true for middle school students who are going through a tumultuous time in their lives 
dealing with changing bodies and emotions, along with added peer awareness and pressure. They 
simply do not want to take any unnecessary risks. Teachers, however, can approach eliciting 
response in a different format, and that is exactly what Jon did. He decided that he needed to 
modify his instruction to accommodate the emotions and behaviors of his seventh grade students. 
He wanted to provide a safe way for them to express their responses to literature. Jon decided to 
ask his students to write their thoughts in a journal instead of speaking them out aloud in front of 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, 45{3), 
66-74). 


the whole class. Asking his students to provide brief written comments about the book allowed 
for Jon’s seventh graders to express their thoughts without risking public exposure. Writing also 
provided a means for students to formalize their responses and to reflect upon their thinking. 
Then, if the students wanted to share their thoughts aloud, they could, with the added support 
that comes from having time to prepare, along with reading what they wrote and not having to 
respond cold, from memory. In a classroom of students, there are frequently those who are more 
comfortable in speaking out while other students are more reluctant to have their voices heard. 

By having students write their responses to literature, all voices have a chance to be heard and 
validated. In the following data excerpt from his journal, Jon describes his thinking that led him 
to encourage his seventh graders to respond to literature through brief, written comments. 

I made some changes for our class reading of Crazy Horse ’s Vision. Today, I wrote the 
discussion prompts on the board prior to reading the story. Then I had the students 
individually write down their answers to these questions. I did this because I have been 
disappointed in the students’ participation in classroom discussion. There are a handful 
of students who do the majority of the talking during discussion. After working with these 
students all year, I know there are some students holding back. I don ’t know if this is due 
to a lack of self-confidence, peer pressure, or interest. What I do know is that there are a 
number of bright students, with good ideas, who are sitting back and letting others do the 
work. 

With this perspective, the strategy of pre -writing [the response prompts] was 
suppose to help the students by giving them time to formulate more complex thoughts and 
description. To my great pleasure this worked. The students wrote in great detail about 
the prompt questions. Because of this, not only did more students volunteer to participate 
[ in whole class discussion ], but I was able to call on students, too. I had confidence that 
because they had time to prepare for the questions, and they were written down in front 
of them, the students would be able to add to the discussion. 

After the students had time to reflect and write their responses to the book, Jon asked if 
anyone would like to share what they wrote. Students who typically had not discussed the 
literature in class spoke up. For example, Derek discussed the theme of generosity in doing 
something for someone else. This possibly could be a central theme that students could develop 
in their own narrative writing. However, sometimes teachers are hesitant to point out a student’s 
good ideas to the class for fear all will take the same path and therefore limiting the range of 
possibilities. Jon discusses this below in a data excerpt from his journal. 

The students seemed to like the story Crazy Horse ’s Vision. They liked the themes of 
bravery, generosity, and selflessness. It was interesting that Derek, a new student who is 
having a lot of difficulty integrating into the class, mentioned that the story had a good 
idea of someone doing something for someone else. I keyed in on this and brought it out 
to the class to give Derek some positive re -enforcement and public success. I don ’t know 
if this will have any other effects on Derek or the other students. I may have “given ” 
them a theme for their story maps. By publicly acknowledging Derek’s idea as good, 
seventh graders seem to pick up on and copy what they believe the teacher wants. In their 
mind this will help guarantee them a good grade — something seventh graders are 
starting to focus on. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, 45{3), 
66-74). 


By encouraging students to write their literature responses, however, it was discovered 
that they were taking the first steps towards developing mature, primary reactions (Rosenblatt, 
1995). Each student wrote a response that was uniquely their own. In a response, the reader does 
not necessarily need to have had identical experiences related to a text, but he or she must have 
experienced some needs, emotions, concepts, some circumstances and relationships, from which 
he or she can draw from in making meaning from the text (Rosenblatt). 

In the following data excerpts of students’ written responses gleaned from their journals, 
evidence can be seen that some of the students were making personal interpretations about the 
book through the lenses of their personal life experiences. In the student responses below, 

Bridget expresses that she was in anticipation along with the main character in waiting for the 
“vision.” Casey relates Crazy Horse’s acts of bravery and courage to present day world leaders in 
relationship to war. Latisha points out the importance of generosity. Joel discusses the civic duty 
one has to his or her community in solving problems. Zach simply states not to give up hope. 
Amber points out that even though Crazy Horse did not follow the advice of the tribal elders and 
his father, he still accomplished receiving a vision. She seems to emphasize her own personal 
desires for independence when she states, “You don’t always have to do things by-the-book.” 
Ryan interprets the special theme to him was one that asks the reader to consider that being 
different from others in some ways can be an advantage rather than a disadvantage. 

Bridget: I thought the story was good overall. The plot was good. 

It also had a strong meaning. I think this is because it is a story of a boy 
that wants to be a good leader and because of the vision quest. 

The most memorable part was when Curly saw his vision. I think it’s 
memorable because it is very powerful and creates a good image. You are 
also waiting for the vision because Curly waited so long. 

The special theme showed that if you want to do something, you should do 
it because it could benefit lots of people. It also shows that there are some 
times when you have to be independent. 

Casey: 7 thought the story was good because it had a very useful theme. I felt that 

if someone or somebody was brave enough to do that [what Crazy Horse 
did] for America, maybe we would not be so ready to go to war. 

The most important part for me was the vision because I was waiting to 
hear about one. I was waiting for one because of the title. 

The theme was about a boy who was unselfish and the rewards that it gave 
him. 

Latisha: The story was very powerful because of the vision. It showed what he was 

going to become, and I thought it was very powerful. 

I had a lot mixed emotions, I was curious when he was about to get the 
vision. I was excited about what he was going to become. 

The most memorable part has to be the vision. That was the main part of 
the story. It was so powerful; it stuck in your mind. 

The special theme maybe to me was you have to be a generous person if 
you want good things to come to you. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, 45{3), 
66-74). 


Joel: The most memorable part was when Curly’s dad told him about Curly’s 

visions. 

The special theme was that you should help your community out with 
leading them to solve problems. 

Zach: 7 think the special theme was not to give up hope. 

Amber: The most memorable part for me was when Crazy Horse got his vision. It 

really got my attention because the description was neat; I also liked the 
colors in the illustrations. 

The special theme was about when Crazy Horse got his vision and his dad 
was mad. I think the message was you don’t always have to do things 
exactly “by the book. ” Because he didn ’t get help from the elders, and he 
still got a vision. 

Ryan: The most memorable part for me was when Curly had his vision because 

you had to listen so you could try to understand what it meant. 

The special theme was that differences could be good because Curly was 
different and he became a great man. 


After reading these responses the seventh graders wrote, Jon thought these were 
reflections and insights that they would not have dared to share openly in class for fear of 
classmate reprisals. In the responses that the students wrote, they pointed out what their 
interpretations were of the text, drawing from individual experiences and present interests, and in 
doing so, they were able to make the text come “alive” in each their own way (Rosenblatt, 1995). 

Writing Process and Discourse 

Following the oral and written responses to each book, students were asked to think of 
their own story to write, and to outline the story using a story map. Students created these story 
maps individually, but did so in small groups, which provided the opportunity for them to 
discuss their ideas with each other. Jon moved from group-to-group answering questions and 
offering support when needed. It is important to note that even though the students could discuss 
their story ideas together, each student developed their own unique narratives. 

The literature discussions and story map creation were considered to be the prewriting 
phase of the writing process. After the students had created four story maps, they selected their 
best or favorite one to develop into a complete narrative story. Following the first drafts of the 
stories, each student read their story to the same small group that they were a member of, and the 
group members offered ideas for clarifications, which lead to revisions. When a student felt that 
his or her story was sufficiently clear and no more revision were needed, they typed the story on 
a computer and checked for spelling and other mechanical errors. For the publishing phase of the 
writing workshop, students were reassigned to different groups and each student read aloud the 
story they had created. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, 45{3), 
66-74). 


Student- Created Narratives 

Prior to examining the student narratives, each Native American folktale that was read to 
the students was analyzed to determine distinguishable patterns in settings, characters, plots, and 
themes. Using the constant comparison method of analysis (Lincoln & Cuba, 1985), the student 
narratives were analyzed to determine patterns that existed across all the literary elements 
identified in the books that held relationships to the student narratives. This analysis (see Table) 
suggested that the many of the seventh graders had developed an internalization of the narrative 
structure or schema for traditional literature as it related to the Native American folktales they 
studied. The data indicated that the opportunity to develop a personal response to the folktales 
through journal writing and small group discussions, empowered students to write stories that 
were reflective of their personal life experiences. The stories revealed their perspectives of the 
issues, concerns, and struggles that many adolescents face today. Because students had the 
opportunity to have their literature responses validated, they felt confident in bringing to their 
writing what applied most clearly to their emotional tensions and perplexities. 

The findings that emerged from the students’ self-created narratives are discussed next 
with each literary element addressed. The seventh graders chose names for their characters that 
were similar, yet different than the books that were read. Some of the names they chose were: 
Little Bear, Small Badger, Selfish One, and Red Claw. The students stated specifically that the 
characters were Native Americans, warriors, chiefs, or spirits. Although the seventh graders 
briefly described some physical features of their main characters, it was most noteworthy how 
they developed their characters’ personalities by describing how they acted or what they l ik ed to 
do. Through character development in the students’ narratives, the problems of their stories took 
shape. The following data excerpt from a student’s story highlights this finding. 

Courage tried to be fearless, but with this fearlessness, was boasting. Courage would 
brag about how he had no fears. He would be mean to all the other boys. The only boy he 
was not mean to was Small Badger. 

The students developed a variety of problems or conflicts that their main characters dealt 
with through their stories, not unl ik e the real-life problems that adolescents face today. The 
problems strongly illuminated the human characteristics of selfishness, stealing, poor self- 
esteem, betrayal, and loneliness. Other story problems portrayed the historic hardships Native 
Americans faced from the forces of nature, such as drought, floods, and fires. The seventh 
graders took the time to carefully develop the problems in their narratives and did not just simply 
state in a few words what the problems were, but instead, intricately developed their problems 
through a series of events and explanations as the plots unfolded. 

The resolutions that the seventh graders developed were introspective, examples 
included: accepting advice from others, learning a lesson, accepting oneself, changing one’s 
attitude, and finding a new identity through a quest. These problems, many times, exposed the 
student behind the writing and the range of personal emotions and feelings seventh graders go 
through and face. I sensed the stories the students were writing sometimes represented their own 
internal struggles and fears. As I read them and reflected upon the student authors, reread the 
written responses they did for the folktales, and watched their behavior during discussions and 
writing, it became more obvious to me that they were projecting themselves into their writing. I 
think the opportunity the students had to respond emotionally and critically to the Native 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, 45{3), *| Q 

66-74). 

American folktales helped to evoke a deeper reader-text relationship that carried into their 
writing. Their writing became a vehicle of self-reflection and revelation. The following data 
excerpts from the students’ stories recounts some of the personal issues these students were 
facing in their lives. 

[Jessica wrote in the conclusion of her folktale]: Shashqua [which means she-who-is- 
alone] would still go to the forest to pray; only now she went and talked to the Spirit of 
Popularity. She would talk to the spirit about who is always being left out. When 
Shashqua died, she became the Spirit of Popularity to help others. 

[Jake, a small boy for his age, wrote at the conclusion of his folktale]: “That’s a great 
idea! ” exclaimed Man of Leadership. “I am terribly sorry about how I only saw your 
body and not your mind! You have saved your village and your people despite your size. 
We are all very grateful. Although I don ’t know how to repay you, but I will give you your 
own horse, my approval for hunting, and the respect of the whole village! ” 

“Thank you!” cried He Who is Small. With that they mounted their horses and 
rode off to hunt. 


Table. Patterns in Seventh Grade Narrative Stories 


Characters 

Settings 

Problems 

Resolutions 

Themes 

Native 

Americans 

Tribes 

Not helping 

Name change 

Generosity 

Chiefs 

Forests 

Selfishness 

Change of 
attitude 

Following rules 

Warriors 

Plains 

Drought 

Accepting advice 
from elders 

Seeking a vision 

Spirits 

Villages 

Not following 
tribal rules 

Accepting 

yourself 

Accepting 

yourself 


U.S. States 

Name quest 

Learning a 
lesson 

Accepting 
differences in 
others 


Woods 

Floods 


Proving yourself 


Rivers 

Loosing trust 


Sacrifice 


Summer time 

Fire 




Winter time 

Finding courage 





Stealing 





Poor self-esteem 





Too small 





Too young 





Controversy 
between tribal 
members 





Being alone 






Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, 45{3), 
66-74). 


Conclusions 

Based on the findings that surfaced from the implementation of the constant comparative 
data analysis, the following conclusions and implications were revealed. The social interaction 
provided by literature discussions served to help build connections between the reading and the 
writing process for the students. Through the literature discussions, the seventh graders 
developed a vocabulary from which they drew from for future discussions and for understanding 
traditional literature, and in this case, folktales. The discussions served as an integral component 
in linking the folktales to the students’ writing. Given the opportunity to discuss their writing in 
small groups helped the seventh graders evaluate, and revise their writing, leading them closer to 
creating well-written narratives and better understandings for a specific genre. When students 
shared ideas for writing, they developed clear thinking for approaching revisions. 

The repeated exposure to the folktales across multiple texts, the opportunity to reflect 
upon the stories, and then extending these experiences into the writing process, deepened the 
seventh graders’ comprehension of the genre. Moreover, the findings indicated that they 
developed an appreciation for the value of folklore as seen reflected into their narratives. 
Studying one genre in depth, helped the seventh graders experience how authors construct texts, 
and since several folktales were studied, to be able to examine relationships across texts within a 
genre. 

Implications for Classroom Practice 

Findings Ifom the study suggested that students’ writing was influenced by the Native 
American folktales that the students studied and responded to during classroom read alouds and 
literature discussions. Student writing indicated that they were able to integrate many of the 
fo lk lore elements into their own narratives. Building from a genre that holds promise for rich, 
literature response can help in the process. As the seventh graders listened and discussed more 
books related to the genre, they were able to examine relationships and see patterns across the 
texts that influenced their narrative writing. This practice will help students develop a better 
understanding for how authors develop texts, and with this knowledge, increased reading 
comprehension and literary interpretation can be nourished. 

Findings from the study indicated that the discussion prompts used to encourage oral and 
written responses were found to be beneficial in helping students form deeper, more meaningful 
reader-text relationships with the Native American folktales. Teachers can influence these 
relationships by knowing when, what, and how to encourage students to respond to a text. 
Although the seventh graders in this present study were reluctant to share orally, whole-class in 
front of their peers, they appreciated the opportunity to write privately an open-ended critical 
response, which they then could choose to share in a small group. When left on their own 
without guidance or instruction, frequently student discussions fall short of being beneficial for 
building reading comprehension and literary interpretation that can be manifested into richly 
written narratives. Once students know how to critically discuss a text or their writing, they can 
do so with confidence and with an evolving knowledge leading them to becoming accomplished 
readers and writers. Moreover, when teachers validate students’ literary criticisms, they help 
students discover their voices or personalities that can be carried over into their writing. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Narrative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, ^5(3), 
66-74). 


The studying and writing of many different genres will benefit students in multiple ways. 
Fo lk lore is a good beginning point because of the potential it holds for evoking vibrant literature 
response among students. It is a genre type that many students are familiar with. Students can 
readily create reader-text relationships to the characters, which are universal and found in many 
cultures. As the findings of this present study suggested, the seventh graders viewed the 
characters as generally recognizable in aspects of their own lives, rather than just characters in a 
story. 

Finally, with instructional focus on drawing from students’ lives and cultures for what 
they can bring to an interpretation of a text, rather than focusing on literal text comprehension, 
teachers can advance reader-text relationships with their students. In addition, when teachers 
combine the practice of using one specific genre for internalizing text structure blended with 
implementing the writing process, the greatest impact upon student writing can be experienced. 

References 

Altieri, J. L. (1995). Pictorial/oral and written responses of first-grade students: Can 
aesthetic growth be measured? Reading Horizons, 55(4), 273-286. 

Altieri, J. L. (1996). Children’s written responses to multicultural texts: A look at aesthetic 

involvement and the focuses of aesthetically complex responses. Reading Research and 
Instruction, 35(3), 237-248. 

Antonacci, & M. Rabinowitz (Eds.), Thinking and Literacy: The mind at work (pp. 283-302). 
Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Cochran- Smith, M. (1984). The making of a reader. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Eckhoff, B. (1983). How reading affects children’s writing. Language Arts, 60(5), 

607-616. 

Jewell, T. A. & Pratt, D. (1999). Eiterature discussions in the primary grades: Children’s 
thoughtful discourse about books and what teachers can do to make it happen. The 
Reading Teacher, 52(8), 842-850. 

Karolides, N. (1997). Reader response in elementary classrooms: Quest and discovery. 

Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Eincoln, Y. S., & Cuba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage 
Publications. 

Many, J. E., & Wiseman, D. E. (1992). The effect of teaching approach on third-grade 
students’ responses to literature. Journal of Reading Behavior, 24(3), 265-287. 

Pappas, C. C., & Pettegrew, B. S. (1998). The role of genre in the 

psycho linguistic guessing game of reading. Language Arts, 75(1), 36-44. 

Reissman, R. C. (1994). Eeaving out to pull in: Using reader response to teach multicultural 
literature. English Journal, 83(2), 20-23. 

Rosenblatt, E. (1978). The reader, the text, the poem. Carbondale, IE: Southern Illinois Press. 
Rosenblatt, E. (1995). Literature as exploration. New York: The Modern Eanguage 
Association of America. 

Sipe, E. R. (2000). The construction of literary understanding by first and second graders in oral 
response to picture storybook read-alouds. Reading Research Quarterly, 35(2), 252-275. 
Vacca, R., & Newton, E. (1995). Responding to literary text. In C. N. Hedley, P. Antonacci, & 
M. Rabinowitz (Eds.), Thinking and literacy: The mind at work (pp. 283-302). Hillside, 
NJ: Erlbaum. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Internalizing Nan'ative Text Structure Impacts Student Writing. Wisconsin State Reading Association Journal, ^5(3), 
66-74). 

Wilkinson, P. A., & Kido, E. (1997). Literature and cultural awareness: Voices from the 
journey. Language Arts, 74(4) 255-265. 

Wollman-Bonilla, J. E., & Werchadlo, B. (1999). Teacher and peer roles in scaffolding first- 
graders’ responses to literature. The Reading Teacher, 52(6), 598-607. 


About the Author 

Timothy G. Weih is a retired elementary teacher who currently is an associate professor teaching 
literacy and literature methods courses to students majoring in elementary education at the 
University of Northern Iowa, USA. 
timothy.weih@uni.edu 


