DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 330 535 



RC 018 091 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



More, Arthur J. 

Learning Styles of Native Americans and Asians. 
13 Aug 90 

22p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Psycholoogy Association (98th , Boston, MA, 
August 13, 1990) . 

Information Analyses (070) — speeches/Conference 
Papers (150) 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Education; * American Indians? * Asian 
Americans; "Cognitive Style; Cultural Influences; 
^Educational Research; Elementary Secondary 
Education; * Learning Modalitias; Literature Reviews; 
^Research Problems 
"Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 



This paper reviews the literature on learning styles 



of Native Americans and Asian-Americans. Four different operational 
definitions of "learning style" or "cognitive style" are presented, 
related terms are examir^d, and inconsistencies of usage in the 
literature are discussed. Noting the great diversity among Native 
American cultures, aspects of Native American learning style are 
described; (1) visual-spatial mode of information processing; (2) 
tendency toward the global end of the global-sequential continuum; 
(3) high levels of field independence? (4) tendency toward the 
imaginal end of the verbal-imaginal continuum; and (5) tendency 
toward reflectiveness on the reflective-compulsive continuum. These 
five aspects are also examined in. the literature on two 
Asian-American cultural groups — Cantonese Chinese (primarily from 
Hong Kong) and South Asians (from India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and 
Bangladesh). This paper finds considerable support for the 
proposition that culture affects learning style. However/ the 
available research has a number of problems: (1) inconsistency in 
operational definitions; (2) lack of comparability among studies; (3) 
possibly inappropriate use of bipolar continua to describe learning 
styles; (4) validity of test instruments across cultures; and (5) 
dearth of cross-cultural studies on aspects other than field 
independence/dependence. This paper contains 83 references. (SV) 



*************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



1 



LEARNING STYLES OF NATIVE AMERICANS AND ASIANS 



U S DEPARTMENT Of EDUCATION 

OWk* of Educational HfWirt n a^d imp/o^mpnt 

EDUCJ^IONAI m SOURCE INFORMATION 
^ CENTFR <ER'C> 



MirtOf cnang** **vr &w i^d* »o <»*p">*e 

Po<ni& trt tie* npm.ons Maiefl »n diX w 
mert do no! nfceMa'i'y w*»*nt nH«t:*' 



Paper presented to 

American Psychological Association 
Boston, August 13, 1990 



Arthur J. More, Ph.D. 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, Canada 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) " 



m 

CO 

o 

CO 
CO 

a 



O 

00 

ERIC 



Culture is learned, but how does culture affect the processes 
by which one learns? How does culture impact on the way one 
perceives, thinks, organizes, reasons, ^tg res anc * retrieves 
information? "Culture is first last and always learned ... [but] 
few people have any notion of how little is really known about the 
microcultural details of how learning proceeds - the implicit 
cultural matrix of learning in different cultures (Hall, 1988, 
22-23) . 

Susan is a member of the Gitksan Indian nation. She is 11. 
I remember her in a grade 5 lesson on government. Her teacher was 
dynamic, warm and responsive. But Susan was really struggling with 
some of the concepts. The night before I sat in her home as her 
Grandmother explained the Potlatch, the Gitksan system of 
government, an extremely complex system. Susan seemed to 
understand. Two nights earlier I listened at a memorial feast as 
an elder spoke about life, death and his spiritual beliefs. Some 
very complex concepts, but Susan seemed to understand; her parents 
also understood at a different level; and her Grandmother seemed to 
understand at a level that only the wisdom of age can bring. 

Susan was learning her culture. And her culture affected the 
processes by which she learned. Susan's culture helped determine 
her world view, her life experiences, the way she learned to learn, 
the way she perceived, organized, reasoned and remembered. 

I think of similar experiences I f ve had with other Native 
Americans. I think of similar, yet different, experiences I've had 
with Asian learners here in North America and in their homeland 
cultures. And I wonder how much culturally-related processing we 
miss as educators? How much do we fail to understand? How much do 
we see as weaknesses rather than strengths? 

This paper examines some of the relationship between culture 
and learning processes, particularly learning styles. The results 
are illustrated in two groups of cultures - Asians and Native 
Americans. 

Introduct ion 

Educators in Ncrth America have long been curious and 
concerned about the varied achievement of ethnic minority students. 
Some minority groups, on the average, achieve well above majority 



2 



2 



students in some areas, while some achieve far below (Gibson, 1987 j 
Ogbu, 1987). There is abundant evidence of low achievement and 
high drop out rates (Coleman, Campbell, Hobson, McPartland, Mood, 
Winfield & York, 1966, Jacob & Jordan, 1987), and the cross-over 
effect in which achievement begins to plummet at about age ten 
(Hall, 1989). 

Achievement problems of minority students have at least three 
major sources. One is bias and discrimination in the education 
systems (Grant, 1975; Gutman & Bar-Tal, 1982). Another is related 
to economics (Coleman et al., 1966; Vernon, Jackson & Messick, 
1988), The third is cultural, related to cultural differences and 
"secondary cultural discontinuity" (Jacob & Jordan, 1987, p. 259). 
"If we are going to equalize the opportunities we provide, we must 
consider culture" (Bennett, 1986, p. 4). This paper relates to the 
third source, but elements of the first two sources are involved 
too. 

In the remainder of the paper I examine the meaning of 
"learning styles" and related terms. Then I discuss application of 
learning styles to understanding cultural differences in the way 
students learn. Finally, I apply this to Native American and Asian 
learners. A premise throughout is that culture does affect 
learning styles, but there are not clear learning style patterns or 
profiles that are unique to each cultural group. 

I have made some rather arbitrary limitations to keep the size 
of the paper manageable, One limitation is to emphasize cognitive 
and perceptual processes at the expense of social emotional 
factors, and I tend to emphasize formal learning situations. I 
have also avoided a search for pervasive personality traits and 
focussed on components of processing. Finally, I have emphasized 
North American learners with some reference to their homeland 
cultures. 

What is Learning Sty le 

Picture for a moment six year old John doing the Block Design 
task on the WISOR in which he must reproduce, with colored blocks, 
a design illustrated for him on a card. His many eye movements 
back and forth from design to blocks may indicate he is copying the 
design, section by section, part by part. Picture a second boy, 
Alec, who looks only occasionally at the original design and 
concentrates his eye movements on the block design he is building. 
John may be using an analytic-sequential learning style; Alec may 
be using a global learning style. 

Picture Susan in the Grade 5 class on government. Susan may 
be using imagery to understand the concepts, while her teacher may 
be concentrating on verbal processes. 

The concept of learning style has its bases in individual 
differences and in cognitive psychology (Keefe, 1990). The term 
customarily refers to the usual cognitive processes by which a 
learner perceives, codes organizes and remembers (Keefe, 1987; 
Schmeck, 1988). Learning styles may also refer to characteristics 
of the physical environment in which an individual learns (e.g. 



9 

ERLC 



3 



3 



Wauters et al., 1989) or solely to sensory modality (Kaulback, 
1984) . 

Cognitive style is usually defined in a manner very similar to 
the definition of learning styles (Messick, 1984 t p. 61; Shipman & 
Shipman, 1985, p. 229) or used interchangeably (Kyllonen & Shute, 
1989) , except when it refers specifically to Witkin's notion of 
field independence (Witkin & Goodenough, 1977). Generally learning 
style is used with learning taskr and cognitive style with broader 
cognitive task. 

The connotation of "style" is inconsistent throughout the 
literature, sometimes even within the same study (e.g., Kaulback, 

1984) . Style is used operationally in at least four different 
ways: 

1. the usual (or characteristic) cognitive or learning process 
(e.g., Messick, 1984). 

2. the preferred (i.e., preference stated by subject) process 
(e.g., Kolb, 1985). 

3. the strongest (similar to a cognitive ability ) process (e.g., 
Ramirez & Castaneda, 1974), or 

a specific cognitive or learning process (e.g., Kirby, et al,, 
1988). 

There is often an implicit assumption that the process for 
which an individual states a preference is the same as the 
individual's usual process, and is also the same as the strongest 
process. There is nothing in the literature to support such an 
assumption. Conceptually the meanings are different, aloeit 
related. The second boy, Alec, in the example above: may usually 
use a global process in to Block design; he may say he prefers a 
global process (although not likely for 6 year old) ; he may have a 
strength in using a global process; or we may refer to the specific 
global process he used in this situation. It will become 
apparent from the selection of studies in this paper I see utility 
in use of the first, and last two operational definitions. But I 
have serious concerns about measures which uses stated preference, 
especially for children (see also Davidman, 1981). 

In this paper, learning style and cognitive style are used 
interchangeably to refer to the usual cognitive process {cs) 
employed by an individual in performing a cognitive task, unless 
otherwise stated, (e.g., to distinguish between a usual learning 
style and a learning style strength ) . 

From the information processing perspective , learning sty] es 
are governed by executive control processes (as in Gagne, 1974), or 
Sternberg's (1988) metacomponents. The processes are considered to 
be procedural knowledge stored in long term memory (as in Anderson, 

1985) . The distinction between styles and strategies is both vague 
and varied. Usually the former is more general, the latter more 
specific to tasks and domains (Messick, 1984, p. 61-2). The two 
boys in the example could be described as using two different 
styles or two different strategies. 

The distinction between cognitive abilities and styles is more 
important and more clear, "styles are propensities rather than 
abilities ; they are ways of directing the intellect that an 



9 

ERIC 



4 



individual finds comfortable" (Sternberg, 1990, p. 366) • ftote 
however that cognitive abilities and learning style strengths are 
conceptually similar, and their measurement often overlaps. There 
are two differences in their measure. The first is usually in the 
perspective of the investigator (e.g., a cloze test can be used as 
a measure of verbal ability, or as a global learning style 
strength). The second difference is usually that abilities are 
much broader categories (e.g., verbal ability, numerical ability) 
whereas learning and cognitive styles are narrower (e.g., global 
style strength, visual style strength), 

I have emphasized the meaning of learning style strengths 
because it can be very useful in understanding learning processes, 
provided it is not confused with usual learning styles. It is as 
important for educators to know the learning style strengths of an 
individual, as it is for them to know the usual learning styles. 
In research, the terra can help to conceptualize strength of a 
cognitive process without the usual associations that the term 
ability has with intelligence and achievement. 

Learning styles are usually bipolar continua (Tiedeman, 1989), 
although there is no conceptual requirement to be bipolar. The 
bipolar requirement is useful in educational applications, but in 
the research it is unnecessary and often unsupportable at the 
present. Examples of bipolar learning styles suggested by Kyllonen 
& Shute (1989) include: holistic processing - serial processing, 
active/impulsive orientation - passive/reflective orientation, top 
down - bottom up, spatial representation - verbal representation. 
Witkin* s field dependence - field independence (Witkin & 
Goodenough, 1977) is the most researched measure of cognitive 
style. It is dismissed by some as a measure of ability (e.g., 
Kyllonen & Shute, 1989) because it is operationally defined as a 
learning style strength not as a usual style. Descriptions and 
critiques of various types of learning and cognitive styles are 
found in Messick (1976), More (1987), Shipman & Shipman (1989) and 
Tiedeman (1989). 

One problematic feature of learning style and cognitive style 
research is the claim of one all-pervasive style, almost a 
personality trait, that applies across all dimensions of human 
functioning. Witkin claims that one's position of the field 
independent - dependent continuum is consistent across perceptual, 
intellectual, social and emotional domains for an individual 
(Witkin & Goodenough, 19775 . The Kaufmans believed that the 
simultaneous-sequential dimension was pervasive enough to base 
their intelligence batter on it (Kaufman & Kaufman, 1983). Schmeck 
felt that "all cognitive styles can be encompassed by one broad 
inclusive dimension 11 (1988, p. 327). In my opinion, this sort of 
claim is not supportable by the literature, nor it necessary. 

Learning Styles and Culture 

Let us return to the original question. How does culture 
affect the processes by which one learns? What of the two boys, 
described above doing the Block Design task of the WISC-R? If John 
(analytic style) is Anglo and Alec is Native American (global 
style) , is culture one of the factors in their learning style 



5 



5 



selection? This could be the case (More, 1984). If they both 
received the same score, do they have the same ability with "Block 
Design" even though they appeared to use different processes? 
Indeed, should their scores even be compared when they appear to 
have used different processes? 

Investigations of relationships between learning and culture 
are not new (Cole, Jay, Click & Sharp, 1971) and they continue 
unabated. However, the emphasis is on ability not process (e.g., 
Irvine & Berry, 1988; Jacob & Jordan, 1987). Perhaps Sternberg's 
(1990) advice needs to be applied specifically to the cultural 
arena: "Styles of thinking and learning are every bit as important 
as levels of ability and we ignore students thinking style at our 
own peril - and theirs" (p. 367) . 

There is certainly evidence of relationships between culture 
and learning style. However, definition and measurement of those 
relationships are problematic . Relationships between culture and 
cognitive style, as conceptualized by Witkin, have been studied 
extensively (e.g., Berry, 1976). Some consistencies have emerged 
for various cultural groups including Mexican- Americans , 
Native -American, Blacks, and Jewish Americans (Vernon, et al., 
L988) . But considerable wi thin-group variation requires very 
uduUious interpretation of the results. Furthermore, there are 
major measurement problems: the measure is almost always 
restricted to a perceptual task and it is a measure of proficiency 
or strength of processing, not a measure of usual or characteristic 
processing. 

Qualitative observations of learners in their own cultural 
setting suggest a strong link between culture and learning style 
(Swisher & Deyhle, 1989; Cooper, 1980). Banks focused on minority 
groups in the U.S., especially Black Americans, He reported that 
some researchers "have found that -ethnicity has a powerful effect 
on behavior related to learning" (1988, p. 461). Anderson also 
focused on Black Americans. He concluded that cultural aspects of 
cognitive/learning style, as "cultural assets", were important to 
more effective educational service delivery (1988, p. 8). 

The experimental anthropological work of Cole and others (Cole 
et al., 1971; Cole & Means, 1981) demonstrates relationships 
between culture and how people think. Their use of cognitive task 
analyses comes very close to learning styles analysis. 

One approach to studying relationships between culture and 
learning styles is to analyze patterns of mental abilities in 
different cultures. The "patterns of abilities hypothesis" 
postulates that "members of different cultural groups will 
typically develop different mental abilities or, more likely, that 
they will develop the same abilities but to different degrees" 
(Vernon et al., 1988, p. 208). It is the relative strengths of the 
various abilities (cognitive styles?) within a particular cultural 
category, that is the focus of interpretation. Most of the 
abilities tested in North America are very broad (e.g., verbal 
knowledge, memory, number, reasoning) and do not lend themselves to 
a learning style/cognitive style interpretation. Measures of very 
specific abilities could be useful in investigating culture ~ 
learning styles relationships. Results from this approach, which 



6 

ERIC 



6 



indicates learning style strength , are not equivalent to results 
which indicate usual learning styles. However, both types of 
results will help to understand culture - learning style 
relationships. In any event, "it would be premature to offer a 
definitive statement regarding cultural influences on patterns of 
abilities" (Vernon et al.» 1988, p. 229), let alone on learning 
style strengths. 

Native American Learning Styles 

One of the difficulties in studying learning styles of Native 
Americans is the great diversity among their various cultures. The 
cultures of the Haida, the Malecite, the Navajo and the Creek are 
very different. Even greater variety has been introduced by the 
impact of non-indigenous cultures. Consequently, the discussion 
below must be interpreted in the context of significant 
inter-cultural differences among Native American cultures, as well 
as intra-cultural differences and individual differences within 
cultures. 

Visual-spatial 

One of the most common generalizations about Native American 
information processing is in visual strength, visual spatial 
strength and usual visual mode (Swisher & Deyhle, 1989). Visual 
and visual-perceptual strengths are reported among Canadian Indians 
and Inuit (McArthur, 1968) , among Alaskan Eskimos (Kleinfeld, 
1973), the Kwakiutl (Rohmer, 1965) and the Pueblo (John Steiner & 
Ostereigh, 1975). Reports of visual mode as a usual style are 
reported among the Navajo (John, 1972) and Alaskan Eskimos 
(Kleinfeld, 1973). 

Many studies of Native American studies have shown superior 
Block Design sub-scale scores on the WISC-R . Whether this shows a 
spatial strength (Kaufman, 1979) or simultaneous (global, holistic) 
strength (Kaufman & Kaufman, 1983), is unclear. 

Global-Sequential 

The global-sequential dimension is becoming increasingly 
prominent (Schroeck, 1988, p. 329; Kirby, 1984; Keefe, 1990). I 
have round it particularly useful with Native American students, 
although I have used the learning style strength rather than usual 
learning style conceptualization (More, 1988). Global processing 
emphasizes the whole, tends to use scanning, makes greater use of 
overviews and meaningful context. Sequential processing emphasizes 
processing the parts in a temporal order, and breaking down into 
component parts, analysis. A whole language approach to learning 
to read may be more effective with a more global learner; a 
phonetic approach may be more effective with a more sequential 
learner. 

A tendency toward global style strength over sequential for 
Native Americans compared to Non Natives has been demonstrated in a 
number of studies (More, 1988; Bryant, 1986; Krywaniuk, 1974) , If 
it can be argued that Bannatyne 1 s categorization "Spatial ability 11 
is significantly a global measure and "Sequencing ability" a 



9 

ERLC 



7 



7 



sequential measure, then ve have additional indications of 
global -sequential learning style strengths among Native Americans, 
McShane & Plas (1982) recategorized WISC-R scores using Bannatyne 
for a group of Ojibwa an Sioux children* They found Spatial scores 
were indeed higher than Sequential scores. Kaufman and Kaufman 
(1983, p. 152-154), using the K-ABC , reported Simultaneous scores 
were greater than Sequential scores for a group of Navajo children 
but not with a group of more assimilated Sioux children [The K-ABC 
has been significantly discredited as a maasure of intelligence 
(Steinberg, 1984) . However the criticisms do not appear to affect 
the legitimacy of using some of the subscales as measures of 
global-sequential processing for groups] . 

Although the global- sequential continuum has been studied as 
a learning style strength for Native Americans , there is very 
little reported on it as a usual learning style. 

The major problem with the use of the global-sequential 
continuum is in its clarity as a construct, and therefore in its 
measurement. Is global processing an internal, holistic and 
simultaneous process, or is it a more external sensory-perceptual 
process, or is it two related processes? Is sequential processing 
the same as analytic processing? Are they two processes which 
always occur together? Is global processing properly 
conceptualized as being at opposite ends of a continuum or should 
they be considered separately? These questions need to be answered 
more clearly for more effective investigation to be possible. 

Field dependence - Field Independence 

A significant degree of research has been done using the field 
dependence- field independence continuum and Native Americans. 
Field independence is the cl<3p.ree to which an individual can 
separate a figure from comf 'ex background, restructure information 
to solve problems, distance oneself during social interaction 
(Berry, van de Koppel &. Annis, 1988). 

Berry (1976) found high levels of field independence for 
hunting-gathering societies and industrial societies, He found 
high levels of field dependence for agricultural societies. For 
example, he found Native Americans who were migratory hunters and 
gatherers in north western Canada to be more field independent than 
the Native American in that area who relied on agriculture (Berry & 
Annis, 1974). In general, studies have found Native Americans to 
be relatively strong on field independence (Swisher & Dayhle, 1989; 
Dinges & Hollenbeck, 1978; Weitz, 1971). This may be related to 
the hunter-gatherer nature of most traditional Native American 
cultures. Or it may be related to the combination of strong native 
American visual-spatial abilities, and the usual measurement of 
field independence with visual perceptual tasks such as the Rod and 
Frame on the Embedded Figures Test (Denny, 1988; Swisler & Deyhle, 
1989). Or it is likely a combination of both. 

There are two significant problems with the use of the field 
independence - dependence cont inuum and its use wi th Native 
American cultural groups. The main problem is confusion between 
the underlying construct and its measure. The underlying construct 
is degree of psychological differentiation across perception, 



o 

ERIC 



s 



8 

higher level cognitive processing, social interaction and affect* 
But it Is usually measured only with a perceptual task. Is the 
construct "exaggerated** (Vernon, 1972 , p. 366) far beyond its 
importance? A second problem is that, while it does discriminate 
between agricultural and industrial societies, it does not 
discriminate in a useful manner between industrial and 
hunter-gatherer societies. This limits its usefulness in 
understanding cultural differences between Native American and 
European cultures (Denny, 1988). 

Verbal -Imaginal 

Another continuum on which Native American learning styles can 
be investigated is verbal- imaginal. The use of imagery as a tool 
for understanding highly complex concepts was an important part of 
learning in many traditional Native American cultures (Tafoya, 
1982; John, 1972). Systems of legends are an excellent example of 
such usage. The explanations of Susan* s Grandmother and the elder, 
in ray example above, included many images. These were not just 
visual images. Some were aural images, others were olefactory. 
Some images were very abstract, not directly related to any of the 
senses • 

Observations of Susan, and informal interviews with Native 
Americans of many ages and many tribes, have led me to suggest a 
verbal -imaginal continuum of learning style. The imaginal end may 
be more than visual coding for long term memory as in Faivio*s 
(1971) work. It may enable a deeper level of processing, 
especially in the use of analogies. It may be related to global 
processing or it may facilitate it. But when I try to understand 
the image behind the killer whale or the eagle, as Susan listened 
to a legend, I realize that it is much more than simple visual 
imaginal coding taking place. There seems to be a type of abstract 
processing taking place that is qualitatively different from that 
which is possible from the verbal label "killer whale'*. This is 
conjecture at this point. But it appears to be a direction worth 
pursuing. 

Reflective - Trial/Error/Feedback 

The reflective - impulsive continuum is a more commonly used 
cognitive style continuum. A more impulsive learner responds more 
quickly and usually has a higher error rate: the reflective 
learner responds more slowly and usually has a 3ower error rate 
(Messer, 1976). 

Reflectiveness is often reported as an important aspect of 
many Native American cultures. Furthermore, bas^d on reports of 
the way many Native American children learn to learn (e.g., Swisher 
&. Deyhle, 1989), one would expect to find greater reflectivity. 
Study of this continuum as a learning style, is confounded by the 
problem of self-confidence. As a result of the cultural dissonance 
between home and school, many Native American .students show low 
self-confidence in school (e.g., Bruneau, 1985). A student who has 
low self-confidence in school is likely to reflect longer before 
replying to a question, regardless of cultural background. 



ERLC 



9 



9 



There is an inconsistency between the expectation and the 
research results ♦ The one study of Native American subjects in the 
literature failed to find significant differences between Native 
American and Non Native children (More, 1984) . 

As I have tried to understand this inconsistency I reviewed my 
interviews with Native American elders. This led me to 
conceptualize the continuum as Reflective - Trial/Error/Feedback 
(or TEF) . The Reflective end of the continuum is related to 
traditional learning. It can be described as watch-them-do (e.g., 
learning to make a fishnet), listen-then-do (e.g., learning values 
through teachings of an elder), or think-then-do (e.g., thinking 
through a response carefully before speaking). The term 
Trial/Error/Feedback is used rather than Impulsive to more clearly 
illustrate the process that occurs if this is to be an effective 
learning process. TEF learning involves the learner attempting a 
verbal response, knowing there will be some errors, and 
successively refining the response on the basis of feedback. 

Concern about the contrast between traditional learning styles 
of many Native Americans and contemporary classroom practice has 
been raised frequently enough to warrant further study of this 
approach to learning styles. 

Modality 

At one time modality preference and learning style were 
understood as synonymous by many people working in Special 
Education. The meaning of learning style has broadened. But the 
modality use and modality strength remain important in working with 
Native American learners. This topic has already been covered 
under the visual-spatial heading. The evidence indicates that 
Native Americans generally use the visual mode more frequently and 
more effectively in relation to the aural mode compared to Non 
Native learners (Kaulback, 1984). 

Asian Learning Styles 

The variety of Asian cultures is almost overwhelming. It is 
not the purpose of this section to imply they are the same. 
Certainly students from Asian cultures have some similarities of 
experience in North American schools - bias and discrimination, 
often assumed to be culturally similar because of perceived 
physical similarities, seen as similar because of perceived 
reputation for relatively high achievement especially in math and 
science. But even these similarities disappear upon closer 
examination. 

In this paper, I look *t only two Asian cultural groups - 
Cantonese Chinese (primarily rrom Hong Kong) and South Asians 1 . 
They were not chosen to imply that they represent all other Asian 
cultures. They were chosen because they are two of the largest 
groups of Asian North Americans, their cultures are very different, 
and their number is rapidly increasing as a result of immigration 
patterns. 



10 



10 



Cantonese Chinese Learning Styles 

The learning styles research on Cantonese students in Hong 
Kong and in North America, is sparse by comparison to the Native 
American literature (e.g., Gardner, 1986). There is some 
literature on achievement and abilities which has a bearing on 
learning styles (Chan & Vernon, 1988; Vernon et al., 1988). There 
is also some anthropological literature (e.g., Guthrie, 1985) which 
serves as useful background but is not discussed here. 

Yu and Bain (1985) studied field independence-dependence, and 
conceptual style using the Sigel Cognitive Style Test (Sigel f 1976) 
and Vygotsky Blocks (Ghuman, 1975). Their subjects were 8-11 year 
old Chinese and Chinese-English children in Hong Kong f as well as 
Chinese-English and Anglo children in urban Alberta in Canada. 
They found that the Chinese md bicultural children in both Hong 
Kong and Canada scored significantly higher on field independence 
than the Anglo children. They did not find significant differences 
on conceptual style between the groups. Correlations between 
cognitive style and conceptual style were statistically significant 
but very low, the highest correlation was 0.16 (Yu & Bain, p. 
140). 

The results confirm other findings of higher field 
independence among Chinese subjects (see also Enright, 1987; 
Hansen, 1984) in both Hong Kong and North America. The low 
correlational results "raise doubts concerning the claim of unity 
of the perceptual and conceptual stylistic behaviors" (Yu & Bain, 
1985, p. 140). 

The results of Gardner's (1986) construct validity study of 
the K-ABC have application to the global-sequential continuum. Her 
subjects were Cantonese, English and Punjabi speaking third graders 
in Vancouver and born in Canada. The Cantonese scored much higher 
on Simultaneous (Global) than Sequencing processing. However a 
confirmatory factor analysis, while supporting the 
Simultaneous/ Sequential factor structure for English and Punjabi 
students, failed to support the model for the Cantonese students. 
Exploratory factor analysis supported a two factor, 
rote-memory/reasoning structure. Examiners also noticed that "the 
number of Cantonese appeared to remember the [Spatial Memory] 
pictures in a set sequence usually moving from left to right" 
(Gardner, 1986, p. 141). The high Simultaneous score came 
primarily from the Triangles subtest (which had a high Simultaneous 
factor loading) , and Spatial Memory (which had a very low 
Simultaneous loading, but a high Sequential loading). The low 
Sequential score came primarily from the Hand movements subtest 
(which had a low Sequential loading) . In other words the Spatial 
Memory subtest seemed to be processed sequentially, rather than 
simultaneously as the model predicts, and processing style for Hand 
movements was unclear. 

Gardner's results raise serious questions about the use of the 
K-ABC as a measure of intelligence especially across cultures. It 
also a reminder of the problem of construct validity in 
cross-cultural measurement. 

However , there are some useful applications of the subscale 
aside from the application to intelligence testing. The high 
Cantonese scores on the Triangles (the highest Simultaneous 
loading) and the much lower scores on the Number Recall subtest 



11 



(the highest Sequential loading), support the conclusion that the 
Cantonese group was much stronger in Simultaneous (Global) 
processing then Sequential compared to the English and Punjabi 
children* 

Studies by Flaugher & Rock (1982) and Vernon (1984) reported 
that Chinese (language not given) students tend to have stronger 
visual-spatial skills. This may be the reason for the high 
Simultaneous scores. 

The learning styles information in this section, so far, 
relate to learning styles strength rather than usual learning 
styles. There is a dearth of literature on usual learning styles 
for Chinese learners. However, some additional information on 
Chinese learning style strengths can be gleaned from research on 
patterns of abilities. 

If the emphasis is on patterns of ability within cultures, 
reasonable hypotheses about the processing styles behind those 
patterns can be generated. For example, Lesser (1976) developed 
differential ability profiles for grade one Jewish, Chinese, Black 
& Puerto Rican children in New York. He then used these profiles 
to predict cultjral groupings from Grade 6 ability data on the same 
children. In grade 1 he was able to predict cultural group 
correctly on 56% of the children (66% of the Chinese) . Using the 
same profiles he correctly predicted 58% on the Grade 6 abilities 
(75% for Chinese). The Chinese profile was to score slightly below 
the mean on Verbal, and above the mean on Reasoning, Number and 
Space. A task analysis of the items in his ability measures could 
produce hypotheses of the usual and/or stronger learning styles 
which might produce this profile. 

South Asian Learning Styles 

One must be cautious in considering South Asian cultures 
because of the vast differences within the sub-continent. 
Language, religion, caste and geography are but four of the factors 
which are related to the huge variations (Vernon, 1987; Sinha, 
1979). 

Vyas ( 1988) studied the field independence-dependence of 
Gujarati boys in Gujarat, Britain ard the U.S. He also included 
English middle-class and working class boys in Britain. The 
Gujarati boys in Britain and the U.S. scored significantly higher 
on field independence than the Gujarati boys in India but still 
lower than the English speaking boys in Britain. This indicates a 
trend from field dependence to greater field independence as the 
boys were assimilated into their new cultures. 

Vyas also concluded "that influences on field dependence are 
more eraic (culture-specific) than etic (universal cross-cultures) 11 
(Vyas, 1988 p. 145). In other words cultural influence is not as 
great as influences within a culture in determining field 
independence of a learner. 

Gardner (1986) found thai, her sample of Punjabi-Canadian 
children scored slightly higher on the Sequential scale than the 
Simultaneous (Global) scale of the K-ABC. The confirmatory factor 
analysis supported the two-factor structure of the K-ABC for 
Punjabi children although the Hand Movements (a sequential task) 



9 

ERLC 



12 



12 

subscale had little effect on either factor. To the extent that 
sequential processing and field dependence are similar, Gardner's 
results in North American corroborate those of Vyas in India and 
Britain. Note that the cultural roots of Gardner's subjects were 
in Punjab, whereas Vyas 1 subjects were from Gujarat - two very 
different cultures. 

There is considerable literature on cognitive styles and 
abilities within India as they relate to caste, poverty and 
urban-rural differences (Das, 1988; Sinha, 1979), Some of these 
studies demonstrate differences between cultures and culture-like 
groups within India. Sinha (1978) altered the Embedded Figures 
Test (EFT) by associating stories with the perceptual disembedding 
task, because he the EFT tasks appeared meaningless to Indian 
subjects . He found that urban subjects scored higher on field 
independence than rural, schooled scored higher than non -schooled. 

Das and Khurana (1988) studied cas"e ; SES, and effect of 
malnutrition on cognitive processes. Caste is no longei legal in 
India but its effects are still apparent (p. 488-490) . He found 
that high and low caste urban children did not differ on 
Simultaneous task performance level. But higher caste children 
scored higher on tasks which were significantly Sequential. One of 
the Simultaneous tasks, Raven's Progressive matrices , is "often 
regarded as an adequate test of nonverbal intelligence" and the 
processing measured by the Sequential measures, especially 
decoding, "is crucial to early stages of reading (p. 496). The 
authors discussed the opportunity of higher caste children to 
develop their Sequential processing skills in the home environment 
and used this to discuss the lower achievement level of many lower 
caste children. 

The low SES, and malnutrition studies showed that these 
factors adversely affect cognitive development in young children 
(Rao, 1979, cited in Sinha, 1988). However similar studies showed 
that the "disadvantaged had an edge over the middle class in three 
out of four dimensions" of creativity (Kaul, 1981, cited in Sinha, 
1988). 

The Indian studies, though few, show some interesting 
results. They tend to show Indian students as higher in field 
dependence than non-Indians. But, more interesting, they 
demonstrate that factors other than culture have a significant 
(possibly greater) effect on learning styles. 

Conclusions and Discussion 

We return again to the original question: How does culture 
affect the process by which one learns? How does Susan's culture 
affect her usual learning style and her learning style strengths ? 
How do the cultures of John and Alec affect the processes they use 
to do Block Design task? 

There is considerable support for the proposition that culture 
does affect the processes by which one learns. The research on 
field independence-dependence (e.g. , Berry, 1976) , on the 
relationships between learning at home and at school (e.g., Swisher 
and Dehyle, 1989), on modality (e.g., Kaulback, 1984) on patterns 
of abilities (e.g., Vernon et al., 1988) and on various bipolar 



9 

ERIC 



13 

continua (e.g. , Messick, 1976; More, 1984) demonstrate that 
relationships exist. 

The nature and direction of the relationships are not clear. 
There are serious problems in understanding, defining and measuring 
the constructs involved. A great deal of the research has been 
limited to one construct, psychological differentiation (field 
independence), and to perceptual measures of it. Few studies have 
used comparable samples. 

Inconsistency in the operational definition between usual 
learning style and learning style strength is common. In many 
studies, learning style is deferred as the usual process but 
measured as process strength . Yet it is the combination of the two 
that holds greatest promise for research and application. The 
notion of learning style strength can be conceptualized without the 
connotations that come from its relationship to intelligence. 
Usual learning style can be measured through direct observation 
rather than stated preference. Studies can be developed using both 
learning style strength and usual learning style as dependent 
variables. This would provide a potent source of meaningful 
research results. 

The use of bipolar continue to describe learning styles is 
popular and useful in an educational setting. But it unnecessarily 
complicates the research. At this point it is more useful to 
define and develop appropriate measures of the processes, 
separately, for each end of each continua. Once the frequency and 
strengths of each process can be measured, then the question of 
bipolar ity can be investigated. 

As in all cross-cultural research, one encounters the problem 
of different implications for different cultures, for the same 
learning task. If the differences imply different cognitive 
processes then we are measuring that which we want to measure. But 
if the differences come from other sources (for example, 
differences in motivation to find the one correct response for a 
Japanese person compared to a South Asian person) there is serious 
validity problem (see Irvine, Schoeman and Prinsloo, 1988 for a 
more complete discussion). 

There is a dearth of cr oss-cul tual studies of 
cognitive/ learning styles other than field independence- 
dependence. Higher level cognitive processes in particular, need 
more investigation. This is not a simple task even within one 
culture. But the potential for understanding human cognitive 
functioning makes the effort worthwhile. 

A major application of learning styles is in education 
especially in a cross-cultural setting. A four step model can be 
used. 

1. Identify learning styles of individuals. 

2. Match teaching styles to stronger learning styles for 
difficult, important learning tasks. 

3. Strengthen weaker learning styles, since some tasks require a 
particular style. 

4 . Help students learn to select appropriate learning styles , 
since appropriateness depends on both the learner and the 
task (More, 1987). 

In summary, it appears that culture does affect the learning 
styles of Susan, John, and Alec (examples above) , although it 



9 

ERLC 



14 



does not completely determine their learning styles* The topic is 
a direction well worth pursuing in research and program 
development. But for *.ww, educators working with Susan, John or 
Alec will have to rely more on professional judgement and 
experience than on the results of research. 



Footnotes 

1 South Asia refers to the Indian sub-continent and includes 
India, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Bengal & Bangladesh. It seems to be 
the most commonly accepted term for the region. 



15 



15 



References 

Ackerman, P.L., Sternberg, R.J., & Glaser, R. (Eds.), Learning and 
individual differences: Advances in theory and research . New 
York: W.H. Freeman. 

Anderson, J. A. (1988). Cognitive styles and multicultural 
populations. Journal of Teacher Education , 39(1), 2-9. 

Anderson, J.R. (1985). Cognitive psychology and its implications , 
second edition. New York: W.H. Freeman. 

Banks, J. A. Ethnicity, class, cognitive and motivational styles: 
Research and teaching implications. Journal of Negro Education , 
57(A), 452-66. 

Bennett, C.I. (1986). Comprehensive multicultural education: 
Theory and practice . Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Berry, J.W. (1976). Human ecology and cognitive style: 
Comparative studies in psychological adaptation . New York: 
Sage-Hals tead. 

Berry, J.W. & Annis, R.C. (1974). Ecology, culture and 
psychological differentiation. International Journal of 
Psychology , 9, 173-193. 

Berry, J.W. , van de Koppel, J.M.H. &. Annis, R.C. (1988). A 
comparative study of cognitive style among Biaka pygmies and 
Bangadu villagers. In J.W. Berry, S.H. Irvine, E.B. Hunt 
(Eds.) Indigenous Cognition . Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff. 

Bruneau, O.J. Self concept: A comparison -jf Native American and 
Anglo preschoolers. Psychology in the Schools , 22(4), 378-79. 

Bryant, H.W. U986) . An investigation into the effectiveness of 
two strategy training approaches on the reading achievement of 
grade one Native Indian children. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation: Vancouver: University of British Columbia. 

Chan, J.W.C. &. Vernon, P.E. (1988). Individual differences among 
the peoples of China. In S.H. Irvine & J.W. Berry (Eds.), Human 
abilities in cultural context . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 



ERIC 



16 



16 

Cole, M. & Means, B. (1931). Comparative studies of how people 
think . Cambridge: Havard University Press. 

Cole, M. , Gay, J., Glic* t J. A. & Sharp, D.W. (1971). The cultural 
context of learning and thinking . New York: Basic Books. 

Coleman, J.S., Campbell, E.Q. , Hobson, C.J., McPartland, J., Mood, 
A.M., Weinfeld, F.D., & York, R.L. (1966). Equality of 
educational opportunity . U.S. Department of Health , Education 
and Welfare. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. 

Cooper, G, (1980). Different ways of thinking, Minority Education , 
2(5), 1-4. 

Das, J. P. & Khurana, A.K. (19tf8). Caste and cognitive process. In 
S.H. Irvine & J.W. Berry (Eds.). Human abilities in cultural 
context . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Davidraan, L. (1981). Learning style: The myth, the panacea, the 
wisdom. Phi Delta Kappan , 62(3), 641-645. 

Denny, J. P. (1988). Contextualization and differentiation in cross 
cultural cognition. In J.W. Berry, S.H. Irvine & E.B. Hunt 
(Eds . ) . Indigenous cognition: Functioning in cultural context . 
Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff. 

Dinges, N.G. & Hollenbeck, A.R. ( 1978), Field 
dependence- independence in Navajo children. International 
Journal of Psychology . 13 , 215-220. 

Enright, D.S. Cognitive style and first language background in 
secnd language test performance. TESOL Quarterly , 21 , 565-9. 

Flaugher, R.L. , & Roch, D.A. (1977). Patterns of ability factors 
among four ethnic groups (Research Memorandum No. 7).. Princeton, 
NJ: Educational Testing Service. 

Gagne, R.M. (1974) . Essentials of learning for instruction . 
Hinsdale, IL: Dryden Press. 

Gardner, J. (1986). Construct validity of the K-ABC for Cantonese, 
English and Punjabi speaking Canadian children. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation. Vancouver: University of British 
Columbia. 

Ghuraan, P. A. (1975) . The cultural context of thinking . Windsor: 
National Foundation for Educational Research. 

Gibson, M.A. (1987). The school performance of immigrant 
minorities: A comparative view. Anthropology & Education 
Quarterly . 18(4) f 262-275, 

Grant , C . A . ( 1975) . Racism in school and society. Education 
Leadership , 33(3) f 184-188. 



9 

ERLC 



17 



17 



Guthman, J., & Bar~Tal, D. (1982)* Stereotyping perceptions of 
teachers. American Educational Research Journal , 19(4) , 
519-5 3. 

Guthrie, G.P. £1985) • A school divided: An ethnography of 
bilinRual education in a Chinese community . Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaura. 

Hall, E.T. (1989). Unstated features of the cultural context of 
learning* The Educational Forum , 54(1), 21-34. 

Hansen, L. (1984). Field dependence- independence and language 
testing: Evidence from six Pacific island cultures. TE50L 
Quarterly , 18, 311-324. 

Irvine , S .H. & Berry, J .W. (Eds . ) ( 1988) . Human abilities in 
cultural context . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Irvine, S.H. , Schoeman, A, and Prinsloo, W. (1988) . Putting 
cognitive theory to the test; group testing reassessed using 
the cross-cultural method. In G.V. Verroa & C. Bagley (Eds.) 
Cross-cultural studies of personality, attitudes and cognition . 
New York: St. Martin* s Press. 

Jacob, E. , & Jordan, C. (Eds.) (1987). Theme issue: Explaining 
the school performance of minority students. Anthropology & 
Education Quarterly , 18(4) . 

John, V.P. (1972). Styles of learning - styles of teaching: 
Reflections on the education of Navajo children. In C. Cazden, 
D. Hymes & V.P. Johns (Eds.) Functions of language in the 
classroom . New York: Teachers College Press. 

John-Steiner , V.P. & Osterreich, H. (1975). Learning styles among 
Pueblo children. Unpublished manuscript. Albuquerque, NM; 
Department of Educational Foundations , University of New 
Mexico. 

Kaufman, A.S. (1979). Intelligence testing with the WISC-R . New 
York: Wiley & Sons. 

Kaufman, A.S. & Kaufman, N.L. (1983), Kaufman assessment battery 
for children: Interpretive Manual , Circle Pines, MN: America 
Guidance Service. 

Kaulback, B. (1984). Styles of learning among Native children. 
Canadian Journal of Native Education , , 27-37. 

Keefe, J.W. (1987). Learning style: Theory and^practice . Reston, 
VA: National Association of Secondary School Principals. 

Keefe, J.W. (1990) . Learning style: Where are we going? 
Momentum . 21(1), 44-48. 

K 4 rby, J.R. (1984). Cognitive strategies and educational 
performance . New York: Academic. 



18 



18 

Kirby, J.R., Moore, P.J., & Schofield, N.J. (1988). Verbal and 
visual learning styles. Contemporary Educational Psychology , 
13(2), 169-184. 

Kleinfeld, J.S. (1979). Intellectual strenghts in culturally 
different groups: An Eskimo illustration. Review of 
Educational Research , 43, 341-359. 

Kolb, D.A. (1985). Learning style inventory . Boston: McBea & 
Co. 

Xyllonen, P.C., & Shute, V.J. (1989). A taxonomy of learning 
skills. In P.J. Ackerman, R.J. Sternberg & R. Glaser (Eds.) 
Learning and Individual Differences . New York: Freeman and 
Co. 

Lesser, G.S. (1976). Cultural differences in learning and thinking 
styles. In S. Messick (Ed.), Individuality in learning: 

Implications of cognitive styles an d cr eativity for human 

development . San Francisco: Jcssey-Bass. 

McShane, D. & Berry, J.W. (1988). Native North Americans: India 
and Inuit abilities. In S.H. Irvine &. J.W. Berry (Eds.), Human 
abilities in cultural context . Cambridge. Cambridge University 
Press. 

Messer, S.B. (1976). Reflect ion- Irapulsivity: A review. 
Psychological Bulletin . 83(6), 1026-1052. 

Messick, S. (1976). Personality consistencies in cognition and 
creativity. In S. Messick (Ed.) Individuality in learning . 
San Francisco: Josey-Bass. 

MacArthur, R.S. (1968). Some differential abilities of Northern 
Canadian Native youth. International Journal of Psychology , 3, 
43-51. 

McShane, D.A. & Plas, J.M. (1982). Weschler scale performance of 
American Indian children. Psychology in the schools , 19. 

Messick, S. (1976). Personality consistencies in cognition and 
creativity. In S. Messick, (Ed.) Individuality in learning . 
San Francisco: Josey-Bass. 

More, A.J. (1984). Okanagan Nicola Indian quality of education 
study . Penticton, Canada: Okanagan Indian Learning Institute. 

More, A.J. (1987). Native Indian learning styles: A review for 
researchers and teachers. Journal of American Indian Education , 
26(2), 17-29. 

More, A.J. (1988). Educator attitudes, curriculum, student 
achievement and learning styles. In M. Napoleon, Lillooet area 



ERIC 



19 



19 

Indian education study , Lillooet, B.C.: Lillooet Educatioa 
Research Board. 

Ogbu, J.U. (1987), Variability in minority school performance: A 
problem in search of an explanation. Anthropology & Education 
Quarterly . 18(4) , 312-334. 

Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes . New York: 
Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 

Pask, G. (1988). Learning strategies, teaching strategies and 
conceptual or learning style. In R.R. Schmeck (Ed.) Learning 
strategies and learning styles . New York: Plenum Press. 

Ramirez, M. , & Castaneda, A. (1974). Cultural democracy , 
bicognitive development, and education . New York: Academic 
Press. 

Renzulli, J.S. , & Smith, L.H. (1978) . The Learning Styles 
inventory: A measure of student preference for instructional 
techniques . Mansfield Centre, CT; Creative Learning Press. 

Rohner, R.P. (1965). Factors influencing the academic performance 
of Kwakiutl children in Canada. Comparative Education Review , 
9, 331-340. 

Schmeck, R.R. (Ed.) (1988). Learning strategies and learning 
styles . New York: Plenum Press. 

Shipraan, S., & Shipman, V.C. (1985). Cognitive styles. Some 
conceptual, methodological and applied issues. Review of 
Research in Education , 12, 229-291. 

Sigel, I.E. (1976). Sigel Cognitive Style Test , rev' sod edition, 
Detroit: Merrill Palmer Institute. 

Sinha, D. (1978). Story-pictorial EFT: a culturally appropriate 
test for perceptual disembedding. Indian Journal of 
Psycholog y. 

Sinha, D. (1979). Cognitive and psychomotor skills in India: A 
review of research. Journal of Cross Cultural Psychology , 
10(3), 324-355. 

Snow, R.E. (1989). Aptitude treatment irteraction as a framework 
for research on individual differences in learning . In P . L . 
Ackerraan, R.J. Sternberg & R. Glaser (Eds. ) Learning and 
individual differences. New York: W.H. Freeman. 

Sternberg, R.J. (1984) . The Kaufman Assessment Battery for 
Children : An information processing analysis and critique. 
Journal of Special Education , 18,(3), 269-279. 



ERIC 



20 



Sternberg, R.J. (1988). A triarchic view of intelligence in 
cross-cultural perspective. In S.H. Irvine, & J.W. Berry (Eds.) 
Human abilities in cultural contact , Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Sternberg, R.J. (1990). Thinking Styles: Keys to understanding 
student performance. Phi Delta Kappan , 71, 366-371. 

Swisher, K. & Deyhle, D. (1989). The styles of learning are 
different, but the teaching is just the same: Suggestions for 
teachers of American Indian youth. Journal of American Indian 
Education , Special Issue, August 1989, 1-14. 

Tafoya, T. (1982). Coyote eyes: Native cognition styles. 
Journal of American Indian Education , 21(2) , 21-33. 

Tiedemann, I. (1989). Measures of cognitive styles: A critical 
review. Educational Psychologist . 24(3), 261-275. 

Vernon, P. A. , Jackson, D.N., & Messick, S. (1988). Cultural 
influences on patterns of abilities in North America. In S.H. 
Irvine, & J.W. Berry, 'Eds.), Human abilities in cultural 
context . Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 208-231. 

Vernon, P.E. (1969). Intelligence and cultural environment . 
London : Me t huen . 

Vernon, P.E. (1984). Abilities and achievements of ethnic groups 
in Canada with special reference to Canadian natives and 
Orientals. In R. Samuda, J. Berry &. M. Laferriere (Eds.), 
Multiculturalism in Canada: Social and educational 
perspectives . Toronto: Allyn & Bacon. 

Vernon, P.P.. (1987). Cognitive and motivational differences 
between Asian and other societies. In S.H. Irvine & S.E. 
Newstead (Eds.), Intelligence and Cognition . Dordrecht Martinus 
Nijhoff. 

Vyas, H. (1988). Education and cognitive styles: A case study of 
Gujerti children in Britain, eastern United States and India. 
In C. Bagley & G. Verma (Eds.) Multicultural childhood: 
Education ethniciV-y and cognitive styles . Hampshire, England: 
Gower Publishing. 

Wauters, J.K., Bruce, J.M. , Black, D.R. , & Hocker, P.N. (1989). 
Learning Styles: A study of Alaska Native and Non-Native 
students. Journal of American Indian Education , Special Issue, 
August, 1989, 53-62. 

Weitz, J. (1971). Cultural change and field dependence in two 
Native Canadian linguistic farailes. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation. Ottawa: University of Ottawa. 

Williams, D.G. (1986). Simultaneous and sequential processing, 
reading and neurological maturation of Native Indian (Tsimshian) 



91 



21 



children, Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Vancouver: 
University of British Columbia. 

Witkin, H.A., & Goodenough, D.R. (1977), Field dependence and 
interpersonal behavior* Psychological Bulletin , .84(1), 
661-689. 



Yu, A. & Bain, B. (1985)* Language, social class and cognitive 
style; A comparative study of unilingual & bilingual education 
in Hong Kong and Alberta . Hong Kong : Hong Kong Teachers 1 
Association. 



22 



