DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 399 990 



JC 960 582 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Susskind, Tamar Y. 

Opportunities and Challenges: Bridging the Two-Year 
Four-Year College Gap. 

Aug 96 

14p.; Paper presented at ’’Articulation from 2- to 
4-Year Colleges: Is It an Allowed or Forbidden 
Transition?” a symposium sponsored by Oakland 
Community College (Auburn Hills, MI, August 4-8, 
1996) . 

Viewpoints (Opinion/Position Papers, Essays, etc.) 
(120) — Speeches /Conference Papers (150) 

MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

^Articulation (Education) ; College Planning; College 
School Cooperation; ’‘'College Transfer Students; 
Community Colleges; ’’^Educational Cooperation; 
Educational Mobility; Higher Education; 
Intercollegiate Cooperation; Program Improvement; 
’’^Transfer Policy; ’’^Transfer Programs; Two Year 
Coll eges 



ABSTRACT 

Community colleges have been criticized with respect 
to both the low numbers of students who transfer to four-year 
institutions and the inadequate preparation of the students who do 
transfer. However, there is no uniform method for calculating 
transfer students and the data that do exist on their performance 
indicate that they do as well as native students. Clearly, 
articulation between two- an four-year colleges is about more than 
the numbers of students transferring; it involves admission, 
exclusion, readmission, counseling, curriculum planning, and course 
and credit evaluation. Differences in academic cultures and attitudes 
between two” and four-year institutions and their faculty do create 
barriers for two-year college transfer students, while establishing 
transfer criteria and the authority for transfer decisions are also 
problems. Three styles of articulation agreements currently operate: 
formal and legal policies, state-system policies, and voluntary 
agreements among institutions. As part of an effort to examine 
articulation practices and problems and investigate the feasibility 
of an approval service for two-year college chemistry transfer 
programs, the American Chemical Society's Committee on Education 
sponsored a conference on two-year college programs in November 1995. 
While the 15 participants decided that such a service would be too 
expensive, they did develop recommendations for improving 
articulation related to developing a literature base, promoting a 
consensus on articulation among all concerned parties, and 
establishing mechanisms to promote collegiality and trust. A chart of 
proposed data elements for improving the articulation of chemistry 
programs is appended. (TGl) 



Vc * Vc Vc Vc * * * * y? * * * * * * * * Vc * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Vc * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 

Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* f rom the or iginal document . 

* * * * * ?V * * ?V Vf Vc * ?V * * * * * * * * * Vc 'k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k kkkk k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k kk 



Opportunities and Chaiienges: Bridging the Two-Year 

Four-Year Coiiege Gap 



Written By 

Tamar Y. Susskind 
Oakland Community College 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Paper presented at “Articulation from 2- to 4- Year Colleges; Is It an Allowed or 
Forbidden Transition?” a symposium sponsored by Oakland Community College 

(Auburn Hills, Ml, August 4-8, 1996). 






U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Ottice o» Educational Research and improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
recetved from the person or organization 
Originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 



e Points of view or opinions stated m this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy 



‘ PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

T.Y, Sus skind 



TO THE educational RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



“Articulation from Two- to Four- Year Colleges: Is It an Allowed or Forbidden 
Transition?” (Symposium Title) 

*>■ 

Opportunities and Chaiienges: Bridging the T\fvo-Year Four-Year Coiiege 
Gap 

Tamar Y Susskind, Oakland Community College, 2900 Featherstone Road 
Auburn Hills, Ml 48326-2854 

At Bucknell’s ‘94 BCCE, Margot Schumm and Dudley Herron organized a symposium 
entitled, “Is an Associate Degree Detrimental to an Academic Future?” The 
symposium was stimulated by an editorial that appeared in the January ‘93 issue of 
the Journal of Chemical Education, which contained these remarks; 

“There is a real concern, which has been strongly voiced by many four-year 
college science faculty, that bachelor’s students who start at community colleges may 
experience a lesser quality of education, in terms of instruction, expectation levels and 
facilities, than that generally provided in four-year institutions. If there are deficits in 
the community college students’ experience, these must be made up in four-year 
institutions.” 

The editor of the Journal based his comments on the results of a Ford Foundation 
study, which claimed that among the states reviewed (California, Florida, Illinois, 
Indiana, and Wisconsin) those that had the least reliance on community colleges 
appeared to have had better success in students earning the baccalaureate degree. 
The conclusion drawn was that if a baccalaureate degree is important for students, 
they should begin their studies at a four-year campus. 




1 



Community colleges have been suspected, if not accused, of doing an inadequate job 
with their transfer students. They are constantly having to defend their transfer 
effectiveness when there are no reliable data. There appears to be no consistent way 
of counting transfers. Patterns of student flow have never been linear; they swirl. 
Students drop in and out of community colleges and universities; they take courses 
concurrently at both types of institutions, and they transfer frequently from one to 
another. Some start as freshmen at the university, drop out to attend a community 
college and subsequently return; some take summer courses at community colleges; 
some attend a community college and do not enroll in the university until several years 
later; some transfer from the community college to the university in midyear; and some 
who have advanced degrees start a new career with courses at the community 
college. All these permutations affect the data sets. In some reports none of these 
students would be considered community college transfers; in others all of them 
would. Why are the data so incomplete? There are no incentives to collect them. In 
addition to their being difficult to collect, state funds are allocated on the basis of 
student enrollment independent of when they leave and where they go. 

Transfer rates vary dramatically from state to state. In Florida, which has a well- 
articulated system, 42% of all the undergraduates in public universities have 
previously attended community colleges; In Kansas only 17% of the undergraduates in 
state universities are transfers. Significant variations among institutions in the same 
state exist; for example, the campuses of California State University receive ten times 
the number of transfers as the campuses of the Univ. of California. 

Can one estimate the number of community college transfer students nationwide? An 
educated guess would be that out of the approximately 350,000 two-yr. college 




2 



graduates nationwide who are awarded AA and AS degrees annually, approximately 

275.000 transfer directly to a university. There are probably another 300,000 to 

400.000 transfers who do not complete a two-year associate degree program. This 
would give us around 625,000 transfers per year out of a total community college 
student population of 5 million (12-13 %). If these figures appear low; consider the 
number of community college students enrolled in current interest courses, 
occupational programs, remedial courses, non-credit educational activities, and the 
number of returning students who have advanced degrees. If we subtract these 
populations from the 5 million, we are left with 1.7 million students whose primary 
reason for attending the community college is to transfer to a baccalaureate-granting 
institution. The transfer rate then increases dramatically to 36%. 

Although the absolute number of transferring students has increased in recent years 
because of expanding populations, the percentage of students who transfer to senior 
institutions has declined when compared with the increased percentage of students 
who enroll in courses that lead to immediate employment, job-enhancement skills, or 
who take courses for personal interest. The mission of the community college is not 
designed primarily for transfer to the baccalaureate granting institution. If it were, then 
the community college is a disaster by design. It draws many poorly prepared 
students and encourages part-time commuters. Its students view the institution as 
being readily accessible for dropping in and out without penalty. This pattern of ad hoc 
attendance seems to fit their needs and purposes. For many community college 
students, especially those who work, those who come from lower socio economic 
classes and those who are minorities, the choice is not between the community 
college and a senior institution; it is between the community college and nothing. It is 
reasonable to expect that on the whole, students who begin their collegiate studies in 



community colleges are more likely to drop out or, if they go on to the baccalaureate, to 
take longer in achieving it. However, the conclusions that critics draw are simply not 
true with respect to the transferring students’ preparation for higher learning. 

The story of transfer is a happy one. Data indicate that most community college 
students who go on to the four-year colleges and universities do quite well. There is 
an initial transfer shock, with the students’ grade point average generally dropping 
slightly in their first term after transfer. Most of them persist on to the baccalaureate, 
and by the time they achieve it, their records are not much different from those who 
began at 4-year institutions. Recent studies show that students who transfer to 
universities with a large number of credits or with an associate degree tend to do 
better than those who transfer with only a few credits; furthermore, they perform as well 
as native students. A Spring ‘95 study by a team of researchers at the University of 
Illinois at Chicago .and at Pennsylvania State University concluded that “at least 
during the first year of attendance, the cognitive impacts of two-year colleges may be 
indistinguishable from those of four-year institutions that enroll similar students." The 
study investigated cognitive impacts of five 2-year (280 students) and six 4-year 
colleges (531 students) drawn from all sections of the United States. Controlling for 
individual precollege ability, there was general parity between 2-yr. and 4-yr. college 
students on end-of -freshman year reading comprehension, mathematics, critical 
thinking, and composite achievement. 

Clearly, articulation is not only about the numbers who transfer or how long it takes a 
student to obtain the baccalaureate degree. It is about the movement of students - and 
their academic credits - from one institution to another: from H.S. to college; from two- 
year colleges to universities and vice versa. Articulation involves admission. 




4 



exclusion, readmission, counseling, curriculum planning, and course and credit 
evaluation. Ideally, articulation should provide the transfer student an academic fit with 
minimal duplication of studies and with no “loss of credits”. The process presumes that 
the transfer student from the 2-yr. college is prepared for upper-division studies. 

Ideally, the transfer function also serves to establish the academic validity and 
credibility of the transferring institution as a legitimate partner in providing education 
for the transfer student. But, in reality, it hasn’t worked that way. Barriers exist, which 
have more to do with differences (real or perceived) in academic cultures and attitudes 
between two-and four-year colleges and faculty than anything else, including: 

- Division-based 2-yr. colleges vs. discipline-based 4-yr colleges. 

-Teaching emphasis in 2-yr. colleges vs. research emphasis in 4-yr. colleges. 

- Accessibility and low-cost tuition at 2-yr. colleges vs. standards and higher cost 
tuition at 4-yr. colleges. 

- A broad a mission at 2-yr. colleges vs. a focussed mission at 4-yr. colleges. 

-Non traditional, working, commuting students at 2-yr colleges vs. full-time, 

residential traditional student at 4-yr. colleges. 

-Realistic & practical emphases at a 2-yr. college vs. learning for its own sake at 
4-yr. colleges. 

These cultural differences often lead to non communication, competition, and 
suspicion. Establishing the criteria for transfer and who shall have the ultimate 
authority to make decisions on transfer are problems to begin with. Until recently 
articulation with 4-year institutions has been largely one-way; a series of policies and 
procedures, called articulation agreements, prescribed by senior institutions. These 
agreements provided the structural framework for the process. 




5 



Today, there are three styles of articulation agreements that operate in our fifty states; 
formal and legal policies; state-system policies, in which the state tends to be the 
coiTtrolling agency; and voluntary agreements among institutions, whose main 
features are cooperation and negotiation rather than unilateral declaration or 
legislative fiat. 

Most states have some type of articulation policy, many of which are merely guidelines 
(e.g., Missouri, Iowa, Michigan); others act 9 s state mandates (e.g., Nevada, Florida). 
Florida, for example, has a state legislated system of common course numbers and 
common transcripts for all public community colleges and universities. Other states 
including California, have central offices to reinforce articulation agreements among 
institutions. However their statewide agreements are so weak that the only useful 
transfer arrangements are those negotiated among sets of institutions. The statewide 
agreements negotiated in New York’s CUNY(City University of New York) provides for 
64 credits toward a baccalaureate program upon transfer. However, the mandated 
acceptance of these credits is not intended to prevent senior colleges from 
establishing requirements and prerequisites for discipline majors. Even with t|^e best- 
mandated agreements, there are loopholes. Students may be guaranteed admission 
to the university in general, but not to specific programs. Maryland's system is quite 
progressive. It accepts all students who have successfully completed the AA degree 
or 56 hours of credit with at least an overall 2.0 average. In oversubscribed programs, 
they provide equal treatment for native and transfer students, with the possibility of 
appeal when there are differences in interpretation. 

Regardless of the presence or absence of state mandates, numerous colleges 
develop articulation agreements with nearby universities. However, more than half the 




6 



institutions (both 2-yr. and 4-yr.) have reported no such agreements in force. More 
than two-thirds of the senior colleges indicate that they would not accept the associate 
degree as evidence that a student has had appropriate lower-division preparation. 
Instead, they review students’ prior course work and grades individually, awarding 
credit toward the baccalaureate only for courses that meet certain unspecified 
specifications. 

On November 3-5, 1995 the American Chemical Society’s Committee on Education 
(SOCED) sponsored an Invitational Conference on two-year college transfer 
programs. It was the latest step in a progression of SOCED activities initiated a 
decade ago focusing on two-year colleges. This invitational was to examine 
articulation practices and problems and investigate the feasibility of an ACS approval 
service for two-year college chemistry transfer programs. The approval service could 
be modeled on the approval service for two-year college chemical technology 
programs, which began as a pilot project in 1990. It was clear to all the 15 invited 
participants, who represented two- and four-year colleges, research universities, 
predominantly minority institutions, SOCED, the Chemical Technology Program 
Approval Service (CTPAS), the College Chemistry Consultants (C 3 S), the ACS 
Committee on Professional Training (CPT), and experts in articulation, that 
implementing such a service would be too expensive, too intricate an operation, and 
would not be the most effective action taken at this time. With this established, the 
focus of the invitational conference became articulation. 

The conferees discussed the many aspects of articulation from the both two- and four- 
year college perspectives and developed the following recommendations to heighten 
articulation effectiveness. Recommendations ranged from increasing the awareness 




7 



in the chemistry community and elsewhere about the articulation issues to developing 
shareholders in the articulation process within the college communities. 



RECOMMENDATIONS: 

1. That ACS catalyze thinking about articulation and develop a literature 
base to reach the pertinent sectors by: 

* publicizing these recommendations in the ACS Education Division web 
site and in various ACS publications (e.g., 2YCq Newsletter, CHED Newsletter, 
Chemunity News, Journal of Chemical Education, ACSESS, Chemical & Engineering 
News, and local section newsletters.) 

* extending the news of ACS actions in articulation to a broader educational 
community through such publications as The Chronicle of Higher Education. 

* publishing a monograph on articulation issues and problem-solving 
strategies, which the AACC (American Assoc of Community Colleges) may undertake. 

• developing an appropriate statement about articulation that the ACS 
government relations department can use for policy makers on both state and 
federal levels. 

2. That ACS build shareholders in articulation and develop a dialogue 
among all parties whose central concern is for the student by 

• organizing series of forums and panels that involve leaders in articulation to 
identify case studies and model articulation programs, obtain innovative 
ideas about productive practices, build regional support, and emphasize the 
significance of articulation. 

• holding forums at ACS national and regional meetings, e.g., Two-Year College 




8 



Chemistry Conferences and DivCHED’s Chemical Education biennial conferences. 



• expanding the forums to other regional and national organizations (e.g., 
American Association of Community Colleges). 

* identifying people who could be added to the local sections speakers bureau 
to validate the importance of articulation. 



3. That ACS develop a consensus on articulation and establish 
mechanisms to promote coiiegiaiity, mutual respect and trust by 

* encouraging allocation of institutional and government resources (e.g., time 
and monies) for collaborative activities between two- and four-year institutions 
including joint research, seminars, course development, teaching and meetings 

on articulation. 

At such meetings curriculum, academic standards and other requirements for 
transfer students could be discussed. 

At some colleges, community college faculty and deans sat at accreditation 
teams for four-year campuses, and vice-versa, in order to insure courses compatibility. 

Shared academic advising can be worked out with nearby state universities 
where most transfers go. 

There needs to be an ongoing process of consultation, monitoring, and review 
of agreements. 

It is known that wherever a university and the community colleges in its region 
work together closely, transfer flourishes. In some cases the university’s upper division 
may have more transfers than native freshmen. Arizona State Univ. and the Univ. of 
MA at Boston serve as examples to this pattern. 

• identifying model faculty exchange programs between four- and two-year 
institutions. 



• recognizing and rewarding those involved in faculty-facujty interactions. 



collaborations and articulation. 



• developing articulation expertise among the ACS College Chemistry 
Consultants and publicizing to administrators and chemistry faculty that ACS can 
provide a service that will assist them in improving articulation and developing 
articulation agreements. 

• examining the feasibility of developing a guideline for those schools approved 
by the ACS Committee on Professional Training that focuses on their interactions with 
two-year colleges. (For example, when a four-year college’s enrollment depends on 
20% transfer students, accountability for the baccalaureate-granting institution to have 
formalized relationships with its feeder schools could be established via a guideline). 

• conducting a comprehensive survey of chemical education in two-year 
colleges and establishing a data base of information to facilitate articulation and to 
develop mutual learning goals among two- and four-year colleges and universities. 

This recommendation is very important in terms of establishing the facts. Community 
colleges have relied far too much on the anecdotal. If there is a two-year college story 
to be told, it needs to be told effectively with hard data. 



10 




12 



Proposed Data Elements to Facilitate Articulation 
for a Baseline Study of Chemistry Education 

in Two-Year Colleges 



A. Course Equivalency 



B. Resources 



• course objective 

• topics covered (sequence) 

• structure 

- hours 

- credit 
-lab 

• prerequisites 

• evaluation 

- grade distribution 

• research component 

• legal limits/restrictions 

C. Faculty 



• department size 

• technical support 

• secretarial support 

• facilities 

- Instruments 

- multimedia 

- cyberspace - student, 

faculty, internet/www 

• distance learning 

• funding 



D. Students 



credentials 

teaching load 

part-time/full-time 

temporary/permanent 

professional development opportunity 

professional scholarship 

expectations/rewards 



• part-time/full-time 

• demographics 

• time/hours to graduation 

• retention 

• class size 

• performance - native & 

transfer 

• status of transfer student 

- simple transfer 

- co-enroll 

- swirling 

- when transfer 

• requirements for transfer 

• % transfer students 

• long-term effects on 

transfer & native 




11 



13 



In conclusion, I see the problems dealing with effective articulation as having to do 
more with prejudice than with any other factor... and prejudice must be broken down. 
A self-selected, intrepid student who has already run the gamut of a two-year college 
chemistry education should be allowed to make his/her transition toward a 
baccalaureate degree in chemistry with fewer barriers than a woman making her way 
into the Citadel in South Carolina. 



References: 

1. Cohen, A.M., and Brawer, F.B. The American Community College, second edition. 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1989. 

2. Cohen, A.M., and Brawer, F.B. The Collegiate Function of Community Colleges. 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1987. 

3. Berman, R, Curry, J., Nelson, B., Weiler, D. Enhancing Transfer Effectiveness: A 
Model for the 1990’s. Washington, DC: AACJC, 1990. 

4. Eaton, J.S., Colleges of Choice: The Enabling Impact of the Community College. 
New York, American Council on Education . Macmillan Publishing Company. 

5. Cohen, A.M. Relating Curriculum and Transfer, New Directions for Community 
Colleges, no. 86. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1984. 

6. Pascarella, E., Bohr, L, Amaury, N., &Terenzini, R. Cognitive Effects of 2- Year and 
4- Year Colleges: New Evidence, Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis, Spring 
1995, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 83-96. 




12 

14 



U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: 


f / 


Author(s): 




V 


Corporate Source: 


1 Publication Date: 

i 

! 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to dsseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced 
in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE). are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced 
paper copy, and etectronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is 
given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document please CHECK ONE of the following two options and sign at 
the bottom of the page. 

The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2 documents 

□ 

t 

Check here 
For Level 2 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4* x 6* film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g.. electronic or optical), 
but not in paper copy. 



0 



Check here 
For Level 1 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4* x 6* film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical) 
and paper copy. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 












TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS 
MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 
COPY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 












TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




St s%%- 




Level 1 



Level 2 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission 
to reproduce is granted, but neither box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1. 



Sign 

here-* 

please 







*i hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and dissemir^ate 
this document as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optical media by persons other than 
ERIC employees and its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit 
reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. * 


Signature: 


: Printed Name/Position/Title: 

1 Y. dP / PRof. 


O'rg^izatioivAdHr^^^^ V 

Atcburn bh-lli M.£. 


s Telephone: i PAX: 

1 l'S^|0■'5‘iO'6^RQ i (etSls 


I P* fi^il Addire S8 : | Date : 

\TY$U6SKiQ^,ec.Mu\ 




III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

TER"n,°'or “■>»>“ -'»• 

publicly available, and a dependable source can ha cno^-ifiaH ^ u ' ^ announce a document unless it is 

significantly more stringent for documents that cannot be m^e aSSSle1hrou?h°EDR&)* 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 




Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 

Rika Nakazawa 

Acquisitions Coordinator 

ERIC Clearinghouse for Community Colleges 

3051 Moore Hall 

Box 951521 

Los Angeles, CA 90095-1521 



<5 

ERJC 3/96/96) 




"Articulation From 2-to-4 Yr Colls: 
Is it Allowed/Forbidden Transition" 
Aug 4-8, 1996 Oakland CC, MI 



