ED459990 2002-01-00 Preparing 
Teachers To Support American Indian 
and Alaska Native Student Success and 
Cultural Heritage. ERIC Digest. 

ERIC Development Team 
www . eric . ed . gov 



Table of Contents 



If you're viewing this document online, you can click any of the topics below to link directly to that section. 

Preparing Teachers To Support American Indian and Alaska Native 



Student Success and Cultural Heritage. ERIC Digest 1 

VALUING INTERCONNECTEDNESS 2 

EFFECTIVE PEDAGOGY AND CURRICULUM 3 

CONCLUSION 4 

REFERENCES 5 



ERIC M Digests 



ERIC Identifier: ED459990 
Publication Date: 2002-01-00 
Author: Jacobs, Don Trent - Reyhner, Jon 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools Charleston WV. 

Preparing Teachers To Support American 
Indian and Alaska Native Student Success and 
Cultural Heritage. ERIC Digest. 

THIS DIGEST WAS CREATED BY ERIC, THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER. FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT ERIC, CONTACT 



ED459990 2002-01 -00 Preparing Teachers To Support American Indian and Alaska 
Native Student Success and Cultural Heritage. ERIC Digest. 



Page 1 of 7 




www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



ACCESS ERIC 1 -800-LET-ERIC 

This Digest briefly summarizes literature related to preparing educators to bring about 
American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) student success and discusses what 
"success" in life means for Indian students of all ages and their extended families. We 
draw our information from both Native and non-Native sources, with the idea that 
educators need to prepare AI/AN students to live in and give back to both local and 
global communities. 

Nearly 30 years after Fuchs and Havighurst concluded that schools "should follow the 
Indian voice" (1973, p. 306), Deloria and Wildcat echo the idea that Indian education 
must become a process "that moves within the Indian context and does not try to avoid 
or escape this context" (2001 , p. 85). This is the expressed, yet unmet, goal of the 
federal government's policy of Indian self-determination, one that shapes the content of 
this Digest, which is in two parts. The first part points to the goals of Indian education, 
and the second part focuses on how to reach them. 

VALUING INTERCONNECTEDNESS 



High expectations. Too often student success is defined in terms of test scores. While 
not discounting academic achievement, traditional expectations for AI/AN learning 
involve the whole child. Although the Indian voice differs some from one community to 
the next, Brendtro, Brokenleg, and Van Bockern, in "Reclaiming Youth at Risk: Our 
Hope for the Future" (1990), describe a model for expectancy patterned after 
accumulated American Indian wisdom that, although intended for "at-risk" learners, 
seems especially applicable to AI/AN children. They challenge traditional Western 
expectations relating to learning theories, discipline, youth empowerment, and school 
structure. Like Jacobs and Jacobs-Spencer's "Teaching Virtues" (2000), it brings virtues 
such as courage and generosity back into the education equation, not as behavioral 
tools, but as a way to give meaning to academic mastery and enhance social 
responsibility. These two books offer an American Indian and Alaska Native perspective 
that supports a "democratic consequences" model of classroom management as 
described by McEwan (2000). 

Values and reciprocal contributions. Many publications address the fact that spirituality 
and reciprocity (giving back to others) are vital to Indian learning, and more and more 
educators believe, in the words of Slattery (1995, p. 79), that "curriculum must include 
the wisdom embedded in Native American spirituality." New books such as "Ecology, 
Spirituality, and Education: Curriculum for Relational Knowing" (Riley-Taylor, in press) 
are evidence that Slattery's call is being heard. American Indian voices speaking on 
AI/AN spirituality are found in Deloria and Wildcat's "Power and Place: Indian Education 
in America" (2001). In examining the issues facing Native students, they write how 
teachers must be prepared so Western (European American) paradigms can coexist 
with Native worldviews about life's complex interconnections among peoples and with 
nature. They focus especially on the need to relate to one's local community and 
geography, an approach to learning referred to as "place-based education," a relatively 



Page 2 of 7 



ED459990 2002-01-00 Preparing Teachers To Support American Indian and Alaska 
Native Student Success and Cultural Heritage. ERIC Digest. 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



new term for how American Indians traditionally viewed teaching and learning. 

Since most teachers of AI/AN students are non-Indian (Pavel, 1999), it would be helpful 
if teacher candidates planning to teach AI/AN students learned at least some of the 
spiritual traditions of the local population. Teachers can support parent and community 
teachings, realizing that "book knowledge," while having its place, should not 
thoughtlessly supplant the "collective wisdom" learned through the ages and passed on 
to each new generation by elders. Teachers cannot be expected to carry the major 
responsibility for facilitating the development of Native identity, but they can honor the 
important contributions of families and elders. To the degree that spirituality represents 
the sense that all things are related, educators must also work carefully to address 
racism issues in the classroom, a subject addressed well by Cleary and Peacock 
(1998). 

Family support and role models to provide student motivation. It is critical that teachers 
of AI/AN children work with students' extended families to enlist their support for literacy 
and academic achievement; reinforce their efforts to pass on their culture; and help their 
children develop a strong, resilient, and caring identity. American Indian and Alaska 
Native families, reacting to assimilationist pressures in schools, can hurt their children 
by creating in them ambivalent attitudes toward schooling (Peshkin, 1997) or even 
antischool "oppositional" identities (Ogbu, 1995). Teachers should realize that however 
culturally sensitive they might be, students can react to them as members of a group 
that often has proven to be insensitive. While educators must work on changing schools 
to be more welcoming of AI/AN students' languages and cultures, they also need to 
work with American Indian and Alaska Native communities. Through community 
partnerships AI/AN students can, as a group, succeed academically and overcome 
obstacles that may be placed in their way. Prospective teachers also can learn how to 
utilize organizations such as the American Indian Science and Engineering Society, 
which can provide support programs and AI/AN role models who prove educational 
success can be achieved without cultural loss. 

EFFECTIVE PEDAGOGY AND CURRICULUM 



Languages, cultures, and bicultural adaptation. Currently, many AI/AN groups are 
becoming more aware that, if they do not do something immediately to stem the loss of 
their languages and cultures, they will be lost forever. Non-Indian teachers will not be 
able to do much about language loss but can contribute much by learning a few key 
phrases and otherwise giving respect to the importance of culture and language. 
Schools, such as Rock Point Community School in the Navajo Nation, that nurture 
bilingual and bicultural perspectives have shown improvements in learning 
environments and academic success (McLaughlin, 1992). Also by learning how to 
provide place- and community-based curriculum and instruction, teachers can provide 
students with a relevant, practical, and motivating education where, in the words of 
Corson (1998), Indigenous learners can actively participate in shaping their own 



ED459990 2002-01-00 Preparing Teachers To Support American Indian and Alaska 
Native Student Success and Cultural Heritage. ERIC Digest. 



Page 3 of 7 




www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



education. 

Pedagogy and curriculum. Cleary and Peacock (1998) found that teaching styles 
common in American schools often fail to meet the needs of AI/AN students. Many 
studies have found that classrooms across the United States are characterized by 
teacher-centered direct instruction where students are expected to sit quietly and listen 
to their teacher or do seat work, except when called upon by their teacher to answer 
questions (Lipka & Mohatt, 1998). While highly motivated students can do relatively well 
in such classrooms, students who may question why they are even sitting in a 
classroom can rebel. 

Generally, books on Indian education (e.g., Reyhner, 1992) call for teacher preparation 
that leads to a constructivist and experiential approach that is both community- and 
environment-centered. This allows students a more active role in their own education. In 
"Look to the Mountain: An Ecology of Indigenous Education" (1994), Gregory Cajete 
concludes that "a primary orientation of Indigenous education is that each person is 
their own teacher and learning is connected to each individual's life process." However, 
this does not mean that teachers do not also need strong preparation in the subject 
matter they plan to teach (Deloria & Wildcat, 2001). 

Native teacher education programs. The vision statement for Oglala Lakota College's 
teacher preparation program reads, 



To graduate highly qualified, professional, motivated, committed teachers who possess 
and who will teach Wolakota in a multicultural, changing world. (Wolakota refers to the 
whole person in balance and in harmony spiritually, physically, mentally and socially.)(1) 



Similarly, the University of Alaska's Cross-Cultural Education Development (X-CED) 
Program, founded a quarter century ago, is a field-based teacher training program that 
believes "traditional cultures face a series of modern choices" and Yup'ik teachers act 
as cultural brokers "negotiating a curriculum with the help of both village elders and 
outside facilitators such as the professors in the X-CED program" (Lipka & Mohatt, 
1998, pp. 26-27). Both of these programs also provide critical follow-up support to their 
graduates once they start teaching. 

CONCLUSION 



Discussing the views of one of the many teachers they interviewed, Cleary and Peacock 
sum up their research: 



Page 4 of 7 



ED459990 2002-01-00 Preparing Teachers To Support American Indian and Alaska 
Native Student Success and Cultural Heritage. ERIC Digest. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



The key to producing successful American Indian students in our modern educational 
system ...is to first ground these students in their American Indian belief and value 
systems. (1998, p. 101) 



Reyhner, Lee, and Gabbard (1993) describe research-based content for specialized 
American Indian and Alaska Native teacher training programs that includes 



* anthropological, sociological, and historical foundations of American Indian and Alaska 
Native education 



* culturally responsive, bilingual, and ESL instructional methodologies 



* guidance on how to "Nativize" curriculum to reflect the American Indian and Alaska 
Native experience 



* learning through internships in American Indian and Alaska Native communities 



While that content is a start, the goal of teacher education is to produce teachers who 
do not disempower AI/AN students and who prepare them to move comfortably among 
different cultures while valuing the unique cultural assumptions of their home, 
community, and heritage. 

REFERENCES 



Brendtro, L. K., Brokenleg, M., & Van Bockern, S. (1990). Reclaiming youth at risk: Our 
hope for the future. Bloomington, IN: National Education Service. 

Cajete, G. (1 994). Look to the mountain: An ecology of Indigenous education. (1 st ed.). 
Durango, CO: Kivaki. 

Cleary, L. M., & Peacock, T. D. (1998). Collected wisdom: American Indian education. 
Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 



ED459990 2002-01 -00 Preparing Teachers To Support American Indian and Alaska 
Native Student Success and Cultural Heritage. ERIC Digest. 



Page 5 of 7 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



Corson, D. (1998). Community-based education for Indigenous cultures. Language, 
Culture, and Curriculum, 1 1 (3), 238-249. 

Deloria, V., Jr., & Wildcat, D. R. (2001). Power and place: Indian education in America. 
Golden, CO: Fulcrum. 

Fuchs, E., & Havighurst, R. J. (1973). To live on this earth: American Indian education. 
Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 

Jacobs, D., & Jacobs-Spencer, J. (2001). Teaching virtues: Building character across 
the curriculum. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow. 

Lipka, J., & Mohatt, G. V. (1998). Transforming the culture of schools: Yup'ik Eskimo 
examples. Sociocultural, political, and historical studies in education. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. (ED 431 565) 

McEwan, B. (2000). The art of classroom management: Effective practices for building 
equitable learning communities. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education. 

McLaughlin, D. (1992). When literacy empowers: Navajo language in print. 
Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico. 

Ogbu, J. U. (1995). Understanding cultural diversity and learning. In J. A. Banks & C. A. 
M. Banks (Eds.), Handbook of research on multicultural education (pp. 582-593). New 
York: Macmillan. 

Pavel, D. M. (1999). Schools, principals, and teachers serving American Indian and 
Alaska Native students (ERIC Digest). Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural 
Education and Small Schools. (ED 425 895) 

Peshkin, A. (1997). Places of memory: Whiteman's schools and Native American 
communities. Sociocultural, political, and historical studies in education. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. (ED 431 565) 

Reyhner, J. (Ed.). (1992). Teaching American Indian students. Norman, OK: University 
of Oklahoma. 

Reyhner, J., Lee, H., & Gabbard, D. (1993). A specialized knowledge base for teaching 
American Indian and Alaska Native students. Tribal College, 4(4), 26-32. Retrieved 
January 25, 2002, from http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~jar/TCarticle.html 

Slattery, P. (1995). Curriculum development in the post-modern era. New York: 

Garland. 



Page 6 of 7 



ED459990 2002-01-00 Preparing Teachers To Support American Indian and Alaska 
Native Student Success and Cultural Heritage. ERIC Digest. 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



Don Trent Jacobs (Creek/Cherokee) was formerly Dean of Education at Oglala Lakota 
College on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation and is currently an associate professor at 
the Center for Excellence in Education at Northern Arizona University. He is the author 
of 10 books on learning and consciousness. 

Jon Reyhner is an associate professor of education at Northern Arizona University, 
where he teaches bilingual multicultural education courses. 

This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. ED-99-CO-0027. The 
opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of OERI, 
the Department, or AEL. 



Title: Preparing Teachers To Support American Indian and Alaska Native Student 
Success and Cultural Heritage. ERIC Digest. 

Note: Online version contains an annotated reference list with links to full-text 
documents. 

Document Type: Information Analyses— ERIC Information Analysis Products (lAPs) 
(071); Information Analyses— ERIC Digests (Selected) in Full Text (073); 

Available From: ERIC/CRESS, P.O. Box 1348, Charleston, WV 25325-1348. Tel: 
800-624-9120 (Toll Free). For full text: 
http://www.indianeduresearch.net/edorc01 -1 3.htm 

Descriptors: American Indian Education, Cultural Maintenance, Educational Needs, 
Elementary Secondary Education, Family School Relationship, Higher Education, 
School Community Relationship, Student Needs, Teacher Education, Teacher Role, 
Values 

Identifiers: American Indian Students, ERIC Digests 
### 



[Return to ERIC Digest Search Page] 



ED459990 2002-01 -00 Preparing Teachers To Support American Indian and Alaska 
Native Student Success and Cultural Heritage. ERIC Digest. 



Page 7 of 7 



