DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 355 535 



CS 213 739 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



Charles, Jim 

Of Mascots and Tomahawk Chops: Stereotypes of 
American Indians and the English Teacher's 
Response. 
23 Nov 93 

16p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
National Council of Teachers of English. (82nd, 
Louisville, KY, November 18-23, 1992). 
Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Information 
Analyses (070) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

'^American Indian Literature; ''^American Indians; 
^Cultural Dif f erencea ; Cultural Images ; Cultural 
Pluralism; *English Instruction; *Ethnic Stereotypes; 
Multicultural Education; Secondary Education 
Cultural Sensitivity; *English Teachers; ^Native 
Americans; Native American Studies; Oral Tradition 



ABSTRACT 

In view of the vast amounts of Native American 
stereotyping that exists in the United States today, English teachers 
should analyze ways to reduce the effects of such stereotypes. 
Despite recent attempts to raise ethnic consciousness, American 
popular culture still perpetuates and reinforces Indian stereotypes, 
and these prevailing images block true perceptions of what American 
Indians really are. In the context of the English curriculum, English 
teachers can present literature in ways which neither reinforce nor 
perpetuate these stereotypes. In the past, widespread improvement in 
the understanding of American Indians was undermined by the largely 
superficial treatment they received in the schools. In view of this, 
students should be shown the nature and historical development of 
stereotypes, as outlined by various researchers. Media like 
literature and films have perpetuated many misconceptions of American 
Indians. These media have grouped Indians into four basic stereotype 
categories: the noble savage, the savage, the generic Indian, and the 
living fossil. To combat these tendencies, English teachers must pay 
attention to curriculum content by trying to teach a representative 
set of Indian-authored selections. The following criteria can be used 
to make such selections: (1) readings should be supplemented w:th 
oral selections; (2) both oral and written selections should 
represent the diversity of the many tribes throughout the nation; and 
(3) contemporary selections should reflect the range of genres 
produced by American Indian writers. (Contains 32 references.) 
(HB) 



^ Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 
* from the original document. * 



CO 



OF MASCOTS AND TOMAHAWK CHOPS: STEREOTYPES OF 
AMERICAN INDIANS AND THE ENGLISH TEACHER'S RESPONSE 



Dr. Jim Charles 
English Education 
University of South Carolina at Spartanburg 
Spartanburg, SC 29303 
(803)599-2563 



Presented at the 1992 NCTE Convention 
Louisville, KY 
November 23, 1992 



(V) 



ERIC 



mimi 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



J3r:l"J EDUCATIONAL RESOURCEiJ 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



Ofiginttino it P«^»on or Ofcantzition 



OF MASCOTS AND TOMAHAWK CHOPS: STEREOTYPES OF 
AMERICAN INDIANS AND THE ENGLISH TEACHERS RESPONSE 



Introduction 

There is no better time than right now, with Thanksgiving looming, for 
English teachers to consider the topic of American Indian stereotypes. 
Coupled with Halloween, Thanksgiving helps form what Michael Dorris 
calls "the annual twin peaks of Indian stereotyping^ (Dorris 1978). In the 
midst of the quincentennial celebrations of Columbus^encoxmter with 
America, the twin peaks of 1992 offer us the best occasion yet for analysis of 
what English teachers can do to reduce the effects of stereotypes of 
American Indians. 

In Ihe days ahead, sales of construction paper will skyrocket as 
elementary school teachers require their students to make headbands 
complete with obligatory rainbow of colored "feathers." Grocery bags will 
make good Indian clothes and instead of sacred paints, moms' lipstick will 
suffice. Students will sit quietly, **Indian style," hoping to avoid their 
teachers' admonishment, **Stop acting like wild Indians!" Secondary-level 
students, avid consumers of visual media, formulate images of Americsm 
Indians based on contemporary films. They see depictions of American 
Indians as nobles (the quiet Lakota man in Dances with Wolves , for 
example), as mystics (the Indian character in Poltergeist , for example), 
and as savages (the half-breed, in Lonesome Dove and the entire Pawnee 
tribe in Dances with Wolves, for example). More generally, since HoUjrwood 
has very little time for anything contemporary about Indians, students 
grant American Indians equal status with dinosaurs-interesting, but 
extinct. 

Elementary school teachers and Holljrwood are not the sole purveyors of 
Indian stereotypes. American popular culture sanctions stereotypical 
treatment of the American Indian experience. The business community, 
from professional sports to advertising and marketing to restaurants and 
bars, does its part. The Atlanta Braves provide a fonmi for adults to 



reenact their elementary school Indian experiences. In Pulton Cotrnty 
stadium, fans arrive technicolor-dad, wielding foam rubber tomahawks, 
and chanting incessant nonsense. In South Carolina, a TV ad and 
billboard campaign urged fans to attend baseball games where they could 
watch the Greenville Braves' (the Atlanta Braves* AA farm team) 
**...surroimd their opponents and beat them with sticks.** "Chiefs'' 
Restaurant in Spartanburg, SC features chicken wings and "fire water." 
Despite the consciousness-raising 1960's and early 1970's, and despite the 
ypppnt popularity of Dances with Wolves . American popular ctdture and 
American schools still perpetuate and reinforce stereotypes of American 
Indians. 

PrevaiUng images of what non-Indians think American Indians are 
su pposed to be block our perception of what American Indians really are. 
According to Robert Berkhofer (1978), 

For most whites throughout the past five centuries, the 
Indian of imagination and ideology has been as real, perhaps 
more real than the Native American of actual existence and 
contact... (71). 

The roots of these stereotypes run deep into history. English teachers can 
help their students overcome the misimderstanding of the American 
Indian experience, particularly of the American Indian literary 
experience^ caused by stereotypes. If English teachers themselves 
imderstand the historical development of stereotypes of American Indians 
and can recognize them in literary works, in textbooks, and in the popular 
cultxire, they can then take appropriate and practical steps to help their 
students avoid reinforcing and perpetuating the stereotypes. Today, I would 
like to describe and trace the development of these stereotypes. Focusing on 
curriculimi, I would also like to suggest some ways English teachers :an 
achieve the goal of presenting literature in ways which neither reinforce 
nor perpetuate stereotypes of American Indians. 
Bagpage and Confusion 



ERIC 



4 



Students in our English classes are likely to sxifFer from an afQiction we 
can call "^American Indian confusion."* During the late 1960*s and early 
1970*s, many high school English teachers attempted to sensitize students 
to the realities of the American Indian experience through literatxire study. 
A few examples of literature authored by American Indians appeared in 
state-adopted textbooks. Typically, these were short song-poems often 
treated as "^primitive, repetitive image poems'* (Theisz, 1977, 50-b3) or 
orations by famous Indian chiefs usually of the "^surrender speech** genre 
(Chief Josephs*s Will Fight No More Forever,** was, and continues to be, 
frequently anthologized). Novels and other works with American Indian 
protagonists and thematic content (often written by non-Indians) were 
popular selections for in-class study. Hal Borland's When the Legends Die, 
for example, was added to many secondary-level English curricula. Vine 
Deloria, Jr. points out that during the 1970*s American Indians enjoyed 
another period of popularity which cyclically recurs every fifteen to twenty 
years (Evers, 1978, p. 81). Students of the day read Dee Brown*s Byry My At 
Wounded Knee and quoted Chief Sealth*s speech, "This Sacred Soil.** 
Often, however, literature teachers* efforts to raise awareness ar.d 
sensitivity were undermined by colleagues in the Social Studies who glossed 
over and failed to consider the American Indian point of view on topics 
such as the federal government*s removal, assimilation and termination 
policies, "manifest destiny,** boarding schools, the nefarious activities of 
various Christian missionaries, and the erosion of religious freedoms for 
American Indians. English teachers often subverted their own 
instructional objecaves through the use of poorly compiled literature 
textbooks, textbooks which actually reinforced stereotypes of American 
Indians (Charles, 1987; 1989). 

The uneven and largely superficial treatment American Indian content 
received in schools effectively derailed hopes for widespread, meaningful 
and far-reaching improvement in the level of tmderstanding of the 
American Indian experience. Therefore, teachers, many of us the 



"products'* of similar treatment of the American Indian experience in our 
own education, find confused students in our English classes. Our 
students carry the heavy baggage of stereotypes with them. Possessing a 
vague, superficial, contradictory, and distorted understanding of American 
Indians, students believe American Indians are mystical yet simple. They 
believe them to be nearly extinct, but the few who are alive are out west 
somewhere probably imemployed, drunk, and not real Indians anyway 
because they drive pickup trucks and wear bluejeans. An understanding of 
the nature and historical development of stereotypes is a necessary starting 
point for those of us who want to help students come to grips with the reality 
of the American Indian experience, 
Stereotvpes 

A stereotype, according to Allport (1958) is ^'••.an exaggerated beHef 
associated with a category. Its function is to justify (rationalize) our 
conduct in relation to that category"* (187). Brigham (1963) adds specificity to 
Allport*s definition by underscoring the negative nature of stereotypes: 
Most researchers seem to have viewed stereotypes as 
generalizations, concerning trait attributes, made about 
members of a...group, A theme which recurs in most 
discussions of stereotypes refers to their undesirable 
nature— a stereotype is usually seen as a generalization 
which is, in some sense, xmdesirable (206)* 
Historical Development of Ster eotvpes of American Indians 

Berkhofer (1978) traces the historical development of stereotypes of 
American Indians back to the European literary and artistic traditions of 
primitivism and romanticism. He demonstrates how the stereotypic image 
of American Indians pervades scientific, philosophical, and cultural 
considerations of the American Indian experience as well as the impact of 
these misconceptions on governmental Indian policy, a policy marked by 
schizophrenic shifts from demands for assimilation to demands for 
American Indian self-determination. 



Deloria (1973) critiques the wave of ostensibly sensitive works with 
American Indian themes and images produced in the late 1960's and early 
1970's: 

Thus it is that the cherished ima££ of the noble redman is 
preserved by American society for its own purposes.... The 
...books reflect that there exists in the minds of non- 
Indian Americans a vision of what they would Hke Indians 
to be. They stubbornly refuse to allow Indians to be or to 
become anything else (emphasis added, 50). 
And, as a result, Deloria continues, 

Indians are unable to get non-Indians to accept them as 
contemporary beings. Non-Indians either cannot or will not 
respond to the problems of contemporary Indians. They 
insist on remaining in the last century..., reciting a past that is 
basically mythological, thrilling, and comforting (56). 
Several researchers have examined the impact of popular culture on the 
creation, reinforcement, and perpetuation of stereotypes of American 
Indians. In his study of movies and popular fiction, Stedman (1982) . 
maintains that stereotjTpes of American Indians dominate these media. He 
describes writers' perpetuation of stereotypes of American Indians through 
the use of referents such as Buck, Half-Breed, Heap Big, Honest Inj\m, 
Indian Giver, Papoose, Scalper, Squaw, and Wild Indian (242). 
Filmmakers are no less guilty of stereotyping American Indians. Stedman 
Hsts the following misconceptions of American Indian life and cxilture 
which contemporary films reinforce and perpetuate: Indians talk like 
Tonto; Indians look, think, and talk ahke; Indians fight at night; Indians 
howl constantly during attacks; Indians torture their prisoners; Indians 
scalp the slain; all Indians worship a being named "Manitou;" Indians are 
expert outdoorsmen; Indians wander Hke nomads; Indians lust after white 
women; Indians cannot resist whiskey; Indians have no spouses of their 
own; Indians flounder when attempting to speak EngHsh; and Indians 



speak a common language called Indian (243-244). 

According to Churchill, et al. (in Bataille and Silet, 1980) Hollywood 
produces films about Indians which are narrowly limited in thematic 
substance. Essentially, Hollywood productions depict American Indians in 
three ways--American Indians as creatiires of a particular time; American 
Indians as seen through white eyes; and "^Seen one Indian, seen them air 
(Bataille and Silet, 37). Lyman (1982), in an analysis of the '^scientific'' and 
ethnographic work of the photographer Edwin S. Curtis, disclosed the use 
of technical processes such as retouching, shadowing, and scratching by 
Curtis and his assistants to make American Indian subjects look more 
"Indian," to enhance the imderlying message of Curtis' work-that 
Americsin Indians were "the vanishing race." 

These stereotypic images began with the bon sauvage motif in European 
literature of the 18th century, continued with American writers' depictions 
of Indians as both noble savages and warrior-savages, and persist today 
with characterizations of Indians as hopeless people xmable to cope with 
"life between two worlds." Stereotypes fill the pages of American literature 
as well as television and movie screens. For non-Indians it is difficult to 
distinguish between fact and myth when dealing with American Indians 
and their cultures. Tourists in Indian Coimtry, gawking at American 
Indian people, can be heard frequently asking, "Is that a real Indian?" 
Stereotype Categories 

Noble Savage. The earliest stereotype of American Indians, the noble 
savage, sprang from the European artistic movements of primitivism and 
romanticism. According to Berkhofer (1978) "primitivism postulated people 
dwelling in nature according to nature, existing free of histories, burdens, 
and the social complexity felt by Europeans..., and offering hope to 
mankind at the same time that they constituted a powerful counter- 
example to existing European civilization" (72). Out of this tradition came 
the motifs of the noble, beautiful, and romantic savage. Early 
manifestations of these motifs can be foxmd in Longfellow's The Song of 



ERIC 



8 



Hiawatha (1890), Contemporary manifestations of this stereotype include 
the images of American Indians used in arti-litter campaigns and the 
recent can make it rain on the golf course** United Airlines commercial, 
HieSavs^a Another stereotype, the savage, depicts American Indians, 
not as beautifiil or romantic, but rather as ruthless and blood-thirsty. This 
characterization of Indians, which portrayed them as sub-humans, 
developed as whites moved westward under the auspices of "manifest 
destiny.** American Indians in the savage mold murdered and scalped 
whites, and pillaged white settlements-all the result of something in their 
genetic makeup. According to Merlock (1990) the character Blue Duck in 
the critically acclaimed and highly rated television mini-series "Lonesome 
Dove** (based on the Larry McMurtry novel) is the definitive example of the 
Hollywood/western stock character, the half-breed-an individual with too 
much American Indian blood in Mm to be tame, a monstrous and vicious 
villain. Another curious manifestation of this stereotype is the "lazy, 
shiftless Indian.** Many criticize contempora:(y Indians' use of bingo as a 
revenue source as resorting to easy money, to an anti-traditional means of 
achieving economic self-sufficiency. Indians* attempt at self-determination 
is ridiculed and undermined-"real, traditional** Indians did not play bingo; 
therefore, bingo can not be a legitimate enterprise. Today, non-Indian 
legislators, thinking they know what*s best for Indian people, attempt to 
regulate Indians out of the bingo business. 

Generic Indian. American Indians are a singular people, sharing the 
same social, spiritual, cultural, and linguistic traditions according to a 
third stereotype category, the generic Indian. The most prevalent 
manifestation of the generic Indian stereotype equates all Indian cultures 
with those of the Plains tribes. As a result, all Indians wear feathered war 
bonnets, live in teepees, and greet strangers with the Lakota word, ""hau" 
(defined "hello** in Mathieu, et al., 11). According to Bataille and Silet 
(1980), "Even the visible cultural characteristics which tend to individuate 
tribal groupings begin to blend into an all encompassing haze** (37). Today, 

erJc s 



tourists insist on seeing feathers, hearing bells, and witnessing the war 
dance when they visit Indian Country, whether or not feathers and bells 
and war dancing are aspects of the cxilture of the tribe they barge in on- 
living fossdL A fourth stereotype category, the living fossil, 
characterizes American Indian people as extinct or nearly extinct, both 
racially and culturally Those who beheve in this stereotype view American 
Indians as either totally assimilated or as feebly clinging to drastically 
altered remnants of their "once proud past,'' This stereotype became 
prevalent in the mid-nineteenth century, thanks in part to popxilar 
literature and art. George Catlin, the famous painter of American 
Indians, once moaned. 

Nature has nowhere presented more beautiful and lovely 
scenes than those of the vast prairies of the west and of 
the men and beast no nobler specimens than those who 
inhabit them-the Indian and the buffalo-joint and 
original tenants of the soil, and fugitives together from 
the approach of civilized man; they have fled to the Great 
Plains of the west, and there under equal doom, they 
have taken their last abode, where their race will expire 
and their bones will bleach together— (in Berkhofer 89). 
The anti-litter television commercial campaigns mentioned earlier rely on 
a "fossilized"* depiction of American Indians, American Indian 
environmental activists paddle canoes and wear buckskins rather than 
drive pickups and wear bluejeans. The use of the living fossil stereotype 
imderscores one message of these ads-"Unless you protect the 
environment, you will die out just like the American Indians did,** 
Practical Suggestions for Secor tHflrv^level English Teachers 

Following an increased understanding of the nature, historical 
development, and prevalence of stereotypes of American Indians, an 
additional step in an English teacher's effort to combat the reinforcement 
and perpetuation of these stereot3^es is the selection of appropriate 



ERIC 



io 



curriculum content, English teachers should teach students a 
rex'i^^^s^^ti'^ set of American Indian-authored selections, A truly 
representative sample of works by American Indian authors is balanced 
with respect to the following criteria: 

1. Oral (traditional) selections, including both song-jioems and oral 
narratives, should supplement assigned reading. According to Lincoln 
(1983), 

The oral litera tures or native cultxires lie deeply rooted in 
America. Radically diverse languages, life styles, 
ecologies, and histories have survived more than forty 
thousand years 'native' to America.... Their oral 
literatxires are made up from a daily speech, a teaching 
folklore, a ritual sense of ceremony and religion, a heritage 
passed on generation to generation in songs, legends, 
morality plays, healing rites, event-histories, social 
protocol, jokes, spiritual rites of passage, and vision 
journeys to the sacred world. These cultural traditions 
evolved before the Old World discovered the New World (15- 
16). 

Scholars from, the fields of anthropology, folklore, linguistics, American 
literature, and American Indian Studies have collected numerous 
examples of American Indian song-poems and oral narratives. Excerpts 
from numerous works containing oral narratives and song-poems from 
various American Indians tribes representing various regions of the 
United States should supplement assigned textbook reading. Recent works 
characterized by thorough and sensitive treatment of American Indian 
oral literary genres include YAQUI DEER SONGS/MASO BWIKAM 
(1987) by Larry Evers and Felipe Molina, AMERICAN INDIAN MYTHS 
AND LEGENDS (1984) edited by Richard Erdoes and Alfonso Ortiz, 
OMAHA TRIBAL MYTHS AND TRICKSTER TALES (1981) edited by Roger 
Welsch, BUCKSKIN TOKENS (1975) edited by R. D. Theisz, AMERICAN 



u 



INDIAN MYTHOLOGY (1968) edited by Alice Marriott and Carol Rachlin, 
and THE STORYTELLING STONE (1971) edited by Susan Feldman. 
Reading such works helps to break down the "living fossils" stereotype by 
showing students that American Indian oral traditions are alive today, as 
are the people themselves. The lifeways of the people-their values, morals, 
and hxmior— are peipetuated through contemporary examples of 
traditional literatures. 

2. Both oral (traditional) arui written (contemporary)^^ 
presented to students. To accurately convey the diverse natiire of American 
Indian literatures, English teachers should spend adequate instructional 
time on oral (traditional) works. Many of these oral works have been 
recorded and trar slated into English. Sources of oral literatvire include 
YAQUI DEER SONGS/ MASO BWIKAM (1987) by Larry Evers and FeHpe 
Molina, SPIRIT MOUNTAIN (1984) edited by Leanne Hinton and Lucille 
Watahomigie, BETWEEN SACRED MOUNTAINS (1984) edited by Sam 
Bingham and Janet Bingham, THE SOUTH CORNER OF TIME (1981) 
edited by Larry Evers, and BUCKSKIN TOKENS (1975) edited by R D. 
Theisz. Use of such sources helps students realize that American Indians 
have traditions, languages, beliefs, and cultures which are both traditional 
anjl vibrant. Coming to thl^ realization helps students reject the "^living 
fossils" stereotype. 

There is a growing body of written (contemporary) work, as well, by 
American Indian authors. Anthologies, containing written works in 
various genres by writers from various tribes across the coimtry, are 
excellent sources for readings to supplement and complement those in 
state-adopted literature anthologies. Some of thsse anthologies include 
THE SINGING SPIRIT (1989) edited by Bemd Peyef, SONGS FROM THIS 
EARTH ON TURTLE^S BACK (1983) edited by Joseph Bruchac, EARTH 
POWER COMING: SHORT FICTION IN NATIVE AMERICAN 
LITERATURE (1983) edited by Simon Ortiz, THE REMEMBERED EARTH 
(1979) edited by Geary Hobson, and AMERICAN INDIAN LITERATURE: ' 



AN ANTHOLOGY (1979) edited by Alan RVelie, Reading selections from 
the ever-growing body of contemporary written works by American Indian 
writers conveys to students that Indian people can speak for themselves, 
clearly and articiilately, on the issues facing them as a contemporary 
people. The implied message that American Indians need whites to speak 
for them, an aspect of the "savage'* stereotype, is thus destroyed, 
a Oral (traditional) and written (contemporary) selections should 
represent the diversity of American Indian tribes and communities from 
various regions of the United States. An analysis of South Carolina's state- 
adopted high school literature anthologies indicated a lack of 
representation of works by members of American Indians tribes and 
communities from regions other than the Great Plains and Southwestern 
United States. Of 64 anthologized selections by American Indians, 45, or 
70%, were by authors from the Plains and Southwestern regions of the 
country (Charles, 1989). The texts' lack of adequate regional 
representation in its sample of American Indian literature contributes to 
the perpetuation of the "generic Indian'' stereotype, English teachers 
should take steps to expand the sample of American Indian selections they 
teach, 

4 Contemporary (written) selections should reflect the range of genres, 
both fiction and non-fiction, produced by American Indian authors. The 

analysis of South Carolina's textbooks also revealed that only 3 of 23 
anthologized contemporary selections by American Indian authors were 
non-fictional (Charles, 1989)- This lack of balanced representation 
reinforces the living fossils stereotype-it is assumed by many that 
American Indian writers do not concern themselves with contemporary 
issues, nor do they possess the rhetorical skill necessary to argue 
persuasively Students are led to believe that American Indians are 
"trapped" hopelessly in the past and that they lack the necessary linguistic 
facility to be considered anything other than "repetitive, imagistic poets/' 
Supplementing assigned literature anthologies with a work such as 

ERIC 1 3 



Hobson's THE REMEMBERED EARTH (1979) will help teachers and their 
students avoid reinforcing the "living fossils'" stereotype by providing 
students with an accurate and representative sample of the range of 
writing interests and abilities of contemporary American Indian writers. 
Conclusion 

To this point, I have suggested that more careful selection of hterature 
content for English courses will aid both teachers and students in 
overcoming stereotypes of American Indians, Following these suggestions, 
English teachers can select course content which conveys to students a 
more balanced and accurate represAtitation of the diverse American Indian 
literary experience. In so doing, English teachers can help to eradicate one 
of the few remaining overtlv sanctioned forms of racism in America— 
stereotjrpes of Anoorican Indians, 



ERIC 



14 



OF MASCOTS AND TOMAHAWK CHOPS: STEREOTYPES OF 
AMERICAN INDIANS AND THE ENGLISH TEACHER'S RESPONSE 

(NOTE 1992, LouisviUe, KY) 

Please direct reactions, comments, and inqmries to: 

Jim Charles, PhD. 
English Education 
University of South Carolina at Spartanburg 
Spartanburg, SC 29303 

WORKS CTTED 

Allport, Gordon W. THE NATURE OF PREJUDICE. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, 1958. 

BataiUe, Gretchen M. and Charles L. P Silet, eds. THE PRETEND 
INDIANS: IMAGES OF NATIVE AMERICANS IN THE MOVIES. 
Ames: Iowa State U P, 1980. 

Berkhofer, Jr., Robert F. THE WHITE MAN'S INDIAN. New York: 
Vantage, 1978. 

Bingham, Sam and Janet Bingham, eds. BETWEEN SACRED 
MOUNTAINS. Tucson: Sim Tracks and U of Arizona P, 1984. 

Borland, Hal. WHEN THE LEGENDS DIE. New York: Bantam, 1972. 

Brigham, John C. "Ethnic Stereotypes and Attitudes: A Different Mode of 
Analysis." JOURNAL OF PERSONALITY 41.2 (1973) 206-214. 

Brown, Dee. BURY MY HEART AT WOUNDED KNEE. New York: 
Bantam, 1971. 

Bruchac, Joseph. SONGS FROM THIS EARTH ON TURTLE'S BACK. The 
Greenfield Review Press, 1983. 

Charles, Jim. "For the Sake of a Fad: The Misrepresentation of American 
Indians and Their Literatures in High School Literature Anthologies." 
THE JOURNAL OF ETHNIC STUDIES, 15:2 (Summer 1987): 131-140. 

"The Need for Textbook Reform: An American Indian Example." 

THE JOURNAL OF AMERICAN INDIAN EDUCATION, 28:3 (May 
1989): 1-13. 

Deloria, Vine, Jr. GOD IS RED. New York: Grosset and Dtmlap, 1973. 

Dorris, Michael. "Why I'm Not Thankful for Thanksgiving," in ANTHRO 
NOTES, no date, 5-6, 15 (excerpted from INTERRACIAL BOOKS FOR 
CHILDREN, 9:7, 1978). 

Erdoes, Richard and Alfonso Ortiz. AMERICAN INDIAN MYTHS AND 
LEGENDS. New York: Pantheon Books, 1984. 

Evers, Larry, ed. "A Conversation With Vine Deloria, Jr." SUN TRACKS 

j5 



14 

FOUR, 1978, pp. 80-88. 

. THE SOUTH CORNER OF TIME. Tucson: Sun Tracks and U of 

Arizona P, 1981. 

, and Felipe Molina. YAQUI DEER SONGS/MASO BWIKAM. 

TVicson: Sim Tracks and U of Arizona P, 1987. 

Feldman, Susan, ed. THE STORYTELLING STONE. New York: Dell, 
1971 

Hmton, Leanne and Lucille Watahomigie, eds. SPIRIT MOUNTAIN. 
Tucson: S\m Tracks and U of Arizona P, 1984. 

Hobson, Geary. THE REMEMBERED EARTH. Albuquerque: U of New 
Mexico P, 1979. 

Lincoln, Kenneth. NATIVE AMERICAN RENAISSANCE. Berkeley: U of 
California P, 1983. 

Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth. THE SONG OF HIAWATHA. Boston: 
Houghton-Mifain, 1890 (originally published 1855). 

Lyman, Christopher M. THE VANISHING RACE AND OTHER 
ILLUSIONS. New York: Pantheon Books, 1982. 

Marriott, Alice and Carol K Rachlin. AMERICAN INDIAN 
MYTHOLOGY. New York: Mentor, 1968. 

Mathieu, David J., Bertha Chasing Hawk, and Elgin Badwound. LAKOTA 
LANGUAGE, I. Spearfish, SD: Black Hills State College, 1978. 

Merlock, Ray. "Blue Duck and the 'Half-Breed' Stereotype," paper delivered 
at the Popular Culture Association Convention, Toronto, 1990. 

Ortiz, Simon J., ed. EARTH POWER COMING: SHORT FICTION IN 
NATIVE AMERICAN LITERATURE. Tsaile, AZ: Navajo Community 
College P, 1983. 

Peyer, Bemd, ed. THE SINGING SPIRIT. Tucson: Sun Tracks and the U 
of Arizona P, 1989. 

Stedman, Raymond William. SHADOWS OF THE INDIAN. Norman: U of 
Oklahoma Press, 1982. 

Theisz,R.D. BUCKSKIN TOKENS. Aberdeen, SD: North Plains P, 1975. 

. PERSPECTIVES ON TEACHING AMERICAN INDIAN 

LITERATURE. Spearfish, SD: Black Hills State College, 1977. 

Velie, AlanR. AMERICAN INDIAN LITERATURE: AN ANTHOLOGY. 
Norman: U of Oklahoma P, 1979. 

Welsch, Roger. OMAHA TRIBAL MYTHS AND TRICKSTER TALES. 
Sage/Swallow P, 1981. 

ERIC ' ^ 



