ISSUES& AN S WERS 



REL 2009-No. 081 




Indian 
education 
policies in five 
Northwest 
Region states 




i 



NATIONAL CENTER for 

EDUCATION EVALUATION 
and REGIONAL ASSISTANCE 



Institute of Education Sciences 



U.S. Department of Education 







ISSUES ANSWERS 



REL 2009-No. 081 



'REL 

NORTHWEST 

Regionol Educational Laboratory 
At Northwest Regional 
Educational Laboratory 



Indian education policies in five 
Northwest Region states 



October 2009 



Prepared by 
Richard Smiley, Ph.D. 

Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory 
Susan Sather, Ph.D. 

Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory 



NATIONAL CENTER for 

EDUCATION EVALUATION 
and REGIONAL ASSISTANCE 



Institute of Education Sciences 
U.S. Department of Education 



REL 

NORTHWEST 



At Northwest Regional 




Issues & Answers is an ongoing series of reports from short-term Fast Response Projects conducted by the regional educa- 
tional laboratories on current education issues of importance at local, state, and regional levels. Fast Response Project topics 
change to reflect new issues, as identified through lab outreach and requests for assistance from policymakers and educa- 
tors at state and local levels and from communities, businesses, parents, families, and youth. All Issues & Answers reports 
meet Institute of Education Sciences standards for scientifically valid research. 

October 2009 

This report was prepared for the Institute of Education Sciences (IES) under Contract ED-06-CO-0016 by Regional Edu- 
cational Laboratory (REL) Northwest administered by Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. Seven other regional 
educational laboratories — Central, Midwest, Northeast and Islands, Pacific, Southeast, Southwest, and West — also partici- 
pated in the study. The content of the publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of IES or the U.S. Depart- 
ment of Education nor does mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. 
Government. 

This report is in the public domain. While permission to reprint this publication is not necessary, it should be cited as: 

Smiley, R., and Sather, S. (2009). Indian education policies in five Northwest Region states (Issues & Answers Report, REL 2009- 
No. 081). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evalu- 
ation and Regional Assistance, Regional Educational Laboratory Northwest. Retrieved from www.ies.ed.gov/ncee/edlabs. 



This report is available on the regional educational laboratory web site atwww.ies.ed.gov/ncee/edlabs. 



Summary 



REL 2009-No. 081 



Indian education policies in five 
Northwest Region states 



The most comprehensive effort to date 
to study Indian education policies, the 
report categorizes the Indian education 
policies of the five Northwest Region 
states based on 13 key policies identified 
in the literature and describes the legal 
methods used to adopt them. 

This study examines state policies that govern 
the education of American Indian and Alaska 
Native (referred to collectively as Native 
American) students in the five Northwest 
Region states of Alaska, Idaho, Montana, 
Oregon, and Washington. This investigation is 
the most comprehensive effort to date to study 
Indian education policies. The study focuses 
on three dimensions of Indian education 
policies: 

• Identification of key Indian education 
policies in the literature. 

• Adoption of key Indian education policies 
by the five Northwest Region states. 

• Specific mechanisms states have employed 
to adopt Indian education policies. 

The goal of the study is to provide state policy- 
makers and organizations representing Native 
Americans with a comprehensive summary 
and analysis of state-level policy initiatives. 



The study identifies 13 key policies from the 
literature on Indian education over the period 
1991-2008. Each state’s Indian education poli- 
cies were compiled and compared with the 13 
key policies to determine whether any policies 
were common to all five Northwest Region 
states and to identify the approaches that 
states have taken to adopt Indian education 
policies. The study also examines the fre- 
quency of policy adoption mechanisms, such 
as statutes, regulations, and executive orders. 

In the data collection phase the researchers 
conducted Internet and library searches for In- 
dian education-related literature over the past 
18 years and searched state education agency 
and legislative web sites to identify Indian edu- 
cation statutes, regulations, and other policy 
adoption mechanisms. The searches were 
followed by interviews with key informants in 
each state education agency. Two researchers 
independently analyzed state policies to deter- 
mine whether a state either had a particular 
key policy or did not. 

Six of the key policies had been adopted by all 
five states: adopting academic standards to 
teach students about the history and culture of 
America’s indigenous peoples, including Native 
American culture and history as part of the 
academic curriculum, involving Native Ameri- 
cans on advisory boards, promoting Native 



SUMMARY 



American languages through certification of 
teachers who speak Native American languages, 
allowing students to learn their native lan- 
guage as a part of their education program, and 
providing scholarships or tuition assistance for 
college-bound Native American students. 

The study found that the five states had differ- 
ent approaches to adopting Indian education 
policies. Of the nine policy mechanisms states 
used to adopt Indian education policy, state 
statutes were the most common, followed by 



regulations. Use of the state constitution, of- 
ficial publications, and administrative actions 
by state officials were the least used mecha- 
nisms for adopting Indian education policies. 

The study revealed that state policymakers in 
search of ways to address the education needs 
of Native American children have a variety of 
choices in both policy approaches and adop- 
tion mechanisms. 

October 2009 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



I 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Why this study? 1 

Research questions and study approach 2 

Thirteen key policies 3 

Nine mechanisms for policy adoption 4 

State adoption of the 13 key policies 5 

Common policies 5 

Policy mechanisms 5 

Conclusion 6 

Limitations of the study 6 

Appendix A Data collection and analysis 7 

Appendix B Key informant interviews and interview protocol 13 

Appendix C Policies, citations, and adoption mechanisms by state 15 

Appendix D Descriptions of Indian education policies by key policy and state 20 

References 27 

Boxes 

1 Key terms used in the report 2 

2 Data collection and analysis 3 

B1 Interview protocol 14 

Tables 

1 Presence of key Indian education policies in the five Northwest Region states, 2008 4 

2 Key Indian education policies and their frequencies in the five Northwest Region states, 2008 5 

3 Frequencies of mechanisms for adopting Indian education policies in the five Northwest Region 

states, 2008 6 

A1 Summary of research questions, data sources, and data analysis techniques 8 
A2 Sources of key Indian education policies in the five Northwest Region states, 1995-2008 11 

Cl Alaska: key Indian education policies, citations, and mechanism types, 2008 15 

C2 Idaho: key Indian education policies, citations, and mechanism types, 2008 16 

C3 Montana: key Indian education policies, citations, and mechanism types, 2008 17 

C4 Oregon: key Indian education policies, citations, and mechanism types, 2008 18 

C5 Washington: key Indian education policies, citations, and mechanism types, 2008 19 



iv TABLE OF CONTENTS 

D1 Tribes have government-to -government status 20 

D2 Tribes and state agencies are authorized to enter into contracts for Indian education 20 
D3 State education agency has a state-funded Indian education coordinator 21 
D4 Academic standards address Native American culture and history 21 
D5 State has a policy to reduce the achievement gap between Native American and other students 
D6 State has targeted funding of Indian education programs 22 

D7 Native American students may learn their native language as part of the education program 

D8 Native American culture and history are part of the school curriculum 23 

D9 Native American community is involved on advisory boards 24 

DIO Teacher certification is promoted for speakers of Native American languages 24 

Dll All teachers are required to have training in Native American culture and history 25 

D12 College scholarship or tuition assistance programs are provided for Native American students 

D13 Tribal colleges have been established 26 



WHY THIS STUDY? 



1 



The most 
comprehensive 
effort to date 
to study Indian 
education policies, 
the report 
categorizes the 
Indian education 
policies of the five 
Northwest Region 
states based on 
13 key policies 
identified in the 
literature and 
describes the legal 
methods used 
to adopt them. 



WHY THIS STUDY? 

This study is intended to provide policymakers 
in all states with a comprehensive list of Indian 
education policies in the five Northwest Region 
states (Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and 
Washington) and the legal mechanisms used 
to adopt them (see box 1 for a definition of key 
terms used in this report). The study categorizes 
the Indian education policies of the Northwest 



Region states using an analytic framework based 
on a review of the literature on Indian education 
policies. 

This study is motivated primarily by the need to 
close the achievement gap between Native Ameri- 
can and other students. For example, the National 
Indian Education Study, sponsored by the National 
Center for Education Statistics, found that reading 
achievement among Native American students in 
grades 4 and 8 on the 2005 National Assessment 
of Educational Progress (NAEP) was significantly 
lower than that of other students (Rampey, Lut- 
kus, and Weiner 2006). Math achievement results 
for Native American students were slightly better 
but were still significantly below those of other 
students. A follow-up study reporting on perfor- 
mance on the 2007 NAEP found no significant 
reductions in the achievement gaps between 2005 
and 2007 in reading and math in grades 4 and 8 
(Moran et al. 2008). 

States have good reasons for addressing these 
achievement gaps. Persistent achievement gaps 
mean that not enough is being done to provide 
equal education opportunity for all students. Ad- 
ditionally, the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) 
of 2001 requires states to impose sanctions on 
schools whose students do not show adequate 
yearly progress. Because states must report test 
data separately for groups of minority students, 
including Native Americans, the disparity in 
achievement becomes apparent and the need for 
policy innovation more urgent. 

States may also adopt Indian education policies 
in response to recommendations by organiza- 
tions representing Native Americans for improv- 
ing education for Native American children. 

These groups advocate for policies that preserve 
Native American heritage and promote the 
academic welfare of Native American students. 
The National Caucus of Native American State 
Legislators, for example, is investigating the 
achievement gap and plans to present policy 
recommendations for state legislatures based on 
its findings. 




2 



INDIAN EDUCATION POLICIES IN FIVE NORTHWEST REGION STATES 



BOX 1 

Key terms used in the report 

Government-to-government status. 
Recognizing government-to-govern- 
ment status means acknowledging 
the sovereignty and right to self- 
determination of Native American 
tribes and establishes a legal relation- 
ship between the U.S. government 
and tribal governments (Bush 2004). 
This policy is the cornerstone of the 
right of tribes to teach their children 
about their culture and to speak their 
native language. 

Indian education. The conventional 
use of the term includes schooling in 
federal, mission, and public schools 



as well as culturally based education 
in American Indian and Alaska Na- 
tive (here referred to as Native Amer- 
ican; see below) communities. Indian 
education also refers to culturally 
based education of Native American 
children by their parents, relatives, 
and communities — traditionally and 
sometimes today in a native language 
(Lomawaima and McCarty 2006). 
This study uses the term Indian edu- 
cation broadly to include any teach- 
ing practice, procedure, curriculum, 
or teaching guide having to do with 
educating the children of Native 
Americans. 

Native American. This study uses 
the term Native American to include 



American Indians and Alaska Na- 
tives (authors’ working definition). 

Public policy. A system of “courses 
of action, regulatory measures, laws, 
and funding priorities concerning a 
given topic promulgated by a govern- 
mental entity or its representatives” 
(Kilpatrick n.d.). 

Policy mechanisms. Policy mecha- 
nisms refer to the legal methods 
used to adopt a policy. Mechanisms 
include statutes enacted by a state 
legislature, regulations adopted by a 
state agency, executive orders, state 
plans, memoranda, state curricula, or 
other legal methods (authors’ work- 
ing definition). 



State policymakers can learn from the experience of 
other states with large numbers of Native American 
students how to improve the education of Native 
American students. Each of the five Northwest 
Region states enrolls significant numbers of Native 
American students. Native American students 
are the largest minority group of K-12 students 
in Alaska (11 percent) and Montana (25 percent), 
and they constitute about 3 percent of the student 
population in Idaho, Oregon, and Washington (U.S. 
Department of Education 2006). Together, the five 
states are home to 16 percent of Native American 
students in the United States (Sable and Noel 2008). 



RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND STUDY APPROACH 



Native American students 
are the largest minority 
group of K 12 students 
in Alaska and Montana 
and constitute about 
3 percent of the student 
population in Idaho, 
Oregon, and Washington 



This study is more comprehensive 
than previous studies. It includes 
all identified policies and the 
mechanisms used to adopt them in 
the five Northwest Region states. 
The study does not, however, ad- 
dress how, or to what extent, the 
policies have been implemented or 
whether they are effective. 



Three research questions guided the study: 

• What state policies govern the education of 
Native American students in the five North- 
west Region states? 

• What Indian education policies are common 
to all five Northwest Region states? 

• What policy mechanisms are used to adopt 
Indian education policies in the five North- 
west Region states? 

A three-phase descriptive study was conducted to 
answer these questions (see box 2 and appendix A 
for details). In the first phase — data collection — 
Internet and library searches were conducted to 
identify scholarly articles on Native American edu- 
cation and state Indian education policies, along 
with interviews with key informants in each of the 
five Northwest Region state education agencies. In 
the second phase analytic frameworks were devel- 
oped for identifying key policies and the mecha- 
nisms for adopting the policies in the Northwest 
Region states. In the third phase state policies were 
analyzed for content and adoption mechanisms. 




RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND STUDY APPROACH 



3 



BOX 2 

Data collection and analysis 

Data collection. An Internet and 
library search identified scholarly 
articles on Indian education policy, 
and a second Internet search of state 
education agency and legislative 
web sites identified Indian educa- 
tion policies in the five Northwest 
Region states. Interviews were then 
conducted with key informants in 
the five state education agencies 
to verify and augment state policy 
information. 

The Internet search was intended to 
provide a baseline against which to 
compare state policies. Key words 
were used to guide the search for 
Indian education policies of the five 
Northwest Region states, to ensure 
that the policies identified included 
the entire range of legal methods that 
the states used to adopt policies. Policy 
documents were downloaded, printed, 
and tabulated by state. To ensure that 
the list was accurate and to reduce 
the number of policies that might be 
overlooked, another researcher located 
each policy on the Internet and veri- 
fied its existence. In addition to this 
internal check, interviews with key in- 
formants served as an external check 
on the completeness of the Internet 
searches. Respondents received copies 



of the tabulated state policies and were 
asked to note any errors or omissions. 
Respondents identified several ad- 
ditional policies during the interviews. 
They also reviewed the list of policies 
several months later, just before the 
data analysis. 

Analytic frameworks. Two frame- 
works were developed for analyzing 
state policies. The first framework 
provided a set of key policies identi- 
fied from the literature search against 
which to compare state policies. The 
second framework was used to define 
the policy mechanisms that states 
used in adopting Indian education 
policies and to calculate frequencies 
for the mechanisms identified. 

In developing the framework for 
analyzing existing state policies, 30 
studies were identified that included 
discussions of Indian education poli- 
cies. These were then winnowed down 
to 11 articles that dealt with state-level 
policies and were published during 
1991-2008 (see reference list), when 
major federal school accountability 
mandates were enacted. To be consid- 
ered a key Indian education policy, the 
policies discussed in these articles had 
to pertain to K-12 education and to 
specify a particular policy approach, 
not just highlight an area of concern. 
Thirteen key policies were identified. 



In developing the framework for 
identifying policy mechanisms, the 
tabulated state policies were grouped 
by the method used to adopt each 
policy. Nine groups or mechanisms 
were identified that captured the 
range of policy adoption mecha- 
nisms. Once the mechanisms were 
defined, each tabulated policy was 
placed into one of the nine groups 
(see appendix C). 

Data analysis. Data analysis in- 
volved five steps. The data from 
the key informant interviews were 
organized for use by the research- 
ers when questions arose about 
how Indian education operated in a 
particular state. Next, two research- 
ers independently compared the 
tabulated state policies with the key 
policies identified in the literature 
and determined whether a state had 
a policy that addressed a particular 
key policy or whether it did not (di- 
chotomous classification). Interrater 
reliability for this coding was 100 
percent. Researchers then deter- 
mined which policies were common 
to all five states. Short descriptions 
were written for each state policy 
and tabulated (appendix D). Finally, 
the policy mechanisms states used 
to adopt Indian education policy 
were classified and frequencies 
calculated. 



Thirteen key policies 

The following are the 13 key policies identified in 
the literature review: 

• Tribes have government-to-government status. 

• Tribes and state agencies are authorized to 
enter into contracts for Indian education. 



• State education agency has a state-funded 
Indian education coordinator. 

• Academic standards address Native American 
culture and history. 

• State has a policy to reduce the achievement gap 
between Native American and other students. 

• State has targeted funding of Indian education 
programs. 



4 



INDIAN EDUCATION POLICIES IN FIVE NORTHWEST REGION STATES 



• Native American students may learn their na- 
tive language as part of the education program. 

• Native American culture and history are part 
of school curriculum. 

• Native American community is involved on 
advisory boards. 

• Teacher certification is promoted for speakers 
of Native American languages. 

• All teachers are required to have training in 
Native American culture and history. 

• College scholarship or tuition assistance 
programs are provided for Native American 
students. 

• Tribal colleges have been established. 



Nine mechanisms for policy adoption 

Nine groups or mechanisms were identified that 
capture the range of policy adoption mechanisms 



in the Northwest Region states (see appendix C, 
tables C1-C5): 

• Statute or code. 

• Regulation or rule. 

• State plan, initiative, guideline, or program. 

• State board of education approval. 

• Executive order or proclamation. 

• Administrative action by state official. 

• State curriculum or student academic 
standards. 

• State constitution. 

• Official publication. 

Examination of the five Northwest Region states’ 
use of the 13 key policies showed that states ad- 
opted different combinations of the 13 key policies 
and that six of the key policies were common to all 
five states. 



TABLE 1 

Presence of key Indian education policies in the five Northwest Region states, 2008 



Key policy 


Alaska 


Idaho 


Montana 


Oregon 


Washington 


Tribes have government-to-government status 




✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


Tribes and state agencies are authorized to enter into 
contracts for Indian education 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 




State education agency has a state-funded Indian education 
coordinator 




✓ 


✓ 






Academic standards address Native American culture and 
history 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


State has a policy to reduce the achievement gap between 
Native American and other students 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 




✓ 


State has targeted funding of Indian education programs 






✓ 






Native American students may learn their native language 
as part of the education program 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


Native American culture and history are part of school 
curriculum 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


Native American community is involved on advisory boards 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


Teacher certification is promoted for speakers of Native 
American languages 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


All teachers are required to have training in Native American 
culture and history 


✓ 




✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


College scholarship or tuition assistance programs are 
provided for Native American students 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


Tribal colleges have been established 3 


✓ 




✓ 




✓ 



a. Tribal colleges are established by federal law, most recently in the Equity in Educational Land-Grant Status Act of 1994. Tribal colleges are included to keep 
the study consistent with the Zinth (2006) study and because a state may use tribal colleges to implement or further its Indian education policies. 

Source: Authors' analysis of data tabulated in appendix C, tables C1-C5. 





POLICY MECHANISMS 



5 



STATE ADOPTION OF THE 13 KEY POLICIES 

For each state the researchers tabulated the In- 
dian education policies that addressed the 13 key 
policies developed from the background literature 
(see box 2 and appendix A). Key informants were 
given two opportunities to review these tabulated 
policies for their state and to offer additions or 
corrections. Informants for three of the five states 
in the study added several additional policies. 
Then, the two study authors independently deter- 
mined whether a state had or did not have each of 
the 13 key policies. Interrater agreement was 100 
percent. 

Table 1 summarizes the findings for the five states. 



Policies that involve state 
funding were adopted less 
frequently than others. 

Only Idaho and Montana 
fund a state Indian edu- 
cation coordinator posi- 
tion in the state education 
agency, and only Montana has a policy targeting 
funding of education programs for Native Ameri 
can students. 



States adopted different 
combinations of the 13 
key policies, and six of 
the key policies were 
common to all five states 



POLICY MECHANISMS 

Table 3 shows the number of times that the nine 
policy adoption mechanisms were employed by 
the five states. 



COMMON POLICIES 

A policy was defined as common if it had been 
enacted in all five states. Six policies were identi- 
fied in all five states, four policies in four states, 
one policy in three states, one policy in two states, 
and another in one state (table 2). 



Laws passed by state legislatures (statutes or 
codes) were used slightly more often than all other 
policy mechanisms together. Regulations were the 
second most frequently used mechanism. The state 
constitution, official publications, and administra- 
tive actions were the least frequently used mecha- 
nisms for adopting Indian education policy. 



TABLE 2 

Key Indian education policies and their frequencies in the five Northwest Region states, 2008 



Key policy 


Number 
of states 


Academic standards address Native American culture and history 


5 


Native American students may learn their native language as part of the education program 


5 


Native American culture and history are part of school curriculum 


5 


Native American community is involved on advisory boards 


5 


Teacher certification is promoted for speakers of Native American languages 


5 


College scholarship or tuition assistance programs are provided for Native American students 


5 


Tribes have government-to-government status 


4 


Tribes and state agencies are authorized to enter into contracts for Indian education 


4 


State has a policy to reduce the achievement gap between Native American and other students 


4 


All teachers are required to have training in Native American culture and history 


4 


Tribal colleges have been established 


3 


State education agency has a state-funded Indian education coordinator 


2 


State has targeted funding of Indian education programs 


1 



Source: Authors' analysis of data tabulated in appendix C, tables C1-C5. 





6 



INDIAN EDUCATION POLICIES IN FIVE NORTHWEST REGION STATES 



TABLE 3 

Frequencies of mechanisms for adopting Indian 
education policies in the five Northwest Region 
states, 2008 



Mechanism 


Frequency 


Statute or code 


38 


Regulation or rule 


13 


State plan, initiative, guideline, or program 


8 


State board of education approval 


6 


Executive order or proclamation 


4 


State curriculum or student academic 
standards 


3 


Administrative action by state official 


1 


State constitution 


1 


Official publication 


1 


Total 


75 



Source: Authors' analysis of data tabulated in appendix C, tables C1-C5. 



CONCLUSION 

The study is the most comprehensive yet on this 
subject and shows that state policymakers have a 
variety of choices in deciding what Indian educa- 
tion policies to adopt and how to do so. While the 
states adopted different combinations of the 13 key 
policies, 6 policies have been put into practice in 
all five states: 

• Academic standards address Native American 
culture and history. 

• Native American culture and history are part 
of school curriculum. 

• Native American community is involved on 
advisory boards. 



• Teacher certification is promoted for speakers 
of Native American languages. 

• Native American students may learn their na- 
tive language as part of the education program. 

• College scholarship or tuition assistance 
programs are provided for Native American 
students. 

The presence of so many common policies shows 
their perceived value in the five states. The states 
used a variety of mechanisms for adopting Indian 
education policies, ranging from including Indian 
education in the state constitution to using admin- 
istrative actions by state officials. 



LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 

The purpose of the study was to identify Indian ed- 
ucation policies in the five Northwest Region states, 
compare them to key policies gleaned from previous 
research, and assess the mechanisms used by the 
states to adopt the policies. The study did not assess 
the merit of any of the policies, how successfully 
they were implemented, or what effect they had on 
Native American students’ academic achievement. 
Additionally, it is likely that some policies were 
overlooked. Considering that about half the policy 
mechanisms identified were state statutes, it is 
possible that policies adopted through mechanisms 
other than statutes may be underrepresented. Some 
policy documents were easier to locate than others, 
and six policies identified for the study were not 
obtained from the Internet search but came to light 
only during the key informant interviews. Future 
research will be needed to address these limitations. 




APPENDIX A. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 



7 



APPENDIX A 

DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 

This was a descriptive study conducted in three 
phases. Phase one was data collection using 
Internet and library searches to identify scholarly 
articles on Indian education and state Indian 
education policies. Interviews were conducted 
with key informants in each of the five state educa- 
tion agencies. Phase two was development of the 
analytic framework to identify key policies and 
mechanisms for adopting policies in the North- 
west Region states. Phase three was analysis of the 
state policies. 



Data collection 

Three data collection strategies were used. First, 
an Internet and library search identified scholarly 
articles on Indian education. A second Internet 
search of state education agencies and legislative 
web sites identified Indian education policies in 
the five Northwest Region states between February 
and April 2008. The final data collection activ- 
ity was interviewing key informants in the five 
state education agencies to verify and add to state 
policy information. Data collection from the key 
informants and the follow-up external check of the 
tabulated policies occurred between March and 
September 2008. Details of the interviews and the 
interview protocol are presented in appendix B. 

To develop a baseline against which to compare 
state policies, an Internet search located articles 
focused on Indian education policy. The search 
identified articles published during 1991-2008 in 
scholarly journals or by national organizations 
with an interest in Indian education policy. The 
articles were downloaded and printed. Additional 
hard copies of materials were located through 
searches of the Northwest Regional Educational 
Laboratory library and interlibrary loan system. 

Collecting the Indian education policies of the 
five Northwest Region states involved an Internet 
search of state education agency and state legisla- 
ture web sites to identify publicly available state 



statutes, regulations, and rules pertaining to the 
education of Native American students. These data 
came from state legislatures, state boards of educa- 
tion, state education agencies, and other state 
agencies involved in Indian education. 

The following three steps describe the search 
method. 

First, a set of search terms derived from the Indian 
education policies and procedures literature was 
used to locate information about state policies. The 
broad terms were paired or linked in searches of 
the relevant web sites to ensure complete discovery 
of pertinent information. The initial list of terms 
was Indian education, Indian education policy, 
Alaska Natives, American Indians, Native Ameri- 
cans, indigenous peoples, First Nations, Title VII, 
Johnson O’Malley, tribal, reservation(s), sover- 
eignty, and bilingual/bicultural. 

Second, when reviews of the identified policies 
revealed state-specific terminology, additional 
searches were conducted using those state-specific 
terms to identify other possible state policies. 

Third, if the information from the search refer- 
enced a state plan, such as a special grant, initia- 
tive, or professional development opportunity 
related to Indian education, a further search was 
conducted to see whether additional policy infor- 
mation was available. 

The research questions and the data sources and 
data analysis techniques used to address them are 
summarized in table Al. 

State web sites. The following are the state web 
sites where the searches occurred. 

Alaska 

• Alaska state legislature (http://w3.1egis. state, 
ak.us/index.php). 

• Alaska Department of Education and Early 
Development (www.eed.state.ak.us/). 



8 



INDIAN EDUCATION POLICIES IN FIVE NORTHWEST REGION STATES 



TABLE A1 

Summary of research questions, data sources, and data analysis techniques 



Research question 


Data source 


Data analysis 




Literature collected through an Internet 
search of Indian education-related 
web sites and articles collected from 
the Northwest Regional Educational 
Laboratory library 


• Identify a set of "key policies" 


What state policies govern the 
education of Native American students 
in the five Northwest Region states? 


Indian education policies collected from 
the web sites of state legislatures and 
education agencies 


• Tabulate policies by state 

• Conduct internal and external checks 
of policies to ensure completeness 

• Briefly summarize each policy and 
tabulate 




Structured interviews with an informant 
in each of the five states and follow-up 
reviews 


• Tabulate interview data and analyze 
to supplement Internet data 
collection and inform the study 






• Verify tabulated policies are 
complete (key informant review) 


What Indian education policies are 
common to all five Northwest Region 
states? 


Indian education policies collected from 
the five states 


• Code state policies against the 13 key 
policies to identify common policies 
across the five states 






• Classify each state policy by the 

mechanism the states used to adopt it 


What policy mechanisms are used to 
adopt Indian education policy in the five 
Northwest Region states? 


Indian education policies collected from 
the five states 


• Define a set of policy mechanisms 

• Classify state policies by policy 
mechanisms 

• Compute frequencies of policy 
mechanisms 




Structured interviews with five key 
informants and follow-up reviews 


• Review interview data to clarify 
policy mechanisms 



Source: Authors' analysis. 



• Alaska Standards (www.eed.state.ak.us/ 
standards/). 

• Alaska Standards for Culturally Responsive 
Schools (www.ankn.uaf.edu/ 
publications/fstandards). 

Idaho 



• Idaho State Department of Education (www. 
sde.idaho.gov/). 

• Idaho content standards (www.sde.state.id.us/ 
ContentStandards/default.asp). 



• Bylaws of Idaho Indian Education Committee 
(ww w. sde .idaho .gov/ site/native_american/ 
by_laws.htm). 

Montana 

• Montana state legislature (http://leg.mt.gov/ 
css/default.asp). 

Montana Office of Public Instruction (www. 
opi.state.mt.us/). 

• Montana content standards (http://opi.mt.gov/ 
accred/cStandards.html). 

• Montana Indian Education for All (http://opi. 
mt.gov/indianed2/). 



• Idaho state legislature (www.legislature.idaho. 
gov/). 




APPENDIX A. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 



9 



Oregon 

• Oregon state legislature (www.leg.state.or.us/). 

• Oregon bills and laws (www.leg.state.or.us/ 
bills_laws/). 

• Oregon Department of Education (www.ode. 
state.or.us/). 

• Oregon content standards (www.ode.state. 
or.us/search/results/?id=53). 

• Oregon Indian Education Resource Guide 
(www.ode.state.or.us/opportunities/grants/ 
nclb/title_vii/ai_anguide. aspx) . 

Washington 

• Washington state legislature (www.leg.wa.gov/ 
legislature). 

• Washington Office of Superintendent of Public 
Instruction (www.kl2.wa.us/). 

• Washington content standards 
(www.washingtonpavilion.org/ 
communitylearningcenter/ContentStandards. 
cfm). 

• Proposed standards for culturally responsive 
schools: Indian education plan for Washing- 
ton state (www.wce.wwu.edu/Resources/CEP/ 
METT/2006/Indian%20Education%20 
Strategic%20Plan.pdf). 

Data verification. To ensure that the Indian educa- 
tion policies identified included the entire range 
of legal methods that states use to adopt policies, 
key words guided the search. Once state Indian 
education policies were located, documents were 
downloaded, printed, and tabulated by state. As an 
internal check to ensure that the list was accurate 
and to reduce the number of overlooked poli- 
cies, a second researcher then located each of the 
tabulated policies on the Internet and verified its 
existence. 



Interviews were conducted with a key informant 
in each state education agency to collect additional 
information and to inform the research staff of the 
particulars of Indian education in each state. The 
interviews also served as an external check on the 
completeness of the Internet searches. Before the on- 
site visit each key informant received a copy of the 
tabulated policies for the state and asked to review it. 
During the on-site visit key informants were asked 
whether they believed that all relevant policies had 
been identified. Respondents identified several addi- 
tional policies, and these were added to the tabulated 
lists. Several months later, prior to the data analy- 
sis, the tabulated state policies were again shown to 
respondents as a final check on completeness. 



Analytic frameworks 

Two frameworks were developed to analyze the 
state policy data. The first framework provided a 
means for comparing state Indian education poli- 
cies against a set of key policies identified from the 
literature review. The second framework provided 
a means for defining the policy mechanisms that 
states used to adopt Indian education policy and 
for calculating the frequencies of the various 
mechanisms. 

Identifying key policies. A search of the recent 
literature on Indian education policies was used 
to develop a framework for analyzing state poli- 
cies. The search of the Internet and materials in 
the Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory 
library and interlibrary loan system led to the web 
sites of the following organizations, from which 
articles were downloaded: 

• Office of Indian Education, U.S. Department 
of Education (www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ 
oese/oie/index.html). 

• Center for Indian Education, Mary Lou Fulton 
College of Education, Arizona State University 
(http://coe.asu.edu/cie/). 

• National Caucus of Native American State 
Legislators (Education Committee), National 



10 



INDIAN EDUCATION POLICIES IN FIVE NORTHWEST REGION STATES 



Conference of State Legislators (www.ncsl.org/ 
programs/statetribe/nativecaucus.htm). 

• Education Commission of the States (www. 
ecs.org/ecsmain.asp?page=/html/IssuesK12. 
asp). 

• American Indian Education Founda- 
tion (www.nrcprograms.org/site/ 
PageServer?pagename=aief_index). 

• National Indian Education Association (www. 
niea.org/). 

• American Indian Higher Education Consor- 
tium (www.aihec.org/). 

• American Education Research Association, 
Indigenous Peoples of the Americas (www. 
coe.missouri.edu/~ipa/). 

• The Council of Chief State School Officers, 
Strengthening Partnerships for American 
Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawai- 
ian Education (www.ccsso.org/projects/ 
Native_American_Student_Education/). 

• Journal of American Indian Education, 
published by the Center for Indian Educa- 
tion, American Indian Education, Northern 
Arizona University (http://jaie.asu.edu/). 

• American Indian Education (http://jan.ucc. 
nau.edu/~jar/AIE/index.html). 

• Indian Education at the Northwest Regional 
Educational Laboratory (www.nwrel.org/indi- 
aned/index.php). 

The search identified 30 studies that discussed In- 
dian education policies. Two selection criteria were 

then used to develop a list of articles that would be 

the source for key policies: 

• Articles must discuss Indian education poli- 
cies at the state level (as opposed to the local 
level). 



• Articles must have been published during 
1991-2008, the period when major federal 
school accountability mandates, including the 
No Child Left Behind Act, were enacted. 

Applying these criteria resulted in the selection of 
11 studies (see reference list for details). 

Policies mentioned in the 11 studies had to meet 
three criteria to be considered a key policy: 

• Pertain to Indian education. 

• Concern the K-12 education system. 

• Specify a policy approach, not merely high- 
light an area of concern. 

For example, a report from the National Caucus of 
Native American State Legislators (2008) pointed 
out numerous risk factors affecting the academic 
performance of Native American students. The re- 
port recommended, among other things, that states 
“promote tribal certification for teaching Native 
language, culture, and oral traditions” (p. 28). That 
policy was thus added to the list of key policies. 

The review identified 13 key policies. Table A2 
presents key policies and their sources. 

Identifying policy mechanisms. A framework for 
classifying policies was prepared to determine the 
range and frequency of the legal means used by 
states to adopt Indian education policies. The tabu- 
lated policies were grouped by the method used 
to adopt each policy . Nine groups or mechanisms 
were established that captured the range of policies. 

In most cases the terms used to describe the 
mechanisms were obviously associated with 
policy. “Statutes” and “codes” are laws passed by 
a state legislature. “Regulations” are rules devised 
by state education agencies and state boards of 
education to implement statutes. 

In other cases the document containing the policy 
was titled “state plan,” “initiative,” “executive 



APPENDIX A. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 



11 



TABLE A2 

Sources of key Indian education policies in the five Northwest Region states, 1995-2008 



Source 



Key policy 



o> to 

«/l C Q O 

D ro rN co 

U u w ro fN 

ro aj £ ^ c 

u £ §5 ^ .2 

ro ro 

= oj 25 c ~ 

.2 .> .2 o 

TO TO TO $ 



cn ’> i/i , 

z> U z> 



Tribes have government-to-government 
status 










✓ 






Tribes and state agencies are authorized to 
enter into contracts for Indian education 














✓ 


State education agency has a state-funded 
Indian education coordinator 








✓ 








Academic standards address Native 
American culture and history 








✓ 








State has a policy to reduce the achievement 
gap between Native American and other 
students 






✓ 






✓ 




State has targeted funding of Indian 
education programs 






✓ 










Native American students may learn their 
native language as part of the education 
program 


✓ 


✓ ✓ 








✓ 


✓ 


Native American culture and history are part 
of school curriculum 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ 




✓ 






Native American community is involved on 
advisory boards 


✓ 


✓ ✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


✓ ✓ 


✓ ✓ 




Teacher certification is promoted for 
speakers of Native American languages 




✓ 


✓ 










All teachers are required to have training in 
Native American culture and history 


✓ 




✓ 




✓ 


✓ 




College scholarship or tuition assistance 
programs are provided for Native American 
students 






✓ 




✓ 


✓ 


✓ 


Tribal colleges have been established 














✓ 



Source: Authors' analysis based on cited sources. 



order,” or “proclamation.” These terms describ- 
ing the mechanisms were accepted verbatim. 
“Official publication” seemed to best describe a 
document published by a state education agency. 
Likewise “state curriculum” or “student academic 
standards” seemed to properly describe a state-de- 
veloped curriculum or curriculum guide and the 
state’s student content and performance standards. 



In the case of “administrative action by state offi- 
cial,” the key informant for the state used “admin- 
istrative action” to describe the mechanism. Each 
policy tabulated in appendix C was classified on 
the basis of one of the nine mechanisms. 

The nine mechanisms identified are presented in 
the main report in table 3. 




12 



INDIAN EDUCATION POLICIES IN FIVE NORTHWEST REGION STATES 



Data analysis 

Data analysis involved five steps. First, the data ob- 
tained in key informant interviews were tabulated. 
Second, identified state policies were compared 
with the key policies identified in the literature. 
Third, a count of the states that had adopted each 
policy was made to determine which policies were 
common to all five states, and short descriptions 
were written for each policy. Finally, the policy 
mechanisms states used to adopt the education pol- 
icy were classified and frequencies were calculated. 

Data from the interviews of five key state infor- 
mants were organized by interview question, to 
allow for a quick review of the responses to each 
question. Researchers reviewed these responses 
when questions arose about how Indian education 
policies operated in a particular state. 



The tabulated state policies were compared with 
the key policies developed for the analytic frame- 
work (see table 1). The two researchers made 
independent dichotomous classifications for 
each state policy: a state either had a policy that 
addressed a particular key policy or it did not. 

In cases where a state had a policy, but adopting 
it was left to the discretion of local agencies, the 
state was given credit for the policy. States were 
also given credit for policies that were simply 
statements of intent or goals. Interrater reliability 
for coding the state policies to the key policies 
was 100 percent. The researchers then counted 
the number of policies that were common to all 
five states. A short description of each state policy 
tabulated in appendix C was then prepared (see 
appendix D). The final data analysis consisted of 
determining how frequently each policy mecha- 
nism was used. 



APPENDIX B. KEY INFORMANT INTERVIEWS AND INTERVIEW PROTOCOL 



13 



APPENDIX B 

KEY INFORMANT INTERVIEWS 

AND INTERVIEW PROTOCOL 

Face-to-face interviews were conducted with a 
key informant in each state education agency to 
confirm that the information from the literature 
and government web site searches was complete 
and that project staff understood the background, 
context, and adoption mechanisms of the state 
education agency Indian education policies. 

Key informants were identified by contacting the 
office of the chief state school officer or the state 
education agency public information officer identi- 
fied on state web sites. A request was made to inter- 
view the professional staff person in each education 
agency who was the Indian education coordinator 
or the coordinator for the federal Title VII program 
(Indian, Native Hawaiian, and Alaska Native Educa- 
tion) of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001. 

An email message was sent to each informant with 
a short description of the study. In a subsequent 
telephone call, the researchers answered questions 
about the study and set a tentative date for the 
face-to-face interview. Draffs of the tabulated poli- 
cies for each state were sent in an email for review 
prior to the interviews. An interview protocol was 
drafted to guide the interviews (box Bl). 



Four of the interviews were conducted with the 
person originally identified as the key infor- 
mant. One key informant was unable to be at the 
interview and sent a substitute. At two of the sites 
a second person sat in on the interview. One was 
a representative of the chief state school officer, 
and the other was a support staff person who was 
knowledgeable about the history and development 
of Indian education in the state. 

At the time of the interview, the researcher pro- 
vided a short overview of the study and explained 
its purpose. Key informants were assured that 
they would not be quoted in the final report and 
that they would have an opportunity to review the 
section of the report that addressed their state. 

The interviews averaged about 45 minutes. This 
included time for probing questions if the initial 
response was not clear and, in several cases, for 
the key informant to locate additional informa- 
tion. Complete information was collected from all 
five states. 

The researcher took notes by hand and transcribed 
them on the day of the interview. 

Each key informant was sent the final draft of 
the tabulated policies for the state for review 
and comment. No additional comments were 
received. 



