DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 402 703 



EC 305 211 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



INSTITUTION 

SPONS AGENCY 

REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
CONTRACT 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 
PUB TYPE 



Frasier, Mary M. ; And Others 

Core Attributes of Giftedness: A Foundation for 
Recognizing the Gifted Potential of Minority and 
Economically Disadvantaged Students* 

National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, 
Storrs, CT* 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED) , 
Washington, DC. 

RM-95210 
Sep 95 
R206R00001 
53p . 

NRC/GT, University of Connecticut, 362 Fairfield 
Road, U-7, Storrs, CT 06269-2007. 

Reports ~ Research/Technical (143) — Information 
Analyses (070) 



EDRS PRICE MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS *Ability Identification; American Indians; Black 

Students; ’Economically Disadvantaged; Elementary 
Secondary Education; Evaluation Methods; ’'Gifted 
Disadvantaged; Hispanic Americans; Language 
Minorities; ’’'Minority Groups; ’’'Student 
Characteristics; ’'Student Evaluation 
IDENTIFIERS African Americans; Hispanic American Students; Native 

Americans 



ABSTRACT 

This report explores the characteristics of 
giftedness in minority, language minority, and economically 
disadvantaged student populations and ways to assess giftedness in 
these populations. A qualitative content analysis is used to analyze 
gifted literature to determine characteristics of gifted children in 
general (n=262) and characteristics of gifted children from specific 
cultural groups (n=95) , including African Americans, Native 
Americans, and Hispanics. Ten core attributes of giftedness are 
identified: communication skills, imagination/creativity, humor, 
inquiry, insight, interests, memory, motivation, problem-solving, and 
reasoning. A general description accompanies each identified 
attribute. Implications are discussed for using these core attributes 
to facilitate educators’ recognition of gifted abilities in student 
populations from minority or economically disadvantaged families and 
areas, and to guide educators in the selection of measures for 
identification of minority or economically disadvantaged families and 
areas. Recommendations for educators include the use of a variety of 
evaluation measures to assess giftedness and the use of standards to 
interpret performance on tests that accommodate the differences in 
the expression of gifted students from diverse backgrounds. An 
appendix includes a list of categories of giftedness and relevant 
checklist indicators for the different categories. (Contains 74 
references .) (Author /CR) 



M 




THE NATIONAL 
RESEARCH CENTER 
ON THE f*” 



mm 





The University of Georgia 




O 

Ui 





Th if /LMwsmly ©f C©m®©fs©ut 
Th <b Umiiiw®ir§iity ©f Qmtrgm 
Th <s UmmmBity ©f VSirgSm® 

YbS® Umw®ir&l$y 



Core Attributes of Giftedness: 

A Foundation for Recognizing the 
Gifted Potential of Minority and 
Economically Disadvantaged 



Students 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 



Mary M. Frasier D 
Scott L. Hunsaker ^ 
Jongyeun Lee 
Sandra Mitchell 
Bonnie Cramond 
Sally Krisel 
Jaime H. Garcia 
Darlene Martin 
Elaine Frank 
Vernon S. Finley 
The University of Georgia 
Athens, Georgia 



Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



I 



j 



September 1995 
Number RM95210 



2 



Core Attributes of Giftedness: A Foundation for 
Recognizing the Gifted Potential of Minority and 
Economically Disadvantaged Students 



Mary M. Frasier 
Scott L. Hunsaker 
Jongyeun Lee 
Sandra Mitchell 
Bonnie Cramond 
Sally Krisel 
Jaime H. Garcia 
Darlene Martin 
Elaine Frank 
Vernon S. Finley 
The University of Georgia 
Athens, Georgia 



September 1995 
Number RM95210 



THE NATIONAL 
RESEARCH CENTER 
ON THE GIFTED 
AND TALENTED 



The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented (NRC/GT) is funded under the 
Jacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Act, Office of Educational 
Research and Improvement, United States Department of Education. 

The Directorate of the NRC/GT serves as the administrative unit and is located at 
The University of Connecticut. 

The participating universities include The University of Georgia, The University of 
Vir ginia , and Yale University, as well as a research unit at The University of 
Connecticut. 



The University of Connecticut 
Dr. Joseph S. Renzulli, Director 
Dr. E. Jean Gubbins, Assistant Director 

The University of Connecticut 
Dr. Francis X. Archambault, Associate Director 

The University of Georgia 
Dr. Mary M. Frasier, Associate Director 

The University of Virginia 
Dr. Carolyn M. Callahan, Associate Director 

Yale University 

Dr. Robert J. Sternberg, Associate Director 



Copies of this report are available from: 
NRC/GT 



The University of Connecticut 
362 Fairfield Road, U-7 
Storrs, CT 06269-2007 



Research for this report was supported under the Javits Act Program (Grant No. R206R00001) as 
administered by the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of 
Education. Grantees undertaking such projects are encouraged to express freely their professional 
judgement This report, therefore, does not necessarily represent positions or policies of the 
Government and no official endorsement should be inferred. 




ii 



4 



Note to Readers, 



All papers by The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented may be 
reproduced in their entirety or in sections. All reproductions, whether in part or 
whole, should include the following statement: 

Research for this report was supported under the Javits Act Program 
(Grant No. R206R00001) as administered by the Office of Educational 
Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education. Grantees 
undertaking such projects are encouraged to express freely their 
professional judgement. This report, therefore, does not necessarily 
represent positions or policies of the Government, and no official 
endorsement should be inferred. 

This document has been reproduced with the permission of The 
National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented. 

If sections of the papers are printed in other publications, please forward a copy to: 

The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented 
The University of Connecticut 
362 Fairfield Road, U-7 
Storrs, CT 06269-2007 




Core Attributes of Giftedness: A Foundation for Recognizing 

the Gifted Potential of Minority and Economically 
Disadvantaged Students 

Mary M. Frasier 
Scott L. Hunsaker 
Jongyeun Lee 
Sandra Mitchell 
Bonnie Cramond 
Sally Krisel 
Jaime H. Garcia 
Darlene Martin 
Elaine Frank 
Vernon S. Finley 
The University of Georgia 
Athens, Georgia 

ABSTRACT 



Identifying the core attributes associated with the giftedness construct would 
provide a better basis for establishing procedures to recognize, identify, and plan 
educational experiences for gifted students from minority or economically disadvantaged 
families and areas. A qualitative content analysis method was used to analyze phrases and 
sentences in literature on the gifted to establish core attributes of giftedness. Data for this 
analysis were collected from two sources: (a) literature on characteristics of gifted children 
in general, and (b) literature on characteristics of gifted children from specific cultural 
groups, e.g., African Americans, Native Americans, and Hispanics. Ten core attributes 
were identified: communication skills, imagination/creativity, humor, inquiry, insight, 
interests, memory, motivation, problem-solving, and reasoning. Implications are 
discussed for using these core attributes: (a) to facilitate educators' recognition of gifted 
abilities in student populations from minority or economically disadvantaged families and 
areas, and (b) to guide educators in the selection of measures for identification of minority 
or economically disadvantaged families and areas. 



Core Attributes of Giftedness: A Foundation for Recognizing 

the Gifted Potential of Minority and Economically 
Disadvantaged Students 

Mary M. Frasier 
Scott L. Hunsaker 
Jongyeun Lee 
Sandra Mitchell 
Bonnie Cramond 
Sally Krisel 
Jaime H. Garcia 
Darlene Martin 
Elaine Frank 
Vernon S. Finley 
The University of Georgia 
Athens, Georgia 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Introduction 

An ultimate goal of gifted educators is to recognize, as early as possible, those 
children who show potential for exceptional performance as adults and to provide them 
with the special instruction they need to develop that potential. A common assertion is that 
children who show this potential for exceptional performance are present in every segment 
of society (Baldwin, 1991; Clark, 1992; Davis & Rimm, 1994; Gallagher, 1994b; Kitano 
& Kirby, 1986; Maker, 1983; Marland, 1972; Pendarvis, Howley, & Howley, 1990). 
However, it is consistently observed that gifted and talented children who are members of 
minority populations, who have limited proficiency in the English language (LEP), or who 
come from economically disadvantaged families and areas are underrepresented in 
programs for the gifted (Ford & Harris, 1990; Frasier, in press; Gallagher, 1991; 
Gallagher & Courtright, 1988). 

One of the reasons given to explain the underrepresentation of these students in 
gifted programs relates to the ability of educators to recognize their display of "gifted 
behaviors" (Baca & Chinn, 1982; Bermudez & Rakow, 1990; Bernal, 1980; Dabney, 

1988; Leung, 1981; Pendarvis, Howley, & Howley, 1990; Whitmore, 1982). These 
authors suggest that the low socioeconomic status (SES), minority group membership, or 
limited competence in the use of the English language of these children may negatively 
affect the identification of these children as gifted. As Gallagher (1994b) notes, for 
example, difficulties in trying to sort out the unique characteristics of minority gifted 
students may be related to the fact that many of diem come from poverty homes. Clark 
(1992) maintains that "A major problem encountered in providing for gifted students 
among the low SES population is the attitude, shared by teachers and parents alike, that 
giftedness could not exist in this population" (p. 428). According to Callahan and Mclntire 
(1994), the emphasis on remediation rather than development of talent may account for the 
low recognition of gifted Native American and Alaska Native students. Others have made 
similar observations about the emphasis on remediation rather than on the development of 
talent in minority groups (Baldwin, 1991; Cummins, 1989; Ford & Harris, 1990; Hilliard, 
1991; Samuda, Kong, Cummins, Pascual-Leone, & Lewis, 1989). The purpose of this 



paper is to explore a different perspective for observing and assessing characteristics of 
giftedness in minority, LEP, and economically disadvantaged student populations. 

First, a summary of what we know about the attributes of gifted and high achieving 
students from minority or economically disadvantaged families and areas is presented. 
Second, a proposal for focusing on core attributes that underlie the giftedness construct as a 
more viable basis for observing and identifying giftedness in minority or economically 
disadvantaged student groups is presented. A description of how a set of core attributes of 
giftedness was derived is also provided. Finally, implications for using these core 
attributes as the basis for a paradigm that better addresses the identification and education of 
gifted students from underrepresented populations are presented. 

Target Populations 

Race, ethnicity, culture, minority group status, low socioeconomic status, 
handicapped status, preschool and primary aged children, and gender have all been used to 
label students who are underrepresented or underserved in programs for gifted children 
(Gallagher, 1994a; Passow, 1982; Richert, 1991; VanTassel-Baska, Patton, & Prillaman, 
1991; Whitmore & Maker, 1985). It is beyond the scope of this paper to address each one 
of these groups. Because African American, Native American, and Hispanic students have 
been and continue to be the most prominent subjects when underrepresentation in gifted 
programs is discussed, it is these gifted students who are the focus in this paper. For the 
most part, these students will be referred to as the target population. Labels such as 
minority, culturally different, and economically disadvantaged are frequently used 
interchangeably in the literature and in practice to refer to the students who are the target 
population in this paper. Therefore, anyone of these terms will be used in this paper as 
appropriate. 



Scope of the Literature Review 

The literature chosen for review in this paper was selected if it contained primary 
descriptions of the cognitive and affective characteristics of target population students. 
Causes for any of these descriptions are included only if they are an integral part of the 
discussion of their characteristics. However, the primary concern is not the cause but the 
characteristics of these students that have emerged over the years. 

Because of the limited base of empirical research investigating the attributes of 
gifted target students, some of the descriptions have evolved from speculative opinions and 
conclusions derived from practice or experience. However, as Ogawa and Malen (1991) 
have observed, such literature can still provide important insights because of the meanings 
people attach to the phenomenon of interest, in this case the gifted potential in students 
from target populations. 

Many of the studies and other reports explicitly describing the characteristics of 
target students were carried out from 1960 through the 1980s. One of the reasons may be 
that the objectives of researchers and practitioners during this period were primarily 
focused on developing theories to account for cultural deficiencies or cultural differences. 
More recently, studies and reports have focused on developing identification strategies and 
programs to address the educational and environmental deficiencies that impede the 
identification of gifted target students. 



O 

ERIC 



Vlll 



8 



What We Know About Attributes of Giftedness in Target 

Student Populations 

Findings from several research studies and reports have recounted the attributes of 
gifted or high achieving target population students. The reports and studies reviewed here 
are concerned with comparisons within and between groups and descriptions based on 
studies of specific cultural and disadvantaged groups. The themes of these studies and 
reports are concerned with personality variables, motivation to achieve, cognitive attributes, 
and other behavioral descriptions. 

Between-Group and Within-Group Comparison Studies and Reports 

Frierson (1965) was interested in the effects of cultural deprivation on the 
development of talent. He undertook a study to determine any significant differences 
between upper and lower status students who were divided into four groups: (a) upper 
status gifted students, (b) lower socioeconomic status gifted students, (c) upper status 
average students, and (d) lower socioeconomic status average students. Frierson 
concluded that differences between the two groups of gifted children were clearly 
associated with differences in their socioeconomic status. 

Other studies comparing target population students were concerned with differences 
in self-concept, personality variables, and other factors attributing to their success. Tidwell 
(1981) conducted a study of the characteristics that distinguished gifted minority and low 
socioeconomic status children from their nongifted peers. Children in this study were 
selected for gifted program participation by criteria that did not rely on intelligence test 
scores as the primary criterion. She found that they had significantly higher self-concepts 
than nonselected students. Davidson and Greenberg (1967) compared differences in 
personality variables between high and low achievers from lower class backgrounds. 
Attributes that distinguished between the two lower class groups were found to be very 
similar to those that distinguish between middle class achievers and underachievers. Glaser 
and Ross (1970) retroactively investigated factors that contributed to the differential success 
rates of individuals growing up in disadvantaged environments. Fourteen factors were 
found to distinguish between successful Mexican American and African American males 
and those who were successful. Successful subjects were described as (a) having a strong 
sense of self, pride, and worth; (b) being able to free themselves from the negative 
conditions of their environment; (c) having a strong belief that hard work or study would 
pay off, and (d) being effective in their ability to channel any rage they felt over being 
disadvantaged into strategic actions. Further, successful subjects were attracted by goals 
such as creativity and self-determination, and had high risk-taking capacities especially 
when experimenting. 

While results of studies comparing personality or nonintellective traits of gifted 
advantaged and disadvantaged children appear to reveal many similarities across cultural 
and economic boundaries, significant but more negative differences in cognitive 
functioning have been reported in other studies. Tannenbaum (1983) suggested that these 
differences are most evident in cognitive organizing as is demonstrated by the lowered 
performance of disadvantaged gifted children on tests of mental ability. Sisk (1973) 
concurred when she describes the deficiencies in cognitive functioning of disadvantaged 
gifted students as evidenced by their limited vocabularies, use of nonstandard grammar, 
inability to observe and state sequences of events, inability to perceive cause and effect 
relationships, and inability to categorize. 




ix 



9 



A different view of the cognitive competencies of African American individuals, 
including children, is presented by Shade (1991). Drawing from several sources, she 
concluded that African Americans appear to have high motoric capabilities and use visual 
perception as a way of protecting and orienting themselves in the environment rather than 
for gathering information. African American children are also largely trained to concentrate 
more on people rather than non-people type information, thus being more people than 
object oriented. Shade also pointed to a preference among African Americans for affective 
materials and a high level of social interaction in their learning environments. Whereas 
Tannenbaum (1983) and Sisk (1973) saw cognitive differences as deficiencies that underlie 
the low test performance of African American children and their weak performances in the 
classroom. Shade noted that the differences really reflected cognitive strengths that are 
expressed in distinct ways due to differences in information processing preferences and 
differences in information analysis and organization. 

Bruch (1971) isolated patterns of cognitive strengths among southeastern African 
American students using an abbreviated version of the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Test. 

She concluded that these students evidenced strengths in visual, auditory, and figural 
content (e.g., art and music); memory; convergent production in practical problem-solving 
situations; awareness of details of descriptions; fluency of ideas; spontaneous 
categorization and classification of spatial items; and awareness of natural relationships or 
systems. Similarly, Meeker (1978) used the Structure of Intellect (SOI) to determine that 
the pattern of gifted strengths among Navajo children included auditory memory and figural 
ability. 



Finally, Baldwin (1978) described the common characteristics of students whose 
achievement might be negatively affected by cultural diversity, socioeconomically deprived 
status, and geographic isolation. Her list of characteristics included descriptions of their 
communication and learning styles as characterized by a language that is rich in imagery 
and is persuasive, a sensitiveness and alertness to movement, and an intuitive grasp of 
situations. She also described these children as (a) having strong group affiliations; (b) 
being skilled in dealing with their environment; (c) being adept at logical reasoning, 
planning, and pragmatic problem solving; (d) having a high tolerance for ambiguities; (e) 
having the ability to produce inventive and revolutionary ideas; and (f) being flexible and 
fluent thinkers. 

Descriptions Specifically Related to Giftedness in Specific Minority Groups 
and Gifted Economically Disadvantaged Students 



Hispanics 

Bernal (1974) conducted a study to determine behavioral descriptors of gifted 
Mexican American students. Attributes or characteristics with the highest discriminant 
power were found to be related to these children's leadership behaviors, acceptance of adult 
authority, self-control, and above-average school performance. Zappia (1989) provided a 
similar description of Hispanic children when she describes their language preference, 
proficiency, and use patterns (in both languages) in the home, school, and community. 
Other attributes include their being able to successfully function in two cultures and to 
communicate fluently, even if the English used is non-standard (Maker & Schiever, 1989). 

Native Americans 

Tonemah and Brittan (1985) noted the strong tribal perspective associated with the 
concept of giftedness in their description of gifted attributes of Native American students. 
They delineated characteristics of gifted potential in four areas: (a) acquired skills in 




x 



language, learning, and technological skills; (b) tribal/cultural understanding referring to 
their exceptional knowledge of ceremonies, tribal traditions, and other tribes; (c) 
personal/human/qualities such as high intelligence, visionary/inquisitive/intuitive, respectful 
of elders, and creative skills; and (d) aesthetic abilities, referring to unusual talents in the 
visual and performing arts, and arts based in the Indian culture. Garrison (1989) described 
gifted Native American individuals as tending to be less dependent on language to 
communicate ideas, to leam by observation and to teach by modeling, and to consider the 
group more important than the individual. 

African Americans 

Hilliard (1976) concluded that gifted African American children demonstrate a 
synthetic-personal style. That is, they tend to approach the world in a way that allows them 
to bring together divergent experiences and to distill them to discover the essence of a 
matter without undue concern for all the small pieces which go to make up a given 
experience. This is in contrast to the atomistic-objective style wherein the habitual pattern 
for approaching an experience involves an attempt to break down that experience into 
components which can be understood. 

Lee (1984, 1989) concluded from his study of successful rural African American 
adolescents, that they have positive self-concepts linked to their extended view of 
themselves as members of collective family and community systems, possess traditional 
values associated with their religious faith, and have good interpersonal relationships. 

They are also successful in school and active in a variety of extra-curricular activities. In 
addition these successful youth are keenly aware of future occupational opportunities and 
understand the education they must acquire to be prepared for such opportunities. Shade 
(1981) concluded from her study of educationally successful African American middle 
class students that the males are more introverted, emotionally stable, and more shrewd, 
though less expressive than males in the standardized sample of the Coan-Cattell Early 
School Personality Questionnaire (ESPQ). Females were found to be more introverted and 
less expressive, more independent and less in need of protection, and displayed a tendency 
to be less placid, conforming, and tranquil than females in the standardized sample. Both 
males and females were very aware that to achieve their goals they must leam how to 
operate within the framework of certain expectations of their school and community, while 
also maintaining their concept of self-determination. 

Economically Disadvantaged Children 

As a result of observations made during a series of summer workshops conducted 
with disadvantaged children, Torrance (1971, 1977) developed a checklist to help guide the 
search for giftedness in culturally different groups. He named this checklist The Checklist 
of Creative Positives. Attributes included on the checklist are concerned with (a) problem 
solving skills (e.g., originality of ideas in problem solving, fluency and flexibility in figural 
media); (b) communication styles (e.g., use of expressive speech, use of colorful language 
rich with imagery); and (c) learning styles (e.g., enjoyment of skills in group activities). It 
also includes descriptions of (a) interests and activities enjoyed by culturally different 
children (e.g., enjoyment of and ability in music, rhythm, creative movement, dance, 
dramatics); and (b) descriptions of the typical methods these children use to respond to 
various stimuli (e.g., high emotional responsiveness, exceptional ability to express feelings 
and emotions). 



A Summary of Themes 



The literature reflects a strong tendency to focus on (a) similarities and differences 
in personality traits between gifted minority and majority students, (b) unique learning and 
communication styles presumed to be characteristics of specific cultural groups, and (c) the 
exceptional abilities that gifted target students demonstrate as they negotiate between their 
culture and the majority culture. Different issues shape the approach to the research and 
other writings developed to describe the characteristics of gifted target students. One 
approach was to focus on deficiencies. The emphasis is on economic disadvantage and its 
effects on cognitive functioning, performance in academic areas, and on general educational 
background and experiences. Another approach focused on these children's cognitive and 
creative strengths as revealed through testing and observing. Yet another approach was 
shaped by comparing the characteristics of disadvantaged students with advantaged 
students. Finally, an approach was developed out of a perceived need to base 
characteristics of gifted target students on results from investigations carried out within a 
specific cultural group. 

These different approaches may well be the result of the continuous search that has 
been conducted to find effective ways to resolve the difficulties that minority students face 
in gaining recognition of their gifts and talents. They may also represent the many factors 
that must go far beyond descriptions of relevant characteristics of giftedness when 
describing gifted minority children. More than for any other group, these more extended 
discussions must include concerns with (a) discrimination in American society, (b) the 
value of efforts to establish the concept of giftedness within the boundaries of a specific 
cultural group, (c) the need to distinguish the meaning of giftedness within a minority 
group from the meaning of giftedness in the Euro- American culture, (d) the inadequacies of 
traditional assessment measures and procedures to identify gifted minority students, and (e) 
the effort that must be put forth to reconcile the concept of individual recognition for 
excellence with cultural concepts that emphasize group solidarity as a unique cultural 
feature. 



As noted earlier, one of the problems felt to impact the representation of target 
population students in programs for the gifted is related to the inability of educators to 
recognize these students' display of gifted behaviors in the classroom. Plans to address 
this concern by describing giftedness in economically disadvantaged and limited English 
proficient populations were an integral part of a project at The University of Georgia 
(Frasier, 1990). The overall goal of this project was to develop a more effective way to 
facilitate the recognition of gifted children from these groups. A proposal to focus on the 
core attributes underlying the giftedness construct as a more viable basis for characterizing 
giftedness in these students is presented in this section. The method by which these 
attributes were developed is summarized along with suggestions for using the core 
attributes as the foundation for developing observation and identification programs to better 
recognize the gifted potential in target population student groups. 

In the initial phase of our project, educators were asked to provide a prototypical 
description of a target population child they felt was bright. These educators were asked to 
focus on describing intellectual and specific academic aptitudes because school programs 
most often address exceptional abilities in these two areas. A guide to assist them in 
developing their descriptions was created using (a) two of the intelligences proposed by 
Gardner (1983) — linguistic and logical-mathematical, (b) the five generic characteristics 



Attributes Underlying the Giftedness Construct 



XU 




ERIC 



proposed by Gallagher and Kinney (1974) to describe gifted advantaged and disadvantaged 
children, and (c) examples of items from culture-specific checklists that reflected behaviors 
that were associated with displays of logical-mathematical and linguistic intelligences. 

A review of this guide revealed a number of similarities. For example, the checklist 
items also appeared to reflect the underlying meanings of the gifted abilities proposed by 
Gallagher and Kinney and appeared to articulate behaviors that students would exhibit 
when showing ability in either of the two intelligences proposed by Gardner. Based on 
these observations, a decision was made to explore these connections more fully. The next 
section discusses the method by which this investigation took place and the rationale for 
making the core attributes associated with the giftedness construct central to this 
investigation. 

The Rationale for Focusing on Attributes Underlying the 
Giftedness Construct 

A construct is a set of hypothesized traits, abilities, or characteristics abstracted 
from a variety of behaviors to have educational or psychological meaning (Sax, 1980). 
Giftedness is a psychological construct, according to Hagen (1980). As such, she 
contends that it is not a directly observable trait of an individual. She also maintains that 
accurate inferences about the giftedness construct depend on the choices of characteristics 
and behaviors that we choose to observe and appraise. This approach to giftedness is 
reflected in current thinking where the giftedness construct is described as incorporating a 
broad range of cognitive, motivational, and personality characteristics (Hoge, 1989; 

Passow & Rudnitski, 1993). Further, the appropriateness of focusing on core attributes of 
giftedness is reflected in recommendations by Hoge (1988, 1989) to base assessments of 
giftedness on a clear statement specifying the traits, aptitudes, and behaviors that underlie 
die construct. This need to reach consensus on a clear statement of the traits, aptitudes, and 
behaviors that underlie the giftedness construct is reflected in the research findings and 
discussions of writers such as the following. 

Bernal (1980) was an early advocate of the value of basing the identification of 
gifted students on an evaluation of their exhibition of behaviors associated with the 
giftedness construct. He was particularly assertive that such a move would provide less 
reason for educators to be bound to the cognitive preferences of the dominant ethnic group 
and greater reason to seek a valid and operationally useful identification and selection 
process for all gifted children. Culross (1989) noted that seeking consensus regarding 
what constitutes giftedness would reduce the pitfalls in screening and selecting students for 
gifted programs. Leung (1981) suggested that absolute characteristics of giftedness 
provide an effective way for educators to consider attributes of giftedness in different 
cultural and economic groups. Finally, Shaklee et al. (1994) felt that the best way to 
identify young gifted and talented minority or economically disadvantaged gifted students 
was to base observation and assessment procedures on universal identifiers of intellectual 
potential. 

Each of these researchers and writers speaks to the importance of clarifying the 
attributes underlying the giftedness construct as the basis for observing gifted potential in 
the target population. The development of a common language to describe these core 
attributes of giftedness may provide a more viable foundation on which to build 
observation and identification methods to discover gifted potential as it is expressed within 
and across groups, regardless of cultural, physical, geographical, or socioeconomic 
differences. 




xih j_3 



Method 



A qualitative content analysis method was chosen to cany out this analysis of the 
gifted literature to determine common features that characterize gifted children from the 
target population and the gifted population in general. Our goal was to achieve "semantic 
validity" by sorting data units which had similar meanings or connotations into the same 
category. 

A brief statement of the parameters that structured the search for core attributes 
follows: 

1 . The basic attributes defined as underlying the giftedness construct would be 
referred to as traits, aptitudes, and behaviors according to Sax's (1980) and 
Hagen’s (1980) definitions and interpretations of a construct. 

2. Dynamic rather than static descriptions would be used to define the basic 
attributes associated with the giftedness construct. 

3. When selecting categories, the broadest and most flexible concepts would 
be sought to encompass the core traits, aptitudes, and behaviors that reflect 
the essence or core of giftedness, within and across different cultures and 
contexts. 

The steps that were followed in carrying out this analysis are briefly outlined: 

Step 1 Locate data sources. 

The University of Georgia Libraries' catalog was used to develop data on 
the general attributes of gifted children as found in books and other reports, 
published from approximately 1957 to the present. 

The literature was searched for checklists or rating scales that had been 
specifically developed to observe the characteristics of gifted African 
American, Hispanic, and Native American students. 

Step 2 Define the recording unit; locate units of information. 

Recording units are defined as a phrase or sentence that described the 
characteristics of a gifted child. 

The information in each data source was thoroughly read to locate phrases 
or sentences that were used to describe the characteristics of gifted children. 
Books, book chapters, and other reports yielded 306 data entries; 120 data 
entries were generated from culture specific checklists and rating scales. 
Each entry was coded by author, year, page number, and category (i.e., 
gifted, talented, creative, or genius) and placed on a separate card. 

Step 3 Develop categories for coding. 

Sixteen broad categories in which to place results of independent coding of 
data were developed: (a) learning style, (b) memory, (c) inquiry, (d) 
ethical/moral, (e) reasoning, (f) problem solving ability, (g) insight, (h) 
imagination/creativity, (i) interests, (j) motivation, (k) humor, 0) 
communication skills, (m) leadership, (n) critical evaluation of self/others, 
(o) relationship with people and ideas, and (p) altruism. 




XIV 



Step 4 Sort data units into the static or dynamic pile. 



Based on the parameters established earlier, 44 data units derived from 
books, book chapters, or other reports, and 25 data units derived from 
checklists were eliminated because it was agreed by the researchers that they 
represented static descriptions of gifted attributes. In the first data pool 260 
data units remained and 95 data units remained in the second. 

Step 5 Sort data units into categories. 

Researchers independently read and sorted the data units into one of the 16 
initial categories or they created a new category. Five additional categories 
were created: (a) sensorial/ emotional sensitiveness, (b) aesthetic 
sensitivity, (c) mental maturity, (d) precocity, and (e) physical 
characteristics. 

Data units were reviewed three times before the researchers reached 95% 
agreement regarding the placement of the phrases or sentences into one of 
the 21 categories. 

Step 6 Determine core categories. 

If one or more of the following criteria suggested by Weber (1990) could be 
applied to a category, the category was eliminated: 



.Reflects characteristics that may be interpreted as being more related 
to specific cultural values and beliefs (e.g., ethical and moral 
behaviors; aesthetic sensitivities). 

Is debatable as a category in which the level of performance could be 
described as gifted or not gifted (e.g., critical evaluation of self and 
others, altruism, interpersonal relationships). 

Includes data units that are in the culture-specific literature but not in 
the general literature. 



Using these criteria, 10 categories were retained as the core attribute categories. 
The definitions and general descriptions of these 10 categories are presented in Table 1. 



Of the 262 descriptive units of information generated from the general literature 167 
(64%) were related to one of the core attribute categories. Eighty-two (86%) of the 95 
descriptive units of information generated from the culture-specific checklists were related 
to one of the core attribute categories. Well over half of the descriptive units of information 
in both information pools were considered to reflect the same or similar characteristics 
associated with gifted students. 



Conclusions 



Summary of Findings 



r 



ERIC 



xv 




Table 1 



Definitions and General Descriptions of the 10 Core Attributes of Giftedness (Traits. 
Aptitudes, and Behaviors) 



Core Attribute 



General Description 



Motivation: Evidence of desire to leam 



Communication skills: Highly expressive 
and effective use of words, numbers, 
symbols, etc. 

Interest: Intense (sometimes unusual) 
interests 



Problem-solving ability: Effective (often 
inventive) strategies for recognizing and 
solving problems 



Imagination/Creativity: Produces many 
ideas; Highly original 



Memory: Large storehouse of information 
on school or non-school topics 

Inquiry: Questions, experiments, explores 



Insight: Quickly grasps new concepts and 
makes connections; senses deeper meanings 



Reasoning: Logical approaches to figuring 
out solutions 



Humor: Conveys and picks up on humor 
well 



Forces that initiate, direct and sustain 
individual or group behavior in order to 
satisfy a need or attained goal 

Transmission and reception of signals or 
meanings through a system of symbols 
(codes, gestures, language, numbers) 

Activities, avocations, objects, etc. that 
have special worth or significance and are 
given special attention 

Process of determining a correct sequence 
of alternatives leading to a desired goal or to 
successful completion or performance of a 
task 

Process of forming mental images of 
objects, qualities, situations, or 
relationships, which are not immediately 
apparent to the senses; solve problems by 
pursuing nontraditional patterns of thinking 

Exceptional ability to retain and retrieve 
information 

Method or process of seeking knowledge, 
understanding, or information 

Sudden discovery of the correct solution 
following incorrect attempts based primarily 
on trial and error 

Highly conscious, directed, controlled, 
active, intentional, forward-looking, goal 
oriented thought 

Ability to synthesize key ideas or problems 
in complex situations in a humorous way; 
Exceptional sense of timing in words and 
gestures 



Implications 



It was proposed that identifying the core attributes associated with the giftedness 
construct would provide a better basis for establishing procedures to recognize, identify, 
and plan educational experiences for gifted students from minority or economically 
disadvantaged families and areas. Ten core attributes were identified: communication 
skills, imagination/creativity, humor, inquiry, insight, interests, memory, motivation, 
problem-solving, and reasoning. Implications for using these core attributes (a) to facilitate 
educators' recognition of gifted abilities in student populations from minority or 
economically disadvantaged families and areas, and (b) to guide educators in the selection 
of measures for identification minority or economically disadvantaged families and areas 
follow: 

1 . Students from minority and economically disadvantaged families and areas 
are likely to fare better in the identification procedures for gifted programs 
when a variety of test and nontest measures are used to assess potential 
across the wide range of traits, behaviors, and aptitudes associated with the 
giftedness construct. 

2. The use of a wide variety of test and nontest measures make it less likely 
that students who are underrepresented in gifted programs will be 
handicapped by identification systems that rely on one or two measures to 
determine eligibility for gifted program services. 

3 . The interpretation of performances on this variety of measures would 
require the use of standards that accommodated the differences in the 
expression of gifted student characteristics as exhibited by students who 
come from diverse cultural, ethnic, economic, and environmental 
backgrounds. The core attributes of giftedness provide a common 
framework within which to make these interpretations. 

4. The core attributes of giftedness provides an important way to assist 
educators working with minority or economically disadvantaged students in 
the establishment of links between specific gifted characteristics and the 
manner in which they may be displayed in their classrooms. 

Arriving at a single conception of giftedness is difficult, given the abundance of 
competing conceptions of giftedness in the literature and the variety in the rules and 
regulations used by different states and local programs to determine who is eligible for 
services. This paper has provided a way to consider achieving consensus about the core 
attributes of giftedness, regardless of the words used to define the concept or the influences 
of culture and environment On gifted abilities. Findings from this study of the 
characteristics of gifted individuals as they are described in the general literature and in the 
culture-specific literature, suggest that gifted individuals are most consistently recognized 
by their motivation, interests, problem-solving ability, imagination/creativity, memory 
abilities, inquiry skills, insight, reasoning capacities, and sense of humor. It is suggested 
that these core attributes be the basis for referring, observing, and identifying children for 
gifted program services and for designing programs to address their needs. 




xvii 



References 



Baca, L., & Chinn, P. C. (1982). Coming to grips with cultural diversity. 
Exceptional Education Quarterly, 2(4), 33-45. 

Baldwin, A. Y. (1978). Introduction. In A. Y. Baldwin, G. H. Gear, & L. J. 
Lucito (Eds.), Educational planning for the gifted: Overcoming cultural, geographic, and 
socioeconomic barriers (pp. 1-5). Reston, VA: The Council for Exceptional Children. 

Baldwin, A. Y. (1991). Ethnic and cultural issues. In N. Colangelo & G. A. 
Davis (Eds.), Handbook of gifted education (pp. 416-427). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Bermudez, A. B., & Rakow, S. J. (1990). Analyzing teachers’ perceptions of 
identification procedures for gifted and talented Hispanic limited English proficient students 
at-risk. Journal of Educational Issues of Language Minority Students, 7, 21-33. 

Bernal, E. M. (1974). Gifted Mexican American children: An ethno-scientific 
perspective. California Journal of Educational Research, 25, 261-273. 

Bernal, E. M. (1980). Methods of identifying gifted minority students. Princeton, 
NJ: Educational Testing Service. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 204 
418) 

Bruch, C. B. (1971). Modification of procedures for identification of the 
disadvantaged gifted. Gifted Child Quarterly, 15, 267-272. 

Callahan, C. M., & Mclntire, J. A. (1994). Identifying outstanding talent in 
American Indian and Alaska Native students. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Education. 

Clark, B. (1992). Growing up gifted: Developing the potential of children at 
home and at school (4th ed.). New York: Merrill. 

Culross, R. (1989). Measurement issues in the screening and selection of the 
gifted. Roeper Review, 12(2), 76-78. 

Cummins, J. (1989). Institutionalized racism and the assessment of minority 
children: A comparison of policies and programs in the United States and Canada. In R. 

J. Samuda, S. L. Kong, J. Cummins, J. Pascual-Leone, & J. Lewis (Eds.), Assessment 
and placement of minority students (pp. 95-107). Toronto: C. J. Hogrefe. 

Dabney, M. G. (1988). An alternative model for identification of potentially gifted 
students: A case study. In R. L. Jones (Ed.), Psychoeducational assessment of minority 
group children: A casebook (pp. 273-304). Berkeley, CA: Cobb & Henry. 

Davidson, H. H., & Greenberg, J. W. (1967). Traits of school achievers from a 
deprived background (Project No. 2805 No. Contract No. OE-5-10-132). New York: 

The City College of the City University of New York. 

Davis, G. A., & Rimm, S. B. (1994). Education of the gifted and talented (3rd.). 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 



xvm 




ERIC 



Ford, D. Y., & Harris, J. J. (1990). On discovering the hidden treasure of gifted 
and talented African American children. Roeper Review, 13( 1), 27-32. 

Frasier, M. M. (1990). An investigation of giftedness in economically 
disadvantaged and limited English proficient populations (The National Research Center on 
the Gifted and Talented Proposal). Athens, GA: The University of Georgia. 

Frasier, M. M. (in press). Gifted minority students: Reframing approaches to 
their identification and education. In N. Colangelo & G. A. Davis (Eds.), Handbook of 
gifted education (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Frierson, E. C. (1965). Upper and lower status gifted children: A study of 
differences. Exceptional Children, 32(2), 83-90. 

Gallagher, J. J. (1991). Issues in the education of gifted students. InN. 
Colangelo & G. A. Davis (Eds.), Handbook of gifted education (pp. 14-23). Boston: 
Allyn and Bacon. 

Gallagher, J. J. (1994a). Current and historical thinking on education for gifted 
and talented students. In P. O’Connell-Ross (Ed.), National excellence: A case for 
developing America's talent, an anthology of readings (pp. 83-107). Washington, DC: 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education. 

Gallagher, J. J. (1994b). Teaching the gifted child (4th ed.). Boston: Allyn and 

Bacon. 



Gallagher, J. J., & Courtright, R. D. (1988). The educational definition of 
giftedness and its policy implications. In R. J. Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), 
Conceptions of giftedness (pp. 93-11 1). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Gallagher, J. J., & Kinney, L. (1974). Talent delayed-talent denied: The 
culturally different gifted child. In Quail Roost Conference. Reston, VA: The Foundation 
for Exceptional Children. 

Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. New 
York: Basic Books. 

Garrison, L. (1989). Programming for the gifted American Indian student In C. 
J. Maker & S. W. Schiever (Eds.), Critical issues in gifted education: Defensible programs 
for cultural and ethnic minorities (pp. 116-121). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 

Glaser, E. M., & Ross, H. L. (1970). A study of successful persons from 
seriously disadvantaged backgrounds (Final Report Contract No. 82-05-68-03). 
Washington, DC: Department of Labor, Office of Special Manpower Programs. 

Hagen, E. (1980). Identification of the gifted. New York: Teachers College 

Press. 



Hilliard, A. (1976). Alternatives to I. Q. testing: An approach to the identification 
of gifted "minority” children. Sacramento, CA: California State Department of Education, 
Sacramento Division of Special Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED 147 009) 



er|c 



xix 



Hilliard, A. G. (1991). The ideology of intelligence and I.Q. magic in education. 
In A. G. Hilliard (Ed.), Testing African American students: Special re-issue of The Negro 
Educational Review (pp. 136-145). Morristown, NJ: Aaron Press. 

Hoge, R. D. (1988). Issues in the definition and measurement of the giftedness 
construct. Educational Researcher, 17(1), 12-16,22. 

Hoge, R. D. (1989). An examination of the giftedness construct. Canadian 
Journal of Education, 14(1), 6-17. 

Kitano, M. K., & Kirby, D. F. (1986). Gifted education: A comprehensive view. 
Boston: Little, Brown. 

Lee, C. C. (1984). Successful rural black adolescents: A psychosocial profile. 
Adolescence, 20(11), 129-142. 

Lee, C. C. (1989). Rural Black adolescents: Psychosocial development in a 
changing environment. In R. L. Jones (Ed.), Black adolescents (pp. 79-95). Berkeley, 
CA: Cobb & Henry. 

Leung, E. K. (1981). The identification and social problem of the gifted bilingual- 
bicultural children. Paper presented at The Council for Exceptional Children Conference 
on the Exceptional Bilingual Child, New Orleans, LA. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 203 653) 

Maker, C. J. (1983). Quality education for gifted minority students. Journal for 
the Education of the Gifted, 6(3), 140-153. 

Maker, C. J., & Schiever, S. W. (Eds.). (1989). Critical issues in gifted 
education: Defensible programs for cultural and ethnic minorities. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 

Marland, S. P., Jr. (1972). Education of the gifted and talented (Report to the 
Congress of the United States by the U.S. Commissioner of Education). Washington, DC: 
U.S. Government Printing Office. 

Meeker, M. (1978). Nondiscriminatory testing procedures to assess giftedness in 
Black, Chicano, Navajo, and Anglo children. In A. Baldwin, G. Gear, & L. Lucito 
(Eds.), Educational planning for the gifted: Overcoming cultural, geographic, and socio- 
economic barriers (pp. 17-26). Reston, VA: Council for Exceptional Children. 

Ogawa, R. T., & Malen, B. (1991). Towards rigor in reviews of multivocal 
literatures: Applying the exploratory case study method. Review of Educational Research, 
61(3), 265-286. 

Passow, A. H. (1982). The gifted disadvantaged: Some reflections. In Fifth 
National Conference on Disadvantaged Gifted/Talented (pp. 19-27). Ventura, CA: 

Ventura County Superintendent of Schools Office. 

Passow, A. H., & Rudnitski, R. A. (1993). State policies regarding education of 
the gifted as reflected in legislation and regulation (CRS93302). Storrs, CT: University of 
Connecticut, The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented. 

Pendarvis, E. D., Howley, A. A., & Howley, C. B. (1990). The abilities of 
gifted children. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 



O 

ERIC 



XX 



20 



Richert, E. S. (1991). Rampant problems and promising practices in 
identification. In N. Colangelo & G. A. Davis (Eds.), Handbook of gifted education (pp. 
81-96). Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Samuda, R. J., Kong, S. L., Cummins, J., Pascual-Leone, J., & Lewis, J. 
(1989). Assessment and placement of minority students. Toronto: C. J. Hogrefe. 

Sax, G. (1980). Principles of educational and psychological measurement and 
evaluation. (2nd ed). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Shade, B. J. (1981). Racial variations in perceptual differentiation. Perceptual 
and Motor Skills, 52, 243-248. 

Shade, B.J. (1991). African American patterns of cognition. InR.L. Jones 
(Ed.), Black Psychology (pp. 231-247). Berkeley, CA: Cobb & Henry. 

Sisk, D. (1973). Developing teacher mediators/teacher training for disadvantaged 
gifted. In First National Conference on the Disadvantaged Gifted. Ventura, CA: 
National/State Leadership Institute on the Gifted and Talented. 

Tannenbaum, A. J. (1983). Gifted children: Psychological and educational 
perspectives. New York: Macmillan. 

Tidwell, R. (1981). A psycho-educational profile of gifted minority group 
students identified without reliance on aptitude tests. Journal of Non-White Concerns, 9, 
77-86. 



Tonemah, S. A., & Brittan, M. A. (1985). American Indian gifted and talented 
assessment model (Grant from the U.S. Education Department, Indian Education Programs 
No. G008420046). Norman, OK: American Indian Research and Development. 

Torrance, E. P. (1971). Are the Torrance tests of creative thinking biased against 
or in favor of disadvantaged groups? Gifted Child Quarterly, 15, 75-80. 

Torrance, E. P. (1977). Discovery and nurturance of giftedness in the culturally 
different. Reston, VA: The Council for Exceptional Children. 

VanTassel-Baska, J., Patton, J. J., & Prillaman, D. (1991). Gifted youth at risk: 
A report of a national study. Reston, VA: Council for Exceptional Children. 

Weber, R. P. (1990). Basic content analysis. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 

Whitmore, J. R. (1982). Recognizing and developing hidden giftedness. The 
Elementary School Journal, 82(3), 274-283. 

Whitmore, J. R., & Maker, C. J. (1985). Intellectual giftedness in disabled 
persons. Rockville, MD: Aspen. 

Zappia, I. A. (1989). Identification of gifted Hispanic students: A 
multidimensional view. In C. J. Maker & S. W. Schiever (Eds.), Critical issues in gifted 
education: Defensible programs for cultural and ethnic minorities (pp. 19-26). Austin, 

TX: Pro-Ed. 




xxi 21 



Table of Contents 



ABSTRACT v 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY vii 

Introduction 1 

Target Population 2 

Scope of die Literature Review 2 

What We Know About Attributes of Giftedness in Target Student 

Populations 3 

Between-Group and Within-Group Comparison Studies and Reports 3 

Descriptions Specifically Related to Giftedness in Specific Minority Groups and 
Gifted Economically Disadvantaged Students 5 

Hispanics 5 

Native Americans 6 

African Americans 7 

Economically Disadvantaged Children 8 

A Summary of Themes 8 

Attributes Underlying the Giftedness Construct 9 

Background 9 

The Rationale for Focusing on Attributes Underlying the Giftedness Construct 10 
Method 11 

Parameters That Structured the Search for Core Attributes 1 1 

Steps Followed in Analyzing Data Units 12 

Conclusions 15 

Summary of Findings 1 5 

Implications 15 

References 17 

Appendix A: Preliminary Explorations of Core Attributes of Giftedness 23 



xxiii 



22 



List of Tables 



Table 1 Definitions and General Descriptions of the 10 Core Attributes of 
Giftedness (Traits, Aptitudes, and Behaviors) 

Frequency and Percentage of Phrases and Sentences From the General 
and Culture-Specific Gifted Literature 



Table 2 



Core Attributes of Giftedness: A Foundation for Recognizing 

the Gifted Potential of Minority and Economically 
Disadvantaged Students 

Mary M. Frasier 
Scott L. Hunsaker 
Jongyeun Lee 
Sandra Mitchell 
Bonnie Cramond 
Sally Krisel 
Jaime H. Garcia 
Darlene Martin 
Elaine Frank 
Vernon S. Finley 
The University of Georgia 
Athens, Georgia 



Introduction 

An ultimate goal of gifted educators is to recognize, as early as possible, those 
children who show potential for exceptional performance as adults and to provide them 
with the special instruction they need to develop that potential. A common assertion is that 
children who show this potential for exceptional performance are present in every segment 
of society (Baldwin, 1991; Clark, 1992; Davis & Rimm, 1994; Gallagher, 1994b; Kitano 
& Kirby, 1986; Maker, 1983; Marland, 1972; Pendarvis, Howley, & Howley, 1990). 
However, it is consistently observed that gifted and talented children who are members of 
minority populations, who have limited proficiency in the English language (LEP), or who 
come from economically disadvantaged families and areas are underrepresented in 
programs for the gifted (Ford & Harris, 1990; Frasier, in press; Gallagher, 1991; 

Gallagher & Courtright, 1988). 

One of the reasons given to explain the underrepresentation of these students in 
gifted programs relates to the ability of educators to recognize their display of gifted 
behaviors (Baca & Chinn, 1982; Bermudez & Rakow, 1990; Bernal, 1980; Dabney, 1988; 
Leung, 1981; Pendarvis, Howley, & Howley, 1990; Whitmore, 1982). These authors 
suggested that low socioeconomic status (SES), minority group membership, or limited 
competence in the use of the English language of these children may negatively affect the 
identification of these children as gifted. As Gallagher (1994b) noted, for example, 
difficulties in trying to sort out the unique characteristics of minority gifted students may be 
related to the fact that many of them come from impoverished homes. Clark (1992) 
maintained that "A major problem encountered in providing for gifted students among the 
low SES population is the attitude, shared by teachers and parents alike, that giftedness 
could not exist in this population" (p. 428). According to Callahan and Mclntire (1994), 
the emphasis on remediation rather than development of talent may account for the low 
recognition of gifted Native American and Alaska Native students. Others have made 
similar observations about the emphasis on remediation rather than on the development of 
talent in minority groups (Baldwin, 1991; Cummins, 1989; Ford & Hams, 1990; Hilliard, 
1991; Samuda, Kong, Cummins, Pascual-Leone, & Lewis, 1989). The purpose of this 
paper is to explore a different perspective for observing and assessing characteristics of 
giftedness in minority, LEP, and economically disadvantaged student populations. 




24 



2 



First, a summary of what we know about the attributes of gifted and high achieving 
students from minority or economically disadvantaged families and areas is presented in 
this paper. Second, a proposal for focusing on core attributes that underlie the giftedness 
construct as a more viable basis for observing and identifying giftedness in minority or 
economically disadvantaged student groups is presented. A description of how a set of 
core attributes of giftedness was derived is also provided. Finally, implications for using 
these core attributes as the basis for a paradigm that better addresses the identification and 
education of gifted students from underrepresented populations are presented in the final 
section. 



Target Populations 

Race, ethnicity, culture, minority group status, low socioeconomic status, 
handicapped status, preschool and primary aged children, and gender have all been used to 
label students who are underrepresented or underserved in programs for gifted children 
(Gallagher, 1994a; Passow, 1982; Richert, 1991; VanTassel-Baska, Patton, & Prillaman, 
1991; Whitmore & Maker, 1985). It is beyond the scope of this paper to address each one 
of these groups. Because African American, Native American, and Hispanic students have 
been and continue to be the most prominent subjects of when underrepresentation in gifted 
programs is discussed, it is these gifted students who are the focus in this paper. For the 
most part, these students will be referred to as the target population. Labels such as 
minority, culturally different, and economically disadvantaged are frequently used 
interchangeably in the literature and in practice to refer to the students who are the target 
population. Therefore, anyone of these terms will be used as appropriate. 

Scope of the Literature Review 

The literature chosen for review in this paper was selected if it contained primary 
descriptions of the cognitive and affective characteristics of target population students. 
Causes for any of these descriptions are included only if they are an integral part of the 
discussion of their characteristics. However, the primary concern is not the cause but the 
characteristics of these students that have emerged over the years. 

Because of the limited base of empirical research investigating the attributes of 
gifted target students, some of the descriptions have evolved from speculative opinions and 
conclusions derived from practice or experience. However as Ogawa and Malen (1991) 
have observed, such literature can still provide important insights because of the meanings 
people attach to the phenomenon of interest, in this case gifted potential in students from 
target population groups. 

Many of the studies and other reports explicitly describing the characteristics of 
target students were carried out from 1960 through the 1980s. One of the reasons may be 
that objectives of researchers and practitioners during this period were primarily focused on 
developing theories to account for cultural deficiencies or cultural differences. More 
recently, studies and reports have focused on developing identification strategies and 
programs to address the educational and environmental deficiencies that impede the 
identification of gifted target students. 





3 



What We Know About Attributes of Giftedness in Target 

Student Populations 

Findings from several research studies and reports have recounted the attributes of 
gifted or high achieving target population students. The reports and studies reviewed here 
are concerned with comparisons within and between groups and descriptions based on 
studies of specific cultural and disadvantaged groups. The themes of these studies and 
reports are concerned with personality variables, motivations to achieve, cognitive 
attributes, and other behavioral descriptions. 

Between-Group and Within-Group Comparison Studies and Reports 

Frierson (1965) was interested in the effects of cultural deprivation on the 
development of talent. He undertook a study to determine any significant differences 
between upper and lower status students who were divided into four groups: (a) upper 
status gifted students, (b) lower socioeconomic status gifted students, (c) upper status 
average students, and (d) lower socioeconomic status average students. The groups were 
matched on sex, age, ethnic background, grade, and school experience with differences 
between any two groups based on socioeconomic status or mental ability. The mean LQ. 
for the upper status gifted group was 133.2; the group of lower status gifted children had a 
mean LQ. of 132.1. Upper and lower status gifted children were found to be more similar 
in attributes than were lower status gifted and average children. However, when the two 
gifted groups were compared, upper status gifted children were described as more self- 
controlled, more ambitious to do well, and better able to control their emotions while lower 
status gifted children were described as being more excitable, demanding, self-assertive, 
and undependable. Upper status gifted children, more than lower status gifted children, 
were also described as liking school better, more likely to choose better quality reading 
materials, being more interested in after school reading, and being more aware of their 
parents' desires for them to attend college. Lower status gifted children were described as 
showing a greater preference for adventure-hero type comics and for competitive sports. 
Frierson concluded that differences between the two groups of gifted children were clearly 
associated with differences in their socioeconomic status. 

Another study which compared the characteristics of gifted minority and low 
socioeconomic status children with those of their nongifted peers was conducted by 
Tidwell (1981). Children in this study were selected for gifted program participation by 
criteria that did not rely on intelligence test scores as the primary criterion and were 
described as having significantly higher self-concepts than nonselected students. It was 
also found that these students had more positive academic self-concepts and higher self- 
esteem. Subjects for this study were low SES students from Anglo American, Asian 
American, Hispanic American, and African American backgrounds. 

Davidson and Greenberg (1967) compared differences in personality variables 
between high and low achievers from lower class backgrounds. Attributes that 
distinguished between the two lower class groups were found to be very similar to those 
that distinguish between middle class achievers and underachievers. For example, high 
achievers were described as having higher ego strength, well developed controls and self- 
confidence, greater maturity and seriousness of interest, a need to seek adult approval, and 
a willingness to postpone immediate pleasures. Similarly, Arnold (1974) compared the 
classroom behaviors of disadvantaged gifted learners with those of regularly identified 
gifted learners and found the disadvantaged learners to exhibit greater dependence on the 
teacher for directions, to reason in a more sequential manner, and to be more patient in 
dealing with tasks. 




20 



4 



In a similar manner Glaser and Ross (1970) retroactively investigated factors that 
contributed to the differential success rates of individuals growing up in disadvantaged 
environments. Fourteen factors were found to distinguish between successful Mexican 
American and African American males and those who were not successful. Some of the 
factors were concerned with the personal attributes that contributed to the success of some 
of the subjects (e.g., having a strong sense of self, pride, and worth; the ability to free 
themselves from the negative conditions of their environment; and a strong belief that hard 
work or study would pay off). Successful subjects were also described as being effective 
in their ability to channel any rage they felt over being disadvantaged into strategic actions. 
Further, successful subjects were attracted by goals such as creativity and self- 
determination, had high risk-taking capacities especially when experimenting with new 
behaviors, and were aware of alternative paths toward achieving future goals. 

While results of studies comparing personality or nonintellective traits of gifted 
advantaged and disadvantaged children appear to reveal many similarities across cultural 
and economic boundaries, significant but more negative differences in cognitive 
functioning have been reported in other studies. Tannenbaum (1983) suggested that these 
differences are most evident in cognitive organizing as is demonstrated by the lowered 
performance of disadvantaged gifted children on tests of mental ability. Sisk ( 1973) 
described deficiencies in cognitive functioning of disadvantaged gifted students as 
evidenced by their limited vocabularies, use of nonstandard grammar, inability to observe 
and state sequences of events, inability to perceive cause and effect relationships, and 
inability to categorize. Because of these deficiencies, Sisk felt that disadvantaged students 
exhibit classroom behaviors that hinder their identification as gifted students. She 
delineates these behaviors as including negative attitudes toward school, toward teachers, 
and toward their own achievement; an inability to focus on long-term goals; and an 
inclination to use violence to resolve problems. 

A different view of the cognitive competencies of African American individuals, 
including children, is presented by Shade (1991). Drawing from several sources, she 
summarizes overall cognitive-behavioral attributes that typify the social-cultural system in 
which African Americans are socialized and come to know things. She concluded from 
several studies of modality preference that African Americans appear to have a high motoric 
capabilities and to use visual perception as a way of protecting and orienting themselves in 
the environment rather than for gathering information. African American children are also 
largely trained to concentrate more on people rather than non-people type information, thus 
being more people than object oriented. Results from a number of studies summarized by 
Shade also point to a preference among African Americans for affective materials and a 
high level of social interaction in their learning environments. Interestingly, she reports 
that when divided by achievement level African American high achievers and Euro- 
American low achievers were more extroverted. Euro- American high achievers and 
African American low achievers, however were more introverted. Overall, she concludes 
that African Americans come to know their world more effectively through their kinetic and 
tactile senses, through their keen observing of the human scene, and through verbal 
descriptions. Tannenbaum (1983) and Sisk (1973) saw these cognitive differences as 
deficiencies that underlie the low test performance of African American children and their 
weak performances in the classroom. Shade, instead, noted that the differences reflect 
cognitive strengths that are expressed in distinct ways due to differences in information 
processing preferences and differences in information analysis and organization. 

Ethnicity and cultural group membership have always been assumed to have an 
affect on the pattern of abilities or the intellective and non-intellective traits unique to a 
specific group. As a result, some researchers have focused on identifying the 




27 



5 



distinctiveness of profiles of strengths displayed by different ethnic and cultural groups in 
American society. 

Bruch (1971) isolated patterns of cognitive strengths among southeastern African 
American students using an abbreviated version of the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Test. 

She concluded that these students evidenced strengths in visual, auditory, and figural 
content (e.g., art and music); memory; convergent production in practical problem-solving 
situations; awareness of details of descriptions; fluency of ideas; spontaneous 
categorization and classification of spatial items; and awareness of natural relationships or 
systems. Based on her research, she concludes that analyzing test results for evidence of 
these attributes would contribute to the effective identification of gifted African American 
students. 

Similarly, Meeker (1978) investigated the cognitive strengths of children whose 
environments were felt to hinder their success in school. She was concerned that children 
who were unfamiliar with formal English would appear less intelligent when simply 
measured on traditional standardized mental ability tests. Using the Structure of Intellect 
(SOI) as her basis for analysis, she determined patterns of gifted strengths among Navajo 
children to include auditory memory and figural ability. She also noted that these children 
were not able to demonstrate their ability in the figural dimension because of differences in 
the structure of the Navajo language and mainstream English. 

Baldwin (1978) took a broader view to encompass target population students 
whose achievement might be negatively affected by cultural diversity, socioeconomically 
deprived status, and geographic isolation. Her list of common attributes include 
descriptions of their communication and learning styles as characterized by a language that 
is rich in imagery and is persuasive, a sensitiveness and alertness to movement, and an 
intuitive grasp of situations. She also describes these children as having strong group 
affiliations and as being skilled in dealing with their environment. Intellectually, these 
children are described as being adept at logical reasoning, planning, and pragmatic problem 
solving. Their creative strengths include a high tolerance for ambiguities, the ability to 
produce inventive and revolutionary ideas, and flexible and fluent thinking. Finally, she 
describes these children as having high interests and special aptitudes in music, drama, and 
creative writing. 

Descriptions Specifically Related to Giftedness in Specific Minority Groups 
and Gifted Economically Disadvantaged Students 



Hispanics 

One of the earliest studies conducted on the attributes of giftedness in the Hispanic 
population was conducted by Bernal (1974). Because of his beliefs that tests and other 
techniques used to identify gifted and talented youngsters were biased in favor of the 
populations for which they were devised, Bernal conducted a study to determine behavioral 
descriptors of gifted Mexican American students. Attributes or characteristics with the 
highest discriminant power were found to be related to these children's leadership 
behaviors, acceptance of adult authority, self-control, and above-average school 
performance. Bernal was particularly concerned with those Hispanic students who were 
not easily identified using traditional criteria. His list of attributes included: (a) the ability 
to rapidly acquire English language skills, once exposed to the language and given an 
opportunity to use it expressively; (b) an enjoyment of intelligent (or effective) risk taking 
behavior, often accompanied by a sense of drama; (c) the ability to keep busy and 
entertained, especially by imaginative games and ingenious applications, such as getting the 
most out of a few simple toys and objects; and (d) the ability to understand and remember 




28 



6 



detailed instructions when given the first time. Gifted Hispanic students, according to 
Bernal, also demonstrated exceptional leadership ability with a heavy emphasis on 
interpersonal skills and are recognized by their peers as someone who has the ability to 
"make it" in the Anglo society. They usually have older playmates and are capable of easily 
engaging in adult conversation. Bernal (1978) suggested that these qualities, and the 
psychological traits they imply, should be included in the design of measures and 
procedures to assess the potential of Hispanic students. 

Maker and Schiever (1989) provided an abbreviated comparison of absolute aspects 
of giftedness compared with typical cultural characteristics of Hispanics, and resulting 
behavioral differences because of differences in culture, language, and the need of Hispanic 
individuals to be effective at negotiating two cultures. For example, they interpreted the 
high level of verbal ability associated with giftedness with the Hispanic individuals ability 
to communicate fluently using the formal language of the majority society in school and die 
language of their peers and the Hispanic community when at home. Udall (1989) also 
commented that a significant ability distinguishing between gifted and nongiffed Hispanic 
students (as well as other minority students) is their ability to adapt successfully to the 
demands of two cultures. 

Zappia (1989) provided a similar description of Hispanic children when she 
described their language preference, proficiency, and use patterns (in both languages) in the 
home, school, and community. Other attributes included their being able to successfully 
function in two cultures and to communicate fluendy, even if the English used is non- 
standard (Maker & Schiever, 1989). 

Native Americans 

In the general literature Native American students are described as being less 
assertive than children from other majority and minority cultures and exhibiting a collective 
identity (Florey & Tafoya, 1988; Sisk, 1989). Indeed a number of researchers and writers 
have reported on the importance of tribal identity when describing Native Americans in 
general. Native Americans have suffered from group descriptions as much as other 
minority groups when attempts are made to come up with one list of typical behaviors. 
While understanding the limitations of a common cultural description. Garrison (1989) 
suggested what she saw as basic distinctions between the Native American culture and the 
mainstream culture. Specifically she noted that Native American individuals tend to be less 
dependent on language to communicate ideas, to learn by observation and to teach by 
modeling, and to consider the group more important than the individual 

Compared to African Americans and Hispanics, Native American students have 
received relatively little attention in the gifted literature. An important study that called 
attention to the gifted attributes specific to Native American students was conducted by 
Tonemah and Brittan (1985). They noted the strong tribal perspective associated with the 
concept of giftedness in their description of gifted attributes in four areas: (a) acquired 
skills in language, learning, and technological skills; (b) tribal/cultural understanding 
referring to their exceptional knowledge of ceremonies, tribal traditions, and other tribes; 

(c) personal and human qualities such as high intelligence, visionary/inquisitive/intuitive, 
respectful of elders, and creative skills; and (d) aesthetic abilities, referring to unusual 
talents in the visual and performing arts, and arts based in the Indian culture. 

In a recent publication edited by Callahan and Mclntire (1994), a pool of potential 
traits/indicators gleaned from the literature on identifying gifted Native American students is 
provided. The characteristics are organized into 14 areas that range from general 
intellectual attributes to giftedness in specific areas. Careful instructions are given 




29 



7 



regarding how to best select and use these characteristics in the development of instruments 
for use in assessment Two other reports related to the attributes of Native American 
students are cited in Callahan and Mclntire: 

1 . A list of traits related to learning style, personal traits, and environmental 
limitations is described by Hartley (1991) as contributing to the lack of 
recognition of gifted/talented Navajo students. [In general, these attributes 
refer to limitations of Navajo students when traditional procedures are used 
to identify them for gifted program participation.] 

2. Romero and Schultz (1992) delineated four areas that Pueblo Indian tribal 
Elders identified as relevant talent dimensions: (a) special abilities in speech 
and song, (b) ability to create with the hands, (c) abilities in acquiring and 
knowing when to apply knowledge, and (d) ability to empathize and give to 
others. [It was noted that these talent dimensions were based on 
interpretations of giftedness within the context of the Pueblo Indian 
community after a rejection of the traditional majority view of giftedness]. 

African Americans 

Hilliard's (1976) study of African American gifted students yielded a list of 
attributes based on behavioral styles. Items for a "WHO" and "O" checklist were 
developed from extensive interviews, the literature, and from observations by his research 
staff to determine their fit with two hypothesized categories: atomistic-objective and 
synthetic-personal. It was concluded that African American children demonstrated a 
synthetic-personal style. That is, they tend to approach the world in a way that allows them 
to bring together divergent experiences and to distill them to discover the essence of a 
matter without undue concern for all the small pieces which make up a given experience. 
This is in contrast to the atomistic-objective style wherein the habitual pattern for 
approaching an experience involves an attempt to break down that experience into 
components which can be understood. 

Much like the approach established by Hilliard (1976) that observations of style are 
important in recognizing gifted attributes in African American children, Hamilton (1993) 
developed two compatible scales, one for parents ( The Gifted Children Locator scales for 
Parents-GCL-P) and one for teachers (The Gifted Children Locator scales for Teachers- 
GCL-T). The six factors identified in Hamilton's scales identify areas in which the 
exceptional attributes of giftedness can be observed for gifted and non-gifted African 
American children: verbal perceptual problem-solving ability, perceptual organization 
ability, assertive verbal expressive ability, verbal memory with concentration ability, 
differential evaluation ability, and spontaneous mental/perceptual problem-solving. A well 
above average rating (+2 to 3 SD) from teachers and parents indicating that the child 
optimally demonstrates attributes of giftedness, is demonstrated by a score of 247 and 248, 
respectively. An above average rating (+1 to 2 SD) range from 221-247 for the parent 
scale and 209-247 for the teacher scale. Scores on the GCL-P and the GCL-T can range 
from 51 to 255. 

Lee (1984, 1989) concentrated on developing a psychosocial profile of successful 
rural African American adolescents. Besides being part of families described as close and 
supportive, he described successful rural African American adolescents as having positive 
self-concepts linked to their extended view of themselves as members of collective family 
and community systems, possessing traditional values associated with their religious faith, 
and having good interpersonal relationships. They are also successful in school and active 
in a variety of extra-curricular activities, e.g., the 4-H club. Future Farmers of America, 
and Future Business Leaders of America. In addition, these successful youths are keenly 




30 



8 



aware of future occupational opportunities and understand the education they must acquire 
to be prepared for such opportunities. 

The development of a profile of the personal traits of educationally successful 
African American children was also the subject of research by Shade (1981). For this 
study she chose only students from middle-income range African American families to 
avoid the confounding variable of income when successful students from lower income 
groups are included in a research sample. Males in her study were described as being more 
introverted, emotionally stable, and more shrewd, though less expressive than males in the 
standardized sample of the Coan-Cattell Early School Personality Questionnaire (ESPQ). 
Females were also found to be more introverted and less expressive. In addition they were 
described as more independent, less in need of protection, and displaying a tendency to be 
less placid, conforming, and tranquil than females in the standardized sample. When 
compared with their standardization counterparts. Shade reported that the females in her 
study were more enthusiastic, self-confident, individualistic, and shrewd. In summary, the 
academically successful African American middle-class students in Shade's study were 
described as being rather reserved and detached instead of affiliative and participating. 

They were very aware that to achieve their goals they must learn how to operate within the 
framework of certain expectations of their school and community while also maintaining 
their concept of self-determination. 

Economically Disadvantaged Children 

Torrance (1964, 1965, 1971, 1974, 1977) has been a long time advocate of efforts 
to recognize the creative strengths displayed by disadvantaged children as a key to 
identifying their gifted potential. He proposed, therefore, that the search for giftedness 
among the culturally different should focus on identifying their creative positives. These 
characteristics should, in turn, become the basis for educational programs and for career 
development activities. 

As a result of observations made during a series of summer workshops conducted 
with disadvantaged children, Torrance (1971, 1977) developed a checklist to help guide the 
search for giftedness in culturally different groups. He named this checklist The Checklist 
of Creative Positives. Attributes included on the checklist are concerned with (a) problem 
solving skills (e.g., originality of ideas in problem solving, fluency, and flexibility in 
figural media); (b) communication styles (e.g., use of expressive speech, use of colorful 
language rich with imagery); and (c) learning styles (e.g., enjoyment of skills in group 
activities). It also includes descriptions of (a) interests and activities enjoyed by culturally 
different children (e.g., enjoyment of and ability in music, rhythm, creative movement, 
dance, and dramatics); and (b) descriptions of the typical methods these children use to 
respond to various stimuli (e.g., high emotional responsiveness, exceptional ability to 
express feelings and emotions). 



A Summary of Themes 

This literature reflects a strong tendency to focus on (a) similarities and differences 
in personality traits between gifted minority and majority students, (b) unique learning and 
communication styles presumed to be characteristics of specific cultural groups, and (c) the 
exceptional abilities that gifted target students demonstrate as they negotiate between their 
culture and the majority culture. Different issues shape the approach to the research and 
other writings developed to describe the characteristics of gifted target students. One 
approach was to focus on deficiencies. The emphasis was on low socioeconomic status of 
target students and the effect this has on cognitive functioning and performance in academic 
areas. Another approach focused on these children's cognitive and creative strengths as 




31 



9 



revealed through testing and observing. Yet another approach was shaped by comparing 
the characteristics of disadvantaged students with advantaged students. Finally, an 
approach was developed out of a perceived need to base characteristics of gifted target 
students on results from investigations carried out within a specific cultural group. 

These different approaches may well be the result of the continuous search that has 
been conducted to find effective ways to resolve the difficulties that minority students face 
in gaining recognition for their gifts and talents. They may also represent the many factors 
that must go far beyond descriptions of relevant characteristics of giftedness when 
describing gifted minority children. More than for any other group, these more extended 
discussions must include concerns with (a) discrimination in American society, (b) the 
value of efforts to establish the concept of giftedness within the boundaries of a specific 
cultural group, (c) the need to distinguish the meaning of giftedness within a minority 
group from the meaning of giftedness in the Euro-American culture, (d) the inadequacies of 
traditional assessment measures and procedures to identify gifted minority students, and (e) 
the effort that must be put forth to reconcile the concept of individual recognition for 
excellence with cultural concepts that emphasizes group solidarity as a unique cultural 
feature. 



Attributes Underlying the Giftedness Construct 

As noted earlier, one of the problems felt to impact the representation of target 
population students in programs for the gifted is related to the inability of educators to 
recognize these students' display of gifted behaviors in the classroom. Plans to address 
this concern by better describing giftedness in economically disadvantaged and limited 
English proficient populations were an integral part of a project at The University of 
Georgia (Frasier, 1990). The overall goal of this project was to develop a more effective 
way to facilitate the recognition of gifted children from these groups. 

In this section, a proposal to focus on the core attributes underlying the giftedness 
construct as a more viable basis for characterizing giftedness in these students is presented. 
The method by which these attributes were developed is also described. Suggestions are 
made for using these core attributes as the foundation for developing observation and 
identification programs to better recognize the gifted potential in target population student 
groups. 



Background 

In the initial phase of our project, plans were made to ask educators to provide a 
prototype of a target population child who they felt was bright by describing the various 
performance features that led them to this conclusion. In formulating the design for data 
collection, we elected to ask these educators to focus on describing brightness as it related 
to intellect ua l giftedness and specific academic aptitudes because school programs most 
often address exceptional abilities in these two areas. Two of the intelligences proposed by 
Gardner (1983) — linguistic and logical-mathematical — were selected as the primary 
domains to reflect this typical focus of school programs for gifted students. Five generic 
characteristics proposed by Gallagher and Kinney (1974) to describe gifted children, 
whether they were from advantaged or disadvantaged backgrounds, were used to define 
descriptors of abilities that might be associated with the two intelligences. Additionally, we 
sought to offer some guidance to educators in the development of their descriptions by 
providing them with examples of items from culture-specific checklists that reflected 
behaviors associated with displays of logical-mathematical and linguistic intelligences. 




32 



10 



When we compared the two intelligences proposed by Gardner (1983) and the basic 
gifted abilities outlined by Gallagher and Kinney (1974) with items from a list of 
characteristics developed by Hagen (1980) and items from culture-specific checklists, two 
observations were evident (see Appendix A). There appeared to be great similarities in the 
meanings of items on the various checklists designed to observe gifted potential in the 
target groups. The checklist items also appeared to reflect the underlying meanings of the 
gifted abilities proposed by Gallagher and Kinney and appeared to articulate behaviors that 
students would exhibit when showing ability in either of the two intelligences proposed by 
Gardner (1983). Further observations suggested that many items on the checklists appear 
to emphasize more than other characteristics, the importance of recognizing target 
population students’ motivation for intellectual pursuits, their learning styles, and their 
interests. 

Based on these observations, we decided to explore these connections more fully. 
The next section discusses the method by which this investigation took place and the 
rationale for making the core attributes associated with the giftedness construct central to 
this investigation. 

The Rationale for Focusing on Attributes Underlying the 
Giftedness Construct 

A construct is a set of hypothesized traits, abilities, or characteristics abstracted 
from a variety of behaviors to have educational or psychological meaning (Sax, 1980). 
Giftedness is a psychological construct, according to Hagen (1980). As such, she 
contends that it is not a directly observable trait of an individual. She also maintains that 
accurate inferences about the giftedness construct depend on the choices of characteristics 
and behaviors that we choose to observe and appraise. This approach to giftedness is 
reflected in current thinking where the giftedness construct is described as incorporating a 
broad range of cognitive, motivation, and personality characteristics (Hoge, 1989; Passow 
& Rudnitski, 1993). Further, the appropriateness of focusing on core attributes of 
giftedness is reflected in recommendations by Hoge (1988, 1989) to base assessments of 
giftedness on a clear statement specifying the traits, aptitudes, and behaviors that underlie 
the construct This need to reach consensus on a clear statement of the traits, aptitudes, and 
behaviors that underlie the giftedness construct is reflected in the research findings and 
discussions of writers such as the following. 

Bernal (1980) was an early advocate of the value of basing the identification of 
gifted students on an evaluation of their exhibition of behaviors associated with the 
giftedness construct He was particularly assertive that such a move would provide less 
reason for educators to be bound to the cognitive preferences of the dominant ethnic group 
and greater reason to seek a valid and operationally useful identification and selection 
process for all gifted children. Further, he comments that the problems of referring 
minority students for gifted program participation may very well stem from an ill-defined 
construct of giftedness. Likewise, Culross (1989) noted that seeking consensus regarding 
what constitutes giftedness would reduce the pitfalls in screening and selecting students for 
gifted programs. 

Leung (1981) suggested that absolute characteristics of giftedness provide an 
effective way for educators to consider attributes of giftedness in different cultural and 
economic groups. Absolute aspects, according to Leung, are those traits that symbolize 
giftedness across these different groups. Conversely, specific aspects of giftedness are 
absolute aspects that have been affected by culture and environment Leung feels that 
adequate understanding of specific aspects of giftedness are predicated on clarifying 
absolute attributes. 




11 



Shaklee, Barbour, Ambrose, Rohrer, Whitmore, and Viechnicki (1994) felt that the 
best way to identify young gifted and talented minority or economically disadvantaged 
gifted students is to base observation and assessment procedures on universal identifiers of 
intellectual potential. They sorted 18 primary identifiers of intellectual potential into four 
groups of identifiers used to assess exceptional potential: (a) exceptional learner, (b) 
exceptional user, (c) exceptional generator, and (d) exceptional motivation. They believed 
that while the manifestation of an identifier may be influenced by the environmental context 
or the cultural heritage of the child, the identifier would remain consistent As a result they 
maintained that "it may be necessary to look for manifestations of exceptional memory 
beyond the traditional academic tasks and into areas such as exceptional memory for 
complex dance steps, or exceptional memory in storytelling or in remembering musical 
lyrics" (p. 28). 

Each of these researchers and writers speak to the importance of clarifying the 
attributes underlying the giftedness construct as the basis for observing gifted potential in 
target populations. The development of a common language to describe these core 
attributes of giftedness may provide a more viable foundation on which to build 
observation and identification methods to discover gifted potential as it is expressed within 
and across groups, regardless of cultural, physical, geographical, or socioeconomic 
differences. 

Method 

A qualitative content analysis method was chosen to carry out this analysis of the 
gifted literature to determine common features that characterize gifted children from the 
target population and the gifted population in general. Content analysis is a broad term 
used to describe a variety of procedures that permit valid inferences to be made about the 
message content of a narrative text (Rosengren, 1981; Weber, 1990). The central idea is 
that words, phrases, or other units of text may be classified in the same category if it is 
agreed that they have a similar meaning. According to Weber, these meanings may be 
precise (such as grouping synonyms together), or may share similar connotations (such as 
grouping together several words implying a concern with a concept such as wealth or 
power). Compared with techniques such as interviews, content analysis usually yields 
unobtrusive measures in which neither the sender nor the receiver of the message is aware 
that it is being analyzed. Hence, there is little danger that an act of measurement will act as 
a force for change that confounds the data. 

Our goal was to achieve "semantic validity" by sorting data units which had similar 
meanings or connotations into the same category. Weber specifies that for semantic 
validity to occur words or other coding units must possess similar connotations. That is, 
semantic validity exists when persons familiar with the language and texts examine lists of 
words (or other units) placed in the same category and agree that these words have similar 
meanings or connotations (Krippendorff, 1980 cited in Weber, 1990, p. 21). 

Parameters That Structured the Search for Core Attributes 

1 . The basic attributes defined as underlying the giftedness construct would be 
referred to as traits, aptitudes, and behaviors according to Sax's (1980) and 
Hagen’s (1980) definitions and interpretations of a construct. The 
Dictionary of Psychology (Chaplin, 1985) defines a trait as a relatively 
persistent and consistent behavior pattern, an aptitude as the capacity to 
perform in the future or some potential ability, and a behavior as any 
response made by an organism. 




34 



12 



2. Dynamic descriptions would be used to define the attributes associated with 
the giftedness construct. It was agreed that dynamic descriptions are better 
able to be universally interpreted in different cultural and environmental 
contexts. A description would be defined as dynamic if it could be 
interpreted as depicting some form of movement, action, or change. For 
example, "demonstrates an accelerated use and understanding of 
vocabulary" would be interpreted as dynamic. Conversely, a description 
would be defined as static if it could be interpreted as describing a fixed 
trait, aptitude, or behavior. For example, "has an advanced vocabulary" or 
"has a high IQ score" would be interpreted as static. 

3. When selecting categories, the broadest and most flexible concepts would 
be sought to encompass the core traits, aptitudes, and behaviors that reflect 
the essence or core of giftedness, within and across different cultures and 
contexts. This was considered an important requirement if these attributes 
were to be optimally amenable to interpretations in a broad range of cultural 
and environmental settings. 

Steps Followed in Analyzing Data Units 

Step 1 Locate data sources. 

The University of Georgia Libraries' catalog was used to develop data on 
the general attributes of gifted children as found in books and other reports, 
published from approximately 1957 to the present. This period was chosen 
because the launch of Sputnik by the Russians stimulated a more intense 
national interest in gifted children. Major texts and an increased number of 
articles on gifted children were generated since this time. 

Because gifted children have also been labeled at times as talented, creative, 
or genius, books and other reports with any of these labels in the title were 
cataloged to ensure a comprehensive search of relevant data sources. The 
data sources were selected for analysis if the entire discussion, or at least 
half of it, was devoted to enumerating and discussing the characteristics of 
gifted children. 

An additional search was made of the literature to identify checklists or 
rating scales that had been specifically developed to observe the 
characteristics of gifted African American, Hispanic, and Native American 
students. 

Step 2 Define the recording unit; locate units of information. 

We defined the recording unit as a phrase or sentence that described the 
characteristics of a gifted child. 

The information in each data source was thoroughly read to locate phrases 
or sentences that were used to describe the characteristics of gifted children. 
Books, book chapters, and other reports yielded 306 data entries; 120 data 
entries were generated from culture specific checklists and rating scales. 
Each entry was coded by author, year, page number, and category (i.e., 
gifted, talented, creative, or genius) and placed on a separate card. Four 
sets of cards were made, a master set, and one set for each of three 
researchers. 




35 



13 



Step 3 Develop categories for coding. 

Next, we developed 16 broad categories in which to place our independent 
coding of data units. The 16 categories initially developed were: (a) 
learning style, (b) memory, (c) inquiry, (d) ethical/moral, (e) reasoning, (f) 
problem solving ability, (g) insight, (h) imagination/creativity, (i) interests, 
(j) motivation, (k) humor, (1) communication skills, (m) leadership, (n) 
critical evaluation of self/others, (o) relationship with people and ideas, and 
(p) altruism. 

Step 4 Sort data units into the static or dynamic pile. 

Based on the parameters established earlier, 44 data units derived from 
books, book chapters or other reports, and 25 data units derived from 
checklists were eliminated because it was agreed by the researchers that they 
represented static descriptions of gifted attributes. In the first data pool 260 
data units remained and 95 data units remained in the second. 

Step 5 Sort data units into categories. 

Each researcher independently read and either sorted the data units into the 
16 initial categories or created a new category if the original categories were 
not thought to be appropriate. As a result, five additional categories were 
developed after the first reading, making a total of 2 1 categories: (a) 
sensorial/emotional sensitiveness, (b) aesthetic sensitivity, (c) mental 
maturity, (d) precocity, and (e) physical characteristics. 

Data units were reviewed three times before the researchers reached 95% 
agreement regarding the placement of the phrases or sentences into one of 
the 21 categories. 

Step 6 Determine core categories. 

If one or more of the following criteria suggested by Weber (1990) could be 
applied to a category, the category was eliminated: 



Reflects characteristics that may be interpreted as being more related 
to specific cultural values and beliefs (e.g., ethical and moral 
behaviors; aesthetic sensitivities). 

Is debatable as a category in which the level of performance could be 
described as gifted or not gifted (e.g., critical evaluation of self and 
others, altruism, interpersonal relationships). 

Includes data units that are in the culture-specific literature but not in 
the general literature. 



Using these criteria, 10 categories were retained as the core attribute categories. 
The definitions and general descriptions of these 10 categories are presented in Table 1. 
The retained data units were classified into one of the 10 categories. Table 2 provides the 
frequencies and percentages for these data units. 



ERIC 




14 



Table 1 

Definitions and General Descriptions of the 10 Core Attributes of Giftedness (Traits. 
Aptitudes, and Behaviors) 



Core Attribute 



General Description 



Motivation: Evidence of desire to learn 



Communication skills: Highly expressive 
and effective use of words, numbers, 
symbols, etc. 

Interest: Intense (sometimes unusual) 
interests 



Problem-solving ability: Effective (often 
inventive) strategies for recognizing and 
solving problems 



Imagination/Creativity: Produces many 
ideas; Highly original 



Memory: Large storehouse of information 
on school or non-school topics 

Inquiry: Questions, experiments, explores 



Insight: Quickly grasps new concepts and 
makes connections; senses deeper meanings 



Reasoning: Logical approaches to figuring 
out solutions 



Humor: Conveys and picks up on humor 
well 



Forces that initiate, direct and sustain 
individual or group behavior in order to 
satisfy a need or attained goal 

Transmission and reception of signals or 
meanings through a system of symbols 
(codes, gestures, language, numbers) 

Activities, avocations, objects, etc. that 
have special worth or significance and are 
given special attention 

Process of determining a correct sequence 
of alternatives leading to a desired goal or to 
successful completion or performance of a 
task 

Process of forming mental images of 
objects, qualities, situations, or 
relationships, which are not immediately 
apparent to the senses; solve problems by 
pursuing nontraditional patterns of thinking 

Exceptional ability to retain and retrieve 
information 

Method or process of seeking knowledge, 
understanding, or information 

Sudden discovery of the correct solution 
following incorrect attempts based primarily 
on trial and error 

Highly conscious, directed, controlled, 
active, intentional, forward-looking, goal 
oriented thought 

Ability to synthesize key ideas or problems 
in complex situations in a humorous way; 
Exceptional sense of timing in words and 
gestures 




37 



15 



Table 2 



Frequency and Percentage of Phrases and Sentences Generated From the General and 
Culture-Specific Gifted Literature 



Core Attributes 


General 
(n = 167) 


Culture Specific 
(11=82) 


Communication Skills 


8(5) 


16 (20) 


Creativity/Imagination 


22 (13) 


19 (23) 


Humor 


7(4) 


4(5) 


Inquiry 


4(2) 


3(4) 


Insight 


20 (12) 


11 (13) 


Interests 


25 (15) 


6(7) 


Memory 


12(7) 


5(6) 


Motivation 


35 (21) 


14 (17) 


Problem Solving 


10(6) 


3(4) 


Reasoning 


24 (14) 


KD 



Note. Numbers in parentheses are percentages. 



Conclusions 

Summary of Findings 

The intent of this analysis was to investigate the extent to which characteristics of 
gifted children as reported in die general literature matched or were similar to characteristics 
of gifted target population students as reported on culturally specific checklists. One- 
hundred-sixty-seven (64%) of the 262 descriptive units of information generated from the 
general literature were related to one of the core attribute categories. Eighty-two (86%) of 
the 95 descriptive units of information generated from the culture-specific checklists were 
also related to one of the core attribute categories. Well over half of the descriptive units of 
information in both information pools were considered to reflect the same or similar 
characteristics of gifted students. 



Implications 

It was proposed that identifying the core attributes associated with the giftedness 
construct would provide a better basis for establishing procedures to recognize, identify, 
and plan educational experiences for gifted students from minority or economically 
disadvantaged families and areas. Ten core attributes were identified: communication 
skills, imagination/creativity, humor, inquiry, insight, interests, memory, motivation, 
problem-solving, and reasoning. Implications for using these core attributes (a) to facilitate 
educators' recognition of gifted abilities in student populations from minority or 
economically disadvantaged families and areas, and (b) to guide educators in the selection 
of measures for identification minority or economically disadvantaged families and areas 
follow: 




38 



16 



1 . Students from minority and economically disadvantaged families and areas 
are likely to fare better in the identification procedures for gifted programs 
when a variety of test and nontest measures are used to assess potential 
across the wide range of traits, behaviors, and aptitudes associated with the 
giftedness construct. 

2. The use of a wide variety of test and nontest measures makes it less likely 
that students who are underrepresented in gifted programs will be 
handicapped by identification systems that rely on one or two measures to 
determine eligibility for gifted program services. 

3 . The interpretation of performances on this variety of measures would 
require the use of standards that accommodated the differences in the 
expression of gifted student characteristics as exhibited by students who 
come from diverse cultural, ethnic, economic, and environmental 
backgrounds. The core attributes of giftedness provide a common 
framework within which to make these interpretations. 

4. The core attributes of giftedness provides an important way to assist 
educators working with minority or economically disadvantaged students in 
the establishment of links between specific gifted characteristics and the 
manner in which they may be displayed in their classrooms. 

Arriving at a single conception of giftedness is difficult, given the abundance of 
competing conceptions of giftedness in the literature and the variety in the rules and 
regulations used by different states and local programs to determine who is eligible for 
services. This paper has provided a way to consider achieving consensus about the core 
attributes of giftedness, regardless of the words used to define the concept or the influences 
of culture and environment on gifted abilities. Findings from this study of the 
characteristics of gifted individuals as they are described in the general literature and in the 
culture-specific literature, suggest that gifted individuals are most consistently recognized 
by their motivation, interests, problem-solving ability, imagination/creativity, memory 
abilities, inquiry skills, insight, reasoning capacities, and sense of humor. It is suggested 
that these core attributes be the basis for referring, observing, and identifying children for 
gifted program services and for designing programs to address their needs. 




17 



References 

Arnold, A. (Ed.)- (1974). Programs for gifted: Research abstracts 1973-1974. 

Los Angeles, CA: Los Angeles City Unified School District. 

Baca, L., & Chinn, P. C. (1982). Coming to grips with cultural diversity. 
Exceptional Education Quarterly, 2(4), 33-45. 

Baldwin, A. Y. (1978). Introduction. In A. Y. Baldwin, G. H. Gear, & L. J. 
Lucito (Eds.), Educational planning for the gifted: Overcoming cultural, geographic, and 
socioeconomic barriers (pp. 1-5). Reston, VA: The Council for Exceptional Children. 

Baldwin, A. Y. (1991). Ethnic and cultural issues. In N. Colangelo & G. A. 
Davis (Eds.), Handbook of gifted education (pp. 416-427). Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Bermudez, A. B., & Rakow, S. J. (1990). Analyzing teachers’ perceptions of 
identification procedures for gifted and talented Hispanic limited English proficient students 
at-risk. Journal of Educational Issues of Language Minority Students, 7, 21-33. 

Bernal, E. M. (1974). Gifted Mexican American children: An ethno-scientific 
perspective. California Journal of Educational Research, 25, 261-273 . 

Bernal, E. M. (1978). The identification of gifted Chicano children. In A. Y. 
Baldwin, G. H. Gear, & L. J. Lucito (Eds.), Educational planning for the gifted: 
Overcoming cultural, geographic, and socioeconomic barriers (pp. 14-17). Reston, VA: 
The Council for Exceptional Children. 

Bernal, E. M. (1980). Methods of identifying gifted minority students. Princeton, 
NJ: Educational Testing Service. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 204 
418) 



Bruch, C. B. (1971). Modification of procedures for identification of the 
disadvantaged gifted. Gifted Child Quarterly, 15, 267-272. 

Callahan, C. M., & Mclntire, J. A. (1994). Identifying outstanding talent in 
American Indian and Alaska Native students. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Education. 

Chaplin, J. P. (1985). Dictionary of psychology (2nd ed.). New York: Laurel. 

Clark, B. (1992). Growing up gifted: Developing the potential of children at 
home and at school (4th ed.). New York: Merrill. 

Culross, R. (1989). Measurement issues in the screening and selection of the 
gifted. Roeper Review, 12(2), 76-78. 

Cummins, J. (1989). Institutionalized racism and the assessment of minority 
children: A comparison of policies and programs in the United States and Canada. In R. 
J. Samuda, S. L. Kong, J. Cummins, J. Pascual-Leone, & J. Lewis (Eds.), Assessment 
and placement of minority students (pp. 95-107). Toronto: C. J. Hogrefe. 




18 



Dabney, M. G. (1988). An alternative model for identification of potentially gifted 
students: A case study. In R. L. Jones (Ed.), Psychoeducational assessment of minority 
group children: A casebook (pp. 273-304). Berkeley, CA: Cobb & Henry. 

Davidson, H. H., & Greenberg, J. W. (1967). Traits of school achievers from a 
deprived background (Project No. 2805, Contract No. OE-5-10-132). New York: The 
City College of the City University of New York. 

Davis, G. A., & Rimm, S. B. (1994). Education of the gifted and talented (3rd 
ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 

Florey, J. E., & Tafoya, N. (1988). Identifying gifted and talented American 
Indian students: An overview (ERIC Digest No. EDO-RC-88-14). Las Cruces, NM: 
ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. 

Ford, D. Y., & Harris, J. J. (1990). On discovering the hidden treasure of gifted 
and talented African-American children. Roeper Review, 13(1), 27-32. 

Frasier, M. M. (1990). An investigation of giftedness in economically 
disadvantaged and limited English proficient populations (The National Research Center on 
the Gifted and Talented Proposal). Athens, GA: The University of Georgia. 

Frasier, M. M. (in press). Gifted minority students: Refraining approaches to 
their identification and education. In N. Colangelo & G. A. Davis (Eds.), Handbook of 
gifted education (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Frierson, E. C. (1965). Upper and lower status gifted children: A study of 
differences. Exceptional Children, 32(2), 83-90. 

Gallagher, J. J. (1991). Issues in the education of gifted students. In N. 
Colangelo & G. A. Davis (Eds.), Handbook of gifted education (pp. 14-23). Boston: 
Allyn & Bacon. 

Gallagher, J. J. (1994a). Current and historical thinking on education for gifted 
and talented students. In P. O'Connell-Ross (Ed.), National excellence: A case for 
developing America's talent, an anthology of readings (pp. 83-107). Washington, DC: 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education. 

Gallagher, J. J. (1994b). Teaching the gifted child (4th ed). Boston: Allyn & 

Bacon. 



Gallagher, J. J., & Courtright, R. D. (1988). The educational definition of 
giftedness and its policy implications. In R. J. Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), 
Conceptions of giftedness (pp. 93-11 1). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Gallagher, J. J., & Kinney, L. (1974). Talent delayed-talent denied: The 
culturally different gifted child. In Quail Roost Conference. Reston, VA: The Foundation 
for Exceptional Children. 

Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. New 
York: Basic Books. 




41 



19 



Garrison, L. (1989). Programming for the gifted American Indian student InC. 
J. Maker & S. W. Schiever (Eds.), Critical issues in gifted education: Defensible 
programs for cultural and ethnic minorities (pp. 116-127). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 

Glaser, E. M., & Ross, H. L. (1970). A study of successful persons from 
seriously disadvantaged backgrounds (Final Report Contract No. 82-05-68-03). 
Washington, DC: Department of Labor, Office of Special Manpower Programs. 

Hagen, E. (1980). Identification of the gifted. New York: Teachers College 

Press. 



Hamilton, S. E. (1993). Identifying African American gifted children using a 
behavioral assessment technique: The gifted children locator. Journal of Black 
Psychology, 19(1), 63-76. 

Hartley, E. A. (1991). Through Navaho eyes: Examining differences in 
giftedness. Journal of American Indian Education, 31(1), 53-64. 

Hilliard, A. G. (1976). Alternatives to I. Q. testing: An approach to the 
identification of gifted “minority” children (Final report No. ED 147 009). Sacramento, 
CA: California State Department of Education, Sacramento Division of Special Education. 

Hilliard, A. G. (1991). The ideology of intelligence and I.Q. magic in education. 
In A. G. Hilliard (Eds.), Testing African American students: Special re-issue of The 
Negro Educational Review (pp. 136-145). Morristown, NJ: Aaron Press. 

Hoge, R. D. (1988). Issues in the definition and measurement of the giftedness 
construct. Educational Researcher, 17(1), 12-16,22. 

Hoge, R. D. (1989). An examination of the giftedness construct. Canadian 
Journal of Education, 14(1), 6-17. 

Kitano, M. K., & Kirby, D. F. (1986). Gifted education: A comprehensive view. 
Boston: Little, Brown. 1 

Krippendorff, K. (1980). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology. 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, j 

Lee, C. C. (1984). Successful rural black adolescents: A psychosocial profile. 
Adolescence, 20(11), 129-142. 

Lee, C. C. (1989). Rural Black adolescents: Psychosocial development in a 
changing environment. In R. L. Jones (Ed.), Black adolescents (pp. 79-95). Berkeley, 
CA: Cobb & Henry. 

Leung, E. K. (1981). The identification and social problem of the gifted bilingual- 
bicultural children. Paper presented at The Council for Exceptional Children Conference 
on the Exceptional Bilingual Child, New Orleans, LA. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 203 653) 

Maker, C. J. (1983). Quality education for gifted minority students. Journal for 
the Education of the Gifted, 6(3), 140-153. 




42 



20 



Maker, C. J., & Schiever, S. W. (Eds.). (1989). Critical issues in gifted 
education: Defensible programs for cultural and ethnic minorities. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 

Marland, S. P., Jr. (1972). Education of the gifted and talented (Report to the 
Congress of the United States by the U.S. Commissioner of Education). Washington, DC: 
U.S. Government Printing Office. 

Meeker, M. (1978). Nondiscriminatory testing procedures to assess giftedness in 
Black, Chicano, Navajo, and Anglo children. In A. Baldwin, G. Gear, & L. Lucito 
(Eds.), Educational planning for the gifted: Overcoming cultural, geographic, and socio- 
economic barriers (pp. 17-26). Reston, VA: Council for Exceptional Children. 

Ogawa, R. T., & Malen, B. (1991). Towards rigor in reviews of multivocal 
literatures: Applying the exploratory case study method. Review of Educational Research, 
61(3), 265-286. 

Passow, A. H. (1982). The gifted disadvantaged: Some reflections. In Fifth 
National Conference on Disadvantaged Gifted/Talented (pp. 19-27). Ventura, CA: 

Ventura County Superintendent of Schools Office. 

Passow, A. H., & Rudnitski, R. A. (1993). State policies regarding education of 
the gifted as reflected in legislation and regulation (CRS93302). Storrs, CT: University of 
Connecticut, The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented. 

Pendarvis, E. D., Howley, A. A., & Howley, C. B. (1990). The abilities of 
gifted children. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Richert, E. S. (1991). Rampant problems and promising practices in 
identification. In N. Colangelo & G. A. Davis (Eds.), Handbook of gifted education (pp. 
81-96). Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Romero, M., & Schultz, H. (1992). Identifying giftedness among Pueblo 
Indians. (Grant No. R1 17E00084). Washington, DC: Office of Education Research and 
Improvement, U.S. Department of Education. 

Rosengren, K. E. (1981). Advances in content analysis. Beverly Hills, C A: 

Sage. 



Samuda, R. J., Kong, S. L., Cummins, J., Pascual-Leone, J., & Lewis, J. 
(1989). Assessment and placement of minority students. Toronto: C. J. Hogrefe. 

Sax, G. (1980). Principles of educational and psychological measurement and 
evaluation. (2nd ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Shade, B. J. (1981). Racial variations in perceptual differentiation. Perceptual 
and Motor Skills, 52, 243-248. 

Shade, B. J. (1991). African American patterns of cognition. InR.L. Jones 
(Ed.), Black Psychology (pp. 231-247). Berkeley, CA: Cobb & Henry. 




43 



21 



Shaklee, B. D., Barbour, N., Ambrose, R., Rohrer, J., Whitmore, J. R., & 
Viechnicki, K. J. (1994). Early assessment for exceptional potential in young minority 
and/or economically disadvantaged students. In C. M. Callahan, C. A. Tomlinson, & P. 
M. Pizzat (Eds.), Contexts for promise: Noteworthy practices and innovations in the 
identification of gifted students (pp. 22*42). Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia, 
The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented. 

Sisk, D. (1973). Developing teacher mediators/teacher training for disadvantaged 
gifted. In First National Conference on the Disadvantaged Gifted. Ventura, CA: 
National/State Leadership Institute on the Gifted and Talented. 

Sisk, D. (1989). Identifying and nurturing talent among American Indians. In C. 
J. Maker & S. W. Schiever (Eds.), Critical issues in gifted education: Defensible 
programs for cultural and ethnic minorities (pp. 128-132). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 

Tannenbaum, A. J. (1983). Gifted children: Psychological and educational 
perspectives. New York: Macmillan. 

Tidwell, R. (1981). A psycho-educational profile of gifted minority group 
students identified without reliance on aptitude tests. Journal of Non-White Concerns, 9, 
77-86. 



Tonemah, S. A., & Brittan, M. A. (1985). American Indian gifted and talented 
assessment model (Grant from the U.S. Education Department, Indian Education Programs 
No. G008420046). Norman, OK: American Indian Research and Development. 

Torrance, E. P. (1964). Identifying the creatively gifted among economically and 
culturally disadvantaged children. Gifted Child Quarterly, 8, 171-176. 

Torrance, E. P. (1965). Motivating the creatively gifted among economically 
disadvantaged children. Gifted Child Quarterly, 9, 9-12. 

Torrance, E. P. (197 1). Are the Torrance tests of creative thinking biased against 
or in favor of disadvantaged groups? Gifted Child Quarterly, 15, 75-80. 

Torrance, E. P. (1974). Differences are not deficits. Teachers College Record, 

75, 472-487. 

Torrance, E. P. (1977). Discovery and nurturance of giftedness in the culturally 
different. Reston, VA: The Council for Exceptional Children. 

Udall, A. J. (1989). Curriculum for gifted Hispanic students. InC.J. Maker & 

S. W. Schiever (Eds.), Critical issues in gifted education: Defensible programs for cultural 
and ethnic minorities (pp. 41-56). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 

VanTassel-Baska, J., Patton, J. J., & Prillaman, D. (1991). Gifted youth at risk: 
A report of a national study. Reston, VA: Council for Exceptional Children. 

Weber, R. P. (1990). Basic content analysis. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 

Whitmore, J. R. (1982). Recognizing and developing hidden giftedness. The 
Elementary School Journal, 82(3), 274-283. 




44 



22 



Whitmore, J. R., & Maker, C. J. (1985). Intellectual giftedness in disabled 
persons. Rockville, MD: Aspen. 

Zappia, I. A. (1989). Identification of gifted Hispanic students: A 
multidimensional view. In C. J. Maker & S. W. Schiever (Eds.), Critical issues in gifted 
education: Defensible programs for cultural and ethnic minorities (pp. 19-26). Austin, 
TX: Pro-Ed. 




23 



Appendix A 

Preliminary Explorations of Core Attributes of Giftedness 





25 



CATEGORY OF 
GIFTEDNESS 


GENERIC INDICATORS 


RELEVANT CHECKLIST 
INDICATORS 


1. LINGUISTIC (Gardner) 


1.1. Meaningfully 
manipulates some symbol 
system (Gallagher & 
Kinney) 


1.1.1. Use of language 
(Hagen) 

1.1.2. Expressive speech 
(Torrance): Uses words to 
express thought and 
meaning (Tonemah) 

1.1.3. Expressiveness of 
gestures, “body language,” 
etc., and ability to interpret 
same (Torrance) 

1.1.4. Large vocabulary 
(Tonemah, Bernal) 

1.1.5. Humor (Torrance) 

1.1.6. Richness in imagery 
in informal language 
(Torrance) 

1.1.7. Speaks correctly 
with good grammar for 
his/her age (Bernal) 


1.2. Thinks logically given 
appropriate data (Gallagher 
& Kinney) 


1.2.1. Devises or adapts a 
systematic strategy for 
solving problems and 
changes strategy if it is not 
working (Hagen) 

1.2.2. Solves problems 
systematically (Tonemah) 

1.2.3. Criticalness of own 
performance (Hagen) 

1.2.4. Quality of questions 
(Hagen) 

1.2.5. Sees logical 
solutions to problems 
(Tonemah) 


1.3. Uses stored 
knowledge to solve 
problems (Gallagher & 
Kinney) 


1.3.1. Breadth of 
information (Hagen) 

1.3.2. Depth of information 
(Hagen) 

1.3.3. Listens well and 
remembers things that are 
heard (Tonemah) 

1.3.4. Understands and 
remembers detailed 
instructions when given the 
first time (Bernal) 




47 



26 



CATEGORY OF 
1 GIFTEDNESS 


GENERIC INDICATORS 


RELEVANT CHECKLIST 
INDICATORS 


LINGUISTICS (Gardner) 
Continued 


1.4. Reasons by verbal 
analogy (Gallagher & 
Kinney) 


1.4.1. Quality of examples, 
illustrations or elaborations 
in explaining something 
(Hagen) 

1.4.2. Readily grasps 
abstract concepts (Tonemah) 


1.5. Extends or extrapolates 
knowledge to new situations 
or unique applications 
(Gallagher & Kinney) 


1.5.1. Innovative use of 
common materials (Hagen) 

1.5.2. Collections of 
materials or hobbies 
(Hagen) 

1.5.3. Articulateness in role 
playing, sociodrama, and 
storytelling (Torrance, 
Tonemah) 

1.5.4. Imagines stories 
with detail (Tonemah) 

1.5.5. Originality in ideas 
in problem-solving 
(Torrance) 

1.5.6. Invents ways to 
make improvements to 
things or ways of doing 
things (Tonemah) 

1.5.7. Uses imagery to gain 
insight, ideas, or 
understanding (Tonemah) 

1.5.8. Enjoys doing things 
in new ways (Tonemah) 




27 



CATEGORY OF 
GIFTEDNESS 


GENERIC INDICATORS 


RELEVANT CHECKLIST 
INDICATORS 


2. LOGICAL- 

MATHEMATICAL 

(Gardner) 


2.1. Meaningfully 
manipulates some symbol 
system (Gallagher & 
Kinney) 


2.1.1. Use of quantitative 
expressions and quantitative 
reasoning (Hagen) 


2.2. Thinks logically given 
appropriate data (Gallagher 
& Kinney) 


2.2.1. Devises or adapts a 
systematic strategy for 
solving problems and 
changes strategy if it is not 
working (Hagen) 

2.2.2. Sees logical 
solutions to problems 
(Tonemah) 

2.2.3. Criticalness of own 
performance (Hagen) 

2.2.4. Quality of questions 
(Hagen) 


2.3. Uses stored 
knowledge to solve 
problems (Gallagher & 
Kinney) 


2.3.1. Breadth of 
information (Hagen) 

2.3.2. Depth of information 
(Hagen) 

2.3.3. Listens well and 
remembers things that are 
heard (Tonemah); 

2.3.4. Understands and 
remembers detailed 
instructions when given the 
first time (Bernal) 


2.4. Reasons by numerical 
analogy (Gallagher & 
Kinney) 


2.4.1. Quality of examples, 
illustrations or elaborations 
in explaining something 
(Hagen) 

2.4.2. Readily grasps 
abstract concepts (Tonemah) 


2.5. Extends or extrapolates 
knowledge to new situations 
or unique applications 
(Gallagher & Kinney) 


2.5.1. Innovative use of 
common materials (Hagen, 
Torrance, Tonemah) 

2.5.2. Collections of 
materials or hobbies 
(Hagen) 

2.5.3. Originality in ideas 
in problem-solving 
(ToiTance) 

2.5.4. Invents ways to 
make improvements to 
things or ways of doing 
things (Tonemah) 

2.5.5. Uses imagery to gain 
insight, ideas, or 
understanding (Tonemah) 




28 



CATEGORY OF 
GIFTEDNESS 


GENERIC INDICATORS 


RELEVANT CHECKLIST 
INDICATORS 


3. MOTIVATION FOR 
INTELLECTUAL 
PURSUITS (EMERGED) 




3.1. Persistence on 
uncompleted tasks (Hagen, 
Tonemah, Torrance) 

3.2. Practices to excel in 
skill area (Tonemah) 

3.3. Absorption in 
intellectual tasks (Hagen) 

3.4. Extensiveness of 
exploratory behavior 
(Hagen) 

3.5. Questioning attitude 
(Tonemah) 

3.6. Wants to know more 
about many things 
(Tonemah) 

3.7. Curiosity (Tonemah) 

3.8. Problem-centeredness 
(Torrance) 

3.9. Quickness of warm-up 
(Torrance) 

3.10. Boredom with routine 
work (Tonemah) 

3.11. Responds readily 
with thoughts, words, or 
actions (Tonemah) 

3.12. Takes risks to do well 
(Tonemah) 

3.13. Gives best effort; 
goes to limit of ability. 

3.14. Preference for 
complexity, difficulty, and 
novelty (Bernal) 

3.15. Shows self-discipline 
(Bernal) 




50 



29 



CATEGORY OF 
GIFTEDNESS 


GENERIC INDICATORS 


RELEVANT CHECKLIST 
INDICATORS 


4. LEARNING 

ENVIRONMENT/ 

LEARNING 

STYLES/INTERESTS 

(EMERGED) 




4.1. Skill in group problem 
solving (Torrance, 
Tonemah) 

4.2. Influence in group 
decisions (Tonemah) 

4.3. Concentrates well 
when information is 
presented as a whole 
(Tonemah) 

4.4. Responsiveness to the 
kinesthetic (Tonemah) 

4.5. Responsiveness to the 
concrete (Torrance, 
Tonemah) 

4.6. Enjoys learning about 
factual events and things 
(Tonemah) 

4.7. Exhibits a concern for 
the environment or nature 
(Tonemah) 

4.8. Emotional 
responsiveness (Torrance) 

4.9. Other children look for 
and want to be around 
him/her (Bernal) 

4.10. Takes care of his/her 
things (Bernal) 

4.11. Questions parental 
rebukes (Bernal) 

4.12. Enjoys doing things 
in new ways (Tonemah) 




51 



31 



The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented 

The University of Connecticut 
362 Fairfield Road,U-7 
Ston-s,CT 06269-2007 



Production Assistants 
Dawn R. Guenther 
Siamak Vahidi 



Reviewers 
Mallory Bagwell 
Bruce Berube 
E. Jean Gubbins 
Cheryl R. Kerison 
Amy Mullen 
Karen L. Westberg 



O 

ERIC 



52 



32 




The 

National 

Research 

Center 

on 



The University of Connecticut 

Dr. Francis X. Archambault, Associate Director 

The University of Connecticut 

School of Education, U-4 

Stores, CT 06269-2004 

203-486-4531 

Dr. Alexinia Y. Baldwin 
Dr. Scott W. Brown 
Dr. Deborah E. Bums 
Dr. David A. Kenny 
Dr. Jonna Kulikowich 
Dr. Sally M. Reis 
Dr. Karen L. Westberg 
Dr. Michael F. Young 

The University of Georgia 

Dr. Mary M. Frasier, Associate Director 
The University of Georgia 
Department of Educational Psychology 
323 Aderhold Hall 
Athens, GA 30602-7146 
404-542-5106 

Dr. Scott L. Hunsaker 



the 

Gifted 

and 

Talented 

Research 

Teams 



The University of Virginia 

Dr. Carolyn M. Callahan, Associate Director 

Curry School of Education 

The University of Virginia 

405 Emme t Street 

Charlottesville, VA 22903 

804-982-2849 

Dr. Michael S. Caldwell 
Dr. Marcia A. B. Delcourt 
Dr. Brenda H. Loyd 
Dr. Kathleen May 
Dr. Claudia Sowa 
Dr. Ellen Tomchin 
Dr. Carol A. Tomlinson 

Yale University 

Dr. Robert J. Sternberg, Associate Director 

Department of Psychology 

Yale University 

P.O. Box 208205 

New Haven, CT 06520-8205 

203-432-4632 

Dr. Pamela Clinkenbeard 






U.S . DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 




