Internet Videoconferencing to Improve EFL Learning 



Paper presented March 8, 2008 at the 2008 Conference on 
English Teaching and Global Communication, 
Chienkuo Technology University, Changhua City, Taiwan. 



Michael Marek, Ed.D 
Wayne State College 
Wayne, Nebraska, USA 
mimarekl @wsc.edu 



Abstract: This presentation describes the methodology used by Dr. 
Michael Marek and Dr. Vivian Wu for English language instruction 
in Taiwan using Internet videoconferencing, and their research 
findings after three semesters. Initial student reaction was positive. 
Quantitative and qualitative evaluation indicated an increase in 
motivation as a result of the interactions. Abundant literature is 
clear that when motivation increases, ability and confidence follow. 
Students cited several elements of the instructional design in 
explaining their increased proficiency: the sessions’ emphasis on 
subjects interesting and pertinent to young adults, including 
American culture and traditions; spontaneous and authentic 
interaction with a native speaker; and the implementation of 
techniques to lessen anxiety. The positive results suggest a new 
avenue for foreign language instruction around the world that 
makes use of student-centered, active learning. 



I am pleased to be here today to tell you about the work Dr. Vivian Wu and I have 
been doing, collaborating between America and Taiwan. We use Internet 
videoconferencing to improve the learning of English of students here in Taiwan. We 
are in the second year of our project and our research, and we are proud of the results 
showing an increase of student motivation to study English as a result of our work (Wu 
& Marek, 2007). 




Dr. Wu and I met in the United States when we were in the same doctoral 



program at the University of South Dakota. Our program in Adult and Higher Education 
stressed active, learner-centered education and constructive learning. It deemphasized 
the traditional format of lecture, memorization, drill, and passive learning. It happened 
that I was a couple of semesters ahead of Dr. Wu and had completed my degree when 
she was working on her dissertation about the optimal learning environment for English 
in Taiwan (Wu, 2006). I was a peer reviewer of her qualitative data and in this way I 
learned about the challenges faced by teachers of English in Taiwan. I learned 
particularly about the difficulty of finding native speakers of English to talk with students 
of English. 

One day, I casually suggested to Dr. Wu that maybe I could talk to her class via 
the Internet. At that time, I was not so much interested in teaching English as I was in 
innovative use of the Internet for mass communication - to benefit my promotion and 
tenure process. This is because I teach Mass Communication at Wayne State College, 
a small public liberal arts college in the American state of Nebraska. For those of you 
who do not know Dr. Wu, she teaches English at Chienkou Technology University 
(CTU) in Changhua City. My casual suggestion soon became an instructional design 
that makes use of our skills in both of our fields, and of our philosophy of student- 
centered education. 

In America, when we teach English to people who are not native speakers, we 
say that we are teaching English as a Second Language (ESL). This is because the 
students are surrounded by a culture that speaks English and the students can easily 
practice their skills (Huan, 1 989). Those of you here today know that in Taiwan, English 




is a foreign language (EFL). The academic literature is clear that the opportunity for 
communication in authentic situations and settings, especially with native speakers, is a 
major factor in successful second-language acquisition by adults (Snow, 1987; Spolsky, 
1989; You, 2003). 

However, we all understand how difficult it is for instructors of English in Taiwan 
to find native speakers of English to interact with students. 

Dr. Wu and I both strongly believe in the student-centered approach to 
instruction, as opposed to the teacher-centered approach. Teacher-centered instruction 
mainly uses lecture and memorization. The result is that students only want to complete 
the class, or use the subject matter for some other very practical purpose, like getting a 
job. They are not very engaged in learning the material, for learning's sake. This is 
called instrumental motivation (Gardner, 2001). On the other hand, integrative 
motivation deals with stimulating the learner's true interest in the subject, interest that 
will carry after the class is completed. In EFL, this means a desire to be engaged with 
the language and culture of native speakers. Teachers accomplish this by giving 
students more control over their learning, thus motivating them to be more engaged, 
and by using materials that are as authentic as possible. We call this making the class 
student-centered. 

The project that Dr. Wu and I developed is an attempt to address this need for 
authentic materials with an innovative use of Internet videoconferencing. Our work 
included development of content providing cultural information about America that 
would interest CTU students. We also developed a structure that integrates my 




presentations into the overall class. The students prepare in advance for the online 
sessions and they are assisted as they directly interact with me. 

This addresses one of the biggest criticisms of past efforts to use 
videoconferencing to assist EFL instruction - that the videoconferences are NOT part of 
a comprehensive pedagogic structure (O’Dowd, 2005). I am going to explain the process 
we use, so you will see that this criticism does not apply to our work. 

Instructional Design 

Last year, I spoke to Dr. Wu’s classes five times over the two semesters. That 
means five “rounds” of speaking to five classes each, or a total of 25 presentations to 
individual classes. There were a total of about 225 students in the classes. Students in 
these classes were non-majors with relatively low English speaking proficiency and 
comprehension. This past semester I talked to two classes of majors three times each. 

The development of the presentations involved several steps, beginning with 
assessment of the technical environment. We chose to use the consumer system 
SKYPE (skype.com) because it was free, easily available in the CTU computer lab, and 
easy for me to use at home. Due to time zone differences, we were 13 to 14 hours apart 
in our local times. For me, the videoconferences fell in mid-evening, in the middle of the 
night, or in the early morning hours in the United States. Last semester, one of the 
classes began at 4:30 am for me. So I talked to the students from home. 

The Taiwanese classes met in an on-campus computer lab. The teacher's work 
station in the lab made the connection to my computer and the screen of the teacher's 
computer was reproduced on a large projected display, as well as on the individual 
student computers in the lab. Wall-mounted speakers and a common microphone 




allowed for all students to hear me and for Dr. Wu to control the flow of the conversation 



and assure equal opportunity for students to participate. 

Once our technology was selected, we collaborated to plan carefully the overall 
strategy of the videoconferences and the individual lessons. I developed a presentation 
lasting about 20 minutes for each round of videoconferences. Dr. Wu gave me 
feedback on my drafts. The subject of each presentation was tailored to interest young 
adults and to highlight American culture, traditions. I worked hard to use simple 
vocabulary. The students received an advance written copy of my presentation, along 
with an mp3 audio recording of the text. In the recording, I slowly spoke the words and 
enunciated my words clearly. I learned this technique from “Voice of America” radio 
transmissions in what they call “special English.” Dr. Wu reviewed the advance text with 
students, emphasizing the new vocabulary and meaning of phrases. Students listened 
to the recording on their own to help their understanding of my spoken English. 

In the live videoconferences, I delivered expanded versions of the presentations, 
adding photographs to enrich my text. Dr. Wu translated or clarified meaning, as 
needed. For a period of about 70 minutes following the presentation, Taiwanese 
students, either as individuals or in small groups based on their comfort levels, asked 
me questions or replied with comments regarding the presentation. My topics included 
rural America, important holidays in the United States, national parks and vacations and 
American clothing. 

The third step of our project last year was to collect and analyze findings at the 
end of each semester about changes in the motivation, ability, and confidence of the 
students. To do this, we used a quantitative survey of the participating students. 




Qualitative interviews of selected students provided added richness of understanding of 
the experiences of the students. We created both the quantitative survey and the 
qualitative interview protocol following a review of the pertinent literature (Gardner, 
1985a; Silva, 1997; Zeng’s, 2001) and with human subjects research approval on both 
of our campuses. The survey questions were grouped to indicate student perceptions of 
motivation, confidence, and ability. The qualitative interview questions explored the 
experiences of the students in this project. 

Findings and Discussion 

Motivation, Confidence & Ability. After five rounds of videoconferencing last year, 
the survey of student perceptions showed that their motivation increased at a level that 
is statistically significant. On a five-point scale, where 3.00 indicated no change, 
motivation was 4.09, which is a statistically significant increase at the 95% level of 
confidence. Although the quantitative survey did not report statistically significant 
increases in confidence and ability in speaking English, much literature exists tying the 
three factors together, indicating that when motivation increases, confidence and ability 
follow (Clement & Kruidenier, 1985; Horowitz, Horowitz, and Cope, 1986; Labrie & 
Clement, 1986). Therefore, we believe that the increased student motivation to study 
English, which can change in a fairly short timeframe, results in longer-term 
improvements in ability and confidence which take more time to develop. 

In addition, the gender of the students produced statistically significant 
differences in motivation and confidence. Female students perceived more of a change 
in their motivation compared to their male counterparts as a consequence of the 




videoconferences. There are probably cultural reasons for this that YOU may 
understand better than I do. 

Cultural Content. Students particularly appreciated that the presentations dealt 
with aspects of current American culture. Their interest in American culture led them to 
respond positively to the videoconference sessions and the subsequent question and 
answer sessions. 

Active Learning. Students clearly recognized that this English course was 
different from other English classes they had taken, not just because of the 
videoconferences but also because they were more engaged, active learners. In 
addition to the interactions with me via videoconference, they cited more interactions 
with each other in English and with their teacher, as the active learning style improved 
their confidence. 

Authentic Materials. One of the primary benefits cited by the students was that 
they had the opportunity to learn accurate American pronunciation and usage. Knowing 
that they were hearing correct American usage increased the confidence of the students 
in the content of the lessons. This, in turn, increased their confidence in their own 
understanding, with resulting increases in their motivation and ability. 

Student Anxiety. The students' perceptions of their distance learning experience 
were often framed in terms of how nervous or relaxed they were while speaking with 
me. Because of the way Dr. Wu and I designed the lessons, students found the 
experience to be less intimidating because she was present and provided assistance 
with vocabulary and grammar. Research shows that strong interactions and contacts 
with native speakers of English in a setting producing low anxiety can be considered to 




be an ideal environment. The students found both criteria to be true in their Internet 
videoconferences. Another important factor in student comfort was that they were 
already familiar with the technology. They use SKPYE, MSN Messenger and similar 
systems regularly in their daily lives. Extending their use to the classroom was an easy 
step for them. 

Learning Environment. Students were highly aware of their learning environment, 
commenting negatively on connectivity and bandwidth issues that occasionally caused 
the video to "freeze," and excessive class size (as high as 50 students) that limited their 
individual time talking with me online. 

Conclusion 

Dr. Wu and I believe that our work represents the development of an important 
technique for distance learning - one that avoids past criticisms of demonstrations of 
videoconferencing for language instruction. While there is considerable literature about 
boosting student motivation and confidence and about computer-assisted teaching, this 
is pioneering research into how precisely student motivation to study English improves 
as the result of videoconferencing with a native speaker of English. 




References 



Clement, R. & Kruidenier, B. G. (1985). Aptitude, attitude and motivation in second 
language proficiency: A test of Clement's model. Journal of Language and Social 
Psychology, 4, 273-291. 

Gardner, R. C. (1985a). The attitude/motivation test battery: Technical report. London, 
Ontario, Canada: Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario. 

Gardner R. C. (2001). Integrative motivation: Past, present and future. Retrieved 

February 05, 2006, from http://publish.uwo.ca/~gardner/GardnerPublicLecture1.pdf 

Horwitz, E., Horwitz, M., & Cope, J. (1986). Foreign Language classroom anxiety. 
Modern Language Journal, 70, 125-132. 

Fluan, T. L. (1989) Age, motivation, and second language learning. Paper presented at 
The Proceedings of the Sixth Conference on English Teaching and Learning in 
the Republic of China, Taipei, Taiwan. 

Labrie, N. & Clement, R. (1986). Ethnoiinguistic vitality, self-confidence and second 
language proficiency: An investigation. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Development, 7(4), 269-282. 

O'Dowd, R. (2005). The use of videoconferencing and e-mail as mediators of 

intercultural student erthnography. In J. A. Belz & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet- 
mediated Intercultural Foreign Language Education. Heinle: Boston. 

Silva, D. (1997). The California Foreign Language Project. Retrieved March 05, 2007, 
from http://www.stanford.edu/qroup/CFLP/ 

Snow, C. E. (1 987). Second language learners' format definitions: An oral language 
correlate of school literacy. Los Angeles: University of California, Center for 
Language Education and Research. 

Spolsky, B. (1989). Consider for second language learning. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Wu, W. V. (2006). EFL optimal learning environment: perspectives of faculty and 

students in a Taiwanese technical university, USA, Vermillion: The University of 
South Dakota. 

Wu. V. & Marek, M. W. (2007, June). Using Internet teleconferencing between 

Taiwanese English language students and a native speaker to improve learning. 
Paper presented at the meeting of ED-MEDIA 2007 - World Conference on 




Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia & Telecommunications, Association for the 
Advancement of Computing in Education, Vancouver, Canada. 

You, Y. H. (2003). A study on motivation to learn English among the freshmen in the 
four-year program. Project Report on Improvements on Faculty Members of St. 
John's Institute of Technology. 

Zeng, K. R., Liao, C. W., Xu, Y. Z., & Wu, S. R. (2001). A study of vocational high 
school students on how to raise their English ability. Paper presented at The 
Sixteenth Proceedings of National Technological and Vocational Education, 207- 
218, Hualien, Taiwan. 




