Reading, Writing, and Reading-Writing in the Second Language Classroom: 



A Balanced Curriculum 

Jeng-yih (Tim) Hsu 
Department of English 

National Kaohsiung First University of Science and Technology 



Abstract 

The notion of integrating reading and writing in LI and L2 literacy education is not new; 
however, only until recently has the reading-writing connection received enough attention and 
been implemented in the teaching of LI and L2. This paper aims to search for the most current, 
up-to-dated, approach that best incorporates the idea of reading- writing connection. It first reviews 
literature and former studies that support that reading and writing mutually reinforce each other in 
both LI and L2 literacy development. Furthermore, it discusses the interface where writer meets 
reader as well as writing meets reading. Next, a survey of the 223 TESOL graduate programs in 
North America attempts to examine how professional ESL/EFL teacher education institutes are 
practicing the latest theory of reading and writing, followed by a questionnaire answered by 14 
teachers -in-preparation (both native and non-native speakers of American English) who shared 
their general concept regarding the teaching of reading and writing. Based on the findings, this 
paper calls for a balanced curriculum in which reading, writing, and reading- writing integration are 
dealt in three separated, independent courses with individually specific focuses as each of them has 
a strong impact on the overall proficiency of L2 students’ acquisition of English. 



Key words: reading and writing integration, TESOE programs, curriculum design 



1. Introduction 

In Taiwan, children always learn to write first. Managing to write with picture-like, 
square-shaped, and logographic Chinese characters is the routine drilled each day at school, for 
more than a hundred times, by every pupil long before he/she starts reading any short texts. It is a 
presumed concept that Chinese speakers ought to learn written words by writing them so that they 



1 




can recognize and comprehend the same characters when encountering them later in the reading 
task. Bits of writing practice gradually build one’s vocabulary capacity that results in the 
development of sentences, paragraphs, and, finally, the maturity of Chinese competence. 
Presumably, writing comes before reading, at least, in the case of Taiwanese educational system. 
However, the same idea does not seem to be applied in the case of Taiwanese students’ second 
language learning (i. e., English). Students, starting form junior high school, learn to read in 
English first along with an extraordinary amount of grammatical rules. Upon entering senior high 
school, they will have their first English writing class. To be more specific, most Taiwanese 
students will have only two-year English composition writing experience at their 11* and 12* 
grades unless they choose to become English majors next in colleges. Most Taiwanese will agree 
and accept the idea that, when learning English, reading precedes writing. Two contradictory kinds 
of learning experiences lead me to a very curious position at which I am not quite certain about 
which skill should come first. As an ESE learner as well as an ESE teacher, I have a particular 
interest in finding out how reading and writing relate to each other, how learners can benefit form 
the interaction between reading and writing, and how classroom teachers can better adjust to 
incorporate the uniqueness of reading- writing connection to facilitate students’ acquisition of 
English. 

This paper will first look at the current trend of both El (i.e., English education in the U. S.) 
and E2 (i.e., TESOE) teaching to see what has been the latest approach of the teaching of reading 
and of writing. Paralleled reviews of theories and empirical studies concerning El and E2 reading 
and writing will be discussed next, followed by the section in which the interaction between 
reading and writing, as well as reader and writer, will be elaborated in terms of both theories and 
classroom practices. 

An additional survey of current TESOE graduate programs in North America, which comes 
next, may reveal how teacher preparation institutes are dealing with the dynamics aroused from the 
reading-writing interactions. Moreover, interviews with TESOE program professors and the ESE 



2 




program director, together with a collection of questionnaires answered by American English 
teachers and international ESL teachers currently enrolled in the TESOE master and Rhetoric and 
Einguistics Ph.D. programs in a small-scale university in Pennsylvania, will provide valuable 
insights that ultimately contribute to the most up-to-dated ESE literacy curriculum. 

2. Does reading precede writing or writing precede reading in LI and L2 acquisition? 

2.1 The Debate 

Traditionally, reading has been considered as an early- acquired skill and ought to have the 
priority to be taught in children’s early schooling. Most researchers in North America had 
sustained such a viewpoint in the past three decades. Julie Jensen (1999), however, argued that 
“writing during the early years is a natural ‘gateway to literacy”’(p. 26). Her compiling of 
responses from twenty-four prominent scholars cited most frequently in Anne Dyson and Sarah 
Freeman’s (1991) chapter, “Writing,” from The Handbook of Research on Teaching the English 
Eanguage Arts showed that researchers now believe that very young children can learn to write 
before they can read and that writing, because it is more easily, quickly learned, “naturally” 
precedes reading. That writing is the gateway to literacy seems to be the most current view shared 
by most literacy scholars. 

As for the ESE teaching and learning, a linear acquisition order of four skills (i.e., listening 
speaking reading-^ writing) seems to have dominated this field long enough and have directed 
most pedagogists and teachers to introduce these four skills with such a presumed order in that 
reading comes before writing (Celce-Murica, 1991). 

However, either in first language or in second language acquisition, the acquired order of 
reading and writing is always debatable and, perhaps, yields less meaningful results. What ought to 
be emphasized is the reciprocal reading- writing relationships in which reading and writing actively 
interact with each other and both construct meanings for language learning. 



3 




2.2 A Brief Historical Review on the Reading-Writing Connection 

In fact, although the discussion centering on the reading-writing connection is a fairly new 
idea, literacy education that advocated the integration of reading and writing has taken place as 
early as the late 1800’s (Quinn, 1995). In 1894, the National Education Association issued a report 
that expressed development of reading and writing skills were equally important (Applebee, 1974). 
Later, MIT, in 1905, offered courses that highly emphasized the communicative uses of language 
and teaching of reading and writing for learning (Quinn, 1995). 

Moreover, psycholinguistic -based models, such as Goodman’s (1967) “Whole Language 
Approach,” had actually, in the 70’s and 80’s, promoted the reading-writing connection to a 
significant level. The Whole Language Approach proposed that active involvement of reading and 
writing leads to ultimate literacy (Goodman, Smith, Meredith & Goodman, 1987). The concept of 
reading-writing integration had also led the literacy researchers of the 80 ’s to further examine 
reading-writing relationships, and to construct process models of reading and writing. 

A famous researcher, L. Llower (1989), indicated that the concept of reading and writing as 
modes of learning in the college context led the researchers and teachers to develop a newer 
concept of “critical literacy.” His theory assumed that reading and writing can be used in ways that 
surpass the functional and minimal literacy demands and that enables students to develop and use 
skills for analysis, synthesis, and creative expression. Coincidentally, the idea of critical literacy 
has just appeared in the ESL field (Hammond & Macken-Horarik, 1999), thus showing that it is 
until recently have these two skills, reading and writing, been taught together in the ESL setting. A 
more in-depth discussion of theoretical arguments and empirical studies focusing on the 
reading-writing interaction in both LI and L2, in the following section, should provide a better 
picture, capturing such dynamics. 



4 




3. How will reading and writing benefit from each other in LI and L2? 

3.1 Reading and Writing in LI Acquisition 

Approaching from a theoretical perspective, Frank Smith (1994) makes a strong point about 
how reading actually enhances writing. He sees reading as a collaborative learning during which 
the reader is not reading alone but “reading like a writer”(p. 196), meaning that the reading is 
being performed while the reader consistently walk through the text with the writer’s path of 
organization of words, sentences, and meanings. He also used evidence from empirical studies 
conducted with the English-speaking children to support his belief. Dean Simonton (1988), cited 
by Smith (1994), found that intensive reading in childhood tends to make one a prolific writer 
throughout one’s life. Diane DeFord (1981) (in Smith, 1994) also reported that children’s reading 
is actually reflected in their writing; the more they read, the better they will write. 

In fact, researchers interested in children’s LI literacy development had conducted a large 
number of experiments before Smith (1988, 1994). For example, Lucy Calkins (1980) in her 
studies of very young writers observed that children learn more about punctuation from their 
reading than any particular formal instruction. Barbara Eckhoff (1983), as a doctoral student at 
Harvard Graduate School of Education, also suggested that children’s reading has a great impact 
on their writing and warned teachers that some poor writers’ writing in elementary school result 
from inappropriate imitation of their basal readers. Besides, based on her synthesis of 
reading/writing research, Sandra Stotsky (1983), indicated that using reading exercises in place of 
grammar drill or additional writing practice proves to be as beneficial as and, somehow even more 
beneficia,! than grammar or extra writing practice in improving students’ writing. She further noted 
that “reading experience seems to be a consistent correlate of, or influence on, writing ability” (p. 
637). 

Similarly, El writing ability strengthens El reading ability. Stotsky (1983), in the same article 
summarized above, recognized the counter benefit deriving from writing to reading once again and 
said that the use of writing activities particularly improves reading comprehension and retention of 



5 




information in instructional material. Moreover, Anthony Petrosky (1982), at the University of 
Pittsburgh, claimed that literary responding and writing are both acts of meaning making, which 
allows one to better understand a text. He further argued that our comprehension of any texts, 
whether literary or not, is mainly a behavior of composing, i.e., our understanding of printed texts 
always begins with certain kinds of composition. In other words, reading is similar to writing. By 
noting down composing process during reading, we actually vocalizing our understanding of the 
written texts. He encouraged that language teachers ought to ask students to write about the texts 
they read in order to help them understand the newly read texts and the responses they wrote for 
the texts. Furthermore, Petrosky, adapting David Bleich’s (1978) idea, concluded that: 

the only way to demonstrate comprehension is through extended discourse where 
readers become writers who articulate their understanding of and connections to 
the text in their responses.... Comprehension means using writing to explicate the 
connections between our models of reality — our prior knowledge — and the texts 
we create in light of them (Petrosky, 1982, p. 24-25). 

To Petrosky, writing means connecting our prior knowledge with the new information we just now 
comprehend by read a text. 

Overall, in the case of LI acquisition, reading and writing are believed to profit each other. 
Angela Jagg, Donna Carrara, & Sara Weiss’s (1986) observation, appearing in Language Arts , on 
the trend of children’s literacy development serves as the best conclusion for the LI 
reading-writing correlation in that they stated: 

1. Reading plays an important role in learning to write. 

2. Writing practice is necessary for mastery of different modes of discourse. Reading 
alone is not enough. 

3. The classroom context is critical in the children’s learning process as well as in our 
own as researchers of that process (p. 298-299). 



6 




In terms of LI reading and writing, it is a widely accepted notion that reading and writing can not 
be dealt with separately in learning or in teaching (Smith, 1985). 

One worthy point to consider, drawn upon the studies presented above, is that, although 
reading and writing gain a lot from each other, the implementation of either skill does not 
necessarily replace the other. At the current stage, reading needs to be taught with the incorporation 
of writing and vice versa. However, it is a consensus that reading and writing should also be taught 
for the purpose of each individual skill (Stosky, 1983). In the instance of American literacy 
education, other than the recognition and application of the reading-writing connection, a new 
curriculum that paralleledly includes reading, writing, and reading- writing correlation is becoming 
seemingly visible. 

3.2 Reading and Writing in L2 Acquisition 

3.2.1 Interlingual transfer vs. Intralingual transfer 

One obvious difference between LI literacy skills and L2 literacy development is that L2 
learners have had certain maturity of reading and writing skills which may or may not affect their 
acquisition of L2 literacy. Factors, including overall L2 proficiency, LI and L2 educational 
training, and cultural literacy practices, could be all involved in the learning process. Therefore, L2 
literacy development seems to be a lot more complex phenomenon than the case of LI (Eisterhold 
et ah, 1990). Studies aimed to examine the effect of transfer fall into two categories: interlingual 
transfer (i.e., influence from the LI) and intralingual transfer (i.e., input from the L2) (Eisterhold et 
ah, 1990). Researchers, in the early 1980’s, tended to particularly focus on the effect of LI whereas 
in the late 1980’s and 1990’s the emphasis was placed much more on the literacy development 
within the process of L2 acquisition itself. 

J. Cummins (1981), among others, probably expressed the strongest feeling for interlingual 
transfer of literacy skills. His “Interdependence Hypothesis” assumes that there is a 
cognitive/academic proficiency that is available to both languages and that such a common 



7 




proficiency allows the transfer of literacy-related skills to take place across languages. According 
to his Interdependence Hypothesis: 

Instruction in Lx [Language One] is effective in promoting [academic] proficiency 
in Lx, transfer of this proficiency to Ly [Language Two] will occur provided there 
is adequate exposure to Ly (either in school or environment) and adequate 
motivation to learn Ly”(p. 29). 

Supporters of Cummin’s hypothesis have found certain evidence in their empirical studies. For 
example, in TESOL Quarterly , Carole Edelsky’s (1982) observation of elementary school 
Spanish-English bilingual children found that the El literacy transfer is incredibly evident in 
children’s writing. Moreover, B. Mace-Matluck and colleagues (1983), in their study of English 
literacy among Cantonese speaking students, revealed that Cantonese students’ prior literacy levels 
have a strong correlation with their later success in English. Nevertheless, not all the former 
studies yielded positive result in supporting the interlingual transfer theory. Cummins (1981) also 
noted that transfer emerges only after learners attain a threshold level of E2 proficiency to permit 
cognitively demanding language use. M. Clarke’s (1978) case study of two students also showed 
that some threshold level of E2 proficiency is necessary for good El readers to maintain their good 
reading skills in the E2. 

Joan Carson Eisterhold and colleagues’ study (1990) of Japanese and Chinese ESE subjects 
where they examined the subjects’ literacy in both LI and L2, perhaps, olFered the best answers in 
responding to questions like: 

(1) What is the relationship between LI and L2 literacy abilities? 

(2) Dose second language proficiency affect interlingual or intralingual language transfer? 

They concluded that (1) LI literacy skills do help learners to perform better in the L2 reading and 
writing tasks, yet there is no guarantee on an automatic transfer of LI literacy skills to L2 literacy; 
(2) interlingual transfer occur at lower proficiency levels whereas intralingual input could be the 
more significant source for developing L2 literacy skills at the advanced level. The focus, after the 




report of Eisterhold et al., shifted from the L1-L2 difference to the L2 literacy development within 
which reading-writing correlation was a main concern. 

3.2.2 The interaction between reading and writing in L2 

From a pedagogical perspective, William Grabe and Robert Kaplan (1996) suggested that L2 
reading would help improve L2 writing at the beginning level and the advanced level. They 
encouraged the use of extensive reading for beginners’ writing class as they noted that “the 
outcome of a reading activity can serve as input for writing, and writing can lead a student to 
further reading resources” (p. 297). Through two efficient techniques, Sustained Silent Reading 
(SSR) and high-interest class sets of readers, extensive reading, which lead to many writing 
activities, can be promoted. In the advanced level, they indicated that there is a need for students to 
read “critically” because the ability of critical reading plays a major in analyzing texts logically 
which is also a key component in academic writing. Practices of critical reading give students an 
authority an voice in their writing and later significantly shaped their writing as well. 

Timothy Bell (1998) acknowledged Grabe and Kaplan’s idea of “extensive reading” because 
he believed that extensive reading olfer teachers worldwide “to encourage learners to engage in a 
focused and motivating reading program with the potential to lead students along a path to 
independence and resourcefulness in their reading and language learning”(1998, paragraph 1). Bell 
furthermore summarized that extensive reading in L2 (1) leads to improvement in writing; (2) 
energizes and motivates learners to read (if materials are selected according to students’ interests); 
(3) leads to the shaping of the reader’s thought, which naturally leads many learners to respond in 
writing with varying degrees of fluency. 

Dana Ferris and John Hedgcock (1998) also suggested that “voluntary/pleasure reading” and 
“assigned reading” have both proved to bring about positive effect on developing composing skills. 
Regardless of group ages, empirical evidence confirmed that written texts actually emanate partly 
from long-term, self-initiated reading. Such ability can develop unconsciously among learners. 



9 




Besides, assigned reading during the limited time of a composition classroom, according to Ferris 
and Hedgcock, may serve as an effective and useful substitute for conventional writing practice 
especially when reading is, once again, self-motivated or self-selected. In addition, Ciaran 
McCarthy (1999), who argued with the extreme elevation of reading, even placed the role of 
reading above all the other three skills, claiming that reading theory can serve as a microcosm of 
the four skills (i.e., L, S, R, and W). 

Relatively, writing in L2 is also a good way for ESL students to progress their L2 reading. 
Ruth Spack (1985) from Tufts University and Boston University in her article in TESOL Quarterly , 
stated that writing is not just a record of understanding but an act of understanding; hence, the 
writing process can aid the reading process. She furthermore recommended the 
“write-before-you-read” technique based on her workshop experience. The technique asks students 
to write from their own experience about an idea or event contained in the work that they are about 
to read. It may help make students better readers because they relate the texts with personal 
knowledge first, thus facilitating their comprehension of the reading. Spack later noted that the 
“write-before-you-read” technique very often works best if the writing practice consists of an issue 
with which the students can easily connect in spite of the complexity of the assigned reading. 

Vivian Zambel (1992), also in TESOE Quarterly , challenging the notion that views writing as 
a typical waste of time activity in the reading classroom, argued that writing assist reading and that 
“reading journals” are the best classroom example. She asserted that the reading journal is the 
place where student reactions to texts are first recorded and reflected upon; where students’ 
in-progress associations, questions, and thoughts are written; and with which students make 
immediate connections between reading and writing. Zambel concluded that “the teaching of 
reading and writing cannot be separated nor can they be sequenced in linear fashion so that reading 
necessarily precedes writing” (p. 480). 



10 




3.2.3 Synthesis of reading-writing relation in LI and L2 acquisition 

Judging upon all the theoretical arguments and experimental findings drawn from studies 
mentioned above which all carefully examined the reading-writing link in both LI and L2 
acquisition, an overview can be presented by using both Eisterhold’s (1990) and William Grabe’s 
(1991) predictions, published in the years during which literacy education in LI and L2 were 
moving toward a new direction. With regard to LI literacy, Listerhold (1990) indicated three 
models of reading- writing relation mainly represent the collective viewpoints in the past two 
decades. (1) “The directional model” hypothesizes that reading and writing share structural 
similarities so that the structure of whatever is acquired in one skill can then be applied in the other 
(i.e., the transfer process moves one-way only either in reading-to- writing or writing-to-reading 
mode). (2) “The non- directional model” assumes that reading and writing derive from a single 
underlying cognitive proficiency and that improvement in one domain will cause improvement in 
the other (i.e., both skills can transfer in either direction as in an interactive model). (3) “The 
bi-directional model” claims that reading and writing are not only interactive but also 
interdependent. In this model, what is learned at a certain stage of development can be 
qualitatively different from what is learned later. The existence of multiple relations as well as the 
possibility that the nature of reading-writing relationship might change as the development 
proceeds. Lormer studies concerning the LI reading- writing connection fall into these three 
categories in which focuses are “input” in the directional model, “meaning constructing” in the 
non-directional model, and “multiple relations and interrelated processes” in the bi-directional 
model respectively, Listerhold encouraged teachers, instead of arguing for which model explained 
best, to take an eclectic approach and take advantage of all these three models while dealing with 
LI literacy courses. 

As for L2 literacy, Listerhold (1990) seemed to hold on to the reserved notion that there is 
always a language threshold barrier before any positive transfer can take place and before LSL 
learners can achieve any promising level of reading-writing fluency in the target language. She 



11 




contended that “teaehing is important [for L2] to facilitate transfer, whether learners are 
reconstructing or synthesizing skills” (p. 100). Her later study with others (Eisterhold et al, 1990), 
as discussed above, clearly suggested that reading and writing be taught together in advanced level 
at which ESL students benefit most from mutually reinforcing cognitive skills. Cross-language 
literacy transfer is to be dealt at the lower levels. It is a position that Grabe (1991) is taking as well. 
To conclude the discussion of L2 reading-writing relation and offer best recommendations to all 
ESE teaehers, Eerris and Hedgcock’s (1998) article, perhaps, provided the best instructional tips: 

1. ESL teachers should adjust the relative weight given to reading and writing 
assignments based on their students’ L2 proficiency levels, needs, and 
expectation. 

2. L2 writing skills cannot be acquired successfully by practice alone. Some 
aspects of composing are difficult to teach and must be acquired through 
sustained exposure to multiple varieties of texts. 

3. ESL learners need instruction to become successful writer of English. Neither 
extensive exposure to reading materials nor large quantities of writing practice 
alone is sufficient — both are necessary. 

4. Just as reading facilitates the development of writing skills, so writing can help 
build proficiency in reading. Therefore, teachers should therefore consider writing 
activities that help students prepare for, respond to, and comprehend reading 
selections more effectively 

(Eerris and Hedgcock, 1998, p. 43). 



12 




4. Where exactly does writer/reader interact with reader/writer? And, where does 
writing/reading meet reading/writing? 

4.1 Writer/Reader as ReaderAVriter: A Philosophical Notion 

In order to capture the very core of writer-reader interaction as well as writing-reading 
dynamics, an illustration of the occasions where writer/reader meets reader/writer and 
writing/reading interplays with reading/writing at both the philosophical and practical levels 
should further support the significance of the implementation of reading- writing connection in the 
literacy education. Robert Tierney & David Pearson (1983), ahead of others, viewed “reading and 
writing as essentially similar process of meaning construction. Both are acts of composing” (p. 
568). And pinpointed that, during the composing process, writers compose meaning and so do 
readers, and they meet at each of the five stages of such an effective meaning composing process: 
(1) planning, (2) drafting, (3) aligning, (4) revision, and (5) monitoring. 

At the earliest stage, while a writer plans his/her writing, a reader is planning his/her reading 
as well. Planning, according to Tierney & Pearson, involves two sub-processes: goal-setting and 
knowledge mobilization, both of which reflect some common behaviors observable in readers and 
writers, such as setting purposes, evaluating one’s current state of knowledge regarding a topic, 
and self-questioning, etc. Next, drafting, defined as “the refinement of meaning which occurs as 
readers and writers deal directly with the print on the page”(p. 571) is where writers and readers 
encounter again. When starting reading a passage, readers typically will search for the right “lead” 
(i.e., “the beginning of the beginning, those few lines the reader may glance at in deciding to read 
or pass on” (p. 571)). Readers’ search- for period resembles precisely writers’ drafting period 
through which both thrive. Moreover, it is believed, at the following stage, that the “alignment” a 
writer and reader adopts will have an overriding influence on a composer’s ability to achieve 
coherence. Tierney & Pearson claimed that, while approaching a text, readers and writers vary in 
the nature of their stance and collaboration with the author/writer (if they are a reader) or 
audience/reader (if they are a writer) and optimally align with this collaboration, immersing 



13 




themselves in different roles. Both adapting and alignment were considered akin to achieving 
foothold from which meaning can be more thoroughly negotiated. Furthermore, “revising,” a 
widely accepted notion in the writing process, is re-integrated into the path of reading. It is argued 
that if readers ought to develop certain control over and a sense of discovery with the models of 
meaning they build, they must approach text with the same deliberation, time, and reflection (at 
rereading, annotating, and questioning the text) that a writer employs so often as he/she revises a 
text. The last moment, monitoring, is identified as the time readers and writers come to evaluate 
what they have developed after hand-in-hand planning, aligning, drafting, and revising. In fact, 
Tierney & Pearson's “composing model of reading” offers a vivid instance in which 
readers/writers contract implicitly with writers/readers. 

Smith’s (1994) “Writer- reader Contract” chapter, in addition, illustrated the writer-reader 
relationship more explicitly by suggesting that writers and readers engage with each other in 
specifically two aspects of language usage, “comprehension” and “convention.” To Smith, writing 
and reading are both acts of putting meanings into words. Comprehension is where writers and 
readers first meet. Initially, composition (i.e., what writers typically do) interacts with 
comprehension (i.e., what readers mostly do). Writers, while composing, need to grasp what the 
reader will comprehend; therefore, are performing comprehending tasks. In contrast, readers, when 
attempting to comprehend a text, must understand what writers are composing, are actually 
composing their own meanings based on the print. The text, according to Smith is the two-sided 
mirror, the link, and the joint where reading meets writing, writers connect with readers as he 
simply put “neither writers nor readers can exist without a text” (Smith, 1994, p. 87). 

Meanwhile, convention, as Smith proclaimed, is crucial in the writer-reader connection. 
“Writers and readers must both share the conventions they employ and encounter; they cannot 
work out what a convention is likely to be” (Smith, 1994, p. 61). In other words, writers and 
readers will be unable to perform either “composition” or “comprehension” without understanding 
the conventions embedded. Smith further explained that writers, by means of “intentions” and 



14 




“conventions,” are allowed to express themselves in writing; readers read with “expectations” 
and ’’conventions” are permitted to understand ideas in reading. Conventions work elosely with 
intentions for writers in that intentions determine what writers want to say, and conventions enable 
it to be said. Layers of intention, ranging from focal to global level (i.e., word, sentence, paragraph, 
chapter, and book intentions), walk with writers when writing a book. Likewise, conventions 
collaborate with expectations for readers as they read with expectations, moving in a non-linear 
fashion around levels of expectations, (including those of word, sentence, paragraph, chapter, and 
book expectations,) readers look for conventions to comprehend. “Perfeet eomprehension would 
oecur when the writer’s intentions and the reader’s expeetations eoineided eompletely, when every 
intention of the author was correctly anticipated by the reader, and when every expectation of the 
reader was fulfilled” (Smith, 1994, p. 96). Nevertheless, it is under the umbrella of conventions 
that writers know what to intend, readers know what to expect, and comprehension of any written 
materials become possible. 

Darrell Like (2000) also discussed how writers meet readers in the interpretation of poetry. 
His theories of analyzing poetry offer conventional interpretations normally associated whenever a 
poem is created or read. Four elements of a poem, including the language (from which the poem is 
made), the subject (the poem contains), the writer (the poem belongs to), and the reader (the poem 
includes) will be normally taken into eonsideration. In his highlight of the “expressive theory of 
writing and reading,” Fike explained that the writer/poet whose soul is emerged within the poem is 
valued highest and find, nearly by magic, ways to put expressions in words on the paper. Non-poet 
readers, though treated seeondary to and less important than the writer, may share the poet’s 
passion and emotions conveyed by the poem. Here a poet and non-poet distinction seems to be 
made. However, it can be inferred that the poet (writer) him-/her-self is still considered a qualified 
reader with unique sense in reading and interpreting his/her own poem. 



15 




To summarize form the philosophieal arguments above, it is then reasonable to considered 
writer/reader and reader/writer as inseparable individuals and is also worthwhile to have examined 
the reading- writing connection as an important component of the literacy development. 

4.2 Writing Meets Reading: A Practical Idea 

Pedagogists and in-class professionals have observed the significance of reading-writing 
correlation and have advocated language teachers to make the best use of such uniqueness derived 
from the interface of these two skills. Spack (1985) introduced the idea of literary journal, an 
activity that is considered as an effective reading/writing-and-writing/reading reinforcing exercise. 
Students, after reading literary works, are directed to write plot summaries, or brief character 
analyses, or to explicate an idea or a passage from the story and further expand their thoughts by 
writing in the literary journal, which serve as directive or reflective guidelines, leading students to 
read and write more. The practice of students’ keeping of a journal entry has been widely adopted 
in many undergraduate, graduate and ESL courses in the United States and has been proved to be 
very efficient in helping students’ learning (Williamson, personal communication, August 15, 1999; 
Bencich, personal communication, July 17, 2000). 

Elsewhere, Julia Gousseva (1998) suggested that “peer reviews” is a very popular technique 
in a composition class that reflects the whole language view of reading and writing as interrelated 
activities and of readers and writers as inseparable entities. Peer reviews, according to Gousseva, is 
a powerful learning tool incorporating reading and writing practice in many ways. Eor example, 
the activity provide students an authentic audience, increase students’ motivation for writing, 
enables students to receive different viewpoints on their own writing, thus helping students learn to 
read critically their own writing and to gain confidence in writing. Besides, A. Gilliam (1990) also 
noted that peer reviews benefit both the respondent and the writer in that students, as reading and 
responding to peers’ papers, develop critical reading skills as well as exercise “different order 



16 




reading skills” (p. 98) than those employed by the students when reading professionally written 
texts, which are assumed to be flawless. 

In short, readers and writers benefit from each other; reading students and writing students 
gain mutually from both of the paralleled learning experiences as well. As Timothy Shanahan 
(1990) sincerely encouraged in his book, Reading and Writing Together: New Perspectives for the 
Classroom , reading and teaching should be taught together because it will improve student 
achievement and teacher instructional efficiency, foster a communications stance in literacy, help 
learners use combined reading-writing skill as a tool to learn, and provide more energetic 
classroom atmosphere. 

5. How are professional TESOL programs designed in practicing theories and preparing ESL 
teachers? 

Since the idea of integration of reading and writing in literacy education is fairly new, it is 
worthy investigating to see if, in particular, TESOL teacher education programs have 
acknowledged such notion and adjusted along with the new trend. Besides, interviews with 
professional teacher educators currently, actively, involved with ESL teacher training and an 
intensive ESL program director will further provide in-depth perspectives regarding the issue of 
reading-writing integration. A questionnaire that containing valuable opinions collected from both 
experienced native and nonnative teachers-in-preparation currently enrolled in the TESOL and 
Rhetoric and Linguistics program here at a small university in Pennsylvania comes next. It gives 
an overview which sketches how first language and second language teachers are going to handle 
this new change and how their ideas will influence their later practice. Hopefully, all of the data 
will eventually contribute to the embryo of the most up-to-dated curriculum in LI and L2 literacy 
development for classroom practitioners as well as for first language and, in particular, second 
language students. 



17 




5.1 Descriptive Survey of TESOL Programs in the U. S. 

Two hundred and twenty-three graduate programs (i.e., 194 master and 29 Ph.D. programs, 
excluding Canadian ones) are listed in Garshick’s (1998) Directory of Professional Preparation 
programs in TESOL in the United States and Canada, 1999-2001 . Though arbitrarily, a glance at 
all of the courses offered in preparing future ESL practitioners to teach literacy skills among these 
programs yields certain interesting results. Courses that target at the teaching of reading and 
writing vary to a great extend but still disclose certain underlying assumptions shared by the initial 
establishers of these TESOL programs in American settings. 

While 21 programs offer only “teaching of reading” kinds of courses, 16 others afford only 
“teaching of writing.” Besides, other 14 programs provide both “teaching of writing” and 
“teaching of reading” courses yet separate them as two independent ones. Still, 22 additional 
programs have obtained “teaching reading and writing” type of courses within which two skills are 
dealt together. If added with other 10 programs that title courses under “literacy” (without 
explicitly listing “reading” and “writing”), 32 graduate TESOL programs have recognized the 
significance of the interaction between reading and writing and have implemented such integration 
in their curricula (see Eigure 1 in Appendix B). 

However, this brief comparison among programs also shows some extreme cases, both of 
conventional and bright new designs. On one hand, reading and writing are somehow separated 
and being considered strongly connected with grammar, linguistic mechanism. Eor instance. 
Linguistics Ph.D. program in the University of Delaware offers course, titled “Linguistics and 
Writing” (Garshick’s, 1998, p. 65). 

MA TESL/intercultural studies program in the Columbia International University separates 
reading from writing and treats these two skills in “Techniques of TEFL: Listening, Speaking, and 
Reading,” and “Techniques of TEFL: Structure and Writing”(Garshick’s, 1998, p. 61). Somehow, it 
seems odd to combine reading with listening and speaking as traditionally and theoretically the 
latter ones are considered as ‘oracy.’ The most unusual program, MA in TESOL, Eastern Michigan 



18 




University, includes reading, writing, and grammar in one course which presumably treats 
grammar as the core of both skills, reflecting the conventional notion that sees grammar as an 
important component in both reading and writing. On the other hand, groundbreaking institutes, 
found in the directory, are sending new practical message which suggests that reading, writing, and 
reading and writing ought to be taught in three different courses, within each of which different 
concentrations lies. Examples are MA TESOL in the Eresno Pacific University (p. 82), MA ESE in 
the University of Texas at San Antonio (p. 235), and MSEd ESE in the University of Southern 
Maine (p. 222). 

5.2 Interviews with Teacher Educators and the Intensive ESL Program Director 

Based on her profound observation and life-long experience with El and E2 teacher education, 
Bencich (personal communication, July 17, 2000) suggested that “reading and writing should 
combined together and taught in the same course in two consecutive semesters.” No other 
researchers, pedagogists or teachers have ever offered this latest view concerning the 
reading-writing correlation in teacher training program. Meanwhile, such view is echoed by 
another TESOE teacher educator who is formerly an intensive ESE program director. Aghbar 
(2000) stated that “When I started [as an administrator], all the skills were separated. Then we 
started thinking that there should be more integration. So we combined reading and writing. We 
also combined listening and speaking.” Aghbar’s integration position at which he sees the 
advantage of teaching both reading and writing skills altogether as he expressed that teachers 
should not focus on just one skill and forget about the other one. Practical mistake often seen in the 
ESE classroom, according to Aghbar, is that teachers find it easy to focus on writing and use 
reading as a springboard to generating ideas for writing without focusing much on developing 
reading strategies. 



19 




5.3 Voice from Teachers-in-preparation: A Mini Questionnaire 

5.3.1 Foreword of the questionnaire 

Fourteen graduate students participated in this survey (see Appendix A), including 5 native 
speakers of English, 4 Taiwanese, 3 Thai, 1 Japanese and 1 Korean speakers who are currently 
enrolled in the MA TESOL and Ph.D. Rhetoric & Einguistics programs in a small scale university 
in Pennsylvania. Before starting analyzing any data, a few notes need to be made to solidify these 
questionnaires. Among all puzzles that occurred, the trickiest one resulted from the lack of a 
specific definition on “reading” and “writing.” All non-natives have the same doubt, i.e., ’’What 
exactly is considered as an act of writing or reading?” Non-native participants who have had an E2 
learning experience have a wider sense in recognizing what counts as an act of writing. It could 
range from the very first experience of drawing, sketching, and producing fragments of sentences, 
to the writing of formal compositions. In contrast, natives have no difficulty in answering most of 
the questions as they somehow associate “writing” with “the act of composition writing;” 
“reading” with “the act of comprehending written materials.” Moreover, anonymity becomes 
invalid as all participants can be identified by the personal information they provide in the first 
question. A more appropriate question should just ask them to identify whether they are native or 
non-native speakers at the beginning since one focus of the questionnaire is looking for the 
contrast between El and E2 language teachers. Besides, their wiliness to declare their identities 
add some more interesting points to the data also. Anonymity is actually not necessary after all. 

5.3.2 Discussion of the questionnaire: Question by question 

In this section, the original layout of the questionnaire is provided. Each question from 
the questionnaire is analyzed based on the participants’ responses. 



20 




SECTION I— PERSONAL ACADEMIC BACKGROUND: 



(Please answer your questions based on your learning experience in your “academic schooling 
before graduate level. ”) 



1 . Personal information 

a. Please provide the names of the institutions of your teaching setting 
currently or formerly (El or L2 or both) and how many years you have 
involved in that setting. 

b. Your position(s) 

c. Courses title(s) taught 



This question serves to retrieve subjects’ teaching experience, such as years of teaching, 
courses in which they taught reading or/and writing. Two native speakers are now actively 
involved with the teaching of composition while the other three used to have experience of 
teaching conversation courses. Non-natives, though vary in the years of teaching, have never 
taught any courses that particularly target at either reading or writing skill. 



2. In your own opinion, does reading come before writing or writing come 
After reading in your El experience? (Recall the very beginning when you 
Eirst sensed these 2 skills.) 

All native subjects report that reading always comes before writing in their El whereas all 
non-natives felt that writing precedes reading if drawing and sketching are considered a form of 
writing. Interestingly, all four Taiwanese subjects recall that their initial experiences of El reading 
and writing were concurrent as they remember reading-aloud words they had just managed to 
write (see Eigure 1, Appendix B). To these Taiwanese subjects, the literacy development starts 
from picture drawing, to logographic word imitating, reading the short passage, and finally to 
formal composition writing. In fact, it is a recursive reinforcing process during writing and 
reading mutually shape each other. 



21 






3. How is the same process taking place while you are learning an L2? 

Only two natives have L2 learning experience. And one of them believed that reading in L2 
arrives earlier than writing in L2. As both native speakers feel that L2 proficiency is a vital factor 
in determining their readiness to read and, then, write, all non-natives share the same feeling. Thai, 
Japanese, and Korean subjects are taking the same position as that of natives. On the contrast, all 
Taiwanese noted that their English learning experience is actually a “write-before-read” one (see 
Table 1). L2 proficiency, to Taiwanese subjects, narrowly refers to vocabulary proficiency only. 





US 


Taiwan 


Korea 


Japan 


Thai ^ TOTAL 


reading > writing 


5 








5 


reading + writing 




4 






I 4 

1 


writing > reading 






1 


1 


3 i 5 



Table 1. Reading and writing in LI (The mark “>” indicates one skill precedes the other.) 



Unless they learn a large numbers of new English words by practicing writing or memorizing, 
they never feel ready to read. It seems that Taiwanese learners carry over their LI learning 
experience and strategies, and implement them again with L2 (English) learning. In fact, it is a 
presumable and widely accepted L2 curriculum (imposed by the Taiwanese Ministry of 
Education,) that any L2 acquisition has to start from writing (the words) and then reading (texts), 
followed by listening and speaking that comes last. Such language teaching and learning policy 
has been practiced for more than five decades. 



22 






4. In LI (and L2) learning, what did you normally do if encountering 
difficulty in reading a text? 

5. In LI (and L2) learning, how was the same problem handled when writing a 
text? 

LI reading strategies, as for native speakers, include re-reading, guessing from contexts, and 
using dictionary. Non-natives employ almost the same strategies except that one Thai subject 
often turns to her parents for help (a case in which home literacy may affect LI literacy 
development). Regarding LI writing habits, natives tend to use revising, reviewing, and editing 
skills but can hardly recall their memory of L2 writing, as their experience of first writing are 
merely too temporary. Non-natives mostly find themselves very confident in writing in mother 
tongue but all report that their biggest trouble in English writing is the problems of grammar and 
mechanism that sometimes make them unable to polish or/and edit their own writing. While 
dictionary is found to be very limited in helping their writing, non-native subjects often turn to 
others for extra help, including American friends, writing tutors, and professors. 



6. In your LI schooling (k-12, college), were writing and reading taught 
separately or altogether? 

Nationality (as for non-natives) and age (as for natives) play a vital role that affects all 
participants’ answering of this question. Taiwanese, Thai, and Korean subjects all respond that 
writing and reading are taught together in their LI education. Surprisingly, Japanese subject says 
that he had many Japanese reading courses and never any academic LI writing training. What is 
even more interesting is that American subjects’ LI educational experience fall into three groups 
according to their periods of schooling: (1) ages of 40 and above — writing is based on reading 
literature, (2) ages between 30 and 40 — writing and reading are separated (though one native says 
she was never taught writing), (3) ages below 30 — writing and reading are dealt within the same 
course (see Table 1 below). 



23 









Literature-based 

Reading 


Reading; Writing 
Separated 


Reading only 


Reading & Writing together 


Ages above 40 


1 native 








Ages between 30 and 40 




2 natives 






Ages below 30 






1 non-native 


11 (1 native; 9 non-natives) 



Table 2. Responses to Question 6 (Were reading and writing taught separately or together in 
K-college?) in the survey 



7. How was L2 writing and reading dealt in your academic training? Were 
they treated separately as that of your LI learning? 

An overwhelming phenomenon is found that reading and writing are always separated in all 
subjects’ L2 learning. Of these two Americans who had L2 experience, one consistently states that 
reading actually helps writing a lot regardless of his LI, L2, or even L3 acquisition. The youngest 
American subject even shares her bitter experience in senior high school where second language 
courses were only offered to academically distinguished students (see Table 3). 





US 


Taiwan 


Korea 


Japan 


Thai TOTAL 


reading > writing 


2 




1 


1 


3 7 

f 


reading -i- writing 










I 0 

'f 


writing > reading 




4 






t A 

t 4 

i 



Table 3. Reading and writing in L2 (The mark “>” indicates one skill precedes the other.) 



SECTION II— TEACHER PREPARATION: 

(Please answer your questions based on your learning experience in your ^‘‘Teacher Preparation 
Process. ”) 

8. Were (Are) you required to take any courses, such as “Teaching reading,” 

“Teaching writing,” or “Teaching literacy,” related to the teaching of these two 
skills (R & W)? (Please list course title, and all related courses you took or are 
taking dealing with these 2 skills in you Master program or Ph.D. program.) 

This question should be completely omitted since most subjects provide either no or less 
meaningful information. All non-native doctoral students do not give any information about 



24 








courses they have taken before entering this university. Moreover, non-native master students 
currently enrolled in the TESOL program have not reported if they have taken any “teaching 
reading” or “teaching writing” course at the graduate level since this is their first teacher 
education program. Two native doctoral subjects, however, share some of their experience prior to 
this graduate program. Both are English professors with more than 10-year experience and are 
teaching courses in literature, compositions, and linguistics at American colleges meanwhile. One 
said that she had a teaching reading course and has taken 4 teaching composition courses 
altogether up to now whereas the other one has had neither the reading theory nor teaching writing 
courses. 



9. As an LI or L2 teacher, what position will you take while teaching reading and writing: 

A. Reading and writing should be taught separately in two separate courses. 

B. Reading and writing should be taught together within one course. 

C. Reading, writing, and reading & writing, should be all dealt in 3 different 
courses. 

D. Others. (Please state your choice and explain why you think so.) 

Amazingly enough, some cross-linguistic agreement can be reached among speakers of 
different languages. Seven subjects (including two of the 5 natives) choose position (A) while 5 
other (including the other 3 natives) subjects prefer position (B). The Japanese and Korean 
subjects pick position (C). People who speak from position (A), overall, believe that reading and 
writing may interrelate to each other yet find it still necessary to teach them independently. If 
taught separately, reading and writing can be dealt with more specific emphasis in their own 
domains. Teachers may use one skill as an activating technique to solidify the acquisition of the 
other skill without completely ignoring the other. Nevertheless, subjects of position (B) draw from 
their own learning and teaching experience during which they never feel that reading and writing 
can be, at any moment, being separated. Einally, the two supporters of position (C) state that it is a 
new trend to include all reading, writing, and reading and writing in a well-prepared curriculum as 



25 





students, other than benefit from each individual skill, can benefit from the reading-writing 
correlation also. 



lO.As an LI or L2 teacher, based on the position you just chose, what are the 
advantages and disadvantages of your position? 

Supporters of position (A) think that the separation of reading and writing will give students 
less burden (especially if they happen to be just beginners). Yet, defenders of position (B) 
approach thi s issue of integration from both teacher’s and learner’s perspectives. They all 
recognize that both reading and writing reinforce each other so that students will gain pretty much 
from such a process. On the other hand, it will also, at the same time, give teacher a lot of work, 
as additional effort id needed to incorporate another language skill. The Japanese participant, 
however, speaks from position (C), saying that his inclusion of all three courses will not only 
require teacher to invest extra energy but also demand students to work harder. He suggests that 
students have certain options when choosing to read, write, or read and write according to 
personal interests, needs, and motivations. 



1 l.In your LI or/and L2, what makes you a better reader? 

12. In your LI or/and L2, what makes you a better reader? 

It is interesting to conclude that all subjects, regardless of their positions discussed above, 
express that reading more will help them read better. Though other minor factors, such as prior 
knowledge, personal interests, extensive and intensive reading, and motivations, may be involved, 
none of them includes writing as a significant contributor in making them become a better reader. 
Along with other components, including teacher feedback, grammar and mechanism, reading, on 
the contrary, is an important skill recognized by all participants in the survey that actually helps 
them write better. 



26 







5.3.3 Synthesis of the questionnaire 

Though it is arguable that the choice of the subjects participating in this survey are too limited 
as they have been pre-selected from the graduate programs in the small scale university, their 
personal opinions have significant meanings that add to the understanding of the process of L1/L2 
reading and writing development: 

1. LI literacy education at earlier stage has a strong impact on students’ later literacy 
development, and may also influence similar process in L2 literacy acquisition. (This is so 
true in the case of Taiwanese subjects.) 

2. Level of proficiency in L2 plays a key role in learners’ determining their success in L2 
reading and writing. 

3. Learners (LI & L2) believe that reading can help writing but have a tendency not to 
consider writing as an equally important contributor to their reading. 

6. Concluding Remarks and Recommendations 

Researchers have all shed lights on the issue of reading-writing correlation. For instance, 
Grabe (1991) concluded, “In short, students learn to read by reading” (p. 396). In addition, Zambel 
(1992) advocated that the teaching of reading and writing cannot be tom apart nor can they be 
arranged in linear order so that one necessarily precedes the other” (p. 480). Likewise, Eisterhold 
(1990) and Eisterhold et al (1990) also recognized that the reading- writing relation changes during 
the literacy development and that ESE learners must break the proficiency barrier to fully develop 
their E2 literacy competence while Grabe and Kaplan (1996) believed that the integration of 
writing and reading is applicable at all proficiency levels. Data collected from teacher educators 
currently involved with reading and writing theory, along with the responses from 
teachers-in-preparation, have also contributed significantly to the blueprint for the best teaching of 
reading and writing. Eour kinds of positions are being taken here: 



27 




1. (L1/L2 ) Reading and writing should be taught separately. 

2. (L1/L2) Reading and writing should be always taught together and never be detached 
from each other. 

3. (L1/L2) Reading-writing relation is considered very important and the nature of the 
reading-writing relationship varies at different stages of acquisition. 

4. Level of L2 proficiency could be a factor that determines learners’ L2 literacy success 
yet should not prohibit L2 teachers from bringing in the reading-writing integration 
technique. 

In order to arrive an ultimately thorough position, I am calling for a combined L2 curriculum in 
which “reading, writing, and the reading-writing interaction” are taught independently while 
emphases are also placed on different levels of literacy developments, students’ needs, and course 
goals. It should be the best position at which teachers can most efficiently teach and help L2 
learners to best learn from each of the three skills, i.e., reading, writing, and reading-writing 
integration. 



28 




References 



Applebee, A. N. (1974). Tradition and reform in the teaching of English: A history. Urbana, 
IL: NCTE. 

Bell, T. (1998). Extensive reading: Why? And how? Internet TEST Journal, [On-line], 4(12), 
25 paragraphs. Available: http://www.aitech.ac.jp/~itesl/Articles/Bell-Reading.html [2000, July 
12 ]. 

Bleich, D. (1978). Subjective criticism. Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press. 

Calkins, E. (1980). When children want to punctuate: basic skills belong in context. Language 
Arts, 57(5), 567-573. 

Celce-Murcia, M. (1991). (Ed.), Teaching English as a second or foreign language. Boston, 
MA: Heinle & Heinle Publishers. 

Clarke, M. (1978). Reading in Spanish and English: Evidence from adult ESE students. 
Language Learning, 29(1), 121-150. 

Cummins, J. (1981). The role of primary language development in promoting educational 
success for language minority students. In Schooling and language minority students: A theoretical 
framework (pp. 3-49). Eos Angeles: Evaluation, Dissemination and Assessment Center, California 
State University. 

DeEord, D. (1981). Eiteracy: Reading, writing and other essentials. Language Arts, 58(6), 
652-658. 

Dyson, A. H. and Ereeman, S. W. (1991). Writing. In J. Elood, J. M. Jensen, D. Eapp and J. R. 
Squire (Eds.), Handbook of research on teaching the English language arts (pp. 754-774). New 
York, NY: Macmillan. 

Eckhoff, B. (1983). How reading affects children’s writing. Language Arts, 60(5), 607-616. 

Edelsky, C. (1982). Writing in a bilingual program: The relation of El and E2 texts. TESOL 
Quarterly, 16(2), 211-228. 

Eisterhold, C. (1990). Reading-writing connections: Toward a description for a second 
language learners. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing (pp. 88-101). New York: NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Eisterhold, C., Carrell, P, Silberstein, S., Kroll, B., and Kuehn, P. (1990). Reading- Writing 
relationships in first and second language. TESOL Quarterly, 24(2), 245-266. 

Perris, D. and Hedgcock, J. S. (1998). Teaching ESL composition: Purpose, process, and 
practice. Mahwah, NJ: Eawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

Pike, D. (2000). Interpreting poetry: A Song of reading. In W. Bishop (Ed.), The subject is 
reading: Essays by teachers and students (pp. 79-91). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Plower, E. (1989). Cognition, context, and theory building. College Composition and 
Communication, 40, 282-311. 



29 




Garshick, E. (1998). (Ed.), Directory of professional preparation programs in TESOL in the 
United States and Canada, 1999-2000. Alexandria, VA: TESOE, Inc. 

Gillam, A. (1990). Eearning through response. English Journal, 1, 98-99. 

Goodman, K. (1967). Reading: A psycholinguistic guessing game. Journal of the Reading 
Specialist, 4, 126-135. 

Goodman, K., Smith, E., Meredith, R. and Goodman, Y. (1987). Language and thinking in 
school: A whole-language curriculum. New York, NY: Richard C. Owen Publishers, Inc. 

Gousseva, J. (1998). Eiteracy development through peer reviews in a freshman composition 
classroom. Internet TESL Journal, [On-line], 4(12), 36 paragraphs. Available: 

http://www.aitech.ac.jp/~itesl/Articles/Gousseva-Eiteracy.html [2000, July 12]. 

Grabe, W. (1991). Current development in second language reading research. TESOL 
Quarterly, 25(30), 375-406. 

Grabe, W. and Kaplan, R. (1996). Theory and practice of writing. New York, NY: Eongman. 

Hammond, J. and Macken-Horarik, M. (1999). Critical literacy: Challenges and questions for 
ESE classrooms. TESOL Quarterly, 33(3), 528-544. 

Jaggar, A., Carrara, D., and Weiss, S. (1986). Research currents: the influence of reading on 
children’s narrative writing (and vice versa). Language Arts, 63(3), 292-300. 

Jensen, J. (1999). What do we know about the writing of elementary school children? In R. 
Graves (Ed.), Writing, teaching, learning: A sourcebook (pp. 25-32). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann 

Mace-Matluck, B. J., Dominguez, D., Holtzman, W, and Hoover, W. (1983). Language and 
literacy in bilingual instruction. Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Eaboratory. 

McCarthy, C. (1999). Reading theory as a microcosm of the four skills. Internet TESL Journal, 
[On-line], 5(5), 23 paragraphs. Available: 

http://www.aitech.ac.jp/~itesl/Articles/McCarthy-Reading.html [2000, July 12]. 

Petrosky, A. (1982). Prom story to essay: Reading and writing. College Composition and 
Communication, 33, 19-36. 

Quinn, K. (1995). Teaching reading and writing as modes of learning in college: A glance at 
the past; a view to the future. Reading Research and Instruction, 34(A), 295-314. 

Shanahan, T.(1990). Reading and writing together: What does it really mean? In T. Shanahan 
(Ed.), Reading and writing together: New perspectives for the classroom (pp. 1-18). Norwood, MA: 
Christopher-Gordon Publishers, Inc. 

Simonton, D. K. (1988). Scientific genius: A psychology of science. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Smith, P. (1985). Reading without nonsense (Second edition) New York, NY: Teachers 
College Press, Columbia University. 

Smith, P. (1988). Understanding reading: A psycholinguistic analysis of reading and learning 
to read (Pourth edition). Hillsdale, NJ: Eawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Smith, P. (1994). Writing and the writer. Hillsdale, NJ: Eawrence Erlbaum Associates. 



30 




Spack, R. (1985). Literature, reading, writing and ESL: Bridging the gaps. TESOL Quarterly, 
i9(4), 703-725. 

Stotsky, S. (1983). Research on reading/writing relationships: A synthesis and suggested 
directions. Language Arts, (50(5), 627-642. 

Tierney, R. and Pearson, P. (1983). Toward a composing model of reading. Language Arts, 
60{5), 568-580. 

Zamel, V. (1992). Writing one’s way into reading. TESOL Quarterly, 26(3), 463-485. 



31 




APPENDIX A 



A CURIOUS QUESTIONNAIRE: 

(Your responses will be kept confidential and destroyed after this paper is completed.) 

SECTION I- PERSONAL ACADEMIC BACKGROUND: 

(Please answer your questions based on your learning experience in your “academic 
schooling before graduate level. ”) 

1. Personal information 

a. Please provide the names of the institutions of your teaching setting currently or formerly (El or 
L2 or both) and how many years you have involved in that setting. 

b. Your position(s) 

c. Courses title(s) taught 

2. In your own opinion, does reading come before writing or writing come after reading in your El 
experience? (Recall the very beginning when you first sensed these 2 skills.) 

3. How is the same process taking place while you are learning an L2? 

4. In El (and L2) learning, what did you normally do if encountering difficulty in reading a text? 

5. In El (and L2) learning, how was the same problem handled when writing a text? 

6. In your El schooling (k-12, college), were writing and reading taught separately or altogether? 

7. How was L2 writing and reading dealt in your academic training? Were they treated separately as 
that of your El learning? 



SECTION II— TEACHER PREPARATION: 

(Please answer your questions based on your learning experience in your ^‘‘Teacher 
Preparation Process. ”) 

8. Were (Are) you required to take any courses, such as “Teaching reading,” “Teaching writing,” or 
“Teaching literacy,” related to the teaching of these two skills (R & W)? 

(Please list course title, and all related courses you took or are taking dealing with 
these 2 skills in you Master program or Ph.D. program.) 



32 




9. As an LI or L2 teacher, what position will you take while teaching reading and writing: 

a. Reading and writing should be taught separately in two separate courses. 

b. Reading and writing should be taught together within one course. 

c. Reading, writing, and reading & writing, should be all dealt in 3 different courses. 

d. Others. (Please state your choice and explain why you think so.) 

10. As an LI or L2 teacher, based on the position you just chose, what are the advantages and 
disadvantages of your position? 

1 1. In your LI or/and L2, what makes you a better reader? 

12. In your LI or/and L2, what makes you a better writer? 



33 




APPENDIX B 




Figure 1. Reading and writing courses offered in TESOL programs in the US (The mark “/” 
indicates that reading and writing are separated.) 



34 




