
The Center 



FOR COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOL 
REFORM AND IMPROVEMENT 




LEARNING POINT 

A<:<;nriatpc® 



ISSUE BRIEF 

www.centerforcsri.org 



August 30 | 



ENGAGING NATIVE AMERICAN 
LEARNERS WITH RIGOR AND 
CULTURAL RELEVANCE 



2009 



By Abner Oakes, senior program associate, and Traci Maday, program associate, 
The Center for Comprehensive School Reform and Improvement 



Historically, education outcomes for Native American 1 
youth have fallen far short when compared with the 
outcomes of their peers. In 2007, the National Indian 
Education Study from the National Center for Education 
Statistics reported that "overall, the average reading 
scores for American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) 
fourth- and eighth-graders showed no significant change 
since" the last report in 2005 "and were lower than the 
scores for non-AI/AN students in 2007" (Moran, Rampey, 
Dion, & Donahue, 2008, p. 1). Similar findings are noted 
for mathematics scores for fourth and eighth graders, 
as they "showed no significant change since 2005 and 
their scores were lower than the scores for non-AI/AN 
students in 2007" (Moran et al., 2008, p. 1). 

A heightened focus on data and disaggregating 
achievement outcomes of various student populations 
has revitalized efforts to address the needs of struggling 



1 The terms Native American and American Indian are used 
interchangeably throughout this brief to refer to American Indian/ 
Alaskan Native and Indigenous Pacific Islander populations. 



students. However, educators have the additional 
challenge of overcoming the troubled legacy of 
interaction between public schooling and Native 
American communities. Although individual experiences 
vary, Native people have often felt disenfranchised from 
an education system that does not seem to understand 
their cultural perspectives and priorities. 

Federal involvement in Indian education can be traced 
back to the earliest years of the United States, when 
the federal government agreed in treaty provisions to 
supply not only schools and teachers but also textbooks 
and materials in Native languages. Currently, the federal 
government administers several programs that aim to 
address the "unique educational and culturally related 
academic needs" (Title VII, Part A, Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act, 2002) of Native American 
students. But what does this mean for today's teachers 
and learners? Unfortunately, the drive to significantly 
raise student achievement can overshadow or take 
attention away from efforts to make education more 
relevant and engaging for Native American students. 




LU 

qE 

QQ 

LU 



CO 

CO 



> ° 
_ Q£ 
un o_ 




Fortunately, growing evidence shows that 
academic rigor and culturally relevant practices 
are mutually compatible. 

In this Issue Brief, The Center for 
Comprehensive School Reform and 
Improvement identifies strategies that foster 
Native American student engagement and 
improved academic achievement. We begin 
by examining the distribution of Native 
students and then we explore three areas that 
are identified in the literature as promising 
strategies for improving educational outcomes 
for Native students: 

• Instructional practices 

• Curriculum content 

• School climate 

Looking at the Numbers 

Nationally, Native American youth comprise 
about 1 percent of the elementary and 
secondary public school student population, 
including Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) 
schools (Fleury DeVoe & Darling-Churchill, 
2008, p. 42). BIE schools can be operated 
by the BIE or by tribes. BIE-funded schools 
serve about 8 percent of the Grades K-12 
tribal school population nationwide (Fleury 
DeVoe & Darling-Churchill, 2008, p. 42), 
while more than 90 percent of all Native 
American students nationwide attend regular 
public schools. 

Native students attend schools in all 50 states 
and territories, yet more than half of the 
Native student population is concentrated 
in just 11 states. In some regions, the 
concentration of Native people rises above 
25 percent of the population, even though 
tribal lands or reservations may be located 
hours away from the school district. Many 
Native students attend rural schools, but 
there also are sizable populations of Native 
students in urban districts, and the numbers 



are growing. Of the 10 largest U.S. cities, 

New York City, Los Angeles, Phoenix, and 
Chicago have the highest population of 
American Indian people (National Urban 
Indian Family Coalition, n.d., p. 8). 

The distribution of Native American people 
and their relatively small population numbers 
can obscure achievement gaps, particularly 
when the population does not meet minimum 
state levels for disaggregation under the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
of 2001 . A high degree of transiency and a 
dropout rate of approximately 50 percent 
further confound the issue of identifying 
the achievement gap. When already small 
populations dwindle, their achievement may 
go unreported, or what is reported may be 
flawed. In addition, schools and districts may 
experience difficulty in maintaining accurate 
records for students who transfer, move, or 
drop out of school. 

Identifying Culturally 
Relevant Strategies 

Native American cultural expressions and 
lifestyles are diverse and varied, comprising 
more than 500 tribal and cultural groups with 
as many unique languages and traditions. 
However, the teachers of Native students can 
be very different than their students. In fact, 
nearly "80 percent of AI/AN students overall 
were taught by teachers who identified 
themselves as White," and "nearly 90 percent 
of AI/AN students overall had teachers who 
provided instruction entirely in English" (Moran 
& Rampey, 2008, p. 1). 

Although cultural differences often exist 
between teachers and students who are 
culturally or linguistically diverse, a multitude 
of strategies exist that can be used to create 
supportive relationships for learning to occur. 

A report by the U.S. Department of Education 
includes the following: 




• Schools that adjust their curriculum to 
accommodate the variety of cultures served 
are more successful than schools that do not. 

• The perspective [Native or non-Native] from 
which a school's curriculum is presented 
can significantly influence Native students' 
attitudes toward the school, schooling in 
general, and academic performance. 

• Schools that respect and support a student's 
language and culture are significantly more 
successful in educating those students. 

• The historical and practical knowledge 
base of the community served must be 
valued and function as a starting point 
for schooling. (Indian Nations At Risk Task 
Force, 1991, p. 16). 

Instructional Practice 

Researchers have worked for years to define 
culturally relevant instruction and connect 
it to increased student achievement for 
Native youth. Jerry Lipka (1994) writes that 
"research from the 1928 Meriam Report to the 
1991 Indian Nations at Risk study indicates 
that increased local autonomy and actively 
valuing elders' knowledge will strengthen 
indigenous schools" (p. 14). Robert Calfee 
and his coauthors (1981) frame the issue 
by boldly asking: "Whose responsibility is 
it to build bridges between the culture of a 
community and the culture of a school?" (p. 

4). A number of theoretical models have 
emerged that identify congruence between 
home and community life, with what is 
learned in the school as a key component for 
effective instruction and learning (Demmert 
& Towner, 2003, p. 8). Demmert and Towner 
(2003) define culturally responsive pedagogy 
as "strategies [that] are congruent with the 
traditional cultural as well as contemporary 
ways of knowing and learning," and "that 
stress traditional cultural characteristics and 
adult-child interactions" (p. 10). 



The Kamehameha Early Education Program 
(KEEP) program is one example of the use 
of culturally congruent instruction. A reading 
program designed for and adapted to the 
cultural needs and abilities of young Hawaiian 
children, it was developed by researchers 
who paid special attention to the home 
environments of these young children. For 
example, peer learning centers were set 
up in classrooms when it was noticed that 
Hawaiian children typically turn for assistance 
to their peers and older siblings rather than 
to adults. In addition, researchers observed 
family interactions and noted a mode of 
communication in which family members take 
turns narrating parts of a story, referred to 
as talk story. KEEP's developers successfully 
adapted this practice into the program, so that 
children engage in the cooperative production 
of responses, co-narrating stories during which 
turn-taking is negotiated among peers. Equal 
rights are exercised during this practice and 
are applied to teacher and students. 

Today Kamehameha Schools (KS) continues to 
deliver on its mission of developing students 
who are "equipped with the skills they need 
to succeed in the endeavors of their choosing 
and prepared to practice and perpetuate the 
Hawaiian values and traditions" (Kamehameha 
Schools, 2000, p. 19). "KEEP is important as 
an example of a deliberate attempt to take 
account of the cultural backgrounds and 
abilities developed in the community and 
design an instructional program which is both 
culturally congruent with community practices 
and manageable in the public schools" (Calfee 
et al., 1 981 , p. 1). 

Curriculum Content 

Curriculum content can be just as important 
as pedagogy for engaging Native youth. 

In case studies and ethnographic studies 
involving Native youth, students have 
frequently reported feeling bored or that 



CO 

CO 



m 

co 

TO 

m 




2 | O 
> -v CD 
z ^ □ 

o m /— f 

- m ro 




-l O 




LU 

qE 

QQ 

LU 



CO 

CO 



> ° 
_ Q£ 
un o_ 




schooling has no relevance to their lives 
outside of school (Coladarci, 1983; Swisher 
& Hoisch, 1992). When teachers tap into 
students' prior knowledge, experiences, and 
community values, they "hook" students and 
act as a bridge between the academic world 
and home life. Two aspects of curriculum 
content are particularly relevant for engaging 
Native learners: infuse culturally relevant 
content across the curriculum and ensure 
that the content is accurate and free of bias 
and stereotype. 

Schools can incorporate contemporary and 
historical content about Native American 
people, perspectives, and issues into courses. 
Many states have recognized the need to 
incorporate such content into classrooms, 
not just for Native youth but for the benefit 
of all learners. Montana's Indian Education 
for All Act is an example of such an initiative. 
Alaska, Wisconsin, and Arizona also have 
curriculum standards that include historical and 
contemporary content about Native American 
people and cultures. 

An example of culturally relevant content 
is the work that the Albuquerque-based 
Native American Materials Development 
Center (NAMDC) did with the Rough Rock 
Demonstration School in northern Arizona 
(now Rough Rock Community School). In 
1980, the Rough Rock school board received 
a federal grant to "create a permanent, 
sequential bi-lingual curriculum in Navajo 
studies for Grades K-9," (McCarty, Wallace, 
Lynch, & Benally, 1991, p. 46), and critical 
to that work was the infusion into the 
curriculum of "key Navajo values, especially 
k'e, meaning kinship, clanship, and 'right 
and respectful relations with others and with 
nature'" (McCarty et al.,1991, p. 46). Working 
closely with the Rough Rock community — 
central to this effort was a survey of Rough 
Rock parents, teachers, and students — the 
NAMDC curriculum built on concepts, ideas, 



and problem-solving abilities in the context 
of culturally relevant experiences and topics 
while also promoting competency in English 
and Navajo. The curriculum was organized 
around concepts relevant to k'e, and Rough 
Rock students responded positively to it, 
as "the materials presented familiar scenes 
and cultural-linguistic content that tapped 
students' background and experiences, 
motivating them to express their ideas and 
actively engage in the lessons" (McCarty 
et al ., 1991, p. 50). Today the Rough Rock 
Community School continues to serve 
students by setting high standards for success 
while grounding youth in the cultural values 
and perspectives of the Navajo people. 

Another strategy is to ensure that the 
content is accurate and free from bias and 
stereotype. As Greg Matson, Hoopa Valley 
tribal education director, stated, "There is a 
lot of misinformation out there about Native 
American cultures, and we must continue 
to correct the wrongs that teachers have 
experienced in their own education." 

School and district staff can review existing 
materials for bias, stereotype, and accuracy 
and adopt new culturally respectful materials 
to ensure content is relevant for Native 
learners and appropriate for all students. 

This requires that they are knowledgeable 
about the content themselves. Ongoing 
professional development and self-reflection 
can help to expand and deepen educators' 
understanding of Native American people 
and cultures. It also is appropriate and 
helpful to engage Native American family and 
community members in reviewing materials 
and identifying topics for professional 
development. In their book Through Indian 
Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for 
Children, Slapin and Seale (1998) identify 
24 criteria with reflective questions that can 
be used to review materials. Listed here is a 
sample of those questions: 




• Look at Lifestyles. 

■ Are Native peoples discussed in the past 
tense only, supporting the "vanished 
Indian" myth? 

■ Is the continuity of cultures represented 
with values, religions, morals, an 
outgrowth of the past, and connected to 
the present? 

• Look for Distortions of History. 

■ Are Native heroes only the people who, in 
some way or another, are believed to have 
aided Europeans in the conquest of their 
own people? 

■ Are Native heroes those who are admired 
because of what they have done for their 
own people? 

• Look for the Effects on a Child's Self-Image. 

■ Is there anything in the story that would 
embarrass or hurt a Native child? 

■ Are there one or more positive role 
models with whom a Native child can 
identify? (Slapin, Seale, & Gonzales Ten 
Fingers, 1998) 

School Climate 

Discussions of school climate often revolve 
around discipline, absenteeism, and family 
engagement. School climate also may include 
the domains of student engagement and 
high expectations for academic achievement. 
Compared with their peers in low-density 
schools, a higher percentage of Native 
American eighth graders at high-density 
schools (defined as schools having 25 percent 
or greater of American Indian students) 
had administrators who indicated serious 
problems with student absenteeism, student 
tardiness, lack of family involvement, student 
misbehavior in class, drug or alcohol use by 
students, and low expectations (Moran & 
Rampey, 2008, p. 25). 

Jon Reyhner (1992) lists seven factors that 
contribute to Native youth disengagement and 



eventual dropping out. These include large 
impersonal schools; teachers and counselors 
untrained in the unique characteristics, history, 
culture, and societies of Native people; 
passive teaching methods; inappropriate 
curriculum with biased, stereotypical, or 
inaccurate material about Native people 
and communities; culturally biased tests 
and inappropriate testing of limited English 
proficient students; tracked classes with 
less rigorous curriculum; and lack of parent 
involvement (Reyhner, 1992). 

Schools can work to address these issues 
and find ways to meet students' needs. For 
example, practices such as positive behavior 
supports have shown to be effective in 
lowering discipline incidents and helping 
students to learn expected behaviors in 
school. Yet, the lack of family engagement, 
absenteeism, discipline, and low expectations 
are complex issues. They may be rooted 
in a legacy of distrust between Native and 
non-Native communities, persistent deep 
poverty, and differing worldviews or cultural 
expressions. One single program, strategy, 
or staff position is not enough to undo this 
history. Schools and districts can benefit 
students by committing to a multilayered 
approach — building relationships with 
students and families, gathering and acting 
on perception data that provides insight into 
the thoughts and experiences of students 
and community members, communicating 
a belief in the abilities of learners, and 
providing needed supports to reach high 
levels of achievement. 

Focusing on school climate, Reyhner (1992) 
concluded that "if students interact with 
caring, supportive adults, if students are 
allowed to explore and learn about the world 
they live in, including learning about their rich 
Indian heritage, if they are allowed to develop 
problem solving skills, if they are given 
frequent opportunities to read and write and 
to do mathematics and science in meaningful 



CO 

CO 



m 

co 

TO 

m 




So™ 

2 | O 
> -u CD 
z ^ □ 

o m /— f 

- m ro 




-l O 




LU 

qE 

QQ 

LU 



CO 

CO 



> ° 
_ CS. 
IS) Q_ 




situations, and if they are encouraged to 
help improve the world they live in through 
community service, it is likely that Indian 
students will feel good about themselves and 
will be successful in life" (p. n.a.). 

Additional Examples 
of Practice 

The examples that follow describe three 
schools that have had success in serving 
Native American learners. 2 Tribal and 
school staffs have shared their insights and 
experiences with regard to implementing 
strategies to support higher levels of Native 
American student achievement. 

Zuni Public School District, 

Zuni, New Mexico 

Established in 1980 by Zuni tribal members 
to meet the needs of their children, the Zuni 
Public School District is the nation's first 
Indian-controlled independent public school 
system. Located about 15 miles east of the 
New Mexico and Arizona border on the 
Zuni Pueblo, it operates five schools, with 
a total population of about 1,500 students. 

Dr. Richard Yzenbaard, the high school's 
principal, knows that "there's no magic pill" 
when working with Native young people 
"and that it takes a hard-working staff that 
cares about kids. The reason for our success," 
continued Dr. Yzenbaard, "is that we take a 
multidisciplinary approach to this work. It's 
not just one class, as all departments support 
the approach." 

With few exceptions, all Zuni High School 
students take Zuni language and culture 
classes their freshman year. Students also are 
exposed to Zuni perspectives, traditions, and 
culture in other subject areas. For example, in 

2 The Center is grateful for the support of the National 
Indian Education Association for assistance in identifying 
schools that successfully serve Native American youth. 



one of the high school social studies classes, 
students interview tribal citizens and develop 
a book from those interviews. A science class 
investigates traditional agricultural methods 
practiced by the Zuni people, and members 
of the school's art department collaborate with 
Phoenix's Heard Museum to develop projects 
that reflect traditional and modern expressions 
of Zuni art. 

Although only some of the classroom teachers 
are Zuni, 100 percent of the school's support 
staff and instructional assistants are Zuni. 

"They are a great resource for helping teachers 
navigate the cultural norms and practices 
of the Zuni people," said Dr. Yzenbaard. 
"Conversations are ongoing throughout the 
year; they take place daily." 

As for its success, Zuni High School is making 
significant strides: for 2009 it attained 
adequate yearly progress (AYP) in reading 
and experienced a 94.8 percent jump in 
mathematics achievement. Dr. Yzenbaard 
attributes this success to many factors, but 
a key change was the move to a 4x4 block 
schedule where students attend fewer classes 
for longer periods on alternating days. 

"We were able to increase the number of 
contact hours per credit," he commented, 

"and it allowed the staff to focus more time 
on addressing student learning needs and 
providing appropriate interventions." The 
schedule has given his teachers more time with 
students to build that trust. "This past year we 
have really focused on strengthening student 
relationships," commented Dr. Yzenbaard. "It 
begins with relationships. You then bring in 
the relevance and the rigor, but you won't get 
anywhere without the relationships." 

Denver (Colorado) Public Schools 

As of October 1, 2008, Denver Public Schools 
had slightly more than 75,000 students in 
152 schools, and 1.11 percent or 835 of those 
students were identified as American Indian. 




The system offers study in 10 languages, 
including Lakota. 

Rose Marie McGuire, the program manager 
for the Department of Indian Education at 
Denver Public Schools, spoke of that system's 
Indian language program, but this program is 
nestled in the system's American Indian focus 
schools, of which there are six. Back in 1994, 
Ms. McGuire was a member of the district's 
American Indian Advisory Council, and she 
and her colleagues went to the school board 
and presented a plan to begin these focus 
schools, which are similar to magnet schools. 
"We needed to provide better services [to 
the district's American Indian students]," said 
Ms. McGuire. During the 15-year tenure of the 
focus schools, the programs have changed 
significantly, with fewer paraprofessionals and 
more teachers qualified to teach upper-level 
mathematics, for example, but the importance 
of mentors and their knowledge of special 
education policy in the buildings has not 
changed, creating a climate of challenge and 
care, high academic standards, and varied and 
intensive support. 

Adding rigorous content to the supportive 
climate of one of the focus high schools is the 
district's lone Lakota language class, taught 
by Gracie RedShirt-Tyon, whose mother, a 
fluent speaker, taught her. "About four or 
five years ago," commented Ms. McGuire, 

"we wanted to have language introduced at 
East High School," a focus school that made 
AYP in mathematics and reading in 2008. Ms. 
McGuire went on to say that the Department 
of Indian Education, other school district 
personnel, and local Lakota tribal elders met 
to discuss the idea and plan the program. A 
private foundation funded the first year of 
the program, and, as a result of its success 
with students, their enthusiasm for it, and 
the numbers that enrolled, the district then 
picked up the cost of the class. "There are 



about 70 percent American Indian students 
in the class," commented Ms. McGuire. "For 
the non-Native students, they obviously gain 
a great deal of understanding about Native 
culture, such as the importance of kinship." 

At the moment, Denver's focus schools serve 
about 25 percent of that system's Native 
American population, and the Department 
of Indian Education looks forward to serving 
even more young Native students. "In the 
elementary focus schools, we are particularly 
pleased with the more structured manner 
that we can engage Native parents," said 
Ms. McGuire, with a person at each school 
who is specifically charged with being a 
liaison to Native American parents. She 
added, "Attendance has improved due to 
this practice and person." Ms. McGuire 
ended by praising the strong relationship 
that she has with other district-level 
personnel and looks forward to continued 
success for the Lakota language and Indian 
focus schools in Denver Public Schools. 

Klamath-THnity Joint Unified School 
District, Hoopa, California 

Greg Masten sits outside the Klamath-Trinity 
Joint Unified School District but works 
intimately with those in it on issues related 
to Native American students. "We work very 
closely with the school district," said Mr. 
Masten, who is education director for the 
Hoopa Valley Tribe in northern California. And 
no doubt Mr. Masten's involvement is critical: 
The two largest schools in this rural district, 
which is about 40 miles south of the California 
and Oregon border, are Hoopa Elementary 
and Hoopa High School. Both schools reside 
on the Hoopa Valley Indian Reservation, the 
largest reservation in California, and both 
schools have a majority population of Native 
students, with Hoopa Elementary at more 
than 90 percent and Hoopa High at more than 
75 percent. 



CO 

CO 

m 

co 

70 

m 



7 




s|n 

> -u CD 
z ^ □ 

o m /— f 

- m ro 




-l O 




LU 

qE 

QQ 

LU 



CO 

CO 



8 



> ° 
_ Q£ 
un o_ 




With the large proportion of Native young 
people at both schools, it makes sense that 
there is an all-encompassing approach to 
culturally relevant curriculum — that "cultural 
relevance in itself is not the solution," 
commented Mr. Masten, "but rather a part of 
the whole. I believe that effective strategies 
must include the family, the community, that 
they must address social and emotional needs 
and include mentoring, cognitive transitions, 
more hands on learning, an anti-drug 
message, and exposure to the wider world — 
all in balance with cultural values." 

As at Denver Public Schools, Klamath-Trinity 
schools offer Native language instruction. 

At the elementary schools, where the school 
is situated determines what language is 
studied — for example, the school on Karuk 
ceremonial land has its students study that 
language — and the high school offers three 
levels of language classes — in Hoopa, Yurok, 
and Karuk. In fact, these language courses 
meet the foreign language requirements for 
what is called the "A-G" college preparatory 
coursework for California's university systems. 
Both Mr. Masten and the school district did 
small studies of students taking a Native 
language, and both showed a significantly 
higher rate of interest in college for students 
who took four years of Native language 
compared with those who studied Spanish or 
no language. 

In fact, a college-going culture is stressed at 
Klamath-Trinity, according to Margo Robbins, 
the district's director of Indian Education and 
Native Language program, and Doug Oliveira, 
the superintendent of Klamath-Trinity Joint 
Unified School District. "We take our students 
on extended college tours," said Ms. Robbins, 
"wanting to open their eyes to this possibility." 

"The nearest California state university 
is about an hour away," commented Mr. 
Oliveira, "and the junior college campus is 



90 minutes away, but we also travel some five 
or seven hours to visit other campuses," such 
as the University of California at Berkeley, for 
example, where a former Hoopa High student 
leads the campus tour. 

The district's language study program is 
just part of its comprehensive approach 
to Native American students and their 
improved achievement. "The school district 
works closely with all three tribes," said Ms. 
Robbins, "to ensure that additional services, if 
need be, are available to students. Our Indian 
education program has its own tutors that 
service any students in Grades K-4 that are 
having difficulties academically. We meet with 
tribal representatives regularly to develop 
data-driven strategies that will best address 
student needs." 

Recently, Mr. Masten, Ms. Robbins, Mr. 

Oliveira, and other district personnel formed a 
curriculum committee, one that went subject 
by subject, standard by standard, and injected 
cultural relevance throughout the entire scope 
and sequence for Klamath-Trinity's K-8 grade 
levels. "The strategy," said Mr. Masten, "is to 
weave it into the very fabric of the educational 
process for each grade, to include all subjects. 
We tried to make it as teacher friendly as 
possible, citing each standard in each module." 

Another resource is the district's Indian 
education building that houses a library of 
culturally relevant curriculum and materials, 

"all of which is available to teachers across 
the district. [The collection is] a wonderful 
resource," said Ms. Robbins. Faculty members 
involved with this work used it as their 
required professional development time and 
even received college credit from Humboldt 
State University. 

Lastly, the Klamath-Trinity's curricular rigor 
continues through the district's college- 
connection program, which allows students at 




the high school to take college-transferable 
courses at the Hoopa tribal campus of College 
of the Redwoods. "The high school and our 
campus have aligned the fifth and sixth periods 
of the students that qualify, to come to our 
campus," commented Mr. Masten. "Students 
can gain up to 33 units of college course work 
when they graduate from high school." 

Conclusion 

The practices discussed here can benefit 
Native American learners, but they also hold 
potential for enriching the experience of 
non-Native learners. Schools and districts 
can employ a variety of strategies to foster a 
respectful and engaging learning environment 
that will support Native learners in both their 
academic achievement and their cultural 
sense of self. "Research and experience in 
Native serving schools indicate that Native 
language and culture and high-quality 
instruction in content areas are not mutually 
exclusive. Rather, they are complementary 
and equally important elements for enhancing 
the knowledge and academic achievement of 
Native children" (National Indian Education 
Association, n.d., p. 2). Educators need not 
choose between high levels of achievement 
and culturally relevant practices; in fact, such 
practices, when interwoven, are supportive of 
teaching and learning. 

References 

Calfee, R., Cazden, C., Duran, R., Griffin, M., Martus, M., 

& Doss Willis, H. (1981). Designing reading instruction 
for cultural minorities: The case of the Kamehameha early 
education program. Retrieved August 20, 2009, from http:// 
www.eric.ed.gov/ERICDocs/data/ericdocs2sql/content_ 
storage_01/0000019b/80/32/b7/8a.pdf 

Coladarci, T. (1983). High-school dropout among Native 
Americans. Journal of American Indian Education, 23(1), 
15-22. Retrieved August 20, 2009, from http://jaie.asu.edu/ 
v23/V23Slhig.html 



Demmert, W., & Towner, J. (2003). A review of the research 
literature on the influences of culturally based education 
on the academic performance of Native American students. 
Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 
Retrieved August 20, 2009, from http://www.nwrel.org/ 
indianed/cbe.pdf 

Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 2001, Pub. L. 
No. 107-110 § 7101. (2002). Retrieved August 20, 2009, from 
http://www.ed.gov/policy/elsec/leg/esea02/pg98.html 

Fleury DeVoe, J., & Darling-Churchill, K. E. (2008). Status 
and trends in the education of American Indians and 
Alaska Natives: 2008. Washington, DC: National Center for 
Education Statistics. Retrieved August 20, 2009, from http:// 
nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid = 2008084 

Indian Nations At Risk Task Force. (1991). Indian nations 
at risk: An educational strategy for action. Washington, 

DC: U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved August 20, 
2009, from http://www.ed.gov/rschstat/research/pubs/ 
oieresearch/research/natatrisk/report.pdf 

Kamehameha Schools. (2000). Kamehameha schools 
strategic plan. Retrieved August 20, 2009, from http:// 
www.ksbe.edu/spi/PDFS/Publications/EntireDocument.pdf 

Lipka, J. (1994). Culturally negotiated schooling: Toward a 
Yup’ik mathematics. Journal of American Indian Education, 
33(3), 14-30. Retrieved August 20, 2009, from http:// 
jaie.asu.edu/v33/V33S3CUL.htm 

McCarty, T. L. Wallace, S., Lynch, R. H., & Benally, A. 
(1991). Classroom inquiry and Navajo learning styles: A call 
for reassessment. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 
22(1), 42-59. 

Moran, R., Rampey, B. D., Dion, G., & Donahue, P. (2008). 
National Indian education study 2007 — Part I: Performance 
of American Indian and Alaska Native students at grades 4 
and 8 on NAEP 2007 reading and mathematics assessments 
(NCES 2008-457). Washington, DC: National Center for 
Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, 

U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved August 20, 2009, 
from http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/pdf/ 
studies/2008457. pdf 

Moran, R., & Rampey, B. (2008). National Indian education 
study — Part II: The educational experiences of American 
Indian and Alaska Native students in grades 4 and 8 
(NCES 2008-458). Washington, DC: National Center for 
Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, 

U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved August 20, 2009, 

http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/pdf/studies/ 

2008458.pdf 



CO 

CO 



m 

co 

m 




gq ^ 

2| O 
> -u CD 
z ^ □ 

o m /— f 
- m fD 




-l o 




ISSUE BRIEF 



National Indian Education Association, (n.d.). Using 
culturally based education to increase academic 
achievement and graduation rates. Washington, DC: 
Author. Retrieved August 20, 2009, from http:// 
www.niea.org/sa/uploads/researchtopics/20.38.CBE.pdf 

National Urban Indian Family Coalition, (n.d.). Urban 
Indian America: The status of American Indian & Alaska 
Native children & families today. Seattle, WA: Author. 
Retrieved August 20, 2009, from http://www.nuifc.net/ 
programs/files/NUIFC_PUBLICATION_FINAL.pdf 

Reyhner, J. (1992). American Indians out of school: A 
review of school-based causes and solutions. Journal 
of American Indian Education, 31(3), 37-56. Retrieved 
August 20, 2009, from: http://jaie.asu.edu/v31/ 
V31S3ind.htm 



Administered by Learning Point Associates in partnership 
with the Southwest Educational Development Laboratory 
(SEDL), under contract with the Office of Elementary and 
Secondary Education of the U.S. Department of Education. 



Slapin, B., & Seale, D. (Eds.). (1998). Through Indian 
eyes: The Native American experience in books for 
children. Berkeley, CA: Oyate. 

Slapin, B., Seale, D., & GonzalesTen Fingers, R. (1998). 
How to tell the difference. In B. Slapin & D. Seale (Eds.), 
Through Indian eyes: The Native American experience in 
books for children (pp. 197-203). Berkeley, CA: Oyate. 

Swisher, K., & Hoisch, M. (1992). Dropping out among 
American Indians and Alaska Natives: A review of 
studies. Journal of American Indian Education, 31(2), 
3-23. Retrieved August 20, 2009, from http://jaie.asu.edu/ 
v31/V31S2dro.htm 



LEARNING POINT 

Associates* 



6£6S~£ZZ~Z0Z d < 0699~£ZZ~Z0Z d 

6j O ■ US3J opi 0}U 3D 'MMM m < PP IZ~ UZ~ LL£ d 

9E002 DO 'uo}6uiL|se/v\ 

00S aiinS 'MN 133-4S Wl 00 L 1 

lN3W3A08dWI 0 N V W80338 
100HDS 3AISN3H38dW03 803 | 

J3JU0D 3l]l V J 





