DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 426 722 



JC 990 049 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Kruger, Mari Lynn 

A Longitudinal Study of Native American Persistence in 
Community Colleges. 

1995-06-00 

93p. 

Information Analyses (070) -- Reports - Research (143) 

MF01/PC04 Plus Postage . 

Academic Achievement ; *Academic Persistence ; Age ; *American 
Indians; *Community Colleges; Dropout Research; Enrollment; 
Grade Point Average; Longitudinal Studies; Sex Differences; 
♦Student Characteristics; Two Year College Students; Two 
Year Colleges 

♦Native Americans; ♦Washington State Community College 
System 



ABSTRACT 



This study, which includes a review of literature and a 
methodology description, investigates the persistence rates of 462 Native 
American first-time college students enrolled in community colleges 
throughout Washington State in the fall of 1988. Their progress was tracked 
over a six-year study period. Existing data from the State Board of Community 
and Technical Colleges were analyzed. The results of the study indicated that 
the persistence rates of Native Americans were low. Factors found to be 
related to persistence were gender, age, enrollment status, educational 
aspirations and college grade point average. A significant relationship was 
foiind between enrollment status (i.e. part-time versus full-time) and 
persistence. Results also indicated that a significant difference existed 
between the grade point average of persisters and non-persisters . The study 
concludes that developing new techniques to increase the retention of Native 
American students is an important challenge to higher education. Appended is 
a list of variables used in the study. (Contains llO references.) (AS) 



******************************************************************************** 



♦ Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made ♦ 

♦ from the original document. ♦ 

★******************************************************************************* 



ERIC 



\oV0 Q]oh 9 -£? 



A Longitudinal Study of Native American 
Persistence in Community Colleges 



Mari Lynn Kruger 



u.s. department OF 

/ originating it. 

' □ Minor changes have been^ 

improve reproduction ^ V 



Smt^d^nmnSsart^^^^^^ 

oHicial OERI position or policy. 



permission TO REPRODUCE AND 

disseminate this matewal has 
been granted by 



M. L. Kruger 



TO THE educational RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




2 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



ABSTRACT 



A Longitudinal Study of Native American Persistence in Community 

Colleges 

Mari Lynn Kruger 

The most underrepresented minority group in higher education is 
the Native American. This study investigated the persistence rates of 462 
Native American first-time college students enrolled in community 
colleges throughout Washington State in Fall, 1988. Their persistence 
and progress were tracked over a six-year study period. Existing data 
from the State Board of Community and Technical Colleges were 
analyzed. Common statistical measures were employed for analysis as 
well as t-tests and chi-square analysis. Differences along a multitude of 
variables were examined for persisters and non-persisters. The results 
of the study indicate that the persistence rates of Native Americans were 
low. Factors that were found to be related to persistence were gender, 
age, enrollment status, educational aspirations and college grade point 
average. It was concluded that enrollment status (i.e. part-time versus 
full-time) and persistence were significantly related. Results also found a 
significant difference between the grade point average of persisters and 
non-persisters. Developing new techniques to increase the retention of 
Native American students is an important challenge to higher education. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



ABSTRACT iv 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT v 

LIST OF TABLES viii 

CHAPTER 

I. INTRODUCTION 1 

Background 1 

Need for the Study 2 

Significance of the Study 3 

Statement of the Problem 5 

Summary 6 

II. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 7 

Introduction 7 

A Theory of Student Departure 8 

Validation of Tinto's Model 1 2 

Why Students Leave Higher Education 13 

Retention of People of Color 1 7 

Factors Related to Persistence of African-Americans 23 

Factors Related to Persistence of Hispanics 25 

Factors Related to Persistence of Native Americans 28 

Demographics of Native Americans in Higher Education 36 

Background Data on Washington's Community Colleges 39 

Summary 41 

III. METHODS 42 

Introduction 42 

Population and Sample 42 

Data Collection 43 

Data Analysis 44 



vi 




4 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



CHAPTER 

IV. RESULTS 45 

Introduction 45 

Demographic Variables 45 

Enrollment Patterns 48 

Persistence and Retention 51 

Student Progress 54 

Other Findings 56 

Summary 57 

V. DISCUSSION 58 

Introduction 58 

Discussion of Findings 58 

Implications 61 

Limitations 62 

Suggestions for Further Research 62 

Summary 64 

REFERENCES 65 

APPENDICES 79 



vii 



ERIC 



5 



LIST OF TABLES 



TABLE 1 Demographics of Persisters, Non-Persisters and Total 47 

TABLE 2 Enrollment Variables 50 

TABLE 3 Total Quarters Enrolled Over a Six Year Period 52 

TABLE 4 Group Percentages by Quarters Enrolled 53 

TABLE 5 Persistence of Total Cohort Over Six Year Period 53 

TABLE 6 Student Progress 56 



CHAPTER ONE 
INTRODUCTION 



Background 

The most underrepresented group of students of color in higher 
education today is the American Indian and Alaska Native (hereafter 
identified as Native American). Researchers have indicated that the 
education of Native Americans is dismal (Rhodes, 1990). Only 6% of 
Native Americans have completed four years of college or more, 
compared to 12% of African-Americans and 23% of Caucasians 
(Astin, 1982). 

Among ethnic groups. Native students experience the highest 
drop-out rates; specific estimates range from 75-93 percent (Astin, 1982; 
Benjamin, Chambers, Reiterman, 1993; Falk & Aitken, 1984; Kleinfield & 
Kohout, 1974; Lin, LaCounte & Eder, 1988; Mow & Nettles, 1990; 

Tijerina & Biemer, 1987/1988). Such a high drop-out rate indicates a 
failure of institutions to meet the educational needs of this unique 
population. 

Developing new techniques to increase the retention of Native 
American students is an important challenge to higher education. Native 
Americans are the least likely to be retained. They are also the least 
likely ethnic group to be studied by researchers of student attrition. The 
purpose of the study is to explore the attrition phenomenon of Native 
American students in two-year institutions in Washington State and to 
identify factors associated with such attrition. 




7 



Need for the Study 

The major share of the enrollment growth of students of color in 
higher education in the United States will occur at two-year institutions. 
For many students of color, community colleges continue to be the major 
point of entry to post-secondary education. Two-year colleges have 
higher attrition rates than four-year colleges (Astin, 1982; Lee & Frank, 
1990; Pascarella & Terenzini, 1992). According to Moyer (1973) only 
one-half of the students of color in higher education successfully 
complete the first two-years of college. As previously alluded to, this rate 
is even lower for Native Americans. Retention rates of students of color 
at two-year institutions and transfers from these institutions are low in 
comparison to whites (Astin, 1982). Native Americans are effected 
because over 50% of these students are enrolled in two-year colleges 
(Hodgkinson, 1990; Mow & Nettles, 1990). 

Research has developed student attrition models seeking to 
identify causes that affect student drop-out (Bean, 1980; Cabrera, Nora, 
& Castaneda, 1993; Tinto, 1975, 1987). Similarly, a growing body of 
studies has emerged in the literature regarding the phenomenon of 
minority drop-outs and factors that might affect persistence among these 
groups of students (Allen, 1988; Astin, 1982; Attinasi 1989; Nora & 
Rendon, 1989). 

To date, there is minimal research available that focuses on the 
retention rates of Native-American students in higher education and 
factors related to persistence. Moreover, the scant information that is 

2 




8 



available primarily focuses on this population in four-year colleges and 
universities and the bulk of this research has been conducted at single- 
sites with very small samples (Mow & Nettles, 1990; Nora, 1993). 

This has become a problem for those studying this population in 
higher education ( Asti n, 1982; Fries, 1987; Wells, 1989). In a national 
study of students of color in higher education, Astin (1982) reported that 
the sample of Native students "was often so small as to raise serious 
questions about the reliability of the results" (p. 23). Furthermore, Fries 
(1987) in a report on Native American college students found that "most 
sample surveys are either too small to produce reliable estimates for 
American Indians, or Indians are grouped into an 'other' category" 

(p.31). The present study of several hundred Native American students 
in twenty-six community colleges throughout Washington State is both 
needed and timely. 

Significance of the Study 

Nationally, the Anglo population is increasing in age and 
becoming less available in the workforce. The demographic trends for 
people of color show that this group is becoming young and is 
increasing in numbers (Cibik & Chambers, 1991; Wilson & Justiz, 1988). 
The birth rate of Native Americans is rapidly increasing and the number 
of college-age (18-24) students has more than doubled (Tijerina & 
Biemer, 1987/1988). In the 21st century, the United States population 
will need to rely on workers of color to sustain their present quality of life. 




3 



9 



These workers must be able to meet businesses' provision of a highly 
skilled labor force given technological advances. The economy will rely 
on people of color to contribute toward its endeavor of maintaining global 
competitiveness. Thus, it is imperative to ensure that students of color 
are retained. 

This study focuses efforts towards that endeavor by contributing to 
the body of research and knowledge on retention of students of color, 
specifically focusing on Native Americans. In addition, the study will 
establish research on the persistence of Native American students in a 
multitude of two-year institutions over an extended period of time where 
the bulk of this population enrolls. 

The Pacific Northwest has a rich Native heritage. Washington 
state is one of six states where the majority of Native Americans in the 
United States live (Statistical Abstracts of the United States, 1994). No 
researcher has sought to examine the retention of Native Americans in 
higher education in this region over an extended period of time. The 
outcomes of this study will help educators in Washington state 
understand the persistence patterns of this forgotten population. Student 
Affairs personnel, through their student development programming, 
academic advising, tutorial efforts and other support services such as 
counseling, are particularly vested in such outcomes. The identification 
of factors that predict the success of these students will assist all those 
involved in the higher education enterprise with retention efforts for 
students of color. 




4 



10 



An assumption made is that if we determine the nature of attrition 
of this population in Washington state, we can begin to work towards 
efforts to retain not only the Native American population but other ethnic 
populations in Washington State as well. 

Statement of the Problem 

The retention of Native American students in higher education is a 
serious concern. Native American students have lower rates of 
persistence than any other ethnic group in higher education. Over 50% 
of Native Americans who enroll in higher education begin their post- 
secondary education at two-year institutions (Hodgkinson, 1990; Mow & 
Nettles, 1990). And while it is suggested that certain indicators have an 
impact on the success of Native American students, this study seeks to 
investigate the persistence rates of Native American students in two-year 
institutions in Washington State and possible causal factors associated 
with such persistence. 

Research will focus on a cohort of Native Americans who were 
enrolled in Washington's community colleges for the first-time in Fall, 
1988 and track their persistence through Spring, 1994. Several 
variables identified in the retention literature will be examined. The 
researcher seeks to determine such research questions as: What is the 
persistence rates of Native American students in community colleges of 
Washington state? What are potential factors related to persistence of 
Native Americans? 




5 



11 



Summary 

The most underrepresented of the targeted minority group in 
higher education today is the Native American. Thus, it is necessary to 
gain a better understanding of the college-going behaviors of these 
students and the characteristics of those who persist and those who do 
not. This study will contribute to that understanding. The following 
chapters will consist of a review of relevant literature, a description of the 
methods and results of the study, and will conclude with a discussion of 
the study's findings and suggestions for further research. 



CHAPTER TWO 



REVIEW OF LITERATURE 

Introduction 

A voluminous body of research on retention in higher education 
exists. Over the past decade, studies examining the retention of people 
of color have flourished. The majority of these studies have been 
conducted using populations in four-year institutions. This inclusive 
focus creates a hole in our understanding of students of color because 
the majority of these students in higher education attend two-year 
institutions. 

Although the research on students of color in higher education 
and factors found to affect their persistence is expanding, there is much 
we do not know (Tinto, 1987). The least is known about Native 
American students. For the purposes of this study, the literature review 
will focus on retention research, specifically on retention in higher 
education. Areas covered include a review of a widely used theory of 
student departure and a general look at why students leave higher 
education. In addition, factors found to affect persistence of African- 
American, Hispanic, and Native American students will be addressed. 
Moreover, the current demographics of Native Americans in higher 
education will be explored. Finally, the researcher will include a 
background section on the characteristics of students in Washington's 
community colleges. 



7 




13 



A Theory of Student Departure 

Student departure has been a much studied phenomenon. Few 
issues in higher education have received as much attention (Astin, 1972; 
Bean, 1980; Cope & Hannah, 1975; Nora, 1987; Pantages & Creedon, 
1978; Pascarella & Terenzini, 1980; Ramist, 1981; Spady, 1970, 1971; 
Summerskill, 1962; Tinto, 1975). In an effort to bring coherence to a 
voluminous body of research on retention, Vincent Tinto introduced a 
model of student attrition that attempts to explain the motivation of 
students who leave colleges and universities. Over the past decade, 
Tinto's theoretical model of student departure (1975, 1987, 1993) has 
guided much of the inquiry into student persistence. 

Building on the work of Spady (1970, 1971), Tinto's theory is 
advanced as a longitudinal process that focuses on the interactions 
between a student's pre-entry attributes and dispositions (i.e., goals and 
commitments) and the academic and social systems of the institution to 
arrive at a decision of student departure. A negative fit between the 
student and the institution will result in a decision to leave. 

Pre-colleae characteristics 

The basic premise of the theory is that students come to college 
with certain pre-college characteristics. Such attributes are a student's 
family and community background, a variety of personal traits (e.g., age, 
sex, race and disabilities), and intellectual and social skills. Other pre- 
college characteristics include financial resources and various 

8 




14 



educational experiences and achievements like the high-school grade 
point average. Each attribute is presumed to have a direct impact on an 
individual's decision to depart because of the "well-documented effect on 
levels of academic performance in college" (1993, p.115). 

Furthermore, family background is a key component of these pre-college 
characteristics. Family background includes parental education and 
encouragement from family and friends. This component has an indirect 
impact on the goals and commitments a student has when arriving at the 
institution. 

Goals and Commitments 

The above characteristics indirectly help formulate the goals and 
commitments that students initially bring with them to college. Goals and 
intentions are the level of degree attainment or occupation a student 
desires. Commitment means the level of commitment to the goals (goal 
commitment) of graduation and to the institution that the student initially 
enrolled in (institutional commitment). 

Along with external commitments the student brings with them to 
the college environment, such as work or family, these goals and 
commitments describe the orientation the student will have regarding 
educational continuance and establishes the later interactions and 
experiences between the student and members of the college or 
university. 



Institutional Experiences 

Given individual characteristics and dispositions at entry, the 
model holds that subsequent experiences and interactions with other 
members of the institution constitute the probability of the student to 
persist or not. It argues that interactions with the academic and social 
systems of the institution both formally and informally have a direct 
impact on student departure. Interactions and experiences with the 
academic system include the academic performance of the student 
(formal) as well as informal discussions and meetings with the faculty 
and staff at an institution. Tinto (1993) revised his earlier models to 
reflect the importance of student interactions with faculty and staff toward 
decisions of educational continuance. 

Additionally, the model reasons that students' interactions with the 
formal social system of the institutions such as involvement in 
extracurricular activities and peer group interactions, considered by the 
model to be the informal social system, to be equally critical toward 
decisions of student departure. The more a student has interactive 
experiences with other students, the more likely it is that the student will 
positively integrate academically and socially to the institution. Such 
integration is believed to have a direct impact on student departure. 

Integration 

The main thesis of the model is that the ability of the students, who 
come with individual pre-college attributes and dispositions that impact 




10 



16 



on their initial goals and commitments, directly affects the subsequent 
interactive experiences with the formal and informal social and academic 
(intellectual) systems of the institution. This in turn directly impacts the 
students' disposition to integrate to the social and academic (intellectual) 
life of the institution. Integration to those institutional systems has a direct 
impact on a decision of student departure. In other words, the ability to 
integrate both socially and academically positively relates to a student's 
likelihood of persisting to degree completion. 

Positive social integration is influenced by greater contact with 
peers and faculty. Furthermore, positive integration serves to heighten 
one's goals and strengthen one's commitment to those goals and to the 
commitment to the institution. As Tinto (1993) himself suggests, "the 
model posits that, other things being equal, the lower the degree of one's 
social and intellectual integration into the academic and social 
communities of the college, the greater the likelihood of departure" 

(p. 116). 

External Commitments 

One final component of the model that could affect persistence is 
the degree in which the individual has commitments to communities 
external from the institution. This is often the case for commuting 
students who may feel pulled away from the campus because of family or 
work responsibilities, thus having a negative indirect affect on 
persistence (p. 116). While at the same time, such external communities 



ERIC 



17 



could have a positive indirect influence on a students' decision to persist 
when the family gives the student strong support and encouragement 
(Bean & Vesper, 1992). 

Validation of Tinto's Model 

As previously alluded to, Tinto's model of student departure has 
withstood the test of time. A review of the literature indicates that this 
model is the most widely researched theory on student retention and 
findings from such research indicate general support for the conceptual 
framework of the model (Aitken, 1982; Baumgart & Johnstone, 1977; 
Bean, 1980, 1982, 1983; Munro, 1981; Pascarella & Chapman, 1983; 
Pascarella and Terenzini, 1979, 1980, 1983; Terenzini and Pascarella, 
1977, 1978, 1980; Terenzini et al., 1983). As Stage (1990) has noted, 
"Today few would question that students' commitment, academic 
integration, and social integration are crucial to their academic success" 
(p. 250). 

However, the model has not totally escaped criticism. Tinto 
himself would be the first to admit that his model is not perfect. For 
example, because the model initially was formulated with traditional 
students in mind, adult students may not fit the model as outlined. 
Moreover, the model may not take into account the individual differences 
of certain subgroups of the general student population. Tierney (1992) is 
concerned with the question of social integration and the assumption that 
Tinto seems to make regarding conformity to the mainstream 




12 



18 



environment as the norm. He states, "A model of integration that never 
questions who is to be integrated and how it is to be done assumes an 
individualist stance of human nature and rejects differences based on 
categories such as class, race, and gender" (p. 611). He goes on to say, 
"...essentially models of integration have the effect of merely inserting 
minorities into a dominant cultural frame of reference that is transmitted 
within dominant cultural forms, leaving invisible cultural hierarchies 
intact" (p. 611). 

Why Students Leave Higher Education 

Early research on attrition tended to label anyone who left higher 
education as a "dropout." Today, the issue is much more complex. 
Students leave for a variety of reasons. Some students begin their 
college education with no intention of receiving a college degree. 

Many others will transfer between institutions. Increasingly students are 
attending part-time and revolving in and out of higher educational 
institutions. This is particularly common among community college 
students. 

Tinto (1993) defines several types of departure from higher 
education: 

institutional departure, or departure from individual institutions 

system departure, or departure from the wider system of higher 
education 




13 



19 



immediate transfer, or departure from one institution to transfer 
to another higher education institution 
stopouts, or temporary withdrawal from the system 
Tinto (1993) states that "such diversity of college entry makes the 
estimation of rates of student departure, institutional and systemic, a very 
difficult task" (p. 9). He estimates that for four-year and two-year colleges 
respectively, "27% of all four-year and 40.7% of all two-year entrants left 
their first institutions prior to the start of the second year" (p. 1 7). 

It is important to mention that a student's departure from an 
institution of higher education should not automatically be viewed in a 
negative manner. Tinto (1987, 1993) warns that in "speaking only of 
departure from college we may inadvertently undervalue the importance 
of the education which goes on outside the formal boundaries of our 
higher educational system" (p. 211). He contends that leaving college 
does not necessarily conclude that one will not partake of other forms of 
education later. He supports the belief that education is a lifelong 
process that does not end when attendance in college ceases. 

Tinto’s model of student departure (1975, 1987, 1993) 
distinguishes between two forms of withdrawal: academic dismissal and 
voluntary withdrawal. The latter is more common. Tinto (1993) estimates 
that only 15 to 25 percent of institutional departure occur because of 
academic failure. While academic failure is generally related to the 
academic performance of the student, issues surrounding voluntary 




14 



20 



withdrawal are related to the student's level of congruence to the 
academic and social communities of the institution after entry. 

Academic failure is one reason why students decide to depart from 
higher education. Astin (1975) found academic failure to be tied to 
inferior high school grades. However, this is not as complex a 
phenomenon as is departure for reasons related to voluntary withdrawal. 
Scholars of student retention have identified several factors associated 
with a student's decision to leave. Very prominent among these reasons 
are those primarily unrelated to the college or university attended. Such 
individual reasons include: sickness or injury, lack of encouragement 
from friends and family, unclear educational goals, lack of institutional 
commitment, difficulty coping with change, and familial obligations 
(Bean, 1980; Cabrera, Nora & Castaneda, 1993; Christie & Dinham, 
1991; Tinto, 1987, 1993). Astin (1975) reported being married was 
positively associated with departure for women, while it was negatively 
associated with departure decisions for men. Tinto (1993) speculates 
that this is largely to do with societal values of women and their roles 
within the family. 

A second major grouping of reasons given for voluntary student 
withdrawal focus on financial concerns. Students cited a lack of financial 
aid, little or no fiscal support from family and difficulty juggling work 
responsibilities and classes as reasons for leaving (Bers & Smith, 1991 ; 
Cabrera, Nora & Castaneda, 1992; Chaney & Farris, 1991; Stampen & 
Cabrera, 1986; Tinto, 1987, 1993). Tinto (1993) cautions that "citing 



15 




21 



financial problems as reason for departure is often merely an end 
product of decisions regarding departure" (p. 67). He goes on to say, "it 
reflects the weighing of benefits as well as of costs and as such mirrors, 
the nature of the students' academic and social experiences on campus" 
(p. 67). 

Pascarella and Chapman (1983) found that few variables that 
significantly affect student attrition are found to be manipulable by the 
institution. However, a review of the literature indicates that there are 
variables that can be more closely attributed to the institutions than can 
individual and financial reasons. For example, some students report an 
inability to register for their desired classes, or dissatisfaction with the 
academic program (Neumann & Neumann, 1989). Neumann, et.al. 
(1989) studied juniors and seniors at a major northeastern university in 
an effort to identify factors that contribute to their persistence. They 
found that students' dissatisfaction with the level of student-faculty 
contact and the quality of course content and instructional activities 
contributed to a student's decision to withdraw. Others report dislike with 
their academic progress and lack of adequate study skills (Bean, 1980; 
Chaney & Farris, 1991; Richardson & Bender, 1987; Tinto, 1987, 1993). 

Another major grouping of findings on why students leave higher 
education are associated with problems adjusting to the college or 
university environment: socially or academically; because of the location 
of the institution; or because of cultural factors, especially for students of 
color (Bers & Smith, 1991; Cabrera, Nora & Castaneda, 1993; 




16 



22 



Christie & Dinham, 1991; Mow & Nettles, 1990; Richardson & Bender, 
1987; Tinto, 1975, 1987, 1993). Others cite that readiness for college 
was a factor (Terenzini & Pascarella, 1980; Tinto, 1987). 

Final reasons for voluntary student withdrawal include a student's 
desire to transfer to another higher education institution and meeting his 
or her objectives (Tinto, 1987, 1993). 

Summary 

Students withdraw from higher education for a myriad of reasons. 
Most prominent are academic failure, individual reasons and financial 
reasons, institutional reasons such as dissatisfaction with academic 
programs, or incongruence with the social or cultural environment. 

Retention of People of Color 

The issue of retention has been given great attention by academic 
scholars both for altruistic and self-serving reasons. On the one hand, 
institutions are interested in assisting students to fully develop both 
psychologically and intellectually, and they are interested in contributing 
to an educated workforce. On the other hand, the interest is a practical 
one in which considerations are given to maintaining enrollments to keep 
institutional budgets fiscally sound. There is also an interest on the part 
of the individual student. Individuals are interested in retention because 
of the promise of overall benefits bestowed upon a college graduate 
(Bers & Smith, 1991; Neumann & Neumann, 1989). 




17 



23 



Because students of color are the least likely to persist, it is of no 
wonder that time and energy have been invested in the undertaking of 
understanding why these students leave higher education. Over the past 
decade, much retention research on students of color has been 
conducted. Most of this research has focused predominantly on African- 
Americans at single four-year institutions. A review of the literature 
indicates that there are important factors that are shown to cause 
departure of people of color. 

Tinto postulates that students of color experience the college or 
university differently than do white students. For the purposes of this 
review, an outline of general factors found to be associated with 
persistence for these students will be presented. Next, will come a 
review of factors shown to affect persistence of African-Americans, 
Hispanics, and Native Americans in particular. Overall, these three have 
been found to have the highest attrition rates. 

African-Americans, Hispanics and Native Americans are 
consistently found to depart from college at much higher rates and to 
obtain baccalaureate degrees at much lower rates than their white 
counterparts (Astin, 1982; Cibik & Chambers, 1991; Mow & Nettles, 
1990; Tinto, 1993). Astin (1982) estimated retention rates to be 
significantly lower for Hispanics (31- 42 percent) and Native Americans 
(39 percent) than African-Americans (42 - 53 percent) and Whites (56 - 
59 percent). To arrive at these estimates, Astin drew the percentages of 
entrants completing colleges from three sources: Current Population 




18 



24 



Studies percentages of persons aged 25 to 29 who had completed four 
or more years of college, CIRP surveys of 1971 freshmen followed up in 
1 980, and National Longitudinal Study data on the 1 976 status of 1 972 
high school graduates who entered college. 

Many of the factors contributing to high attrition rates may not be 
under the control of the student nor the institution. Factors such as 
poverty, low academic preparation, poor study skills, no academic 
preparatory courses in high school, parent's who have no formal 
education, and lack of role models all are difficult obstacles to overcome 
by colleges and universities (Astin, 1982; Loo & Rolinson, 1986; 

Mingle, 1987; Mow & Nettles, 1990; Nora, 1993; Nora & Rendon, 1989). 

Initial educational aspirations of a baccalaureate degree have 
been found to be positively associated with persistence of minority 
students (Astin, 1982; Mow & Nettles, 1990; Nora, 1993; Ramist, 1981). 
Astin (1982) found that student's educational aspirations positively 
influenced college performance and persistence. Other pre-college 
factors include gender and age. Astin (1982) found that for all groups 
except for Native Americans and Hispanics, being a woman is positively 
related to persistence. However, Patton (1972) found being a Native 
American woman to be positively related to persistence. In terms of age, 
Astin (1982) states that the relatively older students show somewhat 
poorer rates of undergraduate persistence among African-Americans 
and Chicanes. 



19 




25 



Environmental factors are a second major grouping. According to 
researchers, students of color who receive financial aid in the form of 
grants or scholarships, and do not work at an outside job are more likely 
to persist (Astin, 1982; Mow & Nettles, 1990; Nora, 1993). Cibik & 
Chambers (1991) in a study of similarities and differences among 
African-Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans and Anglos at a 
predominantly white undergraduate institution in the Southwest, reported 
that students of color cited the availability of finances as the greatest 
obstacle for completing college degrees. 

A lack of academic integration, partially attributed to minimal 
faculty-student contact and low academic abilities, is another factor 
associated with persistence (Fox, 1985; Tinto, 1987; Tracey & 

Sedlacek, 1987). Fox (1985) cited that retention was found to be directly 
related to academic integration. 

Chief among environmental factors is the type of institution a 
student initially attends. Astin (1982), in a study of students of color in 
higher education using national longitudinal data, found a negative 
correlation between a student's chances of attaining a baccalaureate 
degree and initially attending a community college. These findings 
confirm earlier findings showing a negative relationship between 
enrolling in a community college and achieving a bachelor's degree 
(Astin, 1975, 1977). 




20 



26 



This is especially significant for students of color as noted by 
Richardson and Bender (1987) "...access to four-year institutions for 
almost half of all minority students currently participating in higher 
education requires transfer from a two-year to a four-year institution" 

(p. 17). Moreover, for Hispanics and Native Americans specifically, the 
type of institution is even more important because researchers commonly 
attribute the lower retention rates of Hispanics and Native Americans to 
their high concentration in community colleges (Astin, 1982; Richardson 
& Bender, 1987). Others cite factors such as private institutions and 
small enrollments as positive predictors of persistence 
(Astin, 1982; Mow& Nettles, 1990). 

Very prominent among factors shown to predict persistence of 
students of color are those socioculturally grounded. Researchers have 
often identified "isolation" and racial bias as problems. To paraphrase 
the work of Tinto (1993), students of color are particularly vulnerable to 
isolation and marginality at large white institutions where the 
opportunities to become a member of a community composed of students 
like themselves are minimal. Under Tinto's model, peer group interaction 
is especially important to the ability to integrate socially. Cibik & 
Chambers (1991) state that for "many minority students at predominantly 
white institutions, the necessary social, cultural, and mental adjustments 
are simply insurmountable" (p. 130). 

Loo & Rolison (1986) agree with this point. The researchers 
studied ethnic minority and Anglo students at a predominantly white 




21 



27 



institution to assess the scope of alienation among students of color and 
to determine whether the alienation reported by these students differed 
from that of Anglos. The study's sample constituted 76% non-White 
(N=109) and 33% (N=54) white students. Over representation of 
students of color was intentional to gain a better understanding of this 
population's attitudes. Their findings indicate that the sociocultural 
alienation of non-White students was greater than that of White students 
and the ways in which alienation was experienced was through feelings 
of cultural domination and isolation. 

In summary, factors that have been shown to affect persistence of 
students of color are pre-college characteristics, environmental factors 
and sociocultural factors. Pre-college factors include poor academic 
preparation, low family income, and parental education. Environmental 
factors include financial resources, academic integration and institutional 
type. Most prominent are sociocultural factors and feelings of alienation 
and isolation. 

It is important to note that while a review of general factors found to 
affect persistence of students of color can be helpful to an institution 
dealing with retention, it does not serve these students well to stereotype 
all ethnic groups or individuals within such groups as being affected 
equally by such factors. Steward, Germain & Jackson (1992) affirm this 
notion by underscoring the importance of "uniquely addressing each 
racial and ethnic group" (p. 155). In an effort to do this, the next three 
sections will consist of a closer examination of factors that affect 



persistence of three ethnic groups: African-Americans, Hispanics, and 
Native Americans. 

Factors related to persistence of African-Americans 

Studies on retention of students of color have focused primarily on 
African-Americans. While this review is not intended to be 
comprehensive in scope, the review will reveal primary factors identified 
in the research to affect persistence. 

Perhaps the most single cited factor related to African-American 
student persistence is the suggestion that withdrawal is significantly 
correlated to academic problems (Donovan, 1984; Eddens, 1982; 

Myron, 1983; Sedlacek & Webster, 1978). Several researchers have 
found contrasting results. For example, Tracey and Sedlacek (1987) 
found that doing well in college has little bearing on remaining enrolled 
for African-American students. This is consistent with findings from Cibek 
& Chambers (1991) and Pascarella & Terenzini (1985). 

Non-cognitive variables have been found to be predictive of 
persistence among African-American students. In comparing the 
persistence of White and African-American students, Tracey & Sedlacek 
(1987) found that non-cognitive variables were more predictive of 
persistence for African-American students than for White students. Those 
dimensions include having a positive self-concept, a realistic self- 
appraisal of their academic needs, preferring long-term goals over 
immediate desires, and having some leadership experience. Moreover, 




23 



29 



findings indicated that participating in extracurricular activities such as 
the student government was positively related to persistence for African- 
American men. Nettles, Thoeny & Gosman (1986) cited that persistence 
was dependent on motivation and goals, and satisfaction. 

Other studies have identified social integration to be a significantly 
stronger predictor of persistence than academic integration for African- 
American students. Pascarella's (1985) study of racial differences in the 
factors associated with bachelor's degree completion using a sample in 
a nine-year follow up, found that social integration was twice as important 
in predicting degree completion compared to academic integration for 
African-American students. 

Many studies of African-American students at predominantly white 
institutions report findings that indicate that African-American students 
feel isolated and alienated to a much larger degree than do White 
students (Allen, 1988; Nettles & Johnson, 1987; Tinto, 1993). Donald 
Smith (1980, 1981) identified alienation and loneliness as the most 
common factors in African-American student attrition as expressed by 
students, African-American faculty, and administrators. Peer support has 
also been identified as a factor of African-American student persistence 
(Allen, 1988; Galicki & McGewin, 1989; Myron, 1983; Tinto, 1987). 

Final factors believed to have an impact on African-American 
persistence are institutional factors such as type and predominant race. 
Unique to African-Americans is their enrollment in traditional black 
colleges. There seems to be a relationship between African-American 




24 



30 



students' persistence and these institutions but the findings are 
inconclusive. Fleming (1984) found that African-American students at 
black colleges have higher levels of psychological adjustments than do 
African-American students on white campuses. Allen (1988) found that 
African-American students at black colleges were more likely to aspire to 
graduate degrees than African-American students on white campuses. 
Nettles (1988) discovered that African-American students at black 
colleges had higher retention rates and faster progression rates than 
African-American students at white institutions. 

In contrast, Nettles (1988) also found students at black colleges to 
be less satisfied with their academic programs. Similarly, Astin (1982) 
found that attending a traditional black college diminishes the chances of 
completing a degree and has negative effects on undergraduate 
satisfaction. Pascarella (1985) found that attending a predominantly 
black college has no positive nor negative influence on persistence. 

Factors related to persistence of Hispanics 

Substantially less is known about Hispanics in higher education. 
Like African-Americans, Hispanics are less likely to go to college and if 
enrolling take longer to complete degrees. In addition, they withdraw at 
higher rates than do Blacks or Whites. However, it must be cautioned 
that differences exist in the rates of entry and persistence among the 
many Hispanic subgroups. For example, 18.5% of Cubans completed 



25 




31 



four years of college or more compared to 6.2% of Mexican-Americans 
(Bureau of the Census, 1992). 

Some persistence studies have identified 'background' factors 
such as poor academic preparation, lack of enrollment in science and 
math courses, parents' educational and occupational status, and lack of 
financial resources to be predictive of persistence for this group (Astin, 
1982; Astin & Burciaga, 1981; Attinasi, 1989; Mow & Nettles, 1990; 

Nora & Rendon, 1990). Moreover, many Hispanics are first-generation 
college students. Consequently, Hispanic parents lack critical 
information on college admissions, program availability, and financial 
aid. However, lack of knowledge should not be interpreted as lack of 
educational support (Nora & Rendon, 1990). 

Attinasi (1989) in a study of Mexican Americans' perceptions of 
university attendance found that significant others such as friends and 
family had an impact on a student's decision to enter college and 
subsequently on Mexican Americans' decision to stay. That is, that 
students' pre-college opportunities to be exposed to modeling and to 
experiences related to college going are related to a student's decision 
to enroll and to persist. The study's findings also suggest that a student's 
level of anticipatory socialization impacts persistence in the form of 
defining educational goals and forming decisions of whether to go to 
college, which have been shown to positively impact persistence of 
Hispanic students. 




26 



32 



Further studies explored factors after enrollment. Findings from 
these studies indicate that Hispanic students' goals and institutional 
commitment, and encouragement from family, faculty and staff positively 
affect persistence. Additionally, the number of credit hours enrolled is a 
factor found to be associated with persistence (McCool, 1984; Nora, 
1987; Nora, 1993; Nora & Rendon, 1990). 

Nora (1987) found that among a large sample of Chicano 
community college students, the commitment to the goal of completing 
college and the resolve to complete it at a chosen institution, was 
significantly more important in predicting retention than were the factors 
of academic and social integration. Students with higher levels of 
educational goal commitment and institutional commitment had higher 
levels of retention. 

In addition, she found that students who had higher levels of goal 
and institutional commitment were enrolled in more semester hours and 
were more likely to have a form of credential. This is in contrast to Tinto 
who said that initial goal commitment did not directly affect persistence. 
Moreover, Nora's study showed that students with higher grades had 
more encouragement from their instructors and counselors and had 
higher initial goal commitments. 

Finally, as previously stated, the type of institution has been found 
to affect the level of bachelor's degrees that Hispanics receive because 
the majority of Hispanic students began their college education at a two- 
year college and transfer rates from these institutions are low 

27 




33 



(Astin, 1982; Mow & Nettles, 1990; Nora, 1993). Furthermore, findings 
of a study of urban community colleges indicate that students who were 
disengaged or isolated from the colleges' academic and social arenas 
showed fewer inclinations to develop transfer behaviors 
(Cohen, Brawer & Bensimon, 1985). 

Factors related to persistence of Native Americans 

Among studies of retention or persistence of students of color, the 
least is known about Native Americans. From what little focus has been 
given on this population, we know that they are the most 
underrepresented ethnic group in our colleges and universities. As a 
whole. Native Americans have achieved the lowest educational levels 
among all racial minorities (Wright, 1991). The following explanations 
have been given for such disproportion's. 

In 1969, the Senate Subcommittee Report on Indian Education, 
also called the Kennedy Report, attributed the problem to inadequate 
academic preparation, lack of motivation and lack of encouragement 
from teachers and counselors toward college aspirations, financial 
difficulties, and challenges in adjusting to the college environment 
(cited in Wright, 1991). 

Although twenty-six years have past since the report was issued, 
the factors that had an impact on academic failure appear to remain 
much the same today. Researchers have repeatedly cited several factors 
that contribute to the problem: personal reasons, poor academic 




28 



34 



preparation and educational skills, language fluency, financial difficulties, 
institutional climate, lack of role models, lack of adequate support 
services, and cultural conflict. The focus of this section is to examine 
those factors that have been found to have an impact on Native American 
students' persistence. Although not meant to be exhaustive in scope, the 
following review will be representative of the nature of the barriers and 
factors that affect the college-going behaviors of this important 
population. 

Individual reasons are frequently cited by researchers. These 
reasons include substance abuse, health, educational aspirations, self- 
concept, personal motivation, parents' educational level, family and 
community background, encouragement from friends and family, goal 
commitment and lack of long-range goals and career goals 
(Benjamin, Chambers & Reiterman, 1993; Falk & Aitken, 1984; Gilliland, 
1986; Guyette & Heth, 1984; Lin, LaCounte, & Eder, 1988; McIntosh, 
1987; Mow & Nettles, 1990; Nora, 1993; Osborne & Cranney, 1985; 
Pavel, 1991; Pavel & Padilla, 1993; Rindone, 1988; Wells, 1989; 

Wright, 1991). Finally, Whittaker (1986) found marital status to be 
positively related to persistence. 

Gender and age factors have also been found to be related to 
persistence. However, the findings on gender to be predictive of student 
success are inconclusive. Astin (1982) found being a female to be 
negatively related to grade point average and persistence, while Patton 
& Eddington (1973) found being a woman to be positively associated 




29 



35 



with grade point average and persistence. The results of studies on age 
suggest that traditional students do better and persist more than non- 
traditional students (Astin, 1982; Patton .& Eddington, 1973). 

One of the most frequently cited factors related to persistence of 
Native Americans is inadequate academic preparation. The skill level at 
entry is significantly less than their non-Native peers (Wright, 1991). 
Native students have been cited as having poor skills in English 
language, reading and writing and the skill level becomes worse at 
college-going age (Wright, 1991). Researchers "found not only that 
Indian students achieved well below white students but that they fell 
further behind as the higher grades were reached" 

(McNamara, 1984, p. 141). Other factors cited that are associated with 
inadequate academic preparation include poor high school preparation 
and poor study habits (Falk & Aitken, 1984; Guyette & Heth, 1984; 

Lin et al., 1988; Pavel, 1991; Tijerina & Biemer, 1987/1988; 

Wells, 1989). 

Astin (1982) found that high school grade point average was the 
best predictor of the college grade point average and an even stronger 
predictor for Native Americans. Patton & Eddington (1973) found that a 
higher college grade point average was positively related to persistence. 
However, Huffman, Sill, & Brokenleg (1986), in a study of college 
achievement among Sioux and white South Dakota students found that 
high school grade point average was not found to be a factor of 
persistence. 



30 




36 



The most frequent reason for Native American students' attrition 
cited by researchers and students alike is financial difficulties (Astin, 
1982; Falk & Aitken, 1984; Guyette & Heth, 1984; Lin et al., 1988; 
Mingle, 1987; Mow & Nettles, 1990; Nora, 1993; Tijerina & Biemer, 
1987/1988; Wells, 1989; Wilson, 1983; Wright, 1991). The problems 
are compounded for Native American students because many live in 
poverty and in communities with high unemployment rates. Most 
students do not receive support from their parents nor do they have their 
own resources. Thus, they cannot meet the expected personal and 
familial contributions usually required by financial aid package 
guidelines. 

In addition, because many of the students are older, they often 
have familial obligations of support, and thus have limited resources to 
put toward their education. Also, lost wages to a family while a student is 
in school is another consideration (Guyette & Heth, 1984; Wright, 1991). 
Furthermore, the situation becomes more problematic when the primary 
sources of funding, tribal scholarships and the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(BIA), have not kept up with the increased costs of education as well as 
the increased demand. Moreover, Congress has been cutting federal 
financial aid funds for grants, further worsening the condition 
(Tijerina & Biemer, 1987/1988). 

Astin (1982) in a longitudinal study of students of color in higher 
education found that grants and scholarships are positively related to 
persistence of Native Americans. Mendoza & Samuels (1987) findings 



31 




37 



from an evaluation of intervention activities at a community college in 
Arizona suggest that first-time students of color who do not apply for 
financial aid are at greater risks for attrition. 

Another major grouping of factors that affect persistence is the 
institutional climate or environment. Factors in this grouping include 
encountering hostile environments; experiencing feelings of alienation 
and isolation; lack of role models; difficulties integrating academically 
and socially; administrative support; and inadequate student support 
services (Beaty & Chiste, 1986; Browne & Evans, 1987; Falk & Aitken, 
1984; Tijerina & Biemer, 1987/1988; Wright, 1991). 

Lin et al., (1988) in a study on the effect of school environment on 
academic performance and graduation expectation of Native American 
students found that the factors that most significantly had a bearing on 
persistence were feelings of hostility against the Native Americans on 
campus and the feelings of isolation and alienation. 

Lack of Native role models in both the institution and the 
community has been found to negatively affect the persistence of Native 
students (Guyette & Heth, 1984; McIntosh, 1987). Guyette & Heth 
(1984), in a nationwide assessment of higher education needs of Native 
Americans, surveyed institutions, communities, and students. Four items 
identified by all three groups as major causes of Native American 
student drop-outs include: lack of previous educational skills, lack of role 
models, financial difficulties and cultural pressures especially at 
doctorate granting institutions. 




32 



38 



Falk & Aitken (1984) in conjunction with the Minnesota Chippewa 
Tribe, attempted to identify factors that promote retention of Native 
American college students. Interviews were conducted with 125 students 
and 1 1 college personnel from several colleges and universities. One 
hundred percent of the educators reported that Native faculty and staff 
were very important or at least somewhat important to student success 
and retention. Edwards, Edwards, Daines & Reed (1984) reported that 
"modeling can be beneficial in recruiting American Indian women 
students and sustaining their academic achievement at institutions of 
higher education" (cited in Wright, 1991, p. 7). 

Native American students' values, learning styles, and 
communication styles are often different from the institution's and their 
non-Native peers. These differences make it difficult, if not overwhelming 
for Native students to successfully integrate academically and socially 
into the institution (Osborne & Cranney, 1985). "The whole Western 
philosophy of education is an institution ordered according to different 
rules than their own" (Beaty & Chiste, 1986, p. 7). 

Such differences include valuing the needs of the group over the 
individual, communicative styles that are less participatory and more 
reflective, and learning styles that are holistic versus linear (Beaty & 
Chiste, 1986; Benjamin, Chambers & Reiterman, 1993; Browne & 

Evans, 1987). Other findings indicate that Native Americans are found to 
go home more often for personal reasons such as tribal ceremonies and 
family responsibilities, which have a negative effect on attendance and 




33 



39 



academic outcomes, and they are less likely to persist at relatively large 
institutions (Cibek & Chambers, 1991). 

The factor that has an effect on persistence perhaps more than 
any other item related to institutional climate is cultural conflict. Mow & 
Nettles (1990) reported that "several studies show that they (Native 
college students) encounter difficulties in making cultural adjustments to 
predominantly white institutions. What these cultural difficulties are, 
however, and how they relate to college success and failure are unclear" 
(p.88). Students are forced to assimilate into the mainstream culture in 
order to fully integrate academically and socially. Academic and social 
integration have been found by researchers to directly affect persistence. 
Such acculturation requires often times that they reject or reduce ties with 
their Native culture. Researchers reported that "Native American 
students believe they are threatened with losing their "Indianness" 
through absorption into the "mainstream" college setting. As a result, 
many of these students leave school" (Huffman, Sill & Brokenleg, 1986, 
p.33). Scott (1986) concludes that "many Indian students would not 
consider dropping out of school a mark of failure" if dropping out meant 
retaining their cultural identity (p. 393). The students who are most 
successful are those who have struck a balance between maintaining 
their sense of cultural identity and operating in the mainstream culture of 
the institutions (Hornett, 1989). 

Final factors that have been found to positively affect persistence 
of Native American students is high administrative support, faculty 




34 



40 



interaction and mentoring, and the availability of quality student support 
programs. Student support programs include academic support services 
such as tutoring and special remedial courses and workshops, 
counseling support services and student clubs and student government 
(Astin, 1982; Falk & Aitken, 1984; Guyette & Heth, 1 984; Wright, 1985). 
Falk & Aitken (1984) found a significant relationship between years of 
retention in college and attendance at Native American student 
organization meetings. 

Finally, one other factor that appears to positively affect 
satisfaction and persistence of Native Americans is attendance at a 
tribally controlled college. Stien (1992), in a study of student success at 
tribal colleges, found that enrollment for first-generation students at these 
colleges positively affect persistence and retention. The author suggests 
that the reasons for such success are attributed to focus by the colleges 
on the individual student, and the ability of the students to maintain their 
cultural identity. 

In summary, the factors that appear to have an affect on Native 
American persistence are personal reasons, poor academic preparation 
and educational skills, language fluency, financial difficulties, institutional 
climate, lack of role models, cultural conflict, student support services and 
programs, and enrollment in tribal colleges. 




35 



41 



Demographics of Native Americans in Higher Education 



Only recently have data been collected and made available about 
Native Americans in higher education. Prior to the 1970's, the Census 
Bureau, reporting on enrollment figures for minority groups, included 
African-Americans and Hispanics only. Even now, information on Native 
Americans is fragmented and uncoordinated (Hodgkinson, 1990). 
Hodgkinson found that only four of the 1 ,487 tables from the Census 
Bureau's Statistical Abstracts of the United States J 990 reflect data on 
Native Americans. From the scarce data available on this population, 
this review will highlight how many are enrolled, where they are enrolled, 
and what they are enrolling in. 

In 1966, enrollment of Native-American students was 1 .6% of the 
Native population. With the creation of the twenty-four tribally controlled 
colleges, enrollment increased. Dramatic increases in enrollment growth 
in higher education leveled off in the 1980's, peaking in 1982 (Mingle, 
1987). At the graduate level, enrollment peaked in 1980 and first time 
enrollment in professional programs has seen a 22% reduction since 
1976 (Mingle, 1987). 

Enrollment patterns do not match the increase of the population in 
general nor the increase in the college age cohort (Fries, 1 987). The 
U.S. Bureau of the Census projects a 60% increase of the Native 
American population from 1 980 to the year 2000. This has those who 
are interested in the state of this population concerned. Wright (1991) 
comments on the predicament saying that “despite significant advances. 




36 



42 



American Indians and Alaska Natives remain among the least educated 
ethnic groups in the nation" (p. 5). 

Astin (1982) reported that 23% of whites, 12% of African- 
Americans, and 7% of Hispanics have a college degree. 

In comparison, only 6% of the Native population are degree holders. 
Recent reports indicate that "from 1981 to 1992 the number of American- 
Indian students earning degrees at all levels rose 46% to 10,883" (Gose, 
1995, p. A23). This is still only 6% of the Native population based on the 
population total cited by the Bureau of the Census, 1990. 

In the 1990 Census 1.9 million Americans claimed Native 
American status and over 5 million indicated Indian descent. According 
to figures from the U.S. National Center for Education Statistics, 
approximately 118,800 Native Americans in 1992 were enrolled in 
institutions of higher education (Statistical Abstracts of the United States, 
1994). Of those, 58% were female and 42% were male. 

Native American students are predominately enrolled in public 
institutions and the majority attend two-year colleges. In 1 992, 88% of 
the total Native population were enrolled in public institutions. Fifty-four 
percent attended community colleges, compared to thirty-nine percent of 
all college students (Statistical Abstracts of the United States, 1994). 

The high proportion of Native American students enrolled in two-year 
colleges, as alluded to previously, is a matter of concern because 
research has shown that students who attend these institutions have low 
rates of transfer to four-year institutions (Mow & Nettles, 1990). Other 




37 



43 



demographic data is noteworthy. Less than half are full-time equivalents. 
Increasingly, these students are attending part-time (Mingle, 1987). 

More than half of Native Americans live in just six states: 
Oklahoma, California, Arizona, New Mexico, Alaska and Washington 
State (Hodgkinson, 1990). Thus, it is not surprising that the three states 
with the highest Native American student enrollment are California with 
21,000 Native students, Oklahoma with 9,600 and Arizona with 8,200 
(Hodgkinson, 1992). Most institutions have very small Native American 
populations. 

The areas of study that Native Americans pursue are generally not 
very different from their white counterparts (Wright, 1991). In 1987, 
Native American students received 3,196 associate degrees, 3,971 
bachelor's degrees, 1,104 master's degrees, 104 doctoral degrees and 
304 first professional degrees (Hodgkinson, 1990). At the associate 
level, 25 percent of degrees awarded were in the field of Business and 
Management with another 25 percent in Liberal and General studies. 

The next most frequent field of study was in the Health Professions (10 
percent). For those students receiving bachelor's degrees, the most 
frequent were in Business and Management (20 percent). Education (1 1 
percent) and Social Sciences (12 percent). Master's degree recipients 
pursued generally the same fields as the undergraduates with nearly half 
receiving degrees in Business and Management (15 percent) and 
Education (34 percent). In addition, twelve percent were awarded 
master's degrees in public affairs. The two most common areas of study 




38 



44 



in doctoral programs were in education (49 percent) and psychology (16 
percent). Of the professional degrees awarded, half were in law. 

In summary, available demographic data show that Native 
American students have low enrollments compared to the overall 
population, attend predominately two year, public institutions, and attend 
less than full-time. In addition. Native American women attend more than 
men. Finally, these students pursue fields of study that are in the public 
service sector and consequently are generally not high-wage jobs. 

Background Data on Washington's Community Colleges 

Because this is a study on a particular subgroup of students in 
Washington's community colleges, the researcher thought it was 
appropriate to briefly outline general characteristics of students in these 
community colleges. Included in this section is a summary of student 
demographic characteristics, students by purpose of attending, and the 
composition of college personnel by gender and ethnicity (Source: 
Washington Community and Technical Colleges, Academic Year Report, 
1993-1994). 

During the 1993-1994 academic year, there were a total of 
438,281 students enrolled in the state's thirty-two community and 
technical colleges. Females (55%) outnumbered males (45%). In 
addition, 61% were enrolled part-time and 39% were enrolled full-time. 




39 



45 



Of the total, 78% were white, 8% were Asian and Pacific Islander, 

6% were Hispanic, 5% were African-American, and 2% were Native- 
American. Interestingly, it appears that Native American enrollment 
equals their proportion to the state's total population (2%). 

Students were found to enroll for many purposes. Twenty-six 
percent were enrolled with the goal of transferring. The median age of 
this group was 19. About 47% were enrolled for workforce (vocational) 
related purposes. The median age of this group was 27. Six percent 
were enrolled in basic skills classes such as ABE, ESL, GED or high 
school completion. This group was older than the transfer students but 
younger than the workforce students. Another 21% did not specify a goal 
when they enrolled. 

A lack of role models was found to be a predictor of success for 
students of color. An examination of the diversity of the college's 
personnel found that 15.9 % of the colleges support staff, 14% of 
administrative staff, 9.7% of full-time faculty, and 6.9% of part-time faculty 
were persons of color. Females were found to be in the majority of all of 
the above groups, except for full-time faculty (44.5%). It appears that the 
diversity of college personnel does not match that of the student 
population they serve. 




40 



48 



Summary 



Research on retention is a much studied phenomenon. A review 
of available literature on retention indicates that students of color 
experience institutions of higher education differently than their White 
counterparts. Furthermore, it appears that factors associated with 
persistence of students of color highlight experiences of encountering 
hostile environments and feelings of alienation and isolation. For Native 
American students who persist the least among students of color, cultural 
conflicts between maintaining their sense of cultural identity and 
assimilating into the mainstream culture are simply insurmountable. 




41 



47 



CHAPTER THREE 



METHODOLOGY 

Introduction 

This is a descriptive study designed to determine the persistence 
rates and those factors that affect persistence of Native Americans in 
community colleges in Washington State over a six year period (1988- 
1994). Specifically, what are the enrollment patterns of Native American 
students and are there differences along a multitude of variables 
between those who persist and those who do not. Fall to spring 
enrollment the first year was used as the measure of persistence. Non- 
persisters were measured by stop-out or drop-out activity. Such a 
definition of persisters was chosen because community colleges focus 
efforts to increase retention on a quarter by quarter basis, rather than 
from one academic year to the next (Bers & Smith, 1991). In addition, 
the first year of college is considered by researchers to be the most 
critical to future enrollment (Astin, 1982; Tinto, 1993). 

Chapter three will detail the methods used for implementation of 
the study. The population and sample, data collection, and analysis of 
the data will be discussed. 

Population and Sample 

The target population is all current and future Native American 
students in community colleges. The sampling frame consisted of all 
Native Americans enrolled in community colleges in Washington State 




42 



4S 



during Fall quarter, 1988. This starting date was chosen because the 
researcher wanted to be able to follow a cohort over a period of four 
years or more. Longitudinal data is considered more useful in 
understanding enrollment patterns (Astin, 1982; Mow & Nettles, 1990; 
Nora, 1993). 

Although including all Native American students would have 
contrived a larger sample (N=2,358), for the purpose of this study and 
based on a review of the literature, the researcher desired a sample that 
included only first-time college students. Thus, this study excluded 
students enrolled in Fall quarter, 1988, with credits from another college. 
This selection process created a final sample of 462 Native American 
students. 

Data Collection 

From a review of the literature, the researcher composed a list of 
desired variables for study to submit to the Washington State Board for 
Community and Technical Colleges (SBCTC) for data collection. The list 
was revised after a consultation with State Board staff to reflect the 
availability of existing data. The final list was submitted and the SBCTC 
accessed information previously gathered from students by the then 
state's twenty-eight community colleges to create the requested file. 

A file containing data on all students who started in Fall quarter, 
1988, was obtained from the SBCTC (N=27,056). Included on the file 
was data on a multitude of variables used in the study (see Appendix A). 

43 



ERIC 



49 



There were a total of fifty-five variables and corresponding data on the 
original file. After a review of the file by the researcher, and after 
consultation with knowledgeable others on the contents of the file, 
twenty-one of the original fifty-five variables were found not useful for the 
purposes of the study. A total of 34 variables were determined useful for 
examination. Values for the variables were pre-assigned by the staff who 
compiled the data. 

In order to determine how many Native American students were 
enrolled, a frequency was run on the ethnic variable using a statistical 
package called the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS). For 
students just starting college in Fall, 1988, 84.6% were white (N=21,759), 
1.8% Native American (N=462), 2.9% African-American (N=746), 2.3% 
Hispanic (N=591), and 4.9% Asian or Pacific Islander (N=1,368). 

Data Analysis 

The variables were analyzed for like traits and placed in 
appropriate categories for study. These categories are student 
demographics such as age and gender, enrollment activity, retention or 
persistence rates and student progress. The analysis of the data was 
conducted in three phases. Phase One utilized common statistical 
measures such as means, standard deviations and percentages. Phase 
Two consisted of cross tabulations of particular variables such as gender 
and transfer rates. Phase Three consisted of t-tests and chi-square 
analysis. 




44 



50 



CHAPTER FOUR 



RESULTS 

Introduction 

This study investigated the progress of first-time Native American 
students in Washington's community colleges over a six-year period, 
beginning in Fall, 1988. In particular, the persistence rates of Native 
Americans were addressed. Similarities and differences between 
persisters and non-persisters on a multitude of variables were examined. 
Categories of examination include demographics, enrollment patterns, 
retention and student progress. This chapter will describe the research 
results. 

Demographic Variables 

The demographic characteristics for persisters (182), non- 
persisters (280), and the total population (462) are presented in Table 1. 
Overall, 264 (57%) students were female and 198 (43%) students were 
male. Results indicate that females persist at higher rates than males. 
Sixty-three percent of persisters were female; forty-three percent of all 
females in the cohort. In contrast, only thirty-seven percent of persisters 
were male; thirty-four percent of all males in the cohort. 

The mean age of the total population was 25.87 and the standard 
deviation 1 0.84. Sixty-one percent (280) of the total were between the 
ages of sixteen and twenty-four years old. Non-traditional students (older 
than twenty-four) made up only thirty-nine percent (182) of the cohort with 




45 



51 



twenty-six percent (120) over thirty years of age. Findings show that 
persisters were considerably younger than non-persisters. The mean 
age of persisters was 23.7 with a standard deviation of 9.4. The mean 
age of non-persisters was 27.3 with a standard deviation of 11 .5. Over 
seventy-five percent (137 of 182) of persisters were twenty-four years old 
or younger. In contrast 51% (130 of 280) of non-persisters were thirty 
and above. 

Of the original cohort, twenty-five students (5.4%) reported having 
a disability. Eighteen of the original twenty-five students, or seventy-two 
percent of students with disabilities were non-persisters. Seven or 
twenty-eight percent of the total were persisters. 

Economic and academically disadvantaged students made up 
thirty-eight percent (173) of the total. Students who were economically 
disadvantaged were identified by their receipt of need based aid. 
Academically disadvantaged students were identified by their enrollment 
in developmental classes. The results indicate that persisters were more 
likely to receive need-based aid and less likely to be academically 
disadvantaged. Fifty-three percent of all students who received need 
based aid were persisters. Twenty percent of all persisters were 
economically disadvantaged. Less than twelve percent of non-persisters 
were determined to be economically disadvantaged. Fifty-three percent 
of all academically disadvantaged students were non-persisters. 




46 



52 



TABLE 1: DEMOGRAPHICS OF PERSISTERS. NON>PERSISTERS AND TOTAL 



Persisters Non-Persisters 



Total 



Variables M(SD) 


N 


% 


M(SD) 


N 


% 


M(SD) 


N 


% 


Gender 

Female 


114 


62.6 




150 


53.6 




264 


57.1 


Male 


68 


37.4 




130 


46.4 




198 


42.9 


Age 24 (9) 

16-24 


137 


75.3 


27(11) 


120 


42.9 


26(11) 


280 


60.6 


25-29 


18 


9.9 




18 


6.4 




62 


13.4 


30 & above 


27 


14.8 




142 


50.7 




120 


26 


Handicapped 


7 


3.8 




18 


6.4 




25 


5.4 


Disadvantaged 

Economic® 


37 


20.3 




33 


11.8 




70 


15.2 


Academic^ 


48 


26.4 




55 


19.6 




103 


22.3 


3 Based on students who received need based aid. 
Based on enrollment in developmental classes. 











Summary 

Overall, findings show that the majority of the Native American 
student cohort is female (57%), and aged sixteen to twenty-four years of 
age (61%). Thirty-nine percent were twenty-five or older. Twenty-five 
(5%) students reported to have a disability, 103 students (22%) were 
determined academically disadvantaged and 70 (15%) students 
received need based aid. 

Persisters were found to be traditional in age, predominately 
female, more likely to receive need based aid, and less likely to be 
enrolled in developmental courses. The results indicate that the majority 




47 



53 



of non-persisters are thirty or above and a little less than half were male. 
Non-persisters are more likely to be academically disadvantaged and 
less likely to receive need based aid. In addition, of the total students 
with disabilities, over seventy-two percent were non-persisters. 

Enrollment Patterns 

Enrollment activity was examined by students' full and part-time 
status their first quarter, initial intent (goal commitment) upon enrollment 
and their intent at exit. The completion rate of specific college-level 
classes before leaving college was also examined (see Table 2). 

Half of the total population was enrolled full-time (twelve or more 
credits) their first quarter of attendance. Significant differences were 
found between first-quarter enrollment status and persistence. More 
non-persisters (67%) than persisters (24%) were enrolled full-time. 
Chi-square analysis confirmed the statistical significance of enrollment 
status. A cross tabulation of persisters and non-persisters to part-time 
and full-time enrollment status indicated an association 
(X2 = 83.55; p<.01). It is concluded therefore that enrollment status and 
persistence are significantly related. 

Students' intents were categorized by academic, vocational, and 
developmental educational goals. Of the total population, 227 (49%) 
indicated a goal of achieving a vocational degree or certificate at the time 
of initial enrollment. Another 139 (30%) indicated their desire to earn an 
academic transfer or Associate's degree. 




48 



54 



The third category of students indicated that they were enrolled for 
developmental reasons (8%). About 38% of the persisters enrolled with 
the intent of earning an academic degree, compared to 25% of non- 
persisters. Similarly, more persisters (51%) than non-persisters (48%) 
were pursuing vocational goals. Finally, the study found that more non- 
persisters (10%) than persisters (4.3%) were at the community college for 
developmental reasons. 

An analysis of students' intents upon leaving is of interest. The 
research found that while persisters' educational goals increased the 
longer they were enrolled, non-persisters' educational goals decreased. 
For example, persisters at exit reported a two percent increase of those 
planning to transfer, compared to no change in non-persisters. Likewise, 
results indicated a one percent decrease for persisters with 
developmental intents compared to a one percent increase in the intents 
of non-persisters to enroll for developmental reasons. Further, there was 
about a four percent decrease among those reporting a vocational intent 
at time of exit for non-persisters. 

The completion rate for the first or second college-level English 
class or college-level math class before leaving college was explored. 
One third of the total population completed the first college-level English 
class, 18% completed the second college-level English class and 14% 
completed a college-level math class before leaving college. 

The results indicate an important distinction between non-persisters and 
persisters and completion rates of specific college-level classes. 




49 



55 



Although 33% of the total completed the first level English class, over 
56% of persisters and only 18% of non-persisters completed the course. 
Moreover, persisters completed the second college-level English at a 
rate of nearly 30% compared to the completion rate for non-persisters of 
10%. The pattern is the same for completion rates of college-level math. 
Forty-five percent of persisters and roughly six percent of non-persisters 
completed a college-level math class. 

TABLE 2: ENROLLMENT VARIABLES 





Persisters 


Non- 


■Persisters 


Total 


Variables 


N 


% 


N 


% 


N 


% 


Status 


Full-time (>12cr) 


43 


23.6 


188 


67.1 


231 


50 


Part-time (<12cr) 


139 


76.4 


92 


32.9 


231 


50 


Initial Intent 


Academic 


69 


37.9 


70 


25 


139 


30 


Vocational 


92 


51.5 


135 


48.2 


227 


49 


Developmental 


8 


4.3 


29 


10.4 


35 


8 


Exit Intent 


Academic 


72 


39.6 


70 


25 


142 


31 


Vocational 


94 


51.5 


124 


44.3 


218 


47 


Developmental 


6 


3.3 


32 


11.4 


39 


9 


CM Courses^ 


English 1 


91 


56.2 


47 


18.1 


138 


33 


English 2 


48 


29.6 


26 


10 


74 


18 


Math 


45 


27.8 


15 


5.8 


60 


14 



^Frequencies and percentages do not reflect the groups (N's). 

Two colleges (40 students) were excluded from analysis based on unavailable data. 



Summary 

The study revealed that persisters were more often enrolled part- 
time, had higher educational aspirations both initially and when they left 
the institution, and had higher completion rates for both first and second 
college-level English and college-level math classes than non-persisters. 

Persistence and Retention 

The study focused its retention research on the total quarters 
enrolled over a six-year period beginning in Fall, 1988. The study 
presented the percentages of the three groups and the overall population 
percentages of students persisting at the end of one quarter through the 
end of five years. 

Table three presents data on the total quarters enrolled for the 
three groups in the study. The study reveals that for all three groups the 
total number of quarters enrolled were low. The mean number of 
quarters enrolled for the entire Native American population was 3.66 with 
a standard deviation of 3.14 for the entire Native American population. 
The difference in means between persisters and non-persisters is 
important. The mean number of quarters for persisters and non- 
persisters were 5.99 and 2.14 respectively. 




51 



57 



TABLE 3: TOTAL QUARTERS ENROLLED OVEBLA SIX YEAR PERIOD 



Groups 


Mean 


Standard 

Deviation 


Range 


Persisters 


5.99 


3.16 


14 


Non-Persisters 


2.14 


2 


10 


Total 


3.66 


3.14 


16 



Another subset of categories was used to examine retention 
(see Table 4). These categories are early leavers, students who 
enrolled for only one quarter over the six year period; some progress, 
those who enrolled for two or three quarters over a six-year period; and 
substantial progress, those students enrolled in the college for four or 
more quarters over the six-year period. These categories were originally 
used for analysis over a two-year period by researchers at the 
Washington State Board for Community and Technical Colleges. The 
time frame of analysis using these categories was changed for the 
purpose of this study. 

Of the total population, 34% were found to be early leavers, 30% 
had made some progress, and 36% had made substantial progress, 
completing four or more quarters over the six-year period. Another 
difference identified was between persisters (69%) and non-persisters 
(15%) who had made substantial progress. Although non-persisters did 
not complete three consecutive quarters their first year of enrollment, 

15% did make substantial progress by enrolling four or more quarters 
over the course of six years. Thus, some of those students are 




52 



58 



considered stop-outs instead of drop-outs because they came back 
sometime during those six years. 



TABLE 4: GROUP PERCENTAGES BY QUARTERS ENROLLED 



Progress 


Persisters 


Non-persisters 


Total 


Early Leavers 


0 


56 


34 


Some Progress 


31 


29 


30 


Substantial Progress 


69 


15 


36 



Results shown in table 5 indicate the overall persistence or 
retention rates of the Native American cohort examined in this study. 

The findings exhibit that 33% left after only one quarter of enrollment and 
never returned during the six-years of the study. Thus, 66% remained 
after one quarter. Forty-two percent remained after one year, and 27% 
after two years. Another 17% remained after three years. Finally, one 
percent of the total persisted more than five years. 



TABLE 5: PERSISTENCE OF TOTAL COHORT OVER SIX YEAR PERIOD 



Years Enrolled % 



Persisted more than one quarter 66 

Persisted more than one year 42 

Persisted more than two years 27 

Persisted more than three years 1 7 

Persisted more than four years 9 

Persisted more than five years 1 




53 



59 



student Progress 



The researcher sought to investigate students' progress after 
enrollment because the literature found that what happens to a student 
after enrolling in the institution is critical to student persistence and 
success. Variables examined for this category included college-level 
grade point average their first quarter of enrollment, college-level credits 
earned and attempted, whether students earned Associate's degrees or 
certificates during the six year study period, and, finally, how many Native 
American students transferred to four year colleges or universities within 
four years (see Table 6). Although the transfer variable only includes 
transfer within Washington state, it was considered valid for study 
because of the tendency for Native Americans to stay close to home 
(Wright, 1991). 

The first measure of student progress is students' grade point 
average at the end of their first quarter. Statistical differences were found 
between the means of persisters and non-persisters on this variable. 

The mean grade point average of persisters was 2.13 (C+) and the mean 
grade point average of non-persisters was 1.32 (D+). A random sample 
of 30 students was taken from the persisters and non-persister groups. 

An independent t test was used to examine mean grade point average 
differences between the groups. The results indicate a significant 
difference (t=2.08; p<.05) between the grade point average of persisters 
and non-persisters . 




54 



60 



A second measure of progress is the completion rate of credits 
earned over credits attempted. For the total, the mean for credits earned 
was 23.68 and the mean for credits attempted was 24.68 (see Table 6). 
Thus, the credit completion rate was at 96% of credits attempted. 
Research results show that persisters had a higher credit completion 
rate. The rate of completion for persisters was 97% compared to 92% for 
non-persisters. 

Only 37 (8%) students of the entire cohort of 462 earned Associate 
degrees and only 7 (1.5%) earned certificates. Females (62%) 
outnumbered male (38%) degree earners. Similarly, 71% of the 
certificates were awarded to females. Among degree earners, 84% of 
those were under the age of 25. Of those who received certificates, 86% 
were 25 years of age or older. Some 92% of the Associate degrees 
given out went to persisters. Likewise, persisters were found to earn all 
(100%) of the certificates awarded during the six-year period of study. 
Chi-square analysis indicated no significant differences between 
persisters and non-persisters on degrees or certificates earned (X2=.61). 
However, given the numbers, the differences are still of importance. 

Finally, in considering student progress, the researcher examined 
the rate of transfer to baccalaureate institutions within four-years. Nine 
percent of the total cohort were found to have transferred to 
baccalaureate institutions in Washington State within four years, and 
57% of those who transferred were females. The raw rate of all students 
who entered community colleges in Washington State in Fall, 1988 with 




55 



61 



no prior college credits show a 13% transfer rate. In addition, the study 
found that 63% of those who earned transfer degrees transferred. 
Furthermore, more persisters (18%) than non-persisters (4%) transferred. 
Interestingly, a cross tabulation of the sample of the Native American 
cohort who reported an initial intent of academic transfer by actual 
transfer reveals that 17% (24) did transfer. 

TABLE 6: STUDENT PROGRESS 



Persisters Non-Persisters 



Total 



Variables 


M(SD) 


N 


% 


M(SD) 


N 


% 


M(SD) 


N 


% 


College GPA 


2.13 (1.14) 






1.32 (1.5) 






1.64 (1.42) 






College Credits 
Earned 


47.66 (40.65) 






8.1 (16.87) 






23.68 (24.66) 






Attempted 
Completion Rt. 


49.07 (39.78) 




97 


8.82 (16.94) 




92 


24.68 (34.39) 




96 


Completion 
Assoc. Degree 




34 


19 




3 


1.1 




37 


8 


Certificate 




7 


3.8 




0 


0 




7 


1.5 


Transfer 4YR 




32 


18 




10 


3.6 




42 


9.1 


other Findinqs 



















The study's findings indicate that roughly 34% left after one 
quarter, never to return to Washington community colleges within the six 
year study period. Upon discovering these results, the researcher sought 
to determine the characteristics of such an important group. A listing of 
such characteristics are presented in Appendix B. A preliminary 
overview reveals that this group is older than the overall population, with 

56 




62 



a mean of 29, and that 59% indicated a desire to earn an academic 
transfer degree or a vocational degree or certificate. Over fifty percent of 
all students who reported having a disability were among this group of 
early leavers. Further, it was found that the mean first quarter grade point 
average of this group was .899, compared to the mean for persisters of 
2.13. 

Summary 

The results of the study indicate that the persistence rates of 
Native Americans were low and differences exist between persisters and 
non-persisters among the variables studied. Factors that were found to 
be related to persistence were gender, age, enrollment status, 
educational aspirations and college grade point average during the first 
quarter of community college enrollment. It was concluded that 
enrollment status and persistence were significantly related. Results also 
found a significant difference between grade point averages of persisters 
and non-persisters. 




57 



63 



CHAPTER FIVE 
DISCUSSION 



Introduction 

This section will discuss the research findings, discuss the 
implications of such findings, examine the limitations of the study, and 
offer suggestions for further research. Several conclusions will be 
offered based on the results and on the review of literature. 

Discussion of Findings 

The purpose of this study was not only to provide a descriptive 
document on the characteristics and progress of Native American 
students in community colleges in Washington State (currently non- 
existent), but it also sought to determine the persistence rates of this 
group and to identify those factors which were related to persistence in 
higher education. 

The persistence rates of first-time Native students were found to be 
low. The results of the study indicated that the persistence rates were 
similar to previous studies on retention of Native Americans. Sixty-six 
percent persisted more than one quarter, and 42% persisted more than 
one year. Wells (1989) in a survey of roughly 80 colleges and 
universities with high concentrations of Native American students 
reported that over half left during the first year of college. 




58 



64 



Those factors found to be related to persistence were gender, age, 
educational aspirations, enrollment status, and the college grade point 
average. Also, students who persisted were found to have received 
need based aid more frequently and were less likely to be enrolled in 
developmental classes. All of these factors have been found to be 
related to persistence in past retention literature. 

First, the findings found that those who persist were female and 
under the age of twenty-five. Patton & Eddington (1973) reported like 
findings. In their study of a large sample of Native Americans at two 
southwestern universities, two of the factors found to be statistically 
related to persistence were age (younger) and sex (female). What 
explanations can be given for these results? One conclusion that can be 
drawn regarding the age factor is that the younger students have not 
been out of the educational environment as long as the older students 
have been and thus their skills have not had time to deteriorate. Or, the 
results could suggest that because the younger students have not been 
out of the system for as long, they may find the environment of the 
institution to be 'normal' and may be less sensitive to racial bias and 
hostility than older students who may be less accustomed to such an 
environment and less willing to tolerate such a climate. 

Another factor found significantly related to persistence in Patton & 
Eddington's study (1973) was the college grade point average. Again, 
this finding is similar to the findings in the present study where a 




59 



65 



significant association was found between the college grade point 
average and persistence. This finding seems rather logical since those 
who do well, stay. The questions to ask that are more important, 
however, is what factors were associated with such poor academic 
performance? Were there no academic support services available to 
assist those at risk? Did those who were found to not persist, have other 
familial obligations that precluded attendance in class, thus affecting their 
academic outcome? Were the teaching styles incongruent with the 
students' learning styles? 

The most surprising discoveries in the study was the statistically 
significant relationship (p<.01) found between persistence and 
enrollment status. Previous research had indicated that full-time 
enrollment status was positively associated with persistence among 
Native American students as well as students in general 
(Astin 1982; Tinto, 1987, 1993). However, this study's findings show the 
opposite results. Of those who persisted, over 75% were found to be 
enrolled part-time their first quarter of attendance. It can be speculated 
that those who were enrolled part-time were also working part-time and 
thus were forced to prioritize their responsibilities and manage their time 
more efficiently. It can also be speculated that the part-time students 
were more motivated to stay and persist. Another possible conclusion is 
that those who were enrolled only part-time were less pressured to 
assimilate into the mainstream culture. Moreover, they were better able 
to maintain their cultural identity. 




60 



66 



Students who persisted three consecutive quarters their first year 
of enrollment were found to receive need based aid more frequently than 
non-persisters. What conclusions can be drawn from such results? 
Perhaps one conclusion that can be drawn is that those who received 
need based aid had access to information on financial aid from 
supportive friends or family or community members who had some 
knowledge about the application process. Such conclusions imply that 
non-persisters probably had just as much of an economic need as that of 
persisters, but did not have access to the critical information needed to 
receive such aid. Mendoza & Samuels (1987) findings from an 
evaluation of intervention activities at a community college in Arizona 
suggest that first-time students of color who do not apply for financial aid 
are at greater risk for attrition. 

Implications 

Since the persistence and transfer rates for this underrepresented 
population are so low, there are many implications of this study for 
Student Affairs professionals and other educators interested in the higher 
education enterprise for this population. Some indications were 
provided that Native American students may have difficulty initially 
adjusting to college, which has been shown to be particularly crucial to 
persistence. An examination of current intervention activities such as 
academic advising and counseling toward Native American students in 
their first quarter of enrollment must be reviewed to determine 




61 



67 



appropriate actions for improvement. In addition, it appears that 
community education on available financial resources would be helpful 
to those students who might not otherwise receive such critical 
information. 

Furthermore, the findings suggest a need for strategies focusing 
on the retention of those Native American students older than twenty-five 
years of age, who appear to need the greatest assistance to persist. 

Limitations 

There are two potential limitations to this study. Using existing 
data as one's base could be a limitation, since the data collected may 
have been intended for an entirely different purpose than that of the 
study. Second, it must be remembered that the Native American people 
are not a homogenous group. Therefore, the study population and the 
study results are perhaps regionally influenced and may not necessarily 
be reflective of the rest of the United States' indigenous populations who 
may have different relationships with the dominant society. 

Suggestions for Further Research 

Because so little research has focused efforts on understanding 
the persistence of Native American students and those factors related to 
persistence in higher education, there is still much left to do and know. 
The following recommendations for further research represent the nature 
of information still to gather and understand. 




62 



68 



First, because of the cultural differences of the study population, it 
would be helpful to conduct a qualitative study with those who persisted 
and with those who did not, to gather more meaningful reasons for their 
decisions to stay or depart. 

Secondly, studies on institutional satisfaction should be conducted 
with this population to determine to what extent they experience hostility 
and feelings of alienation and isolation. 

Third, it would be beneficial to determine the current existence of 
student support programs in the state that focus efforts on retaining such 
an important population and the effectiveness of such programs from the 
Native students' point of view. 

Fourth, the study found that 72% of students with disabilities left 
after their first quarter of enrollment. Such findings would suggest that 
inadequate accomodations were in place to assist these students to 
persist. A follow up study consisting of personal interviews would help to 
explain such a phenomenon. 

Fifth, the study found that fewer than 10% of the total population, 
transferred to a four-year college or university. The questions to be 
explored are: What factors contribute to transfer for these students? 

How many eventually attain bachelor's degrees? 

Finally, community colleges, because of their mission to assist 
students who might not otherwise attend college, are in a unique position 
to contribute to improving the education of this group. Over 50% of 
Native American students are enrolled in these institutions. 




63 



69 



Research is needed that focuses on Native Americans and persistence in 
two-year colleges. Such research is not only important to the Native 
population but to the nation as a vyhole. 

Summary 

The most underrepresented of the targeted minority group in 
higher education today is the Native American. Researchers have 
indicated that the education of this population is dismal. The results of 
this study on 462 first-time Native college students in Washington State 
confirm such indications. Developing new techniques to increase the 
retention of Native American students is an important challenge to higher 
education. 

The outcomes of this study have given educators a better 
understanding of the persistence patterns of this forgotten population and 
possible causal factors that affect such persistence. It will be up to all of 
those who care about the education of this population to invest in efforts 
to assist these students to persist and maintain their cultural identity in 
the process. 




64 



70 



REFERENCES 



Aitken, N. D. (1982). College student performance, satisfaction and 
retention: Specification and estimation of a structural model. Journal 
of Higher Education . 53 . 32-50. 

Allen, W. R. (1988). Improving Black student access and achievement in 
higher education. Review of Higher Education . 11 . 403-416. 

Astin, A. W. (1972). College dropouts: A national profile . American 
Council on Education Research Reports. Washington, D. C: 

American Council on Education. 

Astin, A. W. (1975). Preventing students from dropping out . San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Astin, A. W. (1977). Four critical years: Effects of college on beliefs, 
attitudes, and knowledge . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Astin, A. W. (1982). Minorities in American higher education. 

San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Astin, H. S., & Burciaga, C. P. (1981). Chicanes in higher education: 
Progress and attainment . Los Angeles: Higher Education Research 
Institute. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 266 690). 

Attinasi, L. C., Jr. (1989). Getting in: Mexican Americans' perceptions of 
university attendance and the implications for freshman year 
persistence. Journal of Higher Education. 60. 247-277. 

Baumgart, M. & Johnstone, J. (1977). Attrition at an Australian 

university: A case study. Journal of Higher Education . 48, 553-570. 




65 



71 



Bean, J. P. (1980). Dropouts and turnover: The synthesis and test of a 
causal model of student attrition. Research in Higher Education . 12 . 
155-187. 

Bean, J. P. (1982). Student attrition, intentions, and confidence. 
Research in Higher Education . 17 . 291-230. 

Bean, J. P. (1983). The application of a model of turnover in work 
organizations to the student attrition process. The Review of Higher 
Education . 6, 129-148. 

Bean, J. P., & Vesper, N. (1990) Quantitative approaches to grounding 
theory in data: using LISREL to develop a local model and theory of 
student attrition . Annual meeting of the American Educational 
Research Association, Boston, Mass. 

Bean, J. P., & Vesper, N. (1992). Student dependency theory: An 
explanation of student retention in college . A paper presented at the 
annual meeting of the Association for the Study of Higher Education, 
Minneapolis. 

Beaty, J., & Chiste, K. B. (1986). University preparation for Native 
American students: Theory and application. Journal of American 
Indian Education . 7-13. 

Benjamin, D., Chambers, S., & Reiterman, G. (1993). A focus on 
American Indian college persistence. Journal of American Indian 
Education . 29-40. 




66 



72 



Bers, T. H. & Smith, K. E. (1991). Persistence of community college 
students: The influence of student intent and academic and social 
integration. Research in Higher Education . 32 . 539-556. 

Bureau of the Census, 1992. 

Browne, D. B., & Evans, W. H. (1987). Native Americans in higher 

education . (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 299 082). 

Cabrera, A. F., Nora, A., & Castaneda, M. (1992). The role of finances 
in the persistence process: A structural model. Research in Higher 
Education . 33 . 571-593. 

Cabrera, A. F., Nora, A., & Castaneda, M.B. (1993). College 

persistence: structural equations modeling test of an integrated 
model of student retention. Journal of Higher Education . 64 . 123-139. 

Christie, N. G. & Dinham, S. M. (1991). Institutional and external 
influences on social integration in the freshman year. Journal of 
Higher Education . 62, 412-436. 

Cibik, M. A., & Chambers, S. L. (1991). Similarities and differences 
among Native Americans, Hispanics, Blacks, and Anglos. NASPA 
Journal . 28 . 129-139. 

Cohen, A. M., Brawer, F. B., & Bensimon, E. M. (1985). T ransfer 
education in American community colleges . Los Angeles, CA: 

Center for the Study of Community Colleges. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 255 250). 

Cope, R., & Hannah, W. (1975). Revolving college doors . New York: 
John Wiley and Sons. 




67 



73 



Donovan, R. (1984). Path analysis of a theoretical model of persistence 
in higher education among low-income black youth. Research in 
Higher Education . 31 . 243-252. 

Eddens, D. D. (1982). A causal model of the attrition of specially 

admitted black students in higher education . Paper presented at the 
annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, 
New York. 

Edwards, D., Edwards, M., Daines, G., & Reed, S. (1984). Modeling: 
an important ingredient in higher education for American Indian 
women students. Journal of the National Association for 
Women Deans. Administrators, and Counselors . 48, 31-34. 

Falk, D. R., & Aitken, L. P. (1984). Promoting retention among American 
Indian college students. Journal of American Indian Education . 23 . 
24-31. 

Fleming, J. (1984). Blacks in college . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Fox, R. N. (1985). Application of a conceptual model of college 
withdrawal to disadvantaged students . Paper presented at the 
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago. 

Fries, J. E. (1987). The American Indian in higher education: 1975- 
1976 to 1984-1985 . Washington, D. C: U.S. Department of 
Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. 




68 



74 



Galicki, S. J., & McGewen, M. K. (1989). The relationship of residence to 
retention of Black and White undergraduate students at a 
predominantly White university. Journal of College Student 
Development . 30 . 389-394. 

Gilliland, H. (1986). The need for adapted curriculum. In J. Reyhner 
rFd.y Teaching the Indian child (Istedl. 1-11. Billings, MT: Eastern 
Montana College. 

Gose, B. (1995). Growth of minority enrollment slowed to 2.6% in 1993. 
The Chronicle of Higher Education . A34. 

Guyette, S., & Heth, C. (1984). Higher education for American Indians 
in the 1980's. Integrateducation . 22 . 21-30. 

Hodgkinson, H. L. (1990). The demographics of American Indians: One 
percent of the people: fifty percent of the diversity . Washington, D.C: 
Institute for Educational Leadership, Inc. 

Hodgkinson, H. L. (1992). The current condition of Native Americans . 
Washington, D. C.: Office of Educational Research and Improvement. 

Hornett, D. (1989). The role of faculty in cultural awareness and 
retention of American Indian college students. Journal of American 
Indian Education . 12-18. 

Huffman, T. E., Sill, M. L, & Brokenleg, M. (1986). College 
achievement among Sioux and White South Dakota students. 

Journal of American Indian Education . 32-38. 




69 



75 



Kennan, W. R., Cummings, H. W., & Lujan, P. D. (1980). A descriptive 
study of intercultural communication between Native American and 
Anglo-American college students . (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 197 898). 

Kleinfeld, J. S., & Kohout, K. L. (1974). Increasing the college success 
of Alaska Natives. Indian Education . 27-31 . 

Lee, V. E., & Frank, K. A. (1990). Students' characteristics that 

facilitate the transfer from two-year to four-year colleges. Sociology of 
Education . 63 . 178-193. 

Lin, R., LaCounte, D., & Eder, J. (1988). A study of American Indian 
students in a predominantly White college. Journal of American 
Indian Education . 29, 1 9-28. 

Loo, C. M., & Rolison, G. (1986). Alienation of ethnic minority students 
at a predominantly white university. Journal of Higher Education . 57 . 
58-77. 

McCool, A. C. (1984). Factors influencing Hispanic student retention 
within the community college. Community/Junior College Quarterly. 

8, 19-37. 

McIntosh, B. J. (1987). Special needs of American Indian college 
students . Mesa, AZ: Mesa Community College, Office of Research 
and Development. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 

ED 288 693). 




70 



76 



McIntosh, B. J. (1987). Native American academic, financial, social. 
psychological and demographic implications for education: A 
challenge to community college administrators, faculty and support 
service personnel . Mesa, AZ: Mesa Community College, Office of 
Research and Development. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 284 597). 

McNamara, P. P. (1984). American Indians in U.S. higher education . 
Los Angeles, CA; Higher Education Research Institute. 

Mingle, J. R. (1981). The opening of White colleges and universities to 
Black students. In G. E. Thomas (ed.). Black Students in Higher 
Education: Conditions and Experiences in the 1970's . Westport, CT : 
Greenwood Press. 

Mingle, J. R. (1987). Focus on minorities: Trends in higher 

education participation, and success . (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 287 404). 

Mow, S. L., & Nettles, M. T. (1990). Minority student access to, and 
persistence and performance in college: A review of the trends and 
research literature. In J. Smart (ed.). Higher Education: Handbook of 
Theory and Research . 6, 35-105. New York: Agathon Press. 

Moyer, M. (1973). Higher education for all? Commentary . 55 . 2. 

Munro, B. (1981). Dropouts from higher education: Path analysis of a 
national sample. American Education Research Journal. 81 . 

133-141. 




71 



77 



Myron, D. F. (1983). Review of the literature: Black student retention 
in higher education institutions . (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 228 912). 

Nettles, M. (1988). Toward black undergraduate student equality in 
American higher education . New York: Greenwood Press. 

Nettles, T. N., Thoeny, M. T., & Gosman, E. J. (1986). Comparative and 
predictive analysis of Black and White students' college achievement 
and experiences. Journal of Higher Education . 57 . 289-319. 

Neumann, Y. & Neumann, E. F. (1989). Predicting juniors' and seniors' 
persistence and attrition: A quality of learning experience approach. 
The Journal of Experimental Education . 57 . 129-140. 

Nora, A. (1987). Determinants of retention among Chicano college 
students: a structural model. Research in Higher Education . 26 . 
31-59. 

Nora, A. (1993). Two-year colleges and minority students; educational 
aspirations: Help or hindrance? In J. Smart (ed.) Higher Education: 
Handbook of Theory and Research . 9, 231-245. New York: 

Agathon Press. 

Nora, A. & Rendon, L. (1989). A synthesis and application of research 
on Hispanic students in community colleges. Community College 
Review . 17, 1 7-24. 

Nora, A. & Rendon, L. (1990). Determinants of predisposition to transfer 
among community college students. Research in Higher Education . 
31, 235-255. 




72 



73 



Nora, A. & Rendon, L. (1990). Differences in mathematics and science 
preparation and participation among community college minority and 
non-minority students. Community College Review . 18 . 29-40. 

Osborne, V. C., & Cranney, G. (1985). Elements of success in a 
university program for Indian students . (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 339 324). 

Pantages, T. J., & Creedon, C. F. (1978). Studies of college attrition: 
1950-1975. Review of Educational Research . 48 . 49-101. 

Pascarella, E. T. (1980). Student-faculty informal contact and college 
outcomes. Review of Educational Research . 50 . 545-595. 

Pascarella, E. T. (1985). Racial differences in the factors influencing 
bachelor's degree completion: A nine-year follow up. Research in 
Higher Education . 23 . 351-373. 

Pascarella, E. T. & Chapman, D. (1983). A multi-institutional, path 
analytic validation of Tinto's model of college withdrawal. American 
Educational Research Journal . 20, 87-102. 

Pascarella, E. T., & Terenzini, P. T. (1979). Interaction effects in Spady's 
and Tinto's conceptual model of college dropout. Sociology of 
Education . 52 . 197-210. 

Pascarella, E. T., & Terenzini, P. T. (1980). Predicting freshman 

persistence and voluntary dropout decisions from a theoretical model. 
Journal of Higher Education . 51 . 60-75. 




73 



79 



Pascarella, E. T., & Terenzini, P. T. (1983). Predicting voluntary 
freshman year persistence/withdrawal behavior in a residential 
university: A path analytic validation of Tinto's model. Journal of 
Educational Psychology . 75 . 215-226. 

Pascarella, E. T. & Terenzini, P. T. (1992). How college affects students: 
Findings and insights from twenty years of research . San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 

Patton, W. S. (1972). An investigation of selected factors related to 
persistence of American-Indian students at two New Mexico 
universities . Unpublished doctoral dissertation. New Mexico State 
University. 

Patton, W., & Eddington, E. D. (1973). Factors related to the persistence 
of Indian students at college level. Indian Education . 19-23. 

Pavel, M. (1991). The application of Tinto's model to a Native 

American student population . Paper presented at the annual meeting 
of the Association for the Study of Higher Education. 

Pavel, D. M., & Padilla, R. V. (1993). American Indian and Alaska Native 
postsecondary departure: An example of assessing a mainstream 
model using national longitudinal data. Journal of American Indian 
Education. 32, 1-23. 

Ramist, L (1981). College student attrition and retention . College Board 
Report, No. 81-1, New York: College Entrance Examination Board. 




74 



80 



Rhodes, R. W. (1990). Measurements of Navajo and Hopi brain 
dominance and learning styles. Journal of American Indian 
Education . 29-40. 

Richardson, R. C., & Bender, L. W. (1987). Fostering minority access 
and achievement in higher education: The role of urban community 
colleges and universities . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Rindone, P. (1988). Achievement motivation and academic 

achievement of American Indian students. Journal of American 
Indian Education . 28, 1-8. 

Scott, W. J. (1986). Attachment of Indian culture and the "difficult 
situation": A study of American Indian college students. 

Youth & Society . 17 . 381-395. 

Sedlacek, W. & Webster, D. W. (1978). Admission and retention of 
minority students in large universities. Journal of College Student 
Personnel . 19 . 242-246. 

Smith, D. H. (1980). Admission and retention problems of Black 
students at seven predominantly White universities . Washington, 

D.C: National Advisory Committee on Black Higher Education and 
Black Colleges and Universities. 

Smith, D. H. (1981). Social and academic environments on White 
campuses. Journal of Negro Education . 50 . 299-306. 

Spady, W. (1970). Dropouts from higher education: An interdisciplinary 
review and synthesis. Interchange . 1, 64-85. 




75 



81 



Spady, W. (1971). Dropouts from higher education: Toward an 
empirical model. Interchange . 2, 38-62. 

Stage, F. K. (1990). Research on college students: Commonality, 
difference and direction. Review of Higher Education . 13 . 249-258. 

Stampen, J. O., & Cabrera, A. F. (1986). Exploring the effects of student 
aid on attrition. The Journal of Student Financial Aid . 16 . 28-40. 

Statistical Abstracts of the United States, 1990. 

Statistical Abstracts of the United States, 1994. 

Stein, W.J. (1992). Tribal colleges: A success story. New Directions for 
Community Colleges . 80 . 89-96. 

Steward, R. J., Germain, S., & Jackson, J. D. (1992). Alienation and 
interaction style: A study of successful Anglo, Asian, and Hispanic 
university students. Journal of College Student Development . 33 . 
149-156. 

Summerskill, J. (1962). Dropouts from college. In N. Sanford fEd.). The 
American College: A psychological and social interpretation of higher 
learning . New York: John Wiley and Sons. 

Terenzini, P. T., & Pascarella, E. T. (1977). Voluntary freshman attrition 
and patterns of social and academic integration in a university: A test 
of a conceptual model. Research in Higher Education . 6, 25-43. 

Terenzini, P. T., & Pascarella, E. T. (1978). The relation of students' 
precollege characteristics and freshman year experience to voluntary 
attrition. Research in Higher Education . 9, 347-366. 




76 



82 



Terenzini, P. T., & Pascarella, E. T. (1980). Toward the validation of 
Tinto's model of college student attrition: A review of recent studies. 
Research in Higher Education . 12 . 271-282. 

Terenzini, P. T., Pascarella, E. T, Theophilides, C., & Lorang, W. (1983). 
A replication of a path analytic validation of Tinto's theory of college 
student attrition . A paper presented at the annual meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association, Montreal. 

Tijerina, K. H., & Biemer, P. P. (1987/1988). The dance of Indian higher 
education: One step forward, two steps back. Educational Record . 
68, 87-91 . 

Tierney, W. (1992). An anthropological analysis of student participation 
in college. Journal of Higher Education. 63 . 603-618. 

Tinto, V. (1975). Dropout from higher education: A theoretical synthesis 
of recent research. Review of Educational Research . 45 . 89-125. 

Tinto, V. (1987). Leaving college: Rethinking the causes and cures of 
student attrition . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Tinto, V. (1993). Leaving college: Rethinking the causes and cures of 
student attrition (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Tracey, T., & Sedlacek. W. (1987). A comparison of white and black 
student academic success using noncognitive variables. A Lisrel 
analysis. Research in Higher Education . 27 . 333-348. 

Washington Community and Technical Colleges, Academic Year Report, 
1993-1994. 




77 



83 



Wells, R. N. (1989). A survey of American Indian students . (ERIC 



Document Reproduction Service No. ED 31 1 778). 

Whittaker, D. (1986). Socio-psycholoaical and background variables of 
Native Indian university students and persistence in a teacher 
preparation program . A paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Education Research Association, San Francisco. 

Wilson, J. (1983). Wisconsin Indian opinions of factors which 
contribute to the completion of degrees . Report from the 
Postdoctoral Fellowship Program at the University of Wisconsin's, 
Wisconsin Center for Education Research. 

Wilson, R., & Justiz, M. J. (1987/1988). Minorities in higher education: 
Confronting a time bomb. Educational Record . 9-14. 

Wright, B. (1985). Programming success: Special student services and 
the American Indian college student. Journal of the American Indian 
Education . 24 . 1 -7. 

Wright, B. (1991). American Indian and Alaska Native higher education: 
Toward a new century of academic achievement and cultural integrity . 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 343 771). 




78 



84 



APPENDIX A 



VARIABLES USED IN STUDY 




79 



85 



VARIABLES USED IN THE STUDY (N=462) 



DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES 


M 


SD 


N 


Age 


25.866 


10.842 




Gender 








Female 






264 


Male 






198 


Handicapped 






25 


Disadvantaged 








Economic 






70 


Academic 






103 



ENROLLMENT/ PERSISTENCE/ RETENTION VARIABLES 



Educational Aspirations 
Student Intent First Quarter 

1 . General Studies, Degree or Certificate 3 8 

2. Academic Transfer 1 39 

3. Adult Basic Education 1 5 

4. High School Diploma, GED Certificate 20 

5. Developmental 2 

6. Vocational Preparatory 93 

7. Vocational Preparatory, Applicant 1 6 

8. Vocational Apprentice 1 0 

9. Vocational Supplemental 50 

10. Vocational Home and Family Life 20 

11. General Studies- Non-degree or certificate 33 

12. Undecided, None of the Above, Not reported 2 6 

Student Intent Last Quarter 

1. General Studies, Degree or Certificate 28 

2. Academic Transfer 142 

3. Adult Basic Education 1 1 

4. High School Diploma, GED Certificate 23 

5. Developmental 5 

6. Vocational Preparatory 98 

7. Vocational Preparatory, Applicant 1 3 

8. Vocational Apprentice 9 

9. Vocational Supplemental 50 

10. Vocational Home and Family Life 20 

11. General Studies- Non-degree or certificate 35 

12. Undecided, None of the Above, Not reported 1 6 



80 




% 



57.1 

42.9 

5.4 



15.2 

22.3 



8.2 

30.1 

3.2 

4.3 
0.4 

20.1 

3.5 
2.2 

10.8 

4.3 

7.1 

5.6 

6.1 

30.7 

2.4 
5 

1 .1 
21.2 
2.8 
1.9 

10.8 

4.3 

7.6 

3.4 



86 



VARIABLES USED IN THE STUDY (N=462) 



Enrollment Status 



Full-time 


231 


50 


Part-time 


231 


50 


College-Level Courses 


English 1 


138 


33 


English 2 


74 


18 


Math 


60 


1 4 


Last Quarter/Year of Attendance 


Fall, 1988 


156 


33.8 


Winter, 1989 


39 


8.4 


Spring, 1989 


72 


15.6 


Summer, 1989 


7 


1 .5 


Fall, 1989 


1 7 


3.7 


Winter, 1990 


1 7 


3.7 


Spring, 1990 


29 


6.3 


Summer, 1990 


4 


0.9 


Fall, 1990 


1 1 


2.4 


Winter, 1991 


1 2 


2.6 


Spring, 1991 


1 7 


3.7 


Summer, 1991 


1 2 


2.6 


Fall, 1991 


1 1 


2.4 


Winter, 1992 


1 0 


2.2 


Spring, 1992 


8 


1.7 


Summer, 1992 


5 


1.1 


Fall, 1992 


4 


0.9 


Winter, 1993 


8 


1 .7 


Spring, 1993 


18 


3.9 


Summer, 1993 


5 


1.1 


Fall, 1993 


0 


0 


Winter, 1994 


0 


0 


Spring, 1994 


0 


0 


Enrollment Patterns 
1988-1989 


Enrolled Fall only 


203 


43.9 


Enrolled Fall and Spring 


7 


1.5 


Enrolled Fall and Winter 


70 


15.2 


Enrolled Fall, Winter, Spring 


182 


39.4 




81 



87 



VARIABLES USED IN THE STUDY (N=462) 



Total Quarters Enrolled in 1988*1989 
Zero 



One 


203 


43.9 


Two 


77 


16.7 


Three 


182 


. 39.4 


Four 






1989-1990 






No enrollment 


310 


67.1 


Enrolled Fall only 


25 


5.4 


Enrolled Fall and Spring 


5 


1.1 


Enrolled Fall and Winter 


1 6 


3.5 


Enrolled Fall, Winter, Spring 


56 


12.1 


Enrolled Winter only 


6 


1 .3 


Enrolled Winter and Spring 


3 


0.6 


Enrolled Spring only 


7 


1 .5 


Enrolled Summer only 


1 1 


2.4 


Enrolled Summer and Spring 


1 


0.2 


Enrolled Summer and Fall 


3 


0.6 


Enrolled Summer, Fall, Winter 


3 


0.6 


Enrolled Summer, Fall, Winter, Spring 


1 6 


3.5 



Total Quarters Enrolled in 1989-1990 

(Not Available) 

1990-1991 



No enrollment 


369 


79.9 


Enrolled Fall only 


1 8 


3.9 


Enrolled Fall and Spring 


2 


0.4 


Enrolled Fall and Winter 


1 2 


2.6 


Enrolled Fall, Winter, Spring 


29 


6.3 


Enrolled Winter only 


4 


0.9 


Enrolled Winter and Spring 


5 


1.1 


Enrolled Spring only 


7 


1 .5 


Enrolled Summer only 


6 


1.3 


Enrolled Summer and Fall 


2 


0.4 


Enrolled Summer, Fall, Winter 


1 


0.2 


Enrolled Summer, Fall, Winter, Spring 


7 


1 .5 


Total Quarters Enrolled 1990-1991 


Zero 


369 


79.9 


One 


35 


7.6 


Two 


21 


4.5 


Three 


30 


6.5 


Four 


7 


1 .5 



82 



O 




88 



VARIABLES USED IN THE STUDY (N=462) 



1991-1992 



No enrollment 


397 


85.9 


Enrolled Fall only 


12 


2.6 


Enrolled Fall and Spring 


2 


0.4 


Enrolled Fall and Winter 


7 


1.5 


Enrolled Fall, Winter, Spring 


1 1 


2.4 


Enrolled Winter only 


6 


1.3 


Enrolled Winter and Spring 


5 


1 .1 


Enrolled Spring only 


4 


0.9 


Enrolled Summer only 


1 1 


2.4 


Enrolled Summer and Spring 


2 


0.4 


Enrolled Summer and Fall 


2 


0.4 


Enrolled Summer, Winter, Spring 


2 


0.4 


Enrolled Summer, Fall, Winter, Spring 


1 


0.2 


Total Quarters Enrolled in 1991-1992 


Zero 


397 


85.9 


One 


35 


7.6 


Two 


16 


3.5 


Three 


1 3 


2.8 


Four 


1 


0.2 


1992-1993 


No enrollment 


425 


92 


Enrolled Fall only 


3 


0.6 


Enrolled Fall and Spring 


1 


0.2 


Enrolled Fall and Winter 


3 


0.6 


Enrolled Fall, Winter, Spring 


10 


2.2 


Enrolled Winter only 


5 


1.1 


Enrolled Winter and Spring 


4 


0.9 


Enrolled Spring only 


2 


0.4 


Enrolled Summer only 


5 


1.1 


Enrolled Summer, Fall, Winter 


1 


0.2 


Enrolled Summer, Fall, Winter, Spring 


3 


0.6 


Total Quarters Enrolled in 1992-1993 






Zero 


425 


92 


One 


1 5 


3.2 


Two 


8 


1 .7 


Three 


1 1 


2.4 


Four 


3 


0.6 



83 

O 

ERIC 



89 



VARIABLES USED IN THE STUDY (N=462) 



1993-1994 


No enrollment 


430 


93.5 


Enrolled Fall only 


3 


0.6 


Enrolled Fall and Winter 


4 


0.9 


Enrolled Fall, Winter, Spring 


8 


1 .7 


Enrolled Winter only 


3 


0.6 


Enrolled Winter and Spring 


3 


0.6 


Enrolled Spring only 


6 


1.3 


Enrolled Summer only 


3 


0.6 


Enrolled Summer, Fall, Spring 


1 


0.2 


Enroiled Summer, Fall, Winter, Spring 


1 


0.2 


Total Quarters Enrolled in 1993-1994 


Zero 


430 


93.1 


One 


1 5 


3.2 


Two 


7 


1.5 


Three 


9 


1.9 


Four 


1 


0.2 


Total Quarters Enrolled Overall 


One 


157 


34 


Two 


64 


13.9 


Three 


74 


1 6 


Four 


34 


7.4 


Five 


23 


5 


Six 


32 


6.9 


Seven 


1 8 


3.9 


Eight 


12 


2.6 


Nine 


1 3 


2.8 


Ten 


10 


2.2 


Eleven 


1 3 


2.8 


Twelve 


7 


1.5 


Thirteen 


1 


0.2 


Fourteen 


2 


0.4 


Fifteen 


0 


0 


Sixteen 


1 


0.2 


Seventeen 


1 


0.2 




84 



90 



VARIABLES USED IN THE STUDY (N=462) 



STUDENT PRCXSRESS 



M SO 



N % 



College GPA 1-64 1 .42 

Credits Earned 



College Level 



Earned 


23.69 


34.59 




Attempted 


24.68 


34.39 




Cumulative 


Earned 


29.34 


37.67 




Attempted 


29.83 


N/A 




Exit Code 


Associate Degree 




37 


8 


Certificate 




7 


1.5 


No degree or certificate 




418 


90.5 


College Level 18 (Students who completed a min. of 18 credits of college level) 




Yes 




154 


33.3 


No 




308 


66.7 


College Level 40 (Same as above but 40 credits) 
Yes 


97 


21 


No 




365 


79 


Transfer to a Community College 




391 


84.6 


Transfer to a Four Year College 




42 


9.1 


Quarter/Year Transferred to Four Year 


Fall. 1990 




1 3 


2.8 


Winter. 1991 




1 


0.2 


Spring. 1991 




8 


1.7 


Fall. 1992 




1 1 


2.4 


Winter. 1992 




2 


0.4 


Spring. 1992 




2 


0.4 


Fall. 1993 




1 


0.2 


Winter. 1993 




2 


0.4 




85 



91 



APPENDIX B 



er|c 



86 



9 



VARIABLES M 


SD 


N 


% 


Age 29.04 


12.61 






Gender 








Female 




80 




Male 




77 




Disadvantaged 








Economic 




1 3 


18.3 


Academic 




29 


18.5 


Handicapped 




13 


8.3 


Educational Aspirations 








1 . General Studies (Degree or Certificate) 




28 


6.1 


2. Academic Transfer 




142 


30.7 


3. Adult Basic Education 




1 1 


2.4 


4. High School Diploma, GED Certificate 




23 


5 


5. Developmental 




5 


1.1 


6. Vocational Preparatory 




98 


21.2 


7. Vocational Preparatory, Applicant 




1 3 


2.8 


8. Vocational Apprentice 




9 


1.9 


9. Vocational Supplemental 




50 


10.8 


10. Vocational Home and Family Life 




20 


4.3 


1 1 . General Studies, Non-degree or certificate 




35 


7.6 


12. Undecided, None of the Above, Not Reported 




1 6 


3.4 


Credits Earned 








College Level 

Earned 2 . 5 


4.15 






Attempted 2.8 


4.9 






Cumulative 

Earned 3.51 


4.92 






Attempted 3.99 


5.82 






Transfer to a Community College 




22 


9.6 


Transfer to a Four Year 




1 


0.6 


Enrollment Status 








Full-time 




43 


27.4 


Part-time 




114 


72.6 



87 



O 




93 



a a 




US. Department of Educa^on 

Office of EducaUonal Research and Improvement (OERl) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



9 




(Sc “^^0 04 ^ 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title 

A 


>: x:;:^ (2.o n^^jvU^tx 1 -hV Ce ! -e<S- 

i" ^ ^ d i i/vcdiy cS~j~r^cLi/j o f /^rhJUl 


Auttior(s):. IvliLr^i L-if 


Corporate Source: ^ 


Publication Date: 

'-J'iycne- 199^ 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE; 



In onter to disseminate as wiMy as poaatete timely and s^ruficant mataiials of impost to the eduoaUena} oommuntty, documents announced In the 
mtsithiy abstra^ Jovimaf of (he ERIC system, ^sources in &^fcaikin (RIE). are usually made avaOabls to ussm in microfiche, repioduoed peper copy, 
end eteetronlc media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reprodu^ion Sendos (EDR3). Credit is given to the source of each document, and. If 
reprodMciton release is granted, one of the fbflowlng notices is affixed to the document 



if permisaton is granted to reprodiraa and disseminate the (dentffied document, please CHECK QH^ of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of (he page. 



TY)s s«i^ S0c|(fir Alwwn bMOw wM to 
to an LfiwiM doaimano 



Tto wiTiple aVctiw ehtoffi tolmr will be 
offbced b ail Iffival 2A dowmenta 



Tto aampia BSGKar tfWMn Mioiiir wtti bo 
alSxto to as 20 SOOflOMO 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN ORANTEDBY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE. AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLUeCnON SUBSCRIBERS ONLY. 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 

disseminate this material in 

MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 












TO THE EDVCAVONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




J 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 



Levell 



Level 2A 



Level 2S 



K1 



□ 




Ctooic bara (br Lavol 1 (olaaaa. pemvtttnB tvpradocSan 
ard araaandnaSto b fflioofkto w otMT ORIC annhnl 
madle {oa** ebctonh;) aodpapw copy. 



Ctodk hem Ibf Laval 2A raieaae. peffnMffQ rvpftoiicflon 
and j te s a m iM Bon in mlGroSdta and tn atacbtoic rnodia 
far ERIC afCMvat ooKeoOoa aubaobaie only 



Cnedt nera tor Leva! 28 ratam. pannittine 
raprodueOon end dlsaendnadon (n mloeSctta oMy 



Ooeunmnlawni to praoeaaed 88 Indoalad provided fopmditfitonquaB^ pannBB. 

If pemdtiion to rapradiiea (a grantad. iRA no box (8 diedifd, dooionentt wB to praeasaed St Level 1 . 



o 



sign 

hera,-* 

pl^ae 



ih&i^y grant to the Eduoatk^ f^sources tnfbmation Center (ERIC) non^xciu^ve pd/m/ssto/) to repwfuc® and dtsseminats this document 
as imscnM above. Rppmfticborr bom me BRIC mimMte or etecboftft; medKs by parsons ofhar than ERIC emptayaas and its srstam 
oanbaetem/egiis^permtos^ &c8pSbn«madbternorH3^n9prD^ by&nanaaandod^arsBndca^fancd^ 

to satisfy intormetiM needs efadutmtofs in responsa to dxscrM fnqublas. 



SIgrttM . 1 




PrtneadNaroerPQshtonmuvc .y a i /> 

yjAn M 


r^(Lr<hi-. l/V /d 9^9U>^ ( 






E4toiDA^pe«»: 

jf)r\rWt^ru ^ €^S c/nvSnt 





r -s&b-oi^l 



(OvOf) 





