DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 445 669 


IR 020 269 


AUTHOR 


McDermott, Laurie; Murray, Julie 


TITLE 


A Study on the Effective Use and Integration of Technology 
into the Primary Curriculum. 


PUB DATE 


2000-05-00 


NOTE 


77p . ; Master's Action Research Project, Saint Xavier 
University and Skylight Professional Development Field-Based 
Masters Program. 


PUB TYPE 


Dissertations /Theses (040) 


EDRS PRICE 


MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 


DESCRIPTORS 


♦Computer Assisted Instruction; Computer Attitudes; 
♦Computer Uses in Education; Curriculum Development; 
♦Educational Technology; Grade 1; Grade 2; Instructional 
Effectiveness; Primary Education; School Surveys; Teacher 
Attitudes 


IDENTIFIERS 

ABSTRACT 


Access to Technology; *Technology Integration 
This report details a plan to effectively integrate 



technology into the classroom. The targeted population consisted of one first 
grade class and one multi-age first and second grade class housed in a K-2 
building. The school is located in a middle class suburban city in the 
Midwest. Although technology was readily available in the school, its 
non-effective use was documented by teacher surveys, student 
self -assessments , technology sign-out sheets and a classroom computer use 
checklist. Analysis of the probable cause indicated that classroom computers 
were not used regularly, nor were teachers comfortable integrating technology 
into the curriculum. Due to the lack of ongoing teacher training, teachers 
felt ill prepared to integrate technology into the curriculum. This situation 
had an adverse effect on students who therefore were not receiving 
opportunities to use the available technology to its fullest potential. A 
review of the literature combined with a year long technology integration 
class suggested that ongoing teacher training is essential to changing 
philosophies and increasing the comfort level of teachers. Regular 
in-classroom access to technology is critical to increasing its effectiveness 
with students. Post intervention data indicated that the students' ability to 
use technology as an effective tool for learning was greatly increased. 
Although targeted students scored higher on the self assessment rubric than 
non- targeted students, more research is necessary to determine whether the 
improved technology skills are a result of the intervention. Appendices 
include the teacher survey, student self evaluation survey, engaged learning 
framework for Native American unit, and student work samples. Contains 28 
references . (Author/MES) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



IR020269 



A STUDY ON THE EFFECTIVE USE AND INTEGRATION 
OF TECHNOLOGY INTO THE PRIMARY CURRICULUM 



Laurie McDermott 
Julie Murray 



o 

ERIC 



An Action Research Project Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of the 
School of Education in Partial Fulfillment of the 
Requirements for the Degree of Master of Arts in Teaching and Leadership 



Saint Xavier University & SkyLight Professional Development 
Field Based Masters Program 



Chicago, Illinois 
May, 2000 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



L. McDerm ott 




□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




BEST COPY AMICABLE 



SIGNATURE PAGE 



This project was approved by 





DEDICATION 



We dedicate this project to all the men in our lives; Rich, Dan, Doomis, Seymour, Spencer, 
Elmo and Chewy. Whether human or animal, they were always around to provide support 
and encouragement. 



ABSTRACT 



This report details a plan to effectively integrate technology into the classroom. The 
targeted population consisted of one first grade class and one multi-age first and second 
grade class housed in a K-2 building. The school is located in a middle class suburban city 
in the Midwest. Although technology was readily available in the school, it’s non-effective 
use was documented by teacher surveys, student self-assessments, technology sign-out 
sheets and a classroom computer use checklist. 

Analysis of the probable cause indicated that classroom computers were not used 
regularly, nor were teachers comfortable integrating technology into the curriculum. Due to 
the lack of ongoing teacher training, teachers felt ill prepared to integrate technology into the 
curriculum. This situation had an adverse effect on students who therefore were not 
receiving opportunities to use the available technology to its fullest potential. 

A review of the literature combined with a year long technology integration class has 
suggested that ongoing teacher training is essential to changing philosophies and increasing 
the comfort level of teachers. Regular in classroom access to technology is critical to 
increasing its effectiveness with students. 

Post intervention data indicated that the students’ ability to use technology as an effective 
tool for learning was greatly increased. Although targeted students scored higher on the 
self assessment rubric than non targeted students, more research is necessary to determine 
whether the improved technology skills are a result of the intervention. 



V 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



CHAPTER 1 - PROBLEM STATEMENT AND CONTEXT 1 

General Statement of the Problem 1 

Immediate Problem Context 1 

The Surrounding Community 3 

National Context of the Problem 5 

CHAPTER 2 - PROBLEM DOCUMENTATION 6 

Problem Evidence 6 

Probable Causes 10 

CHAPTER 3 - THE SOLUTION STRATEGY 17 

Literature Review ; 17 

Project Objectives and Processes 26 

Project Action Plan 26 

Methods of Assessment 28 

CHAPTER 4 - PROJECT RESULTS 29 

Historical Description of the Intervention 29 

Presentation and Analysis of Results 31 

Conclusions and Recommendations 40 

REFERENCES 43 

APPENDICES 46 

A TEACHER SURVEY 46 

B STUDENT SELF EVALUATION SURVEY 49 

C NATIVE AMERICAN UNIT FRAMEWORK 51 

D STUDENT WORK SAMPLES 54 




- U - 6 



1 



CHAPTER 1 

PROBLEM STATEMENT AND CONTEXT 
General Statement of the Problem 

The students in the targeted kindergarten through second grade building are not 
using technology as an effective tool for learning. Evidence for the existence of the 
problem includes, a lack of technology use by students and teachers as documented 
through the monitoring of computer use and sign out sheets, teacher surveys reflecting their 
comfort level using and teaching technology, and student assessments of skills and ability to 
problem solve. 

Immediate Problem Context 

The site used in the following research is a kindergarten through second grade 
building. This building is part of a small elementary school district. Classroom A is a first 
grade room. Classroom B is a first and second grade multi-age class. The students in class 
B stay with the teacher for two full years. The school day begins at 8:25 am and ends at 
2:25 pm. The following information is taken from the 1998 School Report Card. 

This district serves 1 ,716 students, 349 of which are housed in the school. The 
students in this district are predominately white. Table 1 shows the racial background and 
total enrollment of this school. 

Table 1 

Racial/Ethnic Background and Total Enrollment 





White 


Black 


Hispanic 


Asian 


Native American 


Total Enrollment 


School 


78.8% 


2.0% 


8.6% 


10.6% 


0.0% 


349 


District 


84.3% 


1 .6% 


5.7% 


8.2% 


0.2% 


1716 



There are few students from a limited English proficient setting and fewer from low- 
income families. The school’s enrollment of low-income and limited English proficiency 



0 




2 



students is slightly higher than the district’s percentages. Table 2 indicates these 
percentages. 

Table 2 

Low-Income and limited English proficient 





Low- Income 


Limited English Proficient 


School 


6.6% 


10.9% 


District 


5.5% 


5.9% 



This district has a high attendance rate, with little student mobility. The school also 
has a high attendance rate, however the student mobility rate is slightly higher than the 
district . The district and school have no chronic truancy. Table 3 reflects these 
percentages. 

Table 3 

Attendance. Mobility and Chronic Truancy 





Attendance 


Student Mobility 


Chronic Truancy 


School 


95.3% 


10.6% 


0.0% 


District 


96.0% 


6.2% 


0.0% 



The 1998 School Report Card also states that this site spends $6,748 per pupil. 
This is $467 more than the state average. Fifty-eight percent of the district’s expenditure is 
spent from the education fund, compared to 73% which is the state average. Large 
proportions (23.6%) of the monies are spent on operations and maintenance. 

There are 15 single teacher classrooms in the school: 1 early childhood , 3 
kindergarten, 4 first grade, 3 second grade, and 4 first and second grade multi-age rooms. 

All specialist and resource teachers have their own rooms. Classrooms are 
heterogeneously grouped. Most of the first graders loop to second grade with their teacher 
and classmates. All multi-age students stay with their teacher for two years. The 
classrooms have one teacher with the exception of early childhood, which also has one 
speech and language pathologist and a full time teacher aide. There are three classrooms 



ERIC 



- w , 



8 



L 



3 



which contain students whose Individualized Education Plan (IEP) requires them to have a 
full time aide. 

First and second grade students receive 90 minutes of gym, 40 minutes of art, 40 
minutes of library instruction and 50 minutes of music per week. Students with social, 
academic, or behavioral concerns are served by a full-time social worker, and full-time 
teachers specializing in Title 1 , Learning Disabled/Behavior Disordered resource services, 
speech and language, and ESL (English as a Second Language). 

All schools within the district are linked by a local area network (LAN) server. The 
school library houses Macintosh computer lab containing 25 desktop computers. There are 
various models and not all are compatible with the software used by the district. All of the 
computers have printer connections. Nine of the 25 computers have internet connections. 

Each classroom has one Power Macintosh computer connected to the internet and 
district server, and one color printer. In addition, some classrooms have other computers, 
which are older models and are not internet or server compatible. For the 1999-2000 
school year the district offered a Technology Integration Program (TIP). Teachers who 
volunteered to participate received an additional 3 to 4 iMac computers with internet 
capability in their classrooms. The school owns 8 digital cameras, 1 scanner, 2 multi-media 
presentation centers, 2 lap top computers, 2 video cameras, and 5 VCRs on carts. The 
district technology plan calls for each classroom to be equipped with one 27” video / 
computer monitor and a video cassette player for the 1999-2000 school year. Finally, the 
district has hired a full time technology facilitator whose responsibilities include training 
teachers to integrate technology into the curricula. 

The school encourages community involvement. Parents and senior citizens 
volunteer regularly and work with students. Each school in the district has a School 
Improvement Committee made up of parents, teachers and administrators who work to 
improve the quality of the schools. Community members also serve on the district 
technology committee. A future goal of the technology committee is to open the district 
computer labs for the community to use. 

The Surrounding Community 

The school is part of a small Midwest suburban school district, 20 miles outside of a 





9 



4 



major metropolitan center. According to the 1990 census, the population of the school 
community is 15,239 . Average per household income for the school community is 
$43,101 as of the 1990 census. The average resident is 32 years old. Housing ranges in 
price from $60,000 for the less expensive condominiums to $450,000 for the higher price 
single-family homes (Wexcel, 1995). Crime is extremely low in this school’s community 
with a crime rate of 2.552% (Wexcel, 1 995). The district serves four local communities, 
which are comprised of light industry, single-family homes, townhomes and apartments. 
Various racial and ethnic backgrounds make up this community of professionals and blue- 
collar workers. 

The district is made up of one middle school, one K-5 building, one K-2 building and 
one 3-5 building. According to the 1998 School Report Card, the teaching staff employed 
by this district consists of 87.3% female, and 12.7% male teachers, all of white ethnic 
background. The average teaching experience in the district is 12.9 years. Table 4 shows 
that there is evidence of teachers’ commitment to advance themselves educationally. 

Table 4 

T eacher/Administrator Characteristics 



Average Years Teaching 


Teachers with BA 


Teachers with MA and above 


District 12.9 years 


50.6% 


49.4% 



The School Board consists of seven elected members who serve for four years. 
The district’s administrative staff is made up of eight individuals: a superintendent, an 
assistant superintendent, a business administrator, four principals, and one assistant 
principal. During the 1998-1999 school year, the administrative staff increased by one. A 
full time technology coordinator was hired. The technology coordinator’s responsibilities 
include the maintenance of all equipment, the writing of a state mandated district technology 
plan, applying for technology grants and heading the district’s technology team. The 
creation of this position reflects the administrative and School Board’s growing awareness 
for the need of technology assistance. 




10 



5 



National Context of the Problem 

The past decade has seen a great increase in the number of computers found in 
early childhood and primary classroom settings. In 1 984, the computer to student ratio was 
1:125. By 1997 this ratio had improved to 1 computer for every 10 children (Clements, 
1998). The term technology is not limited to computers. Technology encompasses all 
equipment such as printers, scanners, monitors, digital cameras, VCRs, tape recorders, CD 
players, etc. Although the amount of technological equipment in schools has greatly 
increased, students are not using technology as an effective tool for learning. 

More technology in the classroom is still needed. In a recent NEA (National 
Education Association) Communication Survey it was found that more than two-thirds of 
elementary teachers had access to a single computer in their classroom (McKenzie, 

1998b). One computer per classroom is not enough technology “for most students to 
have their schooling experiences significantly and frequently affected” (Becker, 1 994) . 
President Clinton has recognized this need and is “calling for modern equipment in all 
classrooms and relevant training and support for teachers (Coley, Cradler, & Engel, in 
Latham, 1999). 

Standards for student achievement in technology also need to be established. The 
International Society For Technology in Education (ISTE) has initiated the National Education 
Technology Standards (NETS) project. The main goal of NETS is to develop national 
technology standards for students in grades Pre K-12. Over the next three years these 
standards will continue to be developed and refined. It is hoped that these goals will 
facilitate school improvement throughout the United States. (National Education 
Technology Standards Project, 1999). 

The targeted school has an average of two computers per classroom. Although this 
is slightly higher than the national average, it is still not enough computers for technology to 
be used effectively. Along with the lack of technology available, there are other obstacles 
that teachers face when integrating technology into the curriculum. 



O 

tKJC 



11 



6 



CHAPTER 2 

PROBLEM DOCUMENTATION 
Problem Evidence 

Although technology is readily available at the targeted school, it is not being used 
effectively. This has been documented through teacher surveys evaluating how teachers 
are using the available technologies, student self assessment rubrics, and technology 
usage checklists. Data was collected from 41 children ranging in ages from six to eight years 
old. The teacher survey was given to 14 classroom teachers and was completed and 
returned by 13 teachers. 

Teacher Survey 

The teachers were surveyed on how they use technology with their students. This 
survey can be found in Appendix A. The results of the survey confirmed that technology is 
not being effectively integrated into most classrooms on a daily or weekly basis. Effective 
technology use is demonstrated when students are using the technology to solve 
problems, find information, or publish writing that relates to their curricular studies (McKenzie, 
1998a & 1998b). Results showing that technology is not being used on a weekly or daily 
basis are listed in Table 5. 

Table 5 indicates that technology is most frequently used for free time. Free time is 
given when students have completed the required work and are allowed to choose an 
activity. Most frequently this activity is a ”game-like” computer program which may or may 
not relate to the curriculum. Teachers do not monitor or direct the activity. Therefore, free 
time is not considered to be an effective use of technology. 

Table 5 also shows that 30% or approximately one third of teachers do not integrate 
technology into their curricular units more than once a month. Furthermore, 75% of the 
teachers used technology for journal writing once a month or less. Only 9% of students are 
given opportunities to use word processing for publishing their writing on a weekly basis. 
The areas of word processing and publishing are important life skills and most students are 



O 

ERIC 



12 



7 



not receiving practice. These survey results are evidence that technology is not being used 
effectively at the given school. 

Table 5 

Frequency of Technology Use 





Never 


Once a trimester 


Monthly 


Weekly 


Daily 


Frequency of Curricular 
Technology Integration 


0% 


15% 


15% 


46% 


24% 


Frequency of Free Time 
Use 


0% 


0% 


0% 


46% 


54% 


Frequency of Student 
Word Processing for 
Journal writing 


15% 


32% 


30% 


23% 


0% 


Frequency of Student 
Word Processing for 
Publishing 


32% 


13% 


46% 


9% 


0% 



Students come to the classroom with a variety of technological skills. Some children 
have been exposed to technology and feel comfortable using it. On the other hand, there 
are children who have little or no experience using technology. Students in the targeted 
classrooms were asked to self-evaluate their ability levels using technology. Surveys were 
given on an individual basis, with a trained volunteer clearly explaining each item. The 
results are listed in Table 6. The student self evaluation survey can be found in Appendix 
B. 

This survey was given to two classrooms of children. One class contained 21 first 
graders. The second class contained 1 1 first graders and 9 second graders. This survey 
was conducted in the first trimester of the school year. Most of the first grade students 
would not have had exposure to the surveyed skills. The second grade students were 
exposed to the surveyed skills during the previous year. During the current school year, 
the children in the two classrooms surveyed had been exposed to turning the computer on 
and off as well as the application programs, Kid Pix and ClarisWorks. These skills were all 
directly taught by the classroom teacher and as a result, have the highest number of 
proficient children. 



O 

ERIC 



13 



8 



Table 6 

Student Self Assessment 



Skill 


% Proficient 


% Familiar 


% Incapable 


1 can draw a picture 
using Kid Pix. 


61% 


32% 


7% 


1 can e-mail a friend or 
teacher. 


21% 


21% 


58% 


1 can type a journal page, 
save it and print it using Claris. 


42% 


32% 


26% 


1 can turn the computer on 
and shut it down. 


79% 


5% 


16% 


1 can find things that 1 have 
saved on a disk or the server. 


29% 


26% 


45% 


1 can find research on the 
internet. 


21% 


21% 


58% 


1 can use WiggleWorks. 


24% 


8% 


68% 


1 can download pictures from 
the internet. 


3% 


34% 


63% 


1 can use the digital camera and 
put pictures in the news. 


10% 


37% 


53% 



When comparing student rubric results with teacher anecdotal records, a discrepancy 
was found. It appears that students indicated a familiarity using the technology skills when in 
reality they had knowledge that the technology existed, but could not demonstrate its use. 
After completion of the survey, the teachers of the targeted classrooms reviewed the 
student surveys and found 85% of them to be accurate with their own anecdotal records. 

Table 6 indicates that there are only two skills areas in which a majority of the 
students feel proficient. In support that technology is not being used effectively, the survey 
revealed that there are five areas where the majority of the students ranked themselves as 
incapable of using the technology. The user checklist further revealed that technology is 
simply not being used by the students in the targeted school. 




14 



9 



Usage Checklist 

To establish if technology is being used in the 14 regular education classrooms and 
computer lab, random usage checks were initiated. Beginning the fifth week of school, 
random checks for usage of every classroom computer were taken. Using the Apple 
Network Administrative Toolkit, the Building Technology Facilitator was able to monitor 
which computers were turned on and what applications, if any, were running. When 
programs were running, the technology facilitator could view the monitor and see what work 
was being done. For example, a check could determine that ClarisWorks was running and 
a permission slip was being composed. The nature of this document indicates that an adult 
was creating it. Because the targeted school is a K-2 building, the typing speed, grammar 
and spelling indicate whether a child or an adult is using the computer. Checks were done on 
a random schedule over a five week period. In total, 15 checks were made. The results are 
listed in Table 7. 

Table 7 

Classroom Technology Usage 



% Turned Off 


% Used by Students 


%Used by Teachers 


% On but Not Used 


31% 


14% 


12% 


43% 



Table 7 shows that on average 31 % of the computers in classrooms were turned off 
during the school day. The average was calculated by recording the number of computers 
turned off at any given check and dividing it by the total number of computers in the 
classrooms. The average percent of use was found the same way. Of those that were 
turned on, 43% were not in use. One hundred percent use of computers is not expected, 
nor possible in a school day. The goal is not to replace current curriculum with technology, 
but rather to enhance it. However, when only 14% of students are using technology at any 
given time, it would imply that most students are not receiving daily exposure to 
technology. 

Usage was also monitored in the computer lab. Teachers are encouraged to sign up 
for a 40 minute weekly time slot in the lab. Once signed-up, it is not mandatory to attend. 



O 

ERIC 



15 



10 



The classroom teacher is responsible for all technology lessons conducted in the lab. There 
is no technology teacher or support personnel present. 

During the eighth week of school the Building Technology Facilitator conducted hourly 
checks to determine if the computers in the lab were being used. This information was 
compared with the lab schedule to see if teachers were using the lab during their reserved 
time slots. During the week monitored, the lab was used only once by a classroom 
teacher, and once by a special services teacher. Ten teachers had signed up to use it. It is 
evident that the computer lab is not being used effectively. 

It has been established that technology is not being used effectively. Teacher 
surveys at this site revealed that teachers are not using technology to support their 
curriculum nor for increasing student word processing and publishing skills. Rather, the most 
frequent use of technology is for free time. Students surveys reflected that the majority of 
children are not proficient in most skill areas. It has also been found that the technology 
available is not always used. To effectively assist teachers in improving their technology 
skills and the teaching of technology to students, there must be an attempt to understand 
the underlying causes for the lack of effective technology usage. 

Probable Causes 

There are many factors that affect the lack of technology use with primary students. 
First, teachers are simply not comfortable using or teaching the technologies. Teachers are 
not receiving the exposure to technology that is vital both during pre-service and in-service 
training. When technology is used, it is not always used as an effective tool for learning. 
Finally, many districts have not created technology benchmarks. Where there is no 
expectation to teach technology, it is not taught. 

Teacher Comfort 

The teachers at the targeted site were requested to rate their comfort level in both 
using and teaching various forms of technology available at the school. All teachers 
surveyed have had the opportunity, whether through mandatory staff development or 
voluntary workshops, to learn about the surveyed technologies. The survey asked 
teachers to rate their comfort level from 1 through 5, 1 representing very uncomfortable and 
5 representing very comfortable. When interpreting the survey, the ratings of 1 through 3 



O 

ERIC 



16 



11 



indicate discomfort. Discomfort is defined as being unsure of how to use the technology 
independently and to its full potential. 

The survey revealed that teachers are uncomfortable both using and teaching the 
technologies available to them through the school and in the classroom. Table 8 displays 
the percentage of teachers who are personally uncomfortable using the specified 
technologies. The table also displays the number of years the given technology has been 
available in the classroom. Teachers are generally more comfortable with technologies that 
have been around 6 or more years. However, there are a few exceptions. 

A district initiative to minimize paper waste has made the use of e-mail mandatory, 
therefore a high percentage of teachers have become comfortable with this technology in a 
short amount of time. The survey found that 46% of teachers stated that they felt 
comfortable saving to a server. The technology facilitator was asked to report the number 
of teachers who had logged onto the server within a one month period. Of the 14 
classroom teachers, only three had done so. The validity of this self-report is therefore 
questionable. 

Table 8 

Teacher Comfort Levels Using Technology 



Technology 


Years Available 


%Comfortable 


% Uncomfortable 


Using CD ROMS 


6 


85% 


15% 


Saving to a disk 


6 


85% 


15% 


Using ClarisWorks 


6 


85% 


15% 


Using Kid Pix 


6 


54% 


46% 


Using WiggleWorks 


4 


54% 


46% 


Using digital cameras 


4 


38% 


62% 


Using scanners 


4 


15% 


85% 


Using the internet 


2 


46% 


54% 


Using e-mail 


2 


62% 


38% 


Saving to a server 


2 


46% 


54% 


Creating web pages 


2 


15% 


85% 




17 



12 



Table 9 shows how teachers feel about teaching their students the aforementioned 
technologies. However, some teachers feel that it is not developmentally appropriate for 
their students to use the specified technologies therefore, the option of Not Applicable was 
given in addition to the rating scale from 1 to 5. Table 9 shows that teachers exhibit a much 
higher level of discomfort when teaching the same technologies to their students. The 
percent who felt the technology was not developmentally appropriate to their grade level is 
also indicated. 

Table 9 

Teacher Comfort Levels In Teaching Technology 



Technology 


Years 

Available 


% 

Comfortable 


O/ 

/o 

Uncomfortable 


0/ 

/o 

Not Applicable 


Using CD ROMs 


6 


77% 


23% 


0% 


Saving to a disk 


6 


67% 


25% 


8% 


Using ClarisWorks 


6 


77% 


23% 


0% 


Using Kid Pix 


6 


54% 


46% 


0% 


Using WiggleWorks 


4 


50% 


42% 


8% 


Using digital cameras 


4 


12% 


73% 


15% 


Using scanners 


4 


0% 


77% 


23% 


Using the internet 


2 


30% 


55% 


15% 


Using e-mail 


2 


13% 


56% 


31% 


Saving to a server 


2 


23% 


69% 


8% 


Creating web pages 


2 


3% 


82% 


15% 



When teachers are personally uncomfortable using and teaching with technology, 
students are not learning technology skills. In comparing Student Self Assessment and 
Teacher Comfort Levels in Teaching Technology (Tables 6 and 9) it is found that students 
excel in the areas that teachers are most comfortable teaching. For example, 77% of 
teachers felt confident in their abilities to use ClarisWorks and 42% of students were also 
comfortable in using the same program. Conversely, 38% of teachers felt comfortable 
using digital cameras and 10% of students surveyed felt comfortable using the same 



ERIC 



18 



13 



technology. In order for student achievement in the area of technology to be further 
increased, teachers must be comfortable with using the technology. The likelihood of 
teachers introducing a skill that they do not feel proficient in, is slim. It is not enough for 
teachers to know how to use the technology, it must be used regularly. In order for teachers 
to become comfortable in using technology, continual training must be provided. 

Lack of Pre-Service Training 

Many of the teachers surveyed felt that more training and staff development is 
necessary. Research has found that universities do not incorporate technology into their 
methods courses for pre-service teachers (Persichitte, Tharp & Caffarella, 1997; Education 
Technology News, March 1998). Richard W. Riley, Education Secretary, stated to 
eSchool News (1999) “Teacher education and professional development programs are 
not addressing the realities found in today’s classrooms .” Many teacher education 
programs do not have the hardware or software to properly prepare aspiring teachers. 

They are also lacking in faculty members who are trained in using technology (Education 
Technology News, March 1998). In 1996, a technology survey was given to all National 
Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) member colleges responsible for 
teacher education programs. The survey disclosed that 31% of students have no 
requirements to incorporate technology into their instruction during their student teaching 
experience (Persichitte, Tharp & Caffarella, 1997). Cooper in Education Technology News 
(March 1998, paragraph 10) has advised NCATE to “develop a vision of technology as an 
integrated part of reform.... (and) develop a plan for hardware, software and technology 
integration across the curriculum.” With this, it is hoped that new teachers will be able to use 
technology effectively in the classroom and that current teachers will seek training in areas of 
need. 

Lack of In-service Training 

Because technology changes so rapidly and many teachers are not abreast of 
technology updates, staff development and training opportunities need to be continuously 
provided (Roberts, 1999). A national survey done by eSchool News online reports that 
“less than one quarter of the teachers surveyed said they felt prepared to use computers in 
their classroom” (Feb. 22, 1999). At the targeted site, technological equipment preceded 



ERIC 



19 



14 



training. When training was provided, it frequently was optional. The training provided 
emphasized how to use the equipment and not how to use it with children. Teachers were 
never given direction on how to integrate the new technology into the curriculum. 
Furthermore, teachers were not given instruction on how to problem solve when equipment 
did not work as expected. 

There continues to be a lack of professional development opportunities in 
technology for teachers once they are in the classroom. Rosen and Weil (in Latham, 1999) 
estimate that between one and two thirds of all teachers are lacking the confidence to use 
technology to it’s full potential. According to McKenzie , “Most professional development 
for technology still centers around how to use the tools, the software applications and the 
resources. There is little focus on strategic teaching or guidance.. .”(1 998b, paragraph 39). 
To be most effective, computers must not be solely used for drill and practice, but rather 
strategically integrated into the curriculum (McKenzie, 1998b). 

Research has found that teachers receiving less than ten hours of training will not be 
impacted positively (Ryan, as cited in Clements, 1998). Too often school districts quickly 
install the latest equipment without preparing teachers in how to use it and without 
considering how these technologies will be integrated into the curriculum. In order for new 
technologies to be effective, teacher training and curriculum development must come 
before the installation of hardware and software (McKenzie, 1998b). According to Barker 
(1994), mandatory, non threatening staff development, where teachers progress at their 
own pace, needs to be provided. In many situations teachers are fearful of the technology 
they have been given and are expected to teach. Increased training and support gives 
teachers a fearless attitude toward technology and allows them the confidence they need to 
take on new challenges (Education Technology News, March 1 998). In order for comfort 
levels to increase, at least 30% of a district’s technology budget should be spent on training 
its staff (Latham, 1999). Teachers need to know that there is support when problems or 
questions arise. Studies indicate that few districts hire enough technicians to support their 
equipment (McKenzie, 1998a). Not only do teachers need to be trained to use 
technology, they must be trained to use technology effectively. 



ERiC 



20 



15 



Ineffective Use of Technology 

For technology to be used more effectively, teachers will have to change many of 
their teaching philosophies (Maurer & Davidson, 1999). According to Becker (1994), many 
teachers view technology / computers as an isolated subject area. Technology is rarely 
integrated into other subject areas. Because programs geared for the primary level are 
often of a game format, many teachers at the site use the computer for drill and practice 
games. For technology to be effective it is recommended that it be seamlessly integrated 
into all curricular areas. 

Research has also shown that children learn best when they are actively involved 
and the content is meaningful to them. Too often computers are used as a tool for drill and 
practice work, which is neither meaningful nor engaging to students (Bowman, 1998). 

Maurer and Davidson (paragraph 6) suggest that many teachers’ current philosophy would 
be stated as ”1 have the power, and I will give you bits of it as I see fit” (1999). With this 
philosophy teachers are the dispensers of knowledge. McKenzie continues: “So long as 
the majority of teachers value teaching above learning, we are unlikely to see dramatic 
changes in student performance” (1998b, paragraph 33). At the targeted school, teachers 
are not using technology as a tool for learning, nor do they have curricular benchmarks to 
guide them. 

Lack of Technology Benchmarks 

When referencing the targeted district’s curriculum guide, no mention of technology 
was found. With no formal curriculum plan, teachers are unsure of what skills their students 
are required to posses. There is great disparity in how technology is used among the 
teachers at the targeted elementary school. Of the teachers surveyed, 38% felt that a 
formal technology curriculum would enhance their comfort level in using technology. The lack 
of district directives leaves teachers uncertain of what to teach. 

At the given site, technology is not used to it’s fullest potential. Causes may be 
attributed to any of the following: teacher discomfort in using and teaching technology, lack of 
pre-service and in-service teacher training, ineffective use or lack of use of existing 
technology and a lack of district technology benchmarks. These causes were evident in the 
literature reviewed and at the targeted school. 



o 

ERiC 



21 



16 



Teachers have the power to use technology as a tool for learning, however they 
must be empowered to do so. Teachers must take ownership that they are not using and 
teaching technology effectively. The fear of technology must be overcome and teachers 
must be provided with training in areas of need. Teachers, administrators, parents and 
students should view technology as a vital tool that enhances curriculum. Most importantly, 
technology needs to be used. 



o 

ERIC 






22 



17 



CHAPTER 3 

THE SOLUTION STRATEGY 
Literature Review 

Technology has rapidly become a prevalent tool in schools. One can expect 
technology’s presence to continue to increase exponentially. Therefore, it is necessary for 
schools to make many changes so that technology can be used effectively by students, 
teachers, and the surrounding community. These changes include a shift in teacher 
philosophy, the integration of technology throughout the curriculum, increased pre-service 
and in-service technology training and the limitless access to technology. 

Teacher Philosophy 

Changing teacher philosophy is a key element in making any technology 
implementation successful (McKenzie, 1998a). Both student and teacher roles will have to 
change. Teachers need to become more learner centered, focusing on a child’s individual 
needs and learning style. Their role will also change from being the director of learning, to 
being the facilitator of learning. Students will no longer simply receive knowledge, rather 
students will be taught problem solving skills and will be encouraged to construct 
knowledge (Flake, 1999). Students will be encouraged to act as teachers, as well as 
learners. 

Research in multiple intelligences by Howard Gardner and others has shown that 
students gain knowledge in many different ways (Lazear, 1992). Gardner’s research has 
found seven areas of human intelligence. They are: verbal/linguistic, musical/rhythmic, 
logical/mathematical, visual/spatial, bodily/kinesthetic, naturalistic, intrapersonal, and 
interpersonal. In order to reach all students, teachers must present material addressing all 
the intelligences. When teachers teach with all the intelligences in mind, students 
possessing different learning styles are more likely to learn. Many of the intelligences can 
be addressed with the use of technology. For example, on-line virtual museums allow 
students to visually and auditorily explore places they may have only read about. 



o 

ERIC 



23 



18 



Computers, grouped side-by-side, naturally encourage children to share their findings and 
work together (Thouvenelle, 1999a). This appeals to interpersonal learners. 

Content areas are also becoming more integrated. One lesson could include 
elements of math, science, literacy, and social studies. Technology should also be 
integrated into the curriculum. “We use technology to learn, not just to learn how to use 
technology” (Conyers, Kappel & Rooney, 1999, p. 83). By using technology in all areas 
of curriculum, it becomes a tool for learning. It’s presence has purpose. It then becomes 
the role of the teacher to provide open ended projects that allow their students to construct 
knowledge (Clements, 1998; Tapscott, 1999). The teacher facilitates his/her students’ 
learning. Davis and Shade (1999) define the role of the teacher in a computer enriched 
classroom to be “instructor, coach, model and critic” (paragraph 10). 

Computers will never replace the teacher, rather computers will enhance a teacher’s 
resources (Pool, 1997). CD ROM encyclopedias and the internet are excellent tools for 
research. Students have the opportunity to share what they have learned with their peers 
by creating digital slide shows or films that use pictures, sounds, and facts to bring to life the 
concepts learned. Graphing and spread sheet programs can help students organize and 
understand data. 

The role of students also needs to change. Students should not be viewed solely 
as recipients of information. Children should be seen as experts, peer coaches and 
teachers (Deaton, 1991). By giving children opportunities to share their learning with their 
peers, they are empowered as learners (Maurer & Davidson, 1999; Doyle, 1999). No 
longer are the days when curriculum is driven by scope and sequence charts, rather 
curriculum is determined by children’s needs and interests. Students must be given choices 
in their learning. By giving students choices, there is a greater opportunity for children to 
make a personal connection with the material and make the material meaningful. McKenzie 
(1998b) suggests that teachers work to create a classroom of engaged learners. He says 
that engaged learners are “responsible for their own learning, energized by learning, 
strategic, and collaborative” (McKenzie, 1998b, paragraph 7). In an engaged learning 
setting “teams of students employ information technologies to investigate authentic 
problems which parallel curriculum questions and topics” (McKenzie, 1998b, paragraph 7). 




u 24 



19 



The two classrooms participating in this study began a unit on Native Americans. 
Rather than the teachers dispensing knowledge, the students were given the cooperative 
task of choosing a tribe or a geographical region where their tribe would live. Each group 
would be responsible for researching their tribe to find out about it’s regional climate, the 
types of homes that were built, a craft or artwork from the tribe, and a food that was 
prepared. Students did research via internet, CD ROM encyclopedias, e-mailing 
questions to experts, watching videos, and by finding appropriate books in the school 
library. One classroom chose to share their discoveries with other students during a 
classroom pow-wow. The other classroom elected to host a Native American museum and 
have other students visit. Students had ownership of their learning because of the many 
choices they were given. In all cases, the children performed well beyond the teacher’s 
expectations. They were excited about what they were doing. A framework for the Native 
American unit can be found in Appendix C. 

Both teachers discovered that their students were willing and able to stay on task 
and work up to an hour and a half, which is well beyond the average attention span of a first 
or second grader. Also, several curricular areas were naturally integrated into this engaged 
learning project. Once teachers have begun to make changes in their teaching philosophy, 
they will be better prepared to begin integrating technology into the curriculum. 

Curricular Integration 

Computers are a powerful tool for learning. They can be used to help students 
solve problems on their own and allow students “to act as doers and thinkers rather than 
recipients of information” (Bowman, 1998, p. 9). Using the example of the Native 
American project, a visitor to the classroom would see children working on many different 
activities at once. Groups may be researching on the internet, making a model hogan out of 
clay, creating an informative poster or video on how to make a concho belt or reading a 
book about their chosen tribe. The teacher meanwhile, is facilitating each group by making 
sure they are on task. Questions are asked to spark students thinking and direction is given 
when necessary. 

In order for this type of project to occur, students must have experience in using 
these technologies. Just as one would give direct instruction on how to solve addition 
problems, lessons on how to use technology must be given. In math, children must solve 



O 

ERIC 






25 



20 



many addition problems before the concept is understood. Finally, children are ready to 
apply their basic math skills to solve more complex problems. Similarly, students must 
have many opportunities to practice technology skills, so that they are prepared and 
comfortable to use them as a resource for problem solving. For example, a new skill such 
as centering a title in ClarisWorks would be modeled on a large screen monitor and children 
would then have the opportunity to try it. As children accumulate word processing, internet, 
and multimedia skills, they will be able to apply what they have learned to create published 
works or multimedia presentations. 

Integrating technology this way does take time and effort on the part of the teacher, 
but usually results in increased student achievement (Clements, 1998). In order to 
integrate, technology must be readily available. In some instances this requires teachers to 
coordinate with each other, because technology must be shared. Once technology is 
acquired, teachers must have the time to experiment with the equipment, programs, and 
management of the lesson (Conyers, Kappel & Rooney, 1999). It is difficult to help a 
classroom of young children all at once, especially if the teacher is unsure of his or her own 
technological skills. Therefore, a teacher must have the time to learn how to use the 
technology and train parent helpers or student mentors in order to successfully integrate 
technology into their curriculum (Roberts, 1999). 

School curriculums must also be revised to ensure that computers are being used to 
their full benefit. Technology is not a tool that is designed to stand alone, and therefore 
should not be viewed as a separate subject. Technology must be integrated throughout 
the curriculum (McKenzie, 1998). 

Only when computers are integrated into the curriculum as a vital element for 
instruction and are applied to real problems for a real purpose will children 
gain the most valuable computer skill, the ability to use computers as natural 
tools for learning (Shade & Watson, as cited in Davis & Shade, 1994). 

The National Educational Technology Standards (NETS) Project has recognized the 
need to integrate technology throughout the curriculum and is creating basic standards 
(National Educational Technology Standards Project, 1999). The six standards are: Basic 
operations and concepts, Social, ethical, and human issues, Technology productivity tools, 
Technology communications tools, Technology research tools, and Technology problem- 







26 



21 



solving and decision-making tools. In developing these standards, it was assumed that 
students would gain expertise through technology-based activities in the classroom. 
Examples of activities for the primary grades may include writing and illustrating tongue 
twisters using Kid Pix (a primary multimedia program), composing a daily newsletter on 
ClarisWorks with inserted digital photos, or keeping an electronic journal. These activities 
promote life skills, rather than drill and practice. They also reinforce basic technology 
operating skills, require social interaction and problem solving. 

The NETS Project has also created Profiles for Technology Literate Students which 
gives performance indicators by grade level for each of the standards. Included below are 
the performances that all students should be able to demonstrate by the end of second 
grade (National Educational Technology Standards Project, 1999). 

1 . Use input devices (e.g., mouse, keyboard, remote control) and output 
devices (e.g., monitor, printer) to successfully operate computers, VCRs, 
audio tapes, and other technologies. 

2. Use a variety of media and technology resources for directed and 
independent learning activities. 

3. Communicate about technology using developmentally appropriate and 
accurate terminology. 

4. Use developmentally appropriate multimedia resources (e.g., interactive 
books, educational software, elementary multimedia encyclopedias) to 
support learning. 

5. Work cooperative and collaboratively with peers, family members, and 
others when using technology in the classroom. 

6. Demonstrate positive social and ethical behaviors when using technology. 

7. Practice responsible use of technology systems and software. 

8. Create developmentally appropriate multimedia products with support 
from teachers, family members, or student partners. 

9. Use technology resources (e.g., puzzles, logical thinking programs, writing 
tools, digital cameras, drawing tools) for problem solving, communications, 
and illustration of thoughts, ideas, and stories. 

1 0. Gather information and communicate with others using 







27 



22 



telecommunications, with support from teachers, family members, or student 
partners. 

The major goal of these standards and profiles is to create students who are able to use 
technology in their daily lives and have a life long thirst for knowledge (National Educational 
Technology Standards Project, 1999). Teachers can use these standards as guidelines for 
planning technology-based activities where students are responsible for learning how to 
effectively communicate, and solve real life problems. These standards can also be used 
in creating district technology benchmarks. In order to integrate technology effectively into 
the curriculum, teachers must be trained. 

Teacher Training 

Change does not occur naturally or quickly. It has to develop over time and requires 
great amounts pre-service and in-service training. Many of today’s teachers did not 
experience technology as part of their undergraduate program (Persichitte, Tharp & 
Caffarella, 1997). Most college faculty members do not have technology training, and most 
teacher education programs are severely lacking both software and hardware (Education 
Technology News, March 1998). Currently, certification standards for schools of education 
are being revised to include an increased emphasis on technology use (Education 
Technology News, March 1998). With a greater emphasis on technology in undergraduate 
teacher education programs, hopefully tomorrow’s teachers will be better prepared to use 
and teach technology to it’s full extent. 

To update today’s teachers, in-service training is a necessity. According to 
McKenzie: 

The challenge is not about training. It is about learning. If we expect 
teachers to turn around and use technologies daily with students they 
need to discover personally the power of the new technologies when 
combined with rich information. We also need to provide more informal 
support structures such as mentors, coaches and “just in time help” which 
often do more to promote risk taking and growth than formal class 
offerings. (1998b, paragraph 34) 

A peer technology mentor or coach can provide ongoing support (McKenzie, 1998b). 
Support may include ways to integrate technology into the curriculum, how to use software, 




- ^ 



28 



23 



or just basic troubleshooting. Mentors can have scheduled meetings or meet as needed. 
As teachers we encourage our students to share their knowledge with each other. We must 
remember, as teachers we also need to share our technological wisdom with each other. 

Teacher support is also available via satellite. The Educational Resources company 
lets teachers access a number of video training modules from a desktop computer at any 
time (Pierce, 1999). Additionally, teachers should be given the opportunity to take 
computers home over the summer and weekends. With more computer contact, teachers 
will become familiar with the machines and their comfort levels will increase (Deaton, 1991). 
When teachers know how to use the technology they are more likely to integrate into the 
curriculum. 

To further support the need for staff development, a study by Barker (1994) found 
that teacher attitude towards technology impacts student learning. She found that teachers 
who taught with a positive attitude produced students who developed a higher level of 
performance (Barker, 1994). In order to maintain high morale, teachers’ efforts and 
successes need to be celebrated (Thouvenelle, 1999b). A celebration could include the 
sharing of projects and knowledge with mentors and peers. Teachers in the primary grades 
recognize that small successes are an indicator of greater things to come. The teacher- 
researchers involved in this project feel that positively reinforcing one’s own successes both 
encourages one to continue their own learning and lends to the enthusiasm that will be 
shared with students. 

The Technology Integration Program (TIP) was created by the targeted district for 
the 1999-2000 school year. TIP is a year long staff development opportunity where 
participants create and implement an engaged learning project, The class was offered to all 
K-5 classroom teachers and was to be limited to 25 participants. A total of 20 classroom 
teachers agreed to participate. All participants received 3 new iMac computers, computer 
tables and a $500.00 stipend. The funding for this class came from a grant and the monies 
were matched by the Board of Education. TIP is planned to be offered again the following 
year, if funding is available. Current participants will then facilitate in the learning of new 
participants. 

This is the computer age. Today’s children have grown up with home computers 
and digital technologies (Tapscott, 1999). They are not intimidated or anxious about using 




29 



24 



them. In order to foster this excitement, today’s teachers must enthusiastically embrace 
what technology has to offer. They must meet this challenge by overcoming their fears. 
The easiest way to overcome fear is by facing the fear itself. Teachers who accept the 
challenge to learn how to use technology, seek out the necessary assistance, and have the 
courage to learn from their mistakes, will experience the greatest success (Tapscott, 1999). 
Children have the desire to use technology. It is the school’s responsibility to make 
technology readily available for student’s to use. 

Location of Technology 

The last challenge of making technology a prosperous tool for learning, is making 
sure that it is used. The location of technology plays a large role in it’s success. By placing 
two chairs in front of a computer, or placing two computers next to each other, children are 
invited to share ideas and teach each other (Thouvenell, 1999a; Clements, 1998). It is also 
important that technology be used all day long, not only for centers or free time 
(Labbo,1996). Technology can be used in every area of the curriculum. Digital cameras 
can be used by students to document their daily events. Word processing programs can 
supplement written work. Technology should be located where learning takes place. If 
technology is limited, plans should be made to rotate it through the classrooms. When 
technology is removed from the classroom and placed in an isolated computer lab, it 
becomes more difficult to seamlessly integrate technology into the curriculum (Becker, 
1994). 

Summary 

There are schools that are using technology to its full potential. They have changed 
teacher philosophies and provided teacher training in the area of technology. They have 
developed curriculums in which technology is integrated and readily available to be used 
by staff and students. Willow Bend, in Rolling Meadows, Illinois, is such a school. 

Over a five year period, Willow Bend’s administrators, staff and students worked 
towards the goal of achieving a technology enriched school. They had the resources, 
commitment and common goal to make it happen. According to principal T. Kappel 
(personal communication, October 21 , 1999), the most important step was embracing the 
movement towards change. This meant all issues were dealt with up-front. Questions, 
concerns and fears were openly discussed. The option of transferring schools was made 







30 



25 



available for those unable to support the changes being made. Teachers worked 
cooperatively to write a curriculum that would align with their new technology philosophy and 
meet state goals. This curriculum assures hands-on learning where children are engaged in 
problem solving and teachers are facilitating. Every classroom was equipped with 7-9 
student computers, one computer for teacher use, a color printer, a telephone, internet 
access, a VCR, and a 32 inch monitor. The school also hosts a video production lab, a 
computer mini-lab, several laser disk players and student laptop computers. Most 
importantly, teachers received and continue to receive training and support. 

T ransitioning into a technology literate school is neither cheap nor easy. Schools who 
have implemented technology successfully have had teachers who are dedicated to 
making the change, support from the school community, and the financial resources to make 
it happen (Conyers, Kappel & Rooney, 1999). Technology is at the forefront of change. 
Roberts realizes this and advises; “you will never catch up, so stop trying” (1999, p.76). 
Technology is here to stay and must not be ignored. It is vital to provide our children with 
the tools they will need to build a successful future. Technology is the most important tool. 
Therefore, our schools must welcome changes to the curriculum and the way in which it is 
taught. They must also be willing to invest the time and money to train the teachers to use 
the technology properly. Finally, technology must be placed in the most accessible 
location for students. With these criteria met, it is possible to give students a solid 
foundation in the use of technology that will carry them throughout life. 

In the targeted classrooms, teachers are making a conscious effort to effectively 
integrate technology into the curriculum. Both teachers are participating in the TIP program 
offered by the school district. Efforts are being made to teach with a child centered approach 
and integrate technology whenever appropriate. Both teachers are seeking technology 
assistance from the District Technology Facilitator, whose help includes finding relevant 
internet sites, installing software and working with children in the classroom on technology 
skills. In addition, the teachers are using each other and fellow TIP members for support 
and ideas. They are also seeking out of district staff development opportunities. 



ERIC 



31 



26 



Project Objectives and Processes 

As a result of the addition of six computers to the targeted first and first and 
second grade multiage classrooms and a year long staff development course in 
technology integration the students will increase their technology skills and problem 
solving ability during the months of September 1999 through January 2000. This 
will be measured by a student self assessment rubric, teacher anecdotal records, 
and student artifacts. 

In order to accomplish the targeted objective the following processes are necessary. 

1 . Technology in the classroom will be increased by the addition of six computers, a 
28 inch digital monitor, a video cassette player, and a remote control. 

2. Teachers will model technology as a tool for learning, facilitate the students’ 
acquisition of knowledge and integrate technology throughout the curriculum. 

3. A student self assessment rubric developed from Technology Foundation 
Standards for Students will be designed and used. 

4. Teachers will participate in the Technology Integration Program. 

Project Action Plan 

I. Technology in the classroom will be increased by the addition of three computers, a 28 
inch digital monitor, a video cassette player (VCP), and a remote control. 

A. The Board of Education has agreed to increase technology in the classrooms of 

teachers who have volunteered to participate in the Technology Integration 
Program (TIP). Computers will be in the classrooms for the start of the 1999- 
2000 school year. With the additional technology, teachers will be better able 
to implement what they have learned in the staff development program. 

B. Teachers who requested a digital monitor, cart, and VCP will receive them. 

II. Teachers will model technology as a tool for learning, facilitate the students’ acquisition of 
knowledge, and integrate technology throughout the curriculum. 

A. Using the existing district curriculum, teachers will incorporate technology on a 
daily basis. Means of integration may include but are not limited to the following: 
1 . Daily newsletter - Teacher interactively models word processing skills on 
the monitor as students share their daily experiences in the classroom. 
This sharing of events is then sent home on Fridays in the form of a 
classroom newsletter. After modeling how to use the digital camera, a 







32 



27 



classroom photographer is selected each day to take photos and select 
one photo to accompany the news. As skills strengthen, students will be 
independently responsible for composing news on the computer. (The 
length of a news “article” will vary from one sentence to one paragraph 
depending on the students’ abilities.) 

2. Each student will create their own “journal” folder on the server and/or to a 
disk. Through modeling and peer coaching students will learn to save 
their work into their folders. Students will have weekly opportunities to 
add to their digital journal. 

3. Every thematic unit will contain several technology components. Students 
may learn to create a slide show using Kid Pix Deluxe. Slide shows will 
first be done as a whole class and later done in cooperative groups. 
Students may also use CD-Roms, digital encyclopedias and other 
software applications to enhance their learning. 

4. Students will be introduced to e-mail and will set up a class account. 
Weekly correspondence with partner classroom will take place. 
Correspondence may include riddles, interesting trivia, plans to meet to 
do activities together, or students may e-mail another teacher to ask 
permission to read to their class. 

5. Students will be shown how to use the internet and given opportunities to 
use child centered search engines (such as www.yahooligans.com or 
www.askjeeves.com) to find information. This will first be modeled and 
then done in small groups with groups with adult supervision (as per 
district policy.) 

6. Children will be given opportunities to strengthen their literacy skills by 
using Wiggle Works, an interactive reading program which allows students 
to read, respond, develop vocabulary skills, and use a letter board. 

7. Students will learn how to create and interpret graphs using Graph Club. 
Students may graph daily weather conditions, temperature, classroom 
tooth loss, etc. 

B. Staff development will be provided by technology coordinator, workshops, 



ERIC 



33 



28 



and TIP meetings. TIP meets from 3:00 pm to 5:00 pm approximately twice a 
month for a total of 13 meetings. The Willow Bend experience workshop lasted 
two full days. One district wide teacher institute day is planned with a focus on 
technology. 

III. A student self assessment rubric developed from Technology Foundation 
Standards for Students will be designed and used. 

A.The students will assess themselves three times a year. The rubric will follow 
recommended technology benchmarks. Students will gain skills through their 
daily computer experiences. Benchmarks may include but are not limited to the 
following: 

• use of painting and drawing tools 

• use of e-mail 

• compose, save and print using ClarisWorks 

• turn computer on and off 

• retrieve saved items from disk and server 

• access internet and locate search engines 

• download graphics from the internet 

• use digital camera to take pictures and insert them into a document 

IV. Teachers will participate in the Technology Integration Program. 

A. Teachers of the targeted classroom will attend a year long technology 
integration class. The class meets thirteen times during the course of the 
1999-2000 school year. Each class two hours long. Teachers will also attend an 
all day technology conference. 

Methods of Assessment 

In order to assess the effects of these interventions, students will complete a self- 
evaluation rubric at the beginning and end of the project. This will determine where growth 
has been made in using technology skills. Using anecdotal notes and student self 
assessments, teachers will assess the progress children have made in problem solving. 
Teachers will assess their comfort level with technology and teaching skills by completing a 
survey. Computers will be monitored in each classroom, usage will be noted in order to 
calculate the average use of computers at both the beginning and end of the project. 




- O ^ 



34 



29 



CHAPTER 4 
PROJECT RESULTS 
Historical Description of the Intervention 

The objective of this project was to have students use technology as an effective 
tool for learning. This was accomplished through teacher training, assessment of teacher 
philosophy, direct technology instruction to the students and an awareness and effort on 
behalf of the teachers to integrate technology into every curricular area. The targeted 
classrooms were comprised of first and second grade students, in a single age first grade 
classroom and a multi-age first and second grade classroom. 

The first intervention was teacher training. The teachers involved in the study were 
enrolled in The Technology Integration Program (TIP) sponsored by the targeted school 
district. Upon enrollment, the teachers were given 3 iMac computers, computer tables, and 
a $500 stipend. The class met on a bimonthly basis. Teachers were required to research 
software, websites and other technologies outside of the class. Each TIP class began with 
a sharing of information in grade level groups. Teachers also designed and implemented 
an engaged learning unit, incorporating technology throughout. Additional components of 
the class included mini lessons on using digital cameras, e-mail, web design, and conducting 
effective internet searches. 

In addition to the TIP classes the district provided one technology related institute 
day. The morning consisted of a presentation. It focused on how technology will be used 
in the future, as well as how it will change the content and the way that teachers teach. The 
district technology coordinator gave a brief presentation on the progress and future plans of 
the district. The afternoon consisted of break out training sessions. Participants chose 2 
sessions each lasting one hour. Options included web page design, internet searches, 
digital camera use, scanner use, or training on specified software. The targeted school has 
also had three sessions for web page training, each lasting one hour. 







35 



30 



The philosophy of each participating teacher was carefully reviewed. Throughout the 
literature it was stated that teachers must be willing to give students choices in their learning, 
opportunities to teach one another and the chance to use technology on a daily basis. The 
teachers reflected and discussed their own philosophies. Within the TIP class, the teachers 
were exposed to many of their colleagues’ philosophies. The targeted teachers 
developed a firm belief that technology should be integrated into the curriculum. 

That philosophy was then implemented into the classrooms. Basic skills were 
introduced and directly taught at the start of the school year. These skills included, turning the 
computer on and off, saving to the “documents” folder on the desktop, using Kid Pix to 
make a picture and insert text, word processing using ClarisWorks, using bookmarks on the 
internet, and using the reading program WiggleWorks. Both teachers introduced the 
aforementioned skills within the first 2 months of the school year. 

Once students were comfortable using these technologies, further technology skills 
could be added. The two targeted teachers differentiated in the order and type skills that 
were next introduced. The curriculums between teachers varied, as did the technological 
experience, therefore different skills were introduced in each classroom. By February of 
2000 both classrooms had received instruction in selecting printers on the network and had 
established active classroom e-mail accounts. One classroom had students conduct 
independent internet searches using child friendly search engines, while the other class had 
conducted teacher led searches on the same search engines. 

There were some skills that were only done in one of the classrooms. These 
included creating slide shows in the Kid Pix application, using the digital camera, 
downloading pictures off of the internet and saving to the district server. 

Deviations from the original plan existed. The plan had called for individual desktop 
folders to be created for each student. Instead, students in both classrooms saved to a 
single folder created for the specific project. Weekly e-mail between classrooms did not 
occur, however students did e-mail teachers, principal, families, and experts in the 
community. Students were also never taught to save to a disk. This task was found to be 
obsolete. The iMacs are designed to be networked and do not have a floppy disk drive. 
To save work on an iMac, one must save to the harddrive or the district server. 



O 

ERIC 



W \J , 



36 



31 



To assess the effects of the intervention, the teacher-researchers used a student self 
assessment rubric, a teacher survey, and a classroom usage checklist. Each assessment 
was administered at the beginning and the end of the study. On the student rubric, students 
were asked to identify themselves as proficient, familiar or incapable of using technology in 
a variety of skill areas. Teachers were also asked on their survey to rate their comfort in both 
using and teaching technology. Additionally, they were asked questions about the 
frequency and purpose of their computer use. Finally, teachers were asked to identify 
factors that would help them to become technology proficient. The usage checklist was 
conducted to determine the frequency and kind of use of computers in the classrooms and 
computer lab. 

Presentation and Analysis of Results 

In order to assess whether students are using technology effectively, the student self 
assessment rubric, teacher survey and usage checklist were administered in September 
1999 and February 2000. Students from non-targeted classes were also surveyed in 
February to determine and compare their technological skills. Finally, teacher anecdotal 
journals were reviewed. 

Student Surveys 

Because of student mobility, the rubric was given to 41 students in September and 
only 39 in February. After comparing the rubric results with their own anecdotal records both 
teachers found this survey to be much more accurate than the one given in September. 

The teachers believe this self assessment to be 95% accurate, as compared to their own 
records. The assessment results are listed in Table 10. 

When comparing the results from September to February, it was found that the 
level of student proficiency had increased in all skill areas. Likewise, the percent of students 
who felt incapable of doing a task decreased in all areas except for using the digital camera. 
This indicates that the majority of the computer skills assessed showed significant increase 
during the course of this study. Using Kid Pix, ClarisWorks and WiggleWorks, researching 
online and turning the computers on and off were skills that over 50% of the students were 
proficient at. The teacher researchers felt that these skill areas were most regularly reinforced 
in their classrooms. 



ERIC 



37 



32 



Table 10 

Student Self Assessment Rubric - February 2000 



Skill 


% Proficient 


% Familiar 


% Incapable 


1 can draw a picture 
using Kid Pix. 


74% 


21% 


5% 


1 can e-mail a friend or 
teacher. 


33% 


31% 


36% 


1 can type a journal page, 
save it and print it using Claris. 


74% 


15% 


11% 


1 can turn the computer on 
and shut it down. 


82% 


15% 


3% 


1 can find things that 1 have 
saved on a disk or the server. 


41% 


31% 


28% 


1 can find research on the 
internet. 


51% 


23% 


26% 


1 can use WiggleWorks. 


97% 


3% 


0% 


1 can download pictures from 
the internet. 


28% 


49% 


23% 


1 can use the digital camera and 
put pictures in the news. 


18% 


28% 


54% 



Students rated themselves as proficient in an area if they were able to complete the 
given task on their own, without any assistance. Although all skills levels showed an 
increase, they were most dramatic in the areas of drawing in ClarisWorks or Kid Pix, word 
processing using Claris, researching and downloading pictures from the internet and using 
Wiggle Works. Using the digital camera showed the least amount (less than 10%) of 
growth. Because manipulating the digital camera requires more refined motor skills, the 
teacher researchers felt it was not developmentally appropriate to introduce this skill at the 
start of the year. It is anticipated that by the end of the year, this area will see greater 
growth. Figure 1 compares the student self evaluated proficiency levels for targeted skill 
areas in September and February. 



o 

ERLC 



38 



33 



H September 1999 
PH February 2000 



I can draw a picture in Claris or 
Kid Pix. 

I can e-mail a friend or a teacher. 

I can type, save and print a 
journal page in Claris. 

I can turn the computer on and 
off. 

I can find things I have saved. 

I can find research on the internet. 

I can use Wiggle Works. 

I can download pictures from the 
internet. 

l can use tne digital camera and 
put me pictures in me news. 




Figure 1 . Comparison of student proficiency levels 



After charting the growth made in the targeted classrooms, the teacher researchers 
felt it necessary to determine whether the growth made was due to their interventions. 
Questions arose about whether growth would naturally take place due to age and out of 
school experiences. Therefore, two additional classrooms of children were surveyed using 
the same student self assessment rubric. The selected classrooms matched the 
characteristics of the targeted classrooms. One was a single age first grade room and the 
second was a first and second grade multi-age classroom. Neither of the additional teachers 
had participated in the TIP program, nor had they received any additional training or 
computers. In total 33 students were asked to evaluate their own skills. The results are 
listed in Table 1 1. 



O 

ERLC 



39 



Table 1 1 

Student Self Assessment of Non Targeted Classrooms 



34 



Skill 


% Proficient 


% Familiar 


% Incapable 


1 can draw a picture 
using Kid Pix. 


31% 


56% 


13% 


1 can e-mail a friend or 
teacher. 


18% 


18% 


64% 


1 can type a journal page, 
save it and print it using Claris. 


61% 


6% 


33% 


1 can turn the computer on 
and shut it down. 


70% 


21% 


9% 


1 can find things that 1 have 
saved on a disk or the server. 


24% 


36% 


40% 


1 can find research on the 
internet. 


33% 


27% 


40% 


1 can use WiggleWorks. 


39% 


9% 


52% 


1 can download pictures from 
the internet. 


3% 


18% 


79% 


1 can use the digital camera and 
put pictures in the news. 


9% 


27% 


64% 



When comparing the targeted and non-targeted students, it was found that students 
receiving the technology intervention had higher self evaluated skills than those who had 
received no intervention. The results of the comparison are found in Figure 2. 

The September and November student self evaluations show substantive growth 
in the assessed areas. When compared to other students at the school, the targeted 
students also showed a significantly higher confidence in their technology development. 
Teachers also showed growth in their skills and willingness to integrate technology into their 
curriculums. Since first surveyed, all teachers had received more training and had several 
more months to increase their technology awareness. 



ERIC 



.40 



35 



I can draw a picture in Claris or 
Kid Pix. 

I can e-mail a friend or a teacher 

I can type, save and print a 
|oumaJ page in Claris. 

I can turn the computer on and 
off. 

I can find things I have saved. 

I can find research on the 
internet. 

I can use Wiggle Worts. 

I can download pictures from 
the internet. 

I can use the digital camera and 
put the pictures in the news. 



| Targeted Students 
Non -Targeted Students 




non-targeted students 



Teacher Surveys 

Teacher surveys were again given in February of 2000. The surveys asked 
teachers to rate their comfort levels using and teaching technology. Specific questions on 
how technology is used were also asked. As with the previous survey, 13 out of the 14 
surveys given were returned. During the months since the first survey was given, 5 of the 
14 classroom teachers had been participating in the TIP project and had received the 
additional 3 iMacs for their classroom. All teachers had participated in one technology 
based institute day and all were given training opportunities in web page design. Table 12 
reports the results of the teacher comfort levels in using technology resulting from the 
February 2000 teacher survey. 



ERIC 



41 






36 



Table 12 

Teacher Comfort Levels Using Technology - February 2000 



Technology 


Years Available 


%Comfortable 


% Uncomfortable 


Using CD ROMs 


6 


85% 


15% 


Saving to a disk 


6 


100% 


0% 


Using Claris Works 


6 


92% 


8% 


Using Kid Pix 


6 


69% 


31% 


Using WiggleWorks 


4 


54% 


46% 


Using digital cameras 


4 


46% 


54% 


Using scanners 


4 


15% 


85% 


Using the internet 


2 


62% 


38% 


Using e-mail 


2 


85% 


15% 


Saving to a server 


2 


46% 


54% 


Creating web pages 


2 


15% 


85% 



The results of the survey show that no comfort levels have decreased. Teachers 
have become slightly more comfortable in saving to a disk, using ClarisWorks, using Kid 
Pix, using digital cameras, using the internet, and using e-mail. Comfort levels have 
remained constant in using CD ROMs, scanners, and WiggleWorks, saving to a server and 
creating web pages. Teachers listed that more time, support, training and equipment were 
important factors in increasing their comfort with technology. 

With teachers showing some increased comfort in using technology, the survey next 
asked about their comfort in teaching technology. The comfort level in teaching some skill 
areas dropped since September. The February results are reported in Table 13. 

The greatest change in the results from September to February is the number of 
teachers who no longer find that the skill is not applicable to their students. Comfort levels in 
teaching the following skills increased: using WiggleWorks, digital cameras, scanners, the 
internet, e-mail, and creating web pages. Using CD ROMs, ClarisWorks, and saving to a 




42 



37 



server remained constant. However, the comfort levels in teaching Kid Pix and saving to a 
disk decreased. 

Table 13 

Teacher Comfort Levels In Teaching Technology 



Technology 


Years 

Available 


% 

Comfortable 


% 

Uncomfortable 


% 

Not Applicable 


Using CD ROMs 


6 


77% 


23% 


0% 


Saving to a disk 


6 


62% 


30% 


8% 


Using Claris Works 


6 


77% 


23% 


0% 


Using Kid Pix 


6 


46% 


46% 


8% 


Using WiggleWorks 


4 


54% 


38% 


8% 


Using digital cameras 


4 


38% 


54% 


8% 


Using scanners 


4 


15% 


77% 


8% 


Using the internet 


2 


62% 


38% 


0% 


Using e-mail 


2 


54% 


38% 


8% 


Saving to a server 


2 


23% 


69% 


8% 


Creating web pages 


2 


15% 


85% 


0% 



The final section of the teacher survey was used to determine the frequency and 
purpose of technology use. The greatest increase was found in the frequency of 
technology integration into the curriculum. The results of this section of the teacher survey 
are listed in Table 14. 

When comparing the results in Table 14 to those completed in September (Table 
5), it is observed that free time, a non curricular use of technology, remains the most 
frequent way of using computers in the classroom. However, all teachers reported 
integrating technology into the curriculum at minimum, on a monthly basis. While in 
September, 15% of teachers surveyed were only integrating technology once a trimester. 
Using word processing programs for student writing and publishing continues to be done 
on an infrequent basis. The computer usage checklist will determine how frequently 
technology is being used within the building. 



O 

ERIC 



43 



38 



Table 14 

Frequency of Technology Use 





Never 


Once a trimester 


Monthly 


Weekly 


Daily 


Frequency of Curricular 
Technology Integration 


0% 


0% 


23% 


69% 


8% 


Frequency of Free Time 
Use 


0% 


0% 


0% 


46% 


54% 


Frequency of Student 
Word Processing for 
Journal writing 


31% 


8% 


15% 


23% 


23% 


Frequency of Student 
Word Processing for 
Publishing 


38% 


15% 


23% 


23% 


0% 



Usage Checklist 

To see if the available technologies were being used more frequently, the 
technology usage checklist was again implemented in February 2000. The building 
technology facilitator was asked to complete 10 more random checks to see how many 
computers were on and being used by students and teachers. The checks were done at 
random times during the day over the course of one week. A comparison of September 
and February usage is listed in Table 15. 

Table 15 

Classroom Technology Usage - September vs. February 



% Turned Off 


% Used by Students 


%Used by Teachers 


% On but Not Used 


Sep. 


Feb. 


Sep. 


Feb. 


Sep. 


Feb. 


Sep. 


Feb. 


31% 


8% 


14% 


25% 


12% 


14% 


43% 


53% 



Table 15 indicates that there has been an increase in both student and teacher use of 
the computers. The most noticeable increase is found in the amount of computers turned 
off. In February almost one third of the classroom computers were not even being turned 



erJc 



44 



39 



on. With more computers being turned on, it is not surprising to see that both student use 
and teacher use of the computer has increased. 

The usage of the computer lab was once again monitored. During the selected week 
four classroom teachers used the computer lab. Special area teachers, such as English as a 
Second Language and Early Childhood, also used the lab. The numbers of children using 
the lab has increased since September. Although the lab is being used more frequently, it 
is still not being used to its full capacity and often sits vacant. The teacher survey, revealed 
that many teachers felt that the computers were “out of date.” Their comments suggested 
that if the equipment was more “up to date” they would use the lab more frequently. When 
reviewing their journals, the teacher researchers have found that their own classroom “mini 
labs” were highly effective in fostering peer interactions with technology. 

Teacher Anecdotal Journals 

The teacher journals revealed that as students acquired skills, they readily took on the 
role of peer mentors. The students were eager and willing to help each other as 
technological problems arose. Teachers did facilitate this interaction initially by encouraging 
students to ask peers for help before coming to the teacher. As time passed, students 
seamlessly took on the role of problem solver. During class lessons, children would often 
shout out suggestions to solve problems as they saw them arise. Students were even 
able to aid other teachers who encountered technological problems. The biggest challenge 
now for the teacher researchers was to show students how to teach others, without solving 
the problems for them. The teachers developed “the hands off policy.” When helping 
others, students must use their words rather than their hands. This will allow the child 
receiving help to take ownership of the task. 

Students are also realizing the role technology can play in their education. The 
internet has become a logical source of information. Just as children would go to the library 
for a book, they use the internet to find answers to their questions. The children in the 
targeted classrooms now go online independently. E-mail has become a resource for 
communicating with experts. Students view e-mail as being as easily accessed as the 
telephone or mail. To demonstrate what they have learned, students are choosing 
multimedia tools. Posters now include graphics down loaded from the internet, interesting 
fonts, and have been checked for correct spelling. Children also appreciate that eraser 



ERIC 



45 



40 



marks cannot be found on word processed documents. Slide shows, video clips and 
digital photos are all found in student projects. 

The teachers as well as the students have experienced the thrill of technology. 
During this process an unanticipated aspect of teacher training became readily apparent. A 
mentor relationship was developed between the two participating teachers. One teacher 
was skilled in the use of technology. That teacher was able to guide, train and facilitate in the 
learning of the second teacher. The second teacher brought many fresh ideas to the 
partnership and was often responsible for the creative side of projects. Both teachers felt 
that their use of technology was improved and expanded because of this partnership. The 
staff of the targeted school began to see both teachers as technology experts and would 
turn to both when problems arose. Further conclusions and recommendations will be 
discussed. 

Conclusions and Recommendations 

This research showed that when integrated into the curriculum on a regular basis, 
technology becomes a powerful tool for learning. In order for this to occur teachers must 
receive ongoing training, be committed to using the technology and have the equipment 
necessary within the walls of the classroom. The children naturally posses the curiosity and 
desire to use technology. 

The most effective form of teacher training found was mentoring. The key to 
mentoring is time and trust. Both teachers felt comfortable asking questions of each other, 
no matter how simplistic they may seem. Both were also committed to the goal of 
increasing the effective use of technology in their curriculums and investing the time needed 
to help one another. As their skill levels increased, the teachers found more and more ways 
to integrate technology into the curriculum. Their open-minded approach allowed them to 
absorb what researchers suggested about giving students more choices, freedom to 
explore, and time to problem solve independently. They very quickly found themselves 
facilitating the learning of their students. Technology talk filled their conversations. Both were 
excited about what their students were doing, their independence, and their enthusiasm. 
Together, the teachers brainstormed ways to exercise their teaching philosophy and 
worked together to solve technology problems as they occurred. 




46 



41 



In the past, the teacher researchers had participated in various workshops and in- 
services both in and out of district. They hoped to increase their technological skills. The 
teachers usually left with a few new concepts or ideas. Although the information received at 
these workshops was useful, it did not always meet their immediate needs. Mentoring, on 
the other hand, allows teachers to receive immediate feedback on the issues that are most 
important and relevant to them. When answers are not immediate, good ideas are often 
left uncompleted or discarded. 

The mentor relationship allowed a greater variety of technology enhanced projects to 
occur, as the mentors often fed off of each other’s ideas. Both teachers had committed 
themselves to teaching technology skills within the curriculum. Technology was never 
viewed as a separate entity. When planning their curriculum, a technological component 
was always included. Skills were taught as they became necessary to complete tasks 
within curricular areas. This integration allowed students to see technology as a tool. 

Many teachers at the targeted building indicated on the teacher survey a desire for a 
separate technology curriculum. This curriculum would be taught by a “technology teacher", 
just as music is taught by the music teacher, in a separate classroom. When technology is 
taught separately, it’s application in the classroom is not readily apparent. Students may 
develop technology skills, but there is no authentic application of those skills. Therefore, it is 
recommended that technology is taught within the classroom, in every area of the curriculum. 
In order for technology to be taught within the walls of the classroom, there must be 
adequate equipment available. 

Along with the original PowerMac computer, the 3 additional iMacs allowed more 
students to access technology on a regular basis. With the aid of the 27” monitor, group 
lessons could be taught and implemented within the classroom. The monitor gives all 
students a visual reference when directions are being given. The monitor also gives 
students the opportunity to share their work with the class. With several computers in the 
classroom, students are able to complete tasks on a rotating basis. Also several tasks can 
occur during the course of the day. For example, during the length of an average day some 
students may create a math story problem using Kid Pix, research their desert animal on- 
line, watch a Living Books CD ROM, and type a journal page. In a week’s time, most 
students will have completed all of the above tasks. In a lab situation, students in the 



o 

ERLC 



47 



42 



targeted building would have only one hour a week to work on the computer. 

Accomplishing all of these tasks in a week would be impossible. Examples of student 
work done on the computer can be found in Appendix D. 

Technology enables students to become problem solvers. As teachable moments 
arise, students and teachers have the internet, CD ROMs, virtual tours, etc. at their disposal. 
Having technology available in the classroom allows students to find solutions to their 
questions as they occur. There is immediate access to information. A weekly lab time does 
not support student problem solving. When computers are not in the classroom, 
technology cannot be used as an effective tool for learning. 

Recommendations to others include: teacher mentoring, complete integration of 
technology within the curriculum, and the availability of technology in the classroom. The TIP 
program provided the much needed equipment. This allowed for daily integration to occur. 
Although the TIP program provided the opportunity for growth, it was not as effective as 
mentoring. Because the TIP program only met once a month, it did not provide immediate 
feedback to teacher questions and problems, which a mentor was able to provide. 

In conclusion, technology is an appropriate and effective tool for learning with primary 
students. Technology is intrinsically motivating to students. It has been demonstrated that 
regular use of technology strengthens students’ problem solving and communication skills. 
For this reason, training teachers on how to use technology effectively is essential School 
districts must provide staff development opportunities. Additionally, it is necessary for 
teachers to view technology as an essential tool in their classroom. Books, paper and 
pencil, are the basic tools of all subject areas. The computer can and should be used as 
such a tool. Therefore, classrooms must be provided with enough equipment to allow all 
students regular access. When all of these components are implemented students will 
develop highly successful technology skills. 



ERIC 



48 



43 



References 



Barker, F., G. (1994, June). Integrating computer usage in the classroom curriculum 
through teacher training Florida: Nova Southeastern University. (ERIC document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 372 751) 

Becker, H. J. (1994, March). Analysis and trends of school use of new information 
technologies [On-line]. Available: htttp://www.gse.uci.edu/EdTechUse [May 1999]. 

Bowman, B. T. (1998). Math, science, and technology in early childhood education. 
(Report No. BBB21954). Chicago, IL: Erikson Institute for Advanced Study in Child 
Development. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 418 774) 

Clements, D., (1998, February 6-8). Young children and technology. Paper 
presented at the Forum on Early A Childhood Science, Mathematics, and Technology 
Education, Washington, DC. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 416 991) 

Conyers, J. G., Kappel, T., & Rooney, J. (1999, February). How Technology Can 
Transform a School. Educational Leadership. 56 (5), 82-84. 

Davis, B. Caruso, & Shade, D. D. (1994, December). Integrate, don’t isolate!— 
computers in the early childhood curriculm. [On-line] 

Available: http://ericeece.org/pubs/digests/1994/shade94.html Champaign, IL : 

Children’s Research Center. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. EDO-PS-94-17) 

Deaton, M. P. (1991, May) Computer integration in the primary grades Virginia. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 337 137) 

Doyle, A. (1999, February). A practitioner’s guide to snaring the net. Educational 
Leadership [On-line serial], 56 (5). Available: 
http://www.ascd.org/pubs/el/feb99/extdoyle.html 

Flake, J. L. (1999). Visioning about technology and learning. Unpublished 
manuscript, University of Florida. [On-line] available: 
http://mailer.fsu.edu/~jflake/AVISION.html 

Labbo, L. D. (1996). Incorporating a computer into the classroom: lessons learned 
in kindergarten. Instructional Resource No. 20. (Report No. BBB30638). Athens, GA: 
National Reading Research Center. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 393 
079) 

Latham, A. S. (1999). Computers and achievement. Educational Leadership. 56 
(5) , 87-88. 

Lazear, D. (1992). Seven ways of knowing. In A. Costa, J. Bellanca, & R. Fogarty 
(Eds.), If minds matter: a foreward to the future voume II designs for change (pp. 135- 
ISO). Arlington Heights, IL: Skylight. 

Maurer, M. M., & Davidson, G. (1999, February). Technology, children, and the 



O 

ERLC 



49 



44 



Maurer, M. M., & Davidson, G. (1999, February). Technology, children, and the 
power of the heart [23 paragraphs]. Phi Delta Kappan International . [On-line serial], 
Available: http://www.kiva.net/~pdkintl/kappan/kmau9902.htm 

McKenzie, J. (1998a, Summer). Ending the seige: introcucing technologies to the 
regular classroom. From Now On The Educational Technology Journal . [On-line]. 

Available: http://www.fno.Org/seige.html#anchor1 11229 

McKenzie, Jamie. (1998b, November). Learning digitally [46 paragraphs]. From 
Now On The Educational Technology Journal [On-line serial], 8 (13). Available: 
http://www.fno.org/nov98/digital.html 

National Educational Technology Standards Project. (1999). Standards for 
students. [On-line], Available: http://cnets.iste.org 

NCATE says teacher accreditation to include tech minimums by 2000. (1998, 
March 18). [15 paragraphs]. Education Technology News. [On-line serial] Available: 
http://xp.bpinews.com/xp/p-etn/i-1998031801/a-890941771/article.view 

Persichitte, K. A., Tharp, D. D., & Carrarella, E. P. (1997) The use of technology bv 
school, colleges and departments of education. 1996. (Report No. BBB14763). 
Washington DC: American Associaation of Dolleges for Teacher Education. (ERIC 
Document Reporduction Service No. ED 422 268) 

Pierce, D. (1999, May 3). On-demand professional development comes via 
satelite. eSchool News online [On-line serial]. Available: http://www.eschoolnews.com/- 
archive/1 999050301 .html 

Pool, C., R. (1997, November). A new digital literacy. Educational Leadership 
[On-line serial]. 55 (3). Available: http://www.ascd.org/pubs/el/nov97/extgilst.html 

Roberts, G. (1999, February). Lessons From Sisyphus in a technological age. 
Educational Leadership. (51 . 75-77. 

Survey: Teachers feel unprepared for technology. (1999, February 22). [15 
paragraphs]. eSchool News online. [On-line serial] Available: 
http://www.eschoolnews.eom/~archive/1 999022201 .html 

Tapscott, D. (1999, February). Educating the net generation. Educational 
Leadership 56 (5), 7-11. 

Thouvenelle, S. (1999a). Do computers belong In early childhood settings? [On- 
line]. Available: http://www.earlychildhood.com/articles/artcbec.html 

Thouvenelle, S. (1999b). Planning for technology in the classroom. [On-line]. 
Available: http://www.earlychildhood.com/articles/artpft.html 

United States Census (1990). [ On-line], Available: 
http://sasquatch.library.orst.edu/cgi-birVbuildit2?filenam=1a-62016.ilp 



O 

ERIC 



50 



45 



Wexcel, Inc. (1999). Town Profile. [On-line], Available: 
http://blue.wexcel.com/a2z/stat/prspkt.html 



o 

ERIC 



51 



APPENDIX A 



TEACHER SURVEY 




52 



47 



Teachers, 

We are doing research for our masters program and would like 
your help in gathering information about technology use at Ross. Just 
so you know, the results of this are for our own private use and is no way 
linked to any school related issues. We appreciate your honesty and 
thoroughness. Please return to Laurie or Julie by September 10, 1999. 
Thank You! 

Julie Murray and Laurie McDermott 



Using 1 as very uncomfortable and 5 as very comfortable. 



I. Rate your comfort level on the following: 



• creating web pages 1 2 

• using e-mail 1 2 

• using the internet 1 2 

• using CD ROMs 1 2 

• saving to a disk 1 2 

• saving to the server 1 2 

• using Claris 1 2 

• using Kid Pix 1 2 

• using Wiggle Works 1 2 

• using digital cameras 1 2 

• using the scanner 1 2 



3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 



4 5 
4 5 
4 5 
4 5 
4 5 
4 5 
4 5 
4 5 
4 5 
4 5 
4 5 



II. Using the same scale please rate your comfort level when 

teaching vour students to use the following: 



creating web pages 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


n/a 


using e-mail 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


n/a 


using the internet 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


n/a 


using CD ROMs 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


n/a 


saving to a disk 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


n/a 


saving to the server 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


n/a 


using Claris 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


n/a 



ERIC 



53 



48 



• using Kid Pix 

• using Wiggle Works 

• using digital cameras 

• using the scanner 



1 2 3 
1 2 3 
1 2 3 
1 2 3 



4 5 n/a 

4 5 n/a 

4 5 n/a 

4 5 n/a 



III. Please circle the one that best applies. 

How frequently do you integrate technology into your 
curriculum? (Ex. Technology is part of a thematic unit or 
project.) 

never once a trimester once a month weekly doily 

How frequently do you use technology as free time? (Ex. when 
work is finished ) 

never once a trimester once a month weekly daily 

How frequently do you use technology for journal writing? 

(Ex. students are creating on the computer.) 

never once a trimester once a month weekly doily 

How frequently do you use technology for editing? 

(Ex. Students type a good copy of handwritten work?) 

never once o trimester once o month weekly doily 

Where do your students use computers more? 

Lob classroom equally in both 



IV. Check all that apply. 

What factors would increase your comfort levels in using 
technology? 

□ in district staff development 

□ out of district staff development 

□ more technology support 

□ more equipment 

□ a formal technology curriculum 

□ other 




54 



APPENDIX B 



STUDENT SELF EVALUATION SURVEY 




55 



50 




ERIC 56 



APPENDIX C 

ENGAGED LEARNING FRAMEWORK 
FOR NATIVE AMERICAN UNIT 




57 



52 



An Engaged Learning Study of Native Americans 
Unit Framework 



‘Social Studies/Multidisciplinary 
‘First and Second Grade 

Learner Description 

Students are heterogeneously grouped, regular education first and second graders from a 
suburban middle-class community. Some students are not English proficient; others may 
receive Title 1 reading and/or other assistance. 

Overview 

Children from the first grade and first and second grade multiage class were involved in a 
study of Native Americans. Classes were divided into small groups. Each group 
researched a specific region of Native Americans. The classes brainstormed what elements 
were important to a culture. Children were then encouraged to discover the food, housing, 
art, transportation, clothing, music, dance, and beliefs of their region’s Native Americans. 

Rationale 

The goal of this unit was to showcase the similarities and differences between Native 
Americans from different regions of the United States. It was important to end the 
stereotypes that children have of all Native Americans. 

This unit qualifies as an engaged learning unit because the students are responsible for 
choosing their region of study, collaboratively obtaining information, recreating the culture in 
the classroom and sharing their information with other classmates. 

Students were given many opportunities to study their region by using the internet, videos, 
e-mail, and other available technological resources. 

This project is authentic, meaningful, and challenging for students because students 
“became the Native Americans” They knew they had to have food, tools, and shelter to 
stay alive. Once they had the basic elements to maintain life they could learn more about 
their culture. Each class had a culminating activity that students were preparing for. The first 
grade students created a Native American museum in their classroom to share their findings. 
Students from other classrooms came to learn from their findings. The children in the 
multiage classroom were preparing for a Powwow, where they too would celebrate and 
share their newly discovered culture. The challenge comes from the open-ended nature of 
the project as well as from the expectation that the students will be required to teach what 
they've learned. The students could take it as far as they wanted to. 

Goals - Content, Cognitive and Social 

Students will: 

‘become more aware of the diversity and commonalities of Native American cultures, 
‘begin to develop research skills using available resources. 

‘begin to develop presentation skills. 

‘begin to develop skills needed to collaborate within a group setting. 

Learning Activities 

1 . Teachers introduced Native American life by reading both fictional and nonfiction books to 
students. 

2. Students gave themselves Native American names. 




58 



53 



3. Students collectively decided on a region that their group would study. 

4. Students created a list of cultural elements to refer to as well as a rubric to assess the 
acquired information and presentation skills. 

5. With teachers as facilitators, regional groups developed ongoing goals about what they 
needed to accomplish/learn. 

6. In their groups, students found information about their topic using a variety of resources. 

7. Students created tools, food, housing, dances, musical instruments, baskets, fishing 
baskets, canoes, dog sleds, to demonstrate their chosen culture. 

8. Cultures were shared either in a classroom museum or a classroom Pow Wow. 

Assessment 

Students were assessed on an ongoing basis. The accuracy and the amount of information 
was regularly reviewed. The teachers, acting as facilitators, conferenced with groups to 
assure that all members were actively participating and that the groups continued to make 
progress. Students were encouraged to refer back to the class made list of cultural 
elements and be sure that all elements were represented in their research. Student 
presentations and written reflections served as an excellent assessment tool. 

Management 

Groups were managed through teacher conferences. Teachers acted as facilitator to make 
sure that each individual is engaged. Each group was given a plastic tub to hold their 
research materials and artifacts. As students created more artifacts, tables and shelves had 
to be cleared to store their things. Students had access to all classroom and library 
materials. The school library is set up for flexible access with help. Parents also helped in 
the room with internet searches, and reading the found research. 




59 



APPENDIX D 



STUDENT WORK SAMPLES 



O 

ERLC 



60 



55 



Work samples include: 

• A reading response using the WiggleWorks application 

• Math stories using the University of Chicago Math Program format- created on Kid Pix 

• Classroom newsletter created in ClarisWorks- text and digital photos by students 

• Calendar to mark monthly classroom events- created using Super Print 

• Big Cheese - student peer interviews created on ClarisWorks 

• Tongue Twisters - created on Kid Pix 

• Crocodile Research - students searched on-line for answers to questions using 
www.google.com 

• Student journal entry- created in ClarisWorks 

• Learning Reflection- created in ClarisWorks 

• Graphic number sentences- stamped in Kid Pix 

• Desert research - research found on-line, pictures downloaded, final project created in 
ClarisWorks 

• Digital Photo Album 

• Do You Believe in Leprechauns? Graph - created in Graph Club 



o 

ERIC 



61 



56 



Reading Response in WiggleWorks 

oo 

CD 







57 



Math Stories in KidPix 




58 



Classrom Newsletter in ClarisWorks 




The Investigative 
Reporter 

March 17, 2000 




Monday 



Tuesday 



Today we had lots of e- 
mail. We got e-mail from 
Mrs. Warner, Mrs. Fixler, 
Mike's mom and Mike's 
aunt. We read the e-mail 
after calendar. We like to 
read e-mail. 

By Kelsey 




Photo by Nobue 



Today we did author 
studies. In author studies we 
made posters. It is about one 
book that the author wrote. 
We did it in the room. 

By Atara 

I do math. We got a new 
math book in math. We did a 
paper that was of pluses. 

By Janett 



Today we wrote about 
our author study. Some of 
the groups had to stay inside 
and they had to finish. Mrs. 
Murray went around the 
room to see our work. 

By Nicole 




Photo by Eric 



In Dear time Friday tutors 
tutored today because on 
Friday we don't have school. 
Right after Dear time we 
went to music. In Dear time 
we had about 25 minutes to 
read. In Dear time we didn't 
have partner time. We 
started Dear time about 
1 2:40 and we stopped at 
1:15. 

By Mike 



o 

ERIC 



66 





59 



Calendar Created in SuperPrint 




Q. 

< 



CO 



( A 

D 

|S 



■o 

0) 



</) 

0) 

(2 



3 

K> 





03 


uo 


22 


29 




r^- 




21 

good friday 
no school 


28 

walk to the 
PUBLIClibary 




CO 


CO 


O 


N. 








CM 


cm<S 










73 










£ 










£ 










<0 










c 










> 










CD 










€ 










B 




to 


CM 


O) 


CO 










CM 






> 










05 










73 










€ 










Id 










CO 




75 






’c 




CD 






(5 




8 






t— 


03 


LQ 






_ od 

■a 




CM 
















CD 










C V- 










ga 




75 






*8 




CD 






s §_ 




8 




CO 


o 


N. 








T— 


t— >> 


CM 








05 










73 










si 




















-p=i (D 










2 O) 


05 

CJ) 








m ~0 

Z= LU 


8 




CM 


O) 


CO 


O 








T— 


C2 










CO 










CM 



00 

CD 



!> 

CD 



O 

ERIC 



Big Cheese 

Student Peer Interviews in ClarisWorks 

Karo line 

Pink is Karoline's favorite color. 

Blue is Karoline's second favorite 
color. 

Karo line has no pets. Karo line 
likes turtles. 

Karoline's nickname is String. 

Spaghetti is Karoline's favorite 
food. 



Dan drew dynomite dinosaurs. 



61 



Tongue Twisters 

P.rontoH in Wi H Piv 




o 

D- 





Crocodile Research 
Answers found online 



62 



Names 

Crocodile Research Project 

1. Do a search on google.com for crocodiles. 

2. Pick a website and answer these questions. 

Can crocodiles see well? 



How do crocodiles use their teeth? 



What is crocodile skin like? 



Write a research question. 



The answer to my question is... 




72 



63 



Student Journal Entries 



Me and tv>y friend* went hike ridlns 
to,?et^er. Ater we ha d a ^Icfcntefc and 
my dad read to o*. T^en we rlded 
a^en wM my frier)4s*The £nd 
By t>ana 



My 

Brothers 

Accident 

I was timing my brother around 
the block and he fell on the 
corner.He brokethe biggest 
bone.lt is the femur bone.He fell 
off his bike. The End 

By Matt 




73 



64 






Student Learning Reflections 

All about owls. 

I learned owls cough up owl pelist. 

I learned that in owl pelist there are 
bones and fur. I learned some big 
owls eat little owls. With out owls the 
rodents would eat the food from the 
farms. I like learning about owls. 

The Oct/12/99 

Netherlands 

In the Netherlands I learned that they have 
different money. I also learned that thier houses 
are surrounded by water. I learned that they 
yous dams so the water doesn't flood the vilig. 
Mrs.Murray read a book.lt was called the hole in 
the dam. BY VANESSA 




74 



65 



Desert Research 

Tarantulas live in a tunnel under 
ground. Some females may live 
long as 25 years. Tarantulas 
eat grass hoppers and they eat 
beatles and they eat bugs. 
They are friendy but some 
bite, 
by 

Steven 




o 

ERIC 



75 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 








Digital Photo Album 



Native American Research 




$?;. best copy available 76 

ERIC 








How Many? 



Do You Believe In Leprechauns? 
Created in Graph Club 



Do you Believe in Leprechau... 


What? 


How Many? 


© 


1 0 




8 




o 

ERIC 



77 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 






I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



ntie: K Use, or\A Xnlo 

Primary CiAMfi 


jrari&r\ o-f 


Author(s): hKc b^CV>rvQ V\ . L&lirlf. MUfOlM . sialic 


■ " ” ■ ■■ n 

Corporate Source: 

Saint Xavier University 


Publication Date: 
ASAP 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



Level 1 

m 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents 


The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2A documents 


The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2B documents 


PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

$ 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

/ 






r <K 




J 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 



Level 2A 

T 

□ 



Level 2B 



□ 



Check here for Level 1 release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination In microfiche or other 
ERIC archival media (e.g., electronic) and paper 
copy. 



Check here for Level 2A release, permitting Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 

reproduction and dissemination in microfiche and in reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 

electronic media for ERIC archival collection 
subscribers only 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box Is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here,-* 

please 




/ hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 




Printed Name/Positionn'itle: r , , , . . rrU i n 

Student/s FBMP 


“’■“■““"■S.lnt Xavier University E. Mosaic (1 
3700 W. 103rd St. Cfigo, IL 60655 


T ffi8^02-6214 


F/ ft)8-802-6208 


lilWaifcSxu.edu 


“• i)-n-oo 



(over) 




r 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor. 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 


ERIC/REC 




2805 E. Tenth Street 




Smith Research Center, 150 




Indiana University 




Bloomington, IN 47408 



ERIC 



