DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 277 519 



RC 016 047 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
MOTE 
PUB TYPE 



JOURNAL CIT 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Harjo, Joy; And Others 
The Creative Process. 
85 

16p. 

Viewpoints (120) " Creative Works 
(Literature^Drama/Fine Arts) (030) 
Articles (080) 

Wicazo Sa Review; vl nl p38-52 Spr 



— Journal 



1985 



MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; ^American Indian Literature; 
American Indians; Literary Criticism; ^Literary 
'i!>evices; ^Literary Styles; *Poetry ; *Poets ; Writing 
(Composition); ^Writing Processes 

Cook Lynn (Elizabeth); Harjo (Joy); Kenny (Maurice); 
Ortiz (Simon J) 



ABSTI»ACT 

Four Native American poets in easy narrative style 
tell about some o£ the aesthetic judgments they make in their work 
and, in the process, shed some light upon the traditions from which 
their poetry emerges* Joy Harjo discusses how she wrote **The Woman 
Hanging from the Thirteenth Floor Window,** her use of repetition 
influenced by music and preaching, and her vision of Indian women who 
inspired the poem* Maurice Kenny describes the illness which evoked 
associations for the poem **Wild Strawberry** and the significance of 
the strawberry for the Iroquois people* Simon J* Ortiz relates the 
conversation which inspired his political poem, **That*s the Place 
Indians Talk About,** the revision process used to rework the poem, 
and the narrative technique chosen for this work. Elizabeth Cook-Lynn 
comments on her poem, **Survival*** Texts of all four poems are 
included. (NEC) 



iciticieiciciciticiticiticiticiciticiciticitiiiciciciciticicieieititieitieititieitieitieieititititieieieieitieieie^ 

^ Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 
* from the original document* * 

iticicticticitti:it ititicitticicicitit iticictic:k4cicieitieieieititit itieieieieieieitieieieitieieieiei^ 



THE CREATIVE PROCESS 



uJ 



"PBRMISSrON TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERICK" 



EDVCATJONWL flESOUFSCeS JhfFOfllWAnOM 
CENTER lERlO 

NQTtiis document has bo«n rAproducvd is 
I ^•c*#v*<l (fom (h« p«Mort or 0f0«rtiiatK>n 

O Minof ct5«>0>» have be«n niade to imp*ov# 

# ^^o^n^«o<vl«w0^op^ftonsS1»l*^^mlh(Sdoc^^ 
nk»nt ijo not rt«»utftfy nprtseni nfftct^i 
OERi potnion or policy 



N 



To the readers of niodem pocfry. 
Amerindian works ftavc grained signi/i- 
cantrecogn/tion/n the ]^^tdcc2dc orso. 
Some imporamt collections like Angle of 
Geese and Gourd Dancer by Scott 
Moniaday and Goir^ for the Ruin by 
5itnon J. Ortiz hold a firm anci comfor- 
table place on our library shelves. In the 
following pages, four Native poets (Or- 
tiz, Kenny, Cook and Harjo) in easy nar- 
rative style tell us about some of the 
aesthetic judgments they make in their 
work and, and in the process, throw 
some light upon the traditions from 
which their poetry emerges. 



The Woman 
Hanging from the 
Thirteenth Floor 
Window 



Published in She Had Some Horses by Joy 
Har/o, Thunder's Mouth Press, NY. 

She is ihc voman ba^iging from tbc 13th floor 
window. Her tmis ire pressed while against the 
coflcietc moulding of the tenement building, Siie 
hangs from the l3th floor window in cast Chicago, 
withaswuiofbtrds over her head They could 
be 2 baio, or a storm of glass waJtii^ to crush her 

She thinks she will be set fret. 

lite woman hanging u<:m iHe l3th floor win(fow 
on the east side of Chicago is not alone. 
She is a woman of children, of the biby. Carlos, 
and of Margaret, aad of Jimmy who is the oldest. 
She IS her moiher's daughter and her father's son. 
^e IS several pieces between the two UvsbiiuSs 
she has bad. She is all the women of the apartment 
building who stand watching her, witching themselves. 

When she was young she ate wild nee on scraped down 
plates in warm wood rooms. It was in ttie faniier 
north and she «as the baby then. They rocked her. 



She sees take Michigan tapptng it the shorts of 
herself, it is a dizzy hole of witer and the nch 
live in tail glass houses at the edge of it in some 
places lake Michigan speaks soEtty^ here, it just sputters 
and butts itself against the asphalt. She sees 
other buildings fust like hers. She ^ other 
women banging from many-f ooied windows 
countii^ their ihres in the palms of their hands 
and in the pahns of their children s hands 

She is the woman hanging txm the 13th floor window 
on the Indian sid: of town. Her belly is soft from 
her children's binhs. ^ wom fevis svring down betow 
her waist, and then her feet, aad then her heart 
She IS danglii^. 

The woman banging from the l3th floor hears voices. 
They come to her in the ntght when the lights have gone 
dim. retimes they are little cats mewing and scratching 
at the door, sometimes they are her grandmother's voice, 
aad sometimes they are gigantic men of light whispering 
to her to gft up, to g^t up, to get up. Thii's when she wants 
to ha\x another child to hold onto in the night, to be able 
to fail back into dreams. 

And the woman hanging from ihe l3th floor window 
hears other voices Some of dkem scream out from betow 
for berio jump, they would push her over Others cr)' softly 
IhHD Ok Srilcwib, puU ibnr cbiklten up 1^ 
diem imo iheir arms. They woi'id hc|p her, like tbcmset^'es 

But she ts the woman from the l3lh floor wuidowi 
and she knows she is hanging by her own fingers, her 
own skin, her owu thread of indecision. 

She thinks of Carlos, of Margaret^ of Jimmy. 
She thi&b of her fatbert and of her mother. 

thinks of all the women sbe has been, of ail 
the men She thinks of the color of her skin, aad 
of Chicago streets, and of wiierfalls and pmes 
She thinks of mootdight nights, and of cod spnng storms 
Her mind chatters like neon and northside bars 
She thinks of the i a.m. lonelinesses that have foldeti 
her up like death, discordant, without logical and 
beautiful conclusion. Her teeth break off at the edges. 
She would speak. 

The woman hangs (tm the t3ih floor window crying for 
the lo^t beauty of her own life, 5he sees the 
sun Mmg west over the grey plane of Chicago 
5he thinks she remembers listenir^ to her own life 
break loose, as she fails from the 13th floor 
window on the east side of Chicago, or as she 
climbs back up to claim herself again. 




38 



m zmmmii 



-ow did this poem begin? 
This poem began two years before I 
began writing it, during a trip to Chicago 
to visit friends, see the King Tut ext^it 
and look for other Indians. I found the 
Chicago Indian Center at nearly dusk. It 
could have been any other urban Indian 
center, the same part of the city, a color 
like lost dreams, air tasting like a borrow- 
ed hope, and always the tagged pool 
tables where kids acting twice their age 
shoot pool downhill all day. 

One particular image stayed with me 
for two years, and it probably wasn't ex- 
actly what I saw, but changed, transform- 
ed with living. And it wasn't the most 
s^f^nificant Image I remember, or it didn't 
appear to be, but something about that 
one small room, hardly anyone in it, a 
western window with no curtains, 
maybe a few toothless Venetian blinds, 
and a rocking chair, especially that bony 
rocking chair with stuffing coming out 
of the paddiQg, and the sun falling behind 
a horizon of skyscrapers, triggered the 
poem, the story in it. 

What sttl! strikes me about the 
remembering is not knowing whether 
''for rear' anyone had been rocking in 
that rocking chair, but everytime I 
remember it I remember a young woman 
nursing a baby, or an old man with a 
greasy paper sack on his leaning back, 
.softly breathing; or two kids rocking it 
hard and being warned to slow it down; 
or that old woman at forty who w?tch* 
ed the sunset as receding light across the 
floor; or the other one laughing at her 
sister's terrible jokes; or anyone I may 
have seen or not seen in rhat rocking 
chair. 

The woman hanging from the thir- 
teeruh floor window could have been in 
that chair^ just hours before, letting that 
steady rhythm calm her, a heartbeat 
against wood, trying to dream her own 
regeneration, so that any kind of 
hopelessness w<Hildn't be overwhelming. 

Out of this the poem took root, two 
years before the actual writing began. 

I wrote the poem one afternoon as I 
sat at my desk in my office at the Institute 
of American Indian Arts in Santa Fe, after 
I puUed out a sheath of papers one of 
which had a note on it about the Chicago 
Indian Center, something quickly scribbl* 



ed about the rocking chair* that room. 

It was probably one of the quicker 
poems I have written, in terms of getting 
its basic structure down, the basic line of 
it. And unusual in the sense that I kept 
feeling her there, standing behind me, 
urging me on. 



hat changes did you make? 
I don't recall all the changes I made 
after the ftrst draft of the poem, but theie 
were many. I probably wound up with 
at least 20 P^cs of revision and then 
some. These days when I write it*s even 
more revision. To me chat is much of the 
art of writing, the craft of it, taking care 
that the language fits, that what is meant 
is clear in terms of what is evoked in the 
reader, the listener, and what is spoken 
is said so beautifully even when speak- 
ing into moments/events that I have to 
painfully see. 

As a poet I feel that it is my respon- 
sibility tc b^ clear and alive in my work, 
to not add to the confusion. 



hat techniques did you use? 
One technique I often use, and use in 
**The Woman Hanging from the Thir- 
teenth Floor Window" is that of repeti- 
tion. For me it is a way of speaking that 
can, if used effectively, make the poem 
lift off the page and enter into the listener 
much like a song or a chant. Repetition 
has always been used, ceremonially, in 
telling stories, in effective speaking, so 
that what is said becomes a litany, and 
gives you a way to enter in to what is be- 
ing said, and a way to emerge whole, but 
changed. 

Also important as to why a certain 
technique would be appealing to a par- 
ticular poet aiul/or poem has much to do 
with background, culture, family 
histories. What I call my influences tn 
terms of writing are a combination of 
many musics, including: country western 
songs, like the ones my mother played 
on the radio, jukeboxes and often sang 
around the house: preaching, such as that 
tione by Creek preachers, like that one 
of my Creek grandfather Marcy Harjo; 
Creek Stomp Dance songs; jazz, which I 
know my tribe had something to do with 
it's beginnings, coming like we do from 



AIabam> and places south just listen to 
our music; early Motown we played at 
Indian school, danced to it and Icnew all 
the w(&d5; and always the heartbreaking 
blues. 



ho is your audience? 
Who I saw when 1 closed my eyes and 
wrote this poem were women, mostly 
Indian women, ihose who survived and 
those who weren't strong enough 
{whose words we'll always have to 
carry), the ones who speak through me, 
and even those who hate me for speak- 
ing. I saw women who were holding 
many children, others embracing lovers, 
some dancing the stomp dance and 
others swinging hard out on some spin- 
ning dance floor. Heard much weeping, 
and even more laugluer. 

I think 1 always write with especially 
these women in mind because I want us 
all to know as women, as Indian people, 
as human beings that there is always 
hope, that we are whole, alive, and 
precious. 



c 



'an this poem be paraphrased? 
Yes. it is basically easy to paraphrase, 
whereas other poems I have written 
would be nearly impossible to 
paraphrase. It goes like this: an Indian 
woman from Wisconsin who has come 
into Chicago to make a living, because 
she can't at home, is hanging by her 
hands from her apartment building. She 
is desperate, fects alone, and at the mo- 
ment the poem begins has difficulty see- 
ing her Ufe fit clearly, with any kind of 
beautiful meaning. 

She watches her life pass in front of 
her. Thinks especially of her children, 
and of her home, and knows that where 
she is from Lake Michigan speaks another 
tone of voice because she has sat on the 
lake shore and listened long and hard to 
the stories. Here in Chicago Lake 
Michigan speaks more desperately as it 
slams itself against the concrete along the 
edge of the waterfront. She, too, feels the 
city as abrupt, hard. 

She sees people gather below her and 
knows herself as many of the women 
who are watching. Even though there arc 
those who are screaming for her to jump 
I like to feel she sees other possibilities 



in those who, "pull their children up l^^c 
/lowers and gather them into their 
amds/' in those who remember ttfe, and 
can tell their own survival. 

The end of the poem I left deliberate- 
ly ambiguous. The listener doesn't know 
whether she jumped, or whether she 
pulled herself backup. Tve always liked 
stories that were able to accomplish that 
kind of ending well. There aren't too 
many of them. *'The Lady or the Tiger*' 
is One. That kind of ending can work as 
long as there is still a resolution in the 
ambiguity. 



A 



personal comment 
Many people have come up to me after 
a poetry reading and asked me about this 
woman who was hanging from the thir- 
teenth floor window, because they were 
sure they knew her, or one of her 
cousins, her sister, or they had read 
about the story in the newspaper where 
they lived, be it New York or Lincoln 
Nebraska, or Albuquerque. It was familiar 
to them, haunted chem after hearing the 
poem because it evoked some possible 
memory. 

I know there is a woman, perhaps 
many women are this woman. And you 
know her, or thought you did, or wilL 
Because it's a story that has happened, 
perhaps ;t's happening row. 

Wild Strawberry 



by Maurice Kenny 
For Helene 

And 1 rode the Greyhound down to Brooklyn 
where I sit now eating woody strawbenies 
grown on t^.^- ijacks of Mexican fiarmers 
imported from the fields of their hands^ 
juices without color or sweetness. 

my wild blood berries of spring meadows 
sucked byjune bees and protected by hawks 
have siained my face and honeyed 
my tongue , . . healed the sorrow in my flesh 

vines crawl across the grassy floor 
of the north, ^tter to the world 
sreklnf', the light of the sun and innocent 
tap ot the rain to feed the roots 
and bud smalf white flowers that in June 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



will CHim fhiit and announce spring 
when woif will drop winter fur 
ami wrens will break the egg 

my blood« blood berries that brought laughter 
and the ache in the stoop«] back that vied 
with dandelions for the pluckingi 
and the wities nourished our youth and heralded 
tris, com and summer melon 
we fought bluebirds for the seeds 
arm^d ag^Umt garter snake^i field mice; 
won the battle with the burmng sun 
which blinded our eyes and froze our hands 
10 the vifics and the eanh where kn^s knelt 
and we laughed in the moming dew like worms 
and gnibs; we scented age and wisdom 

my mother wrapped the wounds of the world 
with a sassafras poultice and we ate 
wild berries with their juices running 
down the roots of our mouths and our by 

1 sit here in Brooklyn eating Mexican 
bcnics which 1 did not pick, nor do 
1 know the hands which did. nor their stories . . ■ 
January snow falls, listen ... 



.ow did this poem begin? 
In the winter of 1978, January to be 
exact, living in Brooklyn Heights In New 
York City I was tlL A close friend and 
nearby neighbor had the goodness of 
heart and thought to bring to my sick bed 
a basket of cultivated strawberries. 
Helene knew my fondness for the fruit 
and just how itnponant the strawberry 
is to me and my poetry. The wild 
strawberry is not only the first natural 
fruit of the eastern f^pnng, bv.t it is the 
symbol of life to Iroquois people. The 
strawberry does hold strong sigtitficance 
for all the people of the Six Nations and 
for myself as a person, as a Mohawk 
writer and as both an editor and 
publisher* In 1976 I established 
Strawberry press to be an exclusively 
Native American Press to publish the 
poetry and art of Native People, There 
were, and remain still today, other 
Native A'nericans who publish Indian 
writing, but not exclusively. Joseph 
Bruchac of the Greenfield Review and 
Press, of Abanaiki descent himself, in- 
deed, publishes many Native American 
writers aiHl it may well be the presses 
thrust but he also publishes Black, 
Chicano, Asian, Anglo and African 



writers. William Oandasan, 
Yuki/FilJpmOi publishes "A" Press and 
Magazine likewise prints the works of ^ 
multicultural group of authors, Bro, 
Benet Tvedtcn, deserving high praise tor 
his Blue Cloud Quanerly and Press, has 
published more Native AmetScan writers, 
and others cn related subjectSi than 
anyone. Yet, Bk*o, Benet is of Swedish 
abstraction. 

As I rallied from the illnessi and while 
biting inro those cultivated berries, suck- 
ing juices, I began to realize, to remember 
the many mornings of my childhood at 
home in northern New York State when 
I would follow my mother and two older 
sisters Into the flowering fields where the 
wild strawberry vines crawled under the 
sun, 

Strawberr>'ing 

morning 
broods 

in the wide river 
Mama bends 

light 

bleeds 

always 
in her day of 

picking 
(our fields are stained) 
the moon, bats 

tell us 

to go 
in the scent of 

bernes 
fox 

awaken 

in stars 
1979* 

With their children other women, 
often my mother*s friends, would be 
there picking and filling their baskets. It 
was a good time* Burning hot that it was 
in those open meadow's breezes did rush 
the grasses and flowr^rs from off either 
Lake Ontario or the it. Lawrence River, 
k was a time of laughter, jokes and teas- 
ing, cries and tears from we children 
bored with the labor and eager for a 
river swim, and cenainly a time of not 
only filling the belly with the delicious* 
ly honeysweet fruit, dripping in 
ripeness, but a time when the women 
exchanged, what I thought were stories, 
gossip, I am convinced that was the 
reason they came to the fields. Even 




ic 



41 



BEST COPY AVMLABLE 



then, in 1934-35, those many years back 
cultivated berries could be bought at 
roadside stands or in the village markets. 

Also while eating the berries in my 
sick bed I recalled a strong sentiment of 
the Lakota Holy Man, Black Elk: 
"When the ceremony was ow* everybody fell 
a great dc^ better* for it had beet^ a <lay of fun. 
They wcte better able now lo sec the greetwiess 
of the world* the widcness of the sacred ^y* 
the colors of the canh* and to these in their 
minds."" 

There is no doubt in my mtnd that pick- 
ing wild strawberries was a ceremony, 
and to this day has offered me a better 
look at the grasses of the wortd, the 
width of a sacred day, and certainly the 
* 'colors of the earth Picking those ber- 
ries enriched not only our everyday lives 
and bellies but imaginations and spirits 
as well* We all, even the children, truly 
felt better later, f wanted to write of this 
good feeling, this betterment and 
enrichment. 

This year, winter l983, strawberries 
were ihipped air freight to the United 
States from Chile, in South America . . . 
a long v/ay from the home meadows of 
the nonh. Obviously air freighted fruit 
miist be harvested rather green* and need 
to complete the cycle en route. And * so, 
too, the berries m the basket which 
Helene had brought to me in January of 
1978. The straw basket was stamped 
with puiple ink: **Hecho En Mexi^y* . . . 
meanmg, made m Mexico. This sent my 
thou{*fhts and concerns reeling. 1 knew 
that much of the fruit bought in New 
York City winter markets are raised in 
Mexico* The peaches* watermelons, can- 
taloupe, and berries are raised in the 
Mexican State of Sonora* I have spent 
large chunks of time in Mexico. I also 
kiiew that these fruits, and especially the 
strawberries, were grown with the side 
of chemical fertilizers, chemicals tnat 
could and surely would cause great pain 
to the people working those fields with 
bare hands. So as I sat in my bed popping 
herries into my dry mouth 1 recognized 
the horrendous fact that people were 
possibly dying, people I did not personal- 
ly know, nor never would; people were 
dying so that I could eat those terrible 
berries in a winter city* an unnatural time 
to be eating strawberries. And they were 
terrible* Large that they were, at least an 



inch in circumference, they were 
tasteless* Below the bright red skin the 
flesh was colorless, pale white* I did 
thank my friend profusely, but once she 
had left, I not only threw the wretched 
fruit ov^ but vowed Td never eat Mex- 
ican strawberries again unless I personal- 
ly knew the hands that raised and pick- 
ed them for the table, and especially 
those harvested in Sonora. 

Directly, I was not the cause of this 
pain to the workers in Sonora. fm suffi^ 
ciently realistic to comprehend this. My 
purchasing these fruits decidedly 
encouraged the use of not only the 
chemical fentlizers but the deaths of men 
and women, probably children as well, 
i v^as acutely aware that they, the 
harvesters, could not enjoy the labors as 
we had when I was a child of those nor- 
thern meadows, meadows etched by 
blackeyed susan, purple clover* 
dandelion; meadows sung to by wrens, 
larks, blue jays; meadows that tn the con- 
tinuum not only supponed our desires 
for fresh fruit, but supported our 
strengths as a people and as a Nation for 
the wild strawberry was given :o us by 
the "Mttle people" who live In a quarry 
for the pleasure of eating and to be used 
in a healing ceremony. 

December 

Set up the drum. 

Winter s on the creek 

Dark men sit in dark kitchens. 
Words move the air 
A neighbor is sick 
Needs prayer. 

Women thaw frozen 
strawberries. 

In the dark room . a drum 

Kids hang out 
eating burgers 
at McDonalds. 
The Williams boy 
is drunk. 

Set up the drum. 

Berries thaw, 
are crushed^ 
fingers stained* and tongues. 



6 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



Set op the drum, 
A neighbor is sick. 
Say 1 prayer- 

L-'xk men sit in dark kitciicns. 

w 

Wind ractlcs ttic moon. 

While nibbling those horrible 
cultivated berries I became enraged with 
the conglomerate fruit companies, as 
Ncfuda had years ago, which control the 
lives of those Mexican farmers who 
scratch out a meager livelihood from the 
sandst and I was discouraged with my 
own self. 

w 

▼V hat changes did you make? 

Originally the poem was a great deal 
longer, I have not preserved either the 
first or early drafts which had been 
copied into a notebook now destroyed. 
But I recall it was entitled, "Ceremony." 
and ran, as a chant, into three or four 
pages. I wrote in a fury , and words 
sprawled across the lined pages like berry 
vines, I have composed numerous chants 
best heard on the ear rather than read on 
the page and consequently I first felt 
'Xeremony" was meant to be another 
chant. The title was indicative to the 
poem'<; direction. I had titled it before 
writing down the first lines. Ceremony:- 
meaning prayer, music, song, dance, 
ritual, I would not only offera thanksgiv- 
ing to the strawberries, and life under the 
rejuvenating sun itself, to the Creator, 
but a prayer for the workers in those 
commercial Sonoran fields. I would sing 
this prayer or chant and incorporate, as 
I had been doing with other poems at 
that tiroe, not merely a music but dance 
in the beat, the meter of the line. In 
repetition, I would invoke the ''little 
people'' to come to the aide of those 
farmers; I would invoke the spirit of 
those who had passed away because of 
the chemicals; 1 would invoke the 
memory of my mornings of June 
meadows when Td picked beside niy 
mother and sisters. ^ would produce a 
political lyric in the form of a chant. 

In 1977 Leslie Marmon Silko, the 
Laguna poet and novelist, published her 
incredibly beautiful Ceremony, Natural- 
ly, I read it, and was not only well ac- 



quainted with the context and ideas of 
the work, but was deeply aware of the 
ceremony underlining her intentions. 
The very first draft of my own "Wild 
Strawberry" was dedicated to Leslie 
because of the influence she had had on 
the makings of a poem. In a way, I'd sup- 
pose, it was rather an affirmation of 
Leslie's ingenious power in her novel. 
Ceremony, that spurred my poem, and 
the thrust of her foundation and form 
and poetic language which encouraged 
me. So the dedication was an obvious 
testimony of my great and abiding 
respect for Leslie Siiko's creativity. 
There, then, is when the thought process 
changed, and the poem heavily 
rethought, revised, reshaped. It was a 
matter of selection as all good poetry is 
a matter of selection: the most telling 
phi'ase, image of widest connotation, 
sy^nbol of depth and metaphor of width; 
the right words in the right place, I chose 
to compose a circle of worddancers that 
would ripple out to encompass many 
worlds and all people, my residence in 
Brooklyn, the commercial fields in Mex- 
ico, my childhood and home, the past 
and rite. 

And t rode the Greyhound down to Brooklyn 
Adhere I sit eating woody siraT'bcrries 
grown on the backs of Mexican farmers 
imported from the fields of their hands, 
ibices without color or sweetness ' 

It had to be a catching first line, a startl- 
ing opening stanza. Riding a Greyhound 
would surely cause a reader to pause. 
The first line mtisf begin w.Uh a conjunc- 
tion to designate a past, a prefix, a 
preface. The last line was destined to end 
with an elipse ^o suggest continuum of 
birth and death, prayer and rite, song and 
story, time's cycle of seasons. . .winter 
to winter. And for a poem within a 
poem, a flashbacic, a frame was con- 
structed of Brooklyn and Mexican images 
within which the poet sat eating berries 
and reminiscing of a long ago time, an in^ 
nocent time, perhaps a traditional and 
ritualistic time, and a ttrne frought with 
Joy and pleasure, hope and a future 
though not void of pain and labor such 
as the Me:cican farmers were then, and 
probably now, knew. As Black EYx sug- 
gests, a fresh time in which we will be 
''better able to see the greenness of the 



7 



BEST COPY AVAIIABIE 



world, the widencss of the sacred day, 
the colors of the earth/* And we would 
feci **a great deal better." 

Pain ^nd labor leading to feeling * *bet- 
ter/* and the differences bcftwecn two 
opposing sets of pain and labor would be 
the contact between the poet and the 
worker ... not the strawberry which 
would be the larger image/symbol of re* 
juvenarion. Blood would become the 
cetitral word or sound: blood or juice of 
the wild berry, blood of my ancestors 
and the Nation, blood of my blood of the 
future, blood as sweet as wild berries; 
blood of the workers in the Mexican 
fields, their blood corroded and eaten, 
or sucked dry by the cancer resulting 
from the chemical fertilizers; blood spill- 
ed so to speak. Governmental 
genocide of Indian peoples is never too 
far from my mind as its history is so long 
and fhe possible present reality a perma- 
nent fact. 1 could have composed a poem 
dealing with Indian people working in 
the uranium mines in fhe southwest and 
the horrors produced upon their con- 
taminated bodies and minds. There is a 
certain shock appeal by using the word 
''blood/' erpecially when reading poems 
aloud to an audience, ft suggests con- 
tinuiry and both family and clan ties, and 
in ny work it should suggest the Iroquois 
Confederacy, or the League of Six Na- 
tions as founded by Dagana^idah and 
Ayonwatha, the Mohawk prophet and 
his spokesperson. Blood mubt suggest 
war, death, violence, the massacres of In- 
dian people across history since the Euro- 
pean came to this land. Turtle's bac^, 
America. Blood is powerful. 

i dropped the title, "Ceremony/* 
changed the form from an oral chant to 
a free verse lyric and commenced revi- 
sions, redrafting, the blue print, the 
poem's foundation. Under the first title, 
''Ceremony*' the poem flowed in a 
somewhat stream-of-consciousness 
technique or pattern. Now structured it 
tended to be more dejiberate, less instinc- 
tive, inspirational and free flowing. It 
hardens like taffy pulled by buttered 
hands, or, perhaps more apt, like jam 
cooking to a firm for preserving. Words 
rather than chanting sounds bore the 
meaning and became drops of jelly in the 
belly of the poem . I purposely chose im- 



ag^ that most readers could easUy relate 
to and identify with, such as spring 
mcadowst June bees, bluebirds, and the 
like. I also placed in with the images Iro- 
quois traditional symbols: hawks flying 
close to the spirit world; ganer snakes, 
mundane, close to the ground^ wolf, a 
Mohawk clan, and a chn more associated 
with spirit, nvedicine and healing than 
the other two clans, etc. 

The poem was finbhed in a few days. 
It was not published until the collection 
Dancing Bsick Strong The mrion (Blue 
Cloud Qu^erly Press, 1979) appeared. 
"Wild Strawberry** has been translated 
into Japanese, Creation and Dutch. 

c 

V^an this poem be paraphrased? 

Perhaps, but best not by myself. 1 
believe that Paula Gunn Allen in her in- 
troduction to the collection adequately 
sums It up: 
The volume moves with the consciousness of 
the poet recovering what has been lost, first ar- 
ticulating what that is. then how it came to be 
lost, then exploring the exaa dimen^iom of the 
grief, pam and anger that mtjst accompany loss 
In the end'^resolution occurs simultaneous- 
ly celebrate the past by finding it in a mean- 
ingless prc^nt. 

In this fusion, the poet discovers for himself 
and for us the real mcanmg of past and pre^nt, 
for the snow falls tn Brooklyn as on the reser- 
vation, and there are stories everywhere, if we 
hear 

''January snow falls, listen ..." 

''Wild Strawberry** is a richly im- 
portant poem to me and is the center* 
piece of all my work; it is like the 
berry plant vine itself crawling across 
the floor of spring meadows seeking 
the light of the sun. 

Wild Strawberry was first ptibU5hc<i in Dancing 
Back Strong The Nation Copydght 1979 by 
Afaurice Kcnny^ pub/j^hed by the Blue Cloud 
Quarterly. Second expanded eduion o/^ Danc- 
ing Back strong The Nation Copyright 1979 & 
1981 by muncc Kenny. put!t»hcd by white 
P/ne Press, 73 PtitnAm. Biiffsdo. N.Y. 1420. 

*from Kzzdtng The Blood, strawberry Press. 
Copyright 19S1 by Maurice Kenny 

**from Black Elk Speaks^ University of 
Nebraska. Copyright I96l 

'"First published in River ^^'X^' Copynghl 
1980 by Maurice Kenny 

Photo Credit Kobcn Browning 



8 



m eopy AyAiiABiE 



That's the Place 
Indians Talk About 

by Simon J. Ortiz 

Wc^uptiicre andcaoip. 
Scvm) <Iays. wc suy there 
We tta-t to tike hoisci. wagons, 
or walk. 

And wc would stay 
for the days wc hxvz to. 

The Coso Hoi Spnngs would talk to us. 
And wc would talk to it. 
Tbe People have to talk to it. 
Tbat's the place Indians talk about. 
That's the place. 

Chilten, women, men. 

wc would ail go up there 

You drink that water, it tnakcs >'0u well 

You ptit it on youf hands, face, all over 

and you get well, ail well 

That's tike place Indians talk at>out, 

the Coso Hot Springs the Ptopk go to. 

You take a flint like this, 
a hard stone in your hand, 
and you give it (ike this. 
V^hcn you pray. 
Vbcn you sii^. 

When you talk to the hot spnng^. 
You uUc with it ^'hcn it talks to you 

Something from there, 

from down in there ts talking to you 

You coui-] hear it. 

You listim. 

Listen. 
You can hnr it. 

Hk stones in the earth rattling together. 

The stones (town there titoving around each other 
When we pfay. 
When we sing. 

When we talk with the stones 
rattling in the ground 
and the stones moving in the ground 
That's tbe place Indians talk about. 

Ob. 

wc suy tbcft for some days. 
You could bear it talking. 

firoiD fir away inside, tbe moving power. 
Ftom far away, coming to us, 
commg to us pretty soon. 
Getting doscr, getting dose. 



the power is getting close. 

and the ground is hot and shaking 

Something is doing that 
and the I'eople know that 
They have to keep talkii^. 
Praying, that s the Indian way. 
Singing, that's tile Indian way. 
And pretr/ soon, it'stheie 
You know it's all around. 
l!'s right there, 

and the People are right there. 
That's the place Indians talk about. 

And noi^% 

they have a fence around the Coso Hot Springs, 

We ^ up there, but they have a fence around. 

They \mt a govenuncnt fence all irtHind Coso Hot Spni^. 

Since World War II. the Navy of the government 

has 1 fence around that pbce. 

The People go up there to talk with the bot spnngi 

to use the povrcr, to keep ourselves well with. 

but there is a lence with locks up there all around. 

and we have to talk with the Nav>^ people 

so they can let us inside the fence to the hot spnng^ 

We go up there to talk with the hot springs power 
imt the Navy tells us we have to talk to them 
We don't like it, to have to do that. 
We don't ^^ant to talk to the government fence, 
the government Navy. 

That^s tbe place the Indian people are talking about now 

For many years. 

the People went up there 

Families from all over. 

From Nevada, from Utan. from Arizona, 

from nonh California, from south, 

from all o cr. from anyplace 

Families have to travel by horses, 

wagons, and no^ by cars, and walking 

We keep going up there, 

for ail this many years, we have to. 

To keep talking to the power 

of the power in the earths we have ta 

That's tbe Indian way. 

We don't like to talk to the fence and the Navy 
but for a while we will ;mJ prttty soon 
we will talk ro the hot springs power again. 
That's the place the Indians talk about. 

Listen, 

that's the way you hear. 
Pretty soon, you can hear it, 
coming far awty 

deep ill the ground, deep down there coming. 

the voice of tbe power ccmmg, 

doser and closer. 

L^,en, that's the way yuu hear it 

From the earth » 



(be moving power of tbc voice 

and the People talking. 

Fnying. you know, singing soft too. 

Hearing, 

that $ the way you listen. 
Tbc People talking, 
telling the power to come to them 
an<l pretty soon it will come. 
It will come. 

the moving power of the voice, 
ihe moving power of the canh. 
the moving power of the People 
That $ the place Indtan Pcopte tatk ai)Ou! 



He 



^ow did this poem begin? 
Like a number of poems 1 have writ- 
ten, it beg^ with a conversation. That 
is, 1 got the idea, theme and topic, and 
the actual substance from the conversa^ 
tion I was having with a Paiute man in 
Bishop, California. There wa^a meeting 
going on about Coso Hot Springs. Before 
the meeting, pf:ople were getting ac* 
quainted, and I struck upa conversation 
with this elder man. I told him where I 
was from in New Mexico, and he told me 
he had never been there, and then a bit 
later, as we leaned up against a car, he 
told me about Coso Hot Springs. He kr;pt 
repeating the phrase, 'That's the place 
Indians talk about, that's the place.'' And 
it struck me how imponant that "place'' 
was not only as a physical, geographical 
locale but also the **place ' that is 
spiritual, that is historical, emotional fact 
and experience. And then it is all tied 
together and is made imme^ 'ue in the 
sense that we w^ire at this meeting and 
that we were talking together. And, even 
more imponant and stg^iificant, ihis is 
the very way of life that Indian peopi 
know and mus^ make a sutement about. 
So the poem bs basicaQy that, a statement 
which is a political cultural stand, for 
me, conversations have always been im- 
portant beginnmg pofms for me. 1 don't 
mean speeches or orations, but ordinary 
conversations that people have, when 
they are most intimately together in 
language, when the dynamic of words, 
ideas, emotions, reactions are most vital 
and immediate. How the voice is used, 
w'.iat gestures are made, the setting, the 
topic, etc., all of these are important to 
the event of the '^conversation," and 



when I listen 2nd learn I sec myself as a 
participant in the event, even perhaps 
when I am merely ovcrhcarir 3 
something being said. In the case of this 
poem, I was an actual participant in the 
conversation and the "place that Indians 
talk about." Later, when 1 wrote the 
poem, the words and line order seemed 
to be a way of rc^experienctng what was 
{;oing on in the original sense. I realize 
that in another, very close way that it 
was not merely re-enactment of speech, 
emotion, setting and so forth, but actual* 
iy a way of original experiencing in terms 
of words* of language. For me, even six 
years later, the experience of what is 
meant by the various ideas of "place" is 
very strong. 1 hear, feel, know the mov- 
ing power of the voice and the earth. 
That is the deeper and most intimate 
beginning of the poem 1 think. 



hat changes did you make? 
Changes I don*t remember. But 1 know 
there are always changes, i.e., revisions, 
resutements, reworking, etc. The first 
changes probably happen even before it 
is written. I think 1 wrote it down on a 
notepad, probably very briefly, perhaps 
only the central/focal point, "that's the 
place." Something that would recreate 
for me the essences of not only the 
words, language, ideas but also the im- 
age of the ekJerly Paiute man, the setting, 
my rcaaions. Sometime after I must have 
written more of a complete narrative 
which I would designate as a poem, I 
made more definite changes. In this case, 
the changes had to do with expanding 
upon the varied meaning of ''places." 
That is, I was more specific about the 
meanings, making distinctions. For ex* 
ample, the first meaning is terrestrial, a 
physical place, a hot springs in the lower 
California Sierras. That s the place thJ 
Paiute man told me that the people went 
to And then he explained another mean* 
ing of that spring, that it was a healing 
place, a spiritual netting where people 
went to renew and reheal themselves. 
Where they sang, payed, talked with the 
power of that place, the earth. And then 
it's a place in ^he sense of a dynamic rela- 
tionship, i.e., the people ulking, the 
ground talking, the stones moving 



O 46 



10 



BEST copy AVAIIABLE 



aroundi the people moving around. 
"Something \s doing that." he said, and 
Tve heard many Indian people saying 
that in religious narrations and discus- 
sions about life in g^«rral. And then, of 
course. I made an obvious reference, and 
a point of ft, to the "political" place that 
Indian people are ralklng about now. 1 
relate that to the place that is physical, 
which is iocked up behind government 
fences, and ftinher expand or extend it 
to the conclusive meaning, the place that 
will be arrived at, i.e., the ''place" of 
moving power of the eanh, voice, peo- 
ple. So changes here had most to do with 
the effea I wanted "place" to have, hav- 
ing the various meanings come strongly 
apparent, be direacd specifically, always 
being aware of the overall impact I 
wanted the poem to have. 

How revisions are made have to do 
with decisions affecting specifU: focus, 
especially visual images used in the 
poem. I wanted water, ground, flii^z. and 
hands, faces to be very apparent, and 
then later on, the image of the fence and 
locks to rnake a point. The same way 
with the words that show action, move- 
ment, the verbs such as "talk." drink, 
pray, sing, and funher the phrases, "rat- 
tling in the ground," ''the ground ts hot 
and shaking," "the people are right 
there," "we will talk to the power 
again,'' concluding with "pretty soon it 
wtll come. It wili come.*' These words 
and phrases, images and action verbs are 
chosen very deliberately and placed in 
the order that will most completely 
achieve the effect and meaning I intend. 
It builds up to the * place" that is meant, 
the meanings and message that I intend. 
Decisions have to do with sekctton of 
words, phrascst images, but it is more 
than that too. I wanted the poem to be 
meditative but also "active," in the sense 
that the reader can be inspjied to make 
a decision, fed something of the message 
conveyed, and agree with the source of 
the '^moving power" Thai's why I 
dedded to end it '"ith the words '^listen" 
and "hearing" ^ prominently featured 
and intended to be reinforced by the pro- 
cess that is involved in hearing and listei^- 
ing. The poem is very active and 
energetic up to that point and then it 
becomes combined with a meditative 



mood there as I want the reader and 
listener to be aware of the dynamic of 
language and its power. From that point 
on, I think my decision to structure the 
poem in such a way as to make its con- 
clusion or climax obvious has to do most 
with *he directed energy so far, strongly 
released through the "moving power'' 
which is the place Indian people ulk 
about. I think '.hose are some of the more 
obvious items I considered in deciding 
upon the changes after I had drafted the 
poem and having decided how it might 
best work. 

w 

TT h^it techniques did you use? 

The main technique I am aware of 
whenever I read the poem aloud is the 
narratCi because that is the way I heard 
it in the original experience, the event of 
the conversation and the dialogue held. 
The narrative technique, which to me is 
simply the storytelling style of talking^ is 
very effective because it provides its own 
setting, the particular mood intended, 
and requires a cerUin immediacy of 
language which is provided by the 
storyteller or narrator In this panicular 
poem the narrator is the poet and the 
charaaer of the elderly P^iute man and 
eventually the poem's voice itself In tric- 
ing to render the voice of the narrative 
poem most effectively^ i.e.. In creating 
the experience of the poem^ I'm aware 
of the panicular words used for their 
sound and motion, the images conveyed, 
the special nuances and emphasis of 
language as spoken by the narrator, and 
the patterns or rhythms of speech. First, 
I think I wanted a cenain kind of formali- 
ty, like in a meditaticn or prayer, or even 
an oration though not strictly so except 
to have the listener focus upon the 
words. Secondly, I intended for it to use 
what is most effective and beautiful 
about the oral tradition, that is the im- 
mediacy and intimacy of language^ 
Spoken expression draws you into the 
center of expression and perception. 
Thirdly, I wanted tc create a distinct 
identity for the poem as a whole; I think 
it is imponant for that to happen in tills 
case. I wanted to make it special in tenns 
of who "we" are when I writer "When 
wt pray. When we sing," So I say it very 

11 



ODviousiy in "that's the Indian way." as 
well as using repetition 2nd cenain tonal 
effects to achieve a ritual-chant prayer 
poem. I did not want to limit it, of 
course, to the poem oni> having an In- 
dian identity, and "the Pccple" includes 
all people. Fouruily, the narrative techni- 
que stresses ihe rhythms of spoken 
language, and that, to me, ha:^ to do with 
breathing (inhalation and exhalation se* 
quences), accents on cenain words (em- 
phasis), body language in general. For ex* 
ample, I hear and see "Listen, that's the 
way you hear.'' and "Hearing, that's the 
way you listen" very clearly in terms of 
breathing, emphasis, and body motion. 
I can't remember exactly what the Paiute 
man did in our conversation but i .ran 
almost see his hand and arm movements 
and the panicular breathing that accom^ 
panied the words. This last point is 
especially important for me to consider 
when i try to write a poem and deliver 
it orally. ! "sound'* out the words and 
stanzas as I write them down, so that I 
become aware of the weight of the 
sounds and syllables and rhythms of 
speech. Line lengths are decided uponac^ 
cordingly, and. in fact, when I do a 
reading this poem is especially engross- 
ing, physically, almost demanding of all 
my energy, and I have to take a long deep 
breath when I fmish. I think that I try to 
listen to everything that the poem is tell- 
ing me when I am writing it down. 
Maybe that is the main principle- 
listening and hearing — I am awaie of 
when I write certain poems. After I 
finished the poem, I became aware that 
the narrative style changed when 
reference was made to the ''fence around 
Coso Hot Springs" and beauae awkward 
aiid harsh but regained it's meditative 
composure in the last two slanzas. This 
is some evidence that the poet sometimes 
isn't always aware of the techniques in- 
volved in writing, but something is hap- 
pening intuitively at any rate and is ef- 
fective in creating poetic impact. 



ho was your audience? 
Anybody who reads, listens, feels. 
Anybody, but m?ybe Indian people par- 
ticularly smce I always try to focus upon 
the relationships among all o^ us. 



Especially in identifying with this 
"place" that is significant in this poem. 
A couple of times when I have perform* 
ed the poem, I have had people come up 
to me And say, "I know that place." 
Once iR Albuquerque, I read it and after 
watd'^ was approached by a Sioux man 
from South Dakota. He was about eighty 
years old, and he said, "I know that place 
you was talking about, I know it.'' And, 
initially thinking he was referring to Coso 
Hot Springs specifically. I asked him if 
he*d been there at the place. He said he 
had and told me that when he was a boy 
this high about a hundred years ago 
(laughing) an oEd man said to him: come 
here. When he walked over the old man 
staned to unravel a tanned hide bundle 
and finally arrived at a small black stone 
at the center of the bundle. The old man 
said. "Don't touch it, lust look at it," and 
he put it on the ground and he said, 
Listen to it and talk to it, that's the power 
of the earth, that's the place. I've been 
there, I know that place, the Sioux man 
said to me. So he had been :here though 
not to Coso Hot Springs. He knew that 
place that is common to us. that exists 
in all of us. that we all share with our 
concerns. It is something that we can 
identify with, that place. And as I said, 
it does not mean onlv Indian people. 

Another time when I read it, a young 
woman came up to mc and said, "I know- 
that man." I smi!';j, knowing what she 
meant. She mc-ant the Paiute man, of 
course, but also someone familiar and 
warm to us, someone beloved and very 
dear. We all know that person, man or 
woman, because "that place tha* Indians 
talk about" has sustained us and will 
always sustain us if we cherish and honoi 
it- As a poet, it is imponant for me to 
strive to have my poems reestablish and 
rcaffinn relationships among ourselves as 
a community of people and that com* 
munity to know itself in relationship to 
all other fonns of life, especially the land. 
My audience in that sense is that com- 
munity of land and people. I think I 
regard this view as a main principle 
behind my writing efforts, i.e., why I 
write. Hopefully this is achieved to some 
measure in this particular poem. 



12 



c 



'an this poem be paraphrased? 
In several instances, 1 have paraphras- 
ed the poem, and it can be done because 
of the narrative technique upon which it 
is based. It is lilce a story which can be 
retold and ^r-^de anew each time it is 
told. I think it can bed( te especially in 
terms of the intent of the poem, reflec- 
ting upo'A the philosophy behind the 
theme expressed by the phrase, ''that's 
the place Indian people ulk about.'' It 
can be related to other expressions of 
one's awareness of community* the en- 
vironment, and cultural attitudes. 
Although it has a partrular Indian iden- 
tity, It certainly relates to th^ concerns 
felt by all those who have concern for the 
eanh and the social and political strug- 
gle involved in expressing it. When the 
poem is paraphrased^ this concern 
becomes evident 1 feet because of the in- 
herent strength, sincerity, and direct 
nature of its theme. At least* 1 hope so. 
Other examples can be brought up which 
help the paraphrased poem along. There 
should be no problem in paraphrasing 
the poem. 



A 



personal comment 
This poem is a political poem because 
it makesascand for what is important to 
me and to others.- for land and people 
and life. It is important^ 1 think, to iden- 
tify the poem as such so there will be no 
doubt> When that eider Paiute man, the 
ex- migrant laborer and rangerider said* 
'That's the pl?ce Indian people ulk 
about,'' he meant to convey a political 
message, a very direct, simple, clear 
message. There was no mistaking what 
he meant. There is no mistaking what In- 
dian people have meant in their defense 
of land and life. There is no mistaking the 
moving power of the voices earth* and 
the peopie> Often we hear that poetry is 
made "less poetic'' if it expresses and in- 
sists upon a polhical point of view and 
purpose^ but I suspect that designation 
IS made by those who do not want to 
hear the truth spoken by those who de- 
fend the carth> How can there be no 
poetry in the voice that speaks for the 
very essence, the moving power* of life? 
Poetry is a way of engendering life, and 
that Is a political sund when it is against 



what will t:ike away life, when it is 
against the government fence all around 
Coso Hot Springs. Much of Native 
American poetiy is poetry of protest, 
resistance poetry, part of the liberation 
and decolonization movement which is 
worldwide. Resbtance and liberation 
literature has been an importani element 
in the struggles of former colonized 
peoples to affirm their national lands, 
cultures, and governments. Poetry 
spoken and written by indigenous and 
oppressed populations in Africa* Asia* 
Latin America, and the Mid-East has in- 
spired the overall social struggles and 
movements for liberation and 
democracy. Naturally, this inspiration 
has been labelled dangerous in many 
cases-and unliterary and unpoetic as 
well-because it challenges the establish- 
ed oppressive ruling powers that be. 
Native American poets who speak from 
a tradition of resistance against oppres- 
sion are speaking for land and life; their 
pcems, personal and social, are political. 
That's the place Indian people talk about. 

Survival 

In bcxasyllsiblcs 



by Elizabeth Cook-Lynn 

AC nightT startled by the 
Snowy owl who flees her 
perch I waken to the 
sharp sound of sleet gainst 
the cedar tree ^bo\c 
the spring: improbable 
songs by keepers of the 
wind recede toward mountainST 
vacant voices in t^ie 
rain holdlr^ to the sway 
in our own modem worid 
of ghosts upon the land. 

Discomposed 'n the wake 
of a vicious win(cr 
rain storm the cedar tree 
above the spring recalls 
the stages of its own 
fallen needles. Yet^ the 
exact memory of > 
doomed universe is 
undecipherable, 
surreal. Overcoming 
my fear I rise to close 




13 



49 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



the window, strcaiccd smd wet. 
the holy winds arc sent 
to remind me E ani 
transient, adverse, monat. 
The best I can do is 
listen to this oldest 
version of the story. 

In the dawn Jight. mountains 
cradle the breath of the 
cedar trrcafwre the 
spring, dtopkts taking thea 
places on peeled limbs like 
dancers from an ancient 
wOtld, prelude to ritual. 

Later I dry cuttings 
taken from the cedzr 
tree above the spnng and 
hold in piecise regard 
the saered smudging of 
limbs and hair a tribal 
an meticulously 
restored in our night dreams. 



H< 



*ow did this poem begin? 
This poem began because I wanted to 
say something about a cedar tree which 
I can see from the window as I sit at my 
typewriter. It is the only cedar in a forest 
of pines. The poem started without an 
idea and without an event, two of the 
most important components of many of 
my poems, I typed the beginning lines 
'The Cedar Tree Above The Spring * as 
the title of the poem although I rarely 
begin a poem with the title and perhaps 
I should have known thai something else 
would emerge as the substance of the 
poem. As it turned out, this phrase later 
emerged as the repetitive refrain wirhtn 
the poem and I gave the poem the title 
'^Survival,*' 

To say something about the "ideas*' 
which emerged, tt is probably important 
for the reader to know that cedar is used 
in the purification rituals of the Dakotapi 
(Sioux Indians) and if the reader thinks 
about what that means it will help him 
or her to discover how some of the con- 
tent came about in the writing process. 
Indeed, the next lines that I typed 
responded to that cultural idea of 
purification with smoke from burning 
cedar; they were **sacted smudging of 
limbs and hair is a tribal an worth believ- 
ing in/* and I certainly was thinking of 



the recent binh of my grandson who was 
baptized'' in the old traditional way of 
the ancestors, 1 had no idea where to go 
from there with the poem, 

Comcidentally, that night I was 
awakened tn the middle of the night by 
a heavy wind and rain storm and I was 
frightened by some curious sounds like 
a huge bird flapping around outside in 
the darkness, I peered out the window 
but could see nothing. The storm seem- 
ed to just go on and on and I stood on 
an upstairs deck looking into the 
darkness for a long time, I was conscious 
of the cedar tree also standing in the 
darkness, listening, waiting for the storm 
to end. 

The next morning, the storm had sub- 
sided, the sun was shining, and I work- 
ed for quite a while at my typewriter, I 
wrote; 

Sacred smudging of limbs and hair 
IS a tribal an worth beltevmg in. In the wake 
of a winter rain storm, the cuttings 
from the cahr tree 2bovc the spring. Like 
dancers taking their places in an ancient 
worl<i give thanks for , , . 

I lost the drift of my thoughts, so I 
started again. The next attempt looked 
like this: 
Ever green, 

timeless, the cedar tree ^bove the spring 

Holds an IndeCLphetable (undecipherable^) ^orld 

in the memory of its own 

fallen needles, memory of a 

burdened universe; 

the cedir tree aiwve the spnng. 

surrounding mountains cradling its 

breath, repeats the messages 

sent by holy winds to tell us we will 

live to a ripe old age- It is 

the repeated cuttings from the ced^r irec 

3bovc the sprif^ that assures us of 

a final smudgings of \\mbs and hair, 

a sacred an, the dancers take their pl^es 

in an ancient workJ 



hat changes did you make? 
Ftrst drafts of poems are rarely satis- 
fying (though I have on a couple of oc- 
casions sat down at the typewriter aiid 
found that the lines were all there, intact, 
ready,) and in the case of ^'Survival,** 1 
was at this point muddled in my think- 
ing, and disappointed that wliat I wanted 
to say was iiuccessibte. As I looked at the 
lines, I t&li that I was leaving out 



BIST COPY AVAILABLE 



something important, j,c, the event of 
the stonn which had been included in 
the first six-line attempt. I decided to 
start with that 2nd re^arrange some of the 
other materials: 
the cedar riec above the ^P^g 
At night 
startled by the 

snow Owl who (lets her perch 

I waken to the sound of fleeting nun against 

ffie ccdir riee ^vc the spring, I wikcn 

to the song of keepers of the ashi 

to the sway of ghosts upon the land, 

1 5tand at the window toO and listen 
to the rc^tellfng of the story. Surrounding 
mountains cradle tts breathi give thank*^ 
for the survival of a burdened untver^e. 

Discomposed 

in il.^ wake of a 

winter rafn storm 

the ccd2r tree Above the spring 

recovers the memory of iis own fallen needles 

and holds in precise regard the mcss^es 

sent by holy winds to teH me I will 

live to a ripe old age. 

The sacied smudging of limbs and hair 

is a tribal an wonh beUevjng 

Repeated cuttings &om the cedar tree ibove the 

spaing assure us that the 

dancers take their piaccs 

in an ancient world. 

It was at this point that I had started 
tograsp the idea but that my poem lack- 
ed form, structure. In desperation, I 
decided upon syllabic form and arbitrari- 
ly chose hexasyllables. Any port in the 
storm (no pun intended). Although this 
poem went throiigh many more changes 
and I probably worked at it off and on 
for a couple of months, tt was pi this 
stage that the poem was nearly accessi- 
ble to mc. 



hat techniques did you use? 
Modem teachers and critics of poetry 
often speak of "technique"' when 
discussing poetry but I rarely know what 
is mcDnt by that term unless It is pointed 
out to me in specific instances. In general 
discussion, "technique'* has to do with 
"how** something is accomplished, or 
'*the way" something is done. This im- 
plies that there is a systematic procedure 
by which-a_poera is created and that im- 



plication, I think, is misleading, Veti 
there is a way for a poet to discuss the 
''principles of technique" and how they 
emerged in the process of writinga given 
poem. In my case, much of what I think 
might be called ''technique" arises from 
what I know and want to express con- 
cerning Dakotah beliefs and values and 
experiences and imagination, Dakotah 
ritual is always important to me but I 
don't employ ritualistic "techniques'' 
unless you would consider the repetitive 
refrain the cedar tree 2bov€ the spring in 
that category, Ordtnarily, I find repeti- 
tion useful as a technique, T0O1 the 
"techniques** of storytelling are always 
useful, i,e,, description, event, character, 
Robert Penn Warren, the revered man of 
American lettersi once said that short 
stories destroy poems and since I am a 
short story writer as well as a poet, I am 
considering the significance of his 
remark, I very often create poems and 
short stories from the same sources 
although that might be a topic for 
another and different critical essay. 

When ! was writing this poem, "Sur- 
vival/' I was reminded of the Dakotah 
beliefs about wind and ''hailstones/' I 
was reminded in my own imaginatton of 
the idea that stones (like hailstones) come 
scattering on the tipi and Dakotah holy 
men sit in the darkness of tiie tipi with 
no door open and Dakotahs believe that 
the stones can come inside and interact 
with the singers. It is an ancient ritual 
known among us and it continues to ex- 
press important beliefs about the fusing 
of human power and natural power. 
Because I am a Dakotah female I woukl 
liot personally participate tn such a thing 
but my imagination of what it all means 
is what assisted me in finding out what 
I wanted to say in the poem, I am not 
sure if this "process of imagination'' can 
be called "technique," but I think it is 
very likely inseparable from technique. 
Now, how to translate that into a 
"systematic procedure'* for writing is 
something that cannot be spectficaQy ex- 
pressed. How to make this imagination 
accessible certainly takes concentration 
but, more sensibly, the important thing 
to recognize is that the creative arts: can- 
not be generalized. Thai fs the nature of 



ERIC 



T5 



51 



BEST EOPY ftVAILABlE 



* 

k 



poetry. Imagination accessibility cenain- 
ly takes concentration and it is this con- 
centration which produces technique. 
To quote Stephen Spender, "Concentra- 
tion, of course, for the purpose of 
writing poetry, is different from the kind 
of concentration required for working 
out a sum. It is a focusing of the atten- 
tion in a special way, so that the poet is 
aware of all the implications and possi- 
ble developments of his idea. |ust as one 
might say that a plant was not concen- 
trating on developing mechanically in 
one direction, but in many directions, 
toward the warmth and light with all its 
leaves and towards the water with its 
roots, all at the same time/' {"The Mak- 
ing of a Poem/' by Stephen Spender 
"Partisan Review/' XIII Summer, 1946) 

So it is that different poets concentrate 
in different ways, and my own individual 
way of concentration generally comes 
from what I know as a Dakotah woman. 

The significant event of this poem, 
"Survival,'' that is the winter rain storm 
turned out to be most imponant as a 
point of concentration for it is in this 
darkness that the poet in me awakens to 
some sort of truth or consciousness and 
it is in this truth that I survive and that 
I see cultural survival, thus, the title final- 
ly emerges, \ suppose I am saying that 
survival is possible because I recognize 
the imponance of an old purification 
ritual using cedar cuttings. That means, 
probably that this is a religious poem, at 
least it expresses a kind of cultural 
religious survival and perhaps even a per- 
sonal one. That surprises me because I do 
not consider myseif a religious person. 

Nonhrup Frye in fatbits of Identity 
said: "It is in the daylight that mankind 
is really in the power of darkness/' By 
default, then, I think I am saying in this 
poem that it is in the darkness of such a 
winter rain storm that we can come to 
knou' who we are, something like the 
holy men who sit in the darkness of the 
tipi come to know about the power of 
the natural workl and the last lines of the 
poem "a tribal an (is) meticulously 
reftorcd in our night dreams" affirms 
that. 

As I saki before. I am always interested 
in the power of ritual and in this case the 



speculation concerning the fusing of 
human power with the natural power of 
the universe and in speculating about 
that, some of the beliefs concerning the 
wind are alluded to in the poem, I do not 
want to be too specific about that 
because I am only a poet but the lines 
"the holy winds are sent to remind me 
I am transient, adverse, mortal/' the 
thought which came to me as I stood in 
the darkness that winter evening is clear- 
ly expressing a long-standing phil- 
osophical concept of the Dakotapt, 



ERIC 



52 



16 



BESr CflPlf AVAILABLE 



