DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 450 656 



HE 033 832 



TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



CRitical Issues Bibliography (CRIB) Sheet: Native American 
College Students. 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education, Washington, DC. 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED) , 
Washington, DC. 

2001 - 00-00 

1 5p . ; For other CRIB Sheets, see HE 033 821 and HE 033 
833-836 . 

For full text: http://www.eriche.org. 

ERIC Publications (071) -- Reference Materials - 
Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

* American Indians; Annotated Bibliographies; ^College 
Students; Cultural Awareness; ^Disadvantaged Youth; Higher 
Education; Minority Groups; * Resources; School Holding 
Power; ^Student Recruitment 

* American Indian Students; *Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 



This CRitical Issues Bibliography describes resources that 
provide an overview of the issues involved for Native American college 
students, a minority group that is among the least likely to attend college 
and one that has a low graduation rate. The bibliography concentrates on 
cultural influences that affect the participation and success of Native 
Americans in higher education and on issues related to the recruitment and 
retention of this underrepresented minority. The bibliography also highlight 
model programs that help some students succeed, and it concludes with 
literature that discuss the problems and progress Native American students 
are making in the health professions, science, mathematics, and engineering. 
The bibliography concludes with sections on directories and Internet 
resources useful to researchers studying Native Americans in higher 
education. The annotated bibliography describes 53 resources, of which only 
the 2 Internet resources are not available through the ERIC database. (SLD) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 




ED 450 656 



CRitical Issues Bibliography (CRIB) Sheet: 
NATIVE AMERICAN COLLEGE STUDENTS 



U S DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

>->' re 1 lnwrow"pril 

educational resources information 

CENTER | ERIC) 

DH5-rtocumnni has been reproduced as 
ipcpived from the poison or organisation 
originating it 

□ Mm of changes have boon made in 
onpmt/p rnpindiifhon quality 

• Pomis of view or opinions staled in this 
detriment rio not ■locossanty represent 
ollioi.it OERI position oi policy 



The ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education 
The George Washington University School of Education 
and Human Development 
#1 Dupont Circle, Suite 630 
Washington, DC 20036 
http://www.eriche.org 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 







What is a CRitical Issues Bibliography (CRIB) Sheet? 

A CRIB sheet is a selected bibliography on a topic of interest in the field of higher education. The majority of the 
literature cited in the bibliography is found in the ERIC database, though some CRIB sheets also include selected 
Internet resources. CRIB sheets are updated twice a year, usually in May and December. The most recent versions of 
the CRIB sheets can be found on the ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education Web site at http://www.eriche.org. 



How does one get the full text of ERIC materials cited in a CRIB Sheet? 

ERIC references with an ED number are typically research papers and other monographs; the least expensive way to 
obtain these in full text is by seeking out tin ERIC microfiche collection. To locate the ERIC Microfiche Resource 
Collection nearest you, connect to the Internet URL: http://www.ericae.net/derc.htin. Some commercially produced 
books cited in the database are not available in full text through ERIC, and may need to be obtained through 
interlibrary loan, a book retailer, or the publisher. Otherwise, microfiche, paper, and selected electronic copies can be 
ordered from: 

ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) 

DynTel Corporation 

7420 Fullerton Road, Suite 1 10 

Springfield, Virginia 22153-2852 

Phone: 800-443-ERIC (3742) or 703-440-1400; fax: 703^140-1408; email: service@edrs.com 
URL: http://edrs.com 

Address purchase orders to the address above. Fax order and delivery service available. Cost: $4.08 for 25 
pages. 

ERIC References with an EJ number are journal articles. The least expensive way to pursue full text is to consult a 
library, either to track down the appropriate issue of the originating journal or to try to obtain the article through 
interlibrary loan. Otherwise, there are three article reproduction services (listed below) that will provide you with a 
copy for a fee. Please be aware that no article reproduction service carries 100% of ERIC-indexed journal titles. CARL 
Uncover currently offers the greatest number of journals. 

Carl Uncover Document Delivery Service 

The UnCover Company 

3801 East Florida Avenue, #200 

Denver, CO 80210 

URL: http://uncweb.carl.org/ 

Phone: (800) 787-7979; (303) 758-3030 
e-mail: sos@carl.org 

Cost: Articles $10 plus copyright. Fax surcharge for outside US/Canada. 

UMI Information Store 
500 Sansome Street 
Suite 400 

San Francisco, Ca. 94 1 1 1 

Phone: (800) 248-0360; (415) 433-5500 

email: orders@infostore.com 

Cost: $9.00 base rate for titles in the UMI collection, plus minimum $2.00 copyright fee. $12.00 base rate 
for titles in the "extended" collection, plus any copyright fee. $.25 for each page over the first 1 0 pages. 
$5.00 for fax service in U.S. and Canada, additional $1.00 per page after first 10. Call for information 
regarding other services such as rush/ovemight delivery. 

Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) 

Genuine Article Service 
3501 Market Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 

Phone: (800) 523-1850 xl536; (215)386-0100 xl536 
email: tga@isinet.com 

(Give complete citation, and account info— or your phone number so they can call you for 
billing instructions.) 

Cost: $10.75 for first 10 pages, $2.75 for each next 10 




Critical Issues Bibliography (CRIB) Sheet: 

Native American College Students 

Native American students face significant barriers to academic success. They are one of the 
minority groups least likely to attend college, and their graduation rates have remained low. In 
this CRIB, vve include resources that provide an overview of the issues involved. We concentrate 
on the cultural influences that affect the participation and success of Native Americans in higher 
education, and on issues related to recruitment and retention of this underrepresented minority. 
This CRIB also highlights model programs that are helping some students succeed and includes 
literature that discusses the problems and progress Native American students are making in the 
health professions and in science, math, and engineering. The bibliography concludes with 
sections on directories and Internet resources useful to researchers studying Native Americans in 
higher education. 



Overview 



EJ584979 

Pavel, D. M., Skinner, R.R., Farris, E., Cahalan, M., Tippeconnic, J., and Stein, W. (1999). 
American Indians and Alaska Natives in postsecondary education. Education Statistics Quaxivcty, 
1(1), 67-74. 

Describes American Indians and Alaska Natives involved in all facets of higher education. 
Describes demographic characteristics, access to and enrollment in higher education, outcomes, 
financial aid, American Indian staff and faculty, and tribally controlled colleges. 

ED427912 

Pavel, D. M. (1999). American Indians and Alaska Natives in higher education: Promoting 
access and achievement. In: Next Steps: Research and Practice To Advance Indian Education. 
This chapter draws on an extensive literature review to examine factors that influence the access 
and achievement of American Indians and Alaska Natives in higher education. 

EJ595847 

( 1 999).Guidance Counselors. Winds of Change , special issue, 70-74. 

Four American Indian college counselors who work with Native students discuss their role in 
helping to recruit and retain Native students, the importance of student support groups on 
campus, negative stereotypes of students of color, outreach programs for Native high school and 
middle school students, and the emotional struggle of Native students leaving their family and 
reservation. 

ED424081 

Pavel, D. M., Skinner, R.R., Farris, E., Cahalan, M., Tippeconnic, J., and Stein, W. (1998). 
American Indians and Alaska Natives in postsecondary education. Technical report. 

This sourcebook is a comprehensive compilation of data on American Indian and Alaska Native 
participation in higher education, primarily 4-ycar and 2-year universities and colleges, including 

1 



4 



tribal colleges. Data cover undergraduate students, graduate students, and faculty, as well as 
student outcomes following graduation. Data sources include the National Center for Education 
Statistics, the Bureau of the Census, and various published surveys and reports. 

EJ561745 

Wollock, J. (1997). Protagonism emergent: Indians and higher education. Native Americas, 
14(4), 12-23. 

Traces the growth and development of higher education for American Indians during the 20th 
century. Discusses assimilationis! educational policies (1870s-1920s), a tiny group of Indian 
college graduates who advanced Native higher education, early college preparatory schools and 
the role of the church, shift in federal policy (1930s), activism (1960s), Indian Education Act 
(1972), and establishment of tribal colleges. 

ED382441 

Davis, M. B., and others (Eds.). (1994). Native America in the Twentieth Century: An 
Encyclopedia. Garland Reference. 

This encyclopedia contains articles reviewing important aspects of Native American life in the 
United States during the 20th century. Articles are arranged alphabetically by subject and were 
written by Native Americans, historians, anthropologists, and other specialists. 

ED429289 

vanLent, P. (1 999). The Image of Higher Education in American Indian Popular Literature . 
Paper presented at the Annual Joint Meeting of the Popular Culture and 
American Culture Association, San Diego, CA. 

The paper deals with four novels which target specific problems encountered by Native 
American students in college, i.e.: "Wolfsong" (Louis Owen); "Turtle Belly" (Joel 
Monture);"First Eagle" (Tony Hillerman); and "Agoak" (Yves Theriault). Parallels can be drawn 
between reality and the negative image of higher education in American Indian popular literature, 
since the primary reasons for higher education’s failure with Native Americans are outlined in the 
novels discussed: social maladjustment, disinterested faculty, irrelevant curriculum, lack of a 
support network, alienation from personal heritage, racism, etc. 

EJ 5 82346 

Jenkins, M. (1999). Factors which Influence the Success or Failure of American Indian/Native 
American College Students. Research and Teaching in Developmental Education , 15(2), 49-53. 
Examines the culture-specific needs of Native-American students in higher education. Identifies 
family support, student-support services, and precollege preparation as factors contributing to 
academic success, and finances and cultural differences as contributing to failure. Asserts that 
developmental educators must be aware of these factors in order to facilitate these students' 
success. 

EJ585250 

Herring, Roger D. (1998). Native American Indian College Students: Implications for College 
Counseling Practice. Journal of College Counseling, 1(2), 169-80. 



Counselors can enhance the development of Native-American college students by revisiting how 
they deliver services. Awareness of traditional Native- American values, interpretation of mental 
health, and indigenous healing practices is recommended. Content and process concerns in 
counseling are reviewed. 

EJ573268 

Thurston, K. (1998). Mitigating Barriers to Navajo Students' Success in English 
Courses. Teaching English in (he Two-Year College , 26(1), 29-38. 

Discusses the tremendous barriers to success in college that Navajo students face. Discusses five 
major forms: financial difficulty, family obligations, prescriptive attitudes toward Standard 
American English, instructor/faculty ethnocentrism, and ambivalence toward Western education. 
Discusses ways faculty can work to mitigate these barriers as well as those faced by all minority 
culture students. 

ED4141 52 

Garrod, A., and Larimore, C. (Eds,). (1997). First Person , First Peoples: Native American 
College Graduates Tell Their Life Stories. 

This book presents 13 stories of Native American college students struggling for survival on 
several planes— intellectual, emotional, physical, spiritual— and striving for success in their own 
terms in a cultural setting not their own. Although all the students attended Dartmouth College 
and graduated, the salient common theme of the stories is the literal and figurative journey of 
these students from their home communities to the culture of this predominantly White college. 

ED381302 

M inner, S., and others. (1995). Completing university degrees: Barriers for Native Americans. 
In Reaching to the future: Boldly facing challenges in rural communities . Conference 
Proceedings of the American Council on Rural Special Education (ACRES), Las Vegas, 

Nevada. 

This paper outlines results of three informal surveys. identifying barriers that Native Americans 
face when trying to complete a college degree. For the first survey, 22 Native American students 
who had dropped out of Northern Arizona University indicated that family influences and 
responsibilities, lack of financial resources, campus attitudes towards Native Americans, and 
poor academic preparation were reasons for leaving school. In the second survey, nine Native 
American participants in their first year of a field-based special-education teacher training 
program were asked to identify the most difficult aspects of taking courses on a university 
campus and the most desirable traits in a university professor. In the third survey, nine Native 
American students in the field-based preservice program indicated that cultural traditions were 
sometimes a barrier to higher education for Native Americans, as were lack of financial support, 
inadequate high school preparation, alcohol and drugs, poor academic advising, and language 
barriers. 






6 



Recruitment and Retention 



ED433795 

Smith, T. Y. ( 1 999). Baccalaureate Degree Attainment and Precollege Academic Preparedness 
of Underrepresented Minorities. AIR 1999 Annual Forum Paper. 

This study analyzed retention and graduation rates of entering minority group freshmen from the 
1989796 cohort at 232 diverse colleges and universities using data from the Consortium for 
Student Retention Data Exchange (CSRDE), which consistently have indicated that graduation 
rates are lower for underrepresented minority groups of blacks, Hispanics, and American Indians, 
Findings are reported for: first-time freshman population, fall 1989 to fall 1996; retention rate by 
race; graduation rate by race; graduation rates and institutional selectivity; classification of 
CSRDE institutions by selectivity; enrollment of underrepresented minorities; and 
graduation rates of underrepresented minorities and institutional selectivity. 

EJ584555 

Howarth, R. ( 1 999). Reaching new heights: Native kids get a toehold on a college degree. 
American Indian Report , 15(3), 12-15. 

College prospects for American-lndian youth are brighter than in the past, with two-and four-year 
college enrollments up and American-lndian SAT scores rising. Anti-affirmative-action policies 
are having some chilling effects on minority enrollments nationwide, but certain tribes and 
universities are working together to strengthen college preparation and support the adjustment of 
Indian college students. 

ED4355 14 

Thomason, T.C., and Thurber, H J. (1999/ Strategies for the recruitment and retention of 
Native American students. 

This paper describes issues involved in increasing the number of Native American students in 
higher education, with a specific focus on psychology and rehabilitation training programs. The 
paper also describes many specific strategies for use by colleges and universities to recruit, retain, 
and graduate Native American students. 

EJ 595 842 

Campus Cameos. (1999). Winds of Change , special issue* 18-25, 

Describes six colleges that work hard to retain American Indian students through faculty/student 
connections, American Indian Studies programs, links to the wider community, mentoring 
programs, tutoring, or other support programs. Looks at Colorado College, Crownpoint Institute 
ofTechnology, Eastern Washington University, Michigan State University, Purdue University, 
and San Jose State University. Sidebar lists questions to consider about college. 

ED432448 

Denes, R., and Highsmith, R. J. (1998). Keeping Score: Comparative Performance of 
Engineering Institutions in Creating Access, 1997-98. NACME Research Letter , 8(2). 

This document offers a snapshot of enrollment and graduation statistics of African Americans, 
Latinos, and Anierican Indians in engineering institutions in the United States. This data 

4 



7 



provides the baseline for a series that will examine institutional productivity over time and will 
include analyses of retention and effective university policy in addition to ongoing access. 

ED414108 

Wells, R.N., Jr. (1997). The Native American Experience in Higher Education: Turning Around 
the Cycle of Failure II. 

Thirty two-year and four-year colleges and universities from among the 91 serving the largest 
percentage of Native American students were surveyed as a follow-up to a similar survey in 
1988. The purpose was to obtain data on Native Americans enrolled in higher education and to 
ascertain what factors contribute to their success or failure. It was discovered that reliable data 
are not available for Native American student performance and outcomes, financial aid, student 
retention and matriculation, and Native American curricular offerings. 

EJ 54862 1 

Brown, L.L., Robinson K., and Sharon E. (1997). Psychosocial factors influencing academic 
persistence of American Indian college students. Journal of College Student Development , 
38(1), 3-12. 

Using a five-year longitudinal study, examines psychosocial factors related to the academic 
persistence of 288 American Indian college students. Findings indicate that academic 
preparation and aspirations, academic performance, and interactions with faculty and staff best 
differentiated between students who persisted in school and those who did not. 

EJ 539956 

Meyers, G. B. (1997). Keeping students in college: What's working? Winds of Change , 12(1), 
58-59. 

The 1996 RETAIN (Retention in Education for Today's American Indian Nations) Conference 
addressed the low number of Native Americans enrolled in higher education and highlighted 
successful Native American retention and academic support models. Lists important features in 
a college program and questions that students should ask about college retention programs. 

ED420216 

Lintner, T. (1996). The forgotten scholars: American Indian doctorate receipt , 1980-19V0. 

This study provides a multifaceted descriptive analysis of the patterns and preferences of 
American Indian doctorate recipients. It is based on data from the National Research Council’s 
Doctorate Records Project (DRP) for the period 1980-90. The study found that for the 1 l?year 
period, American Indians received 984 doctorates out of a total of 45 1,21 8 doctorates awarded. 
Of these 984 doctorates, 57 percent were awarded to males and 43 percent to females. 

EJ 5 1 25 1 6 

Dingmun, S.M., and others. (1995). Predicting academic success for American Indian students. 
Journal of American Indian Education , 34(2), 10-17. 

Eighty American Indian students enrolled in Montana colleges and universities completed eight 
tests of cognitive function. Academic success (as measured by number of quarters completed) 
was related to three measures of simultaneous processing: orientation, form completion, and 

5 



8 



localization. These measures are seldom included on standardized intelligence tests. 

EJ5 14460 

Dodd, J. M., and others. (1995). American Indian student retention. NAS PA Journal* 33(1). 72- 
78. 

Presents results of study undertaken to learn what academically successful American Indian 
students at one postsecondary school encounter and what persons and/or support services he ] p 
with their academic success. Most students indicated family of primary support. Few reported 
obstacles were academic, indicating the importance of student support services. 

EJ541697 

Tierney, William G. (1995). Addressing failure: Factors affecting Native American college 
student retention. Journal of Navajo Education, 13(1), 3-7. 

This keynote address of the 1996 RETAIN Conference (Retention in Education for Today's 
American Indian Nations, University of Arizona) addresses factors affecting the retention of 
American Indian college students. Includes institutional strategies to meet the needs of American 
Indian students, student strategies to increase their chances for graduation, and family strategies 
to reinforce the importance of education. 

Model Programs 



EJ580372 

Shivers, L.D. (1999). Alcohol Research Center in Colorado. Winds of Change , 14(1), 70-71. 

A summer program at the Alcohol Research Center (University of Colorado) introduces 
American Indian and other college students from across the country to opportunities in research 
and graduate programs in science and medicine. The eight-week program arranges for housing, 
expenses, a stipend, and a mentor. A related summer program brings high school science 
teachers to the center's labs. 

EJ595845 

Sorensen, Barbara. (1999). A summer journey: The 1999 College Horizons Program. Winds of 
Change , special issue, 58-64. 

In 1999, College Horizons brought 50 American Indian high school students from 28 tribes to the 
Native American Preparatory School in Rowe, New Mexico, for a unique seminar. During the 
week-long summer seminar, college representatives presented intensive workshops and large- 
group sessions on the college application process, including essay writing, interviewing, financial 
aid, and dealing with racism. 

ED417883 

Prater, G.. and Lewis, J.B. (1998). Pinon Preparation Program (PPP): Meeting the needs of 
rural Native American students through site-based education programs. In Coming together: 
Preparing jar rural special education in the 2 1st century. Conference proceedings of the 
American Council on Rural Special Education, Charleston, SC. 

This paper examines the experiences of Navajo college students participating in a site-based 

6 



9 



teacher preparation program in a remote community on a Navajo Reservation. The 10 students 
(9 women and 1 man) work as teaching assistants in the Pinon Unified School District (Arizona). 
Having previously completed required Liberal Studies courses, the students take all of the 
courses needed to become certified elementary and special education teachers during the 2-year 
site-based program. 

EJ563532 

Nichols, L.S., and Nichols, T. (1998). 2 + 2 + 2: Collaborating to enhance educational 
opportunities for Native Americans. Journal of Family and Consumer Sciences , 90(1), 38-41 . 
Describes an articulation agreement for two years at reservation high schools, two years at tribal 
colleges, and two years at South Dakota State University designed to increase the numbers of 
Native American college graduates. Discusses these components: faculty immersion, curriculum 
review and revision, student support systems, and experiential learning. 

ED415825 

Lee, W.Y. (1997). Transitioning from high school to college: Surviving a clash of educational 
cultures. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association for the Study of Higher 
Education, Albuquerque, NM. 

This study examined the role of the North Carolina State University Transition Program (UTP) in 
enhancing transition of disadvantaged students from high school and increasing their persistence 
to degree. The UTP, which targets academically underprepared African American and Native 
American students, provides special courses and counseling services. 

EJ556064 

Oliver, J.N. (1997). Students participate in summer program. Winds of Change, 12(4), 68-71. 
The Agricultural Research Service provides "hands-on" work experience in a research laboratory 
to college students interested in agriculture, science, math, and other related fields. Three Native 
American college students describe how participating in this summer intern program has helped 
them pursue their educational goals. 

EJ 556061 

Stark, J. (1997). Two world walkers: The Eagles in Aerospace Program. Winds of Change, 

12(4), 24-25. 

The Nez Perce council, NASA, and the University of Idaho initiated a program that enables 
Native American students to identify and correspond with Native American professionals in 
aeronautical careers who are willing to mentor these students. The goal is to move academia and 
academic programs into the realm of Native American identity, ideology, and thinking. 

EJ539953 

Windham, T.L. (1997). Bridging two worlds: Native American students bring traditional 
knowledge to the study of atmospheric sciences. Winds of Change , 1 2( 1 ), 38-42. 

Four Native American college students who participated in the summer science program. 
Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science (SOARS), discuss how the 
program allowed them to integrate traditional and Western knowledge. SOARS provides 

7 



10 



educational, research, and financial support to minority students completing undergraduate and 
graduate programs in atmospheric and related sciences. 

ED424043 

First Nations Development Inst., Fredericksburg, VA. (1997). Haskell Builds a Home for 
Entrepreneurs in Indian Country. 

This article describes the new associate of arts degree in entrepreneurship at Haskell Indian 
Nations University, Lawrence, Kansas. Offered in Haskell's Center for Tribal Entrepreneurial 
Studies, the program comprises four culturally appropriate courses. Further goals of the program 
include installment of a case study training program in entrepreneurship to enable others to teach 
it, extension of entrepreneurial teaching to tribal councils nationwide, and introduction of an 
entrepreneurial component into the Haskell elementary teacher education program. 

ED398039 

Gilbert, W. S. (1996). Bridging the gap between high school and college: A successful program 
that promotes academic success for Hopi and Navajo students. Paper presented at a national 
conference. Retention in Education for Today's American Indian Nations, Tucson, AZ. 

During 1988-91, the School. College, and University Partnership (SCUP) program at Northern 
Arizona University (NAU) provided services to disadvantaged students in seven rural high 
schools on or near the Navajo and Hopi reservations. Many of these students came from low- 
income families, lived in geographically isolated locations, and attended schools with limited 
resources. SCUP helped students develop the academic skills needed for higher education and 
provided support for the school-college transition. 

ED436336 

Chavers, D. (Ed,). (1996). Exemplaiy programs in Indian education, second edition. 

This directory profiles 16 exemplary programs serving American Indian students in elementary 
and secondary schools, colleges, and community adult education programs. An introduction 
discusses what “exemplary" means, the history of Indian education, the lack of Indian programs 
in the National Diffusion Network's (NDN) directory of exemplary programs, characteristics of 
exemplary programs, and other exemplary programs in the United States. Each program entry 
contains: contact information, program focus, population served, personnel, sources of support, 
indicators used to measure program success, changes in baseline indicators over time, evaluation 
methods, technology use, details of program features contributing to success, comments on 
program replication, outreach efforts, parent involvement, student selection, and recognition or 
awards received. 

EJ 525050 

Fugate, S. (1996). The Kellogg Foundation: Building leadership. Winds of Change, 11(2), 44- 
46,48. 

Program at Bay Mills Community College (Michigan) builds leadership skills among American 
Indian students, develops staff training modules for tribally operated family programs on 
reservations, and improves college curriculum to meet family and community needs. W. K. 
Kellogg Foundation funds 10 such projects as part of its Families and Neighborhoods Initiative. 

8 



U 



Also describes Foundation's Native American Higher Education Initiative. 

EJ528301 

Swisher, K.G. (1995). The Haskell Indian Nations University model for elementary teach - t 
education. Journal of Navajo Education, 12(3), 32-40. 

A four-year teacher education program at Haskell Indian Nations University (Kansas) prepares 
American Indians and Alaska Natives to teach Native American children. In addition to the 
knowledge needed by all teachers, the program focuses on knowledge relevant to American 
Indians, such as foundations of Indian education, learning styles of Indian children, and culturally 
appropriate curriculum materials. 

Mentoring 



EJ580221 

Lintner, T. (1999). Cycle starters: American Indian doctorates as role models. Tribal College , 
10(3), 46-49. 

Suggests that, when looking for ways to increase American-Indian presence in higher education, 
American-lndian doctorates should be contacted. Asserts that these scholars can serve as role 
models and mentors to increase educational access and student retention. 

EJ580370 

Windham, T. (1999). Mentoring: Contemporary use of a timeless resource. Winds of Change, 
14(1), 16-19. 

The role of mentor is inherent to traditional American Indian societies, and American Indian 
students benefit greatly from mentoring. Discusses a handbook and two programs that 
emphasize mentoring in helping American Indians, other minorities, and women pursue higher 
education leading to careers in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology. Sidebar 
describes these mentoring resources and how to contact them. 

EJ528297 

Luna. G. (1995). Mentoring university Navajo pre-service education students. Journal of 
Navajo Education , 12(3), 8-13. 

A mentoring program matched 15 Navajo teacher education students with Native American 
faculty and staff at Northern Arizona University through preassessments that determined 
mentors' and students’ preferred style of mentoring. Mid- and postproject evaluations revealed 
that specified career and psychosocial needs of students were met and that all but one student 
were retained in the teacher education program. 

EJ5 12536 

McGee, R., and Cody, II. H. (1995). Cultivating mentors. Winds of Change, 10(3), 32-34. 
Describes the Mayo Minority Scholars Program, which helps American Indian and other 
minority students become doctors, medical faculty, or biomedical researchers by matching them 
with appropriate mentors. Relates the authors' perspectives and experiences as mentor and 
student. Includes program and contact information. 

9 



U 



Health Professions 



EJ 597900 

Westberg, J, and Blue Spruce, G., Jr. (1999). Native Americans in the health professions. Winds 
of Change, 14(4), 88-94. 

Dr. George Blue Spruce, Jr., who became the first American Indian dentist in 1956. shares his 
views on health professions for Indian young people, as well as his own experiences. Resources 
for prospective dental students, information on the Society of American Indian Dentists, and 
inspiring stories of American Indian healers are provided. 

EJ588540 

Westberg, J. (1999). Native Americans in the health professions: Two interviews. Winds of 
Change , 14(3), 22-30. 

Interviews with Dr. Joseph Bell, president of the American Association of Indian Physicians 
(AAIP), and Wabanang Kuczek, physician assistant, discuss health-care services needed by 
Native people, AAIP efforts to recruit Indian students into medicine, links to traditional healing, 
key health issues facing Indian people, and career opportunities as a physician assistant. Sidebars 
describe resources for health professions. 

EJ539954 

Boswell, E. (1997). Following their dreams: Native American students pursuing medical 
school. Winds of Change, 12, 1,46-48. 

Four Native American first-year medical school students from Montana discuss their career 
choice and their goals for establishing medical practices in Native American communities. A 
regional program has enabled the students to take their first year of classes at Montana State 
University-Bozeman and to complete their studies at the University of Washington School of 
Medicine (Seattle). 

EJ531860 

Upvall, M.J. (1996). Completing the circle: Nursing education in the Navajo Nation. N&HC : 
Perspectives on Community , 17(5), 230-35. 

Describes the baccalaureate nursing program for Native Americans in Ganado, Arizona. Closed 
in 1951, it is reopening with an emphasis on community health. The program, run by Northern 
Arizona University, is the first school of nursing for Native Americans. 

ED411105 

North Dakota Univ., Grand Forks. College of Nursing. (1996). Nursing.. A Tradition of Caring. 
Quentin N. Burdick Indians into Nursing Program. North Dakota: Author 
American Indians are underrepresented in the nursing profession. In fall 1990, the University of 
North Dakota (UND) College of Nursing received funding to increase the number of nurses 
providing health care to Indian people. In 1992, Reeruilment/Retention of American Indians into 
Nursing (RAIN) became one of three Quentin N. Burdick Indian Health Programs at UND. 

RAIN aims to recruit American Indians into UND baccalaureate and master's nursing programs 

10 



13 



and to provide services to American Indian students to foster self-confidence and success. This 
document also describes mentoring, nonacademic retention strategies, multicultural activities, 
application procedures, various tracks and certifications within the nursing program, and student 
financial aid. Includes photographs. 

Science/Math/Engineering 

ED433216 

Clark, J.V. (1999). Minorities in Science and Math . ERIC Digest. 

Looking to the year 2000 and beyond, this digest explores the lack of individuals entering the 
fields of science, especially underrepresented minority students such as Blacks, Hispanics, and 
American Indians. Sections include; (1) "Changing Demographics"; (2) "Status of Minorities in 
Science"; (3) "Barriers to Success"; (4) "Transforming Teaching and Learning"; (5) "Suggestions 
for Teachers"; (6) "Parental Involvement"; and (7) "The Challenge." 

ED432209 

Quality Education for Minorities Network. ( 1 997). Weaving the }veh of MSE success for 
minorities; Top ten colleges and universities report . Washington, DC: Author. 

This study identifies the institutions of higher education which are the most productive in the 
number of degrees in mathematics, engineering, and science (MSE) awarded to minority students 
(African Americans, American Indians, and Hispanics). Using 1992-93 data, the study focused 
on the 1 7 states (and Puerto Rico) in which minority students represent at least 25 percent of high 
school graduates. The main body of the report presents data on the top 1 0 institutions in each of 
the 1 7 states, including general data for the state as a whole as well as specific information on 
MSE minority-focused activities for each institution. A summary chapter notes types of 
programs and services frequently offered by these institutions and offers recommendations. The 
questionnaire is appended. 

EJ546499 

Brazziel, W.F., and Brazziel, M.E. ( 1997). Distinct! ves of high producers of minority science 
and engineering doctoral starts. Journal of Science Education and Technology , 6, 2, 143-53. 
Identifies institutions that are successful in sending Indian, Hispanic, and Black students on to 
graduate study in science and engineering. Reports on site visits and interviews at 10 of the top 
institutions. Identifies valuable threads among the practices for talent development among the 
populations under study. Presents an initiatives checklist for developing minority science and 
engineering doctoral starts. 

Directories 



ED435523 

Sorensen, B., and Pierce, D. (Eds.). (1999). " Winds of Change" Magazine's 6th annual college 
guide for American Indians. 

This guide provides college information tailored for American Indian and Alaska Native 
students, their families, and their counselors. The heart of the guide is a unique compilation of 

11 



14 



199 schools selected because they have a supportive American Indian community and graduate a 
good percentage of their Native undergraduates. Resources available on the Internet are briefly 
described. The guide contains photographs and many paid advertisements describing 
opportunities for Native Americans in colleges, universities, and corporations. 

ED4 10822 

Schlachter, G.A., and Weber, R.D. ( 1 9979. Financial Aid for Native Americans, 1997-99. First 
Edition 

This directory contains information on programs open primarily or exclusively to Native 
Americans including scholarships, fellowships, loans, grants, awards, internships, state sources 
of educational benefits, and general financial aid directories for minorities. The directory is 
divided into six sections. Within sections, each entry lists program title, address and telephone 
number, purpose, eligibility, financial data, duration, special features, limitations, number 
awarded each year, and deadlines for application. 

ED401079 

Hammer, P.C., and Beasley, H. (Comps.), (1997). Native Education Directory : Organizations 
and Resources for Educators of Native Americans . { Revised . } 

This directory provides information on organizations, government agencies, institutions of higher 
education, periodicals, publishers, and other resources useful to persons involved in the 
education of American Indian and Alaska Native students. Section 1 describes approximately 80 
international, national, and multistate nongovernmental organizations, listed alphabetically in 
four categories: advocacy, networking, and reform; research, development, technical assistance, 
and training; funding and sponsorship, and youth leadership, mentoring, and service. 

Internet Resources 



Bureau of Indian Affairs, Office of Indian Education Programs: Higher Education 
http://wvvvv.oiep.bia.edu/contact.htm 

Information on Higher Education Grant Program, Special Higher Education Grant Program, and 
Adult Education Program. 

FinAid! The SiuartStudcnt Guide to Financial Aid: Financial Aid lor Native American Students 
http :/Avvvw. fmaid.org/otheraid/natamind.phtml 

Includes information on eligibility, sources, and other related resources. 



12 



15 



