DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 396 878 



RC 020 612 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 



Schafer » Patricia D. 

A Manual of Cherokee Herbal Remedies: History, 
Information, Identification, Medicinal Healing. 

Mar 93 

292p.; Master’s Thesis, Indiana State University. 
Dissertations/Theses Masters Theses (042) — Guides 
-- General (050) 



EDRS \^ICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC12 Plus Postage. 

^American Indian Culture; American Indian History; 
Botany; ^Cherokee (Tribe) ; Curriculum Guides ; 
Environmental Education; Higher Education; 
Instructional Materials; Lesson Plans; ^Pharmacy; 
*Plant Identification; ^Plants (Botany) ; Science 
Curriculum; Secondary Education 
*Herbal Medicine; Herbs; Indiana (Southwest); 
Medicine Men; ’^Wildf lowers 



ABSTRACT 

This thesis reports on the research of 25 plants, 
used as herbal remedies since the 1800s by the author’s Native 
American ancestors (the Day family) and the Cherokee tribe. The 
plants were identified in four state parks in southwestern Indiana. 
Information sources included the research literature, articles on 
Cherokee herbal remedies, and interviews with Cherokee elders and 
medicine men. The purpose of the project was to develop a Cherokee 
herbal manual and curriculum guide related to plant identification 
and the herbal remedies made from these plants. Following an 
introduction to the purpose and methodology of the study, a 
literature review covers such topics as traditions, plant healing 
properties, the use of plants by early settlers and Native Americans, 
written records, plant medicinal myths, plant selection methods, the 
role of the medicine man, and Cherokee history and traditions. The 
third chapter includes information on plant identification, history, 
Cherokee uses. Day family uses, medical research, and sources 
consulted. Plan^s researched include black cohosh, bloodroot, 
boneset, common or great burdock, catnip, comfrey, dandelion, garlic, 
goldenseal, mayapple, milkweed, mistletoe, partidgeberry, pennyroyal, 
senna, skullcap, snakeroot, spikenard, St. Johns wort, common 
bearberry, white willow, wild black cherry, witch hazel, yarrow, and 
yellow root. The fourth chapter presents a curriculum guide for a 
2“’day workshop on plant identification, conservation, history, 
Cherokee uses , and current developments in herbal medicinal uses . The 
curriculum includes information on course evaluation; six lesson 
plans including objectives, equipment, materials, and procedures; and 
instructional materials needed for program implementation. The manual 
also includes charts related to plant identification, harvesting, and 
uses; preparation and storage of remedies; and terminology. Contains 
105 references. (LP) . « 



Vc * Vc * Vc * * * »V * Vc Vc Vc Vc * * * * Vc * Vc * * Vc Vc Vc * * * * * Vc Vc Vc * * Vc * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Vc * * * * * * * Vc * * * 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. * 

* it it it it it it it it it it it it it it * it it it it it it it it * * it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it * it it it it it it it it it it 



0 2 0 6 1 2 “ 



OO 

r-' 

oo 

ON 

CO 



s 



A MANUAL OP 

CHEROKEE HERBAL REMEDIES: 

HISTORY, INFORMATION, IDENTIFICATION, MEDICINAL HEALING 



A Master's Thesis 



u.t. ocMfrmiNTOf iducation 

Ottc* ot Educational Raaaarch and improvamcni 

educational resources information 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ Thia documani hat baan raproducad at 
racaivad tha parson or organization 
oTigirtating it 

D Minor char^gaa have baan mada to imorove 
raproduction quality 



a Pomta of viaw or opinions staled m this docu- 
mant do not nacassariiy represent oHiciai 
OERI position or policy 



Presented to 

The School of Graduate Studies 
Department of Health Studies 
Indiana State University 
Terre Haute, Indicina 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

In Partial Fulfillment 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES of the Requirements for the Class 

INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

Health 629 



by 

Patricia D. Schafer 
March 1993 



Running Head: CHEROKEE HERBAL REMEDIES 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



ERIC 



2 



Herbal 

i 



ACKN0ULED6EMENTC 

The author would like to gratefully acknowledge 
and give thanks to Dr. Frank Bell, who advised, 
supported, and gave suggestions for this mcuiual. Also, 
thanks to Dr. Portia Plummer, Chairperson, for her 
support and enthusiasm, and for being on my committee. 

A special thanks to Dr. and Mrs. Bernard Mar ley for 
their help, support, and friendship during the writing 
of this project. A special note of theinks to Mrs. 

Paula Pendergrass and Dr. Margaret Earl Harper for 
their expertise in proofreading for errors in all 
phases of the paper. I am also grateful to Mrs. Etta 
Lou Sellars for her encouragement and behind-the-scenes- 
contributions. Thanks also to Dr. Barbara Crowder for 
her help with developing the plant drawing overheads, 
Pat Swails for computer technology, and Lori Douglas 
for typing manual. Not least, my heart-felt thanks 
goes to Dr. Mike Atkinson, who also served on my 
committee, and to Dr. Alma Shuff lebarger and Mr. Gary 
Harper, for their help in collecting, reviewing, eind 
studying the different plants found in Southwestern 
Indiana. Finally, to my friends, Nancy and Mike 
Kieffer, Cindy and Reindy Beard and Karen and Bob 




3 



Herbal 

ii 



McCloud I eun grateful for their kindness, backing and 
friendship. 



O 

ERIC 



4 



Herbal 

iii 



DEDICATED TO MY DAUGHTERS 

Jennifer Jo Meyer and Amy Kay Meyer 
It was their grandparents, great grandparents, and 
great great grcindparents who inspired the writing of 
this manual. Without their love, help, understanding, 
and backing, I could not have completed it. 

















TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PREFACE 

Acknowledgements i 

Dedication iii 

Abstract iv 

Chapter 

1. INTRODUCTION 2 

Statement of the Problem 3 

Purpose of Study 3 

Importance of Study 4 

Delimitations 5 

Assumptions 6 

Hypothesis 6 

Definition of Terms 7 

Methodology 8 

Available Research 9 

Chapter 

2. REVIEW OF LITERATURE 11 

Major Traditions 11 

Plant Healing Properties 11 

Early Settlers; Native Americans 12 

Written Records 13 

Reference Sources 13 

Plant Medicinal Myth 13 

"Doctrine of Signatures" 



O 

ERIC 



13 



Plant Selection Methods 



14 



Spiritual Harvesting 14 

Gathering, Storing, Preparing 15 

Medicinal Treatment 15 

Spiritual Guidance 18 

Native American Medicine Man • 

Medicinal Plant Ceremonies 20 

Cherokee History and Traditions 21 

Trail of Tears 22 

Chapter 



3. PLANT IDENTIFICATION, HISTORY, CHEROKEE USES, 
DAY FAMILY REMEDIES, MEDICAL RESEARCH, PLANT 



PICTURES, AND SOURCES CONSULTED 25 

Plant Discussion 26 

Black Cohosh or Squawroot 29 

Bloodroot 34 

Boneset or Thoroughwort 39 

Common or Great Burdock 44 

Catnip 49 

Comf rey 54 

Dandelion 59 

Garlic 65 

Goldenseal 71 

Mayapple 76 

Milkweed, Common 82 

Mistletoe 87 



O 

ERIC 



7 




Partridgeberry or Squaw Vine 92 

Pennyroyal 96 

Senna, American Wild 102 

Skullcap 106 

Snakeroot Ill 

Spikenard 116 

St. Johns Wort 121 

Uva Ursi or Common Bearberry 127 

White Willow 132 

Wild Black Cherry 137 

Witch Hazel 143 

Yarrow 148 

Yellow Root 154 

Conclusion 158 






Chapter 

4. CHEROKEE HERBAL REMEDIES CURRICULUM GUIDE 



Curriculum Guide 163 

Course Text 165 

Evaluation 166 

Lesson Plan Session One 169 

Lesson Plan Session Two 175 

Lesson Plan Session Three 182 

Lesson Plan Session Four 186 

Lesson Plan Session Five 190 

Lesson Plan Session Six 194 



O 

ERIC 



H 



Herbal 



vi 

Student Check Sheet 197 

Mixers and Energizers 199 

Herbal Word Search 201 

Herbal Password 202 

Blackboard Herbal Baseball 204 

First Aid Review Sheet 214 

Field Experience Materials 222 

Common Poisonous Plants 224 

Snakes 225 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 226 

APPENDIXES 238 

Research Plant Source 239 

Cherokee Nation Plant Source 240 

CHARTS 242 

Plant Identification 243 

Environment and Area Where Located 247 

Herbal History 250 

When Gathered or Harvested 255 

Cherokee Uses 257 

Day Family Remedies 260 

Preparation and Storage of Remedies 263 

Medical Terms and Healing Plants 266 

Botanical Names Alphabetized 




0 



270 



Common Name Alphabetized 272 

Terminology 274 



Herbal 

iv 



ABSTRACT 

Research of twenty- five plants, used as herbal 
remedies by the author's ancestors, especially her 
great grandfather, grandfather, and the Cherokees in 
the 1800 's to the present, and found in the four state 
parks in southwestern Indiana, were identified, 
studied, and reviewed. Interviews were conducted with 
elders and medicine men of the Cherokee Nations. A 
checklist of twenty-five herbs was used to identify 
whether or not the Cherokees had currently been 
implementing any of these treatments. Chronicles of 
current medical research have been studied to ascertain 
if any of these uses have been being medically 
researched today. A manual has been developed which 
covered herbal background history, Cherokee uses, 
treatment values, plant identifications, current 
research experiments, and medicinal healing. A 
curriculum guide, plant identification chart, and 
overhead projector sheets of the plants have also been 
made using the information from the manual. These 
materials have had possibilities for use in a college 
health course, a workshop on medicinal uses of plants 




11 



Herbal 

vi 



and herbs, or a class for studying the culture and 
plant usage of the Cherokee Nations. 




12 



Herbal 

1 




INTRODUCTION 



ERLC 

hiaifiiifftifffi-aaij 



lii 



Herbal 

2 



INTRODUCTION 

Medical treatment using herbs has been recognized 
as being older than man's intelligence. Such herbal 
treatment has been seen in animals' instinctive use of 
plants to help cure certain ailments. For example, a 
dog hunted a special grass to eat when it has become 
ill, a mother bear has dressed a wound on her cub with 
leaves, and a horse lacking vitamins and minerals has 
eaten certain plants and bark from trees (Weiner, 

1972 ) . 

Today people have continued to use herbs with 
medicinal chemicals daily, usually without realizing 
the values of such plants. Herbal tea, a popular 
drink, has contained fluoride, a chemical used in 
preventing tooth decay. Coca-Cola was originally based 
on an herbal remedy used for headaches. Aspirin was 
created from two plants: white willow and meadowsweet. 
Often, however, even with these examples, lack of 
knowledge has prevented health professionals and health 
educators from teaching or supporting herbal healing. 
Nevertheless, the World Health Organization has 
estimated that two- thirds of the world's population has 




14 



Herbal 

3 

depended on healing herbs for primary medicines 
(Castleman, 1991). 

Tyler (1986) stated, "Folk medicine is worthy of 
scientific research: after all, scientists discovered 
morphine from opium poppy, digoxin from the foxglove, 
and ergotcunine from the ergot fungus by observing the 
efficacy of ancient folk remedies." 

STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 

Research has been conducted to identify, study, 
and review the twenty- five plants found in four state 
parks in southwestern Indiana and the herbal remedies 
made from these plants that were used by the Cherokees 
during the period dating from the early 19th century 
and continuing to the present. A study has been made 
of the latest developments and usage of the identified 
plants and herbal remedies for Cherokee purposes, 
herbal background history, treatment values, medicinal 
healing, plant identification, and current medical 
research. 

PURPOSE OF STUDY 

The purpose of this study has been to develop a 
Cherokee herbal manual, including a curriculvim guide 
and identification charts of twenty-five plants found 




O 



Herbal 

4 



in the four state parks in southwestern Indiana and the 
herbal remedies made from these plants. These remedies 
have been used by the Cherokees and by the Day family 
during the nineteenth and t\/entieth centuries. 
IMPORTANCE OF STUDY 

Often, the educational and training backgrounds of 
health professionals, educators, and scientists have 
not included the history and importance of herb 
healing. Many professionals have been unfamiliar with 
the effectiveness of Cherokee herbal remedies and their 
significance. Yet, research has shown that a plant 
called St. Johns Wort inhibited the growth of the 
leukemia virus, the yew bark had potential to cure 
breast and ovarian cancer, and garlic has been 
effective in reducing cholesterol for heart disease 
(Castleman, 1991). Some of the common plants and herbs 
used by the Cherokee Nations, and found in the four 
state parks in southwestern Indiana, have been tested 
for medicinal chemicals to combat some modern day 
diseases. A manual has been needed that has identified 
and discussed Cherokee herbal remedies. Therefore, 
this manual will be beneficial, not only to the 
educational profession, but also to those in sociology. 




Herbal 

5 



in the sciences, and in health. Historical interest in 
Cherokee remedies has neen worth recording, and this 
data has had the potential to develop into a college 
health course, a workshop on the medicinal uses and the 
importance of plants and herbal remedies, a specialized 
botany class, or a social science class studying the 
cultural heritage and plant usage of the Cherokee 
Nations. 

DELIMITATIONS 

1. This study has been limited to twenty-five 
plants and herbs found in the four state 
parks in southwestern Indiana. Specifically, 
these parks have included Harmonie State 
Park, Lincoln State Park, Pike County State 
Forest, and Harrison-Crawford State Forest. 

2. Only Cherokee herbal remedies that were used 
by the Day family, cincestors of the author, 
have been studied. Since other American 
native groups also used plants and herbs, it 
was essential to limit this study to one 
Native American group. 

3. The research has been limited to oral 
traditions provided by elders and medicine 




Herbal 

6 



men of the two Cherokee Nations that has been 
recorded. The two Nations have included 
Cherokee Village, North Carolina, and 
Tahlequah, Oklahoma. 

4. This manual has utilized only research 

materials found in the institutions of higher 
learning and public libraries in Indiana. 
ASSUMPTIONS 

The researcher has assumed that the written 
research surveyed was valid and the interviews of the 
elders and medicine men have been honest and accurate. 

A manual has been developed that would enable a 
researcher to identify and discuss the twenty-five 
Cherokee herbal remedies and plants found growing in 
southwestern Indiana State Parks. 

HYPOTHESIS 

Information has been gathered on the identified 
twenty- five plants and herbs found in the southwestern 
Indiana state parks. These plants were used by the 
Cherokees as herbal remedies and have been discussed in 
an informative manual. This manual has been able to 
increase knowledge of the use of these identified 
plants and herbal remedies for the educational 



professions, as well as for scientists and 
sociologists. 

DEFINITION OF TERMS 



Herbal 

7 



1 . Cherokee Nations has been used to refer to 
two distinct groups of Cherokees, located in 
two geographically different areas in the 
United States. 

2. Medicine man has been the term given by the 
Cherokee people to a male who was specially 
trained in the use of herbs and spiritual 
guidance . 

3. Elder has been used to refer to a Cherokee 
who had earned the respect of the village. 
This person was no longer responsible for the 
welfare of the village, but the nation sought 
this person's wisdom during future planning. 

4. Herbs has referred to plants that have 
healing qualities or medicinal value 
(Castleman, 1991). 

5. Herbal remedy has been used to refer to any 
use of an herb in the preparation of a 
medicine for the cure or prevention of an 
illness or disease. 




19 



Herbal 

8 



METHODOLOGY 

The materials that have been researched for the 
manual has included two components. First, a review of 
available research books and articles on Cherokee 
Nation herbal remedies used from 1850 to the present 
has been completed. Plants and herbs to be studied 
have been identified as those found in the state parks 
in southwestern Indiana. Those herbs have been used by 
the Day Family and the Cherokees for medicinal 
purposes. Since the Cherokee have used many different 
plants and herbs in their medical remedies, it was 
expedient to limit the study to only those pleints and 
herbs found in the state parks of southwestern Indiana. 

Second, oral traditions provided by Cherokee 
elders and medicine men of Cherokee Village, North 
Carolina, and Tahlequah, Oklahoma, have been obtained 
and analyzed. This study has included interviews with 
several Cherokees at each site. To obtain the oral 
traditions, a checksheet has been used. Data gathered 
has been analyzed, reviewed, and studied. Conclusions, 
information, and data have been developed into a 
resource manual that could be used for educational 
classes and presentations. This manual has included 




Herbal 

9 



current medical research information, history of 
medicinal cures, plant identification, and a history of 
Cherokee herbal remedies . 




21 



Herbal 

10 



CHAPTER I 

REVIEW OF LITERATURE 



O 

ERIC 



22 



Herbal 

11 



Chapter I 

REVIEW OF LITERATURE 

Herbal healing has included four major traditions: 
Chinese, Ayurvedic (in India), Duropian (including 
Egyptian), and American Indians (Native Americans) 
(Castleman, 1991). This paper has studied the use of 
selected healing herbs of the Native American, 
particularly the Cherokee Indian Nations. 

Healing properties of plants have not changed; 
plants have had healing powers, and people have 
benefitted from the accumulated wisdom gained from the 
use of herbs through the ages , Of the 265 thousand 
species of plants throughout the world, only eleven 
hundred have be n thoroughly studied by Western 
scientists. More them forty thousand additional plants 
might have had medical value for humans. Research, 
therefore, has had to focus on plants with useful 
properties (Linden, 1991). 

Today forty-seven percent of all prescriptions 
have contained a drug from a natural plant source. 
According to Weiner (1972), the U . S . Pharmacopofe i a has 
listed 170 drugs made from plants that were used by the 




23 



Herbal 

12 



Native Americans. Today, on the average, physicians 
have written eight prescriptions per day for drugs of 
plant origin (Castleman, 1991). 

Early settlers came to America with herbal 
remedies used in Europe. However, they soon realized 
the native inhabitants of America, the Indians, knew 
how to find, select, and preserve plants used to combat 
specific problems. The settlers were quick to accept 
these Indian herbal medical remedies. Because the 
relationship and communication between settlers and 
Native Americans were friendly during those times, it 
was common to find Indian medicine men treating both 
settlers and natives with different plants and herbs. 

Valuable information on Indian herbal remedies 
have come from written records of travelers, 
missionaries, botanists, cind physicians. Of these the 
most complete and helpful has been the classic, 

American Medicinal Plants , written by Millspaugh (1892) 
who illustrated, painted, and reproduced 180 original 
plates from living plants. 

According to Weiner (1972), herbs and early plant 
remedies used by the Indieins were evaluated, 
classified, tested, and approved for the medical 




24 



Herbal 

13 



profession. Three reference sources have recorded 
those early herbal plant medicines and remedies: U.3. 
Pharmacopoeia . National Formulary , and The Dispensatory 
of the United States . 

The Native Americans had a unique way of 
explaining how plants acquired medicinal properties. A 
plaque at the Museum of the Cherokee Indian had 
inscribed on it the following myth: "Diseases were 
created long ago by animals in revenge for the abuses 
they suffered from man. When the plants, who have 
always been the friends of man, learned of the 
afflictions caused by the animals, they decided that 
they should counteract the evil designs. Each tree, 
shrub, and herb, down even to the grasses and mosses 
agreed to furnish a remedy for one of the diseases with 
the promise 'I shall appear to help man when he calls 
upon me in his need. ' Thus did medicine originate, and 
every plant has a use if only we knew it." 

The Indians used a process called "Doctrine of 
Signatures" to decide which plants were valuable, 
useful, and worthwhile. This method identified those 
plants that were potent and best suited for collection. 
The doctrine theorized that medicinal herbs exhibited 





Herbal 

14 



certain colors, smells, and shapes which resembled 
either parts of the human body or the organism causing 
the problem. To eliminate worms, a plant that 
resembled a worm was used. For treatment of inflaimed 
eyes, an herb that characterized the eyes was selected. 
This selection idea was used not only by the Native 
Americans but by early settlers and ancient 
practitioners as well (Weiner, 1972). According to 
Mooney (1982), when harvesting an appropriate plant 
species, the traditional Cherokee doctor passed the 
first three plants and then took the fourth but not 
before he offered a preliminary prayer, in which he 
addressed the "Great Adawehi" humbly asking permission 
to take a small piece of its flesh. After the plant 
had been dug from the ground, he dropped a bead into 
the hole and covered it over. This was a token 
repayment to the plant spirit. 

Other methods of selection included trial and 
error, tasting, sniffing, and relying on the 
supernatural even though instead of a cure, a plant 
selection sometimes caused death. By the process of 
elimination, the Indians discovered certain plants, 
flowers, bark, stems, roots, seeds, fruits, and nuts 



Herbal 

15 



alleviated pain, speeded birth, cured ills, altered the 
mind, and induced abortion. The Native Americans were 
also experts at gathering, storing, preparing, and 
utilizing the different plant species. Annual plants 
were dug before flowering, biennial herbs were gathered 
in late fall when growth had ceased, and other plants 
were collected when they were in the process of storing 
their nutrients before winter. Gathering during 
certain seasons preserved the plants' parts when they 
were richest in medicinal properties. Some plants were 
dried for later use, and others were utilized in the 
fresh state. Roots and stems, if dried, were sliced 
and exposed to the air but were not placed in direct 
sunlight. This process took three to six weeks, 
depending on the weather and nature of the plant parts. 
Bark was gathered when it slipped easily from the trunk 
or branches; the inner layer was most often used. 

Leaves were collected before blooming and dried in the 
shade. Flowers were used, but infrequently, in herbal 
medicines; flowers, however, were preserved for use in 
certain sacred ceremonial rites. Fruits were picked at 
maturity and either used in the fresh state or dried. 
Generally, seeds were harvested before seed pods 




21 



Herbal 

16 



opened; nuts were collected and stored when mature. The 
dried herbs were preserved by storing in dry, cool 
places, or by making them into different preparations. 

Herbal medicinal plants were prepared by boiling 
or steeping in water and were drunk as medicinal tea. 
Often, tea treatment was given one time during the 
course of an illness and then was not repeated; 
however, poultices and salves were often applied 
several times to promote healing. Native Americans 
usually prepared herbal remedies by using only one 
ingredient or plant for each medicine; however, two 
herbs were sometimes combined to create a single herbal 
remedy. Rarely did the Indians combine several herbs 
for one medicine. 

Infusion was the most common iv^ay of preparing 
herbs. A small number of leaves or seeds were added to 
a minute auaount of water and steeped for a few minutes. 
If the prepared herbal remedy was too bitter, other 
plants or foods, such as honey, were added to improve 
flavor and taste. 

Harder and coarser herbs such as stems, bark, and 
roots were gently simmered for several minutes until 
about one-third of the water had evaporated. The 




26 



Herbal 

17 



process was called decoction; the mixture was drunk as 
herbal tea. 

Another way of preparing herbs was fermentation. 

An external application of herbs, made by soaking 
leaves, cloth, or skins in a preparation of the desired 
tea, was applied to an affected area. This 
preparation, used to treat swelling, pains, colds, and 
the flu, was applied as hot as could be tolerated 
without burning. It was allowed to cool and then 
repeated as necessary. 

To reduce swelling, a poultice of powdered herbs 
was made into a paste and then applied directly to the 
skin. Often, hot materials such as leaves or cloths 
were then placed over the paste at the affected area 
where they were left to cool. This procedure was 
repeated many times to reduce swelling, to relieve 
pain, and to quiet muscle spasms. 

A plaster was sometimes used to prevent irritation 
to the skin. It differed from a poultice when powdered 
or wet herbs were placed between two leaves or pieces 
of cloth which was then applied to an affected area. 
This prevented the herbal remedy from coming into 
direct contact with the skin. 









Herbal 

18 



Finally, a salve was made by mixing and blending 
powdered herbs with types of cmimal fat or beeswax and 
cooking this mixture for a couple of hours. It was 
then applied to wounds. Because of the base materials, 
this mixture had the tendency to remain on the wound 
for a longer period of time. 

These treatments used by the Native Americans in 
selecting, collecting, and preparing medicinal cures 
were marveled at by the settlers, as well as by other 
medical professionals, botanists, and missionaries 
(Weiner, 1972). 

Along with the medicinal use of plants, the Native 
Americans used spiritual guidance. The Native 
American's use of the term medicine was different from 
that of white society. To them it meant an array of 
ideas and concepts rather than just remedies and 
treatment. Often when ordinary medicines, made from 
plants, did not bring relief, the medicine man was 
called upon to help along the healing ptocess. He 
resorted to charms, prayers, dances, singing, shaking 
of rattles, and the beating of drums. In an oral 
interview, Mr. Choogie Kingfisher, a full-blooded 
Cherokee and son of a medicine man, from Tahlequah, OK, 




30 



Herbal 

19 



told of an unique tribal custom used by the Cherokee 
medicine men. If a patient recovered through the 
spiritual guidance and medicinal preparations, a lock 
or streuid of the patient's hair was given to the 
medicine man to be placed on a pole (spirit stick). Of 
course, the more hair locks, the greater the healing 
powers of the medicine man. 

The Native American Medicine Mcin, also called the 
Shaman, was many things: a healer, a sorcerer, and a 

seer, an educator, as well as a priest. It was his 
duty to know the properties of a variety of plants, 
what demons were present in the body, and to whom the 
disease was attributed. He was equipped with 
paraphernalia and equipment appropriate to his calling.. 
This included a special costume (usually animal skins), 
a medicine bundle that contained charms, a medicine 
stick, and a bag of herbs. Other equipment included 
drums, rattles, snake fangs, a hollow bone for sucking, 
a mortar and pestle for mixing medicines, and .nany 
times a syringe for injecting medicine into wounds or 
administering an enema (Vogel, 1970). This syringe was 
made from the hollow leg bone of a small bird, by 
affixing a bladder of a small animal to the top of the 




31 



Herbal 

20 



bone, and then sharpening the other end of the bone. 
Other important items of the medicine bundle were deer 
tails and other animal parts. These medicinal bags 
were handed down from father to a son or to a person 
appointed by the medicine man. They were very 
important and contained not only herbs, equipment, and 
paraphernalia, but also charms that warded off evils 
(Vogel, 1970). 

Mr. Kingfisher also related that the full or true- 
blooded Cherokee medicine men live in a wide area in 
the Northeastern part of Oklahoma. The full-bloods 
(about 30 thousand) have maintained authentic ways of 
old in treating illnesses and disease. The medicine 
men have continued to treat people by driving away evil 
spirits and by treating with medicinal plants and 
herbs . 

Medicinal plants were believed to derive their 
strength from ceremonies performed to make them 
powerful. The Doctrine of Signatures provided "like- 
cures" and other plrants which were believed to be 
beneficial to the system because they were distasteful. 
The distasteful plants were used to rid the body of 
poison. Consequently, foul -tasting medicine, emetics. 




32 



Herbal 

21 



and purges were often used. Of course, the faith of 
the patient had much to do with recovery. The prayers 
and ceremonies were calculated to inspire confidence of 
recovery in the mind of the sick person and undoubtedly 
reacted favorably upon the person's physical condition 
(Vogel, 1970). 

The Cherokees, during the 19th century, farmed, 
raised cattle, owned slaves, and raised cotton. They 
quickly adapted to white man's ways, learned his skills 
and arts, and also became Christians. Their villages 
included churches, schools, grist-mills, and blacksmith 
shops. One elder, Sequoyah, invented an alphabet and a 
written language for his tribe in 1820. This was 
unique, as the Cherokee Nations were the only Indian 
culture to develop cin alphabet. This invention 
resulted in a published bilingual newspaper in 1828. 

However, the whites coveted the rich Cherokee 
lands in Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Florida, North 
Carolina, and South Carolina. Therefore, the whites 
sought the United States government to remove the five 
civilized tribes — Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, 
and Seminole — to lands west of the Mississippi River 
(Gilcrease, 1979). This group had the backing of 




33 



Herbal 

22 



President Andrew Jackson, who felt Native Americans 
were deficient in intelligence, possessed no moral 
habits, and lacked the desire to improve their lives 
(Capps, 1973). 

In 1838, President Jackson issued an order to have 
the five Civilized Tribes moved to a Western territory 
that is now Oklahoma. Sixty thousand Native Americans 
were rounded up at gunpoint, herded into camps, and 
moved west under military guard. The greatest number 
of people to be transplanted to Oklahoma were the 
Cherokees. Some of the Cherokees escaped, but at the 
end of the forced march, only fourteen thousand of them 
survived. This forced march has been known as the 
"Trail of Tears" (Capps, 1973). 

Those who escaped established residency in 
Cherokee Village, North Carolina. After the forced 
march, the Cherokees rallied, rebuilt their society, 
and restored a three-part government: executive 

branch, legislative branch, and a judicial branch 
consisting of a five man supreme court. In 1839, they 
drafted a new constitution and by 1840 had implemented 
it at Tahlequah, Oklahoma. In addition, they 
established a public school system (Eighteen schools 




34 



Herbal 

23 



were operating in 1843), published and printed a 
newspaper The Cherokee Advocate , and established two 
seminaries for higher learning (Capps, 1973). 

The Cherokees were suppressed, discriminated 
against, and punished, yet they considered all men to 
be brothers. After meuiy hardships, they mastered 
reservation life and in 1906 accepted United States 
citizenship. The following year, the Cherokees helped 
organize the state of Oklahoma (Capps, 1973). 




35 



Herbal 

24 



CHAPTER II 

PLANT IDENTIFICATI0I9, HISTORY, CHEROKEE USES, 
DAY FAMILY USKS AMD MEDICAL RESEARCH 




36 



Herbal 

25 



Chapter II 

PLANT IDENTIFICATION, HISTORY, CHEROKEE USES, 

DAY FAMILY USES AND MEDICAL RESEARCH 

Twenty-five plants, found in Southwestern Indiana 
have been chosen to be discussed in this chapter. 

Under identification of plants, the common name, 
botanical, scientific, and sometimes family names have 
been given; descriptions of plants and where they were 
located or found have also been included. 

The history of the plant has been given to 
identify the way plants were used in the past, and how 
the herbs were recorded in earlier times. Included 
were several folk remedies that were. used by the 
American Indians (Cherokee), the early settlers, and 
the people of Indiana (Hoosiers) as well as the usage 
of herbs by early medical practitioners. 

Under Cherokee and Day Family uses, herbs and 
plants have been discussed and listed according to 
their medicinal uses or remedies. The ways plants were 
harvested, gathered, conserved, prepared, stored, and 
what parts of plants were used for treatment of the 




37 



Herbal 

26 

different ailments and diseases have been included in 
this paper. The purpose of this paper has been to 
record Cherokee herbal remedies that were used by the 
Day Family so the reader might appreciate, identify, 
and be knowledgeable about the traditional uses of 
Cherokee herbal cures. Day Feunily remedies differed 
somewhat from the original Cherokee uses. Some 
remedies that were handed down by word of mouth were 

^®CD^ded, were altered, and some parts ignored with 
the passage of time. 

Medical research has been included with regard to 
specific chemical components, experiments euid studies 
of mainly laboratory animals, and what new studies have 
been conducted during the present time. Warnings, 
and safety information concerning use of 
herbs have also been included. Certain uses of 

siting, or applying these herbs were found in 
some cases to be harmful and to cause severe medical 
problems. 

Sources consulted have been added for the reader's 
benefit to indicate what usage of plants during the 
present time were practiced throughout the Cherokee 




38 



Herbal 

27 



Nabions. Additional information or continued in— depth 
study of plant identification, history, the Cherokee 
uses, and medical research of the different plants and 
herbal remedies were noted. 

A word of caution: This manual has been written 

to record the Day family Cherokee herbal remedies, not 
to be used as a medical guide. As previously stated, 
many plants have been found to be very poisonous and 
people have needed to be knowledgeable about 
identification and selection of each plant before 
attempting to use it in any way. The author found it 
wise to follow Grandfather Days old adage when looking 
and observing the different plants; "Leaves of three, 
leave them be." 




39 



BLACK COHOSH 













Herbal 

29 



Black Cohosh or Squawroot 

( Cimicifuaa racemoaa ^ 

Plant Identification: 

Included with buttercup, larkspur, and peony 
families. Black Cohosh, Bugwort or Squawroot has been 
found in rich, fertile woods. It was a leafy perennial 
that reached nine feet (Castleman, 1991). The roots 
were knotty and black, the stems smooth, and the leaves 
were large, three-divided, and sharply toothed. The 
slender, candle- like flowers were white, long-spiked, 
and emitted an unpleasant odor. The cluster of 
flowers, up to three feet in length, were found 
blooming during the summer from May through September. 
Black Cohosh grew in rich, open woods cuid along edges 
of fields (Millspaugh, 1892). They have grown profusely 
in the Ohio River Valley near and within Harmonie State 
Park. 

History; 

Black Cohosh, often called Squawroot because of 
its use for "female ailments", has also been known by 
the common name Bugwort, since it emitted an unpleasant 
odor that repelled insects. It was listed as an 




42 



Herbal 

30 



official drug xn US Pharmacopoeia from 1820 to 1936 as 
a sedative, a medication for rheumatism, and as a 
promoter of menstruation (Vogel, 1970). During the 
1800 's and early 1900 's, settlers used a Black Cohosh 
concoction for fever, rashes, yellow-fever, and 
menstrual complaints (Foster and Duke, 1990). In 
Germany, Black Cohosh has been used in several drugs 
that were prescribed for the discomforts of menopause. 
Another herb called Blue Cohosh was not related to 
Black Cohosh; it was of a different botanical family. 
The Cherokees used both for menstrual problems 
(Castleman, 1991). 

Cherokee Uses: 

The Cherokees boiled the Black Cohosh roots in 
water, prepared a tea, and drank the tea for 
bronchitis, rheumatism, snakebite, colic, sore throat, 
fevers, nervous disorders, and menstrual irregularities 
(Vogel, 1970). It was also drunk for consumption, 
constipation, fatigue, and backache (Hamel and 
Chiltoskey, 1975). Since it was used to treat "women's 
problems" (delayed menstruation, profuse bleeding, 
cramps, and pain), it was also called Squawroot 




43 



Herbal 

31 







(Weiner, 1972). They collected the roots in September 
or early fall after the fruits had ripened. The roots 
were cut lengthwise and allowed to dry then stored for 
future use. 

Day Family Remedies: 

Grandmother Day prepared a root tea that was drvink 
to ward off "cricks" in the back and to relieye the 
pain of rheumatism. Since Comfrey tea and Sassafras 
tea had been drimk as spring tonics, the Black Cohosh 
tea was drunk as a tonic to prepare the body for harsh 
winters. Often Grandmother served the roots as a 
vegetable. They were eaten raw or boiled. They had a 
sweet nutty flavor when they were eaten raw, but when 
cooked, they tasted similar to carrots. 

Medical Research: 

Medical research has indicated Black Cohosh was 
anti-inflammatory, that it reduced high blood pressure 
by opening blood vessels in animal limbs, reduced 
animal blood sugar levels, and strengthened female 
reproductive organs in rats (Foster and Duke, 1990). 

The chemical, causlosaponia (similar to pitocin) was 
found to start strong uterine contractions because of 




44 



Herbal 

32 



properties that acted as estrogen-like components. Its 
side effects included dizziness, nausea, vomiting, 
headaches, joint pains, and depressed heart rates 
(Costello, 1950). 

Sources Consulted: 

Black Cohosh, according to Bell (1993), has been 
used by the Eastern Cherokees as a decoction for high 
blood pressure, headache, painful menstruation, labor 
pain, and as a tonic. It was common on uplauid woods at 
low elevations and was often found near old homesites. 
The author purchased an o\mce for medicinal purposes. 




45 



BLOODROOT 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



46 



Herbal 

34 



Bloodroot or Puccoon 

( Scuciquinaria canadensis ') 

Plant Identification: 

Bloodroot, a perennial, grew in height to twelve 
inches and was found in large colonies, on wooded 
slopes, and in rich open woodlands or on bottom lands 
along shaded streams (Wampler, 1988). The stems and 
roots had blood red juice but when dried, turned yellow 
like Goldenseal, and it tasted just as bitter. A single 
waxy, creamy white flower on a long, smooth stem, vrith 
eight to ten petals each had begun to bloom before the 
leaves appeared. The heart-shaped green leaves were 
seven to nine-lobed with network of veins. The under 
surface of the leaves were whitish in color 
(Millspaugh, 1892). This was in early spring from March 
to June. Its genus name, Sanguinaria, meant bloody, 
and it belonged to the poppy family (Foster and Duke, 
1990). Colonies were found in Pike County State Forest 
and the Jim O'Leary Woods; however, it was common 
throughout Southwestern Indiana. 




47 



Herbal 

35 



History: 

Bloodroot was listed in the US Pharmacopoeia from 
1820 to 1926 as a laxative and pain killer and the 
National Formulary from 1926 to 1965 (Vogel, 1970). 
However, it was considered poisonous for animals and 
people. Tyler (1985) stated that people in Indiana 
boiled Bloodroot in water to make a strong tea solution 
for stomach ailments or colic, but he warned it was too 
toxic for humeui consumption and was not to be taken 
internally. Commercial toothpastes, rinses, and 
mouthwashes have used minute amounts in the 
preparations to fight plaque. 

Cherokee Uses: 

The Cherokees used Bloodroot tea for rheumatism 
remedies, to induce vomiting, and to cure sore throats. 
They also used it for asthma, bronchitis, and even as a 
love charm. Root juice was squeezed on maple sugar and 
held in the mouth. A poultice made from the roots was 
used on warts, ringworm, fungus infections, eczema, 
skin cancers and burns (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 1975). A 
dye made from the root's red juice sap and mixed with 
tannin (helped set color and made dye more permanent) 




4S 



Herbal 

36 



from oak bark was used to dye their faces, skin, 
clothing, baskets, cind equipment. Besides being used 
as a dye, the Bloodroot juice repelled insects and was 
used as an insecticide. The Native Americans collected 
the roots in the fall when the seeds were ripe cind 
after the leaves had withered, dried them, cutid stored 
them in a dry place (Weiner, 1972). Some tribes 
believed when a warrior desired a certain womcin to 
marry, he placed Bloodroot in his hands, shook hands 
with her, and they were married within five to six days 
(Foster and Duke, 1990). 

Day Family Remedies; 

The Day fcunily crushed the Bloodroot, prepared a 
poultice, or mixed pulverized Bloodroots with lard and 
placed this mixture on "summer" or "touch" sores 
(Infatigo). Bloodroot pulled the poison from the 
sores . 

Medical Research: 

Medically, Bloodroot had a laxative action. A 
chemical, alkaloid sanguinarine, contained alkaloids 
similar to morphine and was found to be an cuntiseptic, 
anesthetic, and anticancerous drug in laboratory animal 




49 



Herbal 

37 



experiments. When roots were eaten, they were 
poisonous emd very alkaloid. Side effects included 
dizziness, vomiting, and gastrointestinal problems 
(Castleman, 1991). Commercial toothpastes, rinses, and 
mouthwashes used minute amounts in toothpaste 
preparations to fight plaque (Tyler, 1985). 

Sources Consulted: 

Bell (1993) related that Bloodroot was frequently 
found at low elevations. It still had uses during 
special ceremonies as skin coloring and as a dye for 
basket decorations. Walkingstick (1993) indicated 
Bloodroot was mixed with ground hog fat instead of bear 
fat as a base for salve or poultice. Injections of 
strong tea has been used for hemorrhoids and the 
Cherokees have prepared a Bloodroot poultice from 
powdered roots, resin, leaves, and seeds that were used 
on fungus, ringworm and warts. 



51 ) 



BONESET 



Herbal 

39 



Boneset or Common Thoroughwort 

f Eupatorium perfoliatum ) 

Plant Identification: 

Boneset, also known as Common Thoroughwort,. was a 
long-lived, hardy perennial and hairy plant; it was 
included in the daisy, dandelion, and marigold family 
(Castleman, 1991). It was grown in clximps three to 
four feet tall. The leaves were opposite one another, 
and united at the base. The dull, white, dense, and 
flat-topped flowers have appeared from July to 
September or October and have been found in wet, marshy 
places near streams but sunlight areas (Millspaugh, 
1892). Pike County State Forest was the area in which 
Boneset was located. 

History: 

Since the stem of Boneset looked as if it were 
broken by leaves, the Doctrine of Signatures was the 
idea applied when Boneset was used as a remedy for 
broken bones. Millspaugh (1887) wrote that no plant 
was used more extensively or freguently than Boneset. 
It was listed in fifty-nine indigenous remedies. The 
settlers used the herb for dengue (Deng-ee) or 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

52 



Herbal 

4C 



"breakbone fever." This mosquito-borne virus caused 
muscle pains so severe the victims thought their bones 
were breaking. Hence, another reason for the name 
Boneset. The settlers sometimes referred to Boneset as 
Indian sage. They hung bxinches of the dried herb, tops 
down, in attics and woodsheds so it could be used 
immediately when needed (Vogel, 1970). Tyler (1985) 
listed Hoosiers as using Boneset remedies for cold, 
flu, headaches, and malaria fever. It was also placed 
on sprains to speed healing. From 1820 through 1916, 
Boneset was listed in US Pharmacopoeia and in the 
National Formulary from 1926 through 1950 for fevers, 
colds, and the flu (Vogel, 1970). 

C herokee Uses: 

The Cherokees wrapped Boneset leaves around broken 
bones to aid in healing, poulticed it onto tumors, and 
drank it in a tea to relieve pain, fever, colds, flu, 
and constipation. When used in large doses, it became 
a laxative (Weiner, 1972). They also used Boneset for 
swellings, for sore eyes, to induce vomiting, as a 
purgative, and as an antiseptic (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 
1975). For treatment of epilepsy, other tribes boiled 



ERIC 



53 



Herbal 

41 



the Boneset roots to form steam and then immersed the 
epileptic victim in the rising steam (Millspaugh, 

1892). The leaves were collected in late summer 
(usually August) or early fall when the plant was in 
full bloom. The leaves were stripped from the stem, 
dried without exposure to the sun, and then stored in a 
dry, cool place (Olds, 1975). 

Day Family Remedies; 

Boiled Boneset root tea was drunk by the Day 
family as a laxative. Sometimes fresh leaves were 
chewed for relief of constipation. Often, however, it 
caused vomiting 6ind stomach problems. Grandmother used 
Boneset only for extreme cases of bowel problems. 
Medical Research; 

Medical research indicated Boneset contained 
immune-system stimulating properties, and it was found 
to depress the motor nerves of the spinal cord 
(Vollmar, 1986). One of the chemicals derived from 
Boneset, called tremeral, caused nausea, vomiting, and 
diarrhea when taken in large doses (Castleman, 1991). 
Millspaugh (1892) noted another chemical, Eupatorin, 
first caused irritation of motor system but then 




54 



Herbal 

42 



relaxed the capillaries and increased the heart action. 
However, drying the herb eliminated the toxicity. 
Sources Consulted; 

According to Stone (1991), the Cherokees have 
continued to use Boneset tea for pneumonia, colds, and 
flu-like symptoms. During the wintertime, steeped tea 
had been prepared from previously dried leaves and 
stems; however, during the summer months, fresh leaves 
cuid stems have been used for the Boneset tea. Boneset 
or Thoroughwort was found occasionally at low to middle 
elevations in the Smoky Mountains according to Defoe, 
Langdon, and Rock (1989). Mr. Walkingstick (1993) 
proclaimed Boneset tea as an excellent medicine for 
bringing down fevers due to colds or flu. 



BURDOCK 



Herbal 

44 



Common or Great Burdock 

Common ( Arctium minus ) ; Great ( Arctium lappa 1. ) 
Plant Identification: 

A biennial, common, seedy weed. Burdock, was used 
throughout the world as food. It grew to a height of 
three to five feet. Two species were noted: Great 
(lappa) Burdock ouid Common (minus) Burdock. The minus 
was most often foimd during July through October in 
moist abandoned fields and waste areas that were 
readily exposed to the sun (Weiner, 1972). The roots 
had white, spongy, fibrous interiors that became hard 
as they dried. At the end of the long stems were 
large, hairy, egg-shaped leaves. These leaves were 
green and smooth above, whitish beneath, with tiny 
crimson veins (Millspaugh, 1892). Each stem was topped 
with many bristled, purplish flowers that produced 
burrs. Burdock has been found in many areas throughout 
Southwestern Indiana. 

History: 

Burdock was an European treatment for rheumatism. 
The leaves, during the fourteenth century, were made 
into wine and used to treat leprosy. Physicians during 



5V 



Herbal 

45 



the 1800 's treated urinary tract infections, kidney 
problems, painful urination, skin infections, and 
arthritis with Burdock (Castleman, 1991). The settlers 
used dried roots in soups, the leaves as greens, and 
the peeled roots like radishes. Tyler (1985) stated 
Hoosiers used Burdock and onion soup for rheximatism and 
Bloodroot tea to thin the blood. They made a poultice 
from crushed Burdock leaves to draw poison from boils 
and carbuncles; they pulverized Burdock seeds in water 
to cause sweating. Burdock root tea was applied to the 
skin to cure acne. The tea contained the carbohydrate, 
inulin, that formed a protective absorbent layer on the 
skin. He also believed the fresh root may have had 
some bacteriostatic effect. It was listed in the US 
Phar macopoe i a from 1831 to 1842 and in the National 
Formulary from 1916 to 1947 as a diuretic (Vogel, 

1970). As an edible plant, Forey and Fitzsimons (1989) 
stated that the Burdock stalks have been peeled, eaten 
raw, or boiled like celery. The roots have been used 
to make beer, and the leaves have been used in salads. 




V 



58 



Herbal 

46 



Cherokee: 

The Cherokees used Conuuon Burdock extensively. 
Crushed leaves were applied on boils to draw the 
poison. They poulticed the crushed seeds for bruises, 
hives, eczema, and other skin problems (Foster and 
Duke, 1990). It was also used for rheumatism, 
hemorrhoids, swellings, and skin disorders. Root or 
seed tea was driink to cleanse blood, to prevent scurvy 
and give weakly females strength (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 
1975). The leaves and seeds were collected from July 
through October, usually before a frost, dried, then 
crushed, and finally stored in a dry place (Millspaugh, 
1892). The roots were harvested during fall of first 
year growth or spring of second year. They were dried 
by exposing to sunlight or in partial shade (Olds, 
1975). 

Day Family Remedies: 

The Day family has used fresh, crushed leaves on 
sores, cuts, or bruises. The family has also mixed the 
fresh leaves with salad greens. Only young and tender 
leaves were picked. Aged and mature leaves tasted 
bitter, toxic, and sour. 



59 



Herbal 

48 



Medical Research; 

When tested, the chemical arctigenin inhibited 
tumor growth and stimulated uterine activity on 
laboratory animals (Castleman, 1991). Side effects 
included hallucinations, stomach upsets, and diarrhea. 
Leaf hairs irritated the skin in some test situations 
(Bryson, 1978). 

Sources Consulted; 

According to Hutchens (1992), the Cherokees have 
been known to use the parsnip like Burdock roots as a 
boiled vegetable. They also have used the young, 
tender, and fresh leaves as salad greens. Many skin 
conditions such as blemishes, pimples, and whiteheads 
have been treated with a Burdock facial steam bath. It 
has also been poulticed on boils. Burdock was commonly 
found at low elevations in the Smokey Mountains. 



CATNIP 




Catnip 

f Neoeta cataria ) 



Herbal 

50 



Plant Identification; 

Included in the mint family. Catnip has also been 
knovm as Catmints or Catswort because of its 
intoxicating effect on cats (Castlemeui, 1990). A gray- 
green, aromatic, perennial, it grew to a height of two 
or three feet and has been found in well-drained, hximus 
soil tinder full sun or partial shade at Lincoln State 
Park. The two-lipped, white (sometimes purple-dotted), 
clustered flowers bloomed from June to September. The 
stems were square and the leaves were heart-shaped, 
scalloped, strongly toothed, and fuzzy (Foster and 
Duke, 1990). 

History; 

Throughout history. Catnip has been used as a 
trcuiquilizer , a sedative, a digestive aid, a pain 
killer, and as a mean of relieving menstrual cramps. 
The colonists introduced Catnip, which grew wild, and 
quickly spread throughout the country (Millspaugh, 
1892). The settlers prepared a tea from the leaves to 
be drunk for pneumonia, colds, fevers, headaches. 



B2 

o 

ERIC 



Herbal 

51 



irregular menstruation/ insomnia/ chicken pox/ and as a 
tonic. Catnip was listed in US Pharmacopoeia from 1916 
to 1950 as being able to induce sweating/ to promote 
suppressed menstruation/ and to cure colds. It was 
officially listed in the National Formulary from 1916 
to 1950 as a stimulant and tonic (Vogel/ 1970). Tyler 
(1985) indicated Catnip tea had been used more often by 
Hoosiers than any other remedy or herbal preparation; 
they used it as a poultice for headaches and minor 
burns / as tea for colds and fussy babies / and as a 
sedative for adults. 

Cherokee Uses; 

The Cherokees prepared a tea from dried leaves to 
promote digestion/ to sooth infants with coliC/ to 
relieve menstrual cramps / and to calm the nerves 
(Weiner/ 1972). The leaves were chewed to relieve 
toothaches/ and dried leaves were placed in a small 
bag/ hung around a child's neck/ so that the child 
inhaled the healing/ soothing vapors. In 1975/ Hamel 
and Hiltoskey noted catnip was poulticed on swellings/ 
hives / and boils / and leaf tea was used as a stimulant 
or tonic. The Native Americans harvested the leaves in 




63 



Herbal 

52 



late Slimmer, when the plants were in full bloom, dried 
them in the shade to preserve the green color, and then 
stored them in a dry place. Finally, they bruised or 
pinched the leaves to release the aromatic oils 
(Castleman, 1991). 

Day Family Remedies: 

From dried leaves, an infusion of Catnip leaf tea 
was prepared by Great-grandmother and Grandmother Day. 
It was drunk before retiring and was used to calm the 
nerves and to promote sleep. 

Medical Research: 

Medical research has found that Catnip has 
possessed a chemical, nepetalactone, which was a mild 
sedative, and was similar to the natural sedative, 
valepotriate (Jackson, 1969). It had antibiotic, 
herbicidal, and insect-repellant properties. Side 
effects included upset stomachs for some people 
(Poundstone, 1969). 

Sources Consulted; 

Stone (1991) related many present day Cherokee 
uses for Catnip. It has been used as a remedy for 
toothaches, for intestinal cramping, baby's colic, and 




64 



Herbal 

53 



gas pains. Also, the juice from the leaves was used to 
stimulate menstrual flow. Catnip had been used as a 
steam inhalant to relieve congestion. Crushed dried 
leaves were placed in boiling water; a person breathed 
in the vapors from the steam for several minutes. This 
was repeated a few times a day. In the Smoky Mountains 
Catnip was scarce; however, it was fo\uid in several 
locales or scattered in small populations according to 
Defoe, Langdon, and Rock (1989). 





COMFREY 





Herbal 

55 



Cofflfrey 

f Svmphvt:nm officinale ) 

Plant Identification; 

A rough, hardy perennial, often called all-heal, 
Knitbone, or Bruisewort, Comfrey has been included in 
the forget-ias-Tiot family. The large, hairy, lance- 
shaped leaves were found clasping hollow, woody, and 
bristly stems. The roots were thick, deep, and 
spreading. The flowers which bloomed from May through 
Jime were white, blue, or purple and bell-shaped 
(Castleman, 1991). The plants were found growing in 
clay or sandy humus soil and in open woods in Harrison 
Crawford State Forest. They often looked like the 
first year rosettes of foxglove but should not be 
confused with this plant. 

History; 

The Greeks used an extract from Comfrey roots to 
heal woiinds; the Romans boiled it in water and 
prepared a sticky paste that hardened like plaster. 

The paste was wrapped aroimd broken bones of the Roman 
soldiers following battles. The settlers drank a leaf 
tea for respiratory and gastrointestinal ailments 



Herbal 

56 



(Castleman, 1991). Tyler (1985) related Comfrey was 
mixed with other herbs to produce a herbal mixture for 
colds, flu, and for use as a tonic. Herbal tea, made 
from the leaves, provided great relief for stomach 
problems, but he recommended Comfrey be used externally 
for research had shown it caused cancer of the liver in 
small animals. Leaves, too, were chopped, blended, and 
applied as a poultice directly to wounds, or wrapped in 
a bandage around the wound. The juice was saved to 
moisten the bandages when they dried out. The same 
treatment was used for boils. 

Cherokee Uses: 

The Cherokees drank Comfrey root tea for "bad 
memory," cancer, genital infections, milky urine, and 
internal bleeding. Fresh leaves were poulticed for 
sprains, tendinitis, bruises, aumd pulled muscles 
(Foster and Duke, 1990). The dried leaves were used 
like tobacco and smoked. They harvested the leaves 
during May through June when flowers had begxin to bud. 
Leaves were highest in toxic alkaloids during this 
time. The roots were gathered in autumn, cut into 
slices, and dried (Olds, 1975)- The dried roots were 



Herbal 

57 



crushed/ powdered, and placed on cuts, burns, and 
wounds to promote healing. 

Day Family Remedies; 

Comfrey tea and another common root. Sassafras 
tea, were driink by the Day family as spring tonics. 

The Grandparents also mixed a small amount of baking 
soda in a cup of hot comfrey tea for "settling an upset 
stomach" . 

Medical Research: 

Comfrey contained the chemical, allantoin, that 
promoted new cell growth; the roots had more allantoin 
than the leayes. Research data showed liyer damage in 
laboratory animals and other articles indicated 
Comfrey, taken internally, may haye caused cancer 
(Hiron, 1979). It was recommended for external use. 
Comfrey, when eaten fresh, contained yitamin C and E; 
howeyer, it was not to be used in large amounts 
(Castlemein, 1991). 

Sources Consulted; 

Mr. Walkingstick (1993) stated a syrup made by 
boiling Comfrey roots has been long accepted as a 
medicine of great yalue for coughs and problems of the 



O 

ERIC 



63 




Herbal 

58 



lungs. It has also been used for the purpose of 
cleansing the body of impurities and for use as a 
tonic. A poultice of fresh or powdered Comfrey dried 
leaves has helped heal fresh wounds, swellings, burns, 
and bruises. Defoe, Langdon, Rock (1989) indicated 
Comfrey was found occasionally and was well 
distributed, but nowhere abundant in the Smoky 



Mountains. 



DANDELION 






Herbal 

60 



Dandelion 

f Taraxar.iim officinal ) 

Plant Identification; 

Dandelion, a perennial plant, was included in the 
daisy and marigold families. Yellow, several petaled 
flowers, which opened each morning and closed by early 
evening, were found blooming, usually in early spring 
but sometimes as late as August or September (Wcunpler, 
1988). Flowering, elongated, hollow stems had milky 
juice, grew rapidly, and produced fluffy seeds that 
blew away with the wind. The leaves were jagged-cut, 
green, and long. Fields, lawns, and waste areas were 
places where the plants were foimd (Foster and Duke, 
1990). The Dandelion has been common throughout all 
Southwestern Indiana. 

History; 

The DcUidelion did not originate in the United 
States; it was introduced from Europe. The Native . 
Americans soon used all parts for food and medicine. 
Throughout history, all parts have served as food in 
salads, soups, and stews (Millspaugh, 1892). 
Medicinally, it dated back thousands of years. The 



Herbal 

61 



Chinese used Dandelion bea as a cold remedy, and the 
Arabs noted it increased urine production (Castleman, 
1991). The settlers prepared the leaves by boiling, 
and chilling, then they ate them as greens. They also 
dried the roots, roasted them, then boiled them in 
water. This concoction was drunk as a beverage or 
substituted for coffee and tea. Dandelion tea was 
traditionally used as a diuretic for liver, gall 
bladder, and liver problems. It was included in the US 
PharmacoDoe i a from 1831 to 1926 as a diuretic and in 
the National Formulary in 1888 as a tonic (Vogel, 

1970). Tyler (1985) listed the following uses for the 
Dandelion: as greens for blood thinner, purifier, and 

tonic. It was also used to aid digestion, to relieve 
stomachs, and drunk as a wine to promote the 
development of measles rash and to lessen the severity 
of the disease. Forey and Fitzsimons (1989) wrote: 
roots have been used as a vegetable when peeled, 
boiled, and served with butter. 

Cherokee Uses: 

The Dandelion was linked to the Doctrine of 
Signatures because the yellow flowers resembled yellow 




73 



Herbal 

62 



bile; therefore, it was consi'l-red a liver remedy by 
the Native Americans (Castleman, 1991). For medicinal 
properties, the Cherokees prepared a root tea that was 
drunk for heartburn, indigestion and used as a body 
tonic. The tea was also drunk as a beverage (Weiner, 
1972). Roots were dug in the fall, washed, euid dried 
whole or cut into small pieces, three to six inches 
long, eind then stored in a cool dry place (Olds, 1975). 
Sometimes the roots were roasted slowly for several 
hours and ground when they became crisp and brown 
inside. All fresh Dandelion parts were used as a food, 
a beverage, or as a tonic. 

Day Family Remedies: 

Grandfather's Dandelion wine, made from the 
blossoms, was known far and wide. The leaves were used 
for salad and salad "greens". Grandmother also 
prepared the stems and blossoms by dipping them into a 
batter of milk, eggs, and flour, and then frying them 
in hot grease. The taste was similar to that of many 
fried vegetables, such as breaded mushrooms. The 
Dandelion wine was supposed to have cured many 



Herbal 

63 



ailmentis. Even if it did not cure/ participants were 
not aware of any feeling after drinking this beverage. 
Medical Research: 

Research found the Dandelion chemical, 

Taxaxacerin, had antibiotic action and animal studies 
indicated diuretic properties that alleviated 
menstruation bloating, and reduced high blood pressure 
(Steiner, 1986). Dandelion roots and leaves were a 
valuable sources of vitamins; they contained more 
vitamin A than a carrot. They were also high in fiber 
content which acted as a cancer preventive in the 
intestine and colon. For some people, however, it 
caused skin rashes. Millspaugh (1892) noted it 
sometimes caused mental excitement, frequent urination, 
and sweating. 

Sources Consulted: 

Stone (1991) related that present-day Cherokees 
have used Dandelion as greens in salads, blossoms have 
been made into wine, and dried roots have been ground 
into a "coffee -like" beverage. In the spring a tonic 
had been brewed from the roots, this was also used as a 
diuretic, as a laxative, and for many types of 






BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

64 



digestive problems. This Dandelion leaf tonic used 
fresh or dried leaves in one cup of boiling water. The 
Cherokees drank this tea to aid digestion and calm 
digestive disorders. They also had used it to relieve 
cramps, gas pains, control dii rrhea, an relieve 
constipation. Even a herbal hair rinse has been made 
from: dried dandelion flowers, two cups of water, and 

the juice of a lemon. Certainly, the common "weedy" 
dandelion has had many varied uses. Dandelions were 
common and very dominant in the Smok^/ Mountains. They 
were foxmd growing in a wide range of elevations. The 
Eastern Cherokees have continued to use the plant as 
did the Western Cherokee Nation. 



7b 



i 




Herbal 

66 



Garlic 

( Allium sativxim ) 

Plant Identification; 

The pereimial Garlic grew to three feet. The 
long, pointed/ dark green leaves extended to the middle 
of the stem. Six-pointed/ lavender flowers were mixed 
with bulblets that had long, stringed tails (Wampler/ 
1988). They grew well in all types of soil but have 
been found more in direct sunlight areas such as open 
fields. Garlics have a very strong/ pungent odor and 
have been found in all areas of Southwestern Indiana. 

It is hardy and a common plant. 

History; 

Garlic has been considered the world’s second 
oldest medicine/ after ephedra. It belonged to the 
onion family/ the name/ allium/ was derived from the 
Celtic word which meant pungent. Because it was so 
pungent or strong/ it was considered to have great 
powers. History recorded its use by the ancients 
Greeks: Aristotle/ Hippocrates/ and Theophrastus. They 
prescribed Garlic for heart problems/ headaches/ bites / 
worms / and tumors. The Romans used it as a stimulant; 




7o 



Herbal 

67 



their slaves were fed Garlic for strength, endurance, 
and stamina. Garlic was used by the Egyptians to 
repec^t solemn oaths upon, as the Americans have used 
the Bible. Even King Tut's tomb contained Garlic bulbs 
(Castleman, 1991). During the 1800's, settlers 
prepared Garlic in a tea for treatment of colds, 
bronchitis, coughs, and high blood pressure, in a 
poultice for croup and pneumonia, and roasted for 
children's croup (Vogel, 1970). A salve made from 
Garlic was used to treat infected woimds of soldiers in 
World War I. Tyler (1985) stated that Hoosiers have 
used Garlic as an universal home remedy for coughs, 
high blood pressure, and as a tonic. It has also been 
used for intestinal ailments and as a sleep promoter. 

It was officially listed in the US Pharmacopoeia from 
1820 to 1905 and the National Formulary from 1916 to 
1936 and as a tonic and diuretic (Vogel, 1970). 

Cherokee Uses: 

The Cherokees used Garlic daily or frequently. 
Insect sting pain was relieved by placing crushed bulbs 
on the swollen area. Garlic onions and Wild Leeks tea 
(which had similar properties to Garlic) were used by 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 









Herbal 

68 



the Cherokees to lower blood pressure/ decrease wound 
swellings, and inhibit cancer cells. The fresh bulbs 
and young green shoots were eaten raw to help control 
colds, diabetes, or stomach problems. Dried bulbs were 
cooked in other foods for flavor: all parts of Garlic 

were used either as food, flavor, or for medical 
properties (Weiner, 1972). Hamel and Chiltoskey (1975) 
indicated several additional uses, as a stimulant, a 
diuretic, and a mild cathartic. It was used to prevent 
scurvy and dropsy, to remove deafness, and to prevent 
worms in children, as well as (placed on the chest) to 
treat croup. They harvested the bulbs in June or July, 
when the tops had begun to turn yellow. The plants 
were cleaned, the outer loose areas were removed, amd 
the roots were trimmed close to the base. The bulbs 
were stored loosely or dried in bunches which were himg 
in a cool, dark area (Olds, 1975). 

Day Family Remedies: 

Grandfather gathered several bulbs and stored them 
in the "curing" shed. He used them to help flavor and 
cure meats. Grandmother used fresh and dried garlic 
when she prepared many vegetable dishes. She also 



Herbal 

69 



placed the crushed, dried bulbs that were wrapped in an 
old woolen sock alone/ with Vick's salve on a person's 
chest to relieve chest colds or Iting congestion. 

Medical Research; 

There have been many studies, experiments, and 
much research done on Garlic. One laboratory study 
revealed that it lowered blood pressure, reduced serum 
cholesterol, acted as a natural diuretic, emd showed 
antibacterial activity (Steiner, 1986). Garlic has to. 
be chewed, chopped, bruised, or crushed for the 
chemicals, ajoene and allun, to be trcinsformed 
medicinally into the antibiotic allicin. This process 
activated the chemicals into a powerful antibiotic. In 
diabetes experiments, blood sugar has been reduced in 
laboratory animals. AIDS research has indicated daily 
doses have increased imm\uie functions of the body, and 
decreased diarrhea (Castleman, 1991). When used as a 
salve, it has lessened the outbreak of sores, although 
it was not a cure. Other studies have found Garlic has 
helped gastrointestinal disorders, soothed 
hypertension, and decreased cancer cell growth in 
laboratory mice (You, 1989). However, breath odor from 




81 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



Herbal 

70 



Garlic has prevented many people from using the herb. 
Additional research has been needed for other possible 
uses. Garlic has also been fovmd to be high in Vitamin 
C content. 

Sources Consulted; 

Today, Stone (1991) related that Garlic had many 
uses. It has been used by the Cherokees as a remedy 
for colds, flus, sore throats, and coughs. A cough 
syrup was made from boiling garlic bulbs and water for 
half a day. Garlic has also been used for intestinal 
disorders, as a diuretic, for heart problems, 
snakebites, intestinal worms, and as an antiseptic. 
Even charms of Garlic have been worn by many Cherokees 
to ward off evil spirits, to give strength, and to 
stimulate courage and a fighting spirit to the wearer 
of the charm. 

In the Smoky Mountains, according to Defoe, 
Langdon, Rock (1989) Garlic was not as common in this 
area as in other geographic areas. It was well 
distributed but nowhere as abundant auid was noted 
growing in low to middle elevations. 



I 



GOLDENSEAL 






83 



Herbal 

72 



6old«ns«al 

f Hydrastis canadensis ) 

Plant Identification; 

Goldenseal, also known as Golden root or Indian 
Paint, was a low growing (six to twelve inches) hairy 
perennial. The Goldenseal family has included the 
Buttercup, the Larkspur, and the Peony (Foster and 
Duke, 1990). The veined, lobed-leaves were found on 
forked branches; one leaf larger than the other. They 
grew after the flowers had bloomed and became six to 
eight inches across. The flowers, single, greenish, and 
white, bloomed in the spring from April to May and 
produced a single, orange-red berry chat nestled on the 
top of the stem leaf (Wampler, 1988). They lacked 
petals but had numerous stamens. The plant grew in 
clusters and was fotmd in good, natural, drainage areas 
that had an abvindance of leaf mold or decaying 
vegetable matter (Foster and Duke, 1990). Goldenseal 
has been difficult to find; in connection with this 
study, it was found in Pike County State Forest. 




84 



Herbal 

73 



History: 

Settlers used Goldenseal as an eyewash/ a wo\ind 
treatment and as a sore throat aid, as well as to 
soothe digestive problems and to help women recover 
from childbirth. It was included in the US 
Pharmacopoeia from 1831 to 1842 as a stimulant and for 
diaphoretic purposes (Vogel, 1970). Tyler (1985) 
stated Hoosiers used Goldenseal powdered roots for 
cancer, types of skin conditions, cuid for sore mouths. 
The juice of fresh leaves was prepared as a remedy to 
be drxink after an epileptic seizure. 

Cherokee Uses; 

The Cherokees favored Goldenseal as an insect 
repellent or insecticide. V/hen the large rootstock was 
pounded into bear fat and smeared on their bodies, it 
acted as an insect repellent. For skin diseases, the 
roots were boiled in water and the concoction then 
applied to treat skin disorders; it was used in a bath 
for local inflammations (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 1975). 
Because Goldenseal had a bitter taste, honey was added 
to the herbal tea to improve the flavor (Weiner, 1972). 
This tea was drunk for sore mouths and throats as a 




86 



Herbal 

74 



diuretiC/ or used as a sedative, as well as a digestive 
aid. A powder was used as a blister for skin problems 
(Vogel, 1970). The roots were dug and harvested in 
autumn or late fall after the plant had withered and 
frost had killed top growth. The roots were cleaned, 
dried until brittle in an airy, shady p?ace, pounded 
into a powder, and stored in a dry cool place 
(Castleman, 1991). 

Day Family Remedies: 

Grandfather Day prepared a "treatment or blister" 
salve made with Goldenseal, Wintergreen, and turpentine 
for his horses when they "stifled" or "bowed" a tendon. 
The poultice was applied daily for an entire week. 

This treatment "heated" the leg, which promoted 
healing. 

Medical Research: 

In research experiments. Goldenseal contained two 
active chemicals, berberine and hydrastine, that 
boosted the body's immxme system, slowed the growth of 
tiunors, and lowered high blood pressure (Castleman, 
1991). Berberine killed bacteria that caused diarrhea 
(such as amoebic dysentery) and was effective against 



Herbal 

75 



cholera bacteria (Cushman, 1979). More medical 
research has been needed for it to be used in cancer 
chemotherapy. Commercially grovm and harvested 
Goldenseal has been used by modern medicine in a 
variety of prescription as well as over-the-counter 
preparations . 

Sources Consulted; 

Stone (1991) related that her grandmother used 
Goldenseal for treatment of an infant's thrush mouth. 
Within 48 hours, the thrush was gone. Even today, few 
wildf lowers were as important to the Cherokees as was 
the multi-purpose Goldenseal. Remedies were offered 
for inflamed eyes, mouth sores, for stopping bleeding, 
and for hemorrhaging. Its use as an antiseptic was 
also well known. A tea was prepared for stomach aches, 
morning sickness, and as a douche for vaginal 
inflammations . 

Mr. Bell (1993) noted there were two types of 
Goldenseal which grew on the ridges at low elevations 
in the Smoky Motintains. The type used on sores was 
rare in that area; however, the author was able to 
purchase an ounce for medicinal purposes. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 
o 

ERIC 



87 



MAYAPPLE 



Mayapple 

( Podophyllum peltatum ) 



Herbal 

77 



Plant Identification: 

Mayapple, also knovm as Indian Apple, or Devil’s 
Apple, was a common perennial that grew twelve to 
eighteen inches in height. The unpleascuat odor flowers 
bloomed from April through June. A single, waxy, white 
flower drooped from the crotch or under the smooth, 
xnnbre 11a- like seven-to-nine lobed leaves (Millspaugh, 
1892). The plants produced yellovj, two-inch, edible 
fruits and had creeping roots. They were found in 
clusters growing in rich, hvuaus, moist, hilly areas, 
woods or fields (Wampler, 1988). The Mayapple has been 
a common plant found in all areas of Southwestern 
Indieuia. 

History: 

Throughout history, the Mayapple was also known as 
oua Indian apple. Settlers used the roots for medicinal 
remedies and ate the yellow berries for nutritional 
values (Castleman, 1991). Hoosier remedies indicated 
root tea induced abortion, powdered roots relieved 
constipation, and Mayapple fruits, when eaten, helped 




sa 



Herbal 

78 



overcome heat exhaustion. Tyler (1985) indicated that 
the roots were powerful purgatives/ not only on the 
smooth muscles of the intestinal tract but also on the 
uterus. The fruits were edible and when the body lost 
salts (electrolytes) during profuse sweating or heat 
exhaustion, the digested fruits restored body sailts and 
sugar. Because of the sugar, the fruits also served as 
a source of energy and were eaten raw, cooked, or made 
into preserves. It was on the primary list of the 
first US Pharmacopoeia from 1820 to present and the 
National Formulary in 1888 as a purgative and cathartic 
(Vogel, 1970). 

Cherokee Uses: 

Like Goldenseal, the Cherokees used Mayapples as 
insect repellents and insecticides to ward off pesky 
insects. Th flowers had an unpleasant odor. 
Pulverized and crushed, the dried roots made into tea 
were used as a cathartic, a laxative, or a purgative 
substance. The Mayapples were also used for 
gallstones, worms, and dropsy. Another use included a 
poultice made from crushed leaves for skin disorders. 
Homel and Chiltoskey (1975) stated that the joints of 



30 



Herbal 

79 



the roots were poison; the Cherokee used only those 
portions between the joints for boiled tea. Some women 
used large doses to commit suicide. The roots were 
considered poisonous when ingested in large amounts. 
When mixed with other herbs and animal fats, the salve 
or ointment was used to treat different types of warts 
(Weiner, 1972). They ate the ripe fresh fruit, raw or 
cooked; however, the fruit had to be ripe, or it was 
considered poisonous. The fruit was gathered when the 
leaves withered and turned yellow. The Mayapple 
leaves, joints, and roots were harvested, collected, 
and dug from April to June, then dried, made into 
poultices, salves, or were dried in bunches and stored 
(Weiner, 1972). 
nay Fam ily Remedies; 

Grandfather Day prepared Mayapple insecticide by 
boiling the entire plant, which was then sprayed on his 
garden vegetables. This prevented beetles, grub worms, 
and other insects from destroying his crop. 

Grandmother prepared Mayapple jelly from the pulp of 
fresh, ripe fruit. It tasted similar to "crab apple" 
jelly; a bit tart, but sweet and at the same time sour. 




91 



Medical Uses: 






Herbal 

80 



Research has found Mayapple chemical compounds 
treated testicular cancer, venereal warts, and small- 
cell lung cancer (Foster and Duke, 1990). Etoposide, a 
semis 3 ^thetic derivative of Mayapple, was used to treat 
several types of cancer. Side effects have included 
diarrhea and vomiting. It was a very powerful 
glandular stimulajnt and overdoses easily occurred. It 
was recommended that only very small dosages be used 
(Tyler, 1986). Some natural gardeners crushed the 
leaves, boiled them in water, and the sprayed the 
mixture on garden plants. This acted as a natural 
insecticide (Olds, 1975). 

A chart at the museum of the Cherokee Indian in 
Cherokee, NC indicated the following, "Drugs derived 
from Mayapple were used to treat meiny forms of cancer. 
Some scientists have believed the chemicals extracted 
from Mayapple were our best hope of curing many forms 
of lung cancer . " 

Sources Consulted; 

Today as stated by Stone (1991) Mayapples have 
been used as a powerful laxative, as a purge for 



best copy avaiuble 



Herbal 

81 



intestinal worms, as a cure for warts, and for the 
treatment of liver problems and cancer. The fruit has 
been eaten for nutritional purposes. The Cherokees 
also continued to use the Mayapple as an insecticide on 
their crops. 

In the Smoky Mountains and Cherokee, North 
Carolina, Mayapples were common and dominant throughout 
a wide range of elevations. It has been used not only 
as a food but has continued to be used by the Eastern 
Nation as a laxative and to induce vomiting. 




93 



MILKWEED 






94 



Comn Milloraad 

f Asclepias svrlaca ) 



Herbal 

83 



Plant Identification: 

Milkweed, sometimes called Cottonweed or Wild 
Cotton, was of two types: common and four- leaved. The 

milky-juiced, latex, and downy perennial has grown from 
one to four feet in height. The common type has had 
four to ten-inch, paired, broad, long leaves, which are 
four to eight inches in length while the four- leaved 
has had a middle set of larger ones (Millspaugh, 1982). 
A single dusty, pink-purple globe or ball-shaped 
cluster flower has had five downward pointing petals 
and was borne in the upper leaves. The flowers bloomed 
from J;ine to August. Seedpods were rough- surfaced and 
split when ripe; the seeds had tufts of silky hairs 
(Wampler, 1988). The Milkweed has been fo\inc in moist, 
rich or sandy ground near woodlands in all southwestern 
state parks and forests. 

History: 

Early physicians used Milkweed for asthma, 
rheumatism and cancer. As an edible weed, the settlers 
cooked its young shoots or sprouts like asparagus, ate 



Herbal 

84 



the roots raw or cooked, and used the leaves in salads 
(Millspaugh, 1892). The milky sap found in the leaves 
and stems was bitter and contained glycosides. They 
eliminated the bitter taste and glycosides by boiling 
the plants in water several times (Wampler, 1988). 

Tyler (1985) stated that Hoosiers allowed juice or 
milky sap to drip into a cut or wound to stop bleeding, 
treated burns or sunburns with sap diluted with water, 
and also applied the mixture to infected poison ivy 
areas, warts, ringworm, and skin blemishes. Milkweed 
was the most common and popular remedy for warts and 
skin problems. The milky latex formed a protective 
coating when it dried on the skin. Milkweed was 
officially listed in the US Pharmacopoeia under the 
name Asclepias from 1820-1905 and in the National 
Formulary from 1916-1936 as emetic and purgative 
(Vogel, 1970). 

Cherokee Uses: 

The Cherokees prepared a root tea that was used as 
a laxative to relieve constipation, as a diuretic for 
kidney stones, to promote sterility, and to induce 
sweating (Foster and Duke, 1990). It was applied also 



Herbal 

85 



to skin disorders; warts, moles, ringworm. Hamel and 
Chiltoskey (1975) indicated the fiber of the plant was 
also used for bowstrings. The plants were collected 
during the pre-blooming stage when they were tender and 
young. Roots were dug, at that time, dried in partial 
sunlight, pounded into a powdsred mixture, and stored 
in a dry place. Sometimes tea was prepared from a 
whole, fresh plant (Weiner, 1972). 

Day Family Remedies; 

Grandmother prepared fresh Milkweed sap or juice 
mixed with lard or butter. She used this preparation 
on burns, other skin irritations, and blemishes. She 
also used it as an edible yegetable. The leayes, 
stems, and flowers were picked when young, boiled in 
seyeral changes of water, and then simmered until 
tender. The treated pods were sometimes used in soup. 
Medical Research; 

The sap was toxic and contained cardioactiye 
compounds. Very few scientific studies regarding 
ef fectiyeness of milkweed haye been made (Tyler, 1985). 




9V 



Herbal 

86 



Sources Consulted: 

At the present time. Milkweed has had a variety of 
uses according to Stone (1991). A multitude of skin 
ailments, warts, ringworms, and poison ivy have been 
treated with the milky white svibstance or latex that 
oozed from the plant when it was cut or sliced. A 
concoction made from the boiled roots has been used to 
treat bowel problems, kidney disorders, rheumatism, and 
asthma. A tea made from the powdered dry roots has 
been used as a sedative. Even the silky down found in 
the giant seedpods has been used to stuff beds, 
pillows, and to make clothing warmer. Sometimes, the 
young shoots were used as a vegetable but had to be 
boiled in three or four different batches of water to 
remove the toxic substances. The Cherokees considered 
the Milkweed roots poisonous and did not eat them. 

Mr. Walkingstick (1993) indicated Milkweed salve 
was used on skin sores. Milkweed was not abundant in 
certain areas of the Smoky Mountains; however, it was 
found occasionally and was well-distributed over the 
area. 



best copy 




93 



'‘■'''trUBU; 



MISTLETOE 



Herbal 

88 



Mistletoe 

f Phoradendron serotioum ) 

Plant Identification; 

Mistletoe, a perennial parasite, has been best 
known as the plant imder which people kissed at 
Christmas. There were many different species, but the 
most common, least damaging type has been fovind on oak 
trees. The tiny roots bored into the host tree, 
esteUblished new plants, and began to grow (Castleman, 
1991). Leaves appeared first; afterwards, growth was 
rapid. Mistletoe was a thick-branched, woody evergreen 
with leathery, three-inch oblong leaves. The 
translucent white berries or fruit contained a single 
seed (Foster and Duke, 1990). Because it grew high in 
trees. Mistletoe has been difficult to collect. It was 
found high in an oak tree in Harmonie State Park. It 
has not been as common as in the past years. 

Pollutants in the air have taken a toll on this 
parasite; also, logging of oak trees has destroyed many 
of the host trees. 




ICO 



best copy AVAIUBLE 



Herbal 

89 



History; 

During the Middle Ages, the herb was used for 
disorders of the spleen, "falling sickness" or 
epilepsy, and for apoplexy or stroke. The settlers 
used it to treat high blood pressure and cancer. The 
herb's association with kissing was due to Norse 
mythology. The god of peace. Balder, was slain with a 
mistletoe arrow. When the goddess. Queen Frigga, 
restored him to life, she gave the plemt to the goddess 
of love, thus anyone who passed under it received a 
kiss (Castleman, 1991). 

Cherokee Uses; 

The Cherokees found Mistletoe, when taken in large 
quantities, induced abortion and stimulated 
contractions during childbirth (Weiner, 1972). Because 
of the action on the uterus, and its ability to stop 
bleeding following parturition (bleeding after 
childbirth), it was used to promote healing after 
birth. Some women used Mistletoe to prevent 
conception. A tea prepared from the leaves was used 
for epilepsy, headaches, and l\mg ailments (Foster and 
Duke, 1990). Hamel and Chiltosky (1975) noted that the 



101 



Herbal 

90 



Cherokees pulverized the entire plant, made a tea, and 
bathed the head with tea for headaches and high blood 
pressure. Mistletoe was collected during the late 
autumn or early winter (November or December). The 
leaves and young twigs were dried and stored and the 
fresh berries mashed to make a paste. 

Day Family Remedies: 

The Day Family pulyerized the entire plant euad 
made an infusion that was used externally to bathe the 
body and for reducing high feyers. During the 
Christmas season. Grandmother threaded sprigs of 
Mistletoe berries, red holly berries, and popcorn on a 
string. They were used as decorations on the Christmas 
tree. 

Medical Research; 

The chemical, tyramine, stimulated uterine 
contractions in laboratory test; howeyer, to induce 
abortion, the dosage had to be high or close to fatal. 
Scientists studied the chemicals in Mistletoe and found 
that they both raised and lowered blood pressure. The 
chemicals that reduced blood pressure appeared to 
predominate (Franz, 1981). Other studies fovmd 



102 



Herbal 

91 



Mistletoe stimulated the body’s immune system, impaired 
the growth of test-tube tximor cells, and benefitted 
treatment of Iving amd ovarian cancer (Mack, 1984). 

Some reports indicated Mistletoe contained toxic 
chemicals that caused vomiting, muscle spasms, coma, 
convulsions, and death. Further investigation 
concluded that small amounts of the leaves produced no 
serious poisoning even though several toxic chemicals 
were reported (Castleman, 1991). Toxicity included 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headaches, muscle spasms, 
or convulsions. Research has been limited because of 
the fear of toxic chemicals; yet, many approved cemcer 
drugs have been fotind more toxic than Mistletoe. 

Sources Consulted; 

Mr. Walkingstick (1993) indicated Mistletoe was 
poisonous and when used the small white berries were 
mashed, pulverized, and only used externally. 

Mistletoe was scarce in several locales and was found 
scattered in small populations; when found, it was at 
low or middle elevations. 




103 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



PARTRIDGEBERRY 



Herbal 

93 



Partrldgebarry or Squaw Vine 

f Mitchella repens ) 

Plant Identification: 

A creeping, trailing, vining, evergreen perennial, 
Partridgeberry or Squaw Vine has grown from six to 
fourteen inches; it has been found near decayed stumps, 
near oak trees in the Harrison Crawford State Forest, 
in soil rich in humus and moisture, and in moist woods, 
especially those abounding in evergreens. Thick, 
shiny, dark green leaves were rounded or oval, one-half 
inch long, with whitish veins. The creamy white or 
light pink, funnel-shaped, paired flowers had inner 
lobes that were hairy (Wampler, 1988). Single, dry, 
red or scarlet, edible berries developed after the 
flowers blossomed from April, May, or June. Birds have 
been fond of the berries (Olds, 1975). 

History: 

Partridgeberry was listed in the National 
Formulary from 1926 to 1947 as a tonic, as an 
astringent, and a diuretic (Weiner, 1972). Settlers 
used it not only for tonics and astringents but for 
swellings, hives, sore nipples, and menstrual 




Herbal 

94 



difficulties (Vogel, 1970). It was found in a valuable 
diuretic and was used for various forms of uterine 
difficulties (Millspaugh, 1892). 

Cherokee Uses; 

The Cherokees named Partridgeberry, Squaw Vine, 
because it treated the following "female troubles": 
slow childbirth, slow placenta delivery, stopped post 
hemorrhage, and the pain of childbirth (Foster and 
Duke, 1990). An herbal tea was prepared by boiling the 
leaves. This concoction was drunk by the pregnant 
woman preceding the expected date of delivery. The red 
or scarlet fruits or berries were eaten when ripe and 
fresh. Sometimes fresh leaves were made into a tea and 
drunk for painful menstruation, for dysentery and 
piles, and for sore nipples (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 
1975). Leaves were collected when plants were blooming 
in May or June and then dried under partial sunlight 
while others were used while fresh. Often the entire 
fresh plant was chopped and poxinded. The berries were 
collected when ripe and eaten while fresh. 




10 ^ 



Herbal 

95 



Day Family Remedies: 

Great-Grandmother Day prepared Partridgeberry tea# 
which was drunk for painful menstruation or "cramps". 
Tea was also giyen to family members with infected, 
inflamed, or painful bladder problems. 

Medical Research; 

No recent scientific studies haye been foiind 
concerning laboratory tests on Partridgeberry. Since 
it was listed in the National Formulary in years past, 
a more in-depth study has been needed to determine its 
medicinal properties. 

Sources Consulted; 

Mr. Bell (1993) indicated Partridgeberry or Squaw 
Vine was still used for "female problems" and that the 
berries were eaten as a food when ripe. The author was 
able to purchase one ounce for medicinal purposes. In 
the Smoky Moxintains, Partridgeberry was common and 
quite dominant in all locales according to Defoe, 
Langdon, Rock (1989). It was found growing at low and 
middle eleyations. 




lov 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



PENNYROYAL 



pennyroyal 

( Hedeoma puleaioides ) 



Herbal 

97 



Plant Identification: 

An annual. Pennyroyal was included in the mint 
family and was otherwise known as Tickweed, Fleabane, 
or Squawmint. It grew to one and one-half feet in 
height and had a mint-like, strong odor or fragremce. 
Small, opposite leaves were found on short, square 
stems that grew from fifteen to eighteen inches. On 
the end of the stems grew pale, blue flowers (Foster 
and Duke, 1990). Pennyroyal was found growing from 
July to September in areas with dry, sandy soil, or on 
gravelly, loose slopes (Wampler, 1988). It has been 
common along the banks of the Wabash River that runs 
through Harmonie State Park. 

History: 

The Greeks hung Pennyroyal in sickrooms, where the 
fragrance, when released, was thought to promote 
healing (Castleman, 1991). Physicians during the 
1800's combined Pennyroyal with brewer's yeast. This 
has induced abortion, sweating, the early stages of 
colds, and promoted delayed menstruation (Weiner, 



Herbal 

98 



1972). The settlers used Pennyroyal to dress wounds, 
to repel insects, to treat cold, flu, coughs, 
congestions, and to stimulate menstruation or abortions 
(Vogel, 1970). It was listed in the US Pharmacopoeia 
in 1862-1881 as an ointment and was used to keep off 
gnats, ticks, fleas, and mosquitoes (Millspaugh, 1892). 
Tyler (1985) mentioned Pennyroyal several times. 
Hoosiers prepared a tea, that when drunk, caused a 
pregnant woman to "come around"; it was also used for 
colds, flu, colic, and headaches. When hung in dried 
bunches. Pennyroyal drove away mosquitoes. Pennyroyal 
was officially a decongestant, a cough remedy, a 
digestive aid, and an abortion inducer. It got its 
name, Fleabane, because of its use to repel insects and 
fleas. 

Cherokee Uses; 

The Cherokees crushed the leaves euid inhaled the 
mint- like odor to relieve headaches. They also 
prepared a tea to be drunk for relief of menstruation 
craunps and pain. Other uses included treatment of 
diarrhea, painful urination, and hemorrhaging. Hamel 
and Chiltoskey (1975) wrote that beaten leaves were 



Herbal 

99 



held in the mouth for toothaches, and that crushed 
leaves were rubbed on the skin as an insect repellent. 
They collected the leaves in early summer when the 
plant was in full bloom. The leaves were dried in the 
shade and then stored in a dry cool place. The fresh 
crushed leaves were inhaled. Tyler (1985) stated that 
many Native Americans used Pennyroyal tea to treat 
bites from rabid animals that were no higher than the 
shoulder. The wovinds were packed with bruised, fresh 
leaves or with soaked dry leaves, and if patients could 
swallow, tea was given to them. However, if victims 
could not drink the tea, they were washed with the 
liquid. 

Day Family Remedies; 

Grandmother Day boiled or simmered the leaves in a 
small iron pot that was left sitting on the back of an 
old iron kitchen stove. The steam would go throughout 
the home to freshen the air and to relieve headaches 
during the wintertime. She sometimes took Pennyroyal, 
mixed it with other plants (crushed rose leaves, mints, 
pine needles), placed the herbs between clothes, and 
sewed them into small squares. Then she placed these 



Herbal 

100 



fragrances in dresser drawers to keep clothes smelling 
fresh. 

Medical Research; 

Pennyroyal oil was very toxic. Symptoms included 
severe headaches, nausea, weakness, and paralysis of 
limbs (Millspaugh, 1892). As little as a teaspoon of 
concentrate caused death. However, when dried, the 
herb lost its toxicity and was used without danger. 
Scientists have found chemicals similar to peppermint 
menthol but they were not as strong (Sullivan, 1979). 
Some skin creams mixed Pennyroyal with other 
ingredients to promote healing. It has been called a 
powerful but dangerous intestinal irritant which caused 
abortion and sometimes death when eaten by animals 
(Vogel, 1970). 

Sources Consulted; 

According to Bell (1993), Pennyroyal was nowhere 
abundant but was well distributed over a wide area in 
the Smokey Mountains, It was found occasionally at low 
and middle elevations. The Eastern Cherokees inhaled 
Pennyroyal steam for headaches and often crushed the 
fresh leaves which were then placed on a tooth for 




112 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

101 



treatment of a toothache. He also mentioned that 
Prickly Ash Bark (knovm as toothache tree) was an 
excellent remedy for toothaches. The author was able 
to purchase one oimce of Pennyroyal for medicinal 



purposes . 



Herbal 

103 



Anar lean Wild Senna 

( Cassia marilandica ) 

Plemt Identification: 

Wild Senna/ also known as Cassia and included in 
the pea family, was a hardy perennial with five petal 
yellow flowers that was found in loose clusters 
blooming during the summer. The yellow flowers were 
borne on slender, fuzzy stems; the leaves were pointed, 
and the seeds were in leathery pods (Wampler, 1988). A 
small wood shrub, it grew to three feet in height. It 
has been necessary to avoid confusing it with cinneunon; 
both came from peelable bark. It was found growing in 
rich humus soil near woodlands, thickets, and 
bottomlands in Pike County State Forest. 

History; 

History has revealed Senna was widely used in 
other countries from the Middle East to India to treat 
fevers (Castleman, 1991). It was listed in JJS 
Pharmacopoe i a from 1820 to 1882 as a mild laxative 
(Vogel, 1970). Tyler (1985) stated Senna was a folk 
remedy; Hoosiers made tea from the leaves that were 
used as an excellent purge for the body system. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

104 



Cherokee Uses: 

The Cherokees pounded the roots of Wild Senna with 
water to make a salve or poultice and then applied the 
mixtures to sores or wounds. A tea was good for 
childhood illness, for heart troubles, for fainting 
spells, and for cramps (Hame] and Chiltoskey, 1975). 
After a decoction was made from the leaves, it was 
drunk to reduce fevers and to ease sore throats. The 
dried, powdered leaves were also used for cathartic 
purposes or as a strong leucative (Weiner, 1972). The 
Cherokees gathered, prepared, and stored the roots, 
leaves, and seeds at the time of flowering. 

Day Family Remedies: 

Grandmother Day prepared a Wild Senna herbal tea 
and laced it with brown sugar to improve the taste. It 
was dr\ink and used as a mild laxative. 

Medical Research: 

The plant. Senna, contained the chemical, 
anthraquinone, that stimulated the colon. It sometimes 
caused damage when people had chronic gastrointestinal 
conditions such as ulcers, colitis, or hemorrhoids 
(Castleman, 1991). Also, large amounts caused 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

105 



diarrhea, nausea, cramps, severe griping, and 
dehydration (Millspaugh, 1892). 

Sources Consulted; 

According to Hutchens (1992), present day 
Cherokees have made a decoction from dried leaves and 
have drunk it to reduce fevers and ease sore throats. 
They also used Senna tea as a mouth gargle. Large 
doses have been used as an emetic and cathartic. A 
remedy for pimples was a paste made of dried leaves and 
vinegar. Senna was found occasionally at low 
elevations in the Smoky Mountains. It was not 
abundant; however, the author was able to purchase one 
ounce for medicinal purposes. 



SKULLCAP 



Skullcap 

( Scutellaria lateriflora ) 



Herbal 

107 



Plant Identification; 

A member of the mint family. Skullcap has also 
been called Mad-dog Skullcap, Quaker Bonnet, or Mad-dog 
Weed. A slender, branching, two- foot shrubby 
pereimial, it had a tiny skull-cap growth that gave it 
its common name (Wampler, 1988). The upper part also 
had short, whitish hairs. Long-stalked, serrated, 
toothed leaves were opposite one another, pointed at 
the tips, and oval or lanced- shaped. The flowers had 
two lips, were violet or blue, and bloomed in the shade 
(Foster and Duke, 1990). It grew in rich, moist soil, 
in wooded thickets and was found in Harmonie State Park 
from July throrgh August. 

History: 

For years the Chinese used Skullcap as a 
trauiguilizer or sedative for treatment of convulsions 
and as a digestive aid. During the 1800 's Skullcap was 
used as a sedative, for treatment of malaria fever, and 
as a nerve tonic (Castleman, 1991). It was listed in 



Herbal 

108 



the US Pharmacopoeia from 1820 to 1882 where it was 
described as a mild laxative (Vogel, 1970). 

Cherokee Uses; 

The Cherokees drank Skullcap tea. to promote 
suppressed menstruation and also to stop diarrhea 
(Weiner, 1975). Because of its bitter taste, it was 
mixed with honey to improve flavor. It was also 
reported to be effective against rabies, hence the name 
Mad-Dog Skullcap. The Cherokees also mixed bruised 
roots moistened with water and bear grease to be used 
as a dressing for sores, swellings, inflammations, and 
other types of wounds (Hamel and Chiltosky, 1975). The 
plant was cut in the spring when stems and leaves were 
yoxing and tender; however, sometimes the leaves were 
harvested in midsummer when the plant was in full 
bloom. The leaves and stems were dried in full shade 
and then stored. 

Day Family Remedies; 

Great-Grandfather Day used a Skullcap salve and 
mixed it with "hog fat" to use on horses where the 
harness rubbed the body sore. The Skullcap healed and 
the lard prevented large scabs from forming. It also 



Herbal 

109 



prevented white hairs from growing back where the sore 
had occurred. 

Medical Research: 

Skullcap contained the chemical compo\ind 
scutellarine, that was a sedative and was found to have 
antispasmodic qualities (Kimura, 1981). Certainly, 
with all of its past uses, more research has been 
needed. Millspaugh (1892) stated that Skullcap proved 
itself useful as a tonic in chlorea, tremors, chronic 
disorders, and many other diseases. However, he found 
mental confusion, stupor, headache, dilated pupils, and 
variable pulse with reduction of heart action followed 
by wakefulness and restlessness as many of the side 
effects of this plant. 

Sources Consulted: 

The National Park Service indicated Skullcap was 
quite abundant throughout the Smoky Mountains. It was 
found growing at low to middle elevations. 

Walkingstick (1993) stated that a strong Skullcap tea 
was used for insomnia, alcoholism, headaches, and pains 
in the heart. Sometimes it was administrated for the 
treatment of cramps and female problems. It was also 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



f 



Herbal 

110 



used as a dressing on sores, swellings, and 
inf lanunat ions . 




'^2 



d 



v' 



w i ■. V III" 11^*1 UWiU V, “ lH 



♦ 




SNAKEROOT 



Herbal 

112 



Snakeroot 

( Polvoala senega ) 

Plant Identification; 

There have been two species of the perennial 
Snakeroot: Senega and Black Sanicle. The Senega was 

the most common and the most often used. Small, pt.a- 
like, oblong, white-spiked leaves were alternated with 
lance-shaped leaves on smooth stems. The thistle-like, 
greenish-white flowers were mingled with stiff, pointed 
bracts (Foster and Duke, 1990). Snakeroot grew to six 
to eighteen inches during May through July in rocky, 
partially shaded, open hardwood forests where there was 
leaf mold or similar humus. It has been found in many 
areas in Southwestern Indiana. 

History; 

In Indiana, Tyler (1985) noted that Hoosiers used 
Snakeroot remedies for snakebites, kidney problems, euid 
violent bleeding. He recommended that white snakeroot 
f Eupatorium ruaosura ) never be used internally; it was 
extremely poisonous for hiunans and animals. People who 
drank milk from cattle that had eaten the root acquired 
the condition "milk sickness," which was sometimes 




124 



Herbal 

113 



fatal. In 1818, Abraham Lincoln's mother, Nancy Hanks, 
was reported to have died of this disease. (The 
Lincolns, at that time, resided in Spencer Coiinty, 
Indiana). One type. Button Snakeroot ( Ervnaium yucca 
folium ) was similar to yucca; hence, its botanical 
name. Another species. Black Sanicle ( Sanicula 
marilandica ) was used by the settlers and Indians for 
pain, kidney ailments, rheximatism, and fevers. It was 
officially listed in the US Pharmacopoeia from 1820- 
1936 as a cough remedy, stimulant, and diuretic, and in 
the National Formulary from 1936-1960 (Vogel, 1970). 
Cherokee Uses; 

The Cherokees boiled the Snakeroot, made a 
preferred tea, and treated high fevers with this 
infusion. They used a poultice made from the roots 
that was applied on snakebites, reduced swellings of 
wounds, and minimized pain (Weiner, 1972). It was used 
for other ailments as well; as a sweat inducer for 
colds, coughs, croup, bronchitis, asthma, and 
pneumonia. They also rubbed the poultice on joints to 
relieve pain and for rheumatism. They blew a decoction 
of the root upon a patient for fever and feverish 



Herbal 

114 



headaches (Vogel, 1970). The roots were dug in the 
spring and again in late fall when the leaves were dead 
but before the first frost. They were cut, dried in 
the sunshine, and stored in a dry place. Sometimes 
they were pounded into a coarsely-powdered substance 
(Millspaugh, 1892). 

Day Family Remedies; 

The Day family made a poultice from snakeroot and 
lard, or "hog fat." This mixture was placed on swollen 
joints of the farm animals. The family was always 
cautious with the cattle and horses. Snakeroot eaten 
by Crittle and horses killed them or made them severely 
ill. 

Medical Research: 

Snakeroot contained poisonous substances; when 
taken in large doses, it was fatal to laboratory 
animals. However, the chemical, methyl salicylate, has 
relieved pain in laboratory experiments (Foster and 
Duke, 1990). There had been limited scientific 
research due to the toxic chemicals found in different 
species of the plants. Millspaugh (1892) noted 
Snakeroot in some cases caused paralysis of muscles of 



BEST COPY AVAIIABLE 



12G 



Herbal 

115 



the respiratory tract and of the motor system, 
constriction, aching, soreness, restless sleep, and 
general debility. 

Sources Consulted; 

Snakeroot, according to Walkingstick (1993), 
wasn't as popular as a medicinal remedy at the present 
time; however, the Eastern Cherokees sometimes have 
used Snakeroot salve or poultice to reduce swellings of 
joints. The plant was scarce and was scattered in 
small populations at low elevations in the Smoky 
Mountains . 



O 



127 



SPIKENARD 




Spikenard 

f Aralia racemosa ) 



Herbal 

117 



Plant Identification: 

Spikenard was a perennial, aromatic herb that grew 
three to five feet in height, that has been found 
blooming in rich woods in the area of Southwestern 
Indiana. Its family members have included the Ginseng 
family (Foster and Duke, 1990). Long, smooth, dark 
green or reddish stems had small whitish flowers that 
formed small clusters on tiny branches that extended 
from the stems. The flowers bloomed from June to 
August. The leaves were dark, deep green, saw toothed, 
and heart-shaped (Millspaugh, 1892). 

History: 

Settlers used Spikenard as a blood purifier and as 
a remedy for lung ailments, asthma, rheumatism, and 
backaches. The powdered roots were officially listed 
in the National Formulary from 1916 to 1965 as a 
stimulant and for diaphoretic purposes (Vogel, 1970). 
Hoosiers, as reported by Tyler (1985), combined 
Spikenard with wild mint and used this as a prepared 
massage lotion for sore backs. Another herbal mixture 



Herbal 

118 



that included Spikenard was taken for tuberculosis. 

The boiled root was made into a poultice which was 
applied on woimds to treat blood poisoning. 

Cherokee Uses: 

The Cherokees prepared a Spikenard root tea for 
backaches, menstrual difficulties, coughs, asthma, and 
diseases of the lungs; they made the roots into a salve 
to be used on boils, infections, swellings, wounds, and 
cuts (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 1975). The beaten and 
pulverized roots were also used on burns and the root 
juice was used for earaches (Weiner, 1972). Spikenard 
was gathered during June through August. The fresh 
roots were pulverized for the juice and made into a 
salve or poultice. Other harvested, chopped, and 
pounded roots were dried in an open sunny place, then 
powdered, and finally stored in a dry cool place. When 
needed, the powdered roots were used in preparing a 
root tea. 

Day Family Remedies: 

Grandfather Day used a poultice hoof preparation 
made from Spikenard and turpentine. This was placed on 
a horse's hoof when "thrush" (hoof rot) developed. 



130 




Herbal 

119 



Thrush was common during the winter months or when a 
horse was stalled for a long period of time. 

Medical Research; 

Modern research has found Spikenard contained the 
chemical aralin (Weiner/ 1972). This chemical was used 
in some over-the-counter drugs and has been found in 
types of massage lotions. Some people have allergic 
reactions that have caused skin rashes / sores / and skin 
eruptions. Millspaugh (1892) reported some side 
effects that included impeding suffocation/ profuse 
night sweat/ nausea/ and diarrhea. 

Sources Consulted: 

Occasionally/ the CherokeeS/ according to Hutchens 
(1992)/ have used the dark ripe/ purple berries for 
Spikenard jelly. They also have used the whole root as 
food. Spikenard/ as a medicinal remedy/ has been 
combined with other herbs and brewed into a tea. This 
tea was drunk to purify the blood. Walkingstick (1993) 
also indicated Spikenard drops were used extensively 
for earaches. The National Park Service has found 
Spikeiiard growing frequently at a wide range of 




131 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



Herbal 

120 



elevations and has found it well distributed in the 
Smoky Motantains. 




132 



ST.-JOHN'S-WORT 




o 

ERIC 



133 



Herbal 

122 



St. Johns Wort 

( Hypericum perforatum ) 

Plant Identification: 

St. Johns Wort, a woody, rapidly spreading 
perennial belonged to the same family as Rose-of- 
Sharon. The yellow flowers, five-petaled with black 
dots on their margins, were found in bushy clusters and 
measured about one inch across (Foster and Duke, 1990). 
These were found on nximerous slender breunches. Oblong 
and dotted with translucent glands, the leaves when 
pinched produced a red oil and emitted an aroma 
reminiscent of turpentine (Wan^ler, 1988). From June 
to September, it grew one to three feet (sometimes up 
to five feet) and was found in fields with dry, light 
soils in Pike County State Forest. 

History; 

Europeans introduced St. Johns Wort to the United 
States, where it grew wild euad spread rapidly. Named 
in honor of John the Baptist, St. Johns Wort was 
believed to release its blood-red oil on August 29, the 
time of the Saint's beheading. Wort was an old English 
word for plant. Another legend was that the plant. 




134 



Herbal 

123 



during the days of strong belief in witchcraft, was 
collected on St. Johns Night, June 24. It collected on 
time, it afforded protection against witches and evil 
spirits. The Greeks used the herb for burns, as a 
diuretic, as a menstruation promoter, and for fever. 
They also burned the leaves to purify the air, drive 
away evil spirits, and to ensure healthy crops 
(Castlemcm, 1991). It was used as a Doctrine of 
Signatures plant because the red-oil was believed good 
for wounds. The settlers used it for colds and 
bronchitis during the 1800’s and the physicians used 
the herb for the treatment of wounds. Millspaugh 
(1892) recorded its use for the nervous system. 

Cherokee Uses: 

The Cherokees used St. Johns Wort salve or fresh 
milky substance for treatment of external ulcers, 
snakebites, wounds, sores, cuts, bruises, and other 
skin probleitts. They prepared an herbal tea for bladder 
ailments, dysentery, diarrhea, respiratory diseases, 
bronchitis, and lung infections. The crushed plant was 
sniffed for nosebleeds and infants were bathed in a 
root decoction for strength (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 




135 



BEST COPY AVAIIABLE 





Herbal 

124 



1975). Other Native American tribes combined St. Johns 
Wort with Black Raspberry root in hot water; this 
concoction was used for the treatment of tuberculosis. 
The leaves were harvested when the plants bloomed, June 
through August. They were air dried and stored in a 
cool, dry place (Olds, 1975). The fresh blossoming 
plant was chopped and pounded to a pulp for making a 
salve (Millspaugh, 1892). 

Day Family Remedies: 

Great-Grandmother Day always had St. Johns Wort 
salve ready for large cuts and wounds. She ironed old 
linen xintil nearly brown (scorched) to sterilize it. 
Then this material was placed over the salve or wound 
so that it did not become contaminated. Healing was 
rapid, and this preparation rarely left any scar 
tissue. 

Medical Research; 

The active chemicals that were found in St. Johns 
Wort were choline, pectin, rutin, sitosterol, 
hypericin, and pseudohypericin. Since 1988, hypericin 
has been researched for AIDS treatment as a sedative, 
anti-inflammatory, and antibacterial drug. Also, it 




13 « 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 












Herbal 

125 

has reduced fever, decreased swelling of lymph nodes, 
improved appetites, and increased the energy of AIDS 
patients (Foster and Duke, 1990). However, it was not 
a cure. Recent research has indicated immune- 
stimulating chemicals and anti -bacterial, anti-fungal, 
and anti-inflammatory activity. In laboratory 
experiments when mice infected with the leukemia virus 
were injected with an extract of St. Johns Wort, they 
did not develop the disease. When given orally, it was 
equally effective. HIV infected mice had similar 
results. Side effects included skin burns, rashes, and 
blistering because of the chemical hypericin (James, 
1989 ) . Further research was needed for HIV and 
leukeoiia treatments of St. Johns Wort. Other studies 
supported the herb's use for wound healing and 
reduction of wound infections (Meuelo, 1988). 

Millspaugh (1892) reported the ingested plant sometimes 
caused mental depression, exhaustion, confusion, pupil 
dilation, increased heart beats, numbness, and 
shivering. 



Herbal 

126 



Sources Consulted; 

Following an old custom, the Eastern Cherokee 
Nation have dried the St. Johns Wort and have used it 
as they have used the acorn. Prepared tea made from 
fresh leaves was used for soothing effect. Another use 
for the tea has included treatment for bronchitis. A 
salve made from the whole fresh St. Johns Wort plant 
has been used for its healing effects on bruises, 
compound fractures, gunshot wounds, bites, cuts, 
infections, and other types of open wounds according to 
Hutchens (1992). The plant was found occasionally at 
low elevations but was nowhere abundant in the Smoky 
Mountains as noted by the National Park Service. 




13S 




133 



Herbal 

128 



Uva Ural or CooBon Bearberry 

( Arctostaphvlos uva-ursi ) 

Plant Identification; 

Uva Ursi, commonly referred to as Bearberry (bears 
were fond of the fruit), was a hardy evergreen shriib 
that grew in dry, rocky, sandy soil and reached only a 
few inches in height. Its leaves, which turned bronze 
in winter, were leathery and paddle- shaped. The tiny, 
urn-shaped, waucy white flowers sometimes tinged with 
red flowers, were found with red berries among them 
(Foster and Duke, 1990). The fruits, which matured 
from August to late winter, were smooth, red, and 
edible. Uva Ursi belonged to the rhododendron family. 
Bearberry has been found growing in Pike County State 
Forest in southwestern Indiana. 

P4gtpyyi 

Uva Ursi leaves were used by the Romans to treat 
wounds; the Chinese used the plant as a diuretic for 
kidney and urinary problems. Because it grew in rocky 
places and kidney stones were called gravel, and 
because it had been used by the settlers and Native 
Americans as a treatment of kidney stones, Bearberry 



140 



BEST COPY AVAIL4BLE 



Herbal 

129 



was listed with the Doctrine of Signatures (Castleman, 
1991). Uva Ursi or Bearberry was officially listed in 
the US Pharmacopoeia from 1820 to 1936 as an astringent 
(Vogel, 1991). During the 1800's, physicians treated 
patients for diarrhea, dysentery, and kidney infections 
with this herb. Bearberry was listed in Hoosier Home 
Remedies (1985) as a useful diuretic and as a promoter 
that formed and excreted urine. 

Cherokee Uses; 

The Cherokees made a tea which was used as an 
astringent, diuretic, and urinary tract antiseptic. 

They also used Bearberry for bronchitis, for diarrhea, 
for skin sores, and for stopping bleeding. Sometimes 
they mixed dried leaves with tobacco and smoked this 
mixture called kinnikinnik (Weiner, 1972). Hamel and 
Chiltoskey (1975) indicated the Cherokees had used the 
berries for food and for beverages. The leaves were 
harvested in autvunn before the first frost, then air 
dried by spreading them over a large area. Because of 
the thick, leathery texture, the leaves were difficult 
to dry. Sometimes they were chopped and pounded into a 



141 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



Herbal 

130 



pulp to be used later as poultice which was stored in a 
dry cool place. 

Day Fcunilv Remedies: 

Grandfather used a Bearberry poultice for sores, 
scrapes, or. insect bites on his emimals, horses, 
cattle, and hogs. He sometimes placed fresh, crushed 
leaves over wounds to stop bleeding. 

Medical Research; 

Uva Ursi leaves had diuretic properties (Frohne, 
1970). They contained the chemical arbutin, which has 
been found in many over-the-counter creams to treat 
wounds and sores (Castleman, 1991). Sometimes, when 
drunk, the tea caused the urine to turn dark green and 
induced vomiting, convulsions, and stomach upset in 
some cases; however, Millspaugh (1892) recommended it 
highly for diseases of the kidneys, the bladder, and 
the urethra passage. 

Sources Consulted; 

Hutchens (1992) noted at the present time 
Bearberry leaves have been mixed with tobacco leaves 
and was called kinnikinnick. This mixture was smoked 
and was used in certain ceremonial events. For those 




142 



BEST COPY AVAIIABLE 



Herbal 

131 



with diabetes, Bearberry tea has been used to reduce 
sugar levels. The tea has also been used as a 
medicinal remedy to treat inflammations of the urinary 
tract, chronic affections of the kidneys, and pus 
discharge from the bladder. It was occasionally found 
at low elevations in the Smoky Mountains. The author 
was able to purchase some dried leaves for medicinal 
purposes . 




143 




144 



BEST COPY AVAIIABLE 







Herbal 

133 



White Willow 

( Salix alba ) 

Plant Identification: 

The White Willow tree had rough, grayish bark and 
bremches that were pliable; it grew up to sixty feet. 

Its leaves were lance-shaped, finely-* toothed, and lined 
with silky hairs. Long catkins appeared with leaves in 
the spring (Foster and Duke, 1990). They were foxind in 
moist woods, along stream edges in Pike County State 
Forest and along the banks of the Wabash River in 
Harmonie State Park. 

History: 

White Willow was a pain remedy used by the Chinese 
since 500 B.C. The settlers used White Willow tea for 
relieving pain, reducing fevers, and decreasing 
inflammation. It was officially listed in the US 
Pharmacopoe i a from 1882 through 1926 and in the 
National Formulary from 1936 to 1955 as an 
antispasmodic (Vogel, 1970). Tyler (1985) noted that 
White Willow bark tea was an old Hoosier remedy used to 
cure rheumatism. He also added that the use of 
salicylate and anti-inflammatory agents were well known 



Herbal 

134 



in the treatment of arthritic conditions. This 
explained the use of Willow bark tea with its content 
of salicin. 

Cherokee Uses: 

The Cherokees chewed White Willow twigs or bark 
for tonics and for hoarseness, as well as prepared a 
poultice from the bark.. They concocted a bark tea for 
treatment of pain, chills, and fever. They also used 
the twigs, bark, and catkins (pussy willows) for herbal 
remedies. Even the bark was often ground into flour 
and baked into a bread. Other uses included using the 
bark and twigs in making baskets and boiling or soaking 
the bark in water for washing the hair and encouraging 
it to grow (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 1975). They 
collected the bark in the spring as sap began to flow 
when it was more easily removed. 

Day Family Remedies; 

Grandmother Day shaved the inner bark, simmered 
the shavings, and prepared White Willow tea, which was 
drunk to reduce fevers. The Catkins from the White 
Willow tree, she mixed with other wild, dried flowers 
for winter decorations. 



146 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



Herbal 

135 



Medical Research; 

In 1828, French and German chemists found fresh 
White Willow bark contained a chemical, salicin, which 
decomposed into salicylic acid in the hvunan body. From 
salicin, aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) was created. 
Another herb. Meadowsweet, contained the same chemical 
(Castleman, 1991). Research found aspirin reduced risk 
of heart disease in males and delayed cataract 
formation in laboratory animals. It reduced fever, 
pain, and inflammation in other studies (Anon, 1988). 
For women. White Willow contained enough salicylate to 
suppress the action of prostoglandins, which was 
involved in menstrual cramps. Recent diabetes studies 
have suggested more research has been needed to find 
how White Willow has reduced blood sugar (glucose) 
level in diabetic humans (Sallis, 1989). Side effects 
have included gastrointestinal conditions and stomach 
ulcers. 

Sotirces Consulted; 

According to Stone (1991) the present day use of 
White Willow to relieve certain ailments included 
everything from insomnia to rheumatism. Teas have been 




147 



Herbal 

136 



made from the inner bark for the relief of fever, 
chills, rheijmatic pains, colds, and dysentery. The 
leaves have been applied externally on cuts and sores 
as an astringent. The Cherokees have also used the 
young pliable shoots to weave baskets and as charcoal 
pens for drawing. 

Defoe, Langdon, Rock (1989) indicated White Willow 
trees were rare in the Smoky Mountains but when found 
were usually near an old homestead. They were more 
common at lower elevations or near the foothills of the 
Smoky Mountains. 



WILD CHERRY 




149 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

138 



Wild Black Cherry 

( Prunus serotina ) 

Plemt Identification; 

The Wild Black Cherry tree that has been able to 
reach heights of ninety feet has been a beautiful 
wooded tree that has flowered from April to June. The 
bark was black and rough but reddish beneath, producing 
a pleasant aroma. The leaves were oval to lance*- 
shaped, with brown hairs on the midrib. The branches 
supportfid small clustered, elongated, white flowers 
that blossomed in late spring or summer (Foster and 
Duke, 1990). In late summer, blackish fruits, the size 
of large peas, developed. The tree grew in fertile 
soil under full sunlight and has been foimd in many 
areas throughout southwestern Indiana. 

History: 

The settlers used Wild Black Cherry to treat poor 
circulation, lack of appetite, and ailments needing 
sedation. They also treated coughs, fevers, colds, and 
sore throats with inner bark tea. It has been listed 
in US Pharmacopoeia from 1820 to present. The bark was 
officially listed for its properties as a sedative and 



best copy available 



Herbal 

139 



O 

ERIC 



use of the cherries as flavoring as well as its 
medicinal values in cough medicines (Castleman, 1991). 
With the exception of sassafras, there were no more 
popular home remedies than those using Wild Black 
Cherry (Vogel, 1970). Hoosiers, according to Tyler 
(1985), mixed Wild Black Cherry with other herbs and 
drank the tea to thin the blood plus used it as a 
spring tonic. The cherries were eaten daily to cure 
gout: a syrup of Rhubarb and Black Cherry was given 

for diarrhea and dysentery, and it was also taken for 
jaundice and hepatitis. Even bark tea was drunk to 
relieve the discomforts associated with measles. 
Cherokee Uses: 

To relieve pain in the early stages of labor and 
childbirth, Cherokee women were given an herbal tea 
prepared from the inner bark of the Wild Black Cherry 
tree. The Native Americans seldom experienced 
frostbite; they insulated themselves with animal 
skins, fat, and oils; however, when frostbite occurred, 
boiled leaves and pounded Wild Black Cherry bark were 
applied or a decoction was poured over the frostbitten 
area (Weiner, 1972). The fresh leaves were steeped in 




Herbal 

140 



water; the tea was drunk for coughs / diarrhea, sore 
throats, fever, and Indigestion. Wild Black Cherry was 
also used to treated hemorrhoids, sores, and burns. 

The bark was collected and then peeled in the fall when 
it contained the greatest concentration of chemicals 
and was highest in medicinal value (Weiner, 1972). The 
fresh, black berries were picked in late August or 
early September and eaten fresh or dried for future 
use. They were also pulverized and combined with dried 
meat to be used in soups, for carvings, as Iximber, and 
for furniture (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 1975). 

Day Family Remedies; 

A Day family Wild Cherry cough syrup was made by 
using the water from boiled bark, honey, and lemon. If 
that did not cure the problem, drinking Grandfather's 
Wild Cherry Wine did. Dried Wild Cherry smoked chips 
were used to cure meats in the autumn. Since the 
Cherries were slightly bitter, they were eaten with 
sugar, honey, or molasses and milk. The berries were 
also used to make jam or jellies. 



O 

ERIC 



152 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 






Herbal 

141 



Medical Research; 

All parts of the plant, when steeped in water, 
duplicated Prunasin, (a Cyanide-like chemical), which 
converted to hydrocyanic acid. If boiled, its 
medicinal use was destroyed. The fruit pits also 
contain hydrocyanic acid, which has the tendency to 
cause loss of balance, difficult breathing, and 
convulsions. Hydrocyanic acid was also a cyanide-like 
poison. Large amounts of Wild Cherry leaves were 
sometimes eaten by grazing animals (cattle and horses) 
that were especially susceptible to poisoning. The 
wilted leaves were very toxic if eaten by man or beast. 
Horses developed colic from doing so and often died. 
Laboratory animals experienced birth defects; however, 
small amounts were considered safe. Bark had to be 
peeled for medicinal use (Castleman, 1991). 

Sources Consulted; 

Stone (1991) stated that the Cherokees have drunk 
the Wild Black Cherry bark as a tea to treat diarrhea 
and lung ailments. The raw, sour fruit had been eaten 
to cause sweating and to reduce fevers. The bark tonic 
had been used to expel worms and also had been applied 




153 



Herbal 

142 



externally as a poultice to heal ulcers and abscesses. 
Other remedies included Wild Cherry tea flavored with 
honey to relieve coughing. The berries have been used 
as the main ingredient in Wild Cherry Wine also. For 
herbal hair care, a portion of dried cherry bark and 
peanut oil had been mixed to make a conditioning oil 
for the hair. After having been treated for several 
minutes, the hair was shampooed with a Wild Cherry 
shampoo, which used dried cherry bark, boiling water, 
and a mild soap. Finally, a Wild Cherry herbal rinse 
of cherry, bark, water, and lemon had been poured over 
the hair several times. 

The National Park Service (1992) indicated the 
Wild black Cherry was common and dominant throughout 
the Smoky Moimtains. 




154 




155 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

144 



Witch Basel 

f Hamamelis viroiniana ) 

Plant Identification; 

A perennial. Witch Hazel was a deciduous shrub 
that grew eight to fifteen feet in height, dropped its 
leaves each autumn, and had twisting stems that forked 
into flexible, hairy branches. Bright yellow flowers 
appeared in late fall during November and December 
after the leaves had dropped and as the fruits of the 
previous year had ripened (Weiner, 1972). They had 
long, slender petals with a spider-like appearance. 
Seeds in the middle of the flower were edible and 
compared to hazelnuts. Leaves were wavy-toothed with 
scalloped margins and uneven wedge-shaped bases (Foster 
emd Duke, 1990). Witch Hazel has been foimd in low 
damp woods and moist rich areas with partial shade in 
Pike County State Forest and the Harrison-Crawford 
State Forest. 

History; 

The settlers used Witch Hazel for inflammation, 
swelling, bruises, and cuts. The forked branches 
served as divining rods in searching for water. The 




156 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

145 



Latin name referred to Virginia, but the plant has 
grown over the entire Eastern part of United States, 
including Indiana. The leaves were listed in the US 
Pharmacopoe i a from 1862 to 1916 and the National 
Formulary as an astringent (Castleman, 1992). Tyler 
(1985) listed several Witch Hazel home remedies for 
arthritis, rheumatism, and nosebleeds. For the 
nosebleeds, Hoosiers crumbled dry Witch Hazel leaves 
and stuffed them into the nose. They relieved skin 
redness by boiling leaves and bark together and then 
applying the mixture to the inflamed areas. 

Cherokee Uses; 

The Cherokees prepared a leaf and tea concoction 
which was rubbed on the legs to keep the muscles limber 
and to relieve lameness (Weiner, 1972). Powdered 
leaves were made into tea and then drunk to stop 
internal bleeding, to prevent miscarriage, to treat 
colds, fevers, and sore throats, and to ease menstrual 
cramps. Boiled leaves and bark were made into a salve 
for cuts, bruises, bites, scalds, burns, inflammations, 
and painful tximors. The steam from twigs that were 
boiled in water was a treatment used for muscular 



Herbal 

146 



aches, strained backs, painful joints, and eye 
Inflanunations (Vogel, 1970). Leaves, twigs, and bark 
were collected and stored throughout the sxunmer months. 
The edible seeds were harvested when mature, 
nay Pam iiv Remedies; 

The Day family mixed boiled Witch Hazel leaves 
with alcohol or whiskey (moonshine) and used this 
concoction on sore muscles or strained backs. Great- 
Grandfather had a favorite Witch Hazel stick, which he 
called upon to find water. He often had much success 
finding underground water tables. 

Medical Research; 

The chemical, tannin, was an astringent that 
constricted blood vessels. Side effects have included 
skin rashes and irritation. Several commercial 
preparations have used Witch Hazel in extracts, 
ointments, and eye washes. It was used as an 
astringent for piles, skin toner, and eye problems. 
Hemorrhoid salves included Witch Hazel for minor pain 
and Itching (Millspaugh, 1892). 



15S 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

147 



Sources Consulted; 

According to Stone (1991), Witch Hazel had been a 
popular herbal beautify aid when added to vodka and 
chamomile. The ingredients were mixed together in a 
jar cumd allowed to stand for several days. It was then 
used as an astringent, and applied cold; however, it 
was always used externally. 

At the Museum of the Cherokee Indian in Cherokee, 
North Carolina, a chart of several types of plant usage 
indicated that Witch Hazel extract has been widely used 
during the present as a skin freshener lotion, and as a 
treatment for insect bites, bruises, sore muscles, 
scratches, cuts, and rashes. Also, Cherokees have cut 
the stems into small petals that resemble flowers. 

This has been done by peeling back the bark in small 
strips. These attractive stems have been placed around 
their homes as decorations. Witch Hazel was common in 
the Smoky Mountains and was found growing in the low to 
middle elevations. 




159 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

149 



Yarrow 

( Achillea millefolivun ) 

Plant Identification; 

Yarrow was a hardy perennial ^ covered with tiny 
hairs and soft leathery leaves. Family members have 
included the Daisy, Dandelion, and Marigold; other 
names used have been Woundwort, Thousand Weed, and Nose 
Bleed (Weiner, 1972). Numerous tiny, white, pink or 
purple flowers developed into dense clusters that 
bloomed from May to October. Each flowerhead had five 
petal- like rays (usually wider than long) with three 
teeth at top (Wampler, 1988). Stalkless, green leaves 
were divided into thousands of tiny leaflets; hence, 
its name. Thousand Weed. The fern-like foliage leaves 
were long near the base of the plant and shortened 
higher on the stem (Foster and Duke, 1990). It grew to 
three feet and was foxind in abandoned fields, along 
roadsides, and in waste areas throughout Southwestern 
Indiana. Full sunlight was needed for growth. 

History; 

In Greek times, Achilles crushed Yarrow leaves and 
placed them on warriors* wounds; hence, its genetic 



161 



BEST COPY AVAILABUE 



Herbal 

150 



name, Achillea. Also, Millefolium meant thousand- 
leaved, Yarrow's other genetic name. Soon after the 
colonists introduced Yarrow into America, it spread 
quickly, and all Native Americans began to use the herb 
(Castleman, 1991). During the Civil War, Yarrow was 
known as soldiers' woundwort; it was placed on battle 
wounds. Settlers also used Yarrow for bladder 
disorders, ulcers, and kidney problems. Dried leaves 
and tops were listed in the US Pharmacopoeia from 1863 
to 1882 as a stimulant, as a menstruation promoter, and 
as a tonic (Vogel, 1970). Tyler (1985) stated that 
Hoosiers had used Yarrow for rheximatism, to staunch the 
flow of blood from a cut, to relieve colds, and to 
treat cuts, abrasions, and bruises. Yarrow was 
prepared as a salve, as herbal tea, and as a substauice 
to be chewed. When chewed, the leaves were also packed 
aroimd a tooth to relieve toothaches and gum problems. 
Cherokee Uses; 

The Cherokees crushed dried leaves, prepared a 
salve and applied the salve on wounds to stop bleeding 
(Weiner, 1972). Sometimes crushed fresh leaves were 
used as a poultice for skin sores, skin rashes. 



162 



Herbal 

151 



hemorrhoids, and nosebleeds. An herbal tea was used 
for sweat- inducing qualities, for reducing fevers, and 
for the relief of colds and flu. Hamel and Chiltoskey 
(1975) wrote that the leaves were an astringent and 
Cherokees used it for hemorrhages, spitting blood, 
bloody piles, bloody urine, and bowel complaints. The 
Native Americans used the Common Yarrow for many 
ailments. The leaves were harvested when plants were 
in bloom, usually May to October. They were then used 
fresh or dried in partial shade and stored for later 
use (Olds, 1975). 

Day Family Remedies; 

Grandmother Day prepared a salve by crushing the 
leaves and mixing them with rendering lard or "hog 
fat". This salve was placed on small wounds, 
scratches, and sores. She sometimes used the fresh, 
crushed leaves to stop bleeding. 

Medical Research; 

Research has found that Yarrow contained a dark 
blue oil, cineol, which had stimulating properties 
(Weiner, 1972). Over 100 chemical compounds were 
identified from this plant. Some of theses have 





Herbal 

152 



included achilletin and achi Heine that were blood 
coagulators and hemorrhage controllers. Ceuaphor, 
menthol, rutin, and salicylic were anti-inflammatory 
and pain-relieving. Teuinins, terpineol, and cineol 
were auitiseptic. Over one hxindred biologically active 
compounds have been identified with this plauit 
(Castleman, 1991). One limited study indicated Yarrow 
protected the liver from toxic chemical damage. In 
some cases. Yarrow caused dermatitis, in others it 
caused the urine to turn dark brown. In some cases, 
physiological side effects have caused burning, 
considerable pain in the abdomen, and diarrhea 
(Millspaugh, 1892). 

Sources Consulted; 

According to Stone (1991) Yarrow mixed with 
alcohol or vodka and a few drops of tincture of 
benzolin made an excellent astringent that was 
externally placed on the skin when it was cold. 
Another Yarrow use had been an herbal steam facial. 
Yarrow and chamomile flowers were mixed with boiling 
water in a large bowl. The face was placed near the 
steam and the moisture absorbed for a facial uplift. 



1G4 



BEST COPY AVAIIAjLE 



Herbal 

153 



Finally, dried yarrow flowers, rosemary leaves, and 
peanut oil were mixed together for a skin conditioning 
oil. 

The National Park Service (1992) indicated Yarrow 
was found frequently and in a wide range of elevations 
throughout the Smoky Mountains. It was very common 
around Cherokee, North Carolina. 




O 






YEUOWROOT 






IGiil 

I 



Herbal 

155 



Yellow Root 

( Xanthorhiza simplicissima ) 

Plant Identification: 

A low growing hardy shrub. Yellow Root was in some 
areas called Goldenseal but it was a different plant 
from Goldenseal (Foster and Duke, 1990). Yellow Root 
belonged to the Buttercup family and acquired its name 
from the thick deep-yellow roots with yellowish bark. 
The five cleft, toothed leaflets were on long stalks, 
and the light brown-purple flowers were beautiful 
(Wampler, 1988). Yellow Root has grown up to two feet 
in height and has usually been found in colonies on 
shady strecun banks and moist woods or thickets. 

Lincoln State Park was the area in which it was found 
for this study. 

History; 

Yellow Root was used as a stomach remedy by the 
settlers. It was entered in the US Pharmacopoeia from 
1820 to 1882 as a tonic (Vogel, 1970). Tyler (1985) 
stated that Hoosiers combined Yellow Root with other 
herbs and used this mixture as a blood thinner. Root 
tea was drunk to improve the appetite and the digestion 




Ib'V 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

156 



cind to relieve stomach ailments. The Hoosiers also 
chewed Yellow Root to relieve sore mouths and canker 
sores . 

Cherokee Uses: 

The Cherokees boiled the roots and made a root tea 
that was used as a blood tonic, as a remedy for stomach 
ailments, colds, jaundice, cramps, sore throats, 
menstrual disorders, aurxd the relief of constipation as 
well as a rinse for mouth sores (Vogel, 1970). The 
Cherokees used the root's yellow pigment as a dye. The 
roots were sometimes chewed to relieve many ailments 
instead of drinking the prepared tea. Yellow Root was 
also used as an astringent for piles (hemorrhoids). A 
decoction, made from the root, was given for pain in 
childbirth (Weiner, 1972). Hamel and Chiltoskey (1975) 
noted that the Cherokees used Yellow Root as a tonic, 
as a poultice for sore eyes, as a tea for nerves, and 
as crushed leaves for camcer. Roots were collected 
during the late summer months, sliced and dried in the 
shade, then stored in a dry, cool place (Olds, 1975). 




16 B 



Herbal 

157 



Day Family Remedies; 

The Day family used Yellow Root extract for yellow 
dye, Bloodroot for red dye, and onions for brown dye. 
Eggs were dyed with these natural colors for children 
during the Easter holidays. Grandmother also prepared 
a "gargle" or "mouthwash" from Yellow Root tea for sore 
throats and mouth sores. 

Medical Research: 

Yellow Root contained the chemical, berberine, an 
anti-inflammatory chemical. Yellow Root, when giyen to 
experimental animals, produced a drop in blood 
pressure. Other studies showed berberine stimulated 
secretion of bile and was useful in treating patients 
with liyer cirrhosis (Foster and Duke, 1990). 

Sources Consulted; 

From early times to the present day. Yellow Root 
tea has been used extensiyely by the Cherokees for sore 
mouths, sore throats, or stomach problems. Mr. 
Kingfisher (Talhlequah, OK) indicated that the tea was 
prepared from beaten, pulyerized, and dry roots. 

Seyeral Oklahoma Cherokee Clans haye continued to make 




ley 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

158 



a root dye that has been used for coloring baskets and 
for making home decorations. 

According to Walkingstick (1993), the Cherokees 
have continued to prepare a Yellow Root tea as a 
medicinal remedy for stomach ailments, colds, sore 
throats, and mouth sores. The yellow dye for baskets 
and decorations was obtained by boiling the basket 
splints with this dye source as indicated on the plant 
chart at the Museum of the Cherokee Indian, Cherokee, 
North Carolina. Yellow Root was found frequently in low 
to middle elevations in the Smoky Mountains. 




170 









Herbal 

159 



CONCLUSION 

The people of the Cherokee Indian Nation suffered 
from mauny illnesses and diseases. They used mostly 
plants and spiritual guidance to treat their health 
problems. The early settlers used many of the remedies 
that they had learned from the CherokeeS/ but several 
of the remedies were not recorded and had been lost, 
ignored, forgotten, or altered with the passage of 
time. The Cherokee herbal methods of treatment were 
based on experiments, trial auid error, and reasoning. 
Some remedies were useless but usually rational and 
often effective. An astonishing niuober of Native 
American drugs and treatments have proved to be of 
enormous value. The Day family used plants and herbs 
for medicinal purposes up to the time of the discovery 
of penicillin and other antibiotics. The nearest 
doctor and hospital was several miles from their home; 
therefore, the family depended on the natural 
environment for medicinal cures. As a child, the 
author remembers seeing dried herbs hanging in various 
places, crushed or pulverized herbs stored in jars, and 



I'/i 



Herbal 

160 



other herbs being used daily either as teas, salves, or 
poultices. The author has used her grandparents 
"cures" and has found them most effective on animals 
and humcins. 

Certain herbs and plants have been adopted by the 
pharmacopeias and have currently been tested; an 
example would be the use of St. Johns Wort for 
treatment of AIDS, and Mayapple for small-cell lung 
cancer. Herbs have become a very important and 
integral part of modern medicine. Many over-the- 
counter drugs of "modern medicine" have contained as 
active ingredients herbs that have been chemically 
synthesized and mass-produced. Perhaps more use, 
research, and knowledge of Cherokee natural herbal 
remedies would replace more of the synthetic compounds 
that have occurred in many prescription drugs. Often 
use of natural remedies has proved to be safer than use 
of synthetic ones. Unfortunately, most American plants 
have yet to be investigated in terms of pharmacology, 
chemistry, and medicinal cures. Often studies that 
have been several ''ears old have represented the latest 
available information on herbs. Little has been done 



Herbal 

161 



in such research in the United States. Most of the 
research has been conducted in Germany/ Eastern Europe, 
and Asia. Updated and more current research has been 
needed by American scientists. 

As of January 6, 1993, the National Institute of 
Health has recognized the importance and the use of 
herbal medicine as a form of treatment for certain 
types of illnesses. The institute also encouraged 
further study and research on various plants for 
medical value. 

Because of dwindling natural resources, educators 
have had to teach a deeper appreciation of plant usage, 
encourage a commitment to conservation of these plants, 
and help people gain a deeper sense of their 
relationship to their environment and to the natural 
world. Hopefully, mankind, including educators, will 
promote an interest in the conservation, collection, 
identification, preservation, and healing properties of 
herbs . 

Old herbal cures and remedies, better treatments, 
greater appreciation of Cherokee cultural heritage, and 
knowledge of Cherokee Herbal Remedies will add a new 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

162 



dimension and appreciation to people's lives. 



O 

ERIC 



174 



Herbal 

162 




C H A P T E R 111 

CHEROKEE HERBAL REMEDIES 
FACULTY CURRICULUM HANDBOOK 

AMD 

LESSON PLANS 




CHEROKEE HERBAL REMEDIES 
CURRICULUM GUIDE 



Herbal 

163 



This guide is an accelerated course outline 
designed for students who are interested in plant 
identification, conservation, history, Cherokee uses, 
and current developments and research of herbal 
medicinal uses. It is designed to foster the 
cognitive, affective, and psychomotor domains. The 
curriculvim is structured for a two day workshop — 6 
hours per day. Learning occurs as students actively 
participate in field experiences, by the process of 
inquiry, by critical thinking techniques, by playing 
games, and through small group discussions. 



17 o 

o 

ERIC 



Herbal 

164 



CHEROKEE HERBAL REMEDIES 
COURSE TEXT, REFERENCES 
AND EVALUATION 



O 

ERIC 



17V 



Herbal 

165 



Cherokee Herbal Remedies 
COURSE TEXT 

Several references will be reviewed and studied. 
There is no single textlook. In addition, students may 
use literature from the sciences, anthropology, 
history, and other sources, such as medical journals, 
pamphlets, and oral experience. There is much material 
that contains excellent advice and knowledge on plants, 
herbs, and herbal remedies. 



■■'S' 



Herbal 

166 



Cherokee Herbal Remedies 



EVALUATION 



Evaluation of this course will be by student and 
instructor evaluation of the cognitive, affective, and 
psychomotor domains. The evaluations will include in- 
class and field experiences participation, knowledge 
exercises, and plant identification skills, techniques, 
and effectiveness. 

Student self-evaluation 25% 

Instructor evaluation 25% 

Participation and exercises 25% 

in skills and techniques 



Improvement in identification skills, 25% 
knowledge, and techniques 

Broken down into percentages: 



90 - 100 = A range 
80-89 = B range 
70 - J9 = C range 
60-69 = D range 
Below 60 = F 



A = Superior 
A- = Excellent 
B+ = Outstanding 
B = Very good 



B- = Good D+ = Below average 

C+ = High average D = Poor 
C = Average D- = Near failure 
C- = Low average F = Failure 



Herbal 

167 



CHEROKEE HERBAL REMEDIES 
LESSON PLANS 
FACULTY 



O 

ERIC 



ISO 



Herbal 

168 



lesson plan 

SESSION ONE 



181 



Herbal 

169 

Cherokee Herbal Remedies 
LESSON PLANS 
FACULTY 

SESSION ONE: (approximately two hours) 

Objectives: 

A. The instructor and students will participate in 
the activities that introduce them to one another. 

B. The instructor and students will understand the 
goals, objectives, and evaluation procedures of 
the class. 

C. The instructor and students will discuss safety 
procedures, poisonous and nonpoisonous plants, and 
first aid techniques to follow during field 
experiences . 

D. The instructor and students will discuss the use 
of plants throughout history and current uses of 
plants. 

E. The student will have knowledge concerning how 
plants were selected, and the parts used. 

F. The student will participate in laboratory 
experiences with preparation of plants into teas, 
poultices, and salves. 

Equipment and Materials: 

A. Curriculum Handbook, name tags, plant pictures for 




182 



Herbal 

170 

game scavenger hunt, and examples of plants. 

(Dried and fresh) 

Procedures : 

A. Introductions, energizers, and distribution of 
name tags. 

1. Introduction of students and instructor 

2. Students discuss what they want to accomplish 
during the course. 

3. Play energizer games. 

B. Students and instructor will discuss course 
philosophy, references, and learning outcomes. 

C. Students will be prepared to read curriculum guide 
and discuss, articulate, comment, and ask 
questions concerning: 

1. How animals and man have used plauits as 
medicine throughout the ages. 

2. How people have used herbs with medicinal 
chemicals daily without realizing the values 
of such plants. 

3. What four major traditions are included in 
herbal healing. 

4. How many plants have medical value for humans 
and how many prescriptions have contained a 
drug from a natural plant source. 




183 



BEST copy AVAIUBLE 



Herbal 

171 



5. How early settlers came to America and the 
remedies they used that were gotten from the 
Native Americans. 

6. Where valuable information on Indian Herbal 
Remedies was recorded and used. 

D. The instructor and students will review how the 
Native Americans decided which plants were 
valuable, useful, and worthwhile. 

1. "Doctrine of Signatures" 

2. Trial and Error, tasting, sniffing. 

3. Relying on the supernatural 

E. Class discussion on what parts of the plaints were 
used for medicinal purposes. 

1 . Bark 

2 . Stems 

3 . Roots 

4 . Seeds 

5. Fruits 

6 . Nuts 

7. Flowers 

8 . Leaves 

F. Discussion on Native American expertise on 
gathering, storing, preparing, and utilizing the 
different plant species. 




184 



Herbal 

172 



1. 


Annual plants 




2. 


Biennial herbs 




3. 


Different seasons 




4. 


Dried plants 




5. 


Fresh state 




6. 


Exposure to light, dry, cool 


places 


7. 


Time of process 




8. 


When bark was gathered 




9. 


Why flowers were used infrequently 


10. 


Time fruits were picked 




11. 


When seeds were harvested 




12. 


Time nuts were collected and 


stored 


13. 


How roots and stems were gathered 


14. 


How herbs were preserved 





G. Instructor and students will examine and have 
knowledge about several dried herbs. They will 
also participeite in a laboratory experiment 
involving preparation of plants by: 

1 . Infusion 

2. Decoction 

3. Fermentation 

4. Poultice 

5. Plaster 

6. Salves 




183 



BEST COPY AVAIIABLE 



Herbal 

173 



H. End of First Two Hour Session: 15 minute break. 



O 

ERIC 



186 












Herbal 

174 



LESSON PLAN 
SESSION TWO 



167 



o 

ERIC 



Herbal 

175 

Cherokee Herbal Pemedies 

LESSON PLAN 
FACULTY 

SESSION TWO: (approximately two hours) 

Objectives: 

A. The instructor and students will review and answer 

any questions concerning information taught in 
first sessions. 

B. The instructor and students will review history of 
the Cherokee Nation. 

C. The instructor and students will discuss plant 
identification, history, Cherokee Uses, Day Family 
Remedies, and medical uses of herbs and plants. 

D. The instructor and students will discuss recent 
experiments and studies that have been done. 

E. The instructor will caution the student that this 
course is for the purpose of studying different 
herbs and identifying certain plants but is not a 
class for medical purposes. 

F. The students will participate in games and 
activities that will enhance their knowledge of 
plants and herbs. 

Equipment and Materials: 

A. Herbal Word Search Game and Herbal Password 

Sheets, Curriculum Guide, pencils, and plants. 




188 



Herbal 

176 



Hog and bear fat. Containers for preparing herbal 
teas, salves / and poultices. 

Procedures : 

A. Are there any questions concerning the previous 
session's information and laboratory experiment? 

B. The class will begin discussions on Native 
American spiritual guidance. Medicine Man, 
paraphernalia, and charms. 

1. Ideas, concepts, and uses of plants 

2. Medicine Man (Shaman) 

3. Paraphernalia, equipment 

a. Special costumes 

b. Medicine Bundle 

c . Charms 

d. Medicine Stick 

e. Mortar ^d pestle for mixing 

f. Syringe 

g. Medicinal Herb Bag 

h. Plant Strength Ceremonies 

i. Patient Faith 

j . Prayers and Ceremonies 

C. The class will cover knowledge of the Cherokees 
during the 19th century to present time. 



O 

ERIC 



Herbal 

177 

1. Farmed, raised cattle, owned slaves, and 
raised cotton 

2 . Became Christians 

3. Villages 

4 . Sequoyah 

a . Invented alphabet 

b . Written language 

5. Bilingual newspaper 1828 

6. Lands coveted by Whites 

a. Georgia 

b . Alabama 

c. Mississippi 

d. Florida 

e. North Carolina 

f. South Carolina 

7. Five civilized tribes included: 

a . Cherokee 

b. Chickasaw 

c . Choctaw 

d. Creek 

e. Seminole 

8. Removal to Western territory; Oklahoma 

a. President Jackson — 1838 

b. 60 thousand Native Americans 



O 

ERIC 



130 



c. Trail of Tears 



Herbal 

178 



9. Cherokee Village, North Carolina 

a. Escapes 

10. Establishment of three-part government 

a. Executive Branch 

b. Legislative Branch 

c. Judicial Branch 

11. Mastering Reservation Life 

a. Drafted new Constitution — 1839 

b. 1840 Implemented at Tahleguah, OK. 

c. Public schools 

d . Cherokee Advocate 

D. General discussion of Plant Identification, 

History, Cherokee Uses, Day Family Remedies, and 
Medical Research, 

1. Twenty-five plants to be disc”ssed 

a. Common and Botanical names 

b. Descriptions 

c . Location 

2. History of Plant 

a. Past use 

b . Records 

c. Remedies 

d . Usage 

191 



o 




Herbal 

179 

3. Cherokee Uses and Day Family Remedies 

a. Medicinal uses 

b. Harvesting, gathering, conserving, 
preparing, storing. 

c. Parts of plants used 

d. Different ailments/diseases 

4 . Medical Research 

a. Chemical components 

b. Experiments and Studies 

c. Warnings; Safety 

5 . Consulted Sources 

a. Present time 

b . New uses 

E. Pass out gcune called, "Herbal Word Search". This 
will familiarize the students with the name of 
plants. 

F. Have students note the different charts in 
curriculxim guide that can be used as a reference 
guide during active participation of games and 
activities. 

G. Use the Overhead to Identify the different plants 
and what to look for during the field experiences 
sessions 5 and 6. Also show colored pictures 
found in different textbooks. 




192 



best copy available 



Herbal 

180 

H. End of Second Two Hour Session: 15 minute break. 




19j 



Herbal 

181 



LESSON PLAN 
SESSION THREE 



O 

ERIC 

hiaifiiifftaiTi-Taaa 



194 



Cherokee Herbal Remedies 



Herbal 

182 



LESSON PLAN 
FACULTY 

THIRD SESSICW: (approximately 1 1/2 hours) 

Objectives: 

A. The instructor and students will review and answer 
any questions concerning information given to the 
class during the 1st and 2nd sessions. 

B. The instructor and students will continue to 
participate in discussion, clarification, and 
identification of the twenty-five plants that will 
be hunted during field experiences. 

C. The instructor and students will review the 
overhead charts of the different plants and will 
continue to stress the environmental areas where 
the plants can be found. 

D. The instructor and students will review and 
discuss proper attire, first aid, and snacks for 
field experiences. 

E. The students will play games to enhance and 
reinforce their knowledge of the plants studied. 

F. The students will further their knowledge and 
experiences by studying the curriculum guide prior 
to the next session. 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



Herbal 

183 



G. The instructor and students will share experiences 
of family remedies that had been handed down 
through their families. 

Equipment and Materials; 

A. Curriculum Handbook, overhead projector, overhead 
charts, photographs of plants, wild plant 
identification charts, examples of books, and 
games and activities. 

Procedures : 

A. Allow time if there are any class questions or 
discussions concerning the twenty-five plants that 
were shown on the overhead. 

B. Have students play the game Herbal Password to 
reinforce and be able to identify the plants they 
will be studying and hunting during field 
experience . 

C. The instructor and students will continue to 
discuss plant identification. The instructor and 
the students will also refer to the Curriculum 
Guide on History, Cherokee Uses, Day Feimily 
Remedies, Medical Research, and Sources consulted. 
The twenty-five plants will be covered. 

1. The charts in the back of the Curriculum 
Guide will be used as references. 




196 



Herbal 

184 



D. Encourage the students to give examples of herbal 
home remedies that have been handed down through 
their families. 

E. The instructor will cover proper procedures in 
case of an accident. 

F. The instructor will also cover the proper attire 
needed for field experiences. 

G. Have students play the game Blackboard Herbal 
Baseball . 

H. End of Third Session. Tell students the time to 
meet, where, and to bring a notebook, snacks, 
water, pen, pencil. Curriculum Guide, camera, and 
enthusiasm. 




19 V 



Herbal 

185 



LESSON PLAN 
SESSION FOUR 




Ob 



Herbal 

186 

Cherokee Herbal Remedies 

LESSON PLAN 
FACULTY 

FOURTH SESSION: (approximately 30 - 45 minutes) 

Objectives: 

A. The instructor rnd students will discuss, clarify, 
and review benefits, values, shoes, clothing, risk 
factors, safety, and emergencies. 

B. The students will participate, practice, and apply 
skills and techniques in hunting certain pleuits. 

C. The instructor and students will review what 
characteristics to look for in poisonous plants. 

D. The student will understamd the value of plants 
and proper harvesting of plants; how the Native 
American valued the environment. 

E. The students and instructor will cooperate, 
enhance, and enjoy working with one another in 
finding and studying the different species of 
plants. 

Equipment and Materials: 

A. First Aid kit 

B. Curriculum Guide, charts, notebook, recording 
sheets, camera. 

C. Food, drink, cuid containers. 




Herbal 

187 



Procedures ; 

A. Continue review, classroom discussions, analysis, 
participation, safety factors, terminology, and 
answer any questions concerning previous session 
presentations . 

B. Review with students how to find plants — the 
techniques and skills to follow. 

1. Remember "leaves of three" leave them be. 

C. Continue to discuss the knowledge and attitudes 
about the purpose and values of herbal remedies. 
Discuss leaving plants as they are. The Native 
Americans believed in protecting the environment. 

D. Explain where students are meeting for field 
experiences. Divide the group into partners. 
Explain approximately how long it will take to get 
there . 

E. Have students keep a complete and careful record 
of any problems, changes, and recommendations they 
might wish to discuss during the evaluation 
session. 

F. Store snacks, water and food properly in 
containers . 

G. Good luck on finding the plants discussed. 



Herbal 

189 



LESSON PLAN 
SESSION FIVE 



O 

ERIC 






Herbal 

190 

Cherokee Herbal Remedies 

LESSON PLAN 
FACULTY 

FIFTH SESSION: (approximately 4 1/2 to 5 hours) 

Objectives: 

A. The students will have reviewed the skills and 
techniques necessary for finding the different 
plants. 

B. The students will continue to review, discuss, 
implement, and have fun, enjoyment, recreation, 
and friendships while participating in hunting 
plants. 

C. The instructor and students will continue to up- 
date, compensate, and review the different 
problems in finding certain plants. 

D. The students will travel as a group to the 
designated field experience area. 

E. The students will have acquired skills and 
techniques that will be used in the field 
experiences. 

Equipment and Materials: 

A. Same as Session Three 
Procedures : 



202 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



Herbal 

191 



A. Have students continue to apply the knowledge, 
skills, techniques, and courtesies learned in 
previous sessions. 

B. Have students continue to review and apply 
techniques used to overcome auiy problems that 
developed during participation. 

C. Continue to encourage students to have fun, 
enjoyment, recreation, and friendships while 
hunting for the many variety of plants. 

D. Have students in a group type participation 
experiences developed by the instructor that 
combines all of the knowledge previously discussed 
and/or studied. 

E. Continue to have students practice finding the 
different plants, and as a group, or individually 
with the instructor, evaluate the programs of the 
students as well as their efforts, skills, and 
techniques . 

F. Have students take a 15-20 minute break, have a 
snack, and have a "show and tell" time. 

G. After the break, continue to look for the various 
plants. 

H. At the end of the session, have everyone bring 
their experiences, laboratory projects, and 




203 



^ - j*;- 







Herbal 

192 

assessments for evaluation during the following 
session. 

I, Everyone meets at a specific time and travels as a 
group back to the classroom. 




204 



Herbal 

193 



LESSON PLAN 
SESSION SIX 



O 

ERIC 



205 



Herbal 

194 

Cherokee Herbal Remedies 

LESSON PLAN 
FACULTY 

SIXTH SESSION: (approximately 1/2 hour) 

Objectives: 

A. The instructor and students will comment, excheuige 
ideas, and have classroom discussion concerning 
previous field experiences. 

B. The students will discuss the evaluation 
procedures . 

C. The instructor and students will prepare a 
constructive evaluation and critical analysis of 
course activities. 

Equipment and Materials: 

A. Curriculum Guide, skill sheets, written comments, 
and grade sheets. 

B. The plant check sheets and some plants that were 
observed or found. 

Procedures : 

A. The instructor and students discuss grading as 
determined by evaluation procedures. 

B. The instructor and students will write down and 
verbally include comments, ideas, suggestions, and 




Herbal 

195 



criteria that might improve the quality of the 
course . 

C. Have discussion of all problems students 
encountered while searching for the different 
plants. Try to extend help for the students with 
any particular problems that they found. Include 
fellow class members comments or suggestions on 
the way they solved the problem. Encourage peer 
tutoring as this often accounts for 90% of the 
learning. 

D. Closure of th session. Anything students wish to 
discuss concerning any aspect of the course. 
Continue to encourage them to practice and 
participate, studying, and finding the different 
plants, and to practice good conservation. 

Remember the Native Americans practiced good 
environmental techniques. 




BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



Herbal 

196 



APPENDICES 



ERLC 



Herbal 

197 



This 


PLANT/HERB 
FIELD ElIPERIENCE 
STUDENT CHECK SHEET 

is the checklist on twenty-five identified plants 



and herbs. A ( ) will identify that the plant was 

foxind. 

Location Where Found 
1. Black Cohosh or Squawroot 



2. 


Bloodroot or Pucoon 


3. 


Boneset or Thorouahwort 


4. 


Burdock or Common Great 


5. 


Catnin 


6. 


Comf rev 


7. 


Dandelion 


8. 


Garlic 


9. 


Goldenseal 


10. 


MavaPDle 


11. 


Milkweed or Common 


12. 


Mistletoe 


13. 


Patridaeberrv or Souaw Vine 


14. 


Pennyroyal 


15. 


Senna or American Wild 


16. 


Skullcap 


17. 


Snakeroot 


18. 


Spikenard 


19. 


St. Johns Wort 



O 

ERIC 


201 ) 



Herbal 

198 



20. 


Uva Ur si or Bearberrv 


21. 


White Willow 


22. 


Wild Black Berrv 


23. 


Witch Hazel 


24. 


Yarrow 


25. 


Yellow Root 


Comments ; 




210 



SCAVENGER HUNT 
MIXER/ENERGIZER 



Herbal 

199 



Find a person who has the following and have that 
person sign your sheet. Use a person's name only once. 
The one getting the most names within 5 minutes 
receives a prize. 



1. 


Red Lipstick 


2. 


Blue Eves 


3. 


Brown Belt 


4. 


Drummer Bov Quarter 


5. 


Paper Clip 


6. 


Ford Car Kev 


7. 


Yellow Paper 


8. 


Papermate Pen 


9. 


Timex Watch 


10. 


Picture of Husband (Wife) 


11. 


Brown Eves 


12. 


First Name with Initial A 


13. 


Black Shoes 


14. 




15. 


Gold Weddina Rina 


16. 


Clipboard 


17. 


Hairpin 


18. 


Luckv Piece 


19. 


Calendar 


20. 


Comb 


O 

ERIC 


211 



Herbal 

200 



21. 


Blue Shirt 


22. 


Shoe Lace (white) 


23. 


Coin Purse 


24. 


Red Purse/Billfold 


25. 


Pinkie Rina 


26. 


Person with 4 or more children 


27. 


Envelone 


28. 


Kev Chain 


29. 


Rain Can 


30. 


Silver Glasses 


31. 


Class Rina 


32. 


Rebok Tennis Shoes 


33. 


Pink Finaernail Polish 


34. 


Emerv Board 


35. 


Stick of Chewina Gum 



O 

ERIC 





HERBAL WORD SEARCH 



Herbal 

201 



DESCRIPTION: 

Everyone competes to see who can find the most 
words in the shortest time. After finding the 
word, that person also needs to identify the herb. 
The winner is the person who can find and identify 
the most plants/herbs. 

DIRECTIONS: 

1. Set a time limit; 10 to 15 minutes. 

2. Find words horizontally, diagonally, and 
vertically. The words can also be found forward 
and backward. 

3. Have participants draw a line or circle the word 
when they find it. 




21‘i 



CHEROKEE 



B C I 
E A X 
A F S 
R G S 
B N N 
E O A 
R I K 
RLE 

Y E R 
T D 0 
A N O 
BAT 
C D L 
M Z I 
B P Y 

Y R R 
Z E L 
WIN 

BEARBERRY 
BLACK CHERRY 
BLACK COHOSH 
BLOODROOT 
BONESET 
BURDOCK 



HERBAL WORD SEARCH 

LRAGOLDENS 
VIPTOORDOO 
PIKENARDED 
YARROWJLNR 
YHIKMWORDS 
AEZYBHUOVH 
EBLDLICHCI 
FGKLOTJTLM 
FMOCOEIOUQ 
SWPCDWNEFG 
VJAARIRDRH 
XTONOLPOES 
NKNNOLDROE 
TESENOBCAT 
AIOSFWUTVM 
EBEGDIRTRA 
PPAYAMKCOD 
TERGREENXM 
CATNIP MILKWEED 

COMFREY MISTLETOE 

DANDELION PARTRIDGEBERRY 
GARLIC PENNYROYAL 

GOLDENSEAL SENNA 

MAYAPPLE SKULLCAP 



E A L P L 

L B A E B 

U L Z N C 

P A Q N X 

H C T Y C 

S K W R V 

K C H O B 

U H S Y A 

L E O A W 

L R H L E 

C R O U 0 

A Y C X T 

P T K I E 

W Y C B L 

Z K A C T 

P D L F S 

R U B I I 

E G O O M 

SNAKEROOT 
SPIKENARD 
WHITE WILLOW 
WINTERGREEN 
WITCHHAZEL 
YARROW YELLOWROOT 




214 



CHEROKEE 




I G S 



HERBAL WORD SEARCH 

-R — A — e — O — h — B — E — N — S- 

V I P T — O — 0 — R — D — 0 — O- 

-9 1 K — E — N — A — R — e E D 

Y A — R — R — e — W J L N R 



5 


^ 1 


f Y H I KM 


fl 0 


C 1 


3 J 


L A \ Z \ 


' B 


i U 


1 


: F 


: E B \ D L 


1 c 


i 


J I 


: F G K \ 


. 0 ' 


p J 


yr 


? r 


1 E» 1# r\ ^ 






I i 


!i r 


1* W Ai U 






T ] 


) c 


' S W P c 


• D 1 


\ ^ 


A ] 


I c 


1 V J ^ 1 


. R 


: 


B J 


L I 


X y 0 F 


0 ] 


. p 


C I 


) 1 


\ 

a: 

^ 


: 0 1 


. D 


M : 


7. 1 


T E 2 I 


N A 


) R 


B ] 


r Y h 1 0 J 


F \ 


i u 



Z E — L- 

« 1 N- 



■9 — G — R — E — E — N X M 



-R A 



Q f X 
d T V c 

F W I: V 

He H Cl B 



L Y 



U T V M 
« — I — R — A- 
4* — A — ¥ — A — M K— G — O — D — R 



BEARBERRY 
BLACK CHERRY 
BLACK COHOSH 
BLCX)DROOT 
BONESET 
BURDOCK 



CATNIP 

COMFREY 

DANDELION 

GARLIC 

GOLDENSEAL 

MAYAPPLE 



MILKWEED 

MISTLETOE 

PARTRIDGEBERRY 

PENNYROYAL 

SENNA 

SKULLCAP 



U — 0 

E G 0 0 

SNAKEROOT 
SPIKENARD 
WHITE WILLOW 
WINTERGREEN 
WITCHHAZEL 
YARROW YELLOWROOT 




215 



HERBAL PASSWORD 



Herbal 

202 



DESCRIPTION: 

Two teams compete to see who can score the most 
points. Teammates give one member of their team clues 
to assist the member in coming up with the correct 
answer. The first team to guess the password by 
putting together the various clues gets the point. 
DIRECTIONS: 

1. Place two chairs in front of the class with 
the backs facing chalkboard or flip chart. 

2. Divide the class into two equal teams, and 
have one person from each team sit in a chair, 
facing his/her team. 

3. Alternate the team that starts each round 
since this makes an important difference in 
the game. 

4. Be sure the two participants in the chairs 
face the group before the Instructor writes 
the first word on the board. 

5. Start with 10 points and Team A. Have Team A 
give one-word clues . If Teeim A participant 
guesses correctly. Team A is awarded 10 
points. If incorrect, roxmd goes to Team B 




216 



Herbal 

203 



for 9 points and so-forth until the word is 
guessed or until there are no more points. 

6. After a word is guessed, have two new people 
sit in the chairs. Write a new word on the 
board and start again. 

7. NOTE! Only one-word clues may be given, and 
no part of the word may be used in the clue. 

HERBAL UNIT PASSWORDS: 



1. 


Catnip 


14. 


Bearberry 


2. 


Skullcap 


15. 


Goldenseal 


3. 


Partridgeberry 


16. 


Senna 


4. 


Bloodroot 


17. 


Snakeroot 


5. 


Mistletoe 


18. 


St. Johns Wort 


6. 


Spikenard 


19. 


Yarrow 


7. 


Boneset 


20. 


White Willow 


8. 


Black Cherry 


21. 


Comfrey 


9. 


Mayapple 


22. 


Witch Hazel 


10. 


Dandelion 


23. 


Milkweed 


11. 


Pennyroyal 


24. 


Yellowroot 


12. 


Black Cohosh 


25. 


Burdock 


13. 


Garlic 








2.17 






BLACKBOARD HERBAL BASEBALL 



Herbal 

204 



DESCRIPTION: 

Participants knowledge of herbal topics can be 
measured by their success in scoring runs in a game 
with a baseball format. They are given questions that 
differ in difficulty to determine a single, double, 
triple, or home run. The object of the game is to 
score the most runs by correctly answering herbal 
questions of different degrees of difficulty. 
DIRECTIONS: 

1. Divide the class into two equal teams; such as 
plants and herbs. 

2 . Draw a baseball diamond on the chalkboard or 
fe, tboard. 

3. Questions are categorized as single, double, 
triple, and home run, ranging from simple to 
very difficult questions. 

4. Start with the plant group. Ask them to 
choose a single, double, triple, or home run 
question. They confer for 10 seconds, and 
then they give their ansv/er. 

5. If correct and "x" is placed b first base for 
a single question, by second base for a double 
question, and by third base for a triple 




2 lb 



Herbal 

205 



question. If a home run question is answered 
correctly, the team gets a run. 

6. There is only one out per side. This happens 
when a team misses a question or gives an 
incorrect answer. Erase any runners left on 
base. 

7. To keep the game simple, move all players the 
same niimber of bases when a question is 
answered correctly. 

8. If a category of questions runs out, then play 
with the remaining categories. 

9. Place all incorrectly answered questions back 
in the pile for future use, and place the 
correctly answered questions aside. 

SINGLES 



1. The Indians used a process called what to 
decide which plants were valuable, useful, and 
worthwhile? ("Doctrine of Signature") 

2. When was the bark usually gathered? (When it 
slipped easily away from the trunk) 

3. What part of the bark was most often used? 
(Inner layer) 

4. Leaves were often collected before what 
occurred? (Blooming) 




2lS 



Herbal 

206 

5. Generally, seeds were harvested when? (Before 
seed pods opened) 

6. What was the most common way of preparing 
herbs? (Infusion) 

7. What was a common food added to improve taste 
if herbal remedy was too bitter? (Honey) 

8. To reduce swelling, a paste was applied 
directly to the skin. This preparation was 
called what? (Poultice) 

9. What was made by mixing and blending powdered 
herbs with types of animal fat or beeswax, and 
cooking this mixture for a couple of hours? 
(Salve) 

10. Another name for the Native American Medicine 
Man was what? (Shaman) 

11. What was the forced march of the Five 
Civilized Tribes called? (Trail of Tears) 

12. What year did the Cherokees accept United 
States citizenship? (1906) 

13. What was another name for Black Cohosh? 




2Zi) 



( Squawroot ) 



Herbal 

207 



14. Another conunon name for Black Cohosh besides 
Squawroot, since it emitted an unpleasant 
order that repelled insects, was what? 

( Bugwort ) 

15. Another neune for Bloodroot was what? 

(Puccoon) 

16. What did Bloodroot 's genus name (Sanguinari) 
mean? (Bloody) 

17. Medically, Bloodroot had what kind of action? 
(Laxative) 

18. Another name for Boneset was what? (Common 
Thoroughwort ) 

19. Boneset was used as a herb for dengue, 
commonly called what? (Breakbone fever) 

20. On each Burdock stem, what color of flowers 
were found that produced burrs? (Purplish) 

21. This herb was included in the (and was also 
known as Catmint or Catswort, what was it? 
(Catnip) 

22. Catnip, medically possesses a chemical, 
nepetalactone, which was a mild what? 
(Sedative) 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

208 

23. Other names for this herb were All-heal, 
Knitbone, or Bruisewort. What was it? 

(Comfrey ) 

24. When the Fomans boiled then pounded comfrey 
roots in water, the mixture was a sticky paste 
that hardened like what? (Plaster) 

25. The roots of the dandelion were dried, 
roasted, then boiled in water. This tea was 
used as a substitute for what? (Coffee) 

26. Name the world's second oldest medicine, after 
ephedra. (Garlic) 

27. Goldenseal was also known as Golden root or 
what? (Indian Paint) 

28. The Cherokees favored Goldenseal as what? 
(Insect repellent or insecticide) 

29. This plant was also known as Indian Apple, or 
Devil's Apple. What was it? (Mayapple) 

30. During the present time, gardeners used this 
plant as a natural insecticide. What was it? 
(Mayapple) 

31. Mayapple plants were used in large doses by 
some people to do what? (Commit suicide) 

32. Other common names for the milkweed are what? 
(Cottonweed or Wild Cotton) 




222 



Herbal 

209 

33. This parasite plant was best known as the 
plant under which people kissed at Christmas. 
What was it? (Mistletoe) 

34. Another name for Partridgeberry was what? 
(Squaw Vine) 

35. This herb was hung in dried bunches to drive 
away mosquitoes. What was it? (Pennyroyal) 

36. American Wild Senna was also called what? It 
was also used as a strong laxative or 
cathartic. (Cassia) 

37. This plant was reported to be effective 
against rabies. What was it? (Skullcap) 

38. People who drank milk from cattle that had 
eaten the root of this plant acquired the 
condition "milk sickness". Abraham Lincoln's 
mother, Nancy Hanks, was reported to have died 
from this disease. What was the root? 

( Snakeroot ) 

39. What plant was studied for its anti- 

inf Icunmatory and antibacterial properties 
against AIDS? (St. Johns Wort) 

40. The common name for Uva Ursi was what? 
(Bearberry ) 




223 



DOUBLES 



Herbal 

210 



1. To make a syringe for injecting medicine into 
wounds or administering an enema, what was 
used? (Hollow bone of a small bird and a 
bladder of a small animal) 

2. How many Native Americans were rounded up and 
moved west under military guard, and how many 
Cherokees survived this force march? (60,000 
and 14,000) 

3. What have been the two major places of 
residence of the present day Cherokees? 
(Cherokee Village, NC, Tahlequah, OK) 

4. Soon after the forced march, the Cherokees 
rallied and established, and had operating how 
many public schools by what year? (18 by 
1843) 

5. What year did the Cherokees draft a new 
constitution and what year was it implemented? 
(1839 and 1840) 

6. When were Black Cohosh roots (Squawroot, 
Bugwort) collected? (September or early fall 
after fruits had ripened) 




224 



Herbal 

211 



7. There were several uses for the Bloodroot; 
however, the two most common were as a what 
and what ? (Dye and insecticide) 

8. What were the two types of Burdock? (Common — 
arctixim minus and Great — arctium lappa) 

9 . What were two species of the perennial 
Snakeroot? (Senega and Black Sanicle) 

10. From salicin, acetylsalicylic acid was 
created. What was this common product? 
(Aspirin) 

TRIPLES 

1. Name the president who ordered the Five 
Civilized Tribes to move to a Western 
territory, the state it is today, and the year 
the order was issued? (President Jackson, 
Oklahoma, 1838) 

2. The Cherokees rebuilt their society and 
restored a three-part government. What were 
the three-parts? (Executive, Legislative, and 
Judicial Branch) 

3. Pennyroyal was included in the mint family and 
was otherwise known as what? (Tickweed, 
Fleabone, and Squawmint) 




225 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



Herbal 

212 



4. Bearberry Tea was used by the Cherokees as 
what? (Astringent, diuretic, urinary tract 
antiseptic) 

5. What was the chemical found in White Willow 

when twigs were chewed or prepared tea was 
drunk? It relieved pain, reduced, fever, and 
decreased inf Icunmation. (Salicin, which 

decomposed into salicylic acid in the human 
body) 

HOME RUN 

1. Ncime cutid describe the different ways of 
preparing herbs for medical uses? (Infusion, 
decoction, fermentation, poultice, plaster, 
salve) 

2. The Native American Medicine Man, also called 
the Shamam, was many things. Describe these. 
(Healer, sorcerer, seer, educator, priest) 

3. Who were the five civilized tribes? 

(Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, 
Seminole) 

4. Skullcap has been called several different 
names. What were these terms? (Mad-dog, 
Skullcap, Quaker Bonnet, Mad-dog Weed) 




226 



5. 



Herbal 

213 



Spikenard was used as a remedy for several 
conditions. Describe four purposes. (Blood 
purifier, lung ailment, asthma, rheumatism, 
backaches, stimulant) 




227 



FIRST AID REVIEW SHEET 



Herbal 

214 



HEAT STROKE, CRAMPS, HEAT EXHAUSTION 

A. Heat Stroke is characterized by extremely high 
body temperature and no sweating. 

1. A life-threatening emergency. 

2. Skin is hot, red, and dry. 

3. Pulse is rapid and strong. 

4. Victim may lose consciousness. 

5. First Aid. 

a. Sponge bare skin with cool water or 
alcohol . 

b. Fan the victim to promote cooling. 

c. Do not give stimulants. 

d. Get medical help. 

B. Heat cramps. 

1. Heat cramps involve muscular pains and 
spasms . 

a. Muscles of the legs and abdomen are 
usually affected first. 

2. First Aid 

a. Massage the area affected by 

"milking" the muscle towards the 
heart . 




22S 



Herbal 

215 

C. Heat exhaustion is characterized by fatigue, 

weakness, or collapse due to inadequate intake of 
water or loss of body minerals. 

1. Usually normal body temperature. 

2. Pale and clammy skin. 

3. Profuse perspiration. 

4. Sometimes nausea, dizziness, or vomiting. 

5. First Aid 

a. Have victim lie down. 

b. Loosen clothing. 

c. Apply cool, wet clothes. 

d. Get medical help. 

INSECT BITES 

A. Ants, bees, wasps, hornets, and yellow jackets' 
stings may cause an acute allergic reaction. 

1. May be excruciating pain, nausea, 
vomiting, abdominal pain, shock, 
convulsions or coma, and swelling around 
the face, hands, and limbs; may 

be difficulty in breathing; a rash may 
develop. 

2. First Aid 

a. Check vital sign, airway open, 
breathing, circulation. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

216 



b. Keep affected part down below level 
of victims heart. 

c. Apply ice or cold clothes to affected 
area. 

B. Bites or stings from mosquitoes / gnats / and 
chiggers often produce local pain and irritation, 
but are not likely to cause severe reactions. 

1. First Aid 

a. Cold application. 

b. Soothing lotions. 

c. Prevention includes several sprays. 

C. Ticks can transmit diseases, namely Rocky Mountain 
Spotted Fever and Lymes disease. They adhere to 
the skin or scalp. 

1. First Aid 

a. Cover tick with heavy oil. 

b. Carefully remove with tweezers. 

c. Tape tick to tongue depressor for 
further examination. 

d. Gently wash area. 

e. Apply cold pack. 

f. Check the body frequently for 
additional ticks. 




230 



Herbal 

217 



D. Spiders usually are harmless; however, there are 
two exceptions: the Black Widow spider and the 

Brown Recluse (violin spider). 

1. Symptoms include: 

a. Local reaction. 

b. Severe pain with profuse sweating. 

c. Painful abdominal cramps. 

d. Difficult breathing. 

e. May have chills, fever, nausea, or 
vomiting. 

f. Possible rash. 

2. First Aid 

a. Keep victim calm. 

b. Keep bitten area below level of 
heart . 

c. Care for shock. 

d. Monitor breathing and circulation. 

e. Get medical help. 

SNAKEBITES 

A. Include many nonpoisonous and only four poisonous 
varieties in the United States. 

1. Nonpoisonous snakes have round pupils, and 
no fangs. 




231 



Herbal 

218 

a. Reactions from snakebites are 
aggravated by acute fear and anxiety. 

b. If bite is on arm or leg, keep bitten 
area below the level of the heart, 
care for shock, and medical 
attention. 

2. Poisonous snakes include: 

Rattlesnakes, Copperheads, Water 
Moccasins, and Corals. They have fangs 
and a poison sac. 

a. Rattlesnakes, Copperheads, and Water 
Moccasins belong to the pit vipers 
while the Coral is a member of the 
Cobra species. 

b. Symptoms include extremely painful, 
rapid swelling, puncture wounds, 
general weakness, rapid pulse, 
nausea, shortness of breath, slurred 
speech, and shock. 

3. First Aid 

a. Don't apply ice or cold applications; 
can harm surrounding tissue . 




234 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

219 

b. Don't give aspirin. It dilates the 
blood vessels/ which will circulate 
venom in the body faster. 

c. Keep victim calm. 

d. If bite is on arm or leg, keep bitten 
area below the level of the heart. 

e. Care for shock. 

f . Monitor ABC ' s . 

g. Get medical help immediately. 
POISONOUS PLANTS 

A. The skin reaction from contact with poisonous 
plants are allergic in nature and are 
characterized by headaches and fever, itching, 
redness, and a rash. 

1. Three plants are: 

a. Poison Ivy 

b. Poison Oak 

c. Poison Sumac 

2. Old Saying, "Leaves of Three, leave them 
be." 

a. Poison Ivy and Poison Oak have three 
leaves . 




233 



3. First Aid 



Herbal 

220 



a. Remove from source of poison and 
contaminated clothing. 

b. Wash skin. 

c. If severe reaction, seek medical 
attention. 

d . Monitor ABC ' s . 

SHOCK 

A. Shock is the failure of the cardiovascular system 
to keep adequate blood circulating to the vital 
organs of the body. 

1. Symptons include erratic pulse rate, 
trembling, weakness in arms and legs, cool 
and moist skin, and pale or bluish lips, 
skin, and fingernails. 

2. First Aid 

a. Victim in lying-down position. 

b. If no injury, elevate feet 8 to 12 
inches. 

c. Maintain body temperature. 

d. Get medical help as soon as possible. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

234 

o 

ERIC 



OTHER POINTS 



Herbal 

221 



A. Walking in Hot Weather: 

1 . Heat and hximidity can present most serious 
problems. 

2. Dehydration can be avoided by drinking 
fluids before, during, and after exercise. 

3. Intensity and duration of field experience 
should be adjusted during hot, humid 
weather . 

4. Wear light- colored, cotton clothing. 




235 



Herbal 

222 

MATERIALS FOR 
FIELD EXPERIENCES 

SHOES 

A. A proper fit, quality, and construction of shoes 
for walking and hiking are important. 

1 . A cushioning sole between the outer etnd 
inner soles, an arch support, and a heel 
cup. 

2. Should be flexible, durable, and bend at 
the ball of the foot. 

3. Proper caution involving the walking area, 
and proper fitting footwear will cut down 
on sprains and strains. 

CLOTHING 

A. Socks are necessary for absorbing moisture, 
providing extra cushioning, and preventing 
blisters. Wearing two pairs sometimes prevents 
foot problems. 

B. Hot weather clothing is light-colored , loose 
fitting, lightweight, and made of natural fabrics 
(cotton). Pants should be worn and tapered at the 
ankles to prevent ticks and insect bites. They 
should not have large or bulky inseams. This 




236 



Herbal 

223 

could cause friction and irritation to the inside 
of the legs. 

C. A hat that protects the eyes from sunlight, keeps 
out harmful rays of sun, and allows air to 
circulate between the top of the hat and the head 
is a must. The hat can help prevent heat 
emergencies. 

EQUIPMENT 

A. Sunglasses to prevent vision problems. 

B. Walking stick to prevent falls and moving aside 
poisonous plants. 

C. Notebook, pencil, and paper. 

D. Water — freeze a quart milk-carton of water. As it 
thaws a person has cool, clean water to drink. 

E. A plastic bag and string — many uses. 

1 . Rain guard 

2. Collecting plants 

3. Sit on it 

FIRST AID MATERIALS 

A. Soap, bandages, gauze pads, and tape. 

SNACKS 

A. Non-perishable foods, such as: 

1. Fruit (apples, orange, banana) 

2 . Cracker 




237 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




235 









COMMON POISON IVY 

(RHUS RADICANS) 

• Grows as a small plant, a vine, and 
a shrub. 

• Grows everywhere in the United States except 
California and parts of adjacent states. Eastern 
oak leaf poison ivy is one of its varieties. 

• Leaves always consist of three glossy leaflets. 

• Also known as three-leaf ivy, poison creeper, 
climbing sumac, poison oak, markweed, 
picry, and mercury. 



WESTERN POISON OAK 

(RHUS DIVERSILOBA) 

• Grows in shrub and sometimes 
vine form. 

• Grows in California and parts 
of adjacent states. 

• Sometimes called poison ivy, 
or yeara. 

• Leaves always consist, of three 
leaflets. 



POISON SUMAC 

(RHUS VERNIX) 

• Grows as a woody shrub or small 
tree from 5 to 25 feet tall. 

• Grows in most of eastern third 
of United States. 

• Also known as swamp sumac, 
poison elder, poison ash, 

poison dogwood, and thunderwood. 



o 

ERIC 



239 




Herbal 

226 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

and 

ARTICLES 



O 

ERIC 



240 



Herbal 

227 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Bremness, L. Herbs . Pleasantville, NY: Readers Digest 

Association, Inc. 

Burn, B. (1992). The national audubon society nature 
series; North American wildf lowers . New York, NY; 
Gramercy Books. 

Campbell, C.C., Hutson, W.F., Sharp, A.J. (1992). 
Great Smokev Mountains wildf lowers . 4th ed. 
Knoxville, TN; University of Tennessee Press. 
Capps, B. (1973). The Indians; The old west . New York; 
Time- Life Books. 

Castleman, M. (1991). The healing herbs: The ultimate 
guide to the curative power of nature's medicines . 
Emmaus, PA: Rodale. 

Cleaver, V.L., Patcliff. R., Rogers, B. (1989). 

Community health representatives: A valuable 
resource for providing coronary heart diseases 
health education activities for native Americans. 
Health Education : 20. (Oct./Nov.). 16-20. 
Chiltoskey, U. M. (1972). Cherokee words with pictures . 

Cherokee, NC; Cherokee Printing. 

Crovello, T.J., Keller, C.A., Kartesz, J. T. (1983). 
The vascular plants of Indiana; A computer based 




241 



Herbal 

228 



checklist . Notre Dame: The American Midland 

Naturalist and University of Notre Dame. 

Deam, C.C. (1940). Flora of Indiana . Department of 
Conservation: Division of Forestry. Indianapolis, 

IN. 

Defoe, D., Langdon, K., Rock, J. (1989). Flowering 
plants of the Great Smokv Mountains: a checklist 

for flowering plants of great Smoky Mountains 
National Park . Gatlinburg, TN: Great Smoky 

Mountains Natural History Association Publishers. 

Densmore, F. (1974). How Indians used wild plants for 
food, medicine, and crafts . New York, NY: Dover 

Publications, Inc. 

Doane, N. C. (1985). Indian doctor book . Charlotte, 
NC: Aerial Photography Services, Inc. 

Driver, H.E. (1961). Indians of North America . 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago. 

Ehle, J. (1988). Trail of tears, the rise and fall of 
the Cherokee nation . New York, NY: Doiibleday. 

Erdoes, R., Ortiz, A. (1984). American Indians mvths 
and legends . New York: Pantheon Books. 

Erichsen Brown, C. (1979). Medicinal and other uses of 
North American plants . New York, NY: Dover 



O 

ERIC 



24k 



Publications, Inc. 



Herbal 

229 



Foreman, G. (1938). Sectuovah . Norman, OK: University 

of Oklahoma Press. 

Forey, P., Fitzsimons, C. (1989). Edible plants . New 
York, NY: Crescent Books, Random House. 

Forey, P., Lindsay, R. (1991). An instcuit guide to 
medicinal plants . New York, NY: Crescent Books. 

Foster, S., Duke, J.A. (1990). Eastern/central 
medicinal plants . Boston, MS: Houghton Mifflin. 

Gibbons, E. (1966). Stalking the healthful herbs . New 
York, NY: David McKay Co, Inc. 

Gilcrease, T. (1979). The Cherokees: They left a trail 
of tears. Tulsa, OK: Panarizon. 

Hamel, P. B., Chiltoskey, M. U. (1975). Cherokee plants 
their uses - a 400 year history . Cherokee, NC: 
Cherokee Printing. 

Holden, E. (1977). 1906 The Country Diary of an 

Edwardian lady: reproduction of a naturalist 

diary : New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart, and 

Winston. 

Houk, R. (1989). Eastern wildf lowers . San Francisco, 
CA: Chronicle Books. 

Hutchens, A.R. (1992). A handbook of native American 




243 



Herbal 

230 



herbs ♦ Boston and London: Shambhala 

Publications. 

Krochmal, A., Krochmal, C. (1984). A field guide to 

medicinal plants: with more than 375 

illustrations for easy identification . New York, 
NY: Random House, Inc. 

Kruger, A. (1992). Herbs: American nature guides . 

New York, NY: Smithmark Inc. 

Linden, E. (1991). 138., 12, 46-56. Lost tribes, lost 
knowledge. Time . New York, NY: Time Inc. 

Malone, H. (1956). Cherokees of the old south . Athais, 

GA: University of Georgia Press. 

Millspaugh, C. F. (1892). Medicinal plants . 

Philadelphia, PA: John C. Yorston and Company. 

Mooney, J. (1982). Myths and sacred formulas of the 
Cherokees . Cherokee, NC: Cherokee Heritage 

Books . 

Mooney, J. (Reproduced 1982). Myths of the Cherokee 
and sacred formulas of the Cherokees . Nashville, 
TN: Elder Booksellers Publishers. 

Museum of the Cherokee Indian, (1991). Chart of 
American food plants . Cherokee, NC: National 

Zoological Museum of American History Publishers. 



244 



Herbal 

231 



National Park Service (1992). Forests emd wildf lowers . 
Gatlinburg, TN: Great Smoky Mountains National 

Park. 

O'Brian, J. E. (1992). The magic of nature's healing 
herbs . Boca Raton, FL: Globe Communications Corp. 

Olds, J. (1975). The encyclopedia of organic gardening . 

Eromaus, PN: Rodale Books, Inc. 

Osal, A., Farrar Jr., G.E. (1955). The dispensatory of 
the United States of America . Philadelphia, PA: 
J.B. Lippincott. 

Rigg, George B. (1924). The pharmacists' botany . New 
York: Macmillan. 

Reynolds, J.E. (ed.). (1982). The extra pharmacopeia . 

28th ed. London: Pharmaceutical Press. 

Sams, J., Carson, D. (1988). Medicine cards . Santa 

Fe, NH: Bear and Company. 

Schmutz, E.M., Hamilton, L.B. (1988). Plants that 
poison . Flagstaff, AZ: Northland Publishing. 

Sharpe, J. E, (1991). The Cherokee past and present . 

Cherokee, NC: Cherokee Publications. 

Simmons, A.G. (1992). Herbs are forever . New York, 
NY: Mallard Press. 

Simon, C. (1991). Wilma P. Mankiller chief of the 




245 



Herbal 

232 



Cherokee . Chicago, IL: Childrens Press, Inc. 

Sollman, T. (1957). A manual of Pharmacology . 8th ed. 

Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders. 

Sowerby, J. E. (1989). A concise encyclopedia of wild 
flowers . New York, NY: W. H. Smith Publishers, 

Inc. 

Steiner, R. P. (1986). Folk medicine: The art and the 
science . Washington, DC: American Chemical Society. 

Stevenson, V. (1984). Growing herbs successfully . 
London: Tiger Books International. 

Stone, (1991). Indian herbs and Plants . Locust Grove, 
OK: Stone Studio. 

Tyler, V.E. (1982). The honest herbal . Philadelphia, 
PA: George F. Stickely Company. 

Tyler, V.E. (1986). Hoosier home remedies . West 
Lafayette, IN: Purdue University. 

Tyler, V.E., Brady, L.R., Robbers, J.E. (1988). 

Pharmacognosy . 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea 

and Febiger. 

Ulmer, M., Beck, S. E. (1951). Cherokee cooklore . 
Cherokee, NC: Cherokee Publishers. 

Underwood, T.B. (1991). Cherokee Legends and the trail 
of tears . Cherokee, NC: Cherokee Publications. 



246 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

o 

ERIC 



Herbal 

233 



Vogel, V. J. (1970). American Indian medicine . Norman 
OK: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Vogel, (1988). Next generation herbal medicine . Lehi, 
Utah: Cormorant Books. 

Wagner, H. (1985). Indian healing: Shaman i y 

ceremonialism in the Pacific northwest today . 
Surrey, BC: Handcock House. 

Wampler, M. , Wampler, F. (1988). Wildf lowers of 

Indiana . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University 

Press. 

Weiner, M.A. (1972). Earth medicine earth foods: Plant 
remedies. drugs, and natural foods of the North 
American Indians . New York: MacMillan. 

Weiss, G., Weiss G. (1992). Growing and using the 
healing herbs . Avenel, NJ: Random House Company. 

Wernert, S. J. (1982). North American wildlife, an 
illustrated guide to 2,000 plants and animals . 
Pleasantville, NY: Reader's Digest Association, 

Inc. 

Westland, P. (1987). The encyclopedia of herbs and 
spices . London: Marshall Cavendish. 

White, P.S. (1982). The flora of Great Smokv Mountains 
National Park; an annotated checklist of the 



Herbal 

234 



vascular plants and a review of previous florstic 
work^ Research/Resource Management Report SER-55: 
National Park Service. 

Wilkins, T. (1986). Cherokee traoedv . 2nd ED. Nmbi, 
OK: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Woodwand, G. S. (1988). The Cherokees . Norman, OK: 
University of Oklahoma Press. 



248 



ARTICLES 



Herbal 

235 



Anon, F. (1988). Americcm Family Physician ; 38; 197. 

Bryson, P. D. (1978). Journal of the American Medical 
Association ; 239; 2157. 

Buechel, D. W. (1983). Journal of the American 
Osteopathic Association : 82; 793. 

Costello, C. H., Lynn, E. V. (1950). Journal of the 
American Pharmaceutical Association ; 39; 177. 

Cushman, M. (1979). Journal of Medical Chemistry ; 223; 
331 

Davis, R. (1992). Homage to trail of tears marchers . 
Evansville, IN; The Evansville Courier. F3. 

Eli Lilly. (1992). Lilly to make drugs from tropical 
plants. Princeton, IN: The Clarion. 

Fialka, J.J. (1992). Salute the Jimsoni The noxious 
weed could be a boom . New York, NY: The Wall 

Street Journal . 

Finch, C. S. (1992). Pharmacotherapy in Africa from 
antiquity to the present. Journal of the national 
technical association . 65; 4. 34. 

Franz, H. (1981). Biochemistry Journal ; 195; 481. 

Frohne, D. (1970). Planta Medica ; 18; 1. 

Glasbrenner, K. (1985). Seeking Indian acceptable ways 



249 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

236 



to fight hypertension. Journal of American Medical 
Association . 

Hirono, I. (1979). Journal of the National Cancer 
Institute : 63; 469. 

Indiana State Board of Health, (1991). Common 
poisonous plants. Education Series Pamphlet : 22. 

Jackson, B., Reed, A. (1969). Journal of the Americ an 
Medical Association : 207; 1349 



James, 


J. S. 


(1989). 


AIDS 


Treatment News: 


Feb. 


24. 


James, 


J. S. 


(1989) . 


AIDS 


Treatment News: 


June 


2. 


James, 


J. S. 


(1989) . 


AIDS 


Treatment News: 


Nov. 


17. 


Kimura 


/ Y. 


(1981). 


Chemical and Pharmaceutical 



Bulletin : 20; 2308 

Kimura, Y. (1982). Chemical and Pharmaceutical 
Bulletin : 20; 219 

Mack, R. B. (1984). North Carolina Medical Journal : 
45; 791. 

Meuelo, D. (1988). Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences : 85; 5230. 

Poundstone, J. (1969). Journal of the American Medical 
Association : 208; 360. 

Sallis, R. E. (1989). American Family Physician : 39; 

209 . 



O 



250 



Herbal 

237 



Sullivan, B. (1979). Journal of the American Medical 
Association : 

Vollmar, A. (1986). Phytochemistry : 25; 377. 

Washington Post. (1992). Mistletoe has unusual growth 
pattern . Evansville, IN: Evansville Courier. 

You, W. C. (1989). Journal of the National Cancer 
Institute : 81; 162. 




251 



Herbal 

238 



APPENDICE 
A and B 



ERLC 

MflMiiifftfrffiaaii 



APPENDIX A 



Herbal 

239 



Research Source 



Naae of Author 



Title of Article/Book 
Date of Publication 



This is checklist of twenty-five identified plants and herbs found 
in the four state parks in southwestern Indiana and used by the 
Cherokee Nation. ( ) will identify the use of the identified 
pleuit. 



1. Black Cohosh or Souawroot 

2. Bloodroot or Pucoon 

3. Boneset or Thorouahwort 

4. Burdock or Common Great 

5 . Catnip 

6. Comfrev or All Heal 

7. Dandelion 

8. Garlic 

9 . Goldenseal 

10. Mavaople 

11. Milkweed or Common 

12. Mistletoe 

13. Partridqeberrv or Souaw Vine 

14 . Pennyroyal 

15. Senna or American Wild 

16. Skullcap 

17. Snakeroot 

18. Spikenard 

19. St. Johns Wort 

20. Uva Ursi or Bearberrv 

21. White Willow 

22. Wild Black Berry 

23. Witch Hazel 

24 . Yarrow 

25. Yellow Root 

Comanta; 



O 

ERIC 



253 



Herbal 

240 



APPENDIX B 

CHEROKEE NATION SOURCE 



Nana of Interviewee 
Tribal Position 



Date of Intesrview 

This is checklist of twenty-five identified plants and herbs 
found in the four state parks in southwestern Indiana and used by 
the Cherokee Nation. ( ) will identify the use of the identified 
plant. 



1. Black Cohosh or Sauawroot 

2. Bloodroot or Pucoon 

3. Boneset or ThorouQhwort 

4. Burdock or Common /Great 

5 . Catnip 

6. Comfrev or All Heal 

7. Dandelion 

8. Garlic 

9 . Goldenseal 

10. Mavapple 

11. Milkweed or Conurnon 

12. Mistletoe 

13. Partridoeberry or Sauaw Vine 

14 . Pennyroyal 

15. Senna American Wild 

16. Skullcap 

17 . Snakeroot 

18. Spikenard 

19. St. Johns Wort 

20. Uva Ursi or Bearberrv 

21. White Willow 

22. Wild Black Cherry 

23. Witch Hazel 

24. Yarrow 

25. Yellow Root 

CosMients : 



254 



BEST COPY AVAIIABLE 



Herbal 

242 



CHARTS 
I - X 



O 

ERLC 




CHART I 



Herbal 

243 



PLANT IDENTIFICATION 



PLANT 


IDENTIFICATION 


Black Cohosh or Sq^awroot 


Leafy perennial, large, three- 
divided toothed leaves. Flowers 
white, long-spiked with an 
unpleasant odor . Clustered 
flowers, three feet in length. 


BXoodroot or Puccoon 


Twelve- inch perennial; waxy, white 
flowers, long stems and roots with 
blood red juice. 


Boneset or Thoroughnort 


Hardy perennial, clumps three feet 
leaves opposite one another and 
united at base. Dull, white flat- 
topped flowers. 


CoBBK>n or Great Burdock 


White, spongy roots, large, hairy, 
egg-shaped leaves. Stem had 
bristled, purplish flowers that 
produced burrs. 


Catnip 


Aromatic perennial, two or three 
feet tall, two- lipped white 
clustered flowers. Leaves heart- 
shaped, scalloped, toothed and 
fuzzy. 


Comfrey 


Hardy perennial; large, hairy, 
lance-shaped leaves, flowers white 
blue, purple; were bell-shaped. 
Hollow woody stems. 


Dandelion 


Hardy perennial; yellow, several 
petaled flowers. Elongated hollow 
stems with milky juice, produced 
fluffy seeds. Long jagged-cut, 
green leaves. 


Garlic 


Common perennial, long pointed 
leaves and six-pointed lavender 
flowers with stringed tails. 



256 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

244 



Hairy perennial, six to twelve 
inches. Leaves veined, lobed on 
forked branches. Flowers single, 
greenish, white, orange- red berry 
on top of stem. 

Common perennial, twelve to 
eighteen inches tall. Unpleasant 
odor. Single white flower under 
umbrella-like leaves. Two- inch, 
edible, yellow fruit, creeping 
roots . 

ConoBon Millcweed Downy perennial one to four feet, 

four to ten inch, paired, long 
leaves. Single clustered flower 
with pointing petals. Seedpods 
were rough- surfaced. 

Mistletoe Parasite perennial found on oak 

trees. Thick-branched, woody 
evergreen, leathery, three- inch 
oblong leaves. Had white berries 
with single seed. Difficult to 
collect. 

Partridgeberry or Squaw Vine Evergreen perennial from six to 

fourteen inches. Creeping, 
trailing, vining with shiny, dark 
green, rounded or oval one-half 
inch long leaves with whitish 
veins. White or pink, funnel- 
shaped, paired flowers with hairy 
lobes. Red, edible berries. 

Pennyroyal An annual with strong mint- like 

odor. Small, opposite green 
leaves; short square stems with 
pale blue flowers. 

Senna, American Wild Hardy perennial with five petal 

loose clustered, yellow flowers. 
Stems slender and fuzzy. Leaves 
pointed and seeds in leathery pods. 
Small three- foot shrub. 



Goldeneeal 



Mayapple 



257 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

245 



SXullcap 


Two-foot scrubby perennial. Leaves 
long-stalked, serrated, toothed, 
opposite one another, pointed tips 
and oval or lanced shaped. Two- 
lipped flowers were violet or blue. 


Snaksroot 


Smooth stems with small, pea- like, 
white lance-shaped leaves, 
alternated with lance-shaped 
leaves. Greenish-white flowers 
were mingled with stiff, pointed 
bracts. Grew six to eighteen 
inches . 


Spikenard 


A perennial, three to five feet 
tall that had long, smooth, dark 
green stems. Small, whitish 
flowers formed small clusters on 
tiny branches that extended from 
the stem. 


St. Johna Uort 


Woody, spreading perennial. 

Yellow, five-petaled flowers with 
black dots on margins. Leaves 
oblong with translucent glands. 
Leaves, when pinched, produced red 
oil and emitted aroma. Grew one to 
three feet. 


Uva Ural or Coomon Bearbarry 


Hardy evergreen that reached few 
inches in height. Leaves turned 
bronze in winter, were leathery and 
paddle- shaped. Seeds, waxy white 
tinged with red. White flowers. 
Smooth, red, edible fruit. 


White Willow 


Rough, grayish bark tree that 
reached sixty feet. Leaves lance- 
shaped, finely toothed with silky 
hairs. Long catkins appeared with 
leaves. 


Wild Black Cherry 


Wooded, ninety- foot tree that had 
black bark but reddish beneath with 
pleasant aroma. Leaves oval or 
lance-shaped, with brown hairs. 
Small clustered, elongated, white 
flowers during early spring. In 



25S 



BEST COPY AVAIIABLE 



Herbal 

246 



fall had small black fruit the size 
of peas. 



fifteen feet tall. Lost leaves in 
fall. Stems twisted and forked 
into flexible hairy branches. 

Bright yellow, slender petals, 
spider*-! ike appearance flowers late 
fall. After leaves dropped, ripe 
fruit from previous year followed. 
Edible seeds in middle of flower. 
Leaves toothed, scalloped margins 
and uneven wedge-shaped bases. 



feet with fern-like, leathery 
leaves. Found along near base of 
plant and shortened higher on stem. 
Flowers found in dense clusters 
were tiny white, pink, or purple. 
The leaves divided into thousands 
of tiny leaflets, hence nickname. 
Thousand Weed. 



deep-yellow roots. Long stalks 
with five cleft toothed leaflets. 
Flowers light brown-purple with 
puffs of stamens. Red raspberry- 
like fruits. 



Witch Hazel 



Deciduous shrub that grew eight to 



Yarrow 



Hardy perennial that grew to three 



Yellow Root 



Low growing hardy shrub. Thick 




CHART II 



Herbal 

247 



ENVIRONMENT AMD AREA WHERE LOCATED 



PLANT 

Black Cohoah or Sguawrool: 
Bloodroot or Puccoon 

Boneaet or Thoroughwort 
Burdock, Comaon or Great 

Catnip 

Coafrey 

Dandelion 

Garlic 

Goldenseal 

Mayapple 

o 

ERIC 



LOCATION 

Rich, fertile woods near Ohio River 
Valley and Harmonie State Park. 

Large colonies, wooded slopes, and 
open woodlands. Pike Coxinty State 
Forest and O'Leary Woods. 

Cltunps in wet but sunlit areas. 

Pike County State Forest. 

Moist abandoned fields and waste 
areas exposed to sun. Found 
throughout southwestern Indiana. 

Well-drained, humus soil in partial 
shade or sunlight at Lincoln State 
Park. 

Clay or sandy, hximus soil and in 
open woods in Harrison-Crawford 
State Forest. 

Found throughout all southwestern 
Indicuia in fields, lawns, and waste 
areas . 

Grew in all types of soil, open 
fields in sunlight, throughout 
Southwestern Indiana. Very common 
plant. 

Grew in clusters in natural 
drainage areas where an abundeunce 
of leaf mold or decaying vegetable 
matter was found. Goldenseal grew 
in all State Parks and Forests. 

Found growing in clusters in rich, 
humus, moist, hilly areas, woods, 
and fields. A common plant found 
in all areas of southwestern 
Indiana. 



260 



Herbal 

248 



Hllkweedf CoBBon 


Foiind in moist woodlands in all 
southwestern State Parks and 
Forest . 


Mistletoe 


A parasite, it was found in oak 
trees in Harraonie State Park. 


Partridgeberry,. Squaw Vine 


Foiuid near decayed stumps, soil 
rich in humus and moisture in 
Harrison-Crawford State Forest. 


PennsfToyal 


Grew in dry, sandy soil on 
gravelly, loose slopes. Found 
along the Wabash River in Harmonie 
State Park. 


Senna, Jlaerican Wild 


Found in rich, moist soil, and 
wooded thickets and was noted in 
Harmonie State Park. 


Skullcap 


Grew in rich moist soil and in 
wooded thickets. Found in Harmonie 
State Park. 


Snakeroot 


It grew in rocky, partially shaded, 
open hardwood forests where there 
was leaf mold. It was found in 
many areas of southwestern Indiana. 


Spikenard 


Found growing in rich woods around 
southwestern Indiana. 


St. Johns Wort 


Grew in fields with dry, light 
soils and was found in Pike County 
State Forest. 


Uva Ursi, CoBBon Bearberry 


Found in Pike County State Forest 
growing in dry, rocky, sandy soil. 


White Willow 


Commonly found along stream edges 
in Pike County State Forest and 
along the Wabash River in Harmonie 
State Park. 


Wild Black Cherry 


The tree grew in fertile soil under 
full sunlight in many areas 



261 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 










Herbal 

249 

throughout southwestern Indiana. 


Hitch Hasttl 


It grew in low, damp woods and 
moist rich areas with partial 
shade. It was found in Pike County 
State Forest and Harrison-Crawford 
State Forest. 


Yarrow 


Found throughout southwestern 
Indiana in abandoned fields, along 
roadsides, and in waste areas. 


Yellow Root 


Found growing in colonies on shady 
stream banks and moist woods or 
thickets in Lincoln State Park. 



262 



CHART III 



Herbal 

250 



HERBAL HISTORY 

PLANT HISTORY 

Black Cohosh or Squawroot Conunon name Bugwort. Settlers used 

it for fever, rashes, yellow-fever 





and menstrual complaints. In US 
PharmacoDoeia from 1820 to 1936. 


Bloodroot or Puccoon 


Genus name, Sanquinaria, meant 
"bloody". Listed in US 
PharmacoDoeia from 1820 to 1926. 
Hoosiers used it for stomach 
ailments or colic. Very toxic. 


Boneset or Thoroughwort 


Doctrine of Signatures, used often 
for colds, flu, headaches, fever. 
Listed in US PharmacoDoeia from 
1829 to 1916. 


Burdock, Conunon or Great 


European treatment for rheumatism 
and leprosy. Settlers used it for 
urinary infections, kidney 
problems, skin Infections, and 
arthritis. Also eaten as food. 


Catnip 


Used as tranquilizer, sedative, 
digestive aid, and pain killer 
throughout history. Settlers used 
it for colds, fevers, headaches, 
menstruation, insomnia, and chicken 
Dox. Listed in US Pharmacopoeia 
from 1916 to 1950. Hoosiers: 
poultice for burns, tea for colds 
and fussy babies, sedative for 
adults . 


Coafray 


Greeks used it to heal wounds, 
Romans made sticky paste, when 
hardened like plaster placed around 
broken bones. Settlers: tea for 

respiratory and gastrointestinal 
ailments. Hoosiers: colds, flu, 

tonic, placed on wounds. 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



263 



Herbal 

251 



Dandelion 



Garlic 



Goldenseal 



Mayapple 



Milkweed, 



O 

ERIC 



Introduced from Europe. Native 
American used it for food and 
medicine. Settlers roasted roots 
for a beverage substitute for 
coffee. Used it for liver, gall 
bladder, and liver problems. In 
spring, used as blood thinner, 
purifier, and tonic. Listed in US 
Pharmacopoeia from 1831 to 1926. 

World's second oldest medicine 
after ephedra. Greeks used for 
heart problems, headaches, bites, 
worms, and tumors. Romans as a 
stimulant for strength, endurance, 
and stamina. Egyptians used it for 
solemn oaths. Settlers: colds, 

bronchitis, coughs, blood pressure. 
In World War I, salve used to treat 
infected wounds. Hoosiers used it 
for coughs, high blood pressure, 
and as tonic. 

Settlers used it as an eyewash, for 
wounds, sore throats, digestive 
problems and recovery from 
childbirth. Included in US 
Pharmacopoe i a from 1831 to 1842. 
Hoosiers used it for cancer, skin 
problems, sore mouths, and 
epileptic seizures. 

Common name, Indian Apple. 

Settlers used it for many ailments. 
Hoosiers used it for abortion, 
constipation, and heat exhaustion. 
The fruit was eaten for energy and 
food. 

CooBon Settlers used it for asthma, 

rheumatism, cancer, and as food. 
Hoosiers used it for bleeding, 
treatment of burns and scalds, for 
poison ivy, warts, ringworm, and 
skin blemishes. 






Herbal 

252 



Mlstltttoe 


Used in Middle Ages for disorders 
of spleen, epilepsy, and apoplexy. 
Settlers: high blood pressure and 

cancer . 


Partridgebarry or Squaw Vino 


Settler uses: tonic, astringent, 
diuretic, swellings, hives, sore 
nipples, and menstrual problems. 


Pennyroyal 


Greeks hung it in sickrooms for 
fragrance. Settler uses: 
abortion, sweating, colds, dress 
wounds, repel insects, flu, cough, 
and congestion. Hoosiers also used 
it for colic and headaches. Dried 
bunches drove away mosquitoes. 


Senna^ American Wild 


Used widely from Middle East to 
India. Hoosiers used it as a 
laxative and body purge. Listed in 
US PharroacoDoeia from 1820 to 1882. 


Skullcap 


Chinese used it as a tranquilizer 
or sedative, for convulsions and a 
digestive aid. Settlers used it 
for malaria fever and nerve tonic. 


Snakaroot 


Settlers used it for pain, kidney 
ailments, rheumatism, fever. 
Hoosiers used it for snakebites and 
kidney problems. May be extremely 
poisonous for humans and animals. 


Spikenard 


Settler uses: blood purifier, lung 

ailments, asthma, rheximatism, 
backaches. Hoosiers used it for 
sore backs, tuberculosis, as a 
poultice on wounds, and to treat 
blood poisoning. 


St. Johns Wort 


Came from Europe. According to 
legend it releases blood-red oil on 
the date of John the Baptist ' s 
beheading. Greeks used it for 
burns, diuretic, menstrual 
promotor, for fever, to drive away 
evil spirits, and to ensure healthy 



26 b 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Herbal 

253 



crops. Settlers used it on wounds. 
Hoosiers used it for colds and 
bronchitis. 



Chinese for kidney tuid urinary 
problems. Was listed with Doctrine 
of Signatures and US Pharmacopoeia 
from 1820 to 1936. Settlers: 
diarrhea, dipentery, kidney 
infections. Hoosiers used as 
diuretic. 



Settlers for pain, fevers, 
inflammation. Hoosiers used it to 
treat rheiunatlsm. It was listed in 
US Pharmacopoeia from 1882 to 1926. 



lack of appetite, sedative, 
treatment of coughs, fevers, colds, 
sore throats. Hoosiers used it to 
thin blood, as tonic, cure gout, 
for diarrhea, dipentery, jaundice, 
hepatitis, and to relieve 
discomforts of measles. Listed in 
US Pharmacopoeia from 1920 to 
present . 



swellings, bruises, cuts and as 
divining rod in search of water. 
Hoosiers used it for arthritis, 
rheumatism, nosebleeds, skin 
problems. It was listed in US 
Pharmacopoeia from 1862 to 1916. 



also during Civil War to promote 
healing. Settlers used it for 
bladder disorders, ulcers, kidney 
problems. Hoosiers treated cuts, 
abrasions, bruises, toothaches, g\un 
problems and colds with it. It was 
listed in US Pharmacopoeia from 
1863 to 1882. 



Uva Ursi, Common Bearberry Romans used it to treat wounds 



White Willow 



Chinese used it as pain remedy 



Wild Black Cherry 



Settler uses: poor circulation 



Witch Hazel 



Settler uses: inflammations 



Yarrow 



Greeks used it on wounds. Used 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



266 



Herbal 

254 



Yellow Root 



Settlers used it for stomach 
problems. Hoosiers used it to thin 
blood, to improve appetite and 
digestion, to treat sore mouths and 
canker sores. Listed in US 
Pharmacopoeia from 1820 to 1882. 



Herbal 

255 



CHART VI 

MONTHS WHEN GATHERED OR HARVESTED 

PMttff months 



Black Cohosh or Squawroot 


August, September 


Blood Root or Pucoon 


Blooms: April, May 

Roots: September, October, 

November 


Boneset or Thoroughwort 


August, September 


Burdock 


June, July, August, September, 
October 


Catnip 


July, August, September 


Comfrey 


May, June 


Dandelion 


Leaves & stems: May, June, July 

Roots : September , October 


Garlic 


June, July 


Goldanseal 


August, September, October, 
November 


Mayapple 


April, May, June 


Milknaed 


April, May (pre-blooming stage) 


Mistletoe 


January, November, December 


Partridgeberry 


May, June 


Pennyroyal 


June, July 


Senna 


June, July, August 


Skullcap 


April, May, June, July (sometimes 
in full bloom) 


Snakeroot 


March, April, May, September, 
October 




Spikenard 

St. Johns Uort 

Uva Ursi or Bearberry 

White Willow 

Wild Black Cherry 

Witch Basel 

Yarrow 

Yellow Root 



Herbal 

256 

June, July, August 

June, July, August 

August, September, October 

March, April, May 

August, September, October 

June, July, August 

May, Jxme, July, August, September, 
October 

June, July, August 



26 u 









Herbal 

257 



CHART IV 







CREROKEB USES 




PLANT 


PART VSBP 


MEDICAL EFFECT 




Black 
Cohosh or 
Sguawroot 


roots 


Tea used as astringent, diuretic, 
and antiseptic. To stop bleeding 
and diarrhea. 


Bloodroot 
or Puccoon 


roots 


Made dye with roots and 
Oak bark. Also used as 
insecticide. 


tannin from 
an 



Boneset or roots 
Throughcoast leaves 



Burdock or leaves 

Comnon seeds 

Great 

Catnip leaves 



Confrey or roots 

All Heal leaves 



Dandelion roots 

leaves 



Garlic 



bulbs 

shoots 

roots 



Leaves wrapped aroiind broken bones. 
Poulticed onto tumors. Tea to 
relieve pain, fever, colds, flu, 
and constipation. 

Leaves to draw poison from boils. 
Poulticed seeds for bruises, hives, 
eczema, and skin problems. 

Tea to aid digestion, to cure 
colic, to relieve menstrual cramps, 
and to calm nerves. Chewed 
leaves for toothaches. 

Root tea for cancer, genital 
infections, and milky urine. Dried 
leaves smoked. Dried root salve 
used for burns, cuts, wounds, and 
to promote healing. 

Root tea for heartburn, as body 
tonic, and as a beverage. Leaves 
eaten as food. 

Crushed bulbs eaten to lower blood 
pressure, and woxmd swelling, to 
inhibit cancer growth, and to 
flavor foods. 



Goldenseal roots Used with bear fat as insect 

repellent. Tea for sore mouths and 
throats. Concoction for skin 
disorders. 




270 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

258 



Mayapple 

Millofaed 

Mistletoe 

Partridge- 
berry or 
Squaw Vine 

Pennyroyal 

Senna 

Skullcap or 
Mad-dog 

Snakeroot 

St. Johns 
Mort 

Spikenard 



roots Tea as cathartic, laxative, 

purgative. Salve treatment of 
warts . 



roots 



leaves 

berries 

twigs 

leaves 

berries 



leaves 



leaves 

roots 

seeds 

leaves 

stems 



roots 



leaves 



roots 



Tea used as laxative, diuretic, for 
sterility, and inducement of 
sweating. Salve was applied to 
warts, moles, and ringworm. 

Tea for abortions, to stop 
bleeding, as a contraceptive, 
epilepsy, headaches, Ivng ailments. 

Tea for childbirth, placenta 
delivery, hemorrhage, and painful 
menstruation . 

Crushed fresh leaves for headaches 
and snakebite. Tea for 
menstruation cramps, pain, 
diarrhea, and hemorrhaging. 

Decoction for sore throats, fever, 
and cathartic purposes. Roots used 
for sores and wounds. 

Tea mixed with honey to promote 
menstruation and for rabies 
victims. 

Tea for high fevers, colds, coughs, 
croup, bronchitis, and pneumonia. 

As a poultice for snakebite, 
swellings, and pain of rheumatism. 

Salve for wovinds, sores, cuts, 
bruises, and skin problems. Tea 
for bladder infections, dysentery, 
diarrhea, bronchitis, lung 
infections. Concoction for 
tuberculosis . 

Tea for backaches, menstrual 
difficulties and for coughs. 
Pulverized root salve for bolls, 
infection, swellings, and wounds. 
Root juice for earaches. 



Uva~Ursi or 
Baarberry 

White Willow 

Wild Black 
Cherry 

Witch Basel 

Yarrow 
Yellow Root 



Herbal 

259 

leaves Tea as astringent, diuretic, and 

antiseptic. Also used to stop 
bleeding and diarrhea. 

twigs Chewed euid prepared tea for pain, 

bark chills, and fever. 



Inner bark 
leaves 



leaves 

bark 

twigs 

seeds 



leaves 



roots 



Tea from bark for labor and 
childbirth. Concoction of leaves 
and bark for frostbite. Leaf tea 
for coughs, diarrhea, and 
hemorrhoids . 

Tea concoction for muscles and 
lameness. Tea for colds, fever, 
sore throats, and menstrual cramps. 
Salve for cuts, bruises, bites, 
scalds, burns, and inflammations. 
Steamed twigs for muscular aches, 
strained backs, and painful joints. 
Seeds eaten as food. 

Salve applied to wounds and to stop 
bleeding. Fresh leaves used as 
poultice. Tea drunk for sweating, 
reducing fevers, and relief of 
colds and the flu. 

Tea used as blood tonic, for colds, 
jaundice, cramps, sore throats, and 
constipation. Sometimes roots were 
chewed instead of drinking tea. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

260 

CHART V 

DAY FAMILY REMEDIES 

Plant Reaedieg 



Black Cohosh or Squawroot 


Family uses: Warding off 

"cricks” in back, relieving pain 
of rhevuaatism, and as a fall 
tonic. 


Bloodroot or Pucoon 


Family prepared: Crushed Bloodroot 

with lard and placed this poultice 
on "sxunmer" or touch sores. 
(Infatigo) 


Boneset or Coamon 
ThoroughMort 


Day uses included: As a 

laxative by drinking tea or 
for constipation by chewing 
fresh leaves. It was used 
only in extreme cases. 


Coamon or Great Burdock 


Family used: Fresh, crushed leaves 

on sores, cuts, and bruises. The 
fresh leaves were mixed with other 
salad greens. Only young and 
tender leaves were picked; aged and 
mature leaves tasted bitter and 
sour. 


Catnip 


Days prepared: Catnip 

infusion or tea before retiring to 

calm nearves and to promote sleep. 


Coafrey 


Family used: Comfrey and Sassafras 

tea as spring tonic. Comfrey and 
baking soda for "settling an upset 


stomach . " 




Dandelion 


Days used: For wines, for salad 
greens, and for frying stems and 
blossoms. 


Garlic 


Family used: To flavor and cure 

meats, for flavoring of vegetables, 
and medication. The dried bulbs 
were placed in an old woolen sock 



O 



273 



Herbal 

261 





and hung around a person's neck to 
relieve chest colds or lung 
congestion. 


Goldanseal 


Family prepared: Goldenseal, 

Wintergreen, and turpentine 
poultice for "stifled" or "bowed" 
tendons . 


Mayappla 


Days used: As insecticide for 

beetles, grub worms, and other 
insects; and rioe Mavannles for 
jellies. 


Mllkwead Common 


Family used: Fresh Milkweed sap 

cind lard salve was applied to 
burns, blemishes, and skin 
irritations. 


Mistletoe 


Day Family pulverized the plant, 
made an infusion which they bathed 
body with to reduce high fevers. 
Berries, along with holly decorated 
the Christmas tree. 


Partridgeberry or 
Squaw Vina 


Day's drank Partridgeberry tea for 
painful menstruation or cramps. 


Pennyroyal 


Family used: To freshen the air, 

and an inhaler to relieve 
headaches . 


American Wild Senna 


Days used: For mild cases of 

constipation; for extreme cases 
they used Boneset. Senna tea was 
laced with brown sugar to improve 
the taste. 


Skullcap 


Day Family prepared: A salve made 

by mixing Skullcap and lard. This 
was rubbed on horses harness sores 
to promote healing and to prevent 
scabs and white hairs. 



Snaksroot 



Day Family used Snakeroot salve on 
swollen joints of farm animals. 



Herbal 

262 



Splkraard 
St. Johns Wort 



Uva Ural or Bearberry 



White Willow 



Wild Black Cherry 



Witch Basel 



Yarrow 



Yellow Root 



O 

ERIC 



Day's prepared a hoof preparation 
that was placed on horse's hooves 
for "thrush" or hoof rot. 

The Day family used St. Johns Wort 
salve for cuts, wounds, euid for 
preventing scar tissue. 

Grcuidfather Day used a Bearberry 
poultice on animals that had sores, 
scrapes, and insect bites. Fresh 
leaves were used to stop bleeding. 

Day Family uses: A tea to reduce 

fevers, and catkins mixed with 
other wild flowers as winter 
decorations. 

Family used Wild Cherries as: 
cough syrup (honey, lemon). Wild 
Cherry Wine, smoked chips for 
smoking meats, and the berries were 
eaten as fresh fruit, or made into 
jams or jellies. 

The Day Family mixed boiled Witch 
Hazel leaves with alcohol for sore 
muscles or strained backs. The 
stick was also used to find water. 

The Day Family used yarrow salve 
for small wounds, scratches, and 
sores. Sometimes fresh leaves were 
used to stop bleeding. 

The Day Family dyed Easter eggs 
made from yellow root dye; also, a 
gargle or mouthwash was prepared 
with yellow root for sore throats 
or mouth sores. 



275 



BEST COPY AVAIIABLE 



Herbal 

263 

CHART VII 

PREPARATION AND STORAGE OF CHEROKEE HERBAL REMEDIES 



Plant 


Prenaration and Storage 


Black Cohoah or Squawroot 


Roots collected after fruits 
ripened. They were cut lengthwise, 
dried, and stored in dry place. 


Bloodroot or Puccoon 


After leaves withered, roots were 
dug euid dried, then stored in dry 
place. 


Boneset or Thoroughwort 


Leaves were collected and stripped 
from stems when plemt was in full 
bloom. Dried in shade emd stored. 


Burdock or Comnon Great 


Leaves and seeds dried in sunlight 
or partial shade, then stored in 
dry place. 


Catnip 


Leaves gathered when plant in full 
bloom, dried then in the shade to 
preserve the green color. Stored 
in dry, c^'Ol place. 


Comfrey or All Heal 


Leaves harvested when flowers had 
begun to bud. Roots cut into 
slices and dried then crushed and 
powdered . 


Dandelion 


Roots dried whole or cut into small 
pieces, three to six inches long. 
Sometimes roots were roasted then 
ground or powdered. 


Garlic 


Bulbs harvested when tops yellowed. 
Stored loosely dried bunches hung 
in cool, dark area. Bulbs crushed 
to release medicinal properties. 


Goldenseal 


Roots dug pre-blooming stage, dried 
in partial shade until brittle, 
then pounded into a powder. 


*4£yappla 


Pulverized and crushed the dried 



Herbal 

264 





roots. Made root tea and mixed 
crushed roots with animal fats for 
a salve. Ate rine fruit. 


Milkweed 


Roots dug pre-blooming stage, dried 
in partial sunlight, pounded into 
powder, and stored in dry place. 

Tea made from fresh plant. 


Mistletoe 


Fresh berries mashed to make a 
paste. Leaves and twigs dried in 
sunlight and stored. 


Partridgeberry or Squaw Vine 


Leaves collected when plant in full 
bloom, dried in partial sunlight. 
Berries eaten fresh, fresh leaf 
tea drunk. 


Pennyroyal 


Leaves dried in shade, stored in 
cool dry place. Fresh crushed 
leaves inhaled. 


Sezma American Wild 


Leaves harvested when flowers 
bloomed. After drying, leaves were 
powdered and crushed. 


Skullcap or Maddog 


Young stems and leaves were dried 
in full shade and then stored in 
dry place. 


Snakeroot 


Gathered in spring and fall, roots 
were cut, dried in partial 
sunshine, and stored in a dry 
place. 


St. Johns Wort 


Leaves were air dried and stored in 
dry place. A salve, tea, and 
concoction made from dried leaves. 


Spikenard 


Fresh roots pulverized for juice, 
made into a salve or poultice. 
Others dried in sun, powdered, and 
stored in a dry place. 


Uva Ursi or Bearberry 


Leaves gathered before frost, 
dried, spread over a large area. 
Often difficult to dry. A slow 
process. 



27V 



BEST COPY AVAIIABLE 








Herbal 

265 


White Willow 


Bark gathered in spring when sap 
had begun to flow, bark easily 
removed then. 


Wild Black Cherry 


Bark collected and peeled in fall; 
highest medicinal value then. 
Berries eaten fresh or dried and 
pulverized for future use. 


Witch Basel 


Leaves, twigs, bark collected and 
stored throughout the siunmer 
months . 


Yarrrow 


Leaves were harvested when plants 
were in bloom, then used fresh or 
dried in partial shade 


Yellow Root 


Roots sliced, dried in shade, and 
stored in dry cool place. 




Chart VIII 



Herbal 

266 



MEDICAL TERMS 

MEDICAL TERMS 
ABORTION: 

ANTISEPTIC: 

ARTHRITIS : 

ASTRINGENT: 

BACKACHE: 

BLEEDING: 

BOILS: 

BRONCHITIS: 

BRUISES: 

BURNS: 

CANCER: 

CATHARTIC: 

CHILLS: 

CHILDBIRTH: 

COLDS: 

COLIC: 

CONGESTION: 



AND HEALING PLANTS 
HKIVT.TMC PT.AMTg 

Mistletoe 

Black Cohosh (Squawroot) Uva Ursi 
(Bearberry) 

Witch Hazel 

Black Cohosh (Squawroot) Uva 
Ursi (Bearberry) 

Spikenard, Witch Hazel 

Black Cohosh, Mistletoe, 
Pennyroyal, Uva Ursi 
( Bearberry ) , Yarrow 

Burdock, Spikenard 

Snakeroot, St. Johns Wort 

Burdock, St. Johns Wort, Witch 
Hazel 

Comfrey, Witch Hazel 

Comfrey, Garlic 

American Wild Senna, Mayapple 

White Willow 

Partridgeberry, Wild Black 
Cherry 

Boneset, Snakeroot, Witch Hazel, 
Yarrow, Yellowroot 

Catnip 

Mistletoe 







CONSTIPATION: 

CONTRACEPTIVE: 

COUGHS: 

CROUP: 

DIARRHEA: 

DIGESTION: 

DIURETIC: 

EARACHES: 

ECZEMA: 

EPILEPSY: 

FEVER: 

FLU: 

FROSTBITE: 

GENITAL INFECTIONS: 
HEADACHE: 

HEALING: 

HEARTBURN: 

HEART DISEASE: 
HEMORRHOIDS: 

HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE: 












Herbal 

267 

Boneset, Mayapple, Milkweed, 
Yellowroot 

Mistletoe, Mayapple 



Snakeroot, Spikenard, Wild Black 
Cherry 

Snakeroot 

Black Cohosh, Pennyroyal, St. 
Johns Wort, Uva Ursi 
(Bearberry), Wild Black 
Cherry 

Catnip 

Black Cohosh, Milkweed, Uva Ursi 
(Bearberry) 

Spikenard 

Burdock 

Mistletoe 

American Wild Senna, Boneset, 
Snakeroot, Witch Hazel, 
White willow. Yarrow 

Boneset, Catnip, Yarrow 

Wild Black Cherry 

Comfrey 

Mistletoe, Pennyroyal 

Comfrey 

Dandelion 

Garlic 

Wild Black Cherry 
Garlic 



230 



Herbal 

268 



HIGH CHOLESTEROL: 


Garlic 


HIVES: 


Burdock 


INSECTICIDE: 


Bloodroot (Puccoon), Goldenseal 


INFECTIONS: 


Spikenard, Witch Hazel 


JAUNDICE: 


Yellowroot 


LUNG AILMENTS: 


Mistletoe, St. Johns Wort 


MENSTRUAL PROBLEMS: 


Catnip, Partridgeberry, 

Pennyroyal , Skullcap , 
Spikenard, Witch Hazel, 
Yellowroot 


MUSCLE SORENESS/LAMENESS: 


Witch Hazel 


MINOR CUTS: 


Comfrey, St. Johns Wort, Witch 
Hazel 


MOLES: 


Milkweed 


PAIN: 


Boneset, Pennyroyal, White 
Willow 


PNEUMONIA: 


Snakeroot 


PURGATIVE: 


Mayapple 


RABIES: 


Skullcap 


RINGWORM: 


Milkweed 


SNAKEBITE: 


Pennyroyal, Snakeroot 


SKIN PROBLEMS: 


Burdock, Goldenseal, St. Johns 
Wort 


SORES: 


Goldenseal, St. Johns Wort 


SORE THROATS: 


American Wild Senna, Witch 
Hazel, Yellowroot 


STRESS: 


Catnip 


SWEAT INDUCER: 


Milkweed, Yarrow 



281 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

269 



TONIC: 

TOOTHACHE: 

TUBERCULOSIS: 

TUMORS: 

URINARY TRACT: 
KARTS: 

WOUNDS: 



WOUND SWELLING: 



Dandelion, Yellowroot 
Catnip 

St. Johns Wort 
Boneset 

Comfrey, St. Johns Wort 

Mayapple, Milkweed 

American Wild Senna, Comfrey, 

St. Johns Wort, Spikenard, 
Witch Hazel 

Garlic, Snakeroot, Spikenard 



O 

ERIC 



282 



Chart IX 



Herbal 

270 



BOTANICAL NAMES ALPHABETIZED 



BOTANICAL NAME 


COMMON NAME 


ACHILLEA MILLEFOLIUM: 


Yarrow 


ALLIUM SATIVUM: 


Garlic 


ARALIA RACEMOSA: 


Spikenard 


ARCTOSTAPHYLOS UVA-URSI: 


Uva Ur si or Common Bearberry 


ASCLEPIAS SYRIACA: 


Milkweed 


CASSIA HERBECARPA: 


American Wild Senna 


CIMICIFUGA RACEMOSA: 


Black Cohosh or Squawroot 


COMMON-ARCTIUM MINUS: 


Common Burdock 


EUPATORIUM PERFOLIATUM: 


Boneset or Common Thoroughwort 


6REAT-ARCTIUM LAPPA: 


Great Burdock 


HAMAMELIS VIRGINIANA: 


Witch Hazel 


HEDEOHA PULEGIOIDES: 


Pennyroyal 


HYDRASTIC CANADENSIS: 


Goldenseal 


HYPERICUM PERFORATUM: 


St. Johns Wort 


MITCHELLA REPENS: 


Partridgeberry or Squaw Vine 


NEPETA CATARIA: 


Catnip 


PHORADENDRON SEROTINUN: 


Mistletoe 


PODOPHYLLUM PELTATUM: 


Mayapple 


POLYGALA SENEGA: 


Snakeroot 


PRUNUS SEROTINA: 


Wild Black Cherry 


8ALIX ALBA: 


White Willow 



O 



283 



SAN6UIMARIA CANADENSIS: 
SCUTELLARIA LATERIFLORA: 
SYMPHYTUM OFFICINALE: 
TARAXACUM OFFICINALE: 
ZANTHORHIZA: 



Herbal 

271 

Bloodroot or Puccoon 

Skullcap 

Comfrey 

Dandelion 

Yellow Root 



284 

o 

ERIC 



Chart X 



Herbal 

272 



COMMOH NAMES ALPHABETIZED 



COMMON NAME 

BLACK COHOSH OR SQUAMROOT: 
BLOODROOT OR PUCCOON: 

BONESET OR COMMON TH0R0U6HH0RT : 
COMFREY: 

COMMON BURDOCK: 

GREAT BURDOCK: 

CATNIP: 

DANDELION: 

GARLIC: 

GOLDENSEAL: 

MAYAPPLE: 

MILKWEED: 

MISTLETOE: 

PARTRIDGEBERRY OR SQUAW VINE: 
PENNYROYAL: 

SENNA AMERICAN WILD: 

SKULLCAP: 

SNAKEROOT: 

SPIKENARD: 

ST. JOHNS WORT: 

UVA-URSl OR COMMON BEARBERRY: 



BOTANICAL NAME 

Cimicifuaa racemosa 
Sanouinaria canadensis 
Eupatorium perfoliatum 
Svmphvtum officinale 
Conunon-arctium minu« 
Great-arctium lappa 
Svmphvtxua officinale 
Taraxacum officinale 
Allium sativum 
Hvdrastic cemadensis 
Podophyllum peltatum 
Asclepias svriaca 
Phoradendron serotinxim 
Mitchella repens 
Hedeoma puleoioides 
Cassia herbecarpa 
Scutellaria lateriflora 
Polvoala senega 
Aralia racemosa 
Hypericum perforatum 
Arctostaphylos uya-ursi 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



WHITE WILLOW 



Salix alba 



Herbal 

273 



WILD BLACK CHERRY: 
WITCH HAZEL: 
YARROW: 

YELLOW ROOT: 




286 



Prunus serotina 
Hamamelis virainiana 
Achillea millefolium 
Zanthorhiza 



CHART XI 



Herbal 

274 



TERMINOLOGY 

AIR-DRIED: Herbs were placed in bunches and hung to dry. Or 

they were placed over a large area and dried in the sun, 
impartial shade, or in total shade. 

ANESTHETIC: Partial or entire loss of sensation and feelings. 

ANTIBIOTIC: Inhibited or killed bacteria and other 

microorganisms . 

ANTIFUNGAL: Inhibited or prevented the growth of fungi. 

ANTI-INFLAMMATORY: Reduced or neutralized infections and 

diseases that were accompanied by pain, redness, heat, and 
swelling. 

ANTISPASMODIC: Relieved spasms, cramps, or painful tightening of 

muscles. 

ANTISEPTIC: Destructive to germs of disease; prevented decay. 

ASTRINGENT; Caused tissue to contract or bind. 

BACTERIOSTATIC: Prevented the growth or multiplication of 

bacteria. 

BIENNIAL: Happened once in two years; required two years to 

complete its life cycle. 

BLISTER: To place a poultice on the leg of a hoi e in order to 

correct lameness. 

BLOOD THINNER: Caused blood to be less consistent, dense or 

compact and more like thin liquid. 

BOILS: Infected skin glemds caused by pus producing organisms. 

BOWED TENDON: A serious over-stretching of the back of a horse's 

leg. It allowed the fetlock to hit the ground while walking 
and the toe of the hoof to leave the ground. 

CARBUNCLE: Similar to boils but with multiple openings for 

discharge of pus and infected tissue beneath the skin. 

CARDIOACTIVE: A substance or something that affects the heart. 




28 V 



Herbal 

275 



CATHARTIC: Stimulated evacuation of the bowels; laxative. 

CATKIN: Tassel-like, closely clustered, small flowers without 

petals; found on willow, birch, or poplar trees. 

CLUSTER: A number of similar flowers growing or grouped 

together ; a bunch . 



COLIC: Acute abdominal pain caused by various eJsnormal 

conditions in the bowels. 

CONCOCTION: Various ingredients were combined to make a herbal 

remedy. 

CONSTRICTED BLOOD VESSELS: Blood vessels were made smaller, 

narrower by shrinking, contracting, and compressing. 

CONVULSIONS: Violent, involuntary contraction or spasm of the 

muscles. 

CREEPINO ROOTS: Roots that grew along and spread over and xinder 

the groxuid. 

CRICKS: A muscle cramp in the neck aresi. 

DECIDUOUS: Plants shed leaves annually or the leaves fell off 

during certain stages of growth. 

DECOCTION: A remedy made by boiling different plant parts. 

DENGUE: A disease transmitted by mosquitoes; severe joint and 

back pain with fever and rash. Also called breakbone fever. 

DIAPHORETIC: A medicinal plant that produced or increased 

perspiration or sweating. 

DISPENSATORY OF UNITED STATES : A handbook on the preparation and 

use of medicines in the Uixited States. 

DIURETIC: Increased the secretion and flow of urine. 

DOCTRINE OF SIGNATURES : Based upon beliefs, teachings, theories 

that plants represented or looked like certain parts of the 
body; hence, plants were used medicinally for that part. 

'U)IBLB: Anything fit to be eaten; non poisonous. 



28 b 




Herbal 

276 



EMETIC: Something that induces vomiting. 

FLOWERS: 

ANTHERS: Tip of stamen that had pollen. 

STAMENS: The pollen-bore anthers with attached filaments. 

FOLK REMEDY: Traditional beliefs, legends, customs, and 

medicines that were made and handed down among the common 
people . 

FOMENTATION: Bodily pain or injury was treated by the 

application of warm, moist liquid stibstances or compresses. 



GASTROINTESTINAL: Inflammation of the stomach lining and 

intestines . 

GLYCOSIDES: Substances that cause abnormal conditions in 

tissues. 

HEAT EXHAUSTION: Characterized by low body temperature, hot dry 

skin, cU).d no perspiration. 

HERBACEOUS: Non-woody plants that die back to the ground each 

winter . 

HEMORRHAGING: Bleeding, especially heavy flow; broken blood 

vessels that allowed escape of blood. 

HERB: Any plant part used as a medicine, seasoning, or food. 

HERBICIDAL: A substance used to destroy or slow down growth. 

HOG FAT: Another naune for lard. During butchering of hogs, the 

fat was boiled and strained. It was then used for salves, 
cooking, and other uses. 

HOOSIERS: A native or inhabitant of Indiana; a nickname. 

HUMUS: Organic soil that resulted from partial decay of leaves 

and other vegetable matter. 

INFUSION: The plant was steeped or soaked in cold or hot water 

to make a tea. 

IMMUNE-SYSTEM: The body's system that protected it against 

something disagreeable or harmful such as certain diseases. 



28 b 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Herbal 

277 



INSECTICIDE* Any subs't6uice used to kill or ward off insects. 

INTOXICATING! Great excitement/ in medicine a poisonino or 
becoming poisoned. 

KINNIKINNIKs A mixture of dried leaves and bark that was smoked 
by the Native Americans. 



LARD: Hog fat that has been "rendered" or boiled down. Was used 

many different ways. 

LEAVES: 

BRACTS: The grouping of leaf-like structures into an 

arrangement usually small and found at base of flowers. 
LANCE-SHAPED: The leaves are several times longer than 

wide. 

LOBED: Rounded divisions of leaves. 

OVAL: Broad, round leaves; widest part near base. 

SER RATE D; Saw-like notches along the edge of leaves. 
TOOTHED: The edges were notched or wavy. 

WAVY: The leaves had curves, ridges, crests and hollows 

that gave the appearance of wells on the leaf surface. 

MEDICINAL: A substance or remedy that cured, healed or relieved. 

NATIONAL FORMULARY ! A book listing medicines with their formulas 
and directions for compounding them. 

ORALLY: Something taken by mouth. 

PARASITE: A plant or animal that lives on or within smother 

organism; it derives sustenance without making 
compensat ion . 

PARTURITION: The act of giving birth; bringing forth young. 

PASTE: Pounding or grounding plant parts until fine and then 

making the substance or remedy creamy. 

PERENNIAL: Having a life cycle of more than two years; 

perpetual, returned or become active again. 

PLANT: A herb, tree, or shrub that makes its food by 

photosynthesis . 

PLASTER: A medicinal preparation that was spread on 






Herbal 

278 



skins, cloths, or leaves then placed on the body where it 
hardened as it dried. 

POULTICE: A soft, moist mixture that was applied to a sore or 

inflamed part of the body. 

POUDEHED: Any dry, fine, dust-like, substamce that was produced 

by crushing, pounding, or grinding. 

PULVERIZED: To break down a plant completely by crushing, 

grinding, or poxuiding. 



PUNGENT: Something that produced a sharp sensation of taste and 

or smell. 

PURGE: In medicine to empty the bowels or to cause the bowels to 

become clean, clear, or pure. 

PURIFIER: To rid the body of undesirable materials, or foreign 

matter . 

ROOT TEA: A beverage made by steeping, boiling or soaking, plant 

roots, leaves, or stems. 

SALVE: A healing substance applied to a wound. The Native 

Americans prepared salves by mixing and blending powdered 
herbs with types of animal fat or beeswax and then cooking 
this mixture for a couple of hours. 



SEDATIVE: In medicine, to soothe or quiet or lessen excitement, 

irritation, or pain. 

SHRUB: A bushy, woody plant with several permanent stems instead 

of a single trunk. 

STEEPED: To soak in a liquid. A small amount of herbs and 

placed the herbs were placed in a small amount of water; 
this was allowed to soak for a few minutes. 

STIFFLED: A serious injury to the back of the horse's leg; a 

tendon was over-stretched. 

STIMULANT: A drug or substance that increases the activity of 

some vital process of some organ of the body. 

TANNIN: An acid substance used for curing leathers, in preparing 



291 



dyes, auid for medicinal purposes. 



Herbal 

279 



THRUSH: A hoof condition in horses where the inside of the hoof 

begins to rot. Caused by being stalled in the wintertime. 

TONIC: A medicine that invigorates or stimulates. 

TOXIC: Various poisons secreted by plants and animals 

TOSCICITY: The quality or degree a plant is poisonous. 

TRANSLUCENT: Light shined through but other side cannot be 

distinguished . 

TRA.WILZZER: A substance that caused a state of calmness, 

peacefulness, and serenity. 

TREATMENT: An act, manner, or method of caring for a person. 

UPSET STOMACH: A problem within the digestive system which was 

caused by germs or something a person had eaten. 

US PHARMACOPOEIA : An official book with a list of drugs, 

medicines, and a description of their properties, 
preparation, and use. 



29i; 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



