DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 402 623 



CS 215 641 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Webre, Elizabeth C. 

Multicultural Poetry: Voices Unique, yet 
Universal* 

[97] 

15p * 

Viewpoints (Opinion/Position Papers, Essays, etc.) 
(120) — Guides - Classroom Use - Teaching Guides 
(For Teacher) (052) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Literature; Black Literature; 
Cultural Differences; Cultural Images; Elementary 
Education; Hispanic American Literature; 

*Mul ticultural Education; *Poetry; *Reading Material 
Selection; Teacher Role 

African Americans; Asian Literature; Native 
Americans 



ABSTRACT 

As teachers gravitate more and more to the use of 
literature and strive to include a range of cultural experiences in 
their classrooms, the use of poetry from various cultural groups 
should be considered. Poetry is a very real means of having children 
see themselves and others as being both unique and yet the same. In 
considering poetry across cultures, African-American, Native 
American, Hispanic American, and Asian poetry can be selected and 
shared with children. To successfully share poetry across cultures, 
the classroom teacher must have access to a range of multicultural 
poetry and be knowledgeable of: (1) the role of the teacher in 
successful use of multicultural literature; (2) basic reasons for 
sharing poetry with children; (3) poetry preferences of children; and 
(4) themes and poetic forms unique to specific cultures and themes 
and poetic forms common to several cultures. Through multicultural 
poetry, children can see themselves and others in a new way. 

(Contains 28 references.) (RS) 



* ye y? * * v? ye * * * * * * * * yt * * * y? yr yt y? yt yt ye y? y? yt yt y? yc y? yt yc y? y? ye ye ye ye ye ye * ye ye ye ye * ye ye * ye ye ye ?v ye yt ye ye 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. * 

?'e ?'e ye ?'e ye ye ?'e ?'e ?'e ?'e ?'e ?*e ?*e ?'e ?'e ?'e ye ?'e ?'e ?'e ye ye ?'e ?'e ye ?'e ye >’e ye ye ye ye ye ye ye ye ye ?'e ye ye ?'e ?'e ?'e ?'e ye ye ye ye ye ye ?'e ?'e ?'e »Y ?*e ?'e ye ye ?'e ?'e ye ?'e ?'e ?'e ?'e ?'e ?'e ?'e ?'e ?'e 



Multicultural Poetry 



m 

<N 

vo 

(N 

O 



Q 



W 



Multicultural Poetry: 

Voices Unique, yet Universal 
Elizabeth C. Webre 

University of Southwestern Louisiana 



U.8. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

X2 This document has been reproduced os 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes hove been made to improve 
reproduction quality. 



e Points ol view or opinions stated in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERl position or policy 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



% 




2 



Multicultural Poetry 



2 



Abstract 



This article presents the use of multicultural poetry 
as a vehicle for learning about the essence of a culture, as 
well as learning about the many things that we all share. 




Multicultural Poetry 



3 



Multicultural Poetry: 

Voices Unique, yet Universal 

As teachers gravitate more and more to the use of 
literature and strive to include a range of cultural 
experiences in their classrooms, the use of poetry from 
various cultural groups should be considered. Poetry is a 
very real means of having children see themselves and others 
as being both unique and yet the same. Hillman (1995) states 
that a poem can 



... bring the reader new insight, a thought aptly 
expressed in poetic form. As Eve Merriam says, 

... poems aren't "golden mysteries ” but are 
written by people to express a thought, a 
feeling, or, sometimes just nonsense, (p.109) 



Poets voice the needs of us all. A study of poetry from 
various cultures enables children to see the essence of a 
culture, as well as the many things that we share with 
others. One commonality is the oral tradition. Violet 
Harris (1993) states, 



. . . that teachers ought to consider the oral 
tradition which is part of many cultures ... to 
make the oral literacy heritage and oral 
literature ... a part of the literature 
curr i cu 1 urn . (p . 1 ) 



In considering poetry across cultures, African- 
American, Native American, Hispanic, and Asian poetry can be 
selected and shared with children. African-American poetry 
is a wise choice in introducing poetry reflective of various 

4 



Multicultural Poetry 



4 



cultures. In the introduction to the collection Pass It On: 
African-American Poetry for Children . Wade Hudson states, 



Poetry, I believe, holds a special place 
within African-American culture. It is an 
important part of an oral tradition that has 
been passed on by ancestors from Africa. Through 
this oral tradition, which also includes story- 
telling and music, history and traditions are 
kept alive. ( p . 5 ) 



Pass It On: African-American Poetry for Children serves 
as an effective introduction to African-American poetry for 
children. The collection contains approximately twenty poems 
by fourteen Black poets, including such poets as Eloise 
Greenfield, Langston Hughes, and Nikki Giovanni. 

The collection Make a Joyful Sound: Poems for Children 
by African-American Poets by Deborah Slier would also serve 
as an initial introduction to African-American poetry. 

It contains seventy-five poems by twenty-six poets, as well 
as information about the poets. 

Children can become more familiar with specific 
African-American poets through the following books: 



Nikki Giovanni 

ego-tripping and other poems for young people 
Spin a Soft Black Song 



Eloise Greenfield 



Daydr earner s 

Honey. I Love and Other Poems 
Nathan i e 1 Talking 
Under the Sunday Tree 




5 



Multicultural Poetry 



5 



Joyce Carol Thomas 
Brown Honey in Broomwheat Tea 

Walter Dean Myers 

Brown Angels: An Album of Pictures and Verses 

The ten poetry books mentioned above are varied, yet convey 
the African-American contribution to children’s poetry and 
the range of African-American experiences. 

Native American poetry emanates from oral tradition, 
as well. In the various Native American cultures, songs, 
chants, and poems are very important (Norton, 1995). 

Native Americans did not have a written language. They 
relied on their memory to preserve the important values of 
the culture. The spoken word was sacred as was the means by 
which Native Americans passed down stories, chants, and 
songs through generations (Sneve, 1989). Much Native 
American poetry expresses reverence for creation, nature, 
and beauty, as exemplified in such books as Thirteen Moons 
on Turtle’s Back , a collection of poems giving voice to the 
thirteen moons of the year and revealing the wonder of the 
seasons; On the Road to Stars: Native American Night Poems 
and Sleep Charms , created to lull listeners gently to sleep; 
and The Other Wav to Listen , a poetic story that brings us 
close to the essence of the natural world. 

In addition to more traditional Native American poetry, 




contemporary poetry can be shared with children as in 



Multicultural Poetry 



6 



Rising Voices: Writings of Young Native Americans . The poems 
and essays in this anthology, written by young Native 
Americans, speak of their identity, their families and 
communities, their histories and cultures, and the harsh 
realities of their lives. Many of the poems and essays were 
previously published in government publications. This book 
was designed to "set the record straight." 

Hispanic poetry which can be shared with students 
includes Hispanic American poetry as exemplified by Gary 
Soto’s Neighborhood Odes , a collection of poems about a 
Hispanic neighborhood. Soto’s poems bring to life a 
Mex i can-Amer i can neighborhood that is all neighborhoods. 
Other Hispanic poetry comes from Spanish speaking countries 
as exemplified by Arroz Con Leche : Popular Songs and Rhymes 
from Latin America . In a kaleidoscope of cheerful songs and 
rhymes from Mexico, Puerto Rico, and Argentina, the oral 
tradition, too, is presented. 

As is true of Hispanic American poetry, Asian poetry is 
not as readily available as African-American and Native 
American poetry. However, poetry from Asian countries is 
available to a certain extent and is valuable not only for 
exploring unique themes and themes common to other cultures, 
but also for studying varying poetic forms, e.g. tanka and 
haiku. Cricket Songs , for example, is a collection of 
Japanese haiku, centering around the small marvels of 




nature. Haiku consists of three lines, a five-syllable first 



Multicultural Poetry 



7 



line, a seven-syllable second line, and a five-syllable 
third line. On the other hand, The Seasons of Time , a 
collection of ancient Japanese poetry dating as far back as 
the eighth century, includes almost exclusively tanka. 

Still the most popular form in modern Japanese poetry, tanka 
contains thirty-one syllables in five unrhymed lines, the 
first and third having five syllables each and the other 
lines seven syllables. Some of the anonymous poems in The 
Seasons of Time fall into the realm of folk songs, handed 
down orally from one generation to the next (Baron, 1968). 
The leading contemporary Japanese poet Mado also expresses 
the joys of the natural world, but through the eyes of a 
child in The Animals: Selected Poems . 

In order to successfully share poetry across cultures, 
the classroom teacher must not only have access to range of 
multicultural poetry as described above but should be 
knowledgeable of (1) the role of the teacher in successful 
use of multicultural literature, (2) basic reasons for 
sharing poetry with children, (3) poetry preferences of 
children, and (4) themes and poetic forms unique to 
specific cultures and themes and poetic forms common to 
several cultures. 

In regard to the teacher’s role in successful use of 
multicultural literature, Violet Harris notes, 




The successful use of multicultural texts and 
stories with children depends on the multi- 



Multicultural Poetry 



8 



cultural awareness and understanding of the 
teacher and the classroom environment he/she 
promotes during and beyond the sharing of 
literature, (p. 235) 



This stance is echoed by Abt-Perkins and Gomez (1993) in 
their article about teacher examination of personal 
perspectives (fundamental values, attitudes, disposition 
and belief systems). 



In reflecting on these, we gain a clearer picture 
of how our race, social class, ethnicity, and 
other characteristics, such as our language 
background and gender shape our teaching and the 
opportunities for diverse students’ learning and 
achievement, (p. 193) 

The authors suggest that teaching mu 1 1 i cu 1 tura 1 1 y must begin 
with self-inquiry and that teacher self-inquiry leads to 
environments that enhance literacy learning of children in 
the classroom. 

A second premise to successful sharing of multicultural 
poetry deals with rationale - reasons for sharing poetry 
with children. In a 1980 address at a regional International 
Reading Association meeting, Jean Le Pere identified six 
reasons for sharing poetry with children. Among those 
reasons are three which have a direct bearing on the 
rationale for sharing multicultural poetry: (1) having 

children identify with people and situations, (2) expressing 
moods familiar to children and helping children understand 
and accept their feelings, and (3) granting children insight 



3 



Multicultural Poetry 



9 



into themselves and others, developing their sensitivity to 
universal needs and feelings. 

Not only a firm grasp of the rationale for poetry 
sharing is needed, but also awareness of children’s poetry 
preferences is needed for a successful multicultural poetry 
program. Poetry preferences of fourth, fifth, and sixth 
graders, for example, include (1) contemporary poetry, 

(2) poetry dealing with familiar and enjoyable experiences, 

(3) poetry with rhythm and rhyme, and (4) humorous poetry 
(Terry, 1974). The more recent study of poetry preferences 
by Kutiper and Wilson (1993) supports Terry’s findings. 

In reading and sharing poetry from each of the four 
cultural groups, children can be lead to detect themes 
specific to each culture and themes common to several. 

Poetic form, too, can be noted. After reading, for example, 
the poetry of Eloise Greenfield, Nikki Giovanni, Joyce 
Thomas, and Walter Dean Myers, children will detect the 
oral tradition and the pride of heritage, and they will 
absorb a strong sense of African-American experiences. 

In reading Native American poetry, children will become 
aware of that culture’s reverence for nature. A similar 
awareness will be instilled as children read and share Asian 
poetry, so much of it in the form of tanka and haiku. 

In reading Gary Soto’s Neighborhood Odes , poems paying 
homage to the simplicity and enjoyment of everyday life, 




children will experience the essence of growing up Latino 



Multicultural Poetry 



10 



and will be exposed to various Spanish words since Soto 
intertwines various Spanish words and phrases. 

In addition to enabling children to see the essence of 
each culture, poetry across cultures presents children with 
the opportunity of realizing how much is shared. 

In reflecting on the poetry of the four cultural groups, 

(1) familiar experiences and (2) moods and feelings are 
common themes readily apparent and themes that parallel the 
interests of children. Children can select poems about 
familiar experiences and can reflect on how their own 
experiences parallel those of the poet. Gary Soto’s 
"Ode to Weddings" and Eloise Greenfield’s "Wedding Day" 
express an experience familiar and memorable to many 
children. An even simpler experience, kite flying, is 
expressed in " Flying Kites" by Quincy Troupe (Slier, 1991) 
and in the following from Cricket Songs (Behn, 1964). 

What a pretty kite 
the beggar ’ s children fly high 
above their hovel! 

ISSA (p. 49) 

Children may also reflect on the fact that familiar 
experiences are not only expressed across cultures, but 
also across time. 

This, too, is evident in poems about sleep. On the Road 
of Stars: Native American Night Poems and Sleep Charms 




contains verses from over 20 Native American tribes. From 



Multicultural Poetry 



1 1 



the Yuma comes the following: 



Sleep Song 



S 1 eep , S 1 eep , 

It will carry you into the land of wonderful dreams 
In those dreams you wi 1 1 see 

a future day and your future family, (p. 14) 



The modern Japanese poet Mado (1992) writes 



SLEEP 



At night 
When quietly 

The two tiny windows of my body 
Lower their blinds. 

The two tiny windows 

Of all creatures of all kinds, 

Living in the sky, 

The sea, and on land, 

Quietly 

Lower their blinds too, 

So as not to cause 
A single dream 

To be mixed 

With another, (p. 35) 



Poems that suggest moods and feelings familiar to 
children are evident, too, across cultures. Sneve’s 
collection of Native American poetry reflecting the theme of 
youth includes, for instance, "I Watched an Eagle Soar" and 
"Farewell, My Younger Brother,” each expressing opposite 
ends of the spectrum of feelings: elation and resignation. 
Even more thoughtful and somber feelings are expressed in 
Nathaniel Talking : "Missing Mama" expresses the hurt and 




12 



Multicultural Poetry 



12 



loss resulting from the death of a parent, and "Weights” 
expresses a child’s concern for the troubles of another. 

Finally, children can be guided into developing 
sensitivity to universal needs and feelings through multi- 
cultural poetry. Countee Cullen’s poem "Incident" (Hudson, 
1993) exemplifies the universal need for acceptance and the 
harmful effects of prejudice. In Brown Honey in Broomwheat 
Tea . Joyce Carol Thomas celebrates individuality and voices 
the universal need to be loved 

Cherish Me 

I sprang from Mother Earth 

She clothed me in her own colors 
I was nourished by father sun 

He glazed the pottery of my skin 
I am beautiful by design 

The pattern of night in my hair 
The pattern of music in my rhythm 
As you would cherish a thing of beauty 
Cher i sh me (p . 1 ) 

In reading and sharing poems like these, the teacher of 
multicultural poetry can help children understand that 
people of various cultures are more the same than different. 
The teacher can help children see themselves in others. 
Bieger (1995/1996) states, "Each time we read a good piece 
of literature, we are changed by the experience; we see the 
world in a new way." (p. 311) Through multicultural poetry, 

children can see themselves and others in a new way. 




13 



Multicultural Poetry- 



13 



References 

Abt-Perkins, D. & Gomez, M. (1993). A good place to begin - 
Examining our personal perspectives. Language Arts. 70 . 
193-202 . 

Bieger, E. M. (1995/1996). Promoting multicultural education 
through a literature-based approach. The Reading Teacher. 
49. 308-312. 

Harris, V. J. (Ed.). (1993). Teaching multicultural 

literature in grades K-8 . Norwood, MA : Christopher- 
Gordon . 

Hillman, J. (1995). Discovering children’s literature . 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ : Prentice-Hall. 

Kutiper, K. & Wilson, P. (1993). Updating poetry 

preferences: A look at the poetry children really like. 
The Reading Teacher. 47 . 28-35. 

Le Pere . J. (1980). For every occasion: Poetry in the 

reading program . Paper presented at the Eighth Southwest 
Regional Conference of the International Reading 
Association, Albuquerque, NM . 

Norton, D. E. ( 1995). Through the eves of a, child . (4th ed . ) 
Columbus, OH: Merrill. 

Terry, A. (1974). Children’s poetry preferences: A national 
survey of the upper elementary grades . Urbana, IL: 
National Council of Teachers of English. 



Children’s literature cited 

Baron, V. (1968). The seasons of time . New York: Dial. 

Baylor, B. & Parnal 1 , P. (1978). The other wav to listen . 

New York: Scribner. 

Behn , H. (1964). Cricket songs . New York: Harcourt , Brace & 
World. 

Bierhorst, J. (Ed.). (1994). On the road to stars: Native 

American night poems and sleep charms . New York: 

Macm i 1 1 an . 

Bruhac , J. & London, J. (1992). Thirteen moons on turtle’s 
back: A Native American year of moons . New York: Philomel 
Books . 




Multicultural Poetry 



14 



Delacre, L. (Ed.). (1989). Arroz con Leche: Popular songs 

and rhymes from Latin America . New York : Scholastic. 

Giovanni N. (1973). ego-tripping and other poems for young 
peop 1 e . New York: Lawrence Hill & Company. 

Giovanni, N. (1971). Spin a soft Black song . New York: 

Hill & Wang . 

Greenfield, E. (1981). Davdr earner s . New York: Dial. 

Greenfield, E. (1972). Honey, I love and other love poems . 
New York: Crowell. 

Greenfield, E. (1989). Nathaniel talking . New York: Black 
Butterfly Children’s Books. 

Greenfield, E. (1988). Under the Sunday tree . New York: 
Harper & Row. 

Hi rschf e 1 der , A. B. & Singer, B. R. (Eds.). (1992). Rising 

voices: Writings of young Native Americans . New York: 
Scribner’s/Macmil lan. 

Hudson, W. (Ed.). (1993). Pass it on: African-American 

poetry for children . New York: Scholastic. 

Mado , M. ( 1992). The animals: Selected poems . New York: 
Margaret McElderry Books. 

Myers, W. D. (1993). Brown angels: An album of pictures and 
verse . New York: Harper Collins. 

Slier, D. (Ed.) (1991). Make a joyful sound: Poems for 
children bv African-American poets . New York: 

Checkerboard Press. 

Sneve, V. (1989). Dancing teepees: Poems of American 
Indian Youth . New York: Holiday House. 

Soto, G. (1992). Neighborhood odes . New York: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanov itch. 

Thomas, J. C. (1993). Brown honey in broomwheat tea . 

New York: Harper Collins. 




© 

U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 









In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced 
in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced 
paper copy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is 
given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following two options and sign at 
the bottom of the page. 




Check here 
For Level 1 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4" x 6" film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical) 
and paper copy. 



The sample sticker shown _be low will be' The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2 documents 

□ 

S3 

Check here 
For Level 2 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4" x 6" film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e g., electronic or optical), 
but nof in paper copy. 



Level n Level 2 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 


DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 




DISSEMINATE THIS 


HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 






COPY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


A0 










J 









TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission 
to reproduce is granted, but neither box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here^ 

please 




"/ hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate 
this document as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optical media by persons other than 
ERIC employees and its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit 
reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. " 


Signature: 


Printed Name/Position/Title: „ , 

Associate. TVo-fessor 


Organ izatiorV^dress : 

U^S\/£rsi4^ Sou.-VV\oOes4eirir\ Lo^\siav\^ 

l>o. Box 7 V <2.057 
Lfti-ay e.44e- f l_A 7056 7^ JlO 5 ) 


Telephone: 

(3i«V. g3--saLC 


FAX: 

(3/s) V83--5T8V SLj 


E-Mail Address: 


Date: 

a- 1-17 



(over) 




III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, 
please provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is 
publicly available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are 
significantly more stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and address: 



Name: 



Address: 



V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 



2805 E. Tenth Street 
Smith Research Center, 150 
Indiana University 
Bloomington, IN 47408 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 



l o — P 

ERIC/REC 




Eft 1C Pro oeb ' siny arrc t ~fteference~ Fa cTtrty 
tteo West O tr eet, 2 d Hoor 
4r Our el , Ma i yldiiU 20707-3S 9 8 - 

'telephone: 3U1-497-4U80" 

Tull Flee. 800-/as-d/42 
F AX r- 301 - 053 - 0263 
e-m art— e riofac@ i net.ed.gov 
W WW :- http : // e f i cfoo,p i ooard.ooo.oofn 



