DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 467 994 



RC 023 683 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Fox, Sandra J. 

Creating Sacred Places for Students in Grades 7&8. 

National Indian School Board Association, Poison, MT . 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), 
Washington, DC. 

2001 - 00-00 

200p.; For other grade levels, see RC 023 681-682 and RC 023 
684. 

R215C000058 

NISBA, P.O. Box 790, Poison, MT 59860. credit card orders: 
800-542-4922 (Toll Free) ($25.00 plus $3.95 shipping). 

Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC09 Plus Postage. 

Academic Standards; ^American Indian Education; American 
Indian Literature; Class Activities; ^Culturally Relevant 
Education; Curriculum Development; History Instruction; 
Integrated Curriculum; Junior High Schools; Language Arts; 
Mathematics Instruction; Science Instruction; Secondary 
School Curriculum; *Units of Study 



ABSTRACT 

This guide attempts to help teachers of American Indian 
students in grades 7-8 provide a culturally relevant education that takes 
place in the regular classroom, includes content related to Indian students' 
lives, makes students proud, expands to other experiences, and enhances 
learning. Creating sacred places means responding appropriately to students' 
academic, social, emotional, physical, and spiritual needs. Research has shown 
that to empower Indian students to learn, their school programs must 
incorporate their language and culture, involve parents and community as 
partners, provide appropriate instruction, and use appropriate testing 
methods. The approach presented here combines the teaching of various subject 
areas and reinforces classroom instruction with language and cultural 
activities by using American Indian literature as a basis for instruction. 
Materials and activities are aligned with challenging content standards. This 
guide outlines 24 thematic units, which include background information, 
relevant Indian literature, objectives, activities, evaluation methods, and 
content standards. Eight science-based units cover electricity; oil and gas; 
use of plants; man, animals, and plants; sun, moon, and stars; abuse of 
alcohol and drugs; water; and Indian art. Eight social studies and history- 
based units cover tribal histories, before 1492, 1492 and the 1500s, 1600s and 

1700s, 1800-68, 1869-99, 1900-52, and 1953-2000. Eight language arts-based 
units cover contemporary Indian young people, student writing, oral tradition 
and oratory, Indian stories, Indian biographies, poetry, short stories, 
novels, and American Indian and Alaska Native authors. A final section lists 
additional resources and sources for books. (SV) 



ERIC 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



Creating Sacred Places for 
Students in Grades 7 & 8 




by 

Sandra J. Fox D.Ed. 



NaM©imal Emdlii&im Odd©©! 
B©8upd AgsdDositti©ini 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



' u S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
)UCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

Minor changes have been made to 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Creating Sacred Places for 
Students in Grades 7 & 8 




by 

Sandra J. Fox D.Ed. 



8 Science-Based Units 
8 History/Social Studies-Based Units 
8 Language Arts-Based Units 



National Indian School Board 
Association, © 2001 

Carmen Cornelius Taylor, Executive Director 
PO Box 790 
Poison, MT 59860 
406/883-3603 
fax 406/675-4801 
e-mail carmen_taylor@skc.edu 

O 

ERIC 



3 



'A' 



This publication is based on work sponsored wholly, or in 
part, by the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
Department of Education, under Contract Number 
R215C000058. The content of this publication does not 
necessarily reflect the views of OERI, the Department or any 
other agency of the U.S. Government. 



4 

ERIC 



Contents 



Introduction 1 

Creating Sacred Places 1 

Background, Materials, Activities and Standards for Science-Based Units 5 

Electricity 6 

Oil and Gas 1 7 

Use of Plants 36 

Man, Animals and Plants 53 

Sun, Moon and Stars 69 

Abuse of Alcohol and Drugs 8 1 

Water 90 

Indian Art HO 



Background, Materials, Activities and Standards for Social Studies/History- 

Based Units 121 

History/Lives of Tribal Groups 124 

Before 1492 126 

1492 and the 1500’s 128 

1600’s and 1700’s 130 

1800 to 1868 133 

1869 to 1899 136 

1900 to 1952 139 

1953 to 2000 141 

History Standards 143 

Background, Materials and Activities for Language Arts-Based Units 157 

For and About Contemporary Indian Young People 158 

Student Writing 161 

The Oral Tradition and Oratory 1 63 

Indian Stories 165 

Indian Biographies 169 

Poetry by Indian Authors 172 

Short Stories by Indian Authors 174 

Novels by Indian Authors 176 

Some American Indian/ Alaska Native Authors 178 

Language Arts and Math Standards Addressed in Creating Sacred Places for 

Students in Grades 7 & 8 179 

Language Arts Standards 1 80 

Math Standards 1 84 

Where to Get Books and Other Resources 189 



O 

ERLC 



5 



INTRODUCTION 



This book is an attempt to help teachers provide the culturally relevant curriculum that 
has long been the dream of Indian educators. The relevant curriculum that we have 
envisioned takes place in the regular classroom, includes content related to the lives of 
Indian children, makes them proud, expands to other experiences and enhances learning. 

It used to be that there was some funding available to develop culturally relevant 
curricula, and some materials were developed. Few of those materials are still available, 
and the funding has all but disappeared. There is a renewed interest in this dream, 
however, and Indian literature is a resource that can provide the basis for a 
comprehensive culturally relevant curriculum. There are many more Indian authors 
writing books for children and more good Indian literature is being published. 

This document provides teachers with background, materials (Indian literature), and 
activities for 24 units: eight are science-based thematic units, eight are social 
studies/history-based, and eight are language arts thematic units, all for students in grades 
7 & 8. They are aligned with new, required science, social studies/history, language arts 
and mathematics content standards so that teachers are teaching what is expected of them 
and, at the same time, are making instruction more meaningful to the students. The units 
are to be integrated or multidisciplinary. The approach promotes the close coordination 
and cooperation of regular and cultural instruction teachers and their work. This is not a 
canned curriculum; it contains the ingredients necessary for a school to develop its own 
culturally-based curriculum for the junior high or middle grades. 

This document also pays tribute to many: Indian and other authors who write books for 
and about Indians, Indian and other organizations that distribute books by and about 
Indians, Indian and other organizations that have made the improvement of teaching 
Indian children their aim, and teachers who have developed and implemented culturally- 
based curricula in their classrooms. 

Some of the materials and activities included here have been taken from the work of 
others. For example, some of the teacher’s background information included comes from 
math and science materials developed by ORBIS Associates of Washington, DC. The 
math and science activities included were developed by teachers of Indian children at 
summer workshops at Haskell Indian Nations University taking place from 1992-1994. I 
have drawn on the work of educators such as Richard Nichols, Gwen Shunatona and 
Anne Litchfield of ORBIS Associates; and Dan Wildcat, Lucretia Herrin, Dr. Michael 
Ward and Anita Chisholm who led the math and science workshops at Haskell. 

i 




6 



I have not read every book listed in this document, and if I did, I would not be able to 
guarantee their being free of cultural bias or inaccuracies. I did utilize the publication 
Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Children by Beverly Slapin 
and Doris Seale to avoid books that may be offensive. I tried to promote books written 
by Indian authors. I recommend that books be reviewed by local Indian people to be sure 
they are appropriate. If it is found that a book is not acceptable to Indian people or to a 
tribe, especially, the book should definitely not be used. There is guidance for reviewing 
books and curriculum materials in Through Indian Eyes and in a document developed by 
the Indian Community School of Milwaukee listed in the last section of this book. I 
would like to know if there is a book that should definitely be eliminated from this 
document. If the use of the approach outlined in this document works, it should promote 
a resurgence of local storytelling and/or the writing of more children’s books by Indian 
people. 

The development of this document is part of an effort of the National Indian School 
Board Association to provide an Indian model of school reform that includes the 
Effective Schools framework with several enhancements: tribal values and 
organizational culture; wellness, healing and prevention strategies; leadership based on 
vision, wisdom and courage; the Learning Record performance-based assessment system; 
and the integration of Indian curriculum. 

It is hoped that this document will be useful to parents, tutors, teachers, aides, 
administrators and school board members at schools where there are Indian students. I 
hope that Title IX and Johnson O’Malley programs can utilize it. I hope that parents who 
are homeschooling their children will find it helpful. I hope that teachers of nonlndian 
students will use it, especially for that week at Thanksgiving and, hopefully, beyond. 

Most of all, I hope this document will help students somewhere. I greatly enjoyed 
developing it. I hope others will enjoy using it to create sacred places for Indian young 
people. 



-SJF, Oglala Lakota, Albuquerque, NM 



ii 



O 

ERLC 



7 



CREATING SACRED PLACES 



Creating Sacred Places means responding appropriately to students’ academic, social, 
emotional, physical and spiritual needs. This document addresses improving the teaching 
of Indian students and empowering them to learn by addressing these needs. The 
research is quite clear on the matter. If Indian students are to be empowered to learn, 
their school programs must include four characteristics (Cummins, The Empowerment of 
Indian Students): 

1. Language and culture must be incorporated into the school program. 

Considerable research suggests that for minority groups experiencing school 
failure, the extent to which students’ language and culture are incorporated into 
the school program constitutes a significant predictor of academic success. 
Educators who see their role as encouraging their students to add a second 
language and culture to supplement rather than supplant their native language and 
culture are more likely to create conditions in which students can develop a sense 
of empowerment. Educators who see their role as getting their students to replace 
their home language and culture with English and white values in order to 
assimilate them into the dominant culture are more likely to create the conditions 
for student failure. Students who develop skills in two languages have been found 
to have learning advantages over students who have only one language. 

2. There must be an unbreakable bond between school and community. 

When educators involve parents as partners in their children’s education, parents 
communicate to their children a positive attitude toward education that leads to 
improvement in the students’ academic achievement. Teachers operate along a 
continuum from collaborative to exclusionary. Teachers with a collaborative 
orientation work closely with teachers or aides fluent in the student’s first 
language and/or knowledgeable of the community in order to learn from them 
how to communicate effectively with parents. Teachers with an exclusionary 
orientation tend to regard teaching as their job and are likely to view collaboration 
with parents as either irrelevant or actually detrimental to children’s progress. 
Students can become empowered only when education becomes a true community 
enterprise involving an equal partnership between educators at school and 
educators in the home, the children’s families. In addition, the collective 
experience of the community must be used as the context for all learning in the 
school. 



1 

3 

ERIC 



8 



3 . Appropriate instruction must be provided. 

Research indicates that the learning difficulties of minority students are often 
caused by the way we teach them. These students frequently receive intensive 
instruction that confines them to a passive role and induces a form of “learned 
helplessness.” This kind of instruction follows the transmission model in which it 
is the task of the teachers to impart knowledge or skills they possess to their 
students who do not yet have these sk ill s. The teachers initiate and control the 
interaction, constantly orienting it toward the achievement of instructional 
objectives. In contrast, the experiential-interactive model of instruction focuses 
on giving students hands-on classroom experiences that provide students with a 
basis for understanding more abstract academic curricula. The interactive model 
also incorporates what we know about the relation between language and learning 
and promotes language-rich classrooms. The transmission model entails the 
suppression of students’ experiences. The experiential-interactive model entails 
an additive orientation toward students’ cultures and languages, an openness to 
collaborate with community resource persons, and active use of written and oral 
language skills. Learning styles of students must also be taken into account. 

4. Appropriate testing must be used. 

Classroom and psychological testing have disempowered and disabled minority 
students. Minority students are overrepresented in special education because of 
improper testing. To challenge the disabling of minority students, assessments 
must focus on the extent to which children’s language and culture are 
incorporated within the school program, the extent to which educators collaborate 
with parents as partners in a shared enterprise, and the extent to which children 
are encouraged to use language (both tribal and English) actively within the 
classroom. In other words, the primary focus should be on remediating the 
educational interactions that Indian children experience. Further, it is being 
recognized that, while formal testing has a role to play, its impact is considerably 
greater when combined with classroom assessment. The longitudinal observation 
and monitoring of student progress throughout the school year by classroom 
teachers yields valuable data and is much more accurate and fair than formal 
testing, thus the present emphasis on performance-based assessment. 

These four characteristics that address needs of Indian students must be considered 
carefully by every school seeking to educate Indian learners. Consider this quote from 
Ron Edmonds of the Effective Schools movement: 

We can, whenever and wherever we choose, successfully teach all children 
whose schooling is of interest to us. We already know more than we need 
to do that. Whether or not we do it must finally depend on how we feel about 
the feet that we haven’t so far. 



2 



ERIC 



9 



We are at a time when it is being demanded that schools produce higher achievement. 
Students must learn to read and write at higher levels, they must be able to solve more 
difficult math and science problems, they must be adequately prepared to meet the world 
and function successfully in the 21 st Century. We must change the way we do things in 
order to produce these results. Schools have been failing students. Part of the problem is 
that we don’t do what we know should be done, as Ron Edmonds states. We don t listen 
to what the research says. 

Schools are involved in various school reform activities at this time. Teachers are being 
asked to do many things including: 

align curriculum with the new content standards and new assessments, 

do a better job of teaching reading and math, 

utilize an integrated approach to teaching the various content areas, 

teach for understanding and application and focus on depth, 

teach disabled and gifted students in the regular classroom, 

promote positive student behavior through a school-wide approach, and 

provide meaningful parental involvement in the instructional process. 

In addition, teachers of American Indian students are asked to: 

incorporate American Indian content standards, 

provide instruction for Indian children that is based upon research, 

provide culturally relevant instruction within the regular classroom, and 

promote the use of native languages to strengthen children’s language ability. 

This is only a partial list of the many things that teachers have to do. This document will 
provide assistance to teachers who really want to create sacred places for children and 
will help coordinate all that they have to do. 

Essentially, the approach presented here combines the teaching of various subject areas 
and reinforces classroom instruction with language and cultural activities by utilizing 
American Indian literature as a basis for instruction. The materials and activities are 
aligned with the new, more challenging science, social studies/history, language arts and 
math content standards and American Indian content standards for each area. 

3 



O 

ERIC 



10 



To use the approach recommended by this book, teachers must - 

1. Work closely with the cultural instructors at the school. The regular teacher and 
the cultural instructor should team teach these units. If not, the cultural instructor 
must provide input to the regular teacher to help integrate local culture into the 
regular classroom. A less effective approach would be that both the regular 
teacher and the cultural instructor teach the same topic, but separately. The 
science units provide good language immersion topics for teaching the native 
language while reinforcing classroom instruction. This would also be ideal. 

2. Decide what units to teach and what order to teach them in. If all the teachers of 
the junior high or middle grades are using this book, they may want to determine 
which units each class will use. If you are the only teacher in those grades using 
this book, you may want to use all of the units or only some of them. They are 
organized in an order. For example, the science units start with Electricity in 
September when there still may be lightning; Oil and Gas in October; Use of 
Plants including foods in November with Thanksgiving; Mem, Animals and Plaints 
in the winter when most storytelling takes place - for example, coyote stories; 

Sun, Moon and Stars when it is best to observe the night sky. Abuse of Alcohol 
and Drugs in February or March; Water around Earth Day; and Indian Art just 
before school is out. You can also align them with what you are already teaching. 

3. Decide what literature and activities to use. Of course, literature that deals with 
the local tribe(s) would be best. You will want a variety of literature to reach 
various students in your classroom. The example activities included can be 
adapted to your own tribe(s) and to the grade level you teach. Include your own 
ideas for additional materials and activities. Work closely with your librarian. 

4. Align the McREL standards with your own content standards. The standards 
included were developed by the Mid-Continent Regional Educational Lab 
(McREL) and summarize all the state standards. You will want to cross check 
them with the content standards your school has chosen to follow. Review the 
standards to give you ideas for further activities and more cultural information. 

The language arts and math standards cover all units in the book. 

5. Plan a parental involvement strategy. Let the parents know what are studying. Be 
sure there are regular, meaningful parent involvement activities for the units. 

6. Utilize good teaching strategies. Continue to utilize cooperative learning, have 
students read widely, use literature circles where various students are assigned to 
formulate questions for the reading, find interesting words, find interesting parts, 
etc. Many of the suggested activities are based on constructivism or project- 
based learning. 

7. Utilize a form of performance-based assessment to track student progress. 

4 



O 



11 







^nce-Ba*®^ 



r.. 



o 

ERLC 



12 



ELECTRICITY 



Electricity has provided for great advances in the lifestyles of American Indian people. 

It has also contributed to destruction. Tribes have their stories of when electricity first 
came to their lands and what it has done for them, and some have stories of how their 
natural resources are used in the creation of electricity for them and for others. Many 
tribes have rigorously taken on the task of protecting their natural resources now and 
have developed courses to teach about such things. One of the goals of such a course in 
the Northwest is “To understand how positions of power and differing values of natural 
systems by Euro-Americans have influenced changes in Pacific Northwest ecosystems 
and lifestyles since the time American Indians managed the lands.” - American Indian 
Perspectives: Nature, Natural Resources and Natural Resources Education, Chemeketa 
Community College, 1999. 

LITERATURE FOR UNIT - 

How Thunder and Lightning Came to Be by Beatrice Orcutt Harrell (Indian Author), 
Dial, 1995. 

Indian Legends of the Pacific Northwest by Ella E. Clark, University of California Press, 
1971, p. 165. 

Red Ribbons for Emma by New Mexico People and Energy Collective, New Seed Press, 
Berkeley, CA, 1981. Conflict between Native peoples and power companies. 

ACTIVITIES FOR UNIT - 

1 . Have the students learn about electricity and its uses, read cultural materials and 
hear cultural perspectives relating to this topic, and observe electrical systems. 

2. Have students research the coming of electricity to their land/reservation. How 
did it affect the people and the land? Have them make lists of positive and 
negative effects. How much does electricity cost? How else is math involved? 

3. Are any of the local tribes’ natural resources used in the provision of electricity to 
the tribe and to others? Have students research how this has affected the people 
and the land. Have them make lists of positive and negative effects. 

4. Have the students write a joint project article for the local newspaper delineating 
their findings with charts, graphs, etc. Give each student an assignment for the 
project. 

Following are example activities developed by teachers of Indian students who attended 
math and science workshops during 1992-1994 at Haskell Indian Nations University. 
Adapt these activities to meet the needs of your students. Also, review the science 
standards for this unit. They will suggest further science and math activities. 

6 




13 



SCIENCE - 



"ELECTRICITY, WHAT IS IT?" 

CULTURAL OUTCOME: IV 

SCIENCE OUTCOME: V 



CULTURAL OBJECTIVE: 

\\ 

Students will understand that all parts of nature have been given to us to 
respect and use wisely. 



SCIENCE OBJECTIVES: 

Students will: 

identify the nature of electricity and describe its modes of production 
and measurement 

compare different sources of energy and identify the benefits and 
problems associated with each source 

define characteristics and behavior of electrical energy and its uses. 



TEACHER’S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

This unusual concept of Thunder and Lightning is given in the words of 
Andrew Joe, a Skagit on the Swinomish Reservation in Indian Legends of the 
Northwest . 

In the beginning of the world, Thunder and his family lived in a lake. His wife 
was Rain. His children were Lightning and Hail. Then Old Creator placed him 
up above, to control the weather and to control the air in which everyone 
would live on earth. 

After putting him in the sky, Old Creator gave Thunder a special spirit power 
and said to him, “Your spirit power will be discovered and will be brought back 
to earth to be of great use tp the human race." 

Thunder’s spirit power was discovered in our own country. It is electricity, and 
it ]s of great use to the human race. Nothing can live without the electricity 

in the air. 

o 

ERIC 



7 -±4 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 



1 . A Safety Warning 

The teacher should caution the students to never try this, or any other, 
experiment we do in school with other forms of electricity such as 
house current or larger batteries such as 5 volt or a 12 volt battery. 
Impress upon every student that ELECTRICITY CAN KILL IF PEOPLE 
ARE NOT CAREFUL WITH IT; IN ADDITION, WARN STUDENTS 
TO NEVER PLUG INTO A WALL SOCKET ANY OF THE MATERIALS 
USED IN THESE EXPERIMENTS. REMEMBER, SOME 
ELECTRICAL DEVICES STORE ENOUGH ELECTRICAL ENERGY 
TO CAUSE DEATH OR SEVERE INJURY. 



2. Everyday Uses 

List ways electricity is used in their everyday lives (lamps, refrigerators, 
radios and televisions, etc). Discuss the concept that electricity has 
the ability to do work and is a form of energy that can be felt. 



o 

ERIC 



Feeling Electricity 

A safe experiment uses insulated copper wire with almost 1" of 
insulation removed from each end. Cut the wire into two pieces and 
connect one to the negative and one to the postive pole of a C or D size 
battery. Have the students touch the wires to the tip of their tongue so 
they can feel a small sting from the electricity. Discuss what the 
students felt and tell them that the electrons in the battery were the 
cause of the stinging. 




4. 



Making a Closed Circuit 



d 

ERIC 



Get a piece of cardboard about the size of a piece of notebook paper. 
Place it on the desk with the short sides at the top and bottom. Tape 
a 16-inch long strip of aluminum foil, about 1 inch wide, in a C shape 
from the center of the top, around the left side, and to the center of the 
bottom piece. Tape another narrow strip, about 8 inches long, from the 
center of the bottom and up the right side, leaving about 1 inch space 
of space between the pieces. 

Fold another 1 inch wide, 8 inch long piece of foil in half lengthwise and 
wrap one end around the bottom of a flashlight bulb. . 



Fasten a wooden, spring type clothes pin onto the bottom of the bulb, 
leaving the tip of the bulb free. Position the clothes pin so that the 
bottom of the bulb touches the end of the foil. The foil on the bulb 
should not touch the foil strip. The clothes pin should not be taped in 
place. 

The positive end of one battery should now touch the negative end of 
the other battery. Have the other members of the team tape the 
batteries together. 



The batteries are taped to the circuit board. The foil strip should be 
pressed against each end of the battery. A rubber band should be 
used to wrap the batteries tightly together. 



The switch has now been made with the 2 loose pieces of foil. If you 
want to dose the switch, touch the loose ends together. If the light bulb 
lights up, you have completed the switch correctly. If the light bulb 
does not light up, go back and try to connect the switch again. 



If the light bulb does not work, check the following: 



Are there any tears in the foil? 

Does the foil on the bottom of the bulb touch the long piece of 
foil? 

t. 

Are the batteries wrapped together tightly? 

If the light bulb still does not work, ask for another set of 
batteries arid a bulb. 





9 



16 



EVALUATION ACTIVITIES: 



After the activities, ask students the following questions: 

1 . How did you feel when the electricity stung your tongue? Did 

you taste the electricity? What did it -taste like? 

2. What tool do you need to strip the wire? Why do you have to 
strip the insulation off of the wire? What does the copper do? 



RESOURCES: 



Bahti, Tom. Southweste rn Indian Ceremonials . Kansas City, Missouri- Kansas- 
City Publications, 1 982. 

Clark, Ella E. Indian Leo ends of the Pacific Northwest |_ os Angeles 
California: University of California Press, 1953, 1971, p. 165. 

Houghton, Janaye M. "Sensing Circuits." Super Science Bln o Edition \/nl 
3, No. 6, March, 1992: pp. 18-23. ' 



DEVELOPED BY: 

Elaine Hendricks 
Diane Cleveland 
Renata Griego 




o 

ERLC 



to 



17 



SCIENCE/MATH - 



"Electrical Energy" 

DAY ONE 

1. Free exploration 

a. Set up stations with the various electrical 
equipment such as radio, electric pencil sharpener, 
computer , VCR, toaster, lamp, popcorn popper, or 



b. The students move from station to station in groups 
or individually to areas of interest. 

c. Come back to group to discuss the following: 

- commonality 
~ difference 

~ most interesting, why? 

- most useful, why? 

- most recreational, why? 

d. set up a bucket of water on one side of a table and 
an electric pencil sharpener on the other. How are 
these related? How can we get from (a) bucket or 
reservoir or water to (b) electric pencil 
sharpener? List possible answers and then show the 
diagram drawn by Byron Dean showing reservoir to 
house . 

e. Discuss what questions to ask a representative of a 
local power company? 

~ What is the ma^jor source of energy for community? 
Has the source changed in the past? What are the 
future sources of electrical energy? 



DAY TWO 

1. Continued free exploration with Day I stations. 

2. Call to set up a field trip or a visit from representative 
from the local power company. Ask questions from Day I 
discussion. 

3. Brainstorm or set up group learning stations to discuss the 
field trip or visit from power representative. 

4. Use the language development with word worth chart and 
sentence expansion from Day I. Develop poetry, posters, 
cards, bulletin boards, etc.. 



DAY THREE 



1. 



2 . 



3. 



ttinui* 333333 ^ - f ° r . students to ®ake power plants or 
circuit boards. Obtain simple instructions for energy powered 

sel^un sLni le H C - e l3bS ' teXtS ' m ^^ines, or com-.rS.lt IS? 

activity with ertendS ™ s lMinat " 1 cards f ° r » begi^ing 



en ® rgy path froin Da y 1 activity of source 
f water to fuse box in home. Attach types of energy to 
different stages of this path: gY 

Kinetic Energy - Flowing Water 
Mechanical Energy - Rotating in a Turbine 
Electrical Energy - Generator 

Review the stages of electrical energy: 
a . Reservoir 
Dam 

Pipe leading from reservoir to power plant 
Turbines 
Generators 
Transformers 
Power Lines 
House 



b. 

c. 

d. 

e. 

f . 

g. 

h. 



Use the following activities with the above terms: 



1 . 

2 . 

3. 



Put terms on cards and then place in working order. 
Act out each term . 

Write a story about the energy path. 



DAY FOUR 

1. Map the locations of any hydroelectric power facility in your 
®tate or neighboring states. Why were these locations chosen? 
Can we relate, our lifestyles with the water resource in our 
area? What did our ancestors use for basic needs of life? 

2. Compare electrical conveniences from home or school to those 
used 91 years ago. Use resources of catalogs, input from 
parents, encyclopedias, stories from ancestors, literature 
books, etc. 

a. Suggested items: iron, pencil sharpener, toaster, 

popcorn popper, clock, calculator, heater, etc. 



0 

ERIC 



19 



12 



■ 



DAY FIVE 



1. 


Continued exploration with 


energy kits. 




2. 


Display and tell about 
individual or group. 


any 


electrical 


creation as an 


3. 


Make a book about water as a 
student may contribute a page or 
books . 


source of 
work as a 


electricity. Each 
group on different 



RESOURCES: 



"Energizing Water", Project WET Montana notebook. 
Watercourse, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT, 



Western 
1991. pp 



Water wise: A Water Use Handbook, U.S. 
Bureau of Reclamation. 



Dept, of the Interior, 



EVALUATION: 

1. The student will relate the importance of electrical energy. 

2. The student will describe the process of changing kinetic 
energy into electrical energy. 

3. ^The student will show on a state or local map the 
hydroelectric power facilities in a given area. 

4. The student will state the differences between features of 3 
common electrical units now and 91 years ago. 





<L 



IT 



13 



SCIENCE/MATH - 



"Water as Energy" 



TEACHER'S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

° f as e " ergy were turn mills and as steam 

__ machines. Today waterfalls and dams create electrical 

energy. These waterfalls and dams must be within a few hundred 
miles of plants or cities since electricity cannot Ce carried ^ea? 

been tSSLSTt tt.? 

Hydroelectric power plants are found in our Western States -rho 

word -hydro" means water. Hydroelectric poJer is eTertricitv that 

o?an?s • T . he “ ater used f ° r thes^ plants .rf£p!$ SS 

tK-h?n« Tv te9 “ to turn h “9 e wheel - like machines'^ or water 
turbines thus creating electricity. water 

s^that^hor^ » C Plant£ l have • their own facilities to store water 
SLmnio ?/ r JL 1S ? C u nS1Sten cy in the flow throughout the year. An 
« f f* 1B , Hoover Dan which has facilities to store more 
Sr!t ye supply Of water and thus be able to operate at full 

capacity without using any water from the Colorado River. 

The use of water power is limited by the natural distribution of 

throughout the Earth. usually tte sites foj 
K J • Plants are far from industrial centers. Even though 

XS ® fficient ' clean * economical and apparently 
^fo S «i ble -r' n ? t amon 9 the major types of electricity used 

at present. In the United States less than a fourth of electrical 
power generated is hydroelectric power* 



Another use of water power in the experimental stage is the ebb and 
flow of the tides. To utilize this constant motion, a natural bay 
or basin is dammed and turbines are installed in the spaces in the 
dam. The water races through the turbines as the tide rises, 
flowing into the bay, and as it falls flowing back to the sea. 
This experimental project will * probably come into greater use as 
the fuel supplies for thermal plants become more scarce* 



ERIC 



14 



21 



°° & 
CM 




CM 

CM 






SCIENCE STANDARDS ADDRESSED IN ELECTRICITY UNIT - 



Standard - Knows the forms energy takes, its transformations from one form to 
another, and its relationship to matter 
Benchmarks - 

Knows that energy conies in different forms, such as light, thermal, electrical, kinetic 
(motion), and sound, which can be changed from one form to another 
Understands that whenever the amount of energy in one place or form diminishes, the 
amount in other places or forms increases by the same amount 

Knows that temperature changes in a sample of matter are related to the loss or gain of 
thermal energy by the sample 

Knows that energy changes involved in physical or chemical changes can be measured in 
the form of heat 

Knows that energy can be harnessed to do work, which is represented by the quality of 
force applied to an object times the distance the object moves in the direction of the force 

Understands what constitutes a system and how the idea of systems is used in 
different contexts 
Benchmarks - 

Knows that in mechanical and electrical systems, a single faulty or mismatched part may 
cause malfunctioning 

Knows that thinking about things as systems means looking for how every part relates to 
the others 

Knows that the output from one part of a system (which can include material, energy, or 
information) can become the input to other parts 

Knows that any system is usually linked to other systems, both internally and externally 

AMERICAN INDIAN SCIENCE STANDARDS ADDRESSED - 
Physical Science 

All Indian students should develop an understanding of how energy was transferred 
through the use of early Indian hunting tools, such as the act of throwing a spear with an 
atlatl. 

Science and Technology 

All Indian students should develop an understanding of the technological design process 
and how it was applied in the development of various tools and technologies employed 
by early American Indians, such as fish weirs, salmon spearing platforms, and road and 
building construction technologies. 

History and Nature of Science 

All Indian students should develop an understanding of ways in which reasoning, insight, 
energy, skill and creativity were demonstrated in the scientific achievements of early 
American Indians - architecture, tools, health and medicine. 

16 



ERIC 



24 



OIL AND GAS 



Oil and gas are other sources of energy that have contributed to more convenient 
lifestyles for American Indians. But they, too, have also contributed to destruction. 
Many tribes and tribal members have received money for oil and gas found on their 
lands, but it is usually not without a price. Land is destroyed and sometimes lives have 
been destroyed. The Osage Tribe in Oklahoma was particularly devastated by the 
discovery of oil on their lands. 



LITERATURE FOR OIL AND GAS UNIT - 

Old Man Coyote and the Rock and Tunka-Shila, Grandfather Rock, in Keepers of the 
Earth by Michael Caduto and Joseph Bruchac (Indian Author), Fulcrum, 1988. 

Morning Star, Black Sun, Northern Cheyenne Indians and America’s Energy Crisis by 
Brent Ashabranner, Dodd, Mead, 1 982. 



ACTIVITIES FOR UNIT - 

1 . Have the students learn about oil and gas and its uses, read cultural materials 
and hear cultural perspectives relating to this topic, and observe impacts. 

2. Have the students research the use of products from oil and gas in their 
area/reservation. What are the effects? Are there any negative effects? 

3. Does the local tribe(s) have oil and gas resources? How has this affected 
the land and lives of the tribal members? List positive and negative effects. 

4. Discuss the reasons for the fluctuation of oil and gas costs. What do oil 
and gas cost now? Why are these natural resources especially sought? 

5. How is mathematics utilized in the oil and gas industry? Develop some 
problems and solve them. 

6. Have the students develop position papers on what tribes should do in regard 
to their oil and gas resources. 



Following are example activities developed by teachers of Indian students who attended 
math and science workshops during 1992-1994 at Haskell Indian Nations University. 
Adapt these activities to meet your students’ needs. Review the science standards for this 
unit. They will suggest further science and math activities. Also utilize the activities in 
Keepers of the Earth. 



17 




25 



INTRODUCTION - 



erIc 



OIL AND GAS 



CULTURAL OUTCOMES: 

SCIENCE OUTCOMES: II, HI, IV, V, VI 

MATH OUTCOMES: I, II, III, VI, VIII, IX 



II 



TIME FRAME: 



6 weeks 



CULTURAL LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
Students will: 

understand their relationship to Mother Earth 

SCIENCE LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
Students will: 

gain an awareness of basic geological concepts 
understand what energy is and how it's used 

of Materials * 131 th ® 6arth ±S made ° f layers of different types 

certain types of rock absorb and hold liquid 
better than others underground 

know that water isn't found in underground lakes 
identify places where water can gather 
understand porosity and permeability 

acquire information about oil pollution affecting water 
know how leases are used 

identify drilling practices used by companies 
write about financial risk in drilling 

able -to verbally explain that gas coming out of solution can 
cause a gusher 



18 



Sli e 2£t n iL that °i 1Ce th€ "9 Usher " pressure is lessened that 
oil must be pumped out of the ground 

sculpt^? 6 PartS ° f an 0il pump in a student/ s drawing' or 
deliver the Til meth ° d ° f oil transport affects the effort to 



explain in writing a story how oil spills can be avoided 

thG benefits of Pipeline transportation over other 



f kil i? to find information about the three 
methods of exploration for oil 



have an idea of what type of instrument 
look like 



one uses 



and what they 



research seizmic-ref lection exploration 
use listening and note-taking skills 
use hands-on skills and real life skills 



° i3 : refinin 9 involves heating crude oil until 
it vaporizes into its component parts _ 



understand that different solutions boil 
temperatures 



at different 



learn that he can graph how component liguids boil 
different temperatures . 



at 



math objectives 
S tudents will: 

construct a time- lime 
use measurements 

/ 

read a map to show understanding of the Federal Grid system 





19 



27 



SCIENCE/MATH - 



"Energy and Its Uses" 



TEACHER'S BACKGROUND INFORMATION : 

last <3u. arter of the 19th Century, the petroleum industry 
P layed a ® a 3 or role in the story of man's progress. From 

attlx ll came gasoline, kerosene, fuel oils, lubricating oils and 
greases, wax, asphalt, and scores of other products. 

'? It l Pftr° leuln is of Latin origin and means "rock oil". 

thit lived that . P etr S> le u® was formed from plants and animals 

rnat lived ages ago in and around warm seas that covered much of 

*f- the P . lan . tS and animals died, they piled upon the sea 
nXX 1 tlm ® ® llllons of tons of sand and mud covered them. 
Under pressure, the mud and sand changed to rock. The plants and 

r";r ls , tur ?\ d “ a darlc li-joio trapped in the j£res ol Slroete 
°1 Xf earth ' s crust caused parts of the old sea floor to 
become dry land. Some of the liguid oozed to the surface of the 
earth where men first noticed it. 



SXf e J >etrc l leuJn ' as ib comes from the well is of little use. It 
XcXX r ^£ ln t?*_u T 11 ® basic refining process, distillation, is 
based on the fact that petroleum is a mixture of many solids , 
iguids, and gases. The chemist calls them hydrocarbons, for they 
are chemical compounds of carbon and hydrogen. 



Petroleum research scientists have learned a great deal about 
juggling the molecules of oil. They can add or subtract atoms of 
hydrogen almost at will. The high octane gasoline for large modem 
airplanes is a very complex substance. It is made through use of 
the chemical processes these scientists have developed. Without 
this special fuel planes could not fly so far, so high, so fast, or 
carry so heavy a load as they do. 



Gasoline, kerosene, lubricating oils, home heating oils, fuel oils 
for industry, bunker oils to drive great ships, and greases are not 
the only products from petroleum. There are hundreds of others. 
Your automobile may use a petroleum-base antifreeze in the winter. 
Its paint may be made of synthetic rubber. Special cutting and 
stamping oils have aided in the manufacture of the car's metal 
P^rts • Petroleum products are often used to make road— paving 
materials, roofing, candles, paraffin, waxed paper, carbon paper, 
salves, chemicals, cold cream, lotions, lipsticks, linoleum, 
T.N.T., fly sprays, moth repellents, dry-cleaning fluids, and 
alcohols. A few years ago there was usually some waste gas left 
over when oil was refined. Today everything can be used, even the 
smell . odor made from oil is often put in gas used for cooking and 
heating, so people will be warned by their noses when there is a 
leak in a gas line. 





20 



28 



STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 
A. Vocabulary: 



1 . energy 


4. 


hydrocarbons 


2 . petroleum 


5. 


carbon 


3. distillation 


6 . 

7. 


hydrogen 

chemist 



B. Activity: 

1. Materials: butcher paper, pencils, markers, 

encyclopedias, and other resource materials. 

• Place students in cooperative learning groups 

of 3-5 and have them designate a leader and 
secretary. 

3. Have students develop a list of at least 10 
items or products that are made of petroleum. 
Evaluation: Teacher observation of group 

dynamics and use of problem-solving 
strategies . 



4. 



SCIENCE/MATH - 



"Where Is oil Found?" 



TEACHER'S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

con posed 1 " of'hytoog^ind^srton S.' 11 " 5 ° f ° r9anic " 0lecules 
much°of° P t C animtls 1 tha?’ ^rieSrSt 

depths, usually “r! n |S*500 I feet; 8t ** bUri * d t0 COnsiderable 

rock in which tlie Petroleum is formed are 
but i?Tni=?« OU ^ Ce rock * ^ay are usually dark gray or black shale 
«« ii” e f° ne , 1E a Eource under some conditions, oil and natural 
KoKlJ'K water. **“ and for a11 P™ctic.l p££o“* 

STUDENTS LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 

A. Activity l - where oil is Found 



1 . 

2 . 

3 . 

4 . 

5 . 

6 . 
7 . 



Place layers of clay and sand between two pieces of 
glass to show layers of earth. 

Place a sponge filled with ink between the layers 
of clay and sand. 3 

Place some water in a pocket under the ground. 

Make sure you make sand levels. 

Put a solid glass tube down through the layers , in 
or down, to tap into the layers of oil or water. 
Students will pull the glass tube out and let the 
oil pollute the water table. 

Evaluation: 




a. 



b. 



c. 



d. 

e. 



Students will be given a handout that 
has 9 cross section of the earth and 
will point out where it is most likely 
to find oil and why. 

Students will be evaluated on the 
organization of the Thematic Unit Note 
Folders . 

Students will conduct a panel 
discussion on whether they are for or 
against drilling for oil. 

Activity quiz. 

Evaluate each students' models. 






22 



30 



C4 

CO 



V) 25 

e3 § 



o 






u a) 

2 m 



M K h- 



w « 

VI £ u- « 

c J2 « c 

0 rg W53J 
3 : £ c o 

1 « o 1 

o.s 5 5 

M W U M 

*2 3 « g 3 

| -a s | 

3 *5 ^-n ,2 

•5 SO 



•o 
. u 

w - E2 



u **- 

w *J -- 

<2 ~ 3 ,0 

illi 

SsM 

a 5 o > 

S >s C 2 

^ 0 "S J2 
•5 9 Co 

.2,14 2 

k a « o 

« 5 MfC 

JJ 2.5 p 

=«^s 



o «3 i_ J2 

-c c " “ 
C/5 S 
\ p 



z 

a 

3 -S 

S.s 

H b. 

U 



}~ 

C*5 



a s 

E <» 

a | 

11 

!j« 

a. ed . U --j 

6 E 8 S g 

Hill 

ot 00 -a o <2 

o g S « o 

B®eSS 

* o £ 'S S 

£■3 g E 2 

1 1 8 J -S 

U 8 *« 




all | § 
illll 

*■* o « a 

« ^-S e£ 8. 

D 

O 

E 



CO 





SCIENCE/MATH - 



"How Oil is Found" 



TEACHER'S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

methods*? 6 SeVeral means of exploring the earth by geophysical 

techniques exploits fundamental physical aspects of 
gravitationa^properties?" “ eleCtrica1 ^ acoustical or 

techniques do not allow detailed examination of the 

itfer^hr^^i V 1 ®/ often enable geologists and geophysicists to 
infer the most likely properties of large volumes of rocks 




Seismic reflections, a powerful technique for 
exploration has been used for over 60 years . Waves are 
sound waves that 



underground 

essentially 



travel underground at 
velocities of 2 to 4 
miles per second 
depending upon the 
type of rock through 
which they pass. 



Seismic reflection 
techniques depend on 
the existence of 
distinct and abrupt 
sensor-velocity 
and/or mass density 
change in the 
subsurface. These 
changes in either 
density or velocity are known as acoustical contrast. 




STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES : 



1 . Activity 



B. 



Students will research the three types of 
geophysical exploration and see which method would 
cost the most and which one is the most cost 
efficient. 

Students will draw a diagram to illustrate the 
three methods. 

Students will research seismic-reflection 
exploration method and its cost and efficiency. 
Bring in a speaker to make a presentation on the 



24 



33 




local area. 

E. Students will be given a list of words to listen 
for during a video presentation. 

F. Field trip. Students will visit an area where 
these various exploration methods are being used. 



0 ■ 

ERIC 



34 



25 



SCIENCE/MATH - 



"Transportation" 



TEACHER'S BACKGROUND INFORMATION: 

Gas and oil can leave the well or refinery in a variety of ways. 
The most efficient is by pipeline. Less efficient ways include: 
tank trucks; barges; tankers; railroad cars. (See Activity A) 
Transporting oil or gas by pipeline is more efficient because other 
ways are more costly and use energy, i.e., gasoline, electricity. 
The cost of building a pipeline is high but operating one is much 
more inexpensive than other means. 

When a pipeline reaches mountains the contents must be pumped. The 
pumping effort is lessened by a siphoning effect of the contents 
which have reached the lower area. (See Activity B) 

Factors which increase the cost of transportation by means other 
than pipelines involve public as well as oil/gas company resources. 
When oil is transported by truck the company must pay for gasoline 
to operate the truck and the pump used to remove the oil from 
tanks. In addition, the cost of truck and oil well road 
maintenance cuts into the company's profits. The weight of oil 
trucks damage public road surfaces, resulting in higher taxes for 
local citizens. There is also the cost of environmental clean up 
when a tank truck is involved in an accident which causes its 
contents to spill. (See Activity C) 

Trucks are also less efficient for transporting natural gas for the 
same reasons as oil, and one more important reason. Energy must be 
expended to condense the gas for tank truck transport. 

Barges and tankers use oil products to operate and put waterways 
and coastlines at risk of oil spills. Transportation by railroad 
also uses more energy than pipelines and can pollute areas if the 
tank cars spill the oil in a mishap or because of human error. 

STUDENT LEARNING ACTIVITIES: 

A. Activity: < 

1. Materials: 1 watch, 1 soft rope, 1 meter or 

yardstick, one-30 ft. length of garden hose, 
10 one-gallon buckets, water supply, 1 funnel, 
1 roll of tape, 2 very large, waterproof 
containers of equal volume, and 2 
cups. 



2 . 



O i 

ERIC 



Divide the class into two groups or "oil or 
gas companies," Allow them to choose among 
the following roles: Recorder/level checker; 
Dipper; carrier (bucket only group); funnel 
holder (hose group). NOTE: This activity is 
best performed out of doors. 



3 . Extend the hose from the water source and 
place the large containers at the end. Put 
the end of the hose into a container. Fasten 
the funnel to the other end of the hose with 
tape and have the funnel holder hold it 
slightly higher than the other end which is 
the outlet . Stretch . the rope from the other 

^container to the water source — do not make it 
straight. 

4 . Have the hose group empty water buckets into 
the hose to fill up the large container. The 
Dipper removes one cup of water for every 
three buckets poured into the funnel to 
simulate the money, effort and energy required 
to pump a real pipeline. Pour cups into an 
extra bucket. The recorder keeps a count of 
each bucket emptied into the hose. 



5 . The bucket only group operates as a bucket 

brigade. Simulating transportation by trucks, 
rail raid, tank cars, and water craft. The 
bucket carriers carry the buckets from the 
water source to fill the large container. 
When they are doing so, have them walk on a 
rope, placing each foot on it. 



6. The Dipper pours the water into a bucket. 
When he or she has filled a bucket another of 
the groups' buckets must be used. 



7. 



8 . 



The Dipper removes 2 cups from each bucket to 
demonstrate oil money losses in the form of 
transportation. The monetary losses include 
the wages for truck drivers , mechanics and 
other employees as well as energy required to 
transport the oil and/or gas . The Recorder 
should keep track of the buckets of water 
carried to the large container. 



Ask both groups who is 
expending more effort. 



getting tired , 




36 



27 



