ED471719 2002-12-00 Using Culturally 
and Linguistically Appropriate 
Assessments To Ensure that American 
Indian and Alaska Native Students 
Receive the Special Education Programs 
and Services They Need. ERIC Digest. 

ERIC Development Team 
www . eric . ed . gov 

Table of Contents 

If you're viewing this document online, you can click any of the topics below to link directly to that section. 

Using Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Assessments To Ensure 
that American Indian and Alaska Native Students Receive the 
Special Education Programs and Services They Need. ERIC 

Digest 2 

CHARACTERISTICS OF AI/AN STUDENTS IN SPECIAL 

EDUCATION 2 

ADDRESSING LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY 3 

CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY APPROPRIATE 

ASSESSMENTS AS MANDATED BY IDEA 4 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ENSURING CULTURALLY AND 

LINGUISTICALLY APPROPRIATE 5 

SUMMARY 6 

ERIC M Digests 

ERIC Identifier: ED471719 
Publication Date: 2002-12-00 



ED471719 2002-12-00 Using Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Assessments To 
Ensure that American Indian and Alaska Native Students Receive the Special Education 



Page 1 of 7 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



Author: Tippeconnic, John W., Ill - Faircloth, Susan C. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools Charleston WV. 

Using Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate 
Assessments To Ensure that American Indian 
and Alaska Native Students Receive the Special 
Education Programs and Services They Need. 
ERIC Digest. 

THIS DIGEST WAS CREATED BY ERIC, THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER. FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT ERIC, CONTACT 
ACCESS ERIC 1 -800-LET-ERIC 

The "American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda" (Research 
Agenda Working Group, Strang, & von Glatz, 2001) represents the most recent formal 
call for research leading to improved assessments for American Indian and Alaska 
Native (AI/AN) students with special learning needs. Similar calls were recorded at 
hearings and published in commissioned papers in the early 1990s (Cahape, 1993; 
Johnson, 1991). The disproportionate number of AI/AN students receiving special 
education services and identified as "limited English proficient" (LEP) indicates an 
ongoing need for this research. This Digest briefly reviews the legislation and literature 
pertaining to the influence of language and culture in making referrals, administering 
assessments, and providing appropriate services and programs to AI/AN students. 

CHARACTERISTICS OF AI/AN STUDENTS IN 
SPECIAL EDUCATION 



Most (90%) of the approximately 500,000 AI/AN students attend public schools, while 
approximately 50,000 attend schools operated or funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(BIA) (2001 ). Although AI/AN students accounted for only 1 % of the total public school 
enrollment during the 1 999-2000 academic year, they accounted for 1 .3% of ail 
students served under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) (U.S. 
Department of Education [USDE], 2001), a 30% higher than expected representation in 
special education programs and services. 

In addition, among all U.S. students identified as being in need of LEP services 1 .9% 
were AI/AN (nearly 55,000 students) and of all those reported to be enrolled in LEP 
programs, approximately 1.8% were AI/AN students (nearly 48,000) (USDE, 1999). 
According to the U.S. General Accounting Office (Shaul, 2001), approximately 20% of 
students attending BIA-operated or -funded schools received special education 
programs and services, and nearly 60% of the students in these schools were identified 
as LEP. 



Page 2 of 7 



ED471719 2002-12-00 Using Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Assessments To 
Ensure that American Indian and Alaska Native Students Receive the Special Education 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



Citing the potential for over representation of minority students in special education 
programs, the 1997 Amendments to the IDEA required states to begin collecting and 
reporting data on the number of students served in special education programs by race 
and/or ethnicity (USDE, 2001 ). 

Under IDEA, 13 categories of disability may qualify students for services. According to a 
2001 U.S. Department of Education report, AI/AN students were over represented in all 
disability categories with the exceptions of developmental delay (0.9%), orthopedic 
impairments (0.8%), and autism (0.7%). This over representation was the highest for 
the categories of deaf-blindness (2.0%) and traumatic brain injury (1 .6%). The largest 
numbers of AI/AN students appeared in the categories of specific learning disabilities 
(40,208), speech or language impairments (13,080), mental retardation (6,759), and 
emotional disturbance (5,171). 

ADDRESSING LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY 



As mentioned previously, the Office for Civil Rights estimated that in 1997, 54,718 
American Indian students needed services to address limited English proficiency 
(USDE, 1 999). As defined in Title IX of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 , the term 
"limited English proficient" refers to an individual 



* who is aged 3 through 21 ; 



* who is enrolled or preparing to enroll in an elementary school or secondary school; 



* who was not born in the United States or whose native language is a language other 
than English; who is a Native American or Alaska Native, or a native resident of the 
outlying areas, and who comes from an environment where a language other than 
English has had a significant impact on the individual's level of English language 
proficiency; or who is migratory, whose native language is a language other than 
English, and who comes from an environment where a language other than English is 
dominant; and 



* whose difficulties in speaking, reading, writing, or understanding the English language 
may be sufficient to deny the individual (i) the ability to meet the State's proficient level 
of achievement on State assessments . . . ; (ii) the ability to successfully achieve in 
classrooms where the language of instruction is English; or (iii) the opportunity to 



Programs and Services They Need. ERIC Digest. 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



participate fully in society (section 9101). 

CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY 
APPROPRIATE ASSESSMENTS AS MANDATED 
BY IDEA 

Citing the need for culturally and linguistically appropriate assessment, the 1997 
Amendments to IDEA included provisions for nondiscriminatory assessment/evaluation. 
These provisions apply both to pre-placement assessment and to reevaluation of 
students currently served by special education programs and services. According to 
IDEA 



* students must be tested in their native language or primary mode of communication; 



* multiple forms of assessment must be used to ensure adequate assessment of a 
number of factors including cognitive, behavioral, physical, and developmental factors, 
and the results of these assessments are to be used when making placement decisions; 



* tests and other evaluation materials are to be selected and administered in a manner 
that does not discriminate based on race or culture; and 



* students must be assessed in all areas of the suspected disability. 



In addition, standardized tests must be 



* validated for the purpose for which they are to be used; 



administered by trained and knowledgeable personnel; and 



Programs and Services They Need. ERIC Digest. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



* administered in accordance with the instructions issued by the developers of the tests 
(adapted from section 614). 

Finally, assessments should incorporate tools and strategies that provide relevant 
information, which can be used to determine the educational needs of the child. 

A strong indication of the need for tests and testing as outlined in the law is the 
increasing number of AI/AN students who are identified as LEP (Shaul, 2001 ). To 
ensure that these students are appropriately educated, assessments must be 
conducted in a manner that facilitates the identification of and distinction between 
"language-related disabilities" and poor academic performance resulting from a "lack of 
English language proficiency." According to Rice and Ortiz (as cited in USDE, 2001), 
when assessing students who have been identified as LEP, evaluators should obtain a 
clear description of the student's "communicative competence in both languages" (i.e. 
how well the student speaks and writes in his or her native language and in the English 
language). This will assist in determining whether the student has a language-related 
disability or if the student's academic difficulties are related to a lack of competence in 
the English language. 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ENSURING 
CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY 
APPROPRIATE 

ASSESSMENTUse culturally and linguistically appropriate assessments. As discussed, 
evaluators should develop and use culturally and linguistically appropriate assessments 
to ensure that AI/AN students receive appropriate educational services (Banks, 1997; 
Johnson, 1991). Using multiple assessments rather than relying on a single instrument, 
such as a standardized test, can help to achieve this. Further, when using standardized 
tests, noting the potential for bias is especially important if the test has not been normed 
on the population with which it is to be used (Chamberlain & Madeiros-Landurand, 

1991; Ishii-Jordan, 1997). 

Use authentic or performance-based assessments. Educators should explore the use of 
authentic and performance-based assessments, such as the Learning Record (1), to 
complement standardized testing. The Learning Record, currently used in a number of 
BIA-funded schools, has been characterized as "a performance-based assessment 
system that provides teachers with a structured method of tracking students' academic 
development and planning instruction to meet students' needs" (Fox, 1999, p. 167). 
Authentic or performance-based assessments provide students with opportunities to 
demonstrate knowledge of a particular task or set of tasks and ability to perform the 
task(s) in a real-life setting (2). 

Involve parents and families in the assessment process. According to Bordeaux (as 

ED471 71 9 2002-1 2-00 Using Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Assessments To Page 5 of 7 
Ensure that American Indian and Alaska Native Students Receive the Special Education 




www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



cited in Fox, 1999), "the effort to improve cultural relevance of curriculum and 
assessment must be guided by all stakeholders, including parents and other tribal 
community members" (p.174). 

Be aware of and responsive to students cultural and linguistic differences. When 
assessing AI/AN students, remember that there are more than 500 tribes across the 
nation, each with its own distinct language and culture. 

SUMMARY 



Educators must constantly monitor the influence of language and culture on the referral, 
assessment, and provision of special education programs and services to ensure that 
AI/AN students are appropriately served. As noted in the "Twenty-Third Annual Report 
to Congress on the Implementation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act," 
educators should understand that "differences in learning, behavior, culture, and 
language, either separately or in combination, may exacerbate educational problems 
caused by disabilities" (USDE, 2001 , Section II, p. 38). This report points out that 
educators must also know how to distinguish between a student who has a learning 
disability and one whose poor academic performance results in part from limited English 
proficiency. 

A need for continued research related to the referral, assessment, and provision of 
special education programs and services to AI/AN students has long been recognized, 
and recently reinforced by the "American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research 
Agenda" (Research Agenda Working Group, et al., 2001). Educators and parents face 
questions far more complex than whether to place AI/AN students in special education 
programs or services. They need good information to determine what service or 
combination of services can ensure that AI/AN students receive the free and 
appropriate education guaranteed by law. 

Continuing to develop, identify, and publish best practices in culturally and linguistically 
appropriate assessment will help to produce good information and ensure that AI/AN 
students receive educational programs that meet their needs and nurture their talents. 



Title: Using Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Assessments To Ensure that 
American Indian and Alaska Native Students Receive the Special Education Programs 
and Services They Need. ERIC Digest. 

Note: Online version includes an annotated bibliography with some links to full-text 
documents. 

Document Type: Information Analyses— ERIC Information Analysis Products (lAPs) 
(071); Information Analyses— ERIC Digests (Selected) in Full Text (073); 

Available From: ERIC/CRESS, P.O. Box 1348, Charleston, WV 25325-1348. Tel: 
800-624-9120 (Toll Free). For full text: http://www.ael.org/eric/digests/edorc02-8.pdf. 
Descriptors: Alaska Natives, Alternative Assessment, American Indian Education, 



Page 6 of 7 



ED471719 2002-12-00 Using Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Assessments To 
Ensure that American Indian and Alaska Native Students Receive the Special Education 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



American Indians, Cultural Awareness, Culturally Relevant Education, Disabilities, 
Disability Identification, Elementary Secondary Education, Limited English Speaking, 
Parent Participation, Racial Discrimination, Special Education 
Identifiers: ERIC Digests, Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 
### 



[Return to ERIC Digest Search Page] 



Programs and Services They Need. ERIC Digest. 



