m 


THE CENTER ON 

SCHOOL 

TURNAROUND 


The State Role 
in School Turnaround 





Emerging 
Best Practices 


Lauren Morando Rhim 
& Sam Redding 

EDITORS 

'W 





The State Role in School Turnaround 
Emerging Best Practices 


Lauren Morando Rhim & Sam Redding 
Editors 


ULIest zd ^ 

WeBtEd.org 


Copyright © 2014 WestEd. All rights reserved. 


WestEd, 730 Harrison Street, San Francisco, CA 94107-1242 

WestEd — a national nonpartisan, nonprofit research, development, and service 
agency — works with education and other communities to promote excellence, achieve 
equity, and improve learning for children, youth, and adults. WestEd has 16 offices 
nationwide, from Boston and Washington to Arizona and California, with headquarters 
in San Francisco. More information about WestEd is available at WestEd.org. 


□ 


THE CENTER ON 

SCHOOL 

TURNAROUND 

UJestEd®. 


http://centeronschoolturnaround.org 


This work was supported by the Center on School Turnaround through funding from the 
U.S. Department of Education, PR/Award Number S283B120015. It does not necessarily 
reflect the views or policies of the U.S. Department of Education and you should not 
assume endorsement by the Federal Government. 

The Center on School Turnaround, a partnership of WestEd and the Academic 
Development Institute (ADI], the Darden/Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education at 
the University of Virginia, and the National Implementation Research Network, is part of 
the federal network of fifteen Regional Comprehensive Centers, serving individual states 
or clusters of states, and seven national Content Centers. 


Suggested citation for this volume: 

Rhim, L. M., & Redding, S. [Eds]. [2014], The state role in turnaround: Emerging best 
practices. San Francisco, CA: WestEd. 




Acknowledgements 

We would like to acknowledge the dynamic authors who agreed to 
temporarily pause their important work to synthesize and share their evolving 
insights. These emerging insights are critical to accelerating turnaround work 
as the field is literally building the plane flying down the runway. External 
reviewers, Susan Moulden-Horton and Scott Norton, provided thoughtful and 
much appreciated reviews of the chapters. The leadership team of the Center on 
School Turnaround at WestEd — Fred Tempes, Sylvie Hale, and Scott Sargent — 
provided invaluable feedback as we worked to translate our vision for the book 
into a tangible deliverable that would be of value to the field. Finally, we would 
also like to acknowledge the editing team at Academic Development Institute — 
Pam Sheley and Lori Thomas — for their tireless efforts to prepare the chapters to 
ensure a coherent volume. 



Table of Contents 


Foreword 5 

Bryan Hassel 

Introduction to the State Role in School Turnaround: Emerging Best Practice .... 13 
Lauren Morando Rhim and Sam Redding 

Evolution of School Turnaround 19 

Sam Redding and Lauren Morando Rhim 

Section A: Advocate and Lead 

Leveraging the Bully Pulpit: Optimizing the Role of the Chief State School 

Officer to Drive, Support, and Sustain Turnaround 31 

Lauren Morando Rhim and Sam Redding 

Engaging Local School Boards to Catalyze, Support, and Sustain 

School Turnaround 49 

Lauren Morando Rhim 

Section B: Create a Pro-Turnaround Environment 

Successful School Turnarounds Through Labor-Management Partnerships: 

The Role for State Education Agencies 65 

Ken Futernick and Adam Urbanski 

Building Human Capital Pipelines: Examining the Role of the 

State Education Agency 81 

Dennis Woodruff and Cyrillene Clark 

The State's Role in Supporting Data Use to Drive School Turnaround 97 

Daniel Player, Michael Kight, and William Robinson 

Section C: Administer and Manage State Turnaround 

The State of the State: New SEA Structures for a 

New Approach to Turnaround 113 

Justin Cohen and Alison Segal 

State Approaches to Turnaround in ESEA Flexibility Plans 127 

Carole Perlman and Susan Hanes 

Leveraging Technology to Accelerate School Turnaround 143 

Janets. Twyman 

Evaluating the State Turnaround Strategy 157 

Daniel Aladjem 

Section D: Provide Technical Assistance to LEAs and Schools 

Engaging State Intermediate Agencies to Support School Turnaround 169 

Eileen Reed and Sally Partridge 


Navigating the Market: How State Education Agencies Help Districts Develop 

Productive Relationships With External Providers 179 

Julie Corbett 

Turnaround Communities of Practice: Addressing the Urgency 195 

Kelly Stuart, Julie Duffield, and Sylvie Hale 
with contributions by Anu Advani and Libby Rognier 

Fostering Success for English Learners in Turnaround Schools: 

What State Education Agencies Need to Know and Be Able to Do 207 

Robert Linquanti 

Building Rural District Capacity for Turnaround 223 

Sam Redding and Herbert J. Walberg 

Big Sky Hope: How Montana's SEA Supports Turnaround in 

American Indian Schools 239 

Denise Juneau, Mandy Smoker Broaddus, and Deborah Halliday 

Building Leadership Capacity in Native American Schools: 

The Principal Leadership Academy 249 

Pam Sheley 

Authors' Biographies 259 


Foreword 

Bryan Hassel, Co-Director of Public Impact 

One does not have to look past the table of contents of this volume to grasp 
the enormity of the task facing state leaders when it comes to school turnaround. 
In recent years, states have taken center stage in the effort to address chronic 
low achievement in the nation’s schools. In part, this move has come from state 
leaders themselves, as governors, chief state school officers, and legislators have 
sought to accelerate change in these schools. Federal policy and funding streams 
have also elevated the state’s role in successive waves. From No Child Left 
Behind’s requirements around "restructuring” to the inclusion of low-achieving 
schools as one of four "assurance areas" in programs such as Race to the Top, 
federal policymakers have asked states to play an increasing role in addressing 
persistent school failure. 

The book's chapters delve into the state’s role in a wide range of specific 
topics related to school turnaround, and state leaders can find a great deal of 
guidance on all of the specific challenges. In this foreword, the editors asked me 
to take a step back and look at an overarching state role: making policy that 
guides turnaround work within the state . 1 Every state has a set of policies on 
school turnaround. These typically begin with a section of state statutes describ- 
ing how schools are identified as low-achieving and outlining the consequences. 
State boards of education and state education agencies take these statutory pro- 
visions and build out a more detailed set of processes and strategies that guide 
state action. Altogether, these laws and guiding documents make up the state’s 
policy on scho ol turnaround. 

lr This foreword draws heavily on Public Impact’s prior work on school turnaround and 
"Opportunity Culture” staffing designs by Emily Ayscue Hassel and other teammates. It draws on 
remarks made by Dr. Hassel at the September 2013 convening of states by the Center on School 
Turnaround and the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of School Turnaround. 


5 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Why Focus on Policy? 

The obvious reason is that policy is what gives states the leverage to change 
what happens in districts and schools so that the millions of students in low- 
achieving schools can have a better future. State officials are a long way away 
from the real action in the classrooms and teachers’ lounges of the schools they 
are seeking to influence through turnaround strategies. Policy is the main tool 
states have to make a difference from that relatively remote position. 

But policy is also important because it is the formal embodiment of the 
states’ message to parents, educators, and citizens about the states’ priorities, 
in this case, the priority states place on addressing the tragedy of chronically 
failing schools. The states’ turnaround policies express the states’ commitment 
to strategies that have the potential to flip the odds for kids who attend those 
schools. Of course, state leaders have other ways of communicating these mes- 
sages. As Rhim and Redding write in their chapter entitled "Leveraging the Bully 
Pulpit”: "When it comes to school turnaround efforts, chiefs can use the position 
to catalyze, support, enable, and sustain school turnaround efforts. Given limited 
resources at their disposal, effectively optimizing the bully pulpit is a key tool in 
a state chief’s toolbox" (p. 32). Yet actions, as they say, speak louder than words. 
Effectively messaging the states’ intent when it comes to turnaround ideally 
includes a vigorous use of the bully pulpit — backed up by the hard policies that 
put those words into action. 

Policy is also the key to sustainability. When I look at the work states are 
doing, it is often inspiring. But I quickly start to worry that it is temporary. In 
part, this worry stems from the fact that much of the funding states are using is 
temporary, flowing from Race to the Top dollars or School Improvement Grant 
funds that may not persist. I also worry because the vigorous action I see often 
depends on the robust leadership of state officials: state chiefs, governors, and 
other leaders within states. What will keep all of this good work going when 
funding streams turn into a trickle, the champion governor leaves office, or when 
critical SEA officials retire or take the revolving door into the private sector? 
Policies are a states’ main chance of sustaining gains over time by putting into 
law and agency policies the key elements of the states’ strategy so they can last. 

Policy related to school turnaround is complex and multifaceted. Instead of 
trying to cover the full range of important policies comprehensively, I will focus 
in this foreword on five policy levers that share two characteristics. First, they 
are of vital importance to states’ success as leaders of the school turnaround 
effort. Second, very few states have put all five of these policies in place. Almost 
every state, possibly all, would benefit from holding up their policies against 
these five points and asking where there is room for improvement. 


6 


Foreword 


Set Sights High 

One critical aspect of state policy is establishing a set of specific, ambitious 
goals for eliminating chronic low performance within a reasonable timeline. 

Let me unpack this concept a little. One level of this goal-set is a clear definition 
of success at the school level. If a school is low-achieving, what does it mean 
to "turn around"? Ideally, it means something more than just going from "very 
low" to "low." Tennessee’s Achievement School District (ASD), for example, says 
it wants to move schools from the bottom 5% to the top 25%. Is that too ambi- 
tious? Reasonable people might disagree. What states want to avoid is a policy 
that declares "mission accomplished" based on, say, a 10 percentage point rise in 
proficiency rates from 30% to 40%. 

A second level is the statewide view. Taking a state’s set of persistently low- 
achieving schools as a group, what does success look like over the next year, 
three years, and five years? Not ah schools will meet an ambitious target the 
first time around. In fact, 30% on the first try would be on par with cross-sector 
experience and quite good relative to the abysmal success rate of many school 
turnaround initiatives. That does not mean, though, that states need to settle for 
30% as their long-term ambition. As my colleagues and I have written in Try Try 
Again, detecting efforts that are off track early and redirecting can shift some 
initial missteps into successes, sending long-term success rates over 80%, even if 
only 20% or 30% of initial attempts work well. 

What is important here, therefore, is for the state to select and communicate 
a sense of trajectory. After one year, we are aiming for, say, 25% of our turn- 
around schools to have crossed the success threshold. Then we expect that per- 
centage to rise steadily so that after five years, 80% of the schools are over the 
mark. This kind of trajectory allows state officials and others to watch progress 
and then make adjustments. This communicates an ambitious target over time 
but also a realistic path to get there. 

Of course, goals are just goals. They only come to life if they drive a perfor- 
mance management system that also includes: 

• A theory of action that spells out how the state’s strategies will achieve its 
goals; 

• Alignment of resources to support those strategies; 

• Collection of data and ongoing assessment of results and leading 
indicators; 

• Accountability for results, which involves taking action based on the 
achievement or non-achievement of goals; and 

• Communicating actively to the public about how the schools and the state 
are progressing along the trajectory. 

But this all starts with setting sights high. 


7 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Clear Policy Barriers 

Turning around a failing organization is challenging even if leaders have all 
the running room they could ever want. But in public education, numerous policy 
constraints make it even more difficult to turn around schools and succeed. 

Here, I zero in on two categories of constraint that are most significant. One is 
constraints related to staffing turnaround schools. The effectiveness of the school 
leadership and teaching force is what we all know makes the most difference in 
schools and especially turnaround schools. Yet state and local policies often make 
it hard to staff turnaround schools well. Examples include: ineffective evaluation 
systems, restrictive certification rules, rigid seniority-based placement, hurdles 
to dismissing ineffective performers, salary scales that make it difficult to reward 
great leaders and teachers for taking on a challenge and succeeding, and rules 
that limit the number of students a great teacher can have. These all make the 
already hard task of turnaround even harder. 

The same goes for the second category: resource use. Policy constraints 
include rigid line-item budgets that require, for example, using a certain staff- 
ing model within a school, which gets in the way of schools redesigning their 
operations and using teachers and new teaching roles to give more kids access 
to great teachers. Other policies may limit schools’ and districts’ ability to carry 
funds over from one year to the next, making it impossible for them to "save” and 
"invest” in activities that might well pay off for the long-term, such as building 
leadership pipelines. 

States can act on this set of constraints in two ways. First, they can inven- 
tory their own state policies and make a plan for eliminating or creating excep- 
tions for those that hinder turnarounds. Second, states can use the "strings” they 
attach to funding and their accountability policies to insist that districts remove 
barriers as well, because many of these constraints are embodied in local policies 
and agreements. By clearing state-caused barriers directly and by inducing local 
officials to drop their own shackles, state leaders can do a great deal to pave the 
way for successful school turnarounds. 

Get Serious About Talent 

By "talent," I mean especially the teachers, leaders, and organizations that 
operate turnaround schools. I say "get serious" because, in my view, there has 
been a lot of effort on this front, but it generally has not led to a dramatic talent 
shift that is needed in turnaround schools. 

As we think about talent, we tend to think first about how to "push" talent 
into failing schools — by creating pipelines. This is critical work that we can keep 
doing better. 

But I would urge equal attention to "pulling" talent by making target schools 
dramatically better places to work in and lead. Part of this is clearing the barri- 
ers I just mentioned. Top-notch leaders will not be attracted to organizations in 


8 


Foreword 


which they cannot build and shape their teams and allocate resources in ways 
that support their strategic leadership. 

Another part of pulling talent in is creating real career paths for both teach- 
ers and leaders that enable advancement without leaving the work they love 
doing. For excellent teachers, that means being able to sign up to work in a turn- 
around school and not face a career of just teaching a single class or normal load 
of classes forever, without any way to advance. Instead, it means offering great 
teachers the chance to lead teams of other teachers, to direct on-the-job profes- 
sional learning from their peers, and to have an effect on more students, without 
becoming an administrator. These are roles my colleagues and I have written 
about in our Opportunity Culture series of publications. When a set of Charlotte, 
North Carolina-based schools created 19 such positions in turnaround schools 
in early 2013, over 700 people applied from the around the country, including 
many who had moved out of teaching into administration and were eager for the 
chance to come back to teaching. In schools that traditionally had trouble filling 
vacancies, these new roles created a dramatic influx of talent. 

For leaders, it means enabling successful turnaround principals to take the 
next challenge, such as leading a small network of schools, like a feeder pat- 
tern, and helping the building-level school principals become the next great 
turnaround leaders. For both, it means getting serious about compensation. 

In my view, great teachers and leaders in public education generally earn far 
below what they contribute to their students' long-term fortunes. The deficit is 
especially acute in turnaround schools, where the challenges are intense and 
the hours are, or need to be, longer. Though I would support devoting more 
resources to raising pay in turnaround schools, states need not wait for that. A 
top priority for turnaround schools should be thinking of ways to reorganize 
their operations to free money to make their schools as attractive as possible to 
teachers and leaders they need. 

Creating a Real "Or Else" 

Today, most states lack a viable course of action if schools and districts do not 
improve. Exceptions exist. Several states now have authority to take over indi- 
vidual schools and operate them or, more likely, partner with external organiza- 
tions, and in extreme cases of district-wide failure, the authority to take over and 
operate districts. But these powers — and their effective use — are still rare. 

Yet, an "or else" would be a valuable instrument in the hands of states for two 
reasons. First, the threat of state takeover might induce some districts to do what 
they need to do to improve persistently low-achieving schools. Second, when 
districts and schools still fall short despite the threat, a state with an "or else" 
does not have to settle for that. It can take action on its own to improve school 
performance. 


9 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


A real "or else" has three components: 

• Authority — the legal green light to act, likely in the form of a state statute 
authorizing the state to take certain actions in cases of schools or districts 
that chronically fall below some performance level and have not improved 
sufficiently despite other interventions. 

• Theory of action — spelling out what the state will do once it assumes 
control of a school or district. Will it operate schools directly? Find outside 
operators to manage the schools? In either case, what role will the state 
agency play and for how long? 

• Capacity to execute — Taking over and operating failing schools and dis- 
tricts is new territory for almost every state. It requires different staff- 
ing, different partners, and different ways rather than trying to operate 
the schools in the traditional way, only better. Building that capacity is an 
essential ingredient to having a real "or else" at the state level. 

Demand Sustainability 

With funding streams such as school improvement grants, Race to the Top, 
and special state appropriations, one of the phenomena we see far too often is 
the tendency to flow money into costs that are recurring — in the sense that they 
will not go away. Even if a turnaround succeeds, most turnaround schools will 
still be operating in very challenging environments, such as high-poverty neigh- 
borhoods. They will continue to need to deploy strategies like extended school 
days and years, higher compensation to attract and keep great teachers and lead- 
ers, and access to the growing array of learning technology. 

Since these costs will not go away, states need to insist that districts and 
schools find ways to fund them beyond the temporary streams. Fortunately, there 
is a growing set of tools and models to help with this, from Education Resource 
Strategies tools to help districts analyze their resource use to Public Impact’s 
tools on reallocating money to pay teachers more. 

This does not mean special state and federal funds have no role. Rather, the 
point is that states need the discipline to focus 100% of special and temporary 
money on what I would call "investments”: spending that somehow increases the 
capacity of schools and the system to operate successfully and sustainably with- 
out continued funding. 

For example: 

• Pipelines that produce teachers, leaders, and school operators who then 
"pay off" for years; 

• Up-front spending and redesigning school operations, leading to more sus- 
tainable models; 

• Investing in technology and facilities changes necessitated by the new 
design. 


10 


Foreword 


• Other transition costs — such as paying contractual obligations incurred 
under old systems in order to make way for new. 

If turnaround schools put all temporary funding into such "investments" and 
paid for recurring costs with recurring funds, their long-term chance of success 
would be greatly enhanced. 

Conclusion 

I realize that these five policy priorities are relatively easy to write up in a 
foreword, but having these policies enacted in real states is quite another matter. 
This is why these five items are still on the "to do list" after several years of hard 
policy work in most states. I also realize that many of these policies lie outside 
the purview of state education agencies, resting instead with state legislatures. 
Yet, these challenges are nothing new for state agency leaders. Policy change 
is their best chance to make dramatic, lasting improvements for the millions of 
students who attend persistently low-achieving schools. 


11 


12 


Introduction to the State Role in School Turnaround: 

Emerging Best Practice 

Lauren Morando Rhim and Sam Redding 

The Center on School Turnaround (CST) was created to provide technical 
assistance and identify, synthesize, and disseminate research-based practices 
and emerging promising practices for the purpose of increasing state educa- 
tion agency (SEA) capacity to support districts and schools to turn around their 
lowest performing schools and contribute to our collective knowledge of effec- 
tive and sustainable school turnaround strategies. Four objectives that reflect 
the key levers SEA’s are using to drive, support, and sustain effective district and 
turnaround efforts guide the Center’s work: 

• Advocating and building support for schools and districts as they work to 
turn around the lowest performing schools 

• Creating a pro-turnaround statutory and regulatory environment 

• Administering and managing turnaround efforts effectively 

• Providing targeted and timely technical assistance to schools and districts 

As the first major publication of the CST, this book is organized according to 

these four objectives that guide our work. The research base on effective school 
turnarounds, and specifically the critical role of the SEA, is evolving and arguably 
not fully developed. We have yet to witness large-scale research on the potential 
impact of individual SEAs or isolate specific actions to discern their quantifi- 
able impact on targeted change efforts focused on changing both districts and 
schools. The chapter authors represent a portfolio of practitioners and scholars 
actively engaged in these efforts. Building on existing research, their experiences 
and observation of trends provide the emerging outlines of best practice and are 
therefore worth documenting and discussing. 


13 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Advocating and Building Support for Schools and Districts 
as They Work to Turn Around the Lowest Performing Schools 

School turnaround differs substantially from school improvement in that it 
calls for urgent and often disruptive change efforts. This is in contrast to incre- 
mental or continuous improvement that has been characteristic of change efforts 
for the last 20 years. Simply put, school turnaround is not more school improve- 
ment or school improvement plus. School turnaround efforts greatly challenge 
the status quo and significantly impact a wide variety of audiences, including 
school administrators, teachers, families, and community members. To ensure 
the success of turnaround efforts across their respective states, SEAs need to 
cultivate buy-in for the reforms, continuously advocate for tough changes, and 
communicate early and often to a wide range of stakeholders. 

The key actors responsible for advocating and building support for school 
turnaround work are the state board of education, chief state school officer, 
and local school boards. While state boards create the pro-turnaround statu- 
tory and regulatory environment, the state chief and local school boards are 
highly visible actors who are uniquely positioned to encourage or, conversely, to 
impede focused turnaround efforts. The two chapters in this section explore the 
roles and responsibilities of state chiefs and local school boards. In The Chief: 
Leveraging the Bully Pulpit to Drive Turnaround, Rhim and Redding explore the 
political context state chiefs must navigate, and they identify key strategies chiefs 
can use to optimize their bully pulpit to instill a sense of urgency for districts and 
schools to embark upon turnaround and articulate specific strategies. Building 
on prior research regarding the role of school boards in school turnaround 
efforts, in Engaging Local School Boards to Drive, Support, and Sustain Effective 
Turnaround Efforts, Rhim outlines the roles and responsibilities of local boards 
and describes specific actions SEAs can take to build local board capacity to 
foster a meaningful role in district turnaround efforts. Absent intentional efforts 
to engage these key stakeholders, superintendents and building leaders may 
encounter resistance from local boards that are unclear about the need or poten- 
tial value of disruptive change efforts. 

Creating a Pro-Turnaround Statutory and Regulatory Environment 

When working to implement dramatic changes to successfully turn around 
low-performing schools, school and district staff need to work within the context 
of state laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. Some of these foster practices 
that support effective school turnaround while others prohibit or inhibit them. In 
supporting districts as they work to turn around struggling schools, SEAs need to 
review policies, procedures, and regulatory structures to identify those that limit 
the flexibility of districts to take the dramatic action necessary to turn around 
chronically low performers — and work to eliminate them or grant waivers for 
certain requirements when possible. 


14 


Introduction 


In the Evolution of Turnaround, Redding and Rhim review the progression 
of school improvement efforts and programs, such as comprehensive school 
reform, school restructuring, and most recently, school improvement grants 
(SIG) and the ever-morphing role of the SEA in these efforts. The chapter reviews 
the U.S. Department of Education’s seven research-based turnaround principles 
and wraps up with a discussion about how the current strategy differs from prior 
efforts and identifies emerging indicators of success. 

State policies and district structures represent the context that shapes school 
turnaround, but personnel are the key drivers that make or break turnaround 
initiatives. Reflecting on the central role of teachers and leaders in turnaround, 
Woodruff and Clark share knowledge emerging from their work to apply les- 
sons from the private sector to public education efforts to build effective human 
resources practices in Human Capital Pipelines: Examining the Role of the SEA. 

The chapter highlights the SEAs’ roles in developing both policies and programs 
to recruit and retain high-quality leaders and instructional personnel that can 
benefit districts statewide. Building on the critical importance of personnel 
in school turnaround, Futernick and Urbanski examine steps SEAs can take to 
foster labor-management relationships that are more productive. The chapter, 
Successful School Turnaround Through Labor-Management Partnerships, intro- 
duces SEAs to key findings from case study research on the impact of labor-man- 
agement collaboration on school policy and practice and shows how this col- 
laboration is breaking down the fierce resistance to change that has hampered 
so many turnaround efforts. The chapter also offers specific recommendations to 
SEAs based on the success several have had promoting a climate of trust, innova- 
tion, and collaboration among local stakeholders in their states. 

In Building, Providing, and Supporting Functional Data Systems, members of 
the University of Virginia's Partnership for Leaders in Education turnaround 
program present the case that monitoring and data are the critical building 
blocks of any effective school turnaround. The authors outline the potential for 
comprehensive data use at all levels and share practical advice for states and 
districts on how to use performance and behavioral data to improve decisions in 
a variety of contexts. Drawing on expertise gleaned from working with over 200 
schools in dozens of school districts across the country, the chapter explores the 
type of data systems districts and schools engaged in school turnaround require 
and what states can do to create state-level data systems that work for school 
turnaround. 

Administering and Managing Turnaround Efforts Effectively 

With the infusion of unprecedented levels of funding under the revamped 
SIG program in 2010, SEA responsibilities related to administering turnaround 
programs significantly increased. This infusion has further stretched already 
lean state agencies traditionally focused on compliance and monitoring. SEAs 


15 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


have approached their expanded responsibilities by creating a variety of internal 
structures and programs and leveraging external expertise. The third section 
of the book explores the various approaches and structures states are using to 
manage effective turnaround in districts across their respective states. 

Cohen and Segal’s chapter, The State of the State: New SEA Structures for a 
New Approach to Turnaround, examines existing literature on SEA organizations 
and how those organizations provide support for schools and districts. While 
there are a range of approaches and organizational structures, the authors pay 
particular attention to shifting SEA practices and culture to better support dis- 
tricts, attending to the SEA’s reorganization, and the variety of SEA structures 
and activities being implemented to support turnaround. 

In light of delays in the reauthorization of the No Child Left Behind Act and 
growing concerns about the majority of schools across the nation being identi- 
fied as not meeting Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP), in 2011, the U.S. Department 
of Education (USDE) extended SEAs the option to request flexibility from specific 
aspects of the law. The flexibility was offered in exchange for rigorous and com- 
prehensive state-developed plans designed to improve educational outcomes for 
all students, close achievement gaps, increase equity, and improve the quality 
of instruction. States have designed their accountability and support systems in 
a variety of ways that reflect their unique circumstances. Hane’s and Perlman’s 
chapter on The State Process for Turnaround describes how several states 
addressed the turnaround process in their ESEA Flexibility Requests. 

The use of technology is as indelibly linked to the thought of schooling as the 
one-room schoolhouse was a century ago. As part of a comprehensive initiative 
to advance the transformation of American education, the Obama administration 
and the USDE are encouraging a culture of learning powered by technology. In 
How the SEA Leverages Technology to Accelerate Turnaround, Twyman focuses on 
how technology — assuming adequate leadership, resources, and supports — can 
accelerate improved student outcomes in an SEA-driven school improvement 
or school turnaround endeavor. The use of technology across seven areas (i.e., 
learning and instruction, motivation, access, data, teacher training, systems 
and processes, learning analytics) is described and supported by examples of 
research or exemplary programs. 

In Evaluating the State Turnaround Strategy, Aladjem outlines steps states are 
taking to track and evaluate their turnaround work in order to make mid-course 
corrections and assess impact. Rather than explore how to evaluate SIG efforts 
per se, this chapter provides examples of how SEAs evaluate their own work to 
implement SIG. The object of evaluation for this chapter is not the schools, teach- 
ers, or students who ultimately benefit from SIG, but rather, the work of states 
that impacts schools, teachers, and students. The central questions driving this 
chapter are: "How can states be reflective about their own practice?" and "What 
lessons can states learn from other states?" 


16 


Introduction 


Providing Targeted and Timely Technical 
Assistance to Schools and Districts 

In addition to their traditional compliance-related functions, SEAs need 
to embrace their support and technical assistance-related responsibilities to 
foster effective and sustainable turnaround efforts across their states. Just as 
Comprehensive Centers are charged with building SEAs' capacity, SEAs are 
charged with building the capacity of their local educational agencies (LEAs) and 
individual schools. LEAs and schools embarking upon bold turnaround efforts 
need access to research and emerging promising practices. To provide effective 
and meaningful technical assistance, SEAs need to identify, leverage, and repur- 
pose existing resources, as well as those of other agencies and groups, on topics 
that are critical to turnaround success. SEAs also need to institute statewide 
system of supports and assistance through which they can effectively share these 
resources. The fourth and final section of the book focuses on the role of SEAs in 
providing technical assistance to districts and schools to drive, enable, and sup- 
port successful turnaround efforts. 

The responsibility of SEAs to directly support school turnaround has 
expanded under No Child Left Behind, while at the same time, budget cuts and 
consequent staff reductions have decreased the resources available for SEAs to 
engage in direct technical assistance to districts and schools. In light of these 
contextual realities, SEAs must explore possible collaboration with external 
entities to build local capacity to support school turnaround. In Engaging State 
Intermediate Agencies to Support School Turnaround, Reed and Partridge draw 
from their experience in Texas to describe the role of education service agencies 
(ESAs) to influence the interpretation and implementation of policies and prac- 
tices to turn around low-performing schools and districts. The chapter describes 
a successful partnership between an SEA, an ESA, local school districts, and an 
external provider as an example of what is possible when an SEA and an ESA 
engage in creative collaboration to address the needs of a state’s lowest perform- 
ing schools. 

Schools, districts, and states utilize private companies to provide a variety of 
educational, capital, and operational services. The engagement of external part- 
ners for the purpose of turning around schools accelerated in 2010 under the 
revised federal school improvement grant program that encouraged the use of 
external partners in a more comprehensive way. In External Partners: Navigating 
the Marketing: SEA Role in Helping Districts Develop Productive Relationships with 
External Providers, Corbett explores the role of the SEA in assisting districts to 
develop capacity to select providers and negotiate strong performance contracts. 

With an eye toward leveraging internal expertise, Communities of Practice 
(CoPs) can be an important component of a state’s turnaround-focused techni- 
cal assistance efforts through peer-to-peer, face-to-face, and online collaborative 


17 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


activities within states, districts, and schools. Coupled with existing state sys- 
tems of support, CoPs have the potential to transform how states support their 
turnaround LEAs by increasing the SEA’s capacity to deliver technical assistance, 
disseminate key resources, develop networks, and foster collaborative relation- 
ships. In Turnaround Communities of Practice and Sharing Best Practices, Stuart, 
Hale, and Duffield highlight the use of CoPs by states to collaborate with mul- 
tiple stakeholders to strengthen technical assistance, curate best practices, and 
support the implementation of these practices within local district and school 
contexts. 

Shifting from general technical assistance to focused efforts for the benefit of 
specific populations, in the final section of the book, the authors explore issues 
unique to English language learners and small and rural communities that have 
promise to accelerate turnaround efforts. Linquanti’s chapter explores issues 
involved with Fostering Success for English Language Learners in Turnaround 
Initiatives. This chapter lays out a framework of fundamental considerations 
with respect to English learners that fosters a greater understanding of their 
strengths and needs. It examines the opportunities and risks for improving 
English language instruction and learning in the current context of next- 
generation standards and assessments and provides examples of innovative SEA 
practices for supporting local district and school improvement. 

In Building Rural District Capacity for Turnaround, Redding and Walberg 
outline the distinct responsibility SEAs have to intentionally build the capacity 
of rural school districts. Whereas large urban districts can have more resources 
and capacity than their respective SEAs, rural districts must rely more heavily 
on SEAs to access resources and build capacity. State Superintendent of Public 
Instruction Denise Juneau and her colleagues outline strategies to turnaround 
low-performing rural schools — including structured efforts to build rural 
school board capacity — in their chapter, In Big Sky Hope, How Montana’s SEA 
Supports Turnaround in American Indian Schools. Building on themes presented 
in the chapter on turnaround efforts in Montana, Sheley’s chapter on Building 
Leadership Capacity in Native American Schools introduces the Bureau of Indian 
Education’s Rapid Improvement Leader Project that entailed providing targeted 
professional development and mentorship to school-level leaders charged with 
turning around schools located in Native American reservations. 

As SEA leaders strive to optimize their authority and resources to drive 
robust school turnaround efforts that will generate sustainable improvements, 
intentionally constructing an environment that is conducive to change is impera- 
tive. Introducing the structures required to manage the effort and providing 
targeted supports to build essential capacity are critical to long-term success. 


18 


Evolution of School Turnaround 

Sam Redding and Lauren Morando Rhim 

School turnaround in the United States is a recent policy initiative that fol- 
lows two decades of efforts to apply substantial interventions to sharply elevate 
the performance trajectory of persistently low-achieving schools. Unlike prior 
school improvement efforts that sought to implement change over three to 
five years, the focus of turnaround is rapid and dramatic improvement for the 
lowest performing schools — schools that had not responded to prior incremen- 
tal efforts. School turnaround arrived fully at center stage in 2009 when newly 
appointed Secretary of Education Arne Duncan announced the U.S. Department 
of Education goal of turning around the nation’s lowest performing 5% of 
schools. The revamped School Improvement Grant (SIG) program, fueled by 
funding from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), provided 
states with criteria for identifying eligible schools and enabled states to estab- 
lish competitions for LEAs to seek the SIG funding. At the same time, the U.S. 
Department of Education made turnaround a key component of its Race to the 
Top (RTTT) competition for states (and later for LEAs). The U.S. Department 
of Education also established a new Office of School Turnaround. The follow- 
ing chronology of national efforts to improve our schools provides background 
context that is essential to understanding the current strategies being promoted 
at both the federal and state level; the current approach to turning around the 
lowest performing schools is largely driven by the shortcomings of prior efforts. 

School Performance as a National Issue 

A matter of national defense. As the historians of American education 
tell the story, the tradition of public education as a matter of local interest was 
shaken when Sputnik, the Soviet Union’s unmanned satellite, appeared in the 
clear night sky, orbiting earth in October of 1957. Average Americans may not 


19 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


have drawn a connection between this technological master feat by a feared 
enemy nation and their children’s cozy neighborhood school, but governmental 
officials did. We were falling behind in the race to space because our schools 
were not preparing the scientists, engineers, and mathematicians who would 
enable us to keep pace with the communist adversaries. President Dwight D. 
Eisenhower, in the National Defense Education Act of 1958, found common 
ground among divergent critiques of root causes of inadequate school perfor- 
mance in proposing both increased federal financial assistance and higher stan- 
dards in science, math, and language as a matter of national defense (Jeynes, 
2007). 

A matter of equity and opportunity. In the 1960s and 1970s, education 
ascended further as a focus of national interest, now riding the crest of con- 
cern for equity for minorities, as a remedy for poverty, and as just treatment 
for children with disabilities. The Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
(ESEA) of 1965 brought the federal government to the stage as a significant 
player in what had been primarily a state and local enterprise. Federal courts 
oversaw school desegregation across the country. The 1970s enlarged the scope 
of national attention to inequalities with the Title IX (1972) prohibition of 
unequal allocation of resources and program opportunities between the sexes 
and the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (1975), the precursor to 
the Individuals with Disability Education Act, which sought greater educational 
opportunity for children with disabilities (Jeynes, 2007). 

A matter of international competition. In 1980, Congress, at the urging 
of President Jimmy Carter, authorized the formation of the U.S. Department of 
Education. President Ronald W. Reagan’s National Commission on Excellence in 
Education asserted in A Nation at Risk (1983) that America’s pursuit of equity in 
education must be matched with regard for quality. A Nation at Risk showed that 
our students’ academic performance was unfavorably contrasted with students 
in other nations. 

The effective schools research (see, for example, Edmonds, 1979) that 
emerged in the years just prior to A Nation at Risk had already demonstrated 
that school practices varied, and that some schools did a better job than others in 
achieving satisfactory results with similar populations of children. The scores on 
college entrance exams had declined steadily since the mid-1960s; SAT results 
descended during those years to their low point in 1980. Scores on most national 
and state tests fell similarly during this same span of years (Ravitch, 2000). 

State initiative with federal encouragement for standards and research- 
based models. In the 1990s, the states’ governors looked ahead to the new cen- 
tury and set national goals for education (National Education Goals Panel, 1995). 
These goals were codified in 1994 in Congress’s Goals 2000: Educate America 
Act, which endorsed learning standards and standards-based assessments as 
ways to measure progress toward national goals. The reauthorization of the 


20 


Evolution of School Turnaround 


Elementary and Secondary Education Act (Improving America’s Schools) in the 
same year called upon states to build systems of standards and assessments and 
to provide support for schools to improve. President Clinton, in 1996, signaled a 
return to basics with his recommendation to end social promotion and advance 
students based on the merits of their accomplishments. In 1998, the Reading 
Excellence Act emphasized the importance of direct instruction and phonics in 
reading instruction, presaging the recommendations of the National Reading 
Panel (2000). The 1990s closed with comprehensive school reform spreading 
research-based models of effective school practice across the country. Fueled by 
federal dollars, the states erected standards-based curricula and assessments 
(Redding, 2007). 

Strong accountability for school performance for all student groups. By 

2002 when the Elementary and Secondary Education Act was reauthorized as 
No Child Left Behind (NCLB) under the new administration of President George 
W. Bush, America was determined to achieve both equity and quality in public 
education. Achieved learning varied too widely from group to group and from 
school to school, indicating that opportunity was not equal for all. Standards and 
their concomitant assessments provided a measure of progress, and under NCLB 
progress would be measured for each group of students. NCLB sought to close 
the achievement gap between ethnic groups, between rich and poor, between 
children with disabilities and those without, and between English language 
natives and English language learners. 

Focus on the lowest-achieving schools, world-class standards, and inno- 
vation. When Arne Duncan, the superintendent of the Chicago Public Schools 
took the helm as U.S. Secretary of Education under newly elected President 
Barack Obama in 2009, the nation was reeling from a serious economic down- 
turn. With a surge of federal funding to stimulate the economy, Duncan laid out 
an aggressive agenda for K-12 education. The nation would rid itself of pockets 
of low achievement by turning around its lowest-performing 5,000 schools. New 
standards would apply world-class rigor to ensure that all students graduated 
ready for college and career. Innovation and technology would usher in a new era 
of high expectation and high accomplishment. America’s schools were the vehicle 
for renewed economic prosperity. 

Improving Low-Achieving Schools 

Comprehensive School Reform Demonstration Program 

In 1997, Congress authorized the Comprehensive School Reform 
Demonstration Program (CSRDP) to provide three years of funding to schools 
that adopted research-based improvement models. The CSRDP was not targeted 
to the lowest performing schools but was channeled to Title I schools (schools 
with significant levels of student poverty) that were generally performing below 
expectations. More than 6,000 schools participated in the CSRDP, implementing 


21 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


more than 500 models. Evaluation of the results was inconsistent, with some 
models investing in significant evaluations and others not. One study found posi- 
tive results early in the CSRDP implementation, concluding that the effects of the 
CSRDP were stronger than other initiatives in similar schools (Borman, Hewes, 
Overman, & Brown, 2003). An analysis by the Comprehensive School Reform 
Quality Center (CSRQC) at the American Institutes for Research (2006), however, 
found only two elementary school models, both instructionally focused and pre- 
scriptive, to show moderate strength of effect. CSRQC found no middle school or 
high school models with evaluations that showed moderate strength of effect. No 
models at any grade level demonstrated a strong effect. 

Restructuring Under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 

The 2002 reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
(ESEA) outlined a progression of sanctions that states and districts were to apply 
for Title I schools making inadequate yearly progress. Restructuring, for schools 
that had not achieved adequate yearly progress (AYP) for six years, was the most 
severe intervention. At this point, the district was to apply one of four remedies: 

1. State take-over of the school from the district 

2. Turnaround — usually change in leadership and other significant changes 

3. Reopen the school as a charter school 

4. Contract to an Education Management Organization (EMO) to operate the 
school 

5. Other — akin to comprehensive school reform, as determined by the 
district 

The Center on Education Policy (CEP, 2009) found that in the five states it 
studied, 89% to 96% of the restructuring schools (varying by state) had chosen 
the "other" option, and positive results were scarce. By 2009, more than 5,000 
schools (10% of Title I schools) were subject to restructuring (CEP, 2009). Only 
19% of the restructuring schools in the states studied made AYP. Some schools 
remained in restructuring status for many years. 

The Advent of Turnaround Literature and Programs 

In 2004, under the leadership of then Governor Mark Warner, the Virginia 
Department of Education (VA DOE) began to develop a school turnaround spe- 
cialist program. The VA DOE sponsored the two-year program through which 
districts with low-performing schools sent principals and district central office 
staff members to the University of Virginia (UVA) in Charlottesville to obtain 
executive education and related skills to assist them in turning around low-per- 
forming schools. Across the first two cohorts of participants, the majority of the 
schools demonstrated notable gains leading to expansion of the program outside 
of Virginia (Rhim, 2013). Thus was born the UVA Darden/Curry Partnership for 


22 


Evolution of School Turnaround 


Leaders in Education (PLE) program that has led turnaround leadership initia- 
tives across the country. 

In 2007, the Academic Development Institute’s Center on Innovation & 
Improvement (CII) published a synthesis of research across sectors identifying 
key leader actions in successful turnaround efforts and made recommendations 
for districts embarking upon focused turnaround efforts. Also in 2007, Mass 
Insight published The Turnaround Challenge (Calkins, Guenther, Belfiore, & Lash), 
a call-to-action report that highlighted the need for intervention in America’s 
lowest-performing schools. The report outlined structures within states and 
districts to focus on school turnaround and advocated the engagement of lead 
partners (external service providers) to bring special expertise to the work. 

In 2008, the Institute of Education Sciences (IES) released a practice guide, 
prepared by an expert panel, titled Turning Around Chronically Low-Performing 
Schools (Herman et al.). The report stated that no well-designed, control studies 
were available and based its conclusions on case studies. From these case studies 
and the analysis by the panel, the report suggested four interrelated turnaround 
practices: 

• Signal the need for dramatic change with strong leadership 

• Maintain a consistent focus on improving instruction 

• Make visible improvements early in the turnaround process (quick wins) 

• Build a committed staff 

In the wake of the IES report, other studies emerged, including cross-sector 
studies that looked at turnaround in the business sector and public (govern- 
ment) sectors other than education. CII, for example, published six reports from 
2007 to 2009, covering evidence of turnarounds, turnaround leader actions, 
performance-based dismissals, school closure, and the district’s role in rapid 
improvement. In 2010, CII published the Handbook on Effective Implementation 
of School Improvement Grants (Perlman & Redding; revised in 2011) to provide 
guidance for states and districts in utilizing the new federal grant initiative. 

School Improvement Grants 

In the spring of 2009, Arne Duncan, the new Secretary of Education, 
announced his intention to focus on the lowest achieving 5% of schools, with 
new guidelines and funding through Title I's School Improvement Grant pro- 
gram. The program was also revised to include more high schools than had 
previously been eligible for School Improvement Grants, aimed at reversing low 
graduation rates as well as poor test performance. Half of the dropouts from 
American high schools come from just 15% of its high schools (i.e., the "drop- 
out factories"; Balfanz & Legters, 2004). In the fall of 2009, the revamped SIG 
program was unveiled, and the "other" option in ESEA’s restructuring menu was 
strengthened as a "transformation" intervention with the replacement of the 
principal and significant re-design of instruction and other high-leverage areas 


23 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


of school practice. Under SIG, eligible districts competed for large grants fueled 
by $3.5 billion in initial funding, an amount that grew to $5 billion over the next 
few years. In addition to the transformation model, districts could adopt a turn- 
around model (replacement of at least half of the current personnel), restart as a 
charter school, restart as a school governed by an EMO, or close the school. 

The first cohort of more than 1,300 schools began implementing their SIG 
grants in 2010. Of that group, 45% were high schools. Seventy-four percent of 
all the SIG schools chose the transformation model; 20% chose the turnaround 
model; 5% chose the restart model; and 1% chose school closure. Seventy-eight 
percent of the students in these schools received free or reduced lunch, a mea- 
sure of poverty. Forty-four percent of the students were African-American and 
33% were Hispanic. 

A study of the 82 California SIG schools in cohort 1 (Dee, 2012) found after 
a year of implementation the schools had closed 23% of their achievement gap 
(gap between the school’s performance and the state’s performance target). Most 
of the gains were attributed to the schools that chose the turnaround model. 

In an April 2012 press release, Secretary of Education Arne Duncan said: 

A new and important study of school turnarounds by University of 
Virginia economist Thomas Dee provides the first rigorous evidence that 
the Department’s revamped School Improvement Grant (SIG) program is 
having a substantial impact on student achievement in struggling schools in 
California in just the first year of the program Educators and school lead- 

ers cannot give up on making far-reaching improvements in student learning 
in our lowest-performing schools. Children only get one shot at a good educa- 
tion. And Dee’s new study reminds us that poverty is not destiny. 

Between 2010 and 2013, states launched additional cohorts of SIG schools 
and planned to sustain the efforts with declining grant awards. States and dis- 
tricts began internal restructuring to make turnaround an area of emphasis. 

U.S. Department of Education Turnaround Principles 

Late in 2011, the U.S. Department of Education released guidelines for states 
to submit "flexibility requests” to amend their ESEA programs. The guidelines 
included the following set of Turnaround Principles, applicable especially to all 
schools in the bottom 5% in performance (standards-based assessments and 
graduation rates) but also useful for other schools in need of rapid improvement. 

• Leadership. Providing strong leadership by reviewing the performance 
of the current principal, replacing the current principal, or ensuring the 
principal is a change leader and providing the principal with operational 
flexibility; 

• Effective Teachers. Ensuring that teachers are effective and able to 
improve instruction by reviewing all staff and retaining those determined 
to be effective, carefully selecting new teachers including transfers, and 


24 


Evolution of School Turnaround 


providing job-embedded professional development informed by teacher 
evaluations; 

• Extended Learning Time. Redesigning the school day, week, or year to 
include additional time for student learning and teacher collaboration; 

• Strong Instruction. Strengthening the school’s instructional program 
based on student needs and ensuring that the instructional program 
is research-based, rigorous, and aligned with state academic content 
standards; 

• Use of Data. Using data to inform instruction and for continuous improve- 
ment, including providing time for collaboration on the use of data; 

• School Culture. Establishing a school environment that improves safety 
and discipline and addresses students’ social, emotional, and physical 
health needs; and 

• Family and Community Engagement. Providing ongoing mechanisms for 
family and community engagement (U.S. Department of Education, 2011). 

Elementary and Secondary Education Act: Flexibility Waivers 

As Congress struggled to reauthorize NCLB, and states faced the dooming 
reality that most of their schools would be deemed "failing" under existing NLCB 
accountability standards, the USED sought to create opportunities for states to 
revise their accountability structures in a manner that sustained accountability 
while acknowledging some of the practical challenges inherent to NCLB’s goal 
for all students to be proficient by 2014. In 2011, President Obama announced 
that states could apply for waivers for specific aspects of NLCB if they developed 
appropriate means to hold schools and districts accountable for robust academic 
standards, including specific strategies to turn around the lowest performing 
schools (i.e., priority schools). To date 43 states have successfully applied for 
and been granted waivers. While shifting the structure of accountability systems 
developed under NCLB, the waiver provisions require all states to continue to 
devote significant resources to developing systems to support and sustain effec- 
tive turnaround efforts. 

Center on School Turnaround 

In reorienting the national system of content centers in 2012, the U.S. 
Department of Education created a Center on School Turnaround and awarded 
a five-year grant and cooperative agreement to WestEd to administer the new 
center. WestEd’s partners in the center are the Academic Development Institute, 
the University of Virginia’s Darden/Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education, 
the National Implementation Research Network, Public Impact, the National 
Center on Time and Learning, and Education Northwest. 

The CST’s objectives are aligned with each of the following four roles the 
SEAs play relative to school turnaround: 


25 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


1. Advocating and Leading to Build Support for Local Turnaround 
Efforts 

To ensure the success of turnaround efforts across their respective states, 
SEAs need to cultivate buy-in for reforms, continuously advocate for tough 
changes, and communicate early and often to a wide range of stakeholders. 

2. Creating a Pro-Turnaround Statutory and Regulatory Environment 

To support districts as they work to turn around struggling schools, SEAs 
need to review policies, procedures, and regulatory structures to identify those 
that limit the flexibility of schools to take the dramatic action necessary to turn 
around chronically low performers. 

3. Administering and Managing Turnaround Efforts Effectively 

To ensure successful administration and management support to schools and 
districts, SEAs need designed applications that encourage thoughtful explora- 
tion of alternative approaches, administrative procedures that award grants in 
a timely manner, clear expectations for progress leading to grant renewal, and 
minimally intrusive compliance monitoring. 

4. Providing Targeted and Timely Technical Assistance to LEAs and 
Schools 

To provide effective technical assistance, SEAs need to access, leverage, and 
repurpose technical assistance resources on topics that are critical to turnaround 
success; SEAs also need to institute a statewide system of support and technical 
assistance through which they can effectively share these resources. 

Conclusion 

The SIG program, unlike previous efforts at elevating the performance tra- 
jectory of low-achieving schools, targets the very lowest performing schools, 
includes a large proportion of high schools, requires high-leverage interventions, 
and provides substantial amounts of funding. The SIG program and provisions of 
state ESEA flexibility waivers related to priority schools engage each level of the 
education system, from a Turnaround Office in the U.S. Department of Education, 
to similar structures in state education agencies, to a strong district role, and 
finally to the school. SIGs also enlist the expertise of external partners, organiza- 
tions with experience and track records with significant school improvement. 

The SIG program is being closely monitored and evaluated at each level. The 
evaluative research that emerges from the SIG program may prove to be its great- 
est contribution to the renewal of American education. 


26 


Evolution of School Turnaround 


References 

Balfanz, R., & Legters, N. (2004], Locating the dropout crisis: Which high schools pro- 
duce the nation's dropouts? In G. Orfield (Ed.), Dropouts in America: Confronting the 
graduation rate crisis (pp. 57-84). Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press. 

Borman, G., Hughes, G., Overman, L., & Brown, S. (2003). Comprehensive school reform 
and achievement: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 73, 125-2 3 0. 

Calkins, A., Guenther, W., Belfiore, G., & Lash, D. (2007). The turnaround challenge. 
Boston, MA: Mass Insight. 

Center on Education Policy. (2009). A call to restructure restructuring. Washington, DC: 
Author. 

Comprehensive School Reform Quality Center. (2006). Report on elementary school com- 
prehensive school reform models. Washington, DC: Author. 

Comprehensive School Reform Quality Center. (2006). Report on middle and high school 
comprehensive school reform models. Washington, DC: Author. 

Dee, T. (2012, April). School turnarounds: Evidence from the 2009 stimulus. Cambridge, 
MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. 

Edmonds, R. (1979, October). Effective schools for the urban poor. Educational 
Leadership, 37(1), 15-24. 

Herman, R., Dawson, P., Dee, T., Greene, ]., Maynard, R., Redding, S., & Darwin, M. (2008). 
Turning around chronically low-performing schools: A practice guide (NCEE #2008- 
4020). Washington, DC: National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional 
Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved 
from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/publications/practiceguides 

Jeynes, W. H. (2007 ). American educational history: School, society, and the common good. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

National Commission on Excellence in Education. (1983). A nation at risk: The impera- 
tive for educational reform. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 

National Education Goals Panel. (1995). The national education goals report: Building a 
nation of learners. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 

Perlman, C. L., & Redding, S. (Eds.). (2011). Handbook on effective implementation of 
school improvement grants. Lincoln, IL: Academic Development Institute, Center on 
Innovation & Improvement. 

Ravitch, D. (2000). Left behind: A century of failed school reform. New York, NY: Simon & 
Schuster. 

Redding, S. (2007). An evolution in American education. In S. Redding & H. J. Walberg 
(Eds.), Handbook on statewide systems of support (pp. 57-76). Lincoln, IL: Academic 
Development Institute, Center on Innovation & Improvement. 

Rhim, L. M. (2013). State-initiated school turnaround strategies: Leveraging the state edu- 
cation agency to drive meaningful change. Charlottesville, VA; Sacramento, CA; Lincoln, 
IL: University of Virginia's Darden/Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education; Center 
on School Turnaround; Academic Development Institute. Retrieved from http://cen- 
teronschoolturnaround.org/new-monograph-state-initiated-school-turnaround-strat- 
egies-leveraging-the-state-education-agency-to-drive-meaningful-change-rhim/ 


27 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


U.S. Department of Education. (2011, September 23], ESEA flexibility. Washington, DC: 
Author. Retrieved from http://www.ed.gov/esea/flexibility/documents/esea-flexibil- 
ity.doc 


28 


Section A 


Advocate and Lead 



Leveraging the Bully Pulpit: Optimizing the Role 
of the Chief State School Officer to Drive, Support, 
and Sustain School Turnaround 

Lauren Morando Rhim and Sam Redding 

The bully pulpit can set the agenda, express national goals, and frame educa- 
tion issues, proving at times to be a powerful force for reform. Presidential 
pronouncements and commissions have elevated issues of equity and student 
achievement, shifting political lines and sending school systems onto a new 
course. Examples of such agenda-setting include the release of A Nation at 
Risk in 1983, which alerted the country to the poor performance of American 
schools; the NCLB-era emphasis on testing and accountability; and the Obama 
administration's advocacy for school turnarounds, charter schooling, and 
teacher evaluation. Federal policies and rhetoric can provide cover for leaders 
at the state and local levels to enact controversial policies, making it easier for 
them to pursue goals that would otherwise foster fierce backlash. As Michael 
Casserly, executive director of the Council of the Great City Schools, summarizes, 
“Washington is often at its best when a president is using the bully pulpit to 
highlight national educational and civil rights challenges and then tying them 
to our shared goals." ( Hess & Kelly, 2013, p. 4) 

Introduction 

Chief state school officers — typically referred to as Commissioners, 
Superintendents, or Secretaries of Education — are responsible for leading their 
respective states’ public education systems. They work closely with their states’ 
legislatures, state boards of education, and governors to lead their state educa- 
tion agencies (SEA). As the leaders of the system, they have the bully pulpits 
from which they can articulate and drive their agendas. When it comes to school 


31 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


turnaround efforts, chiefs can use the position to catalyze, support, enable, and 
sustain school turnaround efforts. Given limited resources at their disposal, 
effectively optimizing their bully pulpits is a key tool in state chiefs’ toolboxes. 
This chapter explores the role of the chief state school officer in today’s edu- 
cation policy climate and draws lessons from chiefs who have attempted, not 
always successfully, to leverage the position as a platform to drive an agenda to 
turn around the lowest performing schools. The chapter also outlines key action 
principles chiefs should consider to optimize their position to support focused 
turnaround efforts. 

Chief in Charge 

Chief state school officers’ authority, roles, and responsibilities vary across 
the country. Moreover, the selection process for a state chief influences the 
position’s authority because the path is linked to the constituency that secures 
the position and the extent to which the chief is subject to political pressures. 
Nationwide, there are three paths to the chief’s office (National Association of 
State Boards of Education [NASBE], 2013): 

• State board appoints or recommends state chief (23 states) 

• Governor appoints state chief (15 states) 

• Residents of the state elect chief state school officer (12 states) 

Appointed state chiefs avoid the divisiveness of a statewide election but 

may be subject to the whims of governors and state boards. Conversely, elected 
state chiefs may enjoy some degree of security stemming from public support of 
voters but are subject to the distraction that elections can present. 

State chiefs play different roles in the broader state governance structure. In 
some states, the chief is a member of the governor’s cabinet and leads the SEA 
(e.g., Tennessee). In other states, the governor appoints a cabinet-level secretary 
of education to function as policy executive and a commissioner of education to 
manage the SEA (e.g., Massachusetts). The limited research on state chiefs does 
not identify the optimal manner of appointment, parameters of authority, or gov- 
ernance structure (Brown, Hess, Lautzenheiser, & Owen, 2011). 

Legislatures hypersensitive to directing funding to local districts and schools 
have historically relegated the SEA to the role of compliance monitor and pro- 
vided notably limited resources relative to overall responsibilities. A recent anal- 
ysis of eight state education budgets documented that SEA resources are spread 
very thin relative to overall K-12 public education expenditures. Furthermore, 
many of the resources allocated to the SEA are provided through federal categor- 
ical programs (e.g., Title I of ESEA, special education, school nutrition) and are 
therefore highly regulated (Murphy & Ouijdani, 2011). 

Regardless of the manner in which state chiefs obtain the position, how states 
configure the state chief’s role, or the resources over which they have control, 
they have the potential to leverage their authority to significantly influence the 


32 


Leveraging the Bully Pulpit 


direction of public education in their states (Brown et al., 2011). An in-depth 
case study of the implementation of standards-based reform in two states in the 
1990s found that "implementation of complex school reform seems to require 
a more activist definition of the Commissioner’s and the department’s role" 

(Lusi, 1997, p. 158). Chief state school officers and staff members more directly 
charged with driving the SEA’s turnaround agenda have the opportunity to cata- 
lyze turnaround efforts by developing an intentional activist strategy to leverage 
the chief’s bully pulpit. Of particular value for school turnaround efforts, they can 
bring attention to the need for dramatic change and cultivate critical buy-in to 
make the difficult changes required for organizational turnaround (Rhim, 2013). 
In addition, they can demonstrate their commitment by developing relevant 
policy and directing resources to support turnaround. The extent to which chiefs 
fully leverage their authority differs by state and the individual occupying the 
pulpit (Brown et al., 2011). 

Relationship With the State Board of Education 

The state chief is the professional charged with leading SEA. The state board 
fulfills state constitutional responsibilities related to providing citizens with 
access to public education (NASBE, 2011). Similar to the state chief, the state 
board members are either elected or appointed. They are responsible for advo- 
cating for education, serving as a liaison between citizens and education policy 
makers, building consensus, and developing policy. In practice, these responsibil- 
ities translate to actions such as establishing 1) curriculum standards, 2) gradu- 
ation requirements, 3) professional credentialing requirements, 4) statewide 
testing programs, and 5) district accreditation standards. They are also respon- 
sible for appropriately implementing federal statutes (NASBE, 2011). Ideally, the 
state board and state chief work in concert with their state legislature to adopt 
policies and allocate resources to support agreed upon priorities. 

In line with their larger responsibilities, state boards can also play a sub- 
stantive role in establishing goals and supporting the state chiefs in their efforts 
to drive, support, and sustain school turnaround. By way of example, the Utah 
Board of Education outlined the problem facing public education in the state in 
the following simple but powerful terms and developed a strategic plan that out- 
lined specific quantifiable goals: 

As of 2012, only 43% of Utah adults had a postsecondary certificate or 
degree. On average, only 58.5% of Utah high school graduates enroll in col- 
lege. ...By 2020, increase percentage of Utah high school graduates who have 
a postsecondary certificate or degree to 66% and increase percentage of 
students proficient in reading and math in the third, sixth, and eight grades to 
90%. (Utah State Board of Education, 2013, p. 2) 

Clear acknowledgement of the challenges, articulation of the pressing need 
for change, and identification of explicit goals provide a simple and specific focus 


33 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


for educators working across the state. Furthermore, the message communicates 
what the board and presumably the state chief see as priorities. 

While setting goals is the essential first step to driving any agenda, it is argu- 
ably the easy part. Once state boards identify goals, they charge state chiefs with 
developing and implementing policies and funding programs to achieve the 
goals. 

In considering the value of and strategies to leverage the role of the chief, it is 
relevant to acknowledge that state boards and chief state school officers oper- 
ate in a political environment with diverse constituencies advocating their par- 
ticular agendas (Ujifusa, 2012). For instance, decisions to prioritize the lowest 
performing schools, including allocation of additional resources to these districts 
and their respective schools, can trigger an outcry from constituencies in higher 
performing districts. In light of this political reality, efforts to advocate for school 
turnaround must be embedded in broader efforts to ensure that all students 
have access to quality public schools; neither state boards of education nor chief 
state school officers can overlook the majority of schools in the process of priori- 
tizing schools identified for turnaround (i.e., the lowest 5% according to perfor- 
mance on state standardized assessments). They must juggle a dynamic portfolio 
of districts and their schools in a manner that provides incentives for success- 
ful schools while simultaneously providing supports for struggling districts 
(Redding & Walberg, 2007). To accomplish these ambitious goals, the state chief 
must engage constituents, including the state board, and solidify relationships 
in order to build political capital essential to driving ambitious change agendas 
(Brown et al., 2011). 

Leveraging the Bully Pulpit 

Heightened attention to issues such as turning around low-performing schools, 
fixing state data systems, and improving teacher evaluations all require state 
education officials to play a new and far more demanding role, often under the 
scrutiny of the media spotlight. (Brown et al., 201 1, p. 1) 

In a seminal book on federal policy development and implementation, 
Kingdon (1984) refers to "policy entrepreneurs" as the individuals who are 
willing to advocate for high priority proposals and demonstrate a willingness 
to use political influence to advance their agendas (p. 191). Effective policy 
entrepreneurs are individuals with education, resources, and connections — all 
key attributes of individuals who serve as chief state school officers. Examples 
of resources policy entrepreneurs expend are time, energy, reputation, and 
money. State chiefs committed to turning around the lowest performing schools 
should consider themselves entrepreneurs charged with identifying practical 
and sustainable solutions (i.e., solutions that build long-term capacity) to vexing 
problems. Reflecting the complexities inherent in public schools that are largely 


34 


Leveraging the Bully Pulpit 


governed by local school boards resistant to centralized efforts to drive change, 
effectively leveraging their bully pulpits to drive their agendas can increase state 
chiefs' probability of influencing local practices (Malen & Muncey, 2000). 

Redding (2012) charges the state chief and the chief’s leadership team with 
the central role in initiating change and innovation in the SEA and through the 
districts and schools: 

Because of the strictures placed upon them by federal and state statutes, 
mandates, and regulations, SEAs may adopt reactive postures. The divergent 
interests and legitimate authorities of local districts further complicate SEA 
action. For SEAs to meet their gargantuan challenges in a shifting landscape, 
however, a proactive tack is required. SEAs must be able to innovate — to 
change in constructive ways. To fulfill their purposes within the limits of their 
resources, they need sound management practices, including processes for 
implementing innovation. To harness the talents and ingenuity of all their 
personnel, they must inspire individual striving and collective endeavor. SEAs 
need change leadership, (p. 9) 

Change is not a comfortable or easy process for any organization, and the state 
chief must effectively manage the SEA, protect it from ill-conceived and unpro- 
ductive initiatives, and identify and enact necessary changes consistent with the 
SEA’s mission and goals. 

By way of example, Secretary of Education Arne Duncan embarked upon a 
"Back to School Bus Tour" in the fall of 2013 to articulate his priorities. The tour 
entailed visiting cities across the country and giving speeches at schools. During 
a stop in Albuquerque, Secretary Duncan articulated his agenda as follows: 

We have a set of folks, myself and the President included, who think educa- 
tion is an investment. It’s the best investment we can make. ...But every time 
I go testify over at Congress, there is a set of folks who are telling me educa- 
tion is an expense, and we should be cutting back.. ..Are we going to educate 
our way to a better economy, or are we going to cut back. ...We need pres- 
sure across the political spectrum on political leaders to invest in education. 
(Montaya Bryan, 2013). 

This speech is notable not just for its content and clear indication that the 
speaker has the full support of the President, but also for the fact that Secretary 
Duncan did not issue a press release from Washington, DC. Rather, he physically 
travelled to a variety of smaller cities to articulate his agenda directly to constitu- 
ents. Direct communication has both symbolic as well as substantive value as 
it indicates that the topic is important enough for the speaker to devote time to 
travel to advocate directly for his agenda. 

Tracking articles written by and about state chiefs provides other exam- 
ples of their efforts to leverage their bully pulpits to advance their agendas. 

In Oklahoma, in a press release distributed to correspond with the release of 
state assessment data, State Superintendent Janet Burresi acknowledged gains 


35 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


and pressed for district and school personnel to remain focused: "So, while I'm 
pleased with the progress we’ve made, I'm not satisfied. We simply must have 
more of our students prepared for the rigors of college, workforce training, and 
career by the time they graduate high school" (2013, para. 7). In this statement, 
Burresi celebrates success but emphasizes her high expectations and the ongo- 
ing need to stay focused on better outcomes for students. 

In light of competing demands, chiefs committed to school turnaround need 
to be strategic and intentional about how they direct their authority to drive, 
support, and sustain effective turnaround. To optimize their bully pulpits, they 
can 1) communicate a sense of urgency and commitment, 2) advocate for policies 
that facilitate turnaround, and 3) reinforce their agendas by allocating resources 
in line with priorities. The following sections describe these three actions and 
provide examples of state chiefs using these levers. 

Communicate a Sense of Urgency and Commitment 

Rapid and dramatic change is a central component of school turnaround; 
schools identified for turnaround require dramatic change that will benefit the 
students currently in the school, not just students due to enroll in three to five 
years. Consequently, communicating a sense of urgency for immediate action 
(i.e., change is not optional) is critical to successful school turnaround efforts 
(Public Impact, 2007). State chiefs can communicate a sense of urgency within 
their states to build buy-in and, to a broader external policy audience, advo- 
cate for programs that will support their turnaround goals. The following sec- 
tions describe examples of internal and external communication strategies and 
describe the potential role for social media that is emerging as a key means state 
chiefs can use to communicate directly with constituents. 

Internal Communication 

Chief state school officers spend their days interacting with a host of con- 
stituents. These interactions provide chiefs opportunities to communicate their 
priorities. National surveys document that the public has a relatively limited 
understanding of key education policy issues. 1 Yet, voters elect local school 
board members as well as governors who have significant influence over educa- 
tion (e.g., they allocate resources and appoint state chiefs). State chiefs can use 
the position to inform their various constituencies of their priorities related 
to school turnaround given district and school performance levels and instill 
a sense of urgency for change. This may include speaking at statewide school 

1 See, for example, recent Phi Delta Kappa and Gallup (http://pdkintl.org/programs-resources/ 
poll/), Associated Press and NORC Center for Public Affairs Research (http://www.apnorc.org/ 
PDFs/Parent%20Attitudes/AP_NORC_Parents%20Attitudes%20on%20the%20Quality%20 
of%20Education%20in%20the%20US_FINAL_2.pdf), and 2013 Education Next Poll (http:// 
educationnext.org/the-2013-education-next-survey/) for data regarding awareness of Common 
Core, perceptions about the quality of public schools, and understanding of average cost per 
pupil. 


36 


Leveraging the Bully Pulpit 


board conferences in rural states or visiting districts with large numbers of 
schools identified for turnaround (Rhim & Redding, 2011). The engagements 
present opportunities to educate citizens about the performance of schools and 
the need for urgency and provide a context for decisions that will trigger resis- 
tance (e.g., implement robust teacher and school leader accountability systems). 

In the mid-1990s, Richard Mills, the state chief of New York, effectively lever- 
aged the bully pulpit to draw attention to a two-tiered diploma system wherein 
some students earned the rigorous Regents diploma while others received the 
Regents Competency Test diploma. Mills proposed that all students should be 
encouraged and expected to complete the requirements to obtain a Regents 
diploma, and this call catalyzed parents dissatisfied with the system to support 
his agenda for higher expectations for all students (Brown et al., 2011). 

Written communication reinforces these priorities. For instance, in the intro- 
duction to the Rhode Island Department of Education’s 2010-2015 strategic 
plan, Superintendent Deborah Gist stated: 

Our major goal, the primary objective that we are working toward, is to 
ensure that all Rhode Island students are ready for success in college, careers, 
and life. We propose that by 2015 at least 85% of all Rhode Island’s students 
will graduate with a Regents diploma which will signify that they have dem- 
onstrated proficiency in their core academic subjects and that they are ready 
to succeed in postsecondary education and in a challenging career. 

I want to emphasize to all Rhode Islanders the sense of urgency we feel about 
the importance of our work. We have a strong foundation in place, and we are 
building upon it. We are not changing direction, but we are certainly getting 
more specific and ambitious about our goals. Over the next five years, we will 
direct all of our resources to focus squarely on these priorities. (2009, p. 2) 

In this quotation about her school improvement agenda, Gist strives to 
instill a sense of urgency and communicates that she will prioritize or "direct 
all resources" to school improvement efforts. In addition to her formal commu- 
nication strategies, Commissioner Gist has been creative about how she com- 
municates her priorities in informal ways. For instance, she recently took a high 
profile skydive with a teacher to celebrate a school winning the state’s summer 
reading challenge, generating headlines announcing, "Rhode Island Education 
Commissioner Deborah Gist Skydives for Literacy" (Klein, 2013). 

A quotation from the state chief of New Mexico includes a clear signal that 
her goals align with the governor’s goals and provides another example of com- 
municating a sense of urgency related to school improvement: 

As the Governor has often said, education reform must be rooted in the belief 
that every student can learn and must be motivated by a willingness to target 
our investment in education on proven efforts to improve the achievement 
of our struggling schools and students. We have an incredibly long way to 


37 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


go when it comes to raising the reading skills of our third graders, and we 
should not be satisfied by modest gains. Our high school students are demon- 
strating how targeted reforms can yield results, so there should be no excuses 
for why we can’t expand successful efforts to every student in every grade in 
New Mexico. (Logan, 2013, para. 5) 

In this statement, Skandera acknowledges tangible challenges students face and 
then celebrates recent growth, thereby simultaneously communicating a sense of 
urgency and establishing evidence that change is possible. 

An analysis of SEA approaches to implementing the School Improvement 
Grant (SIG) program documented that outreach by chief state school officers 
communicated an important symbolic as well as substantive message to districts 
with low-performing schools (Rhim & Redding, 2011). Of note, chief state school 
officers’ visits to districts and phone calls in addition to written guidance regard- 
ing SIG reportedly communicated that school turnaround was a priority in the 
states. SEA personnel reported that support from their state superintendent 
reinforced their efforts to generate buy-in at the district level. For example, Deb 
Halliday, Policy Advisory to the State Superintendent of Montana, explained, 

Our superintendent hit the road to personally visit the schools and communi- 
ties. We [communicated] high levels of support to get them to commit to the 
change. This involved our state level teachers’ union going out on the road, 
which was pretty phenomenal. We went to very remote parts of Montana to 
talk to teams about the unique approach, and the union was a big part of this 
because of the impact SIG would have on collective bargaining agreements 
and the new teacher evaluation systems. (Rhim & Redding, 2012, p. 35) 

Visits to districts embarking upon turnaround efforts can be a high lever- 
age means to build momentum, especially if the visit reinforces that key leaders 
(e.g., both the state chief and the teacher association leadership) are committed 
to the agenda. For instance, when rolling out the SIG program in Idaho, the state 
chief visited districts identified as eligible for SIG funding to encourage them 
to complete SIG applications. SEA personnel reflected that the state chief used 
"a lot of political capital to talk to district superintendents about [SIG]." He told 
them, "We will do whatever we have to do to work with you." The state chief in 
Arkansas took a similar approach and was very involved with providing support 
to the seven eligible schools including visiting all of the schools and attending 
board meetings in each of the districts. In reflecting on the impact of the visits, 
Arkansas Department of Education personnel noted, "The commissioner’s sup- 
port at the board meetings really showed that this is a collaborative effort cen- 
tered around improvement at all levels” (Rhim & Redding, 2011, p. 15). 

When rolling out their SIG program, chief state school officers in Arizona 
and Utah participated in the related professional development alongside their 
districts and schools. SEA personnel from both states reported that their chiefs’ 


38 


Leveraging the Bully Pulpit 


participation sent a strong message to the teams that the SIG training was impor- 
tant (Rhim & Redding, 2011). 

In New Jersey, to build support for a new initiative to turn around low- 
performing schools, state chief Chris Cerf authored a passionate editorial in a 
regional newspaper and posted the article on the SEA’s website. In the editorial, 
Cerf implores citizens to "work together over the next several years to give all 
students in New Jersey equal opportunities for success, and let’s hope that the 
support of expert educators in our [Regional Achievement Centers] will help to 
turn around low-performing schools. But let’s also be honest that our children 
are the most important resource we have and that we must be ready to do what- 
ever we can to give them a fair shot”(Cerf, 2012, para. 12-13). 

External Communication 

Leveraging their position to advocate for school turnaround is not limited 
to internal communication. State chiefs can also use their bully pulpit to reach a 
national audience, an audience comprised of federal legislators, advocacy groups, 
and private philanthropists who can develop policies and programs and allo- 
cate resources to support local efforts. The Council of Chief State School Officers 
(CCSSO) has historically served as the primary national voice and source of 
professional development for state chiefs. As a membership organization with 
diverse members, CCSSO has played a critical role in supporting state chiefs, but 
it has not typically engaged in particularly controversial advocacy work. Separate 
from CCSSO, in 2010, a small group of state chiefs interested in advocating for 
a more aggressive national education reform agenda signed on to participate 
in a program created by Excellence for Education, Chiefs for Change (CFC), but 
also remained members and supportive of CCSSO’s mission. CFC has articulated 
a "roadmap" to excellent education, including a commitment to "replace failure 
with success" which entails: 

• providing intense interventions for chronically low-performing schools; 

• requiring failing schools to show demonstrable and sustained improvement 
or face closure; and 

• leveraging school and district funding and governance to turnaround low- 
performing schools and districts. (Chiefs for Change, 2013, p. 2) 

In addition to forming coalitions to extend their voices beyond their state 
borders, state chiefs also testify on Capital Hill in an effort to influence Congress, 
including advocating for policies that support school turnaround. For example, in 
February of 2013, the chiefs from Kentucky and New York testified before the 
U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, urging 
Congress to reauthorize the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (i.e., NLCB; 
Council of Chief State School Officers, 2013). By testifying, the chiefs not only had 
the potential to influence federal policy makers, they also communicated to citi- 
zens and employees of their respective SEAs their views about reauthorization 


39 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


and demonstrated that it is a priority given the extent to which it influences state 
and local practice. 

Leverage Social Media 

Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, topical blogs) pro- 
vides an efficient means to communicate directly with stakeholders absent filters 
or delays inherent to more traditional media (e.g., live news, newspaper articles). 
A recent survey found that 72% of all online adults are using social media (Pew 
Internet, 2013). A powerful example of the potency of social media to commu- 
nicate information is the 2011 revolution in Egypt. Organizers used Facebook 
to create coalitions and Twitter to keep the public informed, both in Egypt and 
across the globe, of the evolving revolution against the Egyptian government in 
spite of focused efforts to limit communication. Commentators described the 
phenomenon as a "leaderless revolution fueled by social media that transcended 
national boundaries, religion, economic class, and helped overthrow a 30-year 
old repressive regime" (Kamal & Meenalochani, 2012, p. 343). In large part 
due to the impact of social media on events such as the revolution in Egypt and 
Occupy Wall Street in the U.S., the Foreign Services now requires all diplomats to 
receive training in social media (Kamal & Meenalochani, 2012). 

Many state departments of education, and specifically the chief state school 
officer in the state, leverage social media to communicate directly to constitu- 
ents regarding their priorities. For instance, New York’s Commissioner John King 
maintains a Twitter account and has more than 5,000 followers. He uses the page 
to make announcements, publicize speaking engagements, and highlight school 
and student success stories. In Tennessee, Commissioner Kevin Huffman regu- 
larly tweets about performance data, school success, and his official activities. In 
Michigan, State Superintendent John Flanagan tweets information about school 
performance and regularly posts quotes reflecting his outlook and priorities. 

Effectively utilizing social media requires some basic training; once posted, 
information becomes a part of the public record. Nevertheless, when used strate- 
gically, it has the potential to provide state chiefs with an efficient means to com- 
municate their priorities and reinforce more formal communication methods. 

Drive School Turnaround Policy Agenda 

In addition to communicating a sense of urgency related to school turn- 
around, state chiefs can utilize their position to introduce and advocate for 
policies to foster effective and sustainable school turnaround efforts. State chiefs 
have used this authority to change policies that impede turnaround efforts and 
promote policies that foster and sustain turnaround. 

Address Policies That Undermine School Turnaround Efforts 

State education code typically reflects an evolution of thinking regarding 
public schools and regulations developed to ensure that local districts comply 


40 


Leveraging the Bully Pulpit 


with the code. However, the patchwork nature of policy making can lead to poli- 
cies that trigger unintended consequences. For instance, as demonstrated by 
the debate about superintendent qualifications in Connecticut stemming from 
concerns about a district hiring a superintendent without required administrator 
credentials, certification requirements designed to address cronyism and nepo- 
tism can tie the hands of school boards interested in hiring nontraditional candi- 
dates (Strauss, 2013). 

State chiefs can advocate to extend both the SEAs’ and districts’ flexibility to 
optimize talent management. For instance, SEAs frequently struggle to hire and 
retain qualified personnel; in most instances, professionals can earn more work- 
ing at local districts than working for the state (Brown et al., 2011). However, 
the state chief has the opportunity to seek waivers or reconfigure positions to 
make them more attractive to highly skilled applicants and maximize the value of 
key personnel at the SEA. In Arizona, state chief Lisa Graham Keegan worked to 
change the status of SEA personnel to provide her with more discretion, and she 
successfully leveraged staff promotions to change the conditions of employment; 
each time an employee was offered a promotion, she negotiated greater flexibil- 
ity in their contracts to ensure she could develop the staff she needed and hold 
them accountable for performance (Brown et al., 2011). 

In August of 2013, New Mexico Governor Susan Martinez announced an 
initiative to award teachers an additional $5,000 a year to work in struggling 
schools or to help students earn Advanced Placement credits (Martinez, 2013). 
The initiative had practical implications in that it could increase the labor pool 
interested in low-performing schools. It also had symbolic value; it communi- 
cated that Governor Martinez was committed to improving a targeted group of 
schools, and she was willing to commit resources to support the work. 

Streamline Planning, Reporting, and Compliance 

New initiatives can overburden schools with additional reporting require- 
ments and monitoring. To minimize the adverse impact of cumbersome report- 
ing, state chiefs can solicit input from districts engaged in turnaround to identify 
reporting redundancies that the state chief can then prioritize to streamline. 

For instance, one of the specific goals articulated by the Texas Education Agency 
(TEA) when it created its Texas Turnaround Leadership Academy was to stream- 
line the monitoring and reporting by schools in high poverty areas in order to 
protect teacher and administrator time (Rhim, 2013). This goal emerged from 
state SEA personnel observing that schools identified for low performance by 
federal and state accountability systems devoted onerous quantities of time to 
hosting officials for compliance visits and completing multiple reports, and said, 
"one of the challenges that we have been working hard to overcome is redun- 
dancy of reports" (Rhim, 2013, p. 7). To address redundancies, TEA officials 
examined how many times they visited campuses and how they might limit 


41 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


causing disruptions. Steps TEA took to limit these included coordinating the vari- 
ous teams that "touch the campus." 

Streamlining planning, reporting, and monitoring while preserving account- 
ability for dramatic change efforts was a recurring theme in eight states involved 
with the University of Virginia’s School Turnaround Specialist Program (Rhim, 
2013). Time is a precious commodity for schools embarking upon turnaround 
efforts. A notable benefit of having the SEA, and specifically the state chief, 
actively engaged in school turnaround efforts is its ability to see the entire state 
system and take steps to streamline existing requirements, allowing district and 
school personnel to devote more time to activities more directly involved with 
improving student outcomes (e.g., instructional coaching, structuring interven- 
tions, analyzing data). In Montana, state chief Denise Juneau prioritized flex- 
ibility and shifted her department from a one-size-fits-all approach to extending 
autonomy to districts that were performing well and simultaneously monitoring 
and supporting districts that were struggling (Ujifusa, 2012). 

Create and Activate Consequences for Failure to Change 

Successful turnaround efforts require multiple layers and stages of account- 
ability, with multiple stakeholders fulfilling their respective responsibilities. 
Every stage is dependent upon effective tracking of outcomes to verify successful 
implementation and progress. 

In SEA-initiated efforts, accountability begins with the chief state school 
officer and ends with the building principal. Chief executives must use their bully 
pulpits to garner support for investments in turnaround, ensuring states allocate 
adequate financial and human resources to support the initiative and establish 
systems that create the conditions for the initiatives to succeed (e.g., streamlined 
reporting and monitoring). 

In Colorado, former state chief Dwight Jones took the atypical step of requir- 
ing districts to demonstrate effectiveness in order to access Title I funds, a fed- 
eral entitlement program with few tangible consequences for ineffectiveness 
(Brown et al., 2012). The result of these requirements was greater adoption of 
interim assessments to track student growth. 

In 1998, the Board of Elementary and Secondary Education in Louisiana 
created the School and District Accountability System that outlined specific 
academic performance goals and companion sanctions for districts that failed to 
meet these goals (Smith, 2012). In 2003, the legislature added additional teeth to 
the accountability system when it authorized the creation of a "Recovery School 
District" (RSD) authorized to take over persistently low-performing schools. 
Modeled after U.S. bankruptcy law, the state authorized the RSD to cancel exist- 
ing contracts in schools eligible for takeover (i.e., schools that had failed to meet 
performance standards for four consecutive years and were located within a 
district in which 50% of its schools were failing; Nelson, 2012). Because of these 


42 


Leveraging the Bully Pulpit 


laws, the RSD currently operates dozens of schools in Louisiana. The threat of 
these actions and a state actually taking the actions when appropriate apply 
pressure for change and can instill a sense of urgency. 

Allocate Resources in Line With Priorities 

Money talks, and allocating substantive resources to support turnaround 
efforts communicates that this work is worth prioritizing. This allocation 
reinforces state chiefs’ turnaround agendas. An intentional SEA strategy and 
structure developed to support district turnaround efforts and communicated 
effectively by the state chief signals that turnaround is a priority. This messaging 
has substantive as well as symbolic value, and it reinforces other communica- 
tion related to the importance of addressing low performance. State chiefs have 
aligned resources to support their priorities by developing structures to support 
school turnaround and evaluating turnaround efforts in order to cull emerging 
best practices. 

Develop a Structure to Support School Turnaround 

States have developed a variety of structures to support turnaround from 
basic compliance with requirements related to statewide systems of support 
outlined in NCLB to standalone turnaround divisions charged with operating 
schools identified as candidates for dramatic change (Bakers, Hupfeld, Teske, & 
Hill, 2013; Mass Insight Education, 2010). For instance, Louisiana, Tennessee, 
and Michigan created recovery school districts — separate entities focused on 
creating conditions to support aggressive turnaround in schools that have long 
resisted more incremental change efforts. Indiana created turnaround academies 
and identified lead partners to play a central role in turnaround. Connecticut’s 
state chief created a Commissioner’s Turnaround Network to engage external 
providers to lead turnaround efforts, and Delaware created a Partnership Zone 
comprised of the lowest performing schools receiving targeted interventions and 
monitoring (Baker et al., 2013). It is premature to assess the merits of each of 
these structures, and the results will most likely be variable reflecting a variety 
of local contextual factors. Nevertheless, they are examples of strategies state 
chiefs can pursue to prioritize school turnaround efforts. 

Evaluate and Refine State Support Structures 

As states shift resources to support district efforts to turn around 
low-performing schools, effective evaluation of those efforts is critical to 
documenting emerging promising practices as well as halting ineffective 
practices. By investing in systems to track and evaluate the state’s efforts, the 
chief affirms that effective turnaround is a priority and reinforces the importance 
of robust evaluation. Conversely, absence of effective evaluation systems 
communicates that change is optional. 


43 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


The state of Massachusetts commissioned in-depth analyses of SIG schools 
in 2012 and 2013. 2 After conducting monitoring site visits to collect qualitative 
data, the state examined the practices of schools that had demonstrated the larg- 
est gains relative to those that had demonstrated the least gains. This process 
revealed specific differentiating practices, which the state used to inform future 
guidance to schools embarking upon turnaround (Massachusetts Department 
of Elementary and Secondary Education, 2012). In a memorandum to the state 
board of education, state chief Mitchell Chester highlighted the key findings (i.e., 
turnaround schools demonstrating large jumps in performance have an "instruc- 
tion- and results-oriented principal who has galvanized both individual and col- 
lective responsibilities”, Chester, 2012, para. 6) and signaled how the data were 
used to improve practices (i.e., findings were used to alter the focus of targeted 
assistance to districts; Chester, 2012). The investment in the evaluation of school 
and district turnaround procedures informed state practice while also reinforc- 
ing that turnaround is a priority for the state chief. 

Conclusion 

As the leaders of their respective SEAs, chief state school officers have the 
potential to exert significant influence over school turnaround efforts in their 
states as well as across the nation. While state chiefs must negotiate mandates 
and regulations from the federal government along with their legislatures and 
state school boards and navigate a plethora of local politics, they have a distinct 
perspective that provides many opportunities to influence the quality of public 
education in every school in their states. 

Introducing policies designed to turnaround schools requires upsetting the 
status quo and securing buy-in from stakeholders who do not necessarily share 
common goals or agree upon the means to achieve the goals. Consequently, one 
of the outcomes of chiefs advocating for disruptive change can be loss of support 
that limits their ability to fulfill their goals or leads to them losing their jobs. For 
instance, Idaho state chief Tom Luna’s efforts to enact dramatic changes in how 
public schools operate, including efforts focusing on school turnaround, led to 
a successful voter referendum to roll back his reforms (Popkey, 2012). In 2012, 
Indiana Superintendent Tony Bennett lost his bid to continue as state chief due 
to resistance to his policies, including his policies related to school turnaround 
efforts (Campbell, 2012). 

The extent to which state chiefs opt to fully leverage their bully pulpits varies 
and may be partially attributed to the state political context in which they oper- 
ate. It is also a reflection of the extent to which state chiefs are willing to take 
political risks to accomplish their goals. Nevertheless, while acknowledging the 
political context, all state chiefs have the potential to utilize their bully pulpits 

2 To view the 2012 report, see http://www.doe.mass.edu/boe/docs/2012-04/item2.html 


44 


Leveraging the Bully Pulpit 


to drive, support, and sustain effective turnaround efforts that can lead to better 
opportunities for students. 

Action Principles 

Communicate urgency for turnaround 

• Drive bold turnaround efforts by communicating a sense of urgency from 
the bully pulpit. State chiefs have the opportunity to communicate inter- 
nally to key constituents regarding the need for turnaround and externally 
to advocate for policies and funding streams that support turnaround 
efforts. 

• Optimize social media to communicate directly with diverse constituency 
groups. 

Drive state turnaround policy agenda 

• Propose policies that foster school turnaround (e.g., develop programmatic 
and financial incentives to encourage actions that drive school turnaround; 
allocate resources to build district capacity for school turnaround). 

• Change policies that hinder meaningful and sustainable change (e.g., rigid 
certification requirements that limit local hiring decisions, ineffective 
accountability systems). 

• Address regulatory and procedural redundancies that can distract district 
and school leaders from turnaround work. 

Hold districts accountable for turnaround results 

• Articulate robust and transparent performance metrics and focus on stu- 
dent outcomes rather than compliance. 

• Implement tangible consequences for failure and hold districts accountable 
on an ambitious timeline (e.g., demonstrate clear measures of behavior 
change and academic gains within first year). 

Develop a structure to support school turnaround 

• An intentional SEA strategy and structure developed to support district 
turnaround efforts and communicated effectively by the state chief sig- 
nals that turnaround is a priority. This messaging has substantive as well 
as symbolic value, and it reinforces other communication related to the 
importance of addressing low performance. 

Evaluate and refine state support structures 

• As states shift resources to support district efforts to turnaround low- 
performing schools, effective evaluation of these efforts is critical. By 
investing in systems to track and evaluate the state’s efforts, the chief 
affirms that effective turnaround is a priority and reinforces the importance 
of robust evaluation. Conversely, absence of effective evaluation systems 
communicates that change is optional. 


45 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


References 

Baker, R., Hupfeld, K., & Teske, R (2013, February], Turnarounds in Colorado: Partner- 
ship for innovative reform in a local control state. Denver, CO: Buechner Institute for 
Governance. 

Brown, C. G., Hess, F. M., Lautzenheiser, D. K., & Owen, I. (2011). State education agen- 
cies as agents of change: What it will take for the states to step up on education reform. 
Washington, DC: Center for American Progress. 

Brenner, J. (2013, August 5], Pew internet: Social networking. Retrieved from http:// 
pewinternet.org/Commentary/2012/March/Pew-Internet-Social-Networking-full- 
detail.aspx 

Burresi, J. (2013, August 26], Pleased but not satisfied. From the Superintendent’s desk. 
Oklahoma City, OK: Oklahoma State Department of Education. Retrieved from http:// 
www.ok.gov/sde/newsblog/2013-08-26/pleased-not-satisfied 

Campbell, A. (2013, November 7). Indiana election 2012. Tony Bennett loses re-election 
bid as school superintendent to challenger Glenda Ritz. Indianapolis Star. Retrieved 
from http://www.indystar.eom/article/20121106/NEWS0502/311060012/ 

Center for American Progress, U.S. Chamber of Commerce, & Hess, F. M. (2009], Leaders 
and laggards: A state-by-state report card on educational innovation. Washington, DC: 
Authors. 

Cerf, C. (2012], More must be done for failing schools. Newark, NJ: New Jersey De- 
partment of Education. Retrieved from http://www.state.nj.us/education/ 
news/20 12/0605oped.htm 

Chester, D. M. (2012, April 13], Memorandum to members of the Board of Elementary 
and Secondary Education. Malden, MA: Massachusetts Department of Elementary and 
Secondary Education. Retrieved from http://www.doe.mass.edu/boe/docs/2012-04/ 
item2.html 

Chiefs for Change. (2013 ).A roadmap for excellent education. Tallahassee, FL: Foundation 
for Excellence in Education. Retrieved from http://chiefsforchange.org/web/wp- 
content/ uploads/20 12/05/ chiefs-mission-narrative-and-principles.pdf 

Council of Chief State School Officers. (2013, February], Chiefs from KY and NY call on 
congress to reauthorize ESEA in testimony before U.S. senate. Washington, DC: Author. 
Retrieved from http://ccsso.org/News_and_Events/Current_News/Chiefs_from_KY_ 
and_NY_Call_on_Congress_to_Reauthorize_ESEA_in_Testimony_before_US_Senate.html 

Gist, D. (2009], Transforming education in Rhode Island: Strategic plan 2010-2015. 
Providence, RI: Rhode Island Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. 
Retrieved from http://www.ride.ri.gOv/Portals/0/Uploads/Documents/Inside-RIDE/ 
Additional-Information/RIDEStrategicPlan.pdf 

Gross, B., & Jochim, A. (Eds.]. (2013], Leveraging performance management to support 
school improvement. The SEA of the Future, 1(1). San Antonio, TX: Building State Ca- 
pacity & Productivity Center at Edvance Research, Inc. 


46 


Leveraging the Bully Pulpit 


Herman, R., Dawson, R, Dee, T., Greene, J., Maynard, R., Redding, S., & Darwin, M. (2008], 
Turning around chronically low-performing schools: A practice guide. Washington, DC: 
National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Educa- 
tion Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved from http:// ies.ed.gov/ncee/ 
wwc/pdf/ practiceguides /Turnaround, pg_04181.pdf 

Hess, F., & Kelly, A. (2013, January], What uncle Sam can (and cannot] do to improve 
K-12 schools: Lessons for the next four years. Outlook. Washington, DC: American 
Enterprise Institute. 

Kamal, M., & Meenalochani, P. (2012], Byte is mightier than the sword: Egypt revolu- 
tion of 2011. International Journal of Management and Information Systems, 16(4], 
341-344. 

Kingdon, J. W. (1984], Agendas, alternatives, and public policy. Boston, MA: Little Brown. 

Klein, R. (2013, September 30], Rhode Island education commissioner Deborah Gist 
skydives for literacy. Huffington Post. Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost. 
com/2013/09/30/deborah-gist-skydives_n_4018012.html 

Logan, L. (2013, July 15]. Education reforms lead to significant gains among New 
Mexico minority students. Retrieved from http://excelined.org/2013/07/ 
education-reforms-lead-to-significant-gains-among-new-mexico-minority-students/ 

Lusi, S. F. (1997], The role of state departments of education in complex school reform. 
New York, NY: Teachers College Press. 

Malen, B., & Muncey, D. (2000], Creating “a new set of givens"? The impact of state activ- 
ism on school autonomy. In N. D. Theobald & B. Malen (Eds.], Balancing local control 
and state responsibility for K-12 Education. 2000 Yearbook of the American Education 
Finance Association. Larchmont, NY: Eye on Education. 

Martinez, S. (2013, August 28], Governor Susana Martinez announced stipends for teach- 
ers moving to struggling schools or helping students earn Advanced Placement credits. 
Albuquerque, NM: Office of the Governor. 

Mass Insight Education. (2010, May], Enabling school turnaround through state policy. 
Boston, MA: Author. 

Montoya Bryan, S. (2013, September 9], Duncan kicks off back- to -school bus tour in NM. 
The Associated Press. 

Murphy, P., & Ouijdan, M. (2011, August], State capacity for school improvement: A first 
look at agency resources. Seattle, WA: Center on Reinventing Public Education. 

National Association of State Boards of Education. (2011, March], State boards: A critical 
link to quality education. Arlington, VA: Author. Retrieved from http://www.nasbe.org/ 
wp-content/uploads/2011-03-Policy-Update-State-Boards-a-Critical-Link-to-Quality- 
Education.pdf 

National Association of State Boards of Education. (2013, March], State education gov- 
ernance models. Retrieved from http://www.nasbe.org/wp-content/uploads/Gover- 
nance-Models-Chart-March-2013.pdf. 

Popkey, D. (2012, November 7], Laptop and online mandates lose in all 44 counties. 
Idaho Statesman. Retrieved from: http://www.idahostatesman. 
com/2012/11/07/2337158/laptop-and-online-mandates-lose.html 


47 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Public Impact. (2007], School turnarounds: A review of the cross-sector evidence on dra- 
matic organizational improvement. Lincoln, IL: Center on Innovation & Improvement. 
Retrieved from http://www.adi.org/about/publications.html 
Redding, S. (2012). Change leadership: Innovation in state education agencies. Oakland, 
CA: Wing Institute. Retrieved from http://www.adi.org/about/publications.html 
Redding, S., & Walberg, H. J. (Eds.). (2008). Handbook on statewide systems of support. 
Lincoln, IL and Charlotte, NC: Center on Innovation & Improvement and Information 
Age Publishing. 

Rhim, L. M. (2013 ). State-initiated school turnaround strategies: Leveraging the state 
education agency to drive meaningful change. Lincoln, IL, Sacramento, CA, and Char- 
lottesville, VA: Academic Development Institute, Center on School Turnaround, and 
Darden-Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education. 

Rhim, L. M. (2011). Learning how to dance in the Queen City: Cincinnati public schools’ 
turnaround initiative. Charlottesville, VA: Darden School Foundation. University of 
Virginia. 

Rhim, L. M., & Redding, S. (2011). Fulcrum of change: Leveraging 50 states to turn around 
5,000 schools. Lincoln, IL: Center on Innovation & Improvement. 

Rhim, L. M., Hassel, B., & Redding, S. (2008). State role in supporting school improve- 
ment. In S. Redding & H. J. Walberg (Eds.), Handbook on statewide systems of support 
(pp. 21-56). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing. 

Smith, N. (2012, January). The Louisiana recovery school district: Lessons for the 
buckeye state. Washington, DC: Thomas Fordham Institute. Retrieved from http:// 
edexcellencemedia.net/Ohio/FORINSLRSDReport.pdf 
Ujifusa, A. (2012, October 9). State chiefs' races blend K-12 issues, state politics. 
Education Week, 32(7), 17 & 19. Retrieved from tp://www.edweek.org/ew/ 
articles/2012/10/10/07chiefs.h32.html?qs=chief+state+school+officers 
Utah State Board of Education. (2013, June 18). Common Core and the Utah education 
transformation plan: College, career, and citizenship ready. Salt Lake City, UT: Author. 
Retrieved from http:/ /www.schools.utah.gov/board/Common-Core/USBECommon- 
CorePPT2013618.aspx 

Welburn, B. L. (2011, March). Why state boards of education are an essential part of our 
public education system. Arlington, VA: National Association of State Boards of Educa- 
tion. Retrieved from http://www.nasbe.org/wp-content/uploads/2011-03-Commen- 
tary- Why-State - Boards. pdf 


48 


Engaging Local School Boards to Catalyze, Support, and 
Sustain School Turnaround 

Lauren Morando Rhim 

Engaging Local School Boards in School Turnaround Efforts 

Local school boards are the embodiment of our long-standing commitment 
to local control; elected community representatives have the pulse of the com- 
munity and ensure that public schools reflect an individual community’s values 
and priorities. Overseeing high-quality schools that prepare students to suc- 
ceed in the ever-evolving knowledge economy requires a relatively high level of 
collective sophistication. Local school boards must navigate federal and state 
policy to develop coherent local policy on a range of topics, including school 
turnaround. Yet, ongoing efforts to turn around failing schools focus primarily on 
the role of teachers, principals, and superintendents, as well as state and federal 
policy makers. Missing from this debate is a robust discussion or examination of 
the role of local school boards. Nevertheless, given their broad responsibilities, 
school boards can have a notable impact on turnaround efforts. In particular, 
school boards can make counterproductive decisions if they are not well versed 
on the need for turnaround or the changes required to dramatically improve a 
school’s performance. 

The challenge facing state policy leaders is figuring out how to leverage 
largely volunteer boards of lay citizens to develop effective policies and practices 
in a climate that frequently reduces their role to that of budget hawks or single- 
issue politicians. Efforts to optimize boards’ contribution to turnaround efforts 
typically include training regarding board operations and education policy with 
a heavy focus on using achievement data to inform decisions. State education 
agencies (SEAs) are in a unique position to play a central role in providing or 


49 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


enabling induction and training programs that include the board’s role in school 
turnaround. 

This chapter highlights findings from a report produced by the Academic 
Development Institute (ADI) regarding the role of local school boards in school 
accountability and transformation efforts (Rhim, 2013). The report synthesized 
the contemporary research regarding the role of local school boards in targeted 
improvement efforts and explored emerging practice through interviews with 
key practitioners in districts engaged in such efforts. Building on the research 
findings, this chapter outlines strategies SEAs can leverage to drive and support 
meaningful engagement of local school boards in focused school turnaround 
efforts. 

Policy Context 

Successfully initiating and sustaining meaningful improvements in the lowest 
performing public schools in the United States is a pressing challenge for policy 
leaders and practitioners nationwide. We simply cannot afford, morally or eco- 
nomically, to continue to undereducate generations of students (Alliance for 
Excellent Education, n.d.). Traditional reform initiatives designed to incremen- 
tally improve schools in three to five years are incongruous with the urgency 
driving federal and state policies focused on turning around the lowest perform- 
ing schools — schools that have effectively failed to educate generations of stu- 
dents and are characterized as "drop-out factories" (Duncan, 2009). If we want 
to gain traction on scale that is sustainable, local school boards have to play an 
intentional and strategic role in school turnaround efforts, and SEAs can and 
should serve as catalysts in these efforts. 

As outlined in state constitutions, school boards are agents of the state 
charged with fulfilling the state’s obligation to provide resident students with a 
public education (Kirst, 2008). Within specific parameters dictated by state and 
federal laws, local school boards have the legal authority to craft the conditions 
for districts to operate successfully. Yet, historically they have focused mainly 
on what have been referred to as the "killer b’s" (i.e., books, budgets, buildings, 
buses; Hess & Meeks, 2011). They have not historically focused on academic 
achievement. This division of labor has evolved from efforts to avoid microman- 
aging — schools boards set policy and manage budgets, and superintendents 
run districts — but this overlooks the critical link between policies, budgets, and 
school-level practices. Current efforts to transform schools and districts in a 
significant and sustainable way require meaningful engagement of local school 
boards beyond the "killer b’s” to more strategic work focused on dramatically 
changing the performance of failing schools on a compressed timeline. 

Key Responsibilities of Local School Boards 

Regardless of district size, school boards are responsible for governing a 
multidimensional system and complying with federal and state regulations 


50 


Engaging Local School Boards 


attached to a variety of funding streams. District central offices typically employ 
a variety of specialized personnel charged with administering each district and 
the schools that operate within it. The exception to this is in small, often rural, 
districts in which administrators generally must wear a number of hats (e.g., cur- 
riculum and special education). In the last 50 years, school boards’ responsibili- 
ties have morphed from administering basic operations to aligning federal, state, 
and local policies, crafting and shepherding complex budgets, and hiring and 
evaluating superintendents responsible for leading districts within a high-stakes 
accountability environment (Kirst, 2008; Land, 2002). 

As synthesized by the National School Boards Association (NSBA), school 
boards’ primary responsibilities are: establish vision, articulate standards, 
conduct assessments, implement accountability systems, align programs and 
resources, cultivate a climate for learning, foster collaboration and community 
engagement, and manage a continuous improvement process. However, if the 
role of the school board can be boiled down to a single critical action, it would be 
the hiring and supervising of the superintendent charged with meeting specific 
performance goals (Maeroff, 2011). 

Correlation Between School Board Actions and Student Outcomes 

To create the optimal conditions for student outcomes, local school boards 
must understand how their macro-level decisions impact principals, teach- 
ers, and students and then align resources accordingly (Gremberling, Smith, & 
Villani, 2000). The literature examining the correlation between school board 
behavior and student outcomes is limited and somewhat dated given the current 
policy context. Nevertheless, the seminal multiyear Lighthouse Inquiry Project 
conducted by the Iowa School Boards Foundation from 1998-2000 documented 
a correlation between student achievement and the actions and beliefs of board 
members that has potential relevance today (Delegardelle, 2008). The original 
study and subsequent follow-up projects demonstrated that particular school 
board actions and beliefs transfer to district personnel and lead to better student 
outcomes, even in high poverty districts. Specifically, the Lighthouse study found 
the following school board characteristics present in high performing, high pov- 
erty districts and missing in low performing, high poverty districts: 

• Elevating as opposed to accepting belief systems (e.g., board members 
see schools as elevating students’ potential as opposed to seeing students’ 
potential as fixed); 

• Understanding and focusing on school renewal (e.g., board members 
understand improvement initiatives); and 

• Demonstrating awareness of actions in buildings and classrooms (e.g., 
board members are knowledgeable about schools and specific goals; Iowa 
Association of School Boards, 2000). 


51 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


While school and district performance is influenced by multiple external fac- 
tors, the Lighthouse Inquiry Project documented that school board members are 
positioned to make a difference. Given this correlation, SEAs cannot overlook the 
value of effectively building and leveraging board capacity in order to drive and 
sustain turnaround efforts. 

Intentional goal setting and strategic planning are foundational to effective 
improvement efforts (National School Board Association, 2010; Rhim, 2013). 
Developing a coherent district mission and vision, along with a well-aligned 
strategic plan, can ensure that school board and district personnel have a clear 
understanding of priorities and a road map to achieve goals (Iowa Association 
of School Boards, 2000; Walser, 2009). When turning around low-performing 
schools, this clarity and alignment can ensure that specific schools are prioritized 
when it comes to extending operational flexibility, targeting hiring, and distrib- 
uting resources (e.g., willingness to extend the turnaround principal autonomy, 
increase the amount of time district administrators devote to visiting the school 
and supporting the principal). 

A growing body of literature pertaining to effective school turnaround 
stresses the importance of school districts, as opposed to just individual schools, 
in achieving sustainable turnaround at scale (Education Resource Strategies, 
2011). Districts, starting with their school boards and superintendents, need to 
set agendas and thereafter allocate resources and develop policies to support 
these agendas, including prioritizing schools identified for turnaround (Brinson, 
Kowal, & Hassel, 2007; Public Impact, 2008). 

State Role in Optimizing School Boards in School Turnaround 

State education agencies have multiple tools they can leverage to encourage 
and support local school boards’ efforts related to turnaround. Building on the 
existing research on school boards and emerging turnaround efforts, three tools 
have particular promise: 1) prioritize and promote the role of school boards, 

2) incentivize school board member training, and 3) develop meaningful 
accountability policies and systems. These three levers are explored in the fol- 
lowing sections. 

Prioritize Role of School Boards 

State education agencies issue policies and promulgate regulations related to 
planning and implementing school turnaround initiatives. SEAs can prioritize the 
role of school boards by elevating their involvement from simply being signato- 
ries to active participants in planning; failure to engage school boards can under- 
mine change efforts. 

Newspaper reports and accounts from state officials working with districts 
to implement Race to the Top (RTTT) and School Improvement Grant (SIG) 
initiatives document that boards are often left out of planning and implementa- 
tion. This exclusion can lead to school board members not understanding and 


52 


Engaging Local School Boards 


potentially resisting unpopular but necessary changes (e.g., removal of popu- 
lar but ineffective school leaders, school closures; Rhim & Redding, 2011). For 
instance, in 2011, the Christina, Delaware school district embarked upon a 
turnaround effort in two local schools that entailed replacing a large number 
of teachers. While the school board had initially signed off on the turnaround 
efforts initiated under the state’s Race to the Top grant, when the practical impli- 
cations became public, the board reversed course and voted not to support the 
turnaround actions. The state intervened, threatening to withhold $11 million 
of federal funds, and the board eventually supported the staff replacements 
(Mussoni, 2011). This incident highlights the key role school boards can play in 
turnaround efforts. If the Christina school board had been more substantively 
engaged in the planning process, the district could have preempted the spectacle 
that arose when it came time to implement the school turnaround plan. 

Develop Policies and Allocate Resources to Support School Board 
Member Training 

To be effective managers overall, and specifically to initiate, support, and 
sustain targeted school turnaround efforts, local school board members require 
a clear understanding of their role in district governance and substantive knowl- 
edge about what changes are required to dramatically improve schools. Training 
provides school board members the opportunity to learn about their key roles 
and responsibilities, as well as more substantive content related to education 
policy and practice (Carr, 2012; Walser, 2009). Unfortunately, training in general 
is an area where boards are underinvesting both in terms of time and resources 
(Rhim, 2013). This is particularly problematic when a district is embarking upon 
an ambitious turnaround effort that will require the school board to demonstrate 
an unwavering commitment to change, even in the face of discord (e.g., com- 
plaints stemming from changing school norms and traditions to improve instruc- 
tion). To support effective turnaround efforts, board members need to be aware 
of the strategies and human dynamics in the school and community that are 
likely to accompany a vigorous turnaround effort. 

Of note, training board members about how to use data is a priority for the 
National School Board Association (NSBA, 2012) and affiliated state associations. 
These groups promote data use as the foundation of meaningful planning and to 
hold superintendents accountable (NSBA, 2011). Research on school turnaround 
has demonstrated that planning and accountability are critical to success (Public 
Impact, 2007, 2008; Rhim, 2011). States can support and encourage turnaround- 
specific training by developing policies incentivizing school board members to 
obtain training and allocating resources to create a robust turnaround training 
portfolio. 


53 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Develop Policies to Support School Board Member Training 

Twenty-three states require school board members to obtain training with 
varying levels of prescription, rigor, and compliance (NSBA, 2010). The state of 
Maine, for instance, requires new board members to participate in a single, two- 
hour orientation about freedom of information laws, while Texas requires new 
board members to complete at least 16 hours of training, specifies the focus (e.g., 
initial district orientation, orientation to state education code, team building), 
and requires experienced board members to complete at least eight hours each 
year. In New York, newly elected members are required to complete six hours 
of training regarding fiscal oversight and governance skills. Of the states that 
require training, most allow both the state school board association as well as 
other approved external vendors to provide the training. 

Requirements, however, only have meaning if the training is high qual- 
ity, compliance is tracked, and there are consequences for noncompliance. 
Enforcement provisions range from states simply requiring that districts report 
information about training to the state and the local community to the author- 
ity to remove board members who have not obtained the required training (e.g., 
Kentucky, Mississippi, New Mexico, New York, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Virginia). 

A NSBA (2010) survey regarding training requirements documented that it was 
extremely rare for the state commissioner or state board to actually exercise 
their authority related to the training requirement. 

By way of example, following a school board scandal in Georgia, the Atlanta 
Journal-Constitution reported that the state has the authority to withhold fund- 
ing from districts in which board members failed to comply with training 
requirements, but the state had never exercised this option (Badertscherv & 
Salzer, 2010). Due to concern about local school board capacity and a resulting 
crisis (i.e., loss of district accreditation), in 2012 the Georgia legislature added 
language that now permits the state to bar members from running for reelec- 
tion if they have not completed their required training. Designating compliance 
with the training requirement as a criterion for reelection presumably infuses a 
degree of accountability into the requirement. Individual board members' abil- 
ity to devote adequate time to obtaining training is a practical challenge that is 
difficult to overcome; especially in the majority of districts in which board mem- 
bers are essentially volunteers (i.e., paid less than $1,000 a year for board ser- 
vice) and district budgets are perpetually tight. The SEA can help diminish this 
challenge by investing in developing high-quality opportunities that are readily 
accessible across the state, including distance-learning opportunities. 

SEAs can also engage private philanthropies to support board training. For 
example, in Seattle, a local nonprofit associated with the district sponsors board 
retreats and training to build board members’ capacity and improve board oper- 
ations, management oversight, and support for student achievement (Institute 


54 


Engaging Local School Boards 


for a Competitive Workforce, 2012). In Texas, a group of philanthropies in part- 
nership with the Center for Reform of School Systems offers an annual retreat for 
new board members. The Texas Education Agency also requires vendors inter- 
ested in providing school board training to register with the state; the registra- 
tion process requires vendors to meet specific standards to control for quality 
(Texas Education Agency, 2013). 

Training Approaches 

School board training approaches range from very structured and recurring 
training for boards and superintendents to relatively unstructured individual 
professional development (Rhim, 2013). For instance, Memphis participated 
in the Broad Foundation’s Board Training offered by the Center for Reform 
of School Systems over the course of a year, and their chairperson credited 
the training with significantly improving board capacity. Board members in 
Alexandria, Virginia obtained board training through a national executive search 
firm. Building on findings from the Lighthouse Project documenting the cor- 
relation between effective school boards and student achievement, the state of 
Idaho provides ongoing intensive training to local school boards. The Lighthouse 
framework focuses on preparing board members to communicate a sense of 
urgency, focus on improvement, create conditions for district and school success, 
track progress, develop effective policies, and cultivate leaders (Delegardelle, 
2008; Iowa Association of School Boards, 2007). 

Taking a different approach, the state of Montana hired school board coaches 
for its three lowest-performing districts to build rural school board members’ 
capacity. The coaches work directly with school boards and provide them with 
guidance related to running effective meetings and maintaining a productive 
relationships with their superintendents as well as on more technical issues 
such as using data to inform policy. After two years of implementation, Montana 
officials have seen a dramatic switch in board agendas and a rise in levels of 
board involvement — a switch that is seen as positive and is credited with help- 
ing schools make notable academic improvements. The coaches have facilitated 
a shift to a more intentional discussion of academics (Rhim & Redding, 2011). 
Reflecting on the potent impact of intentionally building school board capacity, 
one official from the Montana Office of Public Instruction noted, "I have seen a 
huge switch from boards just talking about sports to talking about academics 
and following policies and procedures. They see that they set the tone for every- 
thing.” A second official explained, "We had been hearing for years and years that 
the board is the decision-maker, and they need to set the right tone. We heard 
cries from across the state that they, the boards, were the biggest problem, but 
also could be the heart of the solution" (Rhim & Redding, 2013). 

Training is generally funded at the local level, although some states fund their 
training through a combination of state and local funds. Allocating adequate time 


55 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


and resources is a persistent challenge for school boards. Specialized training 
can be cost-prohibitive and, consequently, limited to large districts with cor- 
respondingly large budgets. Board member turnover can also be a challenge; it 
can be hard to justify the return on investment in training when board members 
cycle out of office every few years. Nevertheless, SEA investments in training are 
potentially a high leverage tool as it can build capacity that can pay dividends, 
especially in districts where limited board capacity has contributed to superin- 
tendent churn and operational dysfunction. 

Establish Meaningful Accountability Mechanisms 

Accountability to local constituents is a leading claim proffered regarding 
the merits of local school boards; local communities elect board members and 
therefore board members will be responsive and accountable to local communi- 
ties. However, data regarding the extent to which board elections are generally 
contested — rarely — and low voter turnout raise questions regarding the valid- 
ity of this accountability claim (Kowalski, 2002). In other words, the notion that 
local school board governance ensures a high level of accountability to local 
communities appears to be more facade than fact. Each year there are highly 
contested school board races (e.g., Los Angeles Unified School District in 2013). 
But, in general, the vast majority of school board members who wish to continue 
to volunteer significant quantities of time to govern local schools run unopposed 
and remain in office until they decide to leave (Kowalski, 2002; Samuels, 2011). 
Absent meaningful accountability for individual school board members, the SEA 
can develop policies to collectively hold school boards accountable. 

Efforts to infuse accountability into pubic education include shifts from 
school board governance to mayoral control and a variety of school choice 
initiatives (e.g., charter schools and vouchers) that shift control to individual 
parents. The ultimate and most controversial manifestation of school board 
accountability is state statutes authorizing removal of locally elected boards or 
significant reconfiguration of their responsibilities under dire circumstances. 
Multiple cities have shifted from elected boards to mayoral control in an effort 
to improve district financial or operational health (e.g., Boston, Cleveland, New 
York, Washington, DC). Multiple states, (e.g., Louisiana, Maryland, Michigan, 
Pennsylvania) have passed legislation authorizing removal of elected boards and 
replacing them with appointed boards or emergency managers charged with 
turning around the district’s fiscal operations. These efforts are generally highly 
controversial and, to date, have had mixed results (see, Hess, 2008; Rhee & Fenty, 
2010; Wong & Shen, 2005). 

A less explored option is state- or district-initiated school board evaluations. 
Initial guidance regarding the federal Race to the Top Districts grant competi- 
tion included a requirement that districts conduct school board evaluations, but 
it lacked details regarding meaningful implementation. While dropped from the 


56 


Engaging Local School Boards 


final requirement, it spurred a preliminary discussion of the potential value and 
logistics of school board evaluations (e.g., National School Board Association, 
n.d.). 

Potential strategies SEAs can explore to increase school board account- 
ability include encouraging school boards to conduct rigorous self-evaluations, 
explicitly incorporating school board training and performance in existing state 
accountability systems (e.g., data dashboards, district report cards), and working 
with external entities to evaluate school boards. In instances of egregious behav- 
ior (e.g., inappropriate contracting, open meetings violations), SEAs can also take 
a proactive stance and pursue allegations of board member misbehavior that 
violates education codes and board ethics policies. 

Based on years of school board dysfunction, in 2009 a local nonprofit in 
Pittsburgh initiated Board Watch. Local volunteers were trained to evaluate 
board members during meetings on five measures of good board governance: 
focus and mission, transparency, conduct, role clarity, and competency. Board 
Watch founder, Carey Harris, explained the program "is as much about hold- 
ing the board accountable as it is about engaging the public" (Institute for a 
Competitive Workforce, 2012, p. 59). The organization releases report cards 
evaluating the board and making recommendations for improvement multiple 
times during the year (Maxwell, 2009). 

The most significant challenge associated with regulatory attempts to intro- 
duce school board accountability measures is the previously mentioned convic- 
tion that locally elected school boards are a critical reflection of our democracy; 
infusing regulations into the selection process fundamentally conflicts with our 
notion of representative democracy. Nevertheless, in line with their constitu- 
tional obligation to provide a public education, SEAs can explore a variety of 
means to not only hold low-performing districts accountable for results but also 
the school board members responsible for making critical decisions that shape 
public schools. 

Conclusions 

Local school board governance is an historical carryover reflecting our rural 
roots as opposed to an intentional structure designed to produce optimal results 
for students. Whereas it was rational to elect local citizens to run small public 
schools to ensure the schools reflected the community’s values and distinct 
economy in the 19 th century, today’s complex policy context and global economy 
could arguably benefit from a different structure. Nevertheless, our collective 
commitment to local control and school board governance runs deep; regard- 
less of concerns about challenges involved with locally elected school board 
members governing complex systems, school boards are a mainstay of our public 
school governance structure. As we strive to address nagging concerns about 


57 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


performance, it is critical that SEAs consider strategies to leverage their author- 
ity and resources to boost local school board capacity to turn around failing 
schools. 

There is an established link between effective boards and effective schools 
and districts, but it is unclear whether the link is causal or correlational (i.e., 
are high performing districts able to recruit and sustain effective boards, or do 
effective boards lead to high performance?). In districts with low-performing 
schools, school boards can, and arguably should, play a central role in creating 
the right conditions to initiate, support, and sustain bold improvement efforts. To 
assume this important role, boards need to move past focusing on the "killer b’s" 
to a more sophisticated leadership model in which they intentionally set priori- 
ties, develop strategic plans, align resources, and hold key actors accountable for 
actions required to sustain a laser sharp focus on student outcomes. 

As policy leaders at the federal, state, and local level continue to devote 
increasingly scarce resources to school turnaround efforts, local school boards 
must be part of the conversation if there is hope for dramatic and sustainable 
change. Rather than dismiss school boards from the conversations as antiquated 
holdovers from a different time and short of a massive overhaul of how school 
districts are governed, local school boards are positioned to play a critical role in 
turnaround. 

Action Principles 

Communicate importance of local schools boards to turnaround efforts 

• Embed guidance related to meaningfully engaging local school board mem- 
bers as critical stakeholders positioned to shepherd coherent, effective, 
and sustainable turnaround efforts in training and written documentation 
related to federal and state interventions (e.g., ESEA Flexibility waivers, 
Race to the Top for states and districts, SIG, 21st Century Schools). 

• Produce tools to assist a school board to develop strategic goals and robust 
implementation plans to drive focused, bold turnaround efforts and ensure 
the budget process and priorities align with the strategic plan. 

• Create incentives for districts (e.g., waiver of state required administrative, 
streamlined reporting requirements) embarking upon turnaround efforts 
to nurture a culture of board professionalism that includes paying board 
stipends and allocating financial support for turnaround-specific board 
training opportunities. 

Integrate local school boards in Regional Comprehensive Centers' and 

Content Centers' plans 

• Promote meaningful local school board engagement and training as essen- 
tial components of successful and sustainable school turnaround initiatives. 


58 


Engaging Local School Boards 


• Incorporate local school board training, coaching, support, and self-evalu- 
ation in individual state technical assistance plans developed by Regional 
Comprehensive Centers. 

Develop policies and allocate resources to facilitate school board training 

• Promote training requirements for new and experienced school board 
members focused on process as well as substantive issues critical to estab- 
lishing conditions for district and school turnaround (e.g., effective superin- 
tendent hiring, supervision and evaluation, understanding data, negotiating 
for performance-based teacher assessment systems). 

• Provide experienced board members, and especially board chairpersons, 
with access to relevant and timely training related to school turnaround. 

• Develop tools to track and publish board training and capacity building 
efforts as part of broader state accountability systems. 

• Incubate executive education opportunities with local institutions of higher 
education (e.g., colleges of education; colleges of business) to secure turn- 
around-specific leadership training opportunities for new and experienced 
board members in districts with low-performing schools identified for 
turnaround. 

Engage external stakeholders to drive and support local school boards 

• Network with regional philanthropies to invest in school board capacity 
building efforts in districts with schools identified for turnaround. 

• Enlist the business community (e.g., local chambers of commerce with 
a vested interest in the success of public schools) to cultivate a sense of 
urgency related to school turnaround, invest in building board capacity, and 
promote board member accountability. 

• Engage and support key associations’ (e.g., state superintendents and 
school board associations) work to ensure they have the capacity to be 
key resources for local school boards embarking upon focused turnaround 
efforts. 

References 

Alliance for Excellent Education, (n.d J. About the crisis. Washington, DC: Author. 
Retrieved from http://www.all4ed.org/about_the_crisis 

Alsbury, T. (2008). The future of school board governance: Relevancy and revelation. New 
York, NY: Rowan & Littlefield Education. 

Badertscher, N., & Salzer, J. (2010, October 11). School boards lax on training mandate. 
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Retrieved from http://www.ajc.com/news/school- 
boards-lax-on-675245.html 

Balfanz, R., & Legters, N. (2004). Locating the dropout crisis: Which high schools produce 
the nation’s dropouts? Where are they located? Who attends them? Baltimore, MD: 

Johns Hopkins University. 


59 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Brinson, D., Kowal, J., & Hassel, B. C. (2007], School turnarounds: A review of the cross- 
sector evidence on dramatic organizational improvement. Lincoln, IL: Center on Innova- 
tion & Improvement/Academic Development Institute. Retrieved from http://www. 
adi.org/about/publications.html 

Carr, N. (2012, February], Investing in board leadership. American School Board Journal, 
199(2], 32. 

Delagardelle, M. L. (2008], The lighthouse inquiry: Examining the role of school board 
leadership in the improvement of student achievement. In T. Alsbury (Ed.], The future 
of school board governance: Relevancy and revelation (pp. 191-224], New York, NY: 
Rowan & Littlefield Education. 

Duncan, A. (2009, June 22], Turning around the bottom five percent. Secretary Arne 
Duncan's Remarks at the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools Confer- 
ence, Washington, DC. Retrieved from http://www.ed.gov/news/speeches/ 
turning-around-bottom-five-percent 

Education Resource Strategies. (2011], Sustaining school turnaround at scale. Boston, 

MA: Author. 

Frank, S., & Miles, K. H. (2012, July 18]. Improving special education even in tough times. 
Education Week, 31(36], 24-25. Retrieved from http://www.erstrategies.org/news/ 
improving_special_education_in_tough_times 

Gremberling, K. W., Smith, C. W., & Villani, J. S. (2000], The key work of school boards 
guidebook. Alexandria, VA: National School Boards Association. 

Hawkins, B. (2012, June 5], Is it a good idea to evaluate school boards using test 
data? Minneapolis, MN: MinnPost. Retrieved from http://www.minnpost.com/ 
learning-curve/20 12/06/it-good-idea-evaluate-school-boards-using-test-data 

Hess, F. (2008, August], Assessing the case for Mayoral control of urban schools. Educa- 
tion Outlook, 4. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute. 

Hess, F., & Meeks, 0. (2011], School boards circa 2010: Governance in the accountability 
era. Washington, DC: National School Boards Association. 

Institute for a Competitive Workforce. (2012, May]. School board case studies. Wash- 
ington, DC: Author. Retrieved from http://icw.uschamber.com/publication/ 
school-board-case-studies 

Iowa Association of School Boards. (2000, October], The Lighthouse Inquiry: School 
board/superintendent team behaviors in school districts with extreme differences in stu- 
dent achievement. Paper presented at the at the 2001 Annual Meeting of the American 
Educational Research Association, Seattle, WA. Retrieved from http://www.ia-sb.org/ 
assets/FADFDF72-BE9D-48D7-8CF9-19B823F0CDAl.pdf 

Kirst, M. W. (2008], The evolving role of school boards: Retrospect and prospect. In T. 

L. Alsbury (Ed.], The future of school board governance: Relevancy and revelation (pp. 
37-60], New York, NY: Rowan & Littlefield Education. 

Kowalski, T. J. (2008], School reform, civic engagement, and school board leadership. 

In T. L. Alsbury (Ed.], The future of school board governance: Relevancy and revelation. 
New York, NY: Rowan & Littlefield Education. 


60 


Engaging Local School Boards 


Land, D. (2002, January], Local school boards under review: Their role and effectiveness in 
relation to students’ academic achievement. Baltimore, MD: Center for Research on the 
Education of Students Placed at Risk. 

Maeroff, G. [2011], School boards in America: A flawed exercise in democracy. New York, 
NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Maxwell, L. (2009, October], In Pittsburgh, monitors hold school board account- 
able. Education Week, 29(7], 4 & 5. Retrieved from http://www.edweek.org/ew/ 
articles/2009/10/14/07wallace-pittsburgh.h29.html 

Megan, K. (2013, July 25], Bridgeport schools chief to stay in job during appeal. The 
Hartford Courant. 

Mussoni, J. (2011, April 30], Christina school district rescinds vote and avoids Race to 
the Top funding confrontation. NewsWorks. Retrieved from http://www.newsworks. 
org/index.php/local//delaware-feature/18488-christina-school-district-rescinds- 
vote-and-avoids-race-to-the-top-funding-confrontation 

National School Boards Association. (2012, May 24], NSBA reviews RTTT proposal 
for school districts. Retrieved from http://schoolboardnews.nsba.org/2012/05/ 
nsba-reviews-rttt-proposal-for-school-districts/ 

National School Boards Association. (2010], Mandated training for local school board 
members survey. Alexandria, VA: Author. 

National School Boards Association. (2011], What school boards need to know: Data 
conversations. A report for school boards in planning for and using data systematically. 
Alexandria, VA: Author. 

Public Impact. (2008], School turnarounds: Actions and results. Lincoln, IL: Center on 
Innovation & Improvement/Academic Development Institute. Retrieved from http:// 
www.adi.org/about/publications.html 

Rhim, L. M. (2013], Moving beyond the killer b's: The role of school boards in school 
accountability and transformation. Lincoln, IL: Academic Development Institute. 
Retrieved from www.adi.org/about/publications.html 

Rhim, L. M., & Redding, S. (2011], Fulcrum of change: Leveraging 50 states to turn around 
5,000 schools. Lincoln, IL: Academic Development Institute. Retrieved from http:// 
www.adi.org/about/publications.html 

Rhee, M., & Fenty, A. (2010, October 30], The education manifesto. The Wall Street Jour- 
nal. Retrieved from http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142405270230336240457 
558022 15 11231074.html#printMode 

Samuels, C. S. (2011, November 10]. Board races in N.C., Minn, draw voter interest. Edu- 
cation Week, 31(12). Retrieved from: http://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2011/ll/ 
10/12schoolboard.h31.html?tkn=MVOF5XREBzxTv0BU96VsyfkJHU%2BWFULD8ZRF 
&print=l 

Strauss, V. (2013, June 29], Why judge ordered Paul Valias removed as Bridgeport 
schools chief. Washington Post. Retrieved from http://www.washingtonpost.com/ 
blogs/answer-sheet/wp/2013/06/29/why-judge-ordered-paul-vallas- 
removed-as-bridgeport-schools-chief/ 


61 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Texas Education Agency. (2013], School board member training. Austin, TX: Author. 

Retrieved from http://www.tea.state.tx.us/index4.aspx?id=4327 
Walzser, N. (2009], The essential school board book: Better governance in the age of 
accountability. Boston, MA: Harvard Education Press. 

Wong, K. K., &. Shen, F. X. [2005], When mayors lead urban schools: Assessing the effects 
of mayoral takeover. In W. G. Howell (Ed.], Besieged: School boards and the future of 
education politics (pp. 81-100], Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 

Yudoff, Y., Kirp, D., Levin, B., & Moran, R. [2001]. Educational policy and the law (4th ed.]. 
Belmont, CA: West-Wadsworth. 


62 


Section B 

Create a Pro-Turnaround 
Environment 



Successful School Turnarounds Through Labor-Management 
Partnerships: The Role for State Education Agencies 

Ken Futernick and Adam Urbanski 

In recent years, the federal government has made unprecedented invest- 
ments in programs designed to turn around the nation’s lowest performing 
schools. The Race to the Top program (RTTT), announced in 2009, provided 
$4.35 billion in grants to states that agreed to adopt specific reforms and to turn 
around their lowest achieving schools. That same year, the U.S. Department of 
Education also provided $3.5 billion in Title I School Improvement Grants (SIGs) 
to turn around the nation’s lowest performing schools. 

It’s too early to tell whether RTTT and SIG will produce dramatic and sus- 
tainable improvements in the schools they target, but if similar efforts to turn 
schools around in the U.S. are any indication, the odds may be low (Smarick, 
2010). As University of Chicago sociologist Charles Payne notes in his book, So 
Much Reform, So Little Change, "After a couple of years of being energetically 
reformed, most schools, especially bottom tier schools, and most school systems 
seem to be pretty much the same kind of organizations they were at the begin- 
ning" (Payne, 2008, p. 4). 

However, Payne is referring to reforms that have been undertaken in the U.S. 
A significant number of low performing schools in places like Finland, Canada, 
and Singapore, have made significant and sustained improvements, demon- 
strating that chronically failing schools can, in fact, be turned around at scale 
(Darling-Hammond, 2010; Fullan, 2011; Mourshed, Chijioke, & Barber, 2010). 

The question is, what lessons can education officials in the U.S. learn from these 
countries? Researcher Michael Fullan believes the U.S. must place more emphasis 
on building social capital: 


65 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


By adding social capital-based strategies you get multiple benefits. For 
example, focused collaborative practices mobilize and customize knowledge 
in the system, enabling teachers to know what other teachers do and to learn 
from them. In addition to leveraging instructional capacity, purposeful col- 
laboration serves as the most effective form of lateral accountability. When 
combined with transparency of results, the whole apparatus fosters both 
collective ownership of educational practice and accountability to the public. 
Finally, these actions represent the best route to developing a trusted and 
respected profession. This is what successful countries are doing. (2011, p. 12) 

One way that educators in countries with successful turnaround records 
build and sustain social capital is through collaboration between teacher unions 
and management. Government officials in Finland’s widely acclaimed school 
system have long worked closely with the country’s strong teacher unions and 
view them as essential partners. Struggling public schools in Ontario, Canada 
have made dramatic improvements in academic achievement in recent years, 
but government leaders and teacher unions had been bitter adversaries prior 
to this turnaround. In 2003, officials tried a different approach to address stag- 
nating student performance. According to writer Marc Tucker, who studied the 
reform effort in Ontario, "They brought teachers and their unions to the table for 
discussions of education reform strategy and won their trust by listening hard to 
what the teachers had to say and then providing the needed support. The reform 
strategy that they adopted assumed that teachers wanted to do the right thing 
but lacked the capacity to do it” (2012, p. 20). 

Relations between management and labor unions in the U.S. have historically 
been adversarial, which may help to explain why school turnaround efforts here 
have floundered. Many local and state teacher unions have actively resisted some 
of the turnaround policies required by programs like RTTT and SIG (e.g., replac- 
ing 50% or more of the teaching staff; using academic growth to evaluate teach- 
ers), and the absence of a collaborative environment has surely not promoted 
the "collective ownership of educational practice" that Fullan and others have 
observed outside the U.S. 

The good news is that partnerships between labor and management are 
rapidly emerging in the U.S., and the impact of these partnerships appears prom- 
ising, especially in districts that are engaged in school turnaround work. Our goal 
in this chapter is to acquaint state education agencies (SEAs) with key findings 
from case study research on the impact of labor-management collaboration on 
school policy and practice and to show how this collaboration is breaking down 
the fierce resistance to change that has hampered so many turnaround efforts. 
We also offer specific recommendations to SEAs based on the success several 
have had promoting a climate of trust, innovation, and collaboration among local 
stakeholders in their states. 


66 


Labor-Management Partnerships 


School Turnarounds and Resistance to Change 

Successful school turnaround efforts — those designed to produce swift, 
dramatic, sustained improvements in student academic performance — require 
drastic changes in policy and practice. In the case of the federal SIG program, 
for instance, schools using the "transformation" model must replace the princi- 
pal and extend learning time for students and collaboration time for teachers. 
They must also adopt new teacher and principal evaluation systems that use 
student academic growth as a key indicator. Teachers who perform well must 
be rewarded, and those who don’t must be removed. In schools following SIG’s 
"turnaround" or "restart" models, most or all of the teachers can be replaced. 
Other turnaround strategies, like getting "quick wins” and breaking organiza- 
tional norms, while not mandated, have emerged as recommendations from 
the research on successful turnaround efforts (Calkins et al., 2007; Kowall & 
Ableidinger, 2011). 

Explanations for the dismal results of school turnaround initiatives abound, 
but one of the most compelling is that the changes in policy and practice are 
frequently met with apprehension and resistance from education stakeholders 
(see, for instance, GAO, 2012). 1 Considerable opposition has come from teach- 
ers and their unions who have argued that teachers should not be expected to 
work a longer day or longer school year without additional compensation; that 
standardized test scores are an imperfect indicator of learning and should not 
be used to evaluate or compensate teachers; and that teachers who struggle in 
highly challenging schools should not be removed unless and until they have 
been given ample support from accomplished colleagues. 

Such resistance from local stakeholders presents formidable challenges to 
local and state education leaders. If teachers and their unions do not buy into the 
changes, or worse, resist them, the prospects for successful school turnarounds 
will surely be diminished and may well be doomed from the start. In 2009, many 
states competed for federal RTTT funds, but many were denied because man- 
agement and labor leaders were unable to agree on required elements of the 
program. Many local districts have had difficulty implementing required ele- 
ments of the federal SIG program, again because local labor and management 
leaders could not agree to the terms of the program (Garland, 2012; Klein, 2012; 
Lachlan-Hache, Naik, & Casserly, 2012). 

A growing body of research shows that many of the reforms required for 
successful school turnarounds are successfully implemented when local labor 
and management leaders establish a foundation of trust, agree to make student 
learning their primary objective, and implement critical reforms collaboratively. 
In Delaware, for instance, where $100 million in RTTT funds were awarded, 
change management advisory councils led by state education officials helped 


‘See, for instance, the GAO report, School Improvement Grants: Education Should Take Additional Steps to 
Enhance Accountability for Schools and Contractors (April 2012). 


67 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


resolve a number of contentious labor issues that arose during the grant compe- 
tition (Cavanagh, 2011). 

As noted above, the use of new teacher evaluation systems based on student 
academic growth has proven to be particularly challenging for many districts. 
However, after union leaders and administrators in the Montgomery County 
Public Schools in Maryland agreed to operate as partners rather than adversar- 
ies and then worked together to replace the district’s antiquated teacher evalua- 
tion system, they created a comprehensive alternative that included high-quality 
professional development and extensive training for principals to ensure teacher 
evaluations would be fair and constructive. When leaders in two California dis- 
tricts — Poway Unified and San Juan Unified — used collaboration rather than con- 
frontation to jointly develop peer-assistance and review programs, they created 
nationally recognized models that provide intensive support for struggling teach- 
ers and an effective, union-supported way to dismiss those who do not improve 
(Humphrey, Koppich, & Bland, 2011). Similar turnaround-friendly reforms have 
emerged through labor-management collaboration in New Haven, Connecticut; 
Memphis, Tennessee; and Seminole County, Florida (Hobbs, 2012). It behooves 
SEAs to promote labor-management collaboration because many of the reforms 
that are critical to successful school turnarounds are more likely to be adopted 
and implemented effectively when labor and management are working together. 

Despite the encouraging reforms that have emerged through collabora- 
tion, labor-management partnerships have been the exception and not the 
rule. But recent events suggest that labor relations in U.S. public education may 
have reached a critical turning point — one that may signal a dramatic increase 
in the number of districts in which unions and management are collaborating 
to improve the quality of their schools. In February 2011, the nation’s leading 
management and labor organizations and the U.S. Department of Education co- 
sponsored the first of its kind national conference on labor-management collab- 
oration. Superintendents, labor leaders, and board presidents from 150 school 
districts convened in Denver, Colorado to hear first hand how districts like those 
mentioned above are leveraging collaboration to improve student learning and to 
support school turnaround efforts. A follow-up study conducted a year after the 
conference found that many of the participating districts had begun to collabo- 
rate on a broad range of policies and practices designed to improve the academic 
outcomes of their students (Futernick, McClellan, & Vince, 2011). A similar con- 
ference was conducted in Cincinnati in May 2012, and the same group of labor 
and management co-sponsors signed a shared vision statement to transform the 
teaching profession into an environment where leadership and responsibility 
are shared. Because of the success of these two national conferences, additional 
national, regional, and state events are in the works (Education Week, 2011). 

In the next section, we examine research on labor-management collabora- 
tion and the impact it has had on policies associated with successful school 


68 


Labor-Management Partnerships 


turnaround initiatives. Then, to help SEAs understand the role they can play in 
promoting collaborative partnerships, we describe several successful initiatives 
that have emerged at the state and regional levels. In the final section, we rec- 
ommend specific strategies that SEAs can use to strengthen school turnaround 
efforts through labor-management collaboration. 

Labor-Management Collaboration and Its Impact on School Quality 
The Purpose of Collaboration 

Collaboration, simply defined, calls for parties to communicate well and to 
work in a productive manner. However, as Daniel Humphrey and Julia Koppich 
point out in their book on peer review, "The promise of collaborative bargain- 
ing is not simply in changing the tenor of the discussion, in increasing the level 
of civility. The promise of collaborative bargaining lies in altering the substance 
of labor-management discussions and agreements. It lies in management and 
union being willing to examine the previously unexamined, doing the hard work 
together of confronting tough, high-stakes issues, and reaching accord on how to 
proceed when decisions carry real and human consequences” (Humphrey et al., 
2011, p. 30). 

Simply getting along with one another is not the goal for highly collaborative 
districts that have something to show for their efforts. Collaboration is a means 
to an end — a way to create conditions for powerful teaching and learning and, 
ultimately, to achieve equitable outcomes for all students. When parties are not 
collaborating, they usually resort to an adversarial approach to achieve their 
respective goals. Without a common set of purposes, parties do compromise but 
usually only to avoid losses or costly and time-consuming arbitrations. 

In districts where collaboration is practiced, disputes still occur, and some 
of them must still be resolved through mediation. The difference is that these 
district leaders continue collaborating to solve other problems where progress is 
being made. Important work does not come to a halt just because an impasse has 
been reached on particular issues. With a foundation of mutual trust, collabora- 
tive leaders engage in "constructive conflict” and work together to avoid prob- 
lems before they emerge (Futernick et al., 2013). In Douglas County, Colorado, 
union president Brenda Smith described the tangible benefits of improved pro- 
fessional relationships in her district: 

Our district has really focused in on relationship building. We, as an organi- 
zation, as a teacher’s voice, are always at the table talking about what’s next 
so there are no surprises. We have not filed a grievance in over six years. We 
typically make a phone call prior to a grievance and solve issues through 
dialogue and open communication. Part of this comes from building relation- 
ships, getting to know whom you’re dealing with inside the system and when 
there are problems, solving them very quickly, (as cited in Eckert, 2011, p. 17) 


69 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Another misconception about collaboration is that overly friendly relation- 
ships among parties with different interests will lead to collusion — that lead- 
ers will "give away the store," not represent the interests of their constituents, 
and weaken their power base. This fear may account for much of the skepticism 
about collaboration that is prevalent among labor and management leaders who 
are unacquainted with the outcomes achieved in highly collaborative districts. 
This skepticism can be overcome when conferences, symposia, and site visits 
provide opportunities for school leaders and school board members to learn 
first hand from those working in similar roles how collaboration can produce the 
results they want for their schools and students. 

The Impact of Labor-Management Collaboration 

A meta-analysis of case study research 2 on districts where labor- 
management collaboration is practiced shows that this strategy frequently 
leads to two types of outcomes that are particularly important for districts 
engaged in school turnaround efforts. The first outcome is improved professional 
relationships and trust among leaders in the district. The tangible benefits of 
increased social capital are effective communication, innovation, and problem 
solving, which are vital to school turnaround work. Turning around chronically 
failing schools, each with their own unique challenges, is exceedingly complex 
work, and there are no scripts or formulas for district leaders to follow. All 
stakeholders — including teachers, classified staff, union leaders, administrators, 
community leaders, and parents — must be able to devise and implement sound, 
creative strategies with maximum support from all groups. Tension and conflict 
are an inevitable by-product of change, and they are quick to surface in places 
where reform efforts have repeatedly failed in the past and the expectations 
for rapid change are high. But tensions and conflicts can be mitigated and the 
prospects for successful turnaround heightened if labor and management 
leaders can establish a foundation of trust and communicate effectively in the 
turnaround effort. 

The second way that labor-management collaboration has influenced school 
turnaround efforts is by helping local stakeholders adopt policies that are recom- 
mended by research or required by government agencies (e.g., the federal RTTT 
and SIG programs). Some of the key policies that have emerged through labor- 
management collaboration include: improved teacher evaluation systems that 
take into account student academic growth; extended learning time for students 
and collaboration time for teachers; and peer-assistance and review programs 
that provide additional support to struggling teachers and remove those who 

2 In 2012, WestEd conducted a meta-analysis of 7 recent investigations that examined 50 district cases 
from across 23 states where labor-management collaboration was practiced. Data from these case studies 
typically came from interviews, direct observation, surveys, and artifacts such as contracts, informal agree- 
ments, reports, and meeting minutes. WestEd researchers used this data to identify common patterns and 
themes within and across these district cases. This study is being published by WestEd. 


70 


Labor-Management Partnerships 


cannot improve. We examine a few cases to illustrate how collaboration has 
enabled districts to enact policies that not only met the turnaround require- 
ments but often exceeded them. 

In Minnesota’s St. Francis Independent School District, union leaders work- 
ing with management established a "Teacher Academy" to support professional 
development, evaluation, and compensation innovations. In response to a state 
funding initiative, the collaboration led to the development of the Student 
Performance Improvement Program (SPIP), which incorporated a career ladder 
and additional pay for accomplished teachers and a new teacher evaluation 
system. Initially, only 54% of the district’s teachers supported this program, but 
within one year, 85% of the district’s teachers voted to support it, and 90% of 
the teachers were participating in SPIP a few years later (Eckert, 2011). Evidence 
of success is seen in the district’s low teacher turnover rate — less than 2% per 
year — which leaders credit to SPIP (Rubinstein & McCarthy, 2010). 

The Plattsburgh City School District in New York experienced years of con- 
tentious labor-management relations before adopting a collaborative approach. 
A new relationship and shared decision-making process laid the groundwork for 
the successful implementation of a Peer Assistance and Review (PAR) program. 
Such programs, which first emerged in Toledo, Ohio in 1981, were designed to 
improve classroom instruction by allowing accomplished teachers to work with 
new teachers and struggling veteran teachers. PAR programs were also designed 
to assist with decisions about whether to retain teachers. Prior to implementa- 
tion, a diverse design team in Plattsburgh, which included teachers, adminis- 
trators, and a representative from State University of New York at Plattsburgh, 
attended two 3-day meetings every three months for over a year (WestEd, 2011). 
The design team eventually implemented a PAR system that emphasized "shared 
risk taking, informed professional practice, and high-level student outcomes" 
(Eckert, 2011, p. 38) and continues to direct the district’s professional develop- 
ment efforts, observe all new teachers up to 20 times each year, and provide 
administrators with extensive data to support tenure decisions (WestEd, 20 11). 3 
The reforms undertaken in these districts may not be ones that others would 
want to adopt to help turn around their schools, but the key lesson is that these 
important changes in district policy would not have come about were it not for 
the commitment leaders in these district made to collaborate with one another. 

Labor-management collaboration has also led to the effective implementa- 
tion of extended learning time (ELT). ELT is a key component of many school 
turnaround initiatives and another policy change that often leads to resistance 
from teacher unions. 4 In 2005, a coalition of state government and education 

3 Dan Humphrey and Julia Koppich recently conducted a study of PAR programs and the role labor-man- 
agement collaboration played in the design and implementation of these programs (Humphrey et at, 

2011 ], 

increases in the length of the school day was one of the major issues that led the Chicago Teachers Union to 
strike in fall 2012. 


71 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


leaders in Massachusetts launched the Expanded Learning Time Initiative to 
improve student outcomes in core subjects and to ensure that all students 
receive a well-rounded education. According to the Boston-based National 
Center on Time and Learning: 

In the fall of 2006, Massachusetts became the first state in the nation to 
implement a statewide initiative to dramatically expand the school calen- 
dar in traditional public schools. Ten schools in five districts implemented 
a new school day adding approximately two extra hours a day for all stu- 
dents. Over the past four years, the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Initiative 
has grown. In school year 2010-2011, 19 schools in 9 districts across the 
Commonwealth, serving more than 10,500 students, are participating. 
(National Center on Time and Learning, 2010, p. 1) 

The goals of extending learning time for students are laudable, but adding 
time to the school day or days to the school year poses several challenges for 
labor and management. How will teachers be compensated if they work longer 
hours or additional days? Where will the resources come from to pay them? 

What if teachers with children of their own at home are unable to teach a longer 
school day? Many schools and districts have been unable to find solutions to 
questions like these, but others like the Chelsea Public School in Massachusetts 
and the Oklahoma City Schools have adopted extended learning policies that 
both sides find amenable. As illustrated below, collaboration between manage- 
ment and labor enabled parties to agree to extended learning time policies. 5 

The Chelsea Public School District was one of several to participate in the 
state’s ELT initiative. After working with management on a plan to increase 
learning time, teachers in eight of the nine district schools voted to submit 
extended learning proposals. Deputy superintendent Mary Bourque and Chelsea 
Teachers union president Mary Ferriter believed collaboration between labor 
and management was essential to the successful implementation of this initia- 
tive. Leaders from both sides said this was one of the first times they had worked 
together to solve an important educational problem. According to Bourque, 
"Everyone needed to be talking. We couldn’t exist in silos anymore" (Vince, 

2011). 

The Oklahoma City Schools were recipients of SIG funds, which required 
the district to implement several reforms, including extended learning time for 
students in the district’s five participating schools. A collaborative relationship 
that had formed between a new district superintendent, Karl Springer, and union 
president Ed Allen laid the groundwork for the cooperation that was needed 
to develop a restructuring plan for SIG. Several months of meetings facilitated 
by the American Federation of Teachers resulted in customized reform plans, 

5 It remains to be seen, of course, whether extended learning time, as required by programs like SIG, will lead 
to improved outcomes for students. If it does, districts that want to sustain it will have to find funds to sup- 
port it when their current grants expire. 


72 


Labor-Management Partnerships 


including provisions for ELT, for each SIG school. Springer and Allen credit the 
progress made to a commitment on both sides to work together on matters 
affecting student learning (Vince, 2011). 

One of the hallmarks of successful school reform efforts is a high degree of 
collaboration and buy-in from local stakeholders (Blair, 2000; Rubenstein & 
McCarthy, 2010). Nowhere is this collaboration more important than among 
labor leaders and management, especially when it comes to developing sound 
policies on matters such as teacher evaluation, support for struggling teachers, 
and extended learning time. Because school turnarounds are extraordinarily 
challenging, these leaders must be able to communicate effectively to solve com- 
plex problems as partners rather than as adversaries. 

State and Regional Efforts to Promote 
Labor-Management Collaboration 

In this section, we highlight efforts at the state level that contribute to collab- 
orative labor-management relations. These efforts provide valuable lessons for 
SEAs that want to help lay the groundwork for successful school turnarounds in 
their states. 

Massachusetts 

Massachusetts’ public schools have consistently ranked among the top in the 
U.S. in terms of academic achievement. The state is also widely recognized as a 
leader in educational collaboration — between labor, management, higher educa- 
tion, and nonprofit organizations (Bluestone & Kochan, 2011). Many state educa- 
tors believe much of the success of their schools and a successful bid to receive 
federal Race to the Top funds is attributable to this collaboration. 

A strong track record with labor-management led to the formation of the 
Massachusetts Education Partnership (MEP) in 2012 that had broad representa- 
tion from the state’s administrator organization, the two leading teacher unions, 
and four leading research centers. MEP’s purpose "is to help labor-management 
teams of superintendents, union leaders, school committee members, teachers, 
and administrators to develop active collaborations in the area of labor- 
management relations and school-site operations, in order to: 

• Accelerate student achievement and promote student success; 

• Increase teacher engagement and leadership in school and district 
governance; 

• Improve the productivity of bargaining practices; and 

• Institute policies, structures, and practices for sustainable collaboration 
and reform. (MEP, n.d., para. 1) 

MEP recently launched several initiatives, including support for interest- 
based bargaining, dissemination of knowledge through a new website, and the 
convening of conferences for labor and management leaders, researchers, and 
policymakers to discuss educational issues of mutual interest. In addition, MEP 


73 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


has announced the District Capacity Project (DCP) that will allow local dis- 
tricts to receive intensive support from a team of experts on challenges selected 
by local labor and management leaders. According to Nancy Peace, Executive 
Director of MEP, "[t]he selected districts will also be given the opportunity to 
participate in Capacity Institutes for skill development, planning, and network- 
ing, and join other DCP teams in an online community that will encourage them 
to share their learning and gain access to experts in specific areas of education 
reform” (2012, p. 2). 

California 

In 2012, California Superintendent of Public Instruction, Tom Torlakson, 
appointed an Educator Excellence Task Force to formulate recommendations 
that would strengthen educator effectiveness in the state. Members of the Task 
Force included representatives from the education policy community, higher 
education, teacher unions, school management, school boards, family and com- 
munity advocacy groups, philanthropic organizations, nonprofit support provid- 
ers, and the business community. In September 2012, the Task Force released 
a report titled Greatness By Design, which included detailed recommendations 
on topics ranging from educator preparation, teacher recruitment, professional 
learning, educator evaluation, leadership, and career development. The report 
also included these recommendations for labor-management collaboration: 
Implementation of many of the Task Force’s recommendations will require 
policy changes at the state level, but some will also require innovative new 
agreements between labor and management at the district level. New sys- 
tems of evaluation for teachers and administrators recommended in this 
report will need to become part of the collective bargaining process, with 
care taken to ensure that they are fully understood by all stakeholders in a 
district, including parents, students, and community members. 

The state should. ..promote labor-management collaboration to enable 
innovation in educator roles, responsibilities, and compensation systems. 
Concrete steps should include a statewide conference on labor-management 
collaboration to share innovative practices and to promote cross-district 
dialogue; creation of a comprehensive statewide agenda for improving 
labor-management relations in school districts across the state; and a focus 
in training programs for both teacher leaders and administrators on under- 
standing strategies for labor-management collaboration and opportunities to 
learn new collaborative skills. (Educator Excellence Task Force, 2012, p. 18) 

Since the release of the Task Force report, several steps have been taken 
to implement these recommendations. Local and state labor leaders from the 
state’s largest teacher unions are formulating plans with management leaders 
to conduct symposiums and on-site district study tours so educators throughout 


74 


Labor-Management Partnerships 


the state can learn from districts that have formed labor-management 
partnerships. 

In spring 2013, CalTURN, the state chapter of the national Teachers Union 
Reform Network, and WestEd co-sponsored a conference on collaboration; the 
theme was "Effective Implementation of Common Core State Standards Through 
Labor-Management Collaboration." Close to 150 educators, including labor- 
management teams from nearly 20 California school districts, attended the 
conference. 

Illinois 

Nearly 25 years ago, the Consortium for Educational Change (CEC) was 
formed by union leaders, administrators, school board members with support 
from local universities, and philanthropic organizations. CEC’s collaborative mis- 
sion has been to improve student learning and achievement, and its work focuses 
on: 

• Building educator capacity through coaching, training, mentoring, network- 
ing, and facilitating; 

• Accelerating use of leading school improvement ideas, practices, and prac- 
titioners through robust partnerships; 

• Supporting implementation of customized, evidence-based, effective prac- 
tices across districts and schools; and 

• Enabling district and school teams to be more effective and efficient in con- 
tinuous improvement efforts. 6 

Through a "Dialogue Group" formed in 2006, CEC laid the groundwork for 
several education policy initiatives, including the Burnham Plan which estab- 
lished a comprehensive reform agenda for the state, and the Performance 
Evaluation Reform Act (PERA), signed into law in 2010 by Illinois Governor Pat 
Quinn. PERA requires all districts to implement multiple-measure teacher evalu- 
ation systems that include observations by trained evaluators and evidence of 
student academic growth. As noted previously, these evaluation systems are 
key components of RTTT, SIG, and general guidance from the U.S. Department 
of Education. The state board of education has contracted with CEC to provide 
training for approximately 9,000 teacher and administrator evaluators. CEC 
will also help design standards-based evaluation systems for principals and will 
provide technical assistance to districts implementing these educator evaluation 
systems. 7 

Despite the strong track record of collaboration among education stakehold- 
ers in Illinois, it did not avert the bitter 7-day strike by the Chicago Teachers 
Union in fall 2012 over teacher evaluations, the length of the school day, and 

These focus areas and additional information about CEC are listed in the organization's website at http:// 
cecillinois.org/about/mission-vision/ 

Information about PERA and CEC's role in implementation is available at http://www.growththroughle- 
arningillinois.org/ 


75 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


job security. After a settlement was reached with the Chicago mayor’s office, 
both sides were positive about the outcomes, but a recent announcement by the 
mayor to close 54 of the city’s schools has refueled tensions among local stake- 
holders. It remains to be seen how these ongoing disputes in Chicago will impact 
progress by the CEC to promote collaboration among the state’s education 
stakeholders. 

The Teachers Union Reform Network 

Early efforts to advance labor-management collaboration in education were 
first made by the Teachers Union Reform Network (TURN), a coalition of local 
teacher unions founded in 1996 by Adam Urbanski, president of the Rochester 
Teachers Association, and the late Helen Bernstein, former president of the 
United Teachers Los Angeles. TURN’S mission has been to promote a "respon- 
sible and responsive teacher unionism" in which labor and management work 
together to protect the interests of teachers and students, improve working and 
learning conditions in schools, and implement solutions to advance student 
learning. 

Operating now in five regions, 8 TURN’S regional satellites conduct meetings 
throughout the year and often invite state and national education leaders to 
participate. At the September 2012 meeting of Northeast TURN, for example, 70 
participants representing 17 local districts and 6 states heard presentations on 
"Building a Culture of Collaboration, a Case Study of Collaboration in Providence, 
Rhode Island," and "Lessons from Delaware: Race to the Top and Teacher 
Evaluation." At the Fall 2012 Southwest TURN meeting in Denver, the Colorado 
Education Association and TURN co-sponsored "The First Annual Summit: 

Shared Accountability and Leadership for Student Achievement." This was a 
response to a new Colorado law requiring districts to adopt multiple-measure 
teacher evaluation systems. 

Summary 

Among all of the education reform initiatives that school districts in the U.S. 
are expected to undertake, turning around persistently low-performing schools 
may be the most challenging. While significant funds have become available to 
support district turnaround efforts through federal programs such as RTTT and 
SIG, the policy changes required by these programs — like replacing teachers, 
closing schools, adding hours to the school day, and evaluating and compensating 
teachers based on the academic performance of their students — present their 
own obstacles. Unless teacher unions and management are able to hammer out 
special agreements to accommodate the required policy changes, many turn- 
around initiatives will not get off the ground. 

8 TURN satellites include Southwest TURN, Northeast TURN, CalTURN, Great Lakes TURN, and Mid Atlantic/ 
Southeast TURN. TURN'S website is located at http://www.turnexchange.net/national_turn/whyturn. 
html 


76 


Labor-Management Partnerships 


Even after the requisite agreements are made, case study research has shown 
that districts can overcome many of the most difficult school turnaround chal- 
lenges when local teacher unions and management agree to work as partners 
rather than adversaries. This research also demonstrates that a shift toward col- 
laboration does not happen easily or quickly. Districts that have adopted a collab- 
orative approach often rely on external assistance to cultivate that relationship 
between labor and management because it requires deliberate attention and 
often requires assistance from experienced practitioners. Many that have suc- 
ceeded in cultivating labor-management partnerships have not only been able to 
meet the funding requirements of RTTT and SIG but also surpass them. 

By helping to build state capacity for labor-management collaboration, SEAs 
can create an environment that is more conducive to trust, problem solving, and 
a shared focus on student outcomes — organizational characteristics that are nec- 
essary for any successful school reform effort and especially important for school 
turnarounds. In the next section, we offer several action principles that SEAs can 
use to build capacity for labor-management collaboration. 

Action Principles 

Build internal capacity to support labor-management collaboration 

• Learn about the organizations and districts that are early adopters of 
labor-management collaboration and assess the knowledge and attitudes 
of key state leaders toward this approach. These questions can guide the 
data gathering process: 

■ What districts have participated in the two recent national conferences 
on labor-management collaboration? Did any of these districts make 
presentations ? 9 

■ What are the attitudes of leaders from state teachers unions, policymak- 
ers, and administrator or school board organizations, and have they 
taken a stand on labor-management collaboration? Consider holding 
informal conversations with key leaders and reviewing organizations’ 
websites. 

■ What universities, research institutes, and nonprofit organizations exist 
in the state or region that have expertise in this area, and what kind of 
technical support are they able to provide? 

• SEA staff, particularly those involved in RTTT and SIG, should gather and 
disseminate knowledge to SEA colleagues about labor-management col- 
laboration and participate in events on labor-management collaboration, 
including regional TURN conferences. 

• SEAs that want to become credible advocates for collaboration in school 


’Information about these conferences and the districts that attended is available at http://www.ed.gov/ 
labor-management-collaboration. The Department of Education's website shows the districts that partici- 
pated and presented. 


77 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


districts will need to model effective collaborative practices. This can best 
be accomplished with the assistance of trained facilitators who can assess 
current organizational structures and practices and assist with activities 
that will strengthen collaboration. 

Build state and LEA capacity for labor-management collaboration and 
school turnarounds 

• Facilitate the formation of education partnerships like MEP in Massachu- 
setts and CEC in Illinois. 

• Encourage state education organizations to learn about the impact of 
labor-management collaboration and to take a stand in support of this 
approach. 

• Use websites, webinars, and other delivery methods to disseminate 
research findings, tools, promising practices, conferences, and trainings to 
LEAs. 

• Convene exploratory meetings in which labor and management leaders can 
safely discuss their knowledge, interests, and concerns about labor-man- 
agement collaboration. 

• Encourage state and local education leaders to participate in regional TURN 
conferences. 10 

• Facilitate a state or regional conference on labor-management collabora- 
tion modeled after the ones held nationally in 2011 and 20 12. 11 

• Facilitate "Study Tours," which allow districts to see firsthand how other 
districts are using collaboration in service of their school turnaround 
efforts. 

• Develop "communities of practice" among like-minded districts. 12 

References 

Blair, L. A. (2000], Strategies for success: Implementing a comprehensive school reform 
program. Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development Laboratory. 

Bluestone, B., & Kochan, T. (2011). Toward a new grand bargain. Collaborative 
approaches to labor-management reform in Massachusetts. Boston, MA: The Boston 
Foundation. 

Bosetti, K. R. (2011). Peer review: Getting serious about teacher evaluation. Menlo Park, 
CA: SRI International. 


'"Contact information and conference dates for TURN can be found at www.turnexchange.net 
"Information about these events is available at http://www.ed.gov/labor-management-collaboration. An 
independent study of the 2011 conference in Denver includes recommendations for conference planners. 
This report, titled Forward Together: Better Schools Through Labor-management Collaboration, is avail- 
able at www.wested.org/lmc. A toolkit for conducting labor-management conferences is available at www. 
ed.gov/sites/default/files/lmc-conference-toolkit.pdf 

I2 For more information on the benefits of this practice, see Unger et al. (2008). How can state education 
agencies support district improvement: A conversation amongst educational leaders, researchers, and policy 
actors. Providence, RI: The Education Alliance at Brown University, (p. 27) 


78 


Labor-Management Partnerships 


Calkins, A., Guenther, W., Belfiore, G., & Lash, D. (2007], The turnaround challenge. 

Boston, MA: Mass Insight. 

Cavanagh, S. (2011, November], States urged to promote union-district cooperation. 
Education Week, 31(12], S13-S14. 

Darling-Hammond, L. (2010], The flat world and education: How America’s commitment 
to equity will determine our future. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. 

Education Week. (2011, November]. Joining forces: A special report on labor-manage- 
ment collaboration. Education Week, 31 (12]. Retrieved from www.edweek.org/go/ 
collaboration 

Educator Excellence Task Force. (2012]. Greatness by design. Sacramento, CA: Author. 
Retrieved from http://www.cde.ca.gov/eo/in/ee.asp 

Fullan, M. (2011], The wrong drivers for whole system reform. (Seminar Series Paper No. 
204], East Melbourne, Victoria: Centre for Strategic Education. 

Futernick, K., McClellan, S., & Vince, S. (2012], Forward together: Better schools through 
labor-management collaboration. San Francisco, CA: WestEd. 

Futernick, K., McClellan, S., Vince, S., & Shirley, D. (in press]. Labor-management col- 
laboration in education: The process, the impact, and the prospects for change. San 
Francisco, CA: WestEd. 

GAO. (2012, April], School improvement grants: Education should take additional steps to 
enhance accountability for schools and contractors. Retrieved from http://www.gao. 
gov/products/GAO-12-373 

Garland, S. (2012]. Teacher evaluation: A hurdle for SIG schools. Education Week, 31(28], 
19-21. 

Hobbs, E. (2012], The push for progressive unionism. Harvard Education Letter, 28(6], 

Humphrey, D. C., Koppich, J. E., & Bland, J. (2011], A special report on labor-management 
collaboration. Education Week, 31(12], Retrieved from www.edweek.org/go/ 
collaboration 

Klein, A. (2012], School turnaround push still a work in progress. Education Week, 
31(28], 18-21. 

Koppich, J. E., Humphrey, D. C., Bland, J. A., Heenan, B., McCaffery, T., Ramage, K., & Stokes, 
L. (2013], California’s beginning teachers: The bumpy path to a profession. Menlo Park, 
CA: SRI International. 

Kowal, J., & Ableidinger, J. (2011], Leading indicators of school turnarounds. Chapel Hill, 
NC: Public Impact. 

Lachlan-Hache, J., Naik, M., & Casserly, M. (2012], The school improvement grant rollout 
in America’s great city schools. Washington, DC: Council of Great City Schools. 

Massachusetts Education Partnership (MEP], (n.d.]. About the partnership. Boston, MA: 
Author. Retrieved from http://massedpartnership.org/ 

Mourshed, M., Chijioke, C., & Barber, M. (2010], How the world’s most improved school 
systems keep getting better. Atlanta, GA: McKinsey & Company. 

Murphy, P., & Ouijdani, M. (2011], State capacity for school improvement. Seattle, WA: 
Center on Reinventing Public Education. Retrieved from http://www.crpe.org/sites/ 
default/ files /pub_states_statecap_Augl l_0.pdf 


79 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


National Center on Time and Learning. (2010], Background on Massachusetts 2020, 
the National Center on Time & Learning, and the movement to expand learning time in 
America. Boston, MA: Author. 

Payne, C. M. (2008], So much reform, so little change. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education 
Press. 

Peace, N. E. (2012, Fall). Massachusetts Education Partnership: Improving stu- 
dent achievement through labor-management collaboration. Perspectives Online 
Companion, 14. Retrieved from www.leraweb.org/sites/leraweb.org/files/peace4.pdf 

Rubenstein, S. A., & McCarthy, J. E. (2010). Collaborating on school reform: Creating 
union-management partnerships to improve public school systems. Camden, NJ: Rutgers 
School of Management and Labor Relations. 

Smarick, A. (2010). The turnaround fallacy. Education Next, 10(1), 20-26. Retrieved from 
http://educationnext.org/the-turnaround-fallacy/ 

Tucker, M. (2012). A different role for teachers unions? Education Next, 12(1), 17-20. 
Retrieved from http://educationnext.org/a-different-role-for-teachers-unions/ 

Unger, C., Lane, B., Cutler, E., Lee, S., Whitney, J., Arruda, E., & Silva, M. (2008). How can 
state education agencies support district improvement? New York, NY: The Education 
Alliance, Brown University. 

Vince, S. (2011). Extended time for student learning and teacher collaboration. San 
Francisco, CA: WestEd. 


80 


Building Human Capital Pipelines: Examining the Role 
of the State Education Agency 
Dennis Woodruff and Cyrillene Clark 

Two things are true about talent pipeline work: first, it is absolutely impera- 
tive to the sustained vitality of any organization; second, it is really hard work. 
Yet, investments in human capital pipelines save work in the long run, and there 
are immediate results that will keep the organization healthy and thriving. When 
the organization is a school district, state education agencies (SEAs) can facili- 
tate this work, leading to vital, higher performing districts. Considering that the 
single most significant resource in education is its people, it is essential to get the 
right people in the right jobs, doing the right things. 

A talent pipeline is an intentional system designed to train, cultivate, attract, 
support, and retain exemplary employees who are prepared to meet rigorous 
performance expectations. A strong talent pipeline can pay dividends quickly 
and serve to position an organization for success long term. The superintendent 
and school board must be passionate about talent for efforts to build the pipeline 
to be effective. 

The Need for Effective Talent Pipelines in Education 

Historically, the education sector has not adequately invested in talent pipe- 
line management. The standard career progression is for interested students 
to enroll in a college of education, earn their diploma, teach, and if interested, 
self-select into the management track by obtaining an administrator credential 
and advancing to be a school principal and perhaps central office administrator. 
Furthermore, as a sector, leadership in public education has not been particularly 
sophisticated about matching skill sets and competencies with positions (e.g., 
teaching versus leading or managing) or providing a path for teachers to advance 


81 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


in their career while remaining in the classroom. While the relative balance of 
teacher and administrator supply and demand has ebbed and flowed over the 
years, current research indicates that shortages of personnel are based on retire- 
ments and challenges retaining qualified personnel as opposed to straight supply 
(Ingersoll, 2001, 2002, 2003). 

While retention is an ongoing concern for districts, so is teacher supply 
as a large cohort of teachers reach retirement age. The National Commission 
on Teaching and America’s Future (NCTAF, n.d.) documented that: "Between 
2004 and 2008, 300,000 veteran teachers left the workforce for retirement.... 

In 1987-88, the typical teacher had 15 years of experience, but by 2007-08 the 
typical teacher had just 1 to 2 years of experience" (para. 1). Even as we struggle 
to retain young teachers, demand associated with retirements is increasing 
(Darling-Hammond, 2000). 

As local districts strive to improve their ability to attract and retain both 
effective teachers and leaders, the role of the SEA in helping to solve this cannot 
be overstated. SEAs are positioned to change the dynamics of this challenge by 
examining policies that shape educator and leader credentialing and finding 
creative ways to fill teacher and principal positions with people who are clearly 
talented, can relate to today's students, and reflect the demographics in their 
state’s districts. 

Based on a review of the relevant literature and our experience working 
directly with underperforming schools in 14 states over the last three years 
striving to be more intentional about their talent management strategies, in this 
chapter we outline the components of a robust talent pipeline and identify strat- 
egies SEAs can implement to help districts develop and sustain effective pipe- 
lines. Lastly, we identify specific action principles, resources, and tools that will 
be valuable to SEAs striving to support a district’s turnaround efforts. 

In writing this chapter, we reflected on our direct observations and experi- 
ence consulting with school districts with underperforming schools actively 
engaged in turnaround efforts. In addition, we interviewed a small but purpose- 
ful sample of 14 district leaders, focusing on those who are working effectively 
for change on behalf of students. Lastly, we bring the perspective of decades of 
experience consulting in the area of talent management and leadership research 
with a broad array of organizations, including healthcare, nonprofits, and global 
corporations. Lessons culled from turnarounds in private enterprise continue to 
inform our work in public education. 

What is a "Talent Pipeline"? 

"Talent pipeline” and "leadership pipeline" are terms describing a new area 
of focus in public education circles nationwide. For instance, they are part of 
the federal Elementary and Secondary Education Act flexibility waiver applica- 
tion guidance and are the subject of a growing research and policy discussion. 


82 


Building Human Capital Pipelines 


We need to train, recruit, and retain highly skilled leaders and teachers who will 
have an impact on all of us for generations to come. Framing the potential impact 
of robust talent pipelines, Secretary of Education Arne Duncan has said, "if our 
95,000 schools each had a great principal, this thing would take care of itself" 
(2009). The practical reality is that each of our 95,000 schools does not have a 
great principal. Education is people intensive, yet, when we examine education 
as a sector, we see little substantive work being done on the people side of the 
equation. 

The need for excellent talent management is particularly acute in situations 
involving chronically underperforming schools. Frequently, employees believe 
that they are working hard in the midst of extreme challenges, and their boss 
has reinforced this perception. They are not having an honest discussion about 
performance. For instance, we know that many teachers in underperforming 
schools have received "satisfactory" ratings even though students were not learn- 
ing; unacceptably low levels of performance are tolerated year after year in many 
schools (New Teacher Project, 2008). Among organizations in decline and need- 
ing to be turned around, Ranter (2003) points to the common organizational 
pathologies such as "secrecy, blame, isolation, avoidance, passivity, and feelings 
of helplessness... (that) ...reinforce one another in such a way that the organiza- 
tion enters a kind of death spiral" (p. 4). The supply of leaders in public educa- 
tion that are effective in these situations is quite low, and the stakes are quite 
high. The earning power of young adults, age 25-34, who do not have a high 
school diploma is half that of their peers with a college degree (Aud et al., 2011). 
This is indeed an urgent challenge. 

The term "pipeline" comes from talent management practice outside of edu- 
cation. These practices come from the disciplines of organizational behavior and 
leadership development, having been refined in the business sector. As applied 
to education, the pipeline includes the elements shown in the diagram below. 


Attract top 
students into 
colleges of 
education 


Provide rigorous 
pre-service 
programs 


Establish rigorous 
professional 
standards and 
multiple routes 


Offer incentives to 
attract and retain 
quality personnel 


Expand the 
candidate pool 


Select, place, and 
support 
exemplary 
personnel 


Track hiring 
processes and 
successes to 
replicate 


Done well, talent pipeline management is an ongoing process, where leader- 
ship is continually thinking about how to grow and develop talent at all levels 
of the organization, both for their current role and their next role. Leadership 
pays close attention to the current reality of the organization and what will 
likely unfold in the next five years. They have a clear notion of the sort of lead- 
ers needed presently and in the future. There are frequent, candid discussions of 
performance and potential at all levels. Leaders actively network among sources 
of talent, keep a pulse on who might be a good fit for their needs, and when they 
might become available. The organization monitors how many of their critical 
roles have clear and ready successors and take measures to ensure that the abso- 
lute best are retained, and others are allowed to move on. 


83 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


In a school district, two critical roles need to drive the building of the talent 
pipeline. One role is the superintendent, who as the leader of the district sets the 
tone. The second role is the district administrator in charge of human resources 
(HR), or talent management. The person in this role must be a strong leader and 
change agent who can shape and mold the culture and behaviors of the human 
resources function and can challenge their peers in the district to make talent 
management the top priority for everyone. Reminder: Schools cannot provide a 
quality education with mediocre teachers or poor leadership, thus talent man- 
agement IS the top priority. 

The SEA can assess the extent to which district leadership has invested in 
developing a talent pipeline by looking to see if leaders: 

• develop personnel at all levels, for their current role and their next role; 

• articulate the direction and expectations for personnel that are needed now 
and for at least the next three years; in effect, they know and discuss their 
talent strategy; 

• engage in frequent, candid discussions of performance and potential at all 
levels; 

• network actively among sources of potential talent; 

• know which critical roles have clear successors, ready to take over immedi- 
ately as needed; and 

• know who is at risk of leaving, taking measures to ensure that the absolute 
best are retained. 

The leader sets the direction and the tone through his or her actions. This is 
not the work of "personnel," but the priority of every leader in the district. For 
organizations that are managing the pipeline well, a sudden vacancy does not 
cause panic. 

The challenge for the SEA, however, is that the SEA does not directly 
"manage” school and district operations, except in the most extreme (e.g., take- 
over) cases. Many educators get involved at the state level to drive large-scale 
change, only to find that the levers for implementing meaningful change in 
districts is limited, slow, and blunt. Substantive change that impacts student 
outcomes needs to become a reality at the district level, as that is where the deci- 
sions are made about what happens in the school buildings and the classrooms. 
This calls for the state to leverage its official authority, as well as its ability to 
influence beyond its authority, in order for productive changes to be enacted 
with a sense of urgency. 

The SEA and District Talent Pipelines 

Multiple states and districts we have worked with have developed unique 
approaches to developing effective talent management strategies to catalyze 
turnaround efforts. Some of these have worked well, but some have not worked 
well. In documenting these approaches, our hope is to highlight promising 


84 


Building Human Capital Pipelines 


strategies and identify potential pitfalls in order to accelerate adoption of inten- 
tional talent management practices in districts embarking upon turnaround and 
in the broader system of public education. 

The prerequisite for all of these observations and recommendations is that 
the SEA has invested in building relationships with district leaders. Most of the 
district leaders that we have worked with welcome the involvement of the SEA 
in helping them consider options, deal with tough issues, find funding, research 
various approaches, and even design systems and processes that will drive fidel- 
ity in their talent management practice. They welcome the presence and support 
of a "trusted advisor." 

While some interactions between the SEA and LEA by necessity must focus 
on monitoring and compliance, the SEA should aim to intentionally foster mean- 
ingful dialogue with district leaders actively engaged in school turnaround 
efforts. Difficult discussions have far more impact if they take place in the con- 
text of an established, strong working relationship. In such a relationship, one’s 
technical expertise is less important than one’s ability to be a great thought 
partner (Maister, Green, & Galford, 2000). The trusted advisor listens carefully, 
observes, and seeks to understand the unique needs of the client. This provides 
the platform for honest and open dialogue that is both critical and supportive. 
The indicator of success is this: How often and on what topics do district leaders 
initiate discussions with the SEA? 

The District Leader Perspective: What Has Worked, What Has Not 

The approaches that SEAs have taken that work especially well for district 
leaders fall into three broad categories: (1) align state resources to support 
credentialing and standards including influencing higher education, (2) lever- 
age state resources to benefit all districts, and (3) provide a viewpoint that is 
strategic. The overarching theme of these is ensuring that all policies, programs, 
mandates, and efforts contribute to the quality of education for the students that 
presently reside in the districts and are anticipated to reside there in the future. 

State-Level Standards and Credentials 

SEAs add unique value to the system in the area of standards. There are 
two areas in particular where they have direct impact on the talent pipeline for 
districts: credentialing and overseeing public institutions of higher education 
(IHEs). 

Credentialing Standards 

SEAs are responsible for establishing standards (e.g., credentialing require- 
ments) for school leaders and teachers who plan to work in the state. In turn, 
districts see demonstration of meeting these credentialing standards as a proxy 
for individuals who have the skills required to be successful. 


85 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Establishing rigorous credentialing standards is critical. A district leader we 
spoke with was most adamant about this, stating "I interview numerous teacher 
and principal candidates that have been accredited by our state who have no 
business being in education at all, at any level." Principals and district lead- 
ers who are hiring often fall prey to the trap of "I need a teacher in that class- 
room” and take the best of who is available rather than work for the best for our 
students. 

SEAs can create standards that are challenging to all, yet attainable by the 
best. These standards need to be meaningful in the way that they drive excel- 
lence in the central office and the classroom. This may mean that there is a 
further shortfall in the supply of personnel for a period of time. The uptick in 
quality will come as the best job seekers and the best university students get the 
word that this is a challenging and rewarding profession for bright, high achiev- 
ers. The incredible competition for acceptance into New Leaders and Teach for 
America is a clear example of how building a reputation can lead to a greater 
supply of candidates. We have personally seen this happen at the district level; 
when the word gets out that there is high-quality implementation in an organiza- 
tion, the best talent flocks to it. 

Improving the standards used for hiring and promotion can have a tremen- 
dous impact on the talent pool and thus on student outcomes. For example, 
one new superintendent with whom we worked brought in just two or three 
key people from other districts to help with the initial "heavy lifting” to put the 
district in a position to thrive. They immediately began utilizing clear criteria to 
manage all hiring, promotion, and contract renewal decisions. Within 18 months 
of assuming the superintendency of the district, he was getting calls from tal- 
ented teachers and administrators from near and far who wanted to come and 
work in this district. They had "heard there were great things going on there." 

As an added bonus, a pool of strong candidates saves districts money, time, and 
energy because they do not have to contend with a continual churn of unsuccess- 
ful hiring. 

With standards that are clear and sensible (i.e., they actually drive organiza- 
tional capacity and positive student outcomes), other possibilities, such as licens- 
ing reciprocity among states and alternative paths to licensure. The requirement 
of full certification or licensure by the state in which the leader or teacher wishes 
to work can be a significant barrier for many school districts. More specifically, 
the lack of licensure reciprocity among states limits the opportunity to readily 
hire personnel who may be highly capable. This is a situation for which remedies 
should be relatively straightforward to develop and apply where there is a will- 
ingness on the part of the SEA to explore new models. Doing so will improve dis- 
tricts’ ability to recruit both leaders and teachers. For example, this portability 


86 


Building Human Capital Pipelines 


could increase the pool of teachers as trailing military and corporate spouses/ 
partners could more easily become a part of applicant pools. 

While it might be a Herculean task for the 50 states to agree on uniform prin- 
cipal and teacher licensure standards, it seems a manageable task for states to 
create protocols and monitor their usage. One approach for doing this borrows 
from the legal profession. Twenty-five states participate in some form of licen- 
sure reciprocity. Of these 25, some have reciprocity for all states, while others 
have it only for nearby states. For example, Idaho offers reciprocity to lawyers 
licensed in Oregon, Washington, Utah, and Wyoming, while Maine limits reci- 
procity to attorneys from New Hampshire and Vermont (LaCrosse, 2012). 

With the right standards of excellence in place, the above outlined approach 
can work in public education as follows. When a professional with a certification 
from another state applies to a school district, the SEA of the state in which the 
leader or teacher is applying can confirm the licensure and employment record 
from the peer state agency. SEAs can also include specific texts that document 
baseline content area skills (e.g., the Praxis series). The district can then confirm 
the on-the-job competence of the individual through a series of practical activi- 
ties. When hiring a teacher, these activities may include: 

• creation of a lesson plan 

• observation of a lesson 

• structured interviews with clearly defined rating scales 

• manipulation and derivation of conclusions from a mock data set 

• written and oral responses to a case study 

SEAs can aid districts by conducting the initial screening for baseline content 
requirements, creating a repository of materials that can be drawn from depend- 
ing on the district’s needs, and providing technical assistance in choosing the 
right instruments and administering them. SEAs can also lead in setting up the 
process and standards for reciprocity, with the goal of keeping the standards 
high and not slipping to the lowest common denominator. 

In addition to ensuring greater licensure portability, SEAs can make alterna- 
tive teacher certification programs available and provide tools to assist districts 
in screening leaders attracted from other fields. The pool of candidates with spe- 
cific skills needed for the future may not have enough depth if only candidates 
with education degrees are considered. 

Public education has the potential to be attractive to large segments of quali- 
fied people who could add value to the sector. For instance, professionals who 
retire with 20-30 years of service in a particular industry are frequently still 
interested in working and can bring tremendous depth of experience. Still others 
seek career changes at the midpoint. Education represents a very rewarding 
possibility for professionals who want to make a difference. Classroom teaching, 
obviously, and other positions, such as human resources leader or finance leader 


87 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


in the district, would benefit from a professional from that field in the role, not 
simply the veteran principal who needs a job. 

Supervising Institutions of Higher Education 

The second area related to talent management where an SEA can effectively 
leverage its responsibilities is schools of education. The SEA must utilize its 
authority and influence to ensure that the institutions of higher education (IHEs) 
are indeed that — institutions of higher learning. Following functional high cre- 
dentialing standards, this is a critical point in leveraging the talent pipeline to 
improve the quality of education in the state. Do not take this for granted. One 
private foundation focused on education improvement analyzed data from their 
state university school of education and discovered it was accepting students 
that were predominantly from the bottom third of their high school graduat- 
ing classes. Four years later, a disproportionate number of those students were 
graduating from the school of education with highest honors. Reflecting the 
research, we have frequently heard the complaint that new teachers are not 
arriving equipped for the work required in today’s classrooms (Auguste, Kihn, & 
Miller, 2010). Working with state universities and colleges to ensure that the cur- 
riculum and faculty are up to date and the courses are rigorous is leveraging one 
of the greatest opportunities for children in the state. 

Bringing together the accountability of IHEs with the previously mentioned 
licensing reciprocity and finding ways to make hiring high-quality leaders and 
teachers from out of the state more accessible (revisit and revise reciprocity poli- 
cies) will elevate the competition for local colleges and universities to produce 
better graduates. It breaks their perceived monopoly on the talent pool. 

Leverage State Resources to the Benefit of All Districts 

The SEA can minimize districts’ workloads by finding ways to leverage 
resources for all of districts, statewide. Specifically, the SEA can leverage econo- 
mies of scale by (1) identifying approaches or products that the state is willing 
to support, and (2) coordinating the design/build of systems or processes that 
benefit all districts in the state. 

Identifying approaches or products that the state will support is essentially 
"prequalifying" key resources for the districts, such as curricula, professional 
development offerings, and various consulting services. Many benefits accrue 
from applying this approach: the districts save time, money, and energy as the 
state brings other resources to the opportunity; the students benefit, as the 
possibility for securing the highest quality approach improves; and the SEA 
strengthens credibility by bringing together experts, vendors, state resources, 
and district leaders for a broader and more inclusive approach to the decision. 
The link to talent pipeline is that the SEA can help identify consulting services, 
especially talent management consulting and leadership development, that 
are effective and generate improved outcomes. The SEA can also investigate 


88 


Building Human Capital Pipelines 


alternatives and products that support talent pipeline development, such as 
interviewing processes (e.g., Behavioral Event Interviews) or hiring criteria that 
aid in objectively identifying the best candidate for positions in the districts. We 
have observed that most districts are doing the best they can, but feel as though 
they are "winging it" when it comes to interviewing and selection practices. One 
such opportunity for improvement that we see frequently would be to more 
explicitly define clear criteria for hiring or promoting someone to be the head 
of human resources, given that it is the second most critical role in developing 
robust talent pipelines in any district. 

Coordinating the design and build of systems or processes has tremendous 
potential to support talent pipeline development. The SEA can devote energy, 
expertise, and relationships to coordinate the many parties involved to develop 
something that is then offered to the districts for their use. For instance, Ohio 
has successfully taken this approach with its performance appraisal system for 
teachers and administrators. The Ohio Department of Education devoted signifi- 
cant resources to developing the systems that districts are then able to adopt, 
rather than each district creating their own systems. No one district would have 
been able to fund this system, and the support in implementing it has been well- 
received. The state coordinated the design with district input, invested in build- 
ing of the actual system, and also supported the roll out by providing training 
on the use of the new system. This system has a direct impact on pipeline devel- 
opment as it prioritizes appraising the strengths and opportunities for critical 
resources: teachers and their leadership. 

Leveraging a Broad Perspective 

Unlike most districts, the SEA has the benefit of broad perspective. Seeing the 
bigger picture, knowing how things operate at the state level, gathering infor- 
mation trends and developments that impact public education — these are all 
invaluable aspects of being a strong thought partner with district leaders. Giving 
district leaders the "excuse" to have time in the calendar to look up and look 
forward by meeting with their trusted SEA can be helpful to the district leader 
mired in the day-to-day operation of their district. Particular to building talent 
pipelines, there may be any number of places that the SEA can allocate their 
resources in this regard: providing technical assistance for recruiting and select- 
ing; providing forums for functional areas necessary to support high-quality 
education; and providing districts insight and perspective on data and informa- 
tion pertinent to their mandate. 

Provide Technical Assistance for Recruitment and Selection 

Based on our experience working with dozens of highly successful organi- 
zations, the education community at all levels draws from too narrow a talent 
pool. For instance, with a very traditional educator training approach and few 
professional-level, work-related experiences outside of the realm of education, 


89 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


everyone hails from very similar educational and professional backgrounds 
(Hess & Kelly, 2007). The SEA can provide innovation and insight in this realm 
that may provide the needed breakthrough to staffing key positions. 

Recruitment 

One significant change that is absolutely essential in education is to enact 
more proactive and creative ways to recruit new teachers and leaders. The most 
proactive organizations get tremendous clarity on what their needs will be in the 
short, mid, and long term, and they actively seek talent to help meet those needs. 
Districts have relied for too long on a reactive stance, placing ads and partici- 
pating in job fairs, hoping to create a decent applicant pool. A more aggressive 
approach to recruiting is necessary to create a healthier, high-quality applicant 
pool. The SEA can provide districts with technical assistance focusing on the fol- 
lowing priorities: 

1. Forge relationships with national/regional organizations to meet particu- 
lar staffing needs. For example, districts may need more Native American 
teachers. SEAs can create ongoing relationships with Native American 
colleges and universities and Native American lobbying groups such as 
the National Congress of American Indians. 

2. Help districts find teachers with broad cultural competence. SEAs can 
network and develop relationships with the military, the Peace Corps, 

U.S. State Department alumni and their immediate families, AmeriCorps, 
and other groups. Trailing military spouses, retired U.S. State Department 
employees, the adult children of U.S. State Department employees, former 
Peace Corps and AmeriCorps volunteers are all great sources of people 
who meet the needs of the districts, especially those needs that are 
most difficult to "train." Seek out people who are accustomed to inter- 
acting with people of different cultures and living under challenging 
circumstances. 

3. Develop workshops and tools for districts to help them manage turnover. 
In today’s talent marketplace, the expectation that educators will remain 
educators or with a single district for many years is unrealistic, and poli- 
cies based on this assumption hinder districts’ talent pipeline efforts. 
Districts must seek out and hire the most qualified candidates and pre- 
pare for turnover. SEAs can help districts factor this into their standard 
operating procedures and their expectations. 

Selection 

Teacher and administrator selection is another area in which the SEA can 
be helpful. Many of the same tools and techniques that can be used for confirm- 
ing competence for state licensure can be offered for selection. Many districts, 
especially smaller districts, do not have human resources professionals in their 
human resources departments. Instead, administrators have been asked to take 


90 


Building Human Capital Pipelines 


on a role for which they have limited, if any, practical experience. Their ability to 
create valid selection instruments, including rating scales, is certainly limited. 
Where districts are unable to have professional staff working in these areas, 
states can provide needed technical assistance. 

Providing Forums for Function Areas 

An SEA typically develop standards and credentialing requirements for 
district and school leaders and instructional personnel. However, it does not 
typically develop standards for other key function areas (e.g., human resources 
or business managers). While we are not advocating that states usurp local deci- 
sion making, an SEA can leverage its collective expertise to provide guidance 
regarding skills and competencies in these function areas that can help guide and 
inform district hiring procedures. 

For instance, a district we worked with in Ohio had the opportunity to hire 
a new leader for human resources/talent management. They knew at the state 
level there were groups and support mechanisms for curriculum and instruction, 
professional learning communities, budgeting and finance, school board training, 
nutrition, and even transportation. There was absolutely nothing in the way of 
guidance and support for human resource and talent management issues. There 
was not even a "best practices" meeting, conference, webinar, or white paper. 
There was no resource in place to guide a major urban district in finding and 
selecting their new human resources leader and no group to support and guide 
whomever they decided to hire. 

Education leaders across the country will readily say that "we are only as 
good as our people," yet talent management is the one item that tends to be for- 
gotten. An SEA can ensure that there are such resources, particularly at the state 
level, for human resources/talent management professionals in public education. 

Providing Data and Information: Making Connections for District Leaders 

Utilizing readily available electronic data, an SEA can reduce districts’ admin- 
istrative burden or provide information that smaller districts would never have 
the manpower to access. One such data source is the Institute of Education 
Sciences (IES) census comparator tool with which districts can compare their 
demographic makeup with that of other districts in other states. Such data 
allows for networking and sharing of resources and best practices. For example, 
if the SEA can determine a reasonable pool of comparator districts, their district 
clients can conduct more targeted, focused, rapid benchmarking research. Once 
a district has a valid comparator group, they can share successful strategies in 
talent management, for example. 

Of course, the foundation for this type of action is to begin to think and act 
beyond the "typical” boundaries of the SEA. Another possibility, mentioned 
earlier in this chapter, is to look at the data regarding where the most effective 
teachers are coming from and share that data with districts and IHEs. 


91 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Conclusion 

The SEA is uniquely positioned to influence credentialing policies, invest 
resources that individual districts cannot, and leverage a broader, more strate- 
gic perspective in order to encourage and support development of robust talent 
pipelines. Any of these areas that we have highlighted in this discussion is a 
serious challenge in most states. Each of these presupposes that the state and 
the districts have a clear direction or strategy that informs all decisions. Utilizing 
that direction or strategic plan to prioritize goals and focus resources is the criti- 
cal step as the SEA embarks on any identified initiative, but doing one thing well 
is better for students than doing four things poorly. 

In a system where each jurisdiction, no matter how small, has been vested 
with the awesome responsibility of setting the foundation for the life's course 
of every child, few things should be more powerful than a talent management 
partnership with a larger entity with greater resources. Identifying, recruiting, 
and selecting the right leaders and instructional personnel for a given place and 
situation and ensuring that the right skills and talent are brought to bear on each 
situation are efforts requiring proactive methods and real expertise in talent 
management. 

The leader at the top of the district must be passionate about talent. In turn, 
the human resources leader must be skilled as a human resources professional, 
not simply as an administrator. An SEA must first build relationships that go 
beyond compliance and monitoring with district leaders so they can serve as 
trusted advisors and support, reinforce, and enable district leadership to develop 
and sustain effective talent pipelines for both school leaders and instructional 
personnel. Given that the power of the SEA is less direct and authority stems 
from how effectively the SEA builds relationships that empower others to do 
their jobs most effectively, relationships are critical to SEA’s being able to effec- 
tively assist LEAs. 

The SEA knows that this is happening when there is clear evidence that dis- 
trict leadership: 

• develops personnel at all levels, for their current role and their next role; 

• articulates the direction and expectations for personnel that are needed 
now and for at least the next three years; 

• engages in frequent, candid discussions of performance and potential at all 
levels; 

• networks actively among sources of potential talent; 

• knows which critical roles have clear successors, ready to take over imme- 
diately as needed; and 

• knows who is at risk of leaving, taking measures to ensure that the absolute 
best are retained. 


92 


Building Human Capital Pipelines 


SEAs are in a strong position to allocate key resources and provide districts 
with expertise and advocacy to get the right people in the right roles and doing 
the right things for students. 

Action Principles 

Talent pipeline management is an ongoing process and essential to sustain- 
able school turnaround efforts. Key actions SEAs can take to support the devel- 
opment of robust talent pipelines include: 

Review relevant policies 

• Revisit and revise, if necessary, credentialing standards and processes 
and ensure they reflect what teachers and leaders need to know to be 
successful. 

• Examine reciprocity policies to address barriers to teachers crossing state 
lines to work. 

Allocate resources to support development of systems essential to talent 
pipelines 

• Develop and disseminate practical talent management tools and 
procedures. 

• Drive economies of scale through SEA-level research, identification, and 
coordination around talent pipeline management processes, systems, and 
tools that will be helpful for districts with limited capability to develop 
them individually. 

Provide focused technical assistance 

• Provide recruitment and selection support building on best practices from 
outside of public education. 

• Provide forums for talent management discussions and support across 
districts. 

Be an objective partner 

• Help district leaders look at the direction for their district. 

• Supply districts with data and information pertinent to their mandate, 
including insights from similar districts in your state and other states. 

Talent Pipeline Resources 

Block, P. (2000], Flawless consulting: A guide to getting your expertise used (2nd ed.). San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass/Pfeiffer. 

A very pragmatic look at the helping relationship, including the phases and 
pitfalls of making that work well. 

Charan, R., & Conaty, B. [2010], The talent masters: Why smart leaders put people before 
numbers. New York, NY: Crown Publishing. 

An in-depth and very readable look at four organizations that work hard at 
their talent pipelines for significant results. 

Cooperider, D. L., & Whitney, D. (2005). Appreciative inquiry: A positive revolution in 
change. San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc. 


93 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Cooperider puts forward a strategy for organization and community involve- 
ment, including examples and approaches. 

Liedtka, ]., & Ogilvie, T. (2011], Designing for growth: A design thinking tool kit for man- 
agers. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. 

Liedtka provides practical insight on how to go about designing systems and 
processes and how to involve the ultimate user of those systems and processes. 

Maister, D. H., Green, C. H., & Galford, R. M. (2000], The trusted advisor. New York, NY: 

The Free Press. 

This book emphasizes the importance of earning the trust and confidence of 
one’s clients. It discusses that technical mastery, while fundamental, is not what 
allows for truly fruitful interactions. 

Schein, E. H. (2010], Organizational culture and leadership (4th ed.]. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass. 

If you want to go deep on how organizations work and how culture is formed 
and changed, this is a great place to start. 

References 

Aud, S., Hussar, W., Kena, G., Bianco, K., Frohlich, L., Kemp, J., & Tahan, K. [2011], The 
condition of education 2011 (NCES 2011-033], U.S. Department of Education, National 
Center for Education Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
Augusts, B., Kihn, P., & Miller, M. (2010, September], Closing the talent gap: Attracting 
and retaining top-third graduates to careers in teaching. An international and market 
research-based perspective. New York, NY: McKinsey & Company. 

Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2010], Number of jobs held, labor market activity, and earn- 
ings growth among the youngest baby boomers: Results from a longitudinal survey. 
Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/nlsoy.pdf 
Darling-Hammond, L. (2000], Solving the dilemmas of teacher supply, demand, and 
standards: How we can ensure a competent, caring, and qualified teacher for every child. 
New York, NY: National Commission on Teaching and America's Future. 

Duncan, A. (2009, May], Education leadership: An agenda for school improvement. 
Remarks delivered at The Wallace Foundation’s National Conference on Education 
Leadership, Washington, DC. 

Hess, F. M., & Kelly, A. P. (2007, January], Learning to lead? What gets taught in principal 
preparation programs. Teachers College Record, 109(1], 244-274. 

Ingersoll, R. (2002, June], The teacher shortage: A case of wrong diagnosis and wrong 
prescription. NASSP Bulletin, 86, 16-31. 

Ingersoll, R. (2001]. Teacher turnover and teacher shortages. American Educational 
Research Journal, 38, 499-534. 

Ingersoll, R. M. (2003, September], Is there really a teacher shortage? Seattle, WA: 
University of Washington/Center for the Study of Teaching and Policy. 

Kanter, R. M. (2003], Leadership and the psychology of turnarounds. Harvard Business 
Review, 81(6], 58-67. 


94 


Building Human Capital Pipelines 


LaCrosse, N. (2012], Reciprocity laws among the states. Retrieved from http://www. 

lawcrossing.com/article/1084/Reciprocity-Laws-Among-the-States/ 

Maister, D. H., Green, C. H., & Galford, R. M. (2000], The trusted advisor. New York, NY: 
Simon & Schuster. 

National Commission on Teaching and America's Future, (n.d.) Evaluation. Retrieved 
from http://nctaf.org/research/evaluation/ 

Public Law 107-110 — Jan. 8, 2002. No Child Left Behind Act of 2011. 107 th Congress. No 
Child Left Behind (NCLB] Act of 2001, Pub. L. No. 107-110, § 115, Stat. 1425 (2002], 


95 


96 


The State's Role in Supporting Data Use 
to Drive School Turnaround 

Daniel Player, Michael Kight, and William Robinson 

The intensive care unit (ICU) of a hospital cares for patients whose medi- 
cal conditions place them in serious and immediate danger and therefore are in 
critical need of specialized medical attention and constant support. Upon arrival, 
each patient is given an individualized plan for treatments and outcomes and 
begins a regimen of constant monitoring to measure their progress against those 
plans. Every patient is connected to several automatic sensors monitoring their 
vital signs and raising immediate warnings if necessary. Specially trained critical 
care doctors and nurses closely monitor patient data for indications of recovery 
or any potential signs of danger. They also visit the patients regularly to assess 
their progress and adjust treatments if necessary. All interactions are carefully 
documented so all who work with the patient can see the complete treatment 
history and prognosis for recovery based on the recovery plan. With constant 
monitoring and personalized attention, ICU patients have a much greater chance 
to recover and thrive. 

The roles of monitoring and data use are clear and intuitive in the scenario of 
an ICU. The patients there are in a precarious medical situation and must receive 
quick and appropriate intervention if their condition changes or fails to progress 
in an expected way. If an ICU were to only conduct occasional cursory tests, such 
as checking body temperature and blood pressure, the results could be disas- 
trous. If the results of monitoring were only available several days or weeks after 
they were taken, it would often be much too late to intervene. Similarly, if doctors 
and nurses failed to share information from shift to shift, it would be impossible 
to monitor the patient’s progress, creating information gaps and the potential for 
warning signs to be missed. Indeed, monitoring and data analysis are among the 


97 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


top priorities of a successful ICU. Studies have confirmed that close adherence 
to established care processes are significantly correlated with hospital quality 
(Peterson et al., 2006). 

Every public school district 1 in the United States has at least some students, 
and often entire schools, in need of intensive educational care. While it is difficult 
to imagine a medical ICU that does not closely monitor its patients, it is unfortu- 
nately common for a school, district, and state to let close monitoring and analy- 
sis of its struggling students, teachers, schools, or districts take a back seat to the 
many other responsibilities they have. However, if they hope to see improvement, 
states must expect districts to conduct themselves as educational ICUs and make 
individual student monitoring, data analysis, and data-driven action a priority in 
an "ongoing cycle of instructional improvement" (Hamilton et ah, 2009, p. 10). 
The doctors and nurses of our turnaround schools are the principals and teach- 
ers who have the responsibility to carry out much of the monitoring and analysis 
of a wide range of outcomes and metrics. However, they cannot do it effectively 
without the proper tools and support provided to them by the district and state. 
Thus, the whole system has a key role in the provision of this intensive care. 

In this chapter, we make the case that monitoring and data use is a critical 
foundation of any school turnaround. We offer a perspective on the possibili- 
ties for comprehensive data use at all levels and share some practical advice for 
states and districts on how to use data to improve decisions in a variety of con- 
texts. We draw on the expertise gleaned from the experiences of the University of 
Virginia’s Darden/Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education (PLE) 2 in our work 
with over 200 schools in dozens of school districts across the country as well as 
the best practices documented in the evolving literature on effective school turn- 
arounds (Calkins, Guenthen, Belfiore, & Lash, 2007; Duke, n.d.; Hassel & Hassel, 
2008; Herman et al., 2008; Player & Katz, 2013; Steiner, Kowal, Hassel, & Hassel, 
2009) 

For the purposes of this document, we use the term data to denote a wide 
array of progress indicators. Student diagnostic, formative, and interim assess- 
ment data is clearly the most critical component of a data portfolio. However, 
effective data use goes beyond test scores to capture other academic and behav- 
ioral outcomes such as course completion, discipline, attendance, and graduation 
and professional performance indicators for each teacher, school, and district. 
Together, a rich data system paints a full picture of the health of the education 
system in a state. 

‘When we reference "district” throughout this chapter, our recommendations apply not only to traditional 
"LEAs” but also to non-traditional districts and charter management organizations — any entity that over- 
sees multiple schools. 

2 The PLE sponsors the School Turnaround Specialist Program (STSP), which has operated since 2003 to 
work with schools and districts to turn around persistently low-performing schools in a variety of settings. 
The STSP emphasizes organizational improvement at the district level to support school turnaround. More 
information can be found http://www.darden.virginia.edu/web/darden-curry-ple/ 


98 


Using Data to Support School Turnaround 


Building a Structure to Foster Data Use 

"Data rich and information poor" is a phrase a seasoned principal used to 
describe his district’s situation as they began a turnaround partnership with 
the PLE. The district was gathering large amounts of data on a number of met- 
rics. However, after collection it went largely unused by anyone at the district 
or school level. Unfortunately, this is a common situation in many districts that 
embark on turnaround efforts. Federal and state initiatives ensure that data are 
being collected on a whole host of student and teacher outcomes. In fact, a recent 
federal report found nearly all districts have electronic student information sys- 
tems, and 70% have had them for at least 6 years (U.S. Department of Education, 
2010). However, the data are often poorly organized, difficult to access, based on 
lagging indicators, misaligned with curriculum, and generally misunderstood. 

As a result, the data are collected, reported as required for compliance, and then 
forgotten. This effort comes at a great expense in terms of time and resources, 
and states and districts begin to view themselves as data collectors and compli- 
ance monitors rather than informed data users. Data by itself is nothing extraor- 
dinary. What is extraordinary is building a collaborative culture that embraces 
data as an efficient and effective tool for continual improvement rather than an 
additional burden to bear. 

To address this "data rich and information poor" culture, states must first 
lead by example in modeling effective data use. Likewise, they must provide the 
resources and training to ensure data use is embedded in districts and schools 
in such a way that it becomes an inseparable part of the culture. To do this well, 
these organizations must analyze and respond to the data at all levels. District 
leaders must implement a system that enhances their understanding of what is 
working at a student, teacher, and school level and use this information to help 
administrators and teachers improve instruction. The state’s greatest lever of 
influence over this district practice will be to provide the necessary resources 
and supports, model or highlight promising practice, monitor implementa- 
tion, and hold districts accountable. Ultimately, states should monitor not only 
the summative performance of schools, akin to monitoring the mortality rates 
of hospitals, but more importantly, monitor and support districts in setting up 
systems that foster effective ongoing data use to prevent tragic outcomes for 
students. For the remainder of this chapter, we summarize the elements that are 
most important in building a culture of data use and how states can support their 
districts in implementation. 

• Set clear expectations that data must be used to monitor progress and 
make instructional decisions. 

• Provide rigorous common interim assessments that accurately capture 
learning objectives and provide specific post-assessment formative data. 


99 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


• Provide a robust data system that captures data from a variety of student 
outcomes and school climate, is easily accessed, and presents results in a 
clear and intuitive way. 

• Encourage structured time for collaboration and analysis in the annual 
calendar to make data-informed teacher and student plans in response to 
interim assessments and include time in the weekly schedule to have data 
meetings. 

• Deliver ongoing professional development that builds the capacity to 
analyze and respond to data effectively and is flexible to adapt to student 
learning needs. 

• Build data-driven leadership capacity by requiring principal preparation 
programs to include courses on data-driven instruction, assessments, and 
data literacy. 

• Pursue embedded follow-up to ensure school and teacher leaders receive 
regular, tailored coaching, feedback, and accountability. 

Set Clear Expectations 

The state’s most important role in data use is to establish a clear expectation 
that data will be used to guide instruction and to monitor teacher performance. 
State leaders have an essential, irreplaceable role in influencing district practice. 
By being strategic in framing the importance of data-driven practice, establishing 
what evidence of district-level and school-level data-driven practice it expects 
to see, providing funds and guidance to support the achievement of these prac- 
tices, and ensuring clear lines of communication, state leaders can be catalysts 
for action and change. States should use the levers available to them in a manner 
that conveys collaborative intent and sets the tone for continued, data-driven 
improvement. 

Provide Rigorous Common Interim Assessments 

The current assessment approach of many states and districts fails to meet 
the needs of the most vulnerable students. In many scenarios, high-quality, 
common interim assessments are not used to measure short-term student 
progress. Rather, districts and states rely on the annual state assessment and/ 
or vendor-provided predictive/adaptive assessments to monitor student prog- 
ress. However, we have found that both of these approaches are insufficient for a 
number of reasons. Often, state summative results are not available until several 
months after the end of the school year. By that time, it is too late for the teacher 
or school to use the data to address student deficiencies. The results from these 
assessments are commonly referred to as "Autopsy Reports," as they arrive after 
the student has already failed. A slightly better approach is the use of predictive 
assessments that measure progress on the entire year’s curriculum based on 30 


100 


Using Data to Support School Turnaround 


to 50 questions. 3 While these assessments may gauge a student’s performance 
level compared to his or her peers, they do not provide the detailed information 
a teacher requires to create a thorough learning plan for an individual student or 
small groups of students. 

Although regular formative (or "short-cycle”), literacy, and other types of 
assessment data are useful, rigorous interim assessments best provide district 
and state leaders with a strategic intervention point, or leading indicator, to 
reliably understand if progress is being made and teachers with an objective 
mechanism to monitor retained learning. To fully leverage interim assessments, 
teachers and administrators must have access to user-friendly feedback reports 
that provide specific standard question and student-level analysis that can aid in 
determining the areas of mastery and deficiency. For example, the assessments 
might identify the students in the class who could not correctly answer compu- 
tation questions that involved adding and subtracting fractions. Receiving this 
type of detailed information in a timely manner allows the teacher to assess the 
root cause of the deficiency by analyzing the types of mistakes students made 
and then immediately adjusting future instruction in response. Teachers could 
then devote class time to re-teaching addition and subtraction of fractions to the 
entire class, a targeted group of students, or an individual when appropriate. 

States must be willing to provide districts and schools with the tools and 
types of assessments that generate the detailed performance data needed to 
monitor students’ academic health. Just as an ICU must monitor progress and 
adjust care on a frequent basis using state of the art equipment, educators must 
have access to interim assessments that accurately and precisely measure stu- 
dents’ academic situations and reflect teachers’ efforts to improve student learn- 
ing on a recurrent basis. 

Some would argue that the creation and use of interim assessments ought 
to be left to the discretion of the districts, schools, and teachers. However, this 
approach is akin to an ICU leaving patient monitoring entirely to the discretion 
of the doctors and nurses. While doctors and nurses are experts in treatment 
and patient care, it would be clearly beyond the scope of their expertise to be 
expected to devise all of the necessary techniques and equipment required to 
monitor patient health. It would also be inefficient to rely on each doctor and 
nurse to independently develop his or her own monitoring system for every 
patient. Instead, the hospital establishes clear protocols and provides the health 
care specialists with the tools they need to follow those protocols and lever- 
age their expertise. Like ICU medical equipment, high-quality assessments 
undergo extensive pilot testing and refinement to ensure they accurately mea- 
sure what they purport to measure. States can experience efficiency and quality 
gains by providing districts and schools with professionally created diagnostic 


3 We recommend instead cumulative assessments that measure performance against only standards covered 
to date. 


101 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


assessments, common formative assessments, and supplemental assessment 
question banks aligned to the state’s curriculum. Districts can leverage these 
high-quality assessments or question banks to create interims adapted to their 
instructional sequence and more formative, short-cycle assessments to allow 
them to continuously monitor student learning. 

From a resource perspective, it is more efficient for the state to identify and 
continuously monitor high-quality assessments from a seemingly endless sea of 
options rather than expecting each district to do it independently. 4 It also sends 
the signal to districts about the importance the state places on using resources 
for assessments well. As an example of how this worked in practice, the state 
department of education in one southwestern U.S. state recently investigated 
interim assessment vendors to gauge their alignment with the state learning 
objectives and to assess the specificity of the formative post-assessment data 
provided to teachers and leaders. After identifying three vendors that sufficiently 
met these criteria, the state informed districts with low-performing schools that 
they would pay for assessments from any of these three vendors if the district 
chose to use them. The message was clear that districts and schools would be 
held responsible to use some form of interim assessment to guide instruction. 

Provide Access to a Robust Data Collection System With Clear Outputs 

An effective data system will provide a consistent repository for student- 
level assessment results that link teachers to students, including detailed interim 
assessment results and state assessment results for at least the previous two 
years. The system will also include program data, such as what types of classes 
the students are taking and any special services the students receive, as well as 
attendance data, discipline records, age, and other demographic information that 
might be relevant in making proactive academic plans for students and classes. 
The development of an integrated data collection system is not trivial and 
requires thoughtful execution (U.S. Department of Education, 2010). The student 
data must be easily accessible and interpretable by teachers and principals and 
include student-level progress indicators in multiple areas over multiple years. 
Ideally, educators should be able to log on and view the data any time they need 
it, or they will be unlikely to use it. Users also benefit from professional devel- 
opment and guided practice on how to use reports as they begin to incorporate 
them into their planning and course development. 

Many districts do not have access to a student information system that pro- 
vides the data necessary to improve student achievement. A case study of a 
Texas district confirmed that the usability of the student information system was 
the biggest deterrent to data use (Wayman, Cho, & Johnston, 2007). A school or 

4 If a district has the capacity to identify or develop a suitable assessment system that is aligned with 
standards, the state should be open to learning from their efforts. Some larger districts may have capacity 
to develop high-quality interims, but typically these are lower quality than the market provides, and this 
discrepancy will increase as more rigorous, common core alignment is needed. 


102 


Using Data to Support School Turnaround 


district can collect and provide rich and useful data, but if it is not presented in 
an integrated way and in a format that is easy to digest and interpret, it will likely 
be underused. Such efficient, longitudinal reporting provides educators the data 
to hypothesize the root cause of student’s needs prior to the start of the school 
year and prevents them from having to sift through multiple reports to under- 
stand a student’s academic and behavioral needs and progression. 

Even when districts manage to secure funding to procure such a system, it 
often lacks interoperability with other district- and state-level data systems, 
limiting usability, accuracy, and overall efficiency. This can be especially frustrat- 
ing for districts with a transient student population. All too often, instructional 
time is lost and educational services are not provided due to student being inap- 
propriately placed as the receiving school awaits a printed copy of the student’s 
cumulative records or transcripts. State education agencies could correct this 
imperfection by working with districts to ensure state and local data systems 
are interconnected. If a student transfers from one district to another within 
the state, the receiving district should be able to access the state’s data system 
to view the student’s longitudinal assessment, program, and demographic data 
on the first day of enrollment. Even if a state is not ready to provide an intercon- 
nected system, it should provide technical assistance to help ensure districts 
choose robust and effective data systems. 

Developing a statewide data system that can effectively collect data from 
school and district data systems to track student and teacher data on a state- 
wide basis can also foster a culture of data use. As schools and districts develop 
sophisticated data systems, it is important that the state stay ahead of the tide 
and have a system that can be ready to receive the influx of new data and use it 
accordingly. States will also find it advantageous to use this new system to moni- 
tor the composition of the teacher workforce and student population to antici- 
pate future demand and supply. 

Encourage Districts to Create Structured Time for Collaboration and Analysis 

District calendars and daily school schedules are often tight and allow little 
discretionary time for data analysis. If time is not explicitly reserved for assess- 
ments, data analysis, and action planning, then it will not take hold. At the dis- 
trict level, annual calendars should include specific times to administer interim 
assessments and time for teachers to analyze and formulate individual plans 
to address class-wide and student-level needs based on their results, including 
additional time following major assessments (Bambrick-Santoyo, 2010). Having 
a dedicated time on the calendar ensures that schools recognize data use as a 
priority. 

Effective turnaround schools must regularly analyze and respond to data on 
student learning including both assessments and student work. To accomplish 
this, districts that work with the University of Virginia’s School Turnaround 


103 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Specialist Program are encouraged to have turnaround schools set aside a mini- 
mum of 90 minutes of uninterrupted time each week for teachers to attend col- 
laborative data team meetings (Rowan, Chiang, & Miller, 1997). These 90-minute 
meetings, attended by teams of teachers either within a grade level or content 
area, must be a regular part of each school’s master schedule, and districts must 
provide ongoing support and accountability to ensure this time is used effec- 
tively. Additionally, as interim and critical common short-cycle assessments are 
completed, district calendars should include built-in time to examine new data 
points and make adjustments as indicated by the evidence. 

In a PLE partner state, the number one goal of the state board of education 
is to support accountability for all public schools by establishing policies that 
help schools increase the academic success of all students, especially those who 
are at-risk or in underperforming school systems. To achieve this goal, this state, 
like many others, has passed education policies that mandate school year start 
and end dates, the minimum number of yearly instructional hours, the required 
number of teacher work days, remediation classes for students, intervention 
requirements for schools, and many other strategies. However, we have not yet 
worked in a state with policies that mandate the minimum number of minutes 
required for collaborative teacher meeting time or incentivized scheduling 
changes that prioritize collaboration that results in data-based instructional 
action. This critical instructional infrastructure lever is typically left to the dis- 
cretion of the individual school administrator and is generally treated as an after- 
thought when creating the school master schedule. Mandated instructional hours 
and remediation courses will not have the expected impact on student achieve- 
ment if schools do not provide the structured collaborative meeting time to allow 
teachers the opportunity to work together to analyze student achievement data, 
create teacher action plans, and develop and review intervention strategies. 

Deliver Ongoing Professional Development and Support Aligned to the 
Districts' Data-Driven Instructional Needs 

Data-driven instruction and school turnaround cannot be accomplished using 
only a bottom-up approach. Focused attention on individual schools, with little to 
no improvements and enforced expectations at the district level, will not pro- 
duce sustainable turnaround. Based on our experience working with turnaround 
schools, we focus our energy on the roles and responsibilities of the district 
leaders. For example, districts that work with the PLE send district leaders to a 
four-day executive education boot camp designed to prepare them to establish 
an instructional infrastructure with valid assessments, responsive data systems, 
and a high-quality curriculum with corresponding instructional strategies to 
meet student needs, along with many other important levers in turnaround. 

State education agencies play a key role in building the district and school 
leaders' capacity to help them learn to use the data available and coach teachers 


104 


Using Data to Support School Turnaround 


to adjust their instruction in response to it. This is particularly important when 
states embark on a new initiative such as the common core. It ultimately will not 
make a significant difference if teachers have access to higher quality assess- 
ments and rigorous common core curriculum and are provided with more col- 
laboration time unless district and school leaders know how to support and 
monitor collaboration time and instructional action plans to ensure instructional 
approaches are adapted based on evidence and individual student needs. State 
support can come in the form of general support, such as statewide professional 
development, or in embedded support based on the needs of individual districts. 
Based on the responses of some schools, embedded data coaches who specialize 
in interpreting student data have been reported as being more useful than gen- 
eral professional development around data use (U.S. Department of Education, 
2010). The provision of data coaches or other efforts to prioritize data-based 
capacity, however, is likely to occur only if the district or state provides structural 
and financial support for the effort. 

Make Additional Efforts to Build Data-Driven Leadership Capacity 

Data use among school leaders is a critical component to building a culture 
of data use (Hamilton et al., 2009). Leaders can effectively use data to recognize 
the relative strengths and weaknesses of their schools and teachers and to make 
midcourse corrections to address major areas of concern. Just as teachers can 
better address student needs with data that allows them to make preventive 
course corrections, leaders can better support teacher needs with a data-driven 
mindset. Leaders will also find it advantageous to collect data beyond just stu- 
dent assessment scores in order to better identify potential teacher challenges. 
For example, if data on walk-through observations, teacher absences, and a 
teacher’s prior effectiveness are well-organized and combined with achievement 
data, leaders can make more informed decisions, anticipate needs, and tailor 
coaching. 

States must do a better job requiring principal preparation programs to 
better prepare their graduates for the current era of accountability. A study of 
56 principal preparation programs found that less than 5% of the course weeks 
addressed instruction on managing school improvement via data, technology, or 
empirical research (Hess & Andrews, 2005). States are in a position to provide 
guidance, and perhaps appropriate incentives, to the credentialing organizations 
within their states to develop courses that address this need. Changing practices 
in universities is often difficult due to the internal obstacles created by the uni- 
versities themselves. However, we believe that this change can happen if state 
and university leaders would work together to redesign their current programs 
based on lessons learned from the field. 


105 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Provide Embedded Follow-Up 

A state education leader might only have the capacity to visit his or her low- 
est-performing schools once a year. Many times, these visits help maintain pro- 
fessional relationships and establish an aligned presence but are limited in direct 
impact. The key to effective state education leadership is to impact practice at 
the district level by developing collaborative, trusting interactions at the district 
level, monitoring implementation of best practices, and holding district leaders 
accountable. Improving and maximizing these ongoing visits can be an impact- 
ful leverage point for the state. We recommend that states monitor and support 
district efforts to improve their key data levers: assessments, curriculum, data 
system, calendar, data-based professional development, embedded follow-up, 
and evidence-based decision making. 

Conclusion 

Returning to our metaphor of turnaround schools as ICUs, patient recovery 
does not typically occur by chance. It is the culmination of careful, deliberate, 
and immediate treatment in response to the patient’s real-time condition. None 
of this is possible without accurate monitoring and analysis. In the same way, a 
state cannot expect a turnaround school to experience marked improvement if 
teachers and leaders are not carefully monitoring the progress of students and 
adjusting instruction based on immediate needs. Their ability to do so, however, 
hinges in large part upon the state’s ability to provide the necessary resources 
and direction that impact district practice. 

The culture of data use begins at the top, with states modeling effective 
practices for how and when data are to be used. As states emphasize the impor- 
tance of demonstrating progress and results, districts will recognize the need to 
be monitoring progress among their schools. When districts begin to catch this 
vision, they will see the importance of providing their schools with the tools, 
support, and professional development necessary to ensure that data use is hap- 
pening on the ground. When teachers begin to see data use as a way to provide 
them with greater instructional support, the students in our lowest performing 
schools will begin to see steady improvement. 

State Leader Action Principles 

Set clear expectations and model effective use of data 

• Clearly establish the expectation that data will be used to guide instruction 
and to monitor student and teacher performance. 

• Identify specific metrics to assess district performance and track school 
turnaround efforts to model effective data use. 


106 


Using Data to Support School Turnaround 


Provide rigorous common interim assessments and/or question banks 
to create assessments, and ensure districts administer them every six to 
nine weeks 

• Screen for assessments and questions aligned to the state curricula with 
appropriate rigor, similar in format as the state assessment, and cumulative 
based on standards taught up to the time of administration. 

• Ensure districts adapt curriculum and assessments to align with pacing 
guides. 

• Ensure results are returned to districts in a user-friendly format that allows 
teachers to complete an item analysis within 48 hours after administration. 

Provide access to a robust data collection system that produces clear 
outputs 

• Design district and state student information systems to be interconnected. 

• Screen for robust data systems that provide detailed longitudinal interim 
and state assessment results that are connected to the names of the stu- 
dents’ current and previous teachers. Systems should also include program, 
demographic, attendance, and behavioral data that might be relevant in 
making proactive academic plans for students and classes. 

• Ensure district student information systems produce clear outputs and are 
easily accessed by school administrators and teachers. 

Encourage districts to create structured time for collaboration and 
analysis 

• Ensure teachers have a minimum of 90 minutes of uninterrupted, struc- 
tured collaborative meeting time each week to work together to analyze 
student achievement data, create teacher action plans, and develop and 
review intervention strategies. 

• Provide teachers with additional time after common interim assessments 
to make rigorous instructional plans based on the data. 

• Revisit requirements related to school days and hours to provide districts 
with greater flexibility and, thus, ability to creatively establish collaboration 
time. 

Provide professional development and support aligned to the districts' 
data-driven instructional needs 

• Ensure district leaders establish common expectations for data use in their 
schools. 

• Provide the necessary capacity-building support to districts and, when 
relevant, school leaders, to help them build capacity of teachers to use data 
to drive instruction. 

• Provide ongoing professional development to all district leaders and con- 
struct embedded support based on the needs of each district. 


107 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Make additional efforts to build data-driven leadership capacity 

• Require principal preparation programs to include additional courses on 
data-driven instruction, assessments, and data literacy. 

• Work with university leaders to redesign principal preparation programs 
based on lessons learned from the field. 

• Offer incentives, such as grants, to encourage colleges and universities to 
develop stronger data courses for teachers and administrators. 

Provide embedded follow-up and explicit means of accountability 

• Impact district practice by developing collaborative, trusting interactions at 
the district level, monitoring implementation of best practices, and holding 
district leaders accountable. 

• Set up clear means to track district data use, and hold districts accountable 
for developing and utilizing effective data systems. 

References 

Bambrick-Santoyo, P. (2010], Driven by data: A practical guide to improve instruction. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Calkins, A., Genther, W., Belfiore, G., & Lash, D. (2007], The turnaround challenge. Boston, 
MA: Mass Insight. Retrieved from http://www.massinsight.org/publications/turn- 
around/51/file/l/pubs/2010/04/15/TheTurnaroundChallenge_MainReport.pdf 

Duke, D. (n.d.]. Keys to sustaining successful school turnaround. Unpublished manuscript, 
Darden/Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education, Charlottesville, VA. Retrieved 
from http://www.darden.virginia.edu/web/uploadedFiles/Darden/Darden_Curry_ 
PLE/UVA_School_Turnaround/Keys ToSuccess.pdf 

Hamilton, L., Halverson, R., Jackson, S. S., Mandinach, E., Supovitz, J. A., & Wayman, J. 

C. (2009]. Using student achievement data to support instructional decision making. 
(NCEE 2009-4067], Washington, DC: National Center for Education Evaluation and 
Regional Assistance. 

Herman, R., Dawson, P., Dee, T., Greene, J., Maynard, R., Redding, S., & Darwin, M. (2008], 
Turning around chronically low-performing schools: A practice guide (NCEE #2008- 
4020], Washington, DC: National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional 
Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved 
from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/publications/practiceguides 

Hess, F., & Andrews, P. (2005], Learning to lead: What gets taught in principal- 
preparation programs. Teachers College Review, 109(1), 244-274. Retrieved from 
http://www.hks.harvard.edu/pepg/PDF/Papers/Hess_Kelly_Learning_to_Lead_ 
PEPG05.02.pdf 

Kowal, J., Hassel, E. A., & Hassel, B. C. (2009], Successful school turnarounds: Seven steps 
for district leaders. Washington, DC: Learning Point. Retrieved from http://www.cen- 
terforcsri.org/files/CenterIssueBriefSept09.pdf 


108 


Using Data to Support School Turnaround 


Peterson, E., Roe, M., Mulgund, J., DeLong, E., Lytle, B., Brindis, R.,...Ohman, M. (2006). 
Association between hospital process performance and outcomes among patients 
with acute coronary syndromes. Journal of the American Medical Association, 295(16), 
1912-1920. doi:10.1001/jama.295.16.1912 

Player, D., & Katz, V. (2013). School improvement in Ohio and Missouri: An evaluation of 
the school turnaround specialist program (PLE Working Paper). Charlottesville, VA: 
Darden/Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education, University of Virginia Darden 
School Foundation. 

Rowan, B., Chiang, F-S., & Miller, R. J. (1997). Using research on employees’ performance 
to study the effect of teachers on student achievement. Sociology of Education, 70, 
256-284. 

Steiner, L., Hassel, E. A., & Hassel, B. (2008). School turnaround leaders: Competencies for 
success. Chapel Hill, NC: Public Impact. 

U.S. Department of Education. (2010). Use of education data at the local level: From 
accountability to instructional improvement. Washington, DC: Office of Planning, 
Evaluation, and Policy Development. Retrieved from http://www2.ed.gov/rschstat/ 
eval/tech/use-of-education-data/use-of-education-data.pdf 

Wayman, J. C., Cho, V., & Johnston, M. T. (2007). The data-informed district: A district-wide 
evaluation of data use in the Natrona County School District. Austin, TX: The University 
of Texas. Retrieved from http://edadmin.edb.utexas.edu/datause/Wayman_data_use_ 
evaluation.pdf 


109 


110 


Section C 

Administer and Manage 
State Turnaround 



The State of the State: New SEA Structures for a New 
Approach to Turnaround 

Justin Cohen & Alison Segal 

It has been more than a decade since the passage of the No Child Left Behind 
Act (NCLB). Despite that law’s effect of heightening state and federal govern- 
ments’ attentiveness to school accountability, the state’s role in turning around 
chronically underperforming schools is still nascent and underdeveloped. This is 
exacerbated by the fact that, despite some interesting models, there is no "silver 
bullet" solution for chronic school failure, and there most likely never will be. 
Moreover, there is arguably no single best structure for the state education agen- 
cy's (SEA) role in turnaround given how differently various states and their local 
education agencies (LEAs) are configured. In other words, what can be done in a 
country wherein both California and Washington, DC have SEAs? 

In order to provide optimal support for turnaround schools, an SEA must 
intentionally organize to support those schools’ needs. In addition, despite the 
fact that federal accountability reforms have driven extraordinary focus on the 
school and classroom levels, an SEA must also carefully consider the role — or 
lack of a role — of the district (LEA) in school turnaround. 

This chapter examines existing literature on SEA organizations and how 
these organizations provide support for schools and districts. While there are 
a range of approaches and organizational structures, we pay particular atten- 
tion to shifting SEA practices and culture to better support districts, attending to 
an SEA’s reorganization, and the general range of SEA structures and activities 
implemented to support turnaround. 


113 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Through both our examination of extant research and the accumulated 
knowledge of Mass Insight’s 1 fifteen years of experience working with SEAs, we 
have observed that states’ strategies for addressing chronic underperformance 
at the school level fall somewhere on a spectrum between (a) laissez-faire (i.e., 
the state collects data and encourages LEAs and schools to act on that data) and 
(b) complete takeover of a district or school. While these two points of reference 
occupy the poles of the approach, most SEAs employ a suite of strategies that 
exist between these two poles. Despite some nationally recognized work in state 
takeover, however, the preponderance of evidence suggests that most states still 
pursue strategies closer to the "laissez-faire" approach. We will often refer to 
the "laissez-faire” approach as being "light-touch," meaning that the SEA is not 
heavily involved with LEAs beyond compliance monitoring and specific instances 
where a close relationship with an LEA incites action. 

While most SEAs will struggle to serve and react to all of their LEAs equita- 
bly, we suggest that SEAs take a strategic approach to developing and deploying 
intervention strategies. Rather than creating customized protocols for each LEA, 
SEAs could identify the highest leverage services that it can reasonably deploy, 
and then apply those practices to the LEAs whose needs are most aligned to 
those high-leverage services. In addition, SEAs should identify "proof points” 
wherein they deploy resources more aggressively to achieve faster, bolder gains. 
For instance, to provide support to several struggling LEAs, the SEA may foster 
the development of zones, essentially mini-districts, to provide persistently low- 
achieving schools with localized heavy-touch support to help them succeed. This 
method allows the SEA to cluster schools based on their needs and add on-the- 
ground capacity through Lead Partners. Others may create a lighter-touch inter- 
nal turnaround office to guide LEAs with turnaround schools, consistent with the 
"laissez-faire" approach, while others may opt to create an independent, state-led 
LEA that takes schools out of their existing LEAs, such as the Achievement School 
District in Tennessee, which we will discuss later in this chapter. 

Emerging Knowledge Base 

While somewhat thin, the existing research on how SEAs organize to sup- 
port school turnaround highlights a real range of approaches. The Academic 
Development Institute’s Center on Innovation & Improvement supplied SEAs 
with a number of handbooks and reports, which is where we found the major- 
ity of our resources. It is important to note, too, that SEA structure is just one 

‘Mass Insight Education, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization based in Boston, MA, was founded in 1997 
to help create and implement strategies that close educational achievement gaps. Through its two major 
efforts, The School Turnaround Group and The Mass Math + Science Initiative, Mass Insight Education part- 
ners with school districts to dramatically improve student achievement through increasing academic rigor 
and reinventing district systems. It is the sister organization of Mass Insight Global Partnerships, which has 
worked since 1989 to help businesses and institutions remain globally competitive. In 2007, Mass Insight 
Education published The Turnaround Challenge, a call-to-action style report that challenged the nation to 
improve the nation's lowest performing schools (bottom 5%). 


114 


New SEA Structures 


ingredient in the state intervention infrastructure (Rhim, Hassel, & Redding, 
2007). In particular, state legislation and constitutions may restrict what an SEA 
is able to do and not do, particularly with respect to intervening in local gover- 
nance. Our literature review found that engraining change in the organizational 
culture of an SEA is often the best way to begin reorganization, especially in 
cases where the political will does not exist or is "shaky" (Hess, Lautzenheiser, 
Brown, & Owen, 2011; Mass Insight Education, 2012b; Murphy & Rainey, 2012). 

The Practice Continuum 

Any meaningful restructuring of SEA capacity implies a concomitant rethink- 
ing of practice. Murphy and Rainey (2012) discussed a necessary "shift from 
'compliance monitor’ to 'performance monitor’" (p. 3) for SEAs working with 
turnaround and how that requires a realignment of positions and responsi- 
bilities. Speaking to the continuum described at the beginning of this chapter, 
Murphy and Rainey’s research culminated in the development of a linear spec- 
trum, where "All In" lies at one end of the line, with a counterpart of "Results 
Without Rancor" at the opposite end. Between the two is "Bounded Equilibrium." 
They found a majority of SEAs employed a "Results Without Rancor" strategy, 
which restructures some parts of the SEA to focus on performance management. 
In the end, though, this strategy often relies on relationship building to help LEAs 
support their lowest performing schools rather than more politically aggressive 
strategies. Generally, an SEA hopes that this method will build the foundation for 
a sustainable approach to building a stronger district for school support. Murphy 
and Rainey found that this strategy requires a large cultural shift within both 
the SEA and the LEA. The SEA must embody two firm beliefs: first, believe that 
the LEA has the necessary foundation/organization to support its schools; and 
second, believe that the LEA has knowledge/understanding of the day-to-day 
work of schools. Finally, the LEA must be comfortable with the changes the SEA 
imposes and work collaboratively to support the SEA’s reforms. 2 

At the other end of the spectrum, "All In" shifts the major responsibility from 
the LEA to the SEA for direct school support. In this case, states create an entirely 
new entity to lead a complete takeover of failing schools. In some states, such as 
New Jersey, the SEA does not have the legal power to do this, although they may 
use other legislative or constitutional powers to exact a higher level of control. 
Other states, such as Tennessee (Achievement School District) and Louisiana 
(Recovery School District), have developed either an office or statewide LEA 
specifically for this purpose. As a result, some states wishing to pursue an "All 
In" strategy will instead find themselves working in a "Bounded Disequilibrium" 
framework. This framework relies on a "carrot-and-stick" policy approach to 
encourage LEA behavior that should best support failing schools. Michigan, 


2 In some cases, LEAs may lack capacity to support their own schools. In this case, SEAs can explore takeover, 
creation of Zones, or include Lead Partners in the state or local structure to build LEA capacity. 


115 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Illinois, Indiana, and several other states also have moved to institutionalize a 
more direct approach to intervention. 

As for physical reorganization, Murphy and Rainey cite some SEAs’ reorgani- 
zation efforts that resulted in either creating or strengthening existing regional 
offices. While they concede that this approach does indeed add an additional 
layer of bureaucracy, it also allows for SEA staff to focus on a smaller, regional 
cohort of schools in need of improvement. This helps to develop stronger 
relationships, while also placing more focus on accountability and reporting. 
Regional offices may have the most impact in states with either large geographic 
coverage or many different major metropolitan areas. 

SEA Structural Challenges 

Research documents that SEA structures should allow for provisions of politi- 
cal cover to LEAs and schools (Hess et al., 2011). SEAs can provide this political 
cover by owning the ability to move to the "All In" or "state takeover" end of the 
spectrum of intervention when necessary. In doing so, the SEA can selectively 
exercise its more politically aggressive tactics — namely takeover — in an effort 
to provide incentives and political cover for other reform-minded LEAs to act. 
However, before threatening takeover, the SEA must determine that it does have 
the capacity to follow through. A state may not even consider this option with- 
out its own political cover from the governor, state board of education, or fed- 
eral government. Others may simply not have the legislative ability to execute a 
takeover. 

Hess et al. (2011) found, as did we, that it is very difficult to discuss trends 
and comparisons in SEA organizational makeup, because there are so few origi- 
nal research studies. This is mainly due to the constant flux that SEA structures 
experience, especially in response to new federal initiatives. For example, the 
report found that the most recent, published document that explicitly focused on 
SEA staffing and funding was a compilation by the Government Accountability 
Office (GAO) that was created almost two decades ago. Though this report’s 
study was on a smaller scale, it did find similar results: Many SEAs experience 
lower than ideal capacity because they lack human capital. The authors claimed 
the blame here lies partly in pay grade regulations: Districts often offer higher 
pay grades than the SEA. For example, they cited that while the chief executive 
officer of Chicago Public Schools earned $230,000 in 2011, the Illinois state 
superintendent earned $190,000 without any room for salary growth. This may 
result in districts’ positions being more attractive to talented individuals. 

Hess et al. (2011) called for a reorganization of brain power; above all, the 
structure of the SEA should "de-silo" efforts. The office charged with school 
improvement efforts should not be an "island" unto itself, and particularly not 
nested within the broader distribution of federal title funds. Hess et al. (2011) 
challenged SEAs to push the envelope in their restructuring and build bridges 


116 


New SEA Structures 


among and between departments. The report cited Delaware as an example, 
which, in 2012, reorganized its SEA to best suit the state’s LEAs by merging some 
office branches to create a "one-stop" service with stronger alignment to LEA 
operations. Based on our experience with 12 states, we agree that the School 
Improvement Office needs to have tentacles throughout the SEA, and states 
need to further differentiate "improvement" into varying degrees of intervention 
intensity. 

Running through all considerations of SEA restructuring is the question of 
sustainability. We can change the structure, but what happens when there is 
leadership or staff turnover? How can we ensure that a restructure survives 
personnel changes? Hess et al. (2011) say that a strong culture of high expecta- 
tions for students and adults is key. They suggest maintaining political pressure, 
through public communications, to avoid going back to the old way of doing 
things. This includes drawing out a plan to encourage buy-in both internally and 
externally to a new turnaround unit and creating strong lines of open communi- 
cation and collaboration up to the state chief as well as among other department 
of education offices. 

As Hess et al. (2011) make clear, culture also seems to be a critical 
component of sustaining reform. The report found that along with the siloed 
departments that often exist, there is sometimes an additional fragmentation 
that appears between federal employees at the state level and their state- 
employed counterparts. Although they are all working for the same cause, the 
two types of employees tend to be in different silos. Many SEA leaders found 
that to accomplish a cultural change, they needed to shift from a compliance- 
focused environment to one that focused on the real reason every employee 
held their respective jobs — to support district reform and effective educational 
opportunities for all students. If this resonated with everyone in the SEA and 
the organization could change to put students first, then collaboration within 
the organization became more feasible, which is the first step to developing 
strong relationships with LEAs. From here, LEAs must also be open to a change 
in norms; rather than playing into compliance, local education leaders must also 
become comfortable with taking the lead on local school improvement. 

Research also indicates that funding shouldn’t be a barrier to reorganiza- 
tion efforts. Kober and Renter (2012) documented that many state legislatures 
cut costs to the SEA as opposed to districts to find savings. While cost-cutting 
might result in overall decreases in SEA staffing levels, many states were able 
to increase staff levels in reform-critical offices while dismissing staff aligned to 
less relevant functions. In fact, Kober and Renter (2012) found that many states 
were even cutting staff from other departments to maintain — or in some cases 
increase — their capacity within educational improvement offices. Additionally, 
in some cases technological advances helped increase capacity in those depart- 
ments that have been forced to downsize due to budgetary constraints. This is 


117 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


especially true in terms of evaluation analytics and longitudinal data tracking. In 
some instances, federal dollars may be used to supplant state dollars and avoid 
downsizing. For example, some SEAs might seek guidance for supplementing 
grant streams with Title I dollars for schoolwide funding. 

Support Systems and State-Level Intervention 

The best structure for an SEA depends on the specific needs of the schools 
that require the strongest supports. Public education is a state’s responsibility, 
as the constitution leaves responsibility for educating the public to the states. 
However, the federal government has become a powerful influence in education 
by providing funding attached to conditions (i.e., SIG, NCLB waivers), leaving 
implementation up to the state. We found that there are various methods for 
determining which schools need what kinds of support (Mass Insight Education, 
2012b). School Improvement Grant (SIG) accountability structures, NCLB perfor- 
mance measures, funding from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 
2009, and state Elementary and Secondary Education Act Flexibility waivers pro- 
vide frameworks for identifying chronically underperforming schools and their 
needs. However, while these programs should incentivize SEAs to restructure 
their services, there is no mandate to do so. Neither is there a mandate to require 
LEAs to concomitantly change their approaches. The various programs continue 
to evolve over time — especially as administrators and their views change. As 
such, SEAs cannot afford to provide a one-size-fits-all service to the schools they 
serve; rather, they must remodel their procedures and policies to reflect variable 
school and district performance. 

Federal accountability and intervention strategies can drive urgency at 
the state and district level, but other external forces can also influence action. 
However, Murphy and Rainey (2012) cautioned that waiting for a crisis to appear 
is not the best practice to infuse urgency. For Louisiana, the disaster of Hurricane 
Katrina forced the state to start anew. While unfortunate events such as this 
often spur a state to take action, Murphy and Rainey (2012) advised that the cur- 
rent state of education is a "disaster" in itself and should be an ample catalyst to 
drive change to help these struggling schools and serve as the basis for commu- 
nicating the rationale for a transformation of current systems and the status quo. 

Finally, our own research provides a useful framework for rethinking the 
structure of the state intervention system. We found that successful school 
intervention strategies generally relied on creating stronger policy "conditions" 
for intervention; investing selectively in increased "capacity” to drive interven- 
tions, either at the SEA or LEA level; and "clustering" interventions — particu- 
larly in K-12 feeder patterns — in order to maximize the impact of investments. 
These so-called "3 Cs" offer a policy framework for states looking to make more 
aggressive, targeted investments in remedying chronic underperformance (Mass 
Insight Education, 2012b). 


118 


New SEA Structures 


To cultivate the conditions, capacity, and clustering for turnaround, we rec- 
ommend that states move the turnaround function out of the traditional "Title 
I/School Improvement” hierarchy. While there are good reasons to maintain a 
statewide approach to incremental improvement, states need a specialized unit 
to handle the most entrenched problems. In other sectors — such as state infra- 
structure investment and transportation — states create special authorities with 
unique powers, particularly for massive challenges. SEAs could learn from this 
approach. For instance, Massachusetts created an independent Massachusetts 
Water Resource Authority to manage the Boston Harbor cleanup in the 1980s. 
This authority existed outside of the normal constraints of bureaucratic author- 
ity and was able to attract a different kind of transformational talent to a major 
initiative (Massachusetts Water Resources Authority, 2005). 

Outside of the creation of a special purpose authority, we have also sup- 
ported and written about a number of states that fostered the creation of pro- 
tected in-district improvement zones through competitive grant processes. 

While all states have created subcompetitions for SIG dollars, a smaller number 
of states created processes that actually account for the quality and intensity of 
proposed interventions, while requiring the use of preapproved Lead Partners 
for turnaround. It is possible that creating competitions for SIG funds prefer- 
ences better organized and prepared LEAs. That said, this is probably a feature 
of competitions rather than a glitch, because the program already is limited to 
the country’s lowest performing schools, and requiring some preparedness is 
a safeguard against investing in hopeless situations. The SEAs support of Lead 
Partners for districts or zones takes a great deal of direct service and technical 
assistance toward capacity building off the plates of both the SEA and the LEAs 
it serves. Virginia, Delaware, and Illinois all have pursued such an approach. 3 In 
this model, the SEA moves from a compliance mindset to a competitive mind- 
set, incentivizing more aggressive methods of turnaround. We called this the 
"intra-state Race to the Top" approach. We cautioned that many states require 
a self-evaluation of current practices before they launch into this structure, as 
it requires significant managerial and investment sophistication. Without the 
proper planning, developing a zone will leave schools without the support they 
need from a partner, district, or state-level liaison. 

From the review of available recent literature on SEA organization and struc- 
ture, we find three major takeaways: 

1. The actions carried out by specific SEA structures lie across a continuum 
ranging from light-touch strategies to complete takeover. The majority of 
SEAs currently do not rely on a clear organizational imperative, but rather 

3 In addition to research, we at Mass Insight Education also worked in partnership with the Delaware 
Department of Education and assisted in identification and development of Lead Partners, as well as the 
creation of the state's Partnership Zone. 


119 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


on relationships with LEAs to provide support. To build capacity for all 
LEAs and turnaround schools, SEAs should reevaluate this approach. 

2. The key to maintaining any reorganization is changing the culture. 
Engraining the new missions in the soul of the organization will outlast 
turnover in staff and leadership. 

3. Through the financial crisis, many SEAs have maintained or built upon the 
capacity and human capital of their turnaround units. Although some of 
this investment was driven by shrewd actions by the federal government, 
these investments provide a long-term platform for building the capacity 
of SEAs to invest in turning around chronically underperforming schools. 

Based on the findings from the literature review and our experience working 
with both SEAs and LEAs, we submit that the structure of an SEA should both 
create and provide for: (1) a mechanism for assessing the kinds of interven- 
tion a district requires (a diagnostic function); (2) a strategic review process for 
determining the financial and talent capacity of the SEA to provide those kinds of 
interventions; (3) aligned system for delivering those interventions that are both 
feasible and of the highest yield vis-a-vis student outcomes; and (4) a quasicom- 
petitive process for making investments in turnaround in order to create "proof 
points” for bold strategies. 



State capacity both human 
and financial to implement 

► 


Focusing SEAs on Turnaround 

In the end, our proposed SEA structure requires one particular character- 
istic: a district- and school-facing focus. Especially in the turnaround or school 
improvement office, it is important for the SEA to maintain a strong customer- 
service attitude. This includes actively communicating to schools and districts 
in need of support that the state will direct appropriate resources to turnaround 
efforts, provide a structure of political cover for bold decisions and actions, and 


120 


New SEA Structures 


maintain transparency by inviting input on decisions that will affect the schools 
and districts it supports. 

The diagnostic function is fairly straightforward. SEAs need a mechanism 
for determining what kinds of interventions are most likely to succeed given a 
particular school and/or district environment. A chronically underperforming 
school in a relatively high-performing district is going to need a different kind 
of attention than a school in a district that contains 50% of a state’s chronically 
underperforming schools. Similarly, a school with a 98% free or reduced price 
lunch population probably needs different supports than a school with relatively 
high socioeconomic status but a high percentage of English language learners. 
Note that both the school conditions and the district conditions — and practices 
within those districts and schools — are critical to consider. For example, inter- 
ventions that require significant district structural cooperation, like aligned 
coaching schemes, are unlikely to succeed in a low-capacity district. Any reason- 
able diagnostic mechanism ought to take into account leadership team capacity 
at both the school and district level. Even in the smallest states, such as Rhode 
Island or Delaware, an assortment of persistently low-achieving schools can 
require the full gamut of support. It may seem simpler for an SEA in this situa- 
tion to provide individualized menus of support, but it still might not be the best 
investment of SEA time or resources or even of the LEA’s time. 

The strategic review process is the mechanism through which SEAs make 
realistic assessments of their own abilities to deliver on intervention protocols. 
The revamp of the SIG program was helpful in sharpening SEAs’ ability to target 
investments, in that states can differentiate both funding levels and intensity of 
interventions. While "state takeover" might seem like an attractive and expedi- 
ent mechanism for quickly turning around a school, states have, at best, a mixed 
track record of assembling the capacity to run schools in perpetuity. Oftentimes, 
state takeover suffers from a short planning process or lack of clear communica- 
tion to the community. For example, Maryland’s state takeover process of indi- 
vidual schools in Baltimore was rushed and did not give the state time to identify 
and vet potential external partners; Pennsylvania's oversight of Philadelphia 
schools was implemented too quickly and failed to include local stakeholder 
input; and four years into state takeover in New Jersey, local stakeholders still 
did not understand the rationale or process for the state’s takeover of their 
schools (Center for Comprehensive School Reform and Improvement, 2005). 
States should use the results of a diagnostic process — ideally over the course of 
multiple years — to assess the kinds of interventions they are capable of provid- 
ing and leveraging. The strategic review should consider human capital, long- 
term fiscal sustainability, local governance, statewide governance, and political 
cover. 

The aligned systems are critical for delivering the kinds of interventions 
identified through the earlier parts of the process. While organizational structure 


121 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


certainly is not sufficient to drive change, a strategy misaligned to structure is 
destined to fail. SEAs should create enough autonomy for their turnaround strat- 
egies to have a chance at working, and burying such strategies under layers of 
bureaucracy stifles the ability to be nimble and innovate. 

Finally, the competitive process — though potentially politically unpopular — 
can help states make smarter investments. When districts and schools compete 
to win grants, they are pushed to invest in rigorous planning to be successful. 
Backed by a rigorous plan, actions are more likely to be sustainable, first because 
school leaders feel ownership over the proposed plan, and second because in 
writing the plan, conversations have already been started about change and 
reform around current practices. Moreover, while competitive grant processes 
might favor better-resourced competitors, the SIG program is limited to a small 
subset of chronically underperforming schools, in which case all schools are at a 
level of operation requiring intervention and some sort of increased support. The 
distinction among the schools is their ability to create and implement a strong 
plan for improvement. Perhaps most importantly, a competitive process enables 
the emergence of "proof points,” the success of which can accelerate outcomes 
and provide political cover for future endeavors. 

Whichever interventions are selected, an effective structure for SEA sup- 
port to high-need schools requires removing some layers of bureaucracy. These 
schools cannot afford to wait, and bureaucracies are designed to institutionalize 
reforms, not generate them. Going upwards, the state’s predominant turnaround 
unit should have a line of direct report to the State Education Chief. The unit also 
should have an external, politically insulated advisory council that provides cover 
for difficult decisions. In addition, the turnaround unit should be both a sustain- 
able force and able to collaborate with other SEA departments. SEAs should 
secure funding to keep the office in play, while also encouraging the development 
of strong human capital and capacity within the department. This includes work- 
ing with external partners at the state level (Mass Insight Education, 2012a). 

Some states create a Deputy Superintendent position at the state level to 
be responsible specifically for school improvement. In Georgia, for example, a 
cohort of SEA school improvement staff was transferred to a newly established 
Office of School Turnaround to focus on school improvement and accountability 
(Murphy & Rainey, 2012). 

Examples from the Field and Concrete Practices 

Though we cannot say that any state has found an absolute best practice 
(if they had, they would not have any schools left to support!), some states are 
employing practices that seem to be working. These strategies include part- 
nering with third-party organizations to provide turnaround expertise, creat- 
ing SEA-level leadership positions specific to turnaround, or creating zones of 
schools. 


122 


New SEA Structures 


At least three states make it easier for districts to work with third-party 
organizations with turnaround expertise. The state of Illinois preapproves Lead 
Partners for school turnaround, and LEAs must select a Lead Partner in order to 
be eligible for turnaround funds. Indiana conducts a similar pre-approval pro- 
cess, and the state uses third-party management organizations when interven- 
ing directly in schools. The Virginia Department of Education also uses a Lead 
Partner model; the state also tailors the Lead Partner requirements to serve the 
needs of the state, adding in stipulations such as collaboration with social ser- 
vice organizations, assisting in student funding research, and working with the 
local community to garner support for reform (Rhim & Redding, 2011; Smith & 
Shannon, 2011). 

In our work, we advocate for SEAs to build a marketplace for Lead Partners to 
develop and grow. Corbett (2011) believed Lead Partners (or Lead Turnaround 
Partners) could serve as an external unit to evaluate, plan, and partner with 
schools. A Lead Partner does not need to be a preexisting organization; rather, it 
can be a homegrown 501(c)(3) that is held accountable to an external board of 
local stakeholders, or even an in-unit component of the LEA’s central office. In 
our work, an effective Lead Partner has four characteristics: 

1. The organization has signed a 3-5 year performance contract for student 
achievement with the district or state; 

2. The organization has assumed authority for decision making about school 
staffing; 

3. The organization has agreed to provide core academic and student sup- 
port services either directly or through subcontracted "Supporting 
Partners"; and 

4. The organization has an embedded, consistent, and intense relationship 
with each school — including physical presence — during the turnaround 
period for five days per week. 

Other states have gone so far as to create a new entity in addition to the 
SEA. Going back to Murphy and Rainey’s (2012) research, the approach that 
Louisiana took in developing the RSD represents the "All-In" approach. This 
strategy assumes that the district requires SEA action to move forward; in its 
current state, the district is unable to change the schools. The RSD was created 
in 2003 — before Hurricane Katrina — and although it used that event to quickly 
step in to take over operations of schools that the district was unable to oper- 
ate, the so-called necessary "crisis" to spur its creation was truly the state of the 
LEA’s education system. On the intervention spectrum discussed at the beginning 
of this chapter, this strategy falls closer to the end of complete district takeover 
(Reform Support Network, 2012). 

The ASD in Tennessee is another example of an SEA focusing enhanced 
resources on a cluster of the lowest-performing schools across the state (namely 


123 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


in Memphis and Nashville) that require the greatest support. The model focuses 
on building capacity for districts and schools. In this instance, the state created 
an independent entity at the state level to directly control a zone of schools 
spread across multiple districts that were seriously underperforming. This lays 
the foundation for the SEA to be (1) school-facing, and (2) bolder in its actions 
to support and encourage improvement at chronically low-performing schools. 
The truly unique aspect of this structural model is that the ASD handpicks 
schools that have been identified as Priority Schools within districts to support, 
as opposed to identifying and taking over entire districts (Murphy & Rainey, 
2012). The state of Tennessee granted the ASD the ability to authorize Charter 
Management Organizations (CMOs) to serve the schools within the LEA. Schools 
are then managed for at least five years by either the ASD or by the authorized 
CMO after a comprehensive assessment identifies the best support system for 
each school (Tennessee Department of Education, 2012). 

Other states have stopped short of direct takeover, while still aiming to incen- 
tivize dramatic action through state intervention. The Delaware Department of 
Education created a statewide Partnership Zone of low-performing schools. The 
School Improvement Unit in Delaware is able to offer targeted support to these 
schools, including funding and technical assistance, partly due to the Partnership 
Zone’s added capacity. These serve as the carrot while the schools must pursue 
innovative ideas and strategies to improve their standards, and LEAs have to 
renegotiate collective bargaining agreements in order to provide more operating 
flexibilities to participating schools. The expectation is that the added autonomy 
along with special SEA supports will lead to a better environment for academic 
growth (Mass Insight Education, 2012a). In fact, this structure could be marketed 
as a proof point within the state: In summer 2012, test score analyses showed 
that every Partnership Zone school saw progress and that the Partnership Zone 
schools’ growth outpaced the state average in both reading and math for similar 
grades (Delaware Department of Education, 2012). 

Action Principles for SEAs 

In conclusion, there are a variety of steps SEAs can take to organize more 
effectively to support turnaround LEAs and schools. The following six steps aim 
to provide starting points for states to more effectively organize to provide the 
strongest support to their LEAs. 

• Be bold. While there are no silver bullets for school turnaround, light-touch 
solutions alone rarely work. Schools that have failed for years are unlikely 
to change through modest interventions. SEAs should determine whether 
they or other entities are best positioned to provide the supports neces- 
sary to be bold, but politically popular paths of least resistance should be 
avoided. 


124 


New SEA Structures 


• Focus on what schools need to succeed, as opposed to creating additional 
regulatory and compliance burdens, and create "proof points." By focusing 
on adding capacity — either with or without the cooperation of LEAs — an 
SEA that employs productive customer service techniques and provides 
technical assistance is likelier to see strong outcomes. Creating "proof 
points" quickly will get the outcomes and political cover SEAs need to push 
further. 

• Pursue legislative and policy actions that provide the SEA with the author- 
ity to create a nonbureaucratic space — perhaps even a statewide LEA — for 
turnaround. SEAs that created new entities within their overall structure, 
or zones of schools across districts, did so with political support. SEAs must 
work to garner political will from the legislative branch, the school board, 
and the state chief in order to create conditions at the state level for school 
success. 

• Encourage collaboration with third-party Lead Partners. Organizations 
with specialized turnaround experience can help to integrate and deliver 
solutions in low-capacity LEAs. Creating a homegrown 501(c)(3) organiza- 
tion that is accountable for improving student achievement — and main- 
tains that accountability through oversight by community stakeholders — 
adds capacity at both the state and school level. 

• Identify, own, and intentionally communicate strategies. States that have 
seen any success have done so through an intentional and sustained strat- 
egy — which includes clear communication of state strategy to LEAs and 
public stakeholders. While there is no silver bullet solution, muddling 
through will never suffice. 

• Identify outside accountability partners. Turnaround decisions are bound 
to be unpopular. Identify an outside organization that can publish a data- 
rich annual report on the "State of Turnaround,” so that states have the 
political credibility to continue successful reforms while discontinuing 
unsuccessful ones. 

References 

Center for Comprehensive School Reform and Improvement. (2005). State takeovers of 
individual schools. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from http://www.centerforcsri. 
org/pubs/restructuring/KnowledgelssueslStateTakeovers.pdf 
Corbett, J. (2011). Lead turnaround partners: How the emerging marketplace of lead turn- 
around partners is changing school improvement. Lincoln, IL: Academic Development 
Institute. Retrieved from http://www.adi.org/about/downloads/LeadPartners.pdf 
Delaware Department of Education. (2012, July 19). DCAS score release shows prog- 
ress in Partnership Zone schools. Retrieved from http://www.doe.kl2.de.us/ 
news/20 12/0719b.shtml 


125 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Hess, F., Lautzenheiser, D., Brown, C., & Owen, I. (2011, July 27], State education agencies 
as agents of change. Washington, DC: Center for American Progress; American 
Enterprise; Institute for Public Policy Research; The Broad Foundation. Retrieved 
from http://www.aei.org/papers/education/state-education-agencies-as-agents 
-of-change-paper/ 

Kerins, T., Perlman, C., & Redding, S. (2009). Coherence in statewide systems of support. 
Lincoln, IL: Academic Development Institute. Retrieved from http://www.adi.org/ 
about/downloads/CoherenceintheStatewideSystemofSupport.pdf 
Kober, N., & Renter, D. (2012, February 7). State education agency funding and staffing in 
the education reform era. Washington, DC: The Center for Education Policy. Retrieved 
from http://www.cep-dc.org/displayDocument.cfm?DocumentID=396 
Mass Insight Education. (2012a, May). Being bold: An assessment of turnaround ini- 
tiatives in select school districts and states. Boston, MA: Mass Insight Education. 
Retrieved from http://www.massinsight.Org/publications/turnaround/162/file/l/ 
pubs/2012/05/23/Mass_Insight_STG_-_Being_Bold_Assessment_-_May_20 12_l.pdf 
Mass Insight Education. (2012b, June). State education agencies: Creating proof points 
and scaling results. Boston, MA: Mass Insight Education. Retrieved from http://www. 
massinsight.org/cms_page_media/201/STG%20Turnaround%20Brief%20-%20 
June%202012%20-%20SEA%20Proof%20Points.pdf 
Massachusetts Water Resources Authority. (2005). 5 year progress report (2000-2004). 
Boston, MA: Author. Retrieved from http://www.mwra.state.ma.us/publications/5yea 
rreport0004/5yearreport0004.pdf 

Murphy, P., & Rainey, L. (2012, September). Modernizing the state education agency: 
Different paths toward performance management. Seattle, WA: Center on Reinventing 
Public Education. Retrieved from http://www.crpe.org/sites/default/files/ 

Reform Support Network. (2012). Highlights of state approaches to school turnaround 
governance. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved from http:// 
www2.ed.gov/about/inits/ed/implementation-support-unit/tech-assist/st-highlights. 
pdf 

Rhim, L., Hassel, B., & Redding, S. (2007). State role in supporting school improvement. 

In S. Redding & H. J. Walberg (Eds.), Handbook on statewide systems of support (pp. 
21-56). Lincoln, IL: Academic Development Institute. 

Rhim, L., & Redding, S. (2011). Fulcrum of change. Lincoln, IL: Academic Development 
Institute. Retrieved from http://www.adi.org/about/downloads/Fulcrum_of_Change. 
pdf 

Smith, K., & Shannon, D. (2011). Virginia’s lead turnaround partner initiative. 
[PowerPoint], Richmond, VA: Virginia Department of Education. Retrieved from 
http://www.doe.virginia.gov/support/school_improvement/titlel/1003_g/models/ 
va_lead_turnaround_partner_initiative.ppt 
Tennessee Department of Education. (2012). Title I school improvement grant: 
Achievement school district. Retrieved from http://www.tn.gov/education/fedprog/ 
doc/ASD_SIG_App_C2.pdf 


126 


State Approaches to Turnaround in ESEA Flexibility Plans 

Carole Perlman and Susan Hanes 

Background 

When the U.S. Congress reauthorized the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act (ESEA) in 2001, state education agencies (SEAs) found them- 
selves in a new and more complex regulatory environment. No Child Left Behind 
(NCLB) required states to put in place an accountability regimen with sanctions 
for districts and schools that failed to show adequate yearly progress (AYP) 
in a march toward all students meeting standards by 2014. The progressively 
more severe sanctions for each successive year that a school failed to make 
AYP included restructuring for schools falling short for five consecutive years. 
Restructuring options were: 

• Turning the school over to the state; 

• Reopening the school as a charter school; 

• Entering into a contract to have an outside organization with a record of 
effectiveness operate the school; 

• Replacing all or most of the staff who are relevant to the failure to make 
AYP; or 

• Undertaking any other major restructuring of the school’s governance that 
produces fundamental reform. 

Within a few years, two problems became obvious: (1) the "all students” 
target for meeting state standards on annual assessments by 2014 was not going 
to be achieved; (2) districts faced with restructuring schools predominately 
chose the mildest available option, and the schools remained in a low-achieving rut. 

A study of five states by the Center on Education Policy (2008) found that 
during the 2006-2007 school year, districts and states overwhelmingly avoided 


127 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


the most drastic restructuring options, instead selecting the "any other" option 
for between 86%-96% of their schools in restructuring. Nationally, few schools 
in restructuring were implementing significant changes to school governance 
and staffing (U.S. Department of Education, 2007). Brinson and Rhim (2009) 
observed that LEAs often chose the least prescriptive restructuring option, in 
part because other, more significant options were not appealing or possibly 
because of state law (e.g., prohibitions against state takeovers [Steiner, 2006], 
lack of laws authorizing charter schools or caps on the number of charter schools 
[Hassel, Hassel, Arkin, Kowal, & Steiner, 2006]). In other cases, outside contrac- 
tors were unavailable or unaffordable, and replacing some or all teachers and 
administrators was impractical because it was not possible to recruit staff likely 
to get better results (Kowal, 2009). In addition to these possible barriers as 
reasons for not choosing a more dramatic option for restructuring, LEAs often 
simply lacked the political will to execute significant change. 

NCLB enabled the U.S. Department of Education, through Section 1003(g) 
of ESEA Title I, to administer a School Improvement Grant (SIG) program that 
awarded funds to states for the purpose of school improvement with guidelines 
and regulations for the allocation of the major portion of the funds to districts 
with schools not keeping pace with NCLB timelines. Congress approved steady 
increases in SIG funding in an attempt to resuscitate NCLB with an infusion of 
resources. But even as the SIG funding increased, so did the number of schools 
failing to make AYR By the 2010-2011 school year, 48% of the nation’s schools 
were not making AYP, according to a study by the Center on Education Policy 
(2012). The U.S. Department of Education (2013) reported that in the 2011- 
2012 school year, 7,643 schools were in restructuring status. 

When Arne Duncan assumed the role of Secretary of Education in 2009, the 
trends from NCLB data were clear. The number of schools failing to meet NCLB 
trajectories was staggering and growing each year. The number of persistently 
low-achieving schools was likewise rising and revealing a segment of signifi- 
cant dysfunction within the public education system. The new administration 
attacked the problems through three competitive grants: (1) Race to the Top 
would attempt overhaul of whole state systems; (2) Investing in Innovation (i.e., 
13) grants would infuse innovation into the system; and (3) SIG would target the 
lowest achieving schools and provide unprecedented resources. 

School Improvement Grants 2.0: 2010-2013 

The 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) pumped large 
sums of money into education as part of an overall strategy to stimulate the 
economy. The SIG program had a substantially increase in funding, with awards 
to states for competitive subgrants to LEAs that demonstrated the greatest need 
for the funds and the strongest commitment to use the funds to substantially 


128 


ESEA Flexibilty Plans 


raise student achievement in their lowest performing schools. The 2010 SIG 
program required more rapid, dramatic, and prescriptive interventions than ever 
before and provided a massive infusion of money to fund these interventions 
(Perlman & Redding, 2011). 

Beginning in 2010, states could apply for funding that would enable the 
persistently lowest achieving 5% of schools in the state to apply one of four pre- 
scribed rapid improvement models (Perlman & Redding, 2011): 

• Turnaround model: The LEA replaces the principal and rehires no more 
than 50% of the staff; gives greater principal autonomy; implements other 
prescribed and recommended strategies. 

• Restart model: The LEA converts or closes and reopens the school under 
a charter school operator, charter management organization, or education 
management organization. 

• School closure: The LEA closes the school and enrolls the students in other 
schools in the LEA that are higher achieving. 

• Transformation model: The LEA replaces the principal (except in speci- 
fied situations); implements a rigorous staff evaluation and development 
system; institutes comprehensive instructional reform; increases learn- 
ing time and applies community-oriented school strategies; and provides 
greater operational flexibility and support for the school. 

Once again, the least dramatic model (transformation) was by far the most 
widely chosen (Hurlburt, Therriault, & Le Floch, 2012), accounting for 75% of 
awards; turnaround accounted for an additional 19%. 

ESEA Flexibility Waivers 

In 2011, the U.S. Department of Education allowed each SEA the option 
to request flexibility on behalf of itself, its LEAs, and its schools from certain 
requirements of NCLB in exchange for rigorous and comprehensive state- 
developed plans designed to improve educational outcomes for all students, 
close achievement gaps, increase equity, and improve the quality of instruction. 1 
The U.S. Department of Education chose the flexibility process to address prob- 
lems with NCLB because the expected reauthorization of ESEA was stalled in 
Congress, the number of schools not meeting AYP was growing astronomically, 
and NCLB’s requirements, such as the provision of supplemental educational 
services, was viewed by many states as an unproductive use of funds. 

One of the requirements of flexibility is that the state must effect dra- 
matic, systemic change in the lowest-performing schools by publicly identify- 
ing "Priority schools" and ensuring that each LEA with one or more of these 
schools implements, for three years, meaningful interventions aligned with the 

‘For a more detailed explanation regarding the ESEA flexibility waiver, see http://www.ed.gov/esea/ 
flexibility 


129 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


turnaround principles in each of these schools. The SEA must also develop crite- 
ria to determine when a school may exit priority status. 2 Priority schools include: 

• the lowest 5% of Title I schools based on achievement and progress on 
statewide assessments; 

• Title I-participating or Title I-eligible high schools with graduation rates 
less than 60%; or 

• SIG schools. 

As noted by the U.S. Department of Education, education experts and reform- 
ers differ on the best strategies for the lowest performing schools to undertake, 
but most agree that the key factors for success include a dynamic principal with 
a clear vision for establishing a culture of high expectations and talented teach- 
ers who share that vision, with a commitment to improving instruction through 
more collaboration and better use of data. 3 Flexibility requirements stipulated 
that states’ interventions in Priority schools must assist schools in accordance 
with the following turnaround principles (U.S. Department of Education, 2012): 

• Providing strong leadership; 

• Ensuring that teachers are effective and able to improve instruction; 

• Redesigning the school day, week, or year to include additional time for 
student learning and teacher collaboration; 

• Strengthening the school’s instructional program based on student needs 
and ensuring that the instructional program is research-based, rigorous, 
and aligned with state academic content standards; 

• Using data to inform instruction and for continuous improvement; 

• Establishing a school environment that improves school safety and dis- 
cipline and addressing other nonacademic factors that impact student 
achievement, such as students’ social, emotional, and health needs; and 

• Providing ongoing mechanisms for family and community engagement. 

State Flexibility Plans 

States have designed their accountability and support systems in a variety 
of ways that reflect their diverse circumstances. The remainder of this chapter 
describes how several states addressed the turnaround process in their ESEA 
Flexibility Requests. For readers seeking additional information, a link to each 
state’s approved flexibility request is given. 

Idaho 

Idaho provides an illustration of how a large, sparsely populated, rural state 
has leveraged its resources and used online tools to support school and district 
improvement. 4 

2 For a more detailed explanation regarding the definition of Priority schools, see http://www.ed.gov/sites/ 
default/files /supporting-state-local-progress, pdf 

Tor a more detailed explanation regarding the principles underlying ESEA flexibility waivers, see http:// 

www2.ed.gov/policy/elsec/guid/esea-flexibility/resources/turn-around.pdf 

4 See http://www2.ed.gov/policy/eseaflex/approved-requests/id.pdf 


130 


ESEA Flexibilty Plans 


Idaho employs a five-star rating system for schools based on the following 
measures: 

• Reading, mathematics, and language achievement for all students; 

• Achievement growth for all students; 

• Subgroup achievement growth, using a combined subgroup composed of 
economically disadvantaged students, minorities, students with disabilities, 
and English learners; 

• Graduation rate (for schools with grade 12); 

• Percentage of students reaching college readiness on college entrance/ 
placement exams (for schools with grade 12); and 

• Percentage of juniors and seniors completing at least one AP, IB, dual credit, 
or Tech Prep course and the percentage receiving a grade of C or better in 
advanced courses (for schools with grade 12). 

Idaho uses the WISE (Ways to Improve School Effectiveness) tool, a version 
of the Academic Development Institutes’s Indistar® 5 online tool, to create and 
monitor implementation of rapid improvement plans for Priority schools. WISE 
includes a set of over 80 research-based practices that are associated with school 
improvement. In addition, the WISE tool contains links to research summaries 
and videos of educators demonstrating improvement strategies. 

The turnaround planning process for each Priority school is preceded by 
a site visit to determine the school’s existing capacity and collect evidence of 
practices associated with substantial school improvement (Center on Innovation 
& Improvement, 2009). Data are collected by an external team of reviewers who 
observe all teachers, including teachers of special populations. The site visit pro- 
tocol is linked to the WISE Tool, so recommendations directly tie back to school 
and district improvement plans and processes. Recommendations also include 
connections to programs, technical assistance, and training opportunities that 
match the needs of the district or school. 

In creating plans, Priority schools must use rapid improvement strategies and 
address feedback provided to the school and district through the site visit. As the 
school and district plans are implemented, notes of steps taken are entered into 
the online WISE system. The district may use the tool to monitor the progress of 
schools, and the state may use the tool to monitor implementation and progress 
of school and district plans. All school improvement plans, including turnaround 
plans, are developed jointly by schools and districts, approved by the state, and 
monitored by both the state and district. Idaho holds districts responsible for 
the quality and the fidelity of implementation of those plans and monitors the 
districts’ support and technical assistance efforts through its statewide system of 
support. 

Before the school creates its turnaround plan, the district must choose one 
of five permissible SIG turnaround models: transformation, turnaround, restart, 

Tor more information on Indistar, see www.indistar.org 


131 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


closure, or a governance partnership model, in which the district partners with 
an external entity to implement the turnaround principles and transform the 
governance of the school. In the case of district charter schools, the district must 
renegotiate and significantly restructure the school’s charter. 

The interventions Idaho uses are aligned to the Turnaround Principles 
defined in ESEA flexibility. Idaho provides on-site technical assistance to districts 
with Priority schools and recommendations to districts regarding school and 
district leadership capacity, instructional practice, and governance structure. 

In addition to the site visit, the statewide system of support team 6 oversees the 
implementation of the following services directly: 

• Idaho Building Capacity Project: Cultivation of leadership in rural and 
remote areas within the state is a key focus of this collaboration among the 
state and three universities. Distinguished educators trained by the state 
are assigned to all participating schools and districts within the network. 
They provide monthly training to leadership teams and assist in planning. 

• Principals Academy of Leadership: Principals participate in a balance of 
content instruction, professional conversation, and collegial instructional 
rounds related directly to instructional leadership, managing change, and 
improving the overall effectiveness of instruction. 

• Superintendents Network of Support: The purpose of this collaboration 
between an SEA and a university is to support the work of district leaders 
in improving outcomes for all students. Superintendents identify the issues 
to be addressed, and the network serves as a resource for superintendents 
with districts with Priority and Focus schools. 

The state expects districts to be the first line of support for the lowest per- 
forming schools and provides training to district leadership teams to fulfill this 
role. Districts provide technical assistance at every point prior to submission of 
school improvement plans to the state. The state provides a rubric for districts 
to use as they review school plans and requires districts to submit copies of their 
completed rubric to demonstrate that assistance has been provided. The state 
then conducts an independent review and returns feedback to the district and 
school. Where there are differences in state and local scoring of the rubric, the 
state returns the plan for further discussion and revisions. This design encour- 
ages a capacity-building relationship between the state and district and between 
the district and school. 

ISDE will only approve district and school plans that ensure alignment of 
funds with school improvement plan priorities. Plans deemed to be lacking align- 
ment will not be approved, and districts will be expected to revise them at the 
district and/or school level as necessary. 

6 ESEA requires states to establish statewide systems of support to assist LEAs and schools not making 
adequate progress. 


132 


ESEA Flexibilty Plans 


The state brokers resources to ensure that schools and districts are matched 
with the supports they need, such as external expertise or training opportuni- 
ties available from ISDE or institutions of higher education. If a school is strug- 
gling with meeting the needs of ELLs, the state’s Title III coordinator reviews the 
school improvement plan and provides feedback. If the state has provided all of 
the technical assistance and support described in the ESEA Flexibility Plan and a 
school has not met the exit criteria by the end of the third year in priority status, 
the district is considered to be responsible. 

At times, districts are in need of improvement due to governance issues that 
can be changed by coaching of the superintendent and cabinet level staff. For 
this, the state will utilize support mechanisms to provide coaching. However, 
district leaders may not have the capacity or may be unresponsive to external 
support. In this situation, the state will work directly with the local school board 
to make recommendations regarding staffing. Recommendations may be paired 
with positive or negative incentives for change, such as providing extra grant 
funding to solve specific concerns or withholding funding until conditions are 
met. In rare cases, district leaders have sufficient capacity and are responsive to 
support, but they are constrained by decision making and policies of the local 
school board. 

In severe circumstances, the state will work directly with the community to 
inform stakeholders about the needs of their district, since only the local commu- 
nity can facilitate a change in trustee membership. Under these conditions, the 
state reserves the right to withhold any or all federal funding for use in providing 
services directly to the students, families, and community of that school district 
in a manner that will ultimately result in turning around the performance of the 
district. Such services may include, but are not limited to: 

• Contracting services, such as before and after school tutoring for students; 

• Providing transportation for students to other school districts; 

• Enrolling students in a virtual charter school and redirecting funds to that 
school; or 

• Reserving a percentage of funds for the state to conduct public meetings, 
provide public notices, and work with the public to make necessary deci- 
sions about yearly school board elections. 

Massachusetts 

The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education 
(ESE) uses a Progress and Performance Index (PPI) to classify schools and dis- 
tricts under their accountability and assistance framework . 7 The cumulative PPI 
is a four-year, comprehensive indicator of district and school progress towards 
college and career readiness, with the most recent years weighted most heav- 
ily. It is based on testing participation, student achievement, student growth/ 

7 See http://www2.ed.gov/policy/eseaflex/approved-requests/ma.pdf 


133 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


improvement, and high school graduation and dropout rates. The most recent 
year receives a weight of four, the previous year a weight of three, the year before 
that a weight of two, and the year before that a weight of one. Annual PPIs are 
also calculated. 

ESE uses three measures to assess student achievement for districts, schools, 
and subgroups with three indicators: 

• Closing proficiency gaps in English language arts (ELA), mathematics, and 
science; 

• Reducing the percentage of students scoring in the warning/failing cat- 
egory in ELA and mathematics; and 

• Increasing the percentage of students scoring in the advanced category in 
ELA and mathematics. 

Massachusetts assigns growth and improvement credit for: 

• Exceeding the median student growth percentile (SGP) for the state; 

• Increasing the group’s median SGP over the previous school year; and 

• Reducing the percentage of nonproficient students by at least 10% (assum- 
ing at least 30 students in the group are tested). 

Massachusetts includes both graduation rates and dropout rates in the Progress 
and Performance Index as indicators of success in preparing students to be ready 
for college and careers. 

The superintendent of a Priority school’s district must submit a redesign plan 
to the local stakeholder group, local school committee, and, lastly, to the state 
commissioner for approval. The SEA assigns assistance liaisons and account- 
ability monitors; defines exit criteria, including measurable annual goals tailored 
to each school and based on empirical data; assesses fidelity to the federal turn- 
around principles as well as district capacity to implement one of four federally 
required implementation models; and provides targeted assistance via partner 
providers, tools, templates, and other resources. 

Massachusetts requires districts with Priority schools to develop a redesign 
plan to rapidly implement interventions aligned to each of the Conditions for 
School Effectiveness, 8 which are research-based interventions that all schools, 
especially those that are struggling most, need to implement to effectively meet 
the learning needs of every student. The District Standards and Indicators 9 iden- 
tify the characteristics of effective districts in supporting and sustaining these 
conditions in their schools. The redesign plan takes the place of any other school 
improvement plan and is a multipart instrument that, for a three-year period: 

• Addresses district-level capacity to support its Priority schools; 

• Provides a blueprint for intervention at each identified school; and 

• Sets measurable annual goals which serve as the standard for exiting prior- 
ity status. 

8 http://www.doe.mass.edu/apa/ucd/CSE.pdf 

9 www.doe.mass.edu/apa/review/district/StandardsIndicators.doc 


134 


ESEA Flexibilty Plans 


Prior to identifying interventions in Priority schools, districts must demon- 
strate that they have the capacity to plan for, implement, and monitor school- 
level redesign efforts, including the effective allocation of resources (people, 
time, materials, and fiscal, including all ESEA funds). In addition, the district 
must clearly describe: 

• Their theory of action and approach to effect rapid, systemic change in its 
Priority schools within three years; 

• The district’s redesign and planning process, including descriptions of 
teams, working groups, and stakeholder groups involved in the planning 
process, especially how interventions are selected for each Priority school; 

• How the district will recruit, screen, and select any external providers who 
provide expertise, support, and assistance to the district or to schools; 

• The district’s systems and processes for ongoing planning, supporting, and 
monitoring the implementation of planned redesign efforts; 

• Their policies and practices that may serve as barriers to the implementa- 
tion of the proposed plans and how those will be modified; 

• How the district will ensure that the identified schools receive ongoing, 
intensive technical assistance and related support from the state, district, 
or designated external partner organizations; and 

• How the district will monitor the implementation of the selected interven- 
tion at each identified school, and how the district will know that planned 
interventions and strategies are working. 

In addition to identifying systems, processes, and issues at the district level, 
the plans must also describe how the school will implement interventions 
aligned to the Conditions for School Effectiveness as a blueprint for school-level 
redesign efforts. A description of each condition and examples of meaningful 
interventions aligned with the turnaround principles that districts with Priority 
schools could implement is provided to the districts. 

Because Priority schools are required to address all of these conditions at 
once in their redesign plans, Massachusetts has seen many of these schools 
rapidly transform into high functioning learning environments for students. This 
occurs through the redesign of school and district systems and supports, includ- 
ing school leadership, instruction, and family/community partnerships. It also 
involves a rapid diagnosis of student needs, instruction tailored to the needs of 
each student, and a culture of high expectations for all students, parents, and 
families. Prior to removing a school from Priority status, the Department of 
Elementary and Secondary Education will ensure that the capacity and condi- 
tions are in place at both the district and school levels to sustain improvement. 


135 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


Tennessee 

Tennessee is notable for the variety of options it offers for managing the turn- 
around process in Priority schools. 10 These options are intended to effectively 
serve students in its two large urban centers, as well as the other parts of the 
state. 

Tennessee’s Priority schools are identified every three years based on all 
(not just Title I) schools’ three-year achievement data. Elementary and middle 
schools are assessed on an aggregate index of state assessment results, which 
equally weights the percentage of students scoring proficient or advanced in 
math, reading/language arts, and science. High schools are assessed using a 
weighted composite of graduation rate and percentage of students scoring profi- 
cient or advanced on end-of-course exams in Algebra I, English I, English II, and 
Biology I. 

In the short-term, identified Priority schools face one of four types of 
interventions: 

1. Enter the state-run Achievement School District (ASD); 

2. Enter an LEA-run "innovation zone” (affords schools flexibilities similar to 
those provided by the ASD) that an LEA has applied to create and that the 
state has approved; 

3. Apply and be approved by TDOE to adopt one of four SIG turnaround 
models; or 

4. Undergo LEA-led school improvement planning processes, subject to 
direct ASD intervention in the absence of improved results. 

By 2014-15, all Priority schools will be served through one of the first three 
options. 

The Achievement School District 

The Achievement School District (ASD) was created as a division of the state’s 
department of education. It is modeled after Louisiana’s Recovery School District 
and has the ability to take over and operate persistently poor-performing schools 
or to authorize charter schools. 

The primary functions of the ASD fall into five categories; the first two involve 
state-level work and the last three, school-level work. The categories and some 
kinds of activities that fall under each include: 

• Oversight, when necessary, for compliance (identifying schools to enter 
the ASD, selecting intervention strategies, holding schools accountable for 
results and compliance); 

• Facilitation (developing policy, overseeing public affairs); 

• Human Capital (hiring and evaluating teachers and leaders); 

10 For Tennessee's Flexibility Request, see http://www2.ed.gov/policy/eseaflex/approved-requests/ 
tn.pdf 


136 


ESEA Flexibilty Plans 


• Operations (transportation, food service, technology, maintenance); and 

• Support (instructional services, professional development, grants 
administration). 

The ASD employs two primary intervention strategies to dramatically 
increase student achievement: convert the school into a charter school or replace 
the LEA and directly manage daily operations of the school. In the case of direct- 
run conversions, the ASD’s role is to: 

• Invest heavily in recruiting and in human capital management in order to 
secure a highly effective school staff; 

• Hire the turnaround team (principal and lead teachers) at least six months 
in advance to allow for a robust induction program; 

• Employ charter-like flexibility and autonomy over personnel, budget, 
schedule, and program; and 

• Maintain tight control over scope and sequence, assessments, professional 
development, and performance management. 

Among the identified Priority schools, the ASD determines which schools to 
absorb based on (1) student achievement growth and (2) feeder pattern analysis. 
Priority schools that are geographically clustered with the worst growth are the 
first candidates for an ASD conversion. 

Consistent with state law, the use of the full per-pupil funding, facilities, and 
transportation services for all students within the school are accessible to the 
ASD. The ASD controls local, state, and federal funding attributable to each school 
placed in its jurisdiction and has the same authority to seek, expend, manage, 
and retain funding as that of an LEA. In addition, the ASD has the right to use any 
school building and all facilities and property otherwise part of the school and 
recognized as part of the facilities or assets of the school prior to its placement in 
the ASD. 

In ASD direct-run schools, the ASD has the authority to select, hire, and assign 
staff to positions in the school as needed to support the highest possible qual- 
ity faculty in the school. All existing staff within an ASD school must reapply for 
a position with the ASD. The ASD has the same salary autonomy and flexibility 
afforded any LEA. Schools enter the ASD for a period of at least five years, with 
return of the management of the school subject to both the school and the home 
LEA meeting performance goals. 

LEA Innovation Zones 

Reflecting their belief that whenever possible, LEAs should be the point of 
intervention with failing schools, the state may permit LEAs to establish innova- 
tion zones that have similar flexibilities to the state-run ASD. These allow for 
greater local innovation in turning around the worst schools. 

Creating an LEA innovation zone creates capacity within the LEA to success- 
fully build upon the turnaround strategies implemented by the ASD and ensure 


137 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


the long-term sustainability of student achievement gains at the campus level 
once the school is returned to the LEA. 

The Tennessee Department of Education (TDOE) may approve and support 
the creation of LEA-directed innovation zones. TDOE may flow federal and state 
funding ear-marked for Priority schools to the LEA if the LEA has: (1) developed 
a clear, realistic plan for developing an innovation zone and (2) demonstrated 
evidence that the LEA will be able to afford the innovation zone the necessary 
flexibility to be effective (e.g., new policies adopted by school boards). 

The responsibilities of the LEA are to establish an innovation zone office and 
hire a leader with the authority to hire staff (at minimum, one full-time employee 
per Priority school and one full-time data analyst for the office). The LEA must 
allow innovation zone schools autonomy over financial, programmatic, staffing, 
and time allocation decisions. 

Among other tasks, the innovation zone office: 

• Establishes and monitors progress toward goals and timelines (the state 
also monitors progress annually through annual measurable objectives 
[AMOs] and on-site visits by state officials); 

• Administers SIG and other grants; 

• Pursues outside funding opportunities; and 

• Provides technical assistance directly or through external partners. 

If a school’s student achievement does not improve within two years, the school 
will be absorbed into the ASD. LEA innovation zones that have slower rates of 
improvement across schools than the ASD will lose the right to expand into new 
schools until achievement growth in the rest of their schools improves to ASD 
levels. 

Washington State 

Washington identifies Required Action Districts (RAD) that have persistently 
low-achieving schools if those districts/schools did not apply for SIG funding. 
Washington established stringent criteria and monitoring to address the needs 
of these districts and schools. 11 

Washington’s accountability system incorporates the use of an index to iden- 
tify chronically low-performing schools for turnaround. The index incorporates 
the following measures over a period of years: (a) performance on state assess- 
ments in reading, mathematics, science, and writing; (b) graduation rates; and 
(c) student growth in reading and mathematics. Results for (a) and (b) are disag- 
gregated by subgroup. 

Washington State’s Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction (OSPI) 
identifies two sets of Priority Schools: those that have received federal School 
Improvement Grants, and those that have not. SIG Priority schools undergo an 
academic performance audit and develop an action plan that addresses the audit 

11 For more information, see http://www2.ed.gov/policy/eseaflex/approved-requests/wa.pdf 


138 


ESEA Flexibilty Plans 


findings and employs one of the four SIG improvement models, which must be 
approved by the state. 

Washington requires low-performing schools that do not receive SIG funds to 
develop and implement action plans that include rigorous interventions and are 
monitored by an external liaison. A district with at least one persistently lowest 
achieving school is designated as a RAD. A series of required steps then follows: 

1. The district notifies parents that the school has been identified for 
required action. 

2. OSPI contracts with an external review team to conduct an academic 
performance audit of the district and each persistently lowest achieving 
school within the district. 

3. RADs must then collaborate with administrators, teachers, other staff, 
parents, students, and unions to write a required action plan. The plan 
must include: 

a. An application for a SIG that includes a plan to implement one of the 
four federal intervention models; 

b. A budget that provides adequate resources to implement the plan; 

c. A description of the changes in the district’s and school’s policies, struc- 
tures, agreements, processes, and practices that are necessary to attain 
significant achievement gains for all students; 

d. A plan to adequately remedy all the findings in the academic perfor- 
mance audit; and 

e. Identification of the measures the district will use to assess student 
achievement in at least reading and mathematics. 

4. RADs must reopen collective bargaining agreements to make changes 
to the terms and conditions of employment necessary to implement the 
plan. 

If a district does not receive state approval for a required action plan, that 
district’s Title I funds may be redirected based on the academic performance 
audit findings. The SEA provides RADs with technical assistance and federal 
SIGs or other federal funds for school improvement, if available, to implement an 
approved plan. The RAD is required to report progress to the SEA. 

A district may be released from RAD status after it (a) has implemented 
the required action plan for three years, (b) has made progress in reading and 
mathematics over the past three years, and (c) no longer has a school identi- 
fied as persistently lowest achieving. If the RAD has not met the requirements 
for release, the district remains in RAD status and must submit a new or revised 
required action plan. 

Schools identified for SIG or Priority school status based on their mathemat- 
ics and reading (combined) performance must: (1) increase performance in 


139 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


reading and mathematics in the all students group and for all subgroups for 
three consecutive years and (2) decrease the percentage of students (for the all 
students group and subgroups) scoring at the lowest levels of performance on 
reading and mathematics over a three-year period. 

Secondary schools that graduate students and are identified for SIG or 
Priority school status based on their graduation rates must (1) increase gradu- 
ation rates in the all students group and for all subgroups and (2) decrease the 
percentage of students who drop out over a three-year period (for all students 
and subgroups). 

Prior to removing any school from priority status, OSPI will review evidence 
submitted by the district around the goals on its redesign plan to ensure the 
district has the capacity and that conditions are in place at both the district and 
school levels to sustain that improvement. 

Conclusions 

The ESEA Flexibility process is an attempt to patch up deficiencies in 
NCLB while the nation awaits reauthorization of ESEA by Congress. The U.S. 
Department of Education’s guidance and regulations assert administration prior- 
ities to maintain or elevate accountability while allowing greater state discretion 
in designing accountability regimes, to focus on the lowest achieving schools, 
and to implement turnaround principles. As with the SIG program, the state flex- 
ibility plans open a wide vista of alternative approaches that will yield valuable 
evaluative data to determine what, in this great laboratory, proves to work. 

Action Principles 

States have responded to the ESEA Flexibility requirements in a variety of 
ways suited to their unique contexts. Although it is too soon to know the results 
of their interventions, the following practices seem promising: 

• Take advantage of the state-designed flexibility plan to make significant 
changes in the education system, and pay close attention to high-quality 
implementation. 

• Aggressively build school and district capacity simultaneously. Providing 
training and technical assistance to districts as well as schools can help 
states maximize "bang for the buck," increase local buy-in to improvement 
efforts, sustain positive changes, and increase the ability of the district to 
work with other schools that need to improve. 

• Assign districts responsibility for the improvement process in their Priority 
schools with consequences for failure to improve. 

• Conduct comprehensive school site visits to help identify instructional, per- 
sonnel, and professional development needs that must be addressed in the 
school’s rapid improvement plan. 


140 


ESEA Flexibilty Plans 


• Create and, with the help of the district, closely monitor implementation of 
a single, realistic school improvement plan in which resources are tightly 
aligned with identified needs. 

• Convey a sense of urgency to school staff, parents, the school board, and the 
community. Effectively communicate to each constituency the reasons why 
drastic change is necessary, what the changes will be, and the consequences 
for continued low performance. 

• Use technology to leverage sparse state resources and increase the effec- 
tiveness of the statewide system of support by making it easier to monitor 
improvement plan implementation, providing training and technical assis- 
tance, and making data and other resources readily available to schools. 

References 

Brinson, D., & Rhim, L. M. (2009], Breaking the habit of low performance: Successful 
school restructuring stories. Lincoln, IL: Center on Innovation & Improvement. 
Retrieved from http://www.centerii.org/survey/downloads/Breaking_the_habit_of_ 
low_performance.pdf 

Center on Education Policy. (2008], A call to restructure restructuring: Lessons from the 
No Child Left Behind Act in five states. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from http:// 
www.cep-dc.org/displayDocument.cfm?DocumentID=175 

Center on Education Policy. (2012], AYP results for 2010-11: November 2012 update. 
Washington, DC: Author. 

Center on Innovation & Improvement. (2009], Patterns of practice: A school review 
process. Retrieved from http://www.centerii.org/districts/resources/Patterns_of_ 
Practice2.pdf 

Hassel, E. A., Hassel, B., Arkin, M. D., Kowal, & Steiner, L. M. [2006], School restructur- 
ing under No Child Left Behind: What works when? Washington, DC: Public Impact for 
Learning Point Associates. Retrieved from http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED496104. 
pdf 

Hurlburt, S., Therriault, S. B., & Le Floch, K. C. (2012], School Improvement Grants: 
Analyses of state applications and eligible and awarded schools (NCEE 2012-4060], 
Washington, DC: National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, 
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. 

Kowal, J. (2009], Performance-based dismissals: Cross-sector lessons for school turn- 
arounds. Lincoln, IL: Public Impact for the Center on Innovation & Improvement. 
Retrieved from http://www.adi.org/about/downloads/Performance-Based_ 
Dismissals.pdf 

Perlman, C., & Redding, S. (Eds.]. (2011], Handbook on effective implementation of 
School Improvement Grants. Lincoln, IL: Academic Development Institute/Center on 
Innovation & Improvement. Retrieved from http://www.centerii.org/handbook/ 

Steiner, L. (2006], School restructuring options under No Child Left Behind: What 
works when? State take-overs of individual schools. Washington, DC: Public Impact 
for Learning Point Associates. Retrieved from http://www.centerforcsri.org/pubs/ 
restructuring/KnowledgelssueslStateTakeovers.pdf 


141 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


U.S. Department of Education. (2007]. State and local implementation of the No Child Left 
Behind Act, Volume 111 — Accountability under NCLB: Interim report. Washington, DC: 
Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development, Policy and Program Studies 
Service. 

U.S. Department of Education. [2012], ESEA flexibility request for window 3. Washington, 
DC: Author. Retrieved from www.ed.gov/esea/flexibility. 

U.S. Department of Education. [2013], Total number of schools in restructuring: 

2011-12. Retrieved from http://eddataexpress.ed.gov/data-element-explorer. 
cfm?indicator_id=521 


142 


Leveraging Technology to Accelerate School Turnaround 

Janets. Twyman 

Tremendous excitement and lofty expectations surround the use of technol- 
ogy in schools and its promise of increasing student achievement. As part of a 
comprehensive initiative to advance the transformation of American education, 
the Obama administration and the U.S. Department of Education are encourag- 
ing a culture of learning powered by technology (U.S. Department of Education, 
Office of Educational Technology, 2010). The use of technology is now as indel- 
ibly linked to the thought of schooling as the one-room schoolhouse of a century 
ago (i.e., the brick-and-mortar schoolhouse that online education could conceiv- 
ably replace). When thinking about school turnaround in the 21st century, it is 
not a question of whether turnaround efforts should include technology but how. 

Technology has the potential to improve schooling at all levels of the system, 
from the preschooler or kindergartner entering school on the first day of class, to 
the high school senior graduating with distance learning college credits already 
under his belt, to the state superintendent responsible for teaching, learning, and 
professional development across her state. But how do we leverage technology 
to reap these rewards? What is the best way for state education agencies (SEAs) 
to ensure each learner, each teacher, each administrator, each person involved in 
schooling is meaningfully included? 

Let’s start with what we mean by technology. Hardware, software, and digital 
tools and other devices are readily thought of as "technology"; however, the term 
actually refers to the application of knowledge and research to solve practical 
problems and includes the use of processes as well as tools (Clark & Salomon, 
1986; Twyman, 2011). Beginning in the 1950s, the "new" computer-based 
educational technologies were thought to illuminate the path towards solving 
instructional problems (Reiser, 2012), and we have yet to give up that quest. Only 


143 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


recently does there seem to be more rigorous, empirical, consistent evidence that 
the integration of technology truly can have a meaningful, widespread impact on 
learning (Lemke, Coughlin, & Reifsneider, 2009; Flecknoe, 2002; Spector, 2010). 
Meta-analyses of existing research are increasingly finding positive effects for the 
instructional use of computers, game-like curricula, and interactive simulations 
(Blanchard & Stock, 1999; Niemiec, Samson, Weinstein, & Walberg, 1987; Vogel 
et al., 2006). 

To accelerate learning, we need to view technology not as the answer to our 
instructional woes, but as a medium to obtain better student academic outcomes. 
Digital and computer-based technologies are a means to the solution; their use 
is not the solution. It is quite important for schools and districts to not simply 
acquire technology but also contemplate and clarify their goals for the use of 
technology, asking, "What do I want to achieve using this technology, and under 
what conditions will it have the most benefit to students?" 

The barriers to as well as recommendations for effective, sustainable technol- 
ogy integration within a school or district has been described extensively (see 
Blumenfeld, Fishman, Krajcik, & Marx, 2000; Fabry & Higgs, 1997; Giilbahar, 
2007). Researchers note the importance of considering both first-order barriers 
such as hardware, infrastructure, and technical support (i.e., variables that are 
"outside" a teacher’s control) and second-order barriers such as attitudes about 
technology, pedagogical beliefs, or resistance to change (i.e., variables that are 
"internal" to the teacher; Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010; Lowther, Inan, 
Strahl, & Ross, 2008). Both forms of barriers must be addressed for technology 
to help accelerate student learning. There must be adequate infrastructure and 
appropriate resources. As the field of education is littered with failed initiatives, 
schools must focus not only on acquiring new technology but also on extensive 
professional development related to implementing and scaling up new technolo- 
gies (Zorfass, 2001). A committed, involved leader, from the school level to the 
state level, must ensure that educators have the necessary resources and support 
and that technology-based content and tools are connected to teaching practice 
and the curriculum (Staples, Pugach, & Himes, 2005) and are meaningful to the 
school community and the community at large. 

This chapter will focus on how technology — assuming adequate leadership, 
resources, and supports — can accelerate improved student outcomes in an SEA- 
driven school improvement or school turnaround endeavor. The use of technol- 
ogy across seven areas (i.e., learning and instruction, motivation, access, data, 
teacher training, systems and processes, and learning analytics) is described and 
supported by examples of research or exemplary programs. 

The Use of Technology to Personalize Learning and Improve Instruction 

Any attempt to improve student learning must be anchored in relevant, 
well-designed curricula and evidence-based instructional methods. Good 


144 


Leveraging Technology 


instructional design requires a systematic process "that includes performing con- 
tent, task, and learner analyses, clearly defining the learning objectives, deter- 
mining the criterion tests to assess for understanding or mastery, establishing 
the entry repertoire needed by the student, building the instructional sequences, 
using performance data to continually adjust instruction, and ensuring student 
motivation by incorporating both program intrinsic and extrinsic consequences 
throughout the instructional sequence" (Twyman & Sota, in press; see also 
Dick & Carey, 1996; Smith & Raglan, 1999; Tiemann & Markle, 1990; Twyman, 
Layng, Stikeleather, & Hobbins, 2004). Worthwhile instruction (the delivery) 
requires frequent opportunities for the student to actively respond (Rosenshine 
& Berliner, 1978) with immediate, relevant feedback (Shute, 2008) that sup- 
ports self-paced progress (Fox, 2004) with new material presented only after the 
student has demonstrated mastery of the current material (Bloom, 1968; Keller, 
1968; Kulik, Kulik, & Bangert-Drowns, 1990). The progression of instruction and 
content must be tied to actual measures of student learning and not portioned 
by curriculum content chunks such as chapters or units or the passage of grading 
periods, semesters, or calendar years. Any viable "technology assist" (i.e., the use 
of technology to make the attainment of a goal more likely) in school turnaround 
must support, enhance, or provide these critical components. State education 
leaders can prime, develop, and support a culture of selecting curriculum materi- 
als known to be effective or even promising (i.e., based on evidence-based com- 
ponents), as well as quickly abandoning those shown, under reliable implemen- 
tation conditions, to be ineffective. States can partner with vendors who directly 
link outcomes to purchase costs. 

Research-informed, technology-enhanced instructional programs that ana- 
lyze current skills, target student deficits, and deliver tailored instruction auto- 
matically are increasingly prevalent. 1 A blend of real-time, data-based recom- 
mendations and teacher insight into student needs and preferences may provide 
an ideal framework for personalized learning that actually improves student 
outcomes (Thropp, Friedman, & Elliott, 2011; Wayman, 2005). 

There is an ever-growing cornucopia of visually rich, well-curated content 
from highly respected sources and digital and Internet-based technologies that 
all educators may access at little or no cost, such as those by NASA or the World 
Wildlife Fund. The opportunities to pull in rich content and personalize offerings 
to student interests seems infinite, yet may be both a boon and a bane for educa- 
tors. Educators must sift through and evaluate the plethora of available content 
and technology tools to find those that meet their teaching or their students’ 
learning needs. The number of apps, tools, and resource sites, as well as commer- 
cial or enterprise technology programs from established educational publishers, 
already enormous, continues to grow, thus requiring that teachers, curriculum 

'Current examples include Burst®, Reading by Wireless Generation®, or "Groupinator” by Scholastic's Read 
180 ®. 


145 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


specialists, technology specialists, and administrators become "educated con- 
sumers" in the technology tools and content marketplace. Quality research on 
effectiveness is critical, yet may be insufficient given the fast pace of technology 
changes (see Technology in Education, 2011). In the interim, guidelines, rubrics, 
or checklists of necessary or notable characteristics can be helpful in determin- 
ing what to use, when, and with whom (for a collection of such resources, see 
Appendices in Twyman & Sota, in press). 

The Use of Technology to Increase Motivation 

Students who historically have had difficulty in school are less likely to 
engage in learning and practice opportunities (Fuchs et al., 2008). Technology 
can aid motivation to participate and create opportunities for more interest- 
ing and engaging activities, structuring learning for mastery-based progression, 
and personalizing content to suit student interests. Personalized learning has 
surfaced as a potential instructional strategy to increase motivation and student 
success (Wolf, 2012). "Serious games” and games for learning seem different 
from "edutainment" programs of the past, may be especially effective in increas- 
ing motivation for struggling students (Burguillo, 2010), and may offer a learning 
environment where feedback is less threatening (Shute, 2008). 

Motivators may be "extrinsic" to instruction, such as points or awards for 
mastery performance. Sites that purport to enhance student motivation through 
digital badges (e.g., Badgeville, Mozilla’s Open Badges) or behavior manage- 
ment apps (e.g., Class Dojo) are just a few examples of motivational technology 
tools. Motivators may also be "intrinsic” to instruction, arising from learning 
and what mastery enables the student to do in other contexts (Layng, Twyman, 

& Stikeleather, 2004). When an instructional sequence begins with a challeng- 
ing task that a student learns successfully, it may help the student more readily 
approach learning in the future (Fuchs et al., 2008). 

The Use of Technology to Improve Access 

Arguably one of the most outstanding benefits of new technologies, such as 
portable digital devices and Internet-based content delivery, is the increased 
access all students have to these technologies. This is especially important to 
SEAs as they have an obligation to provide equal access and meet the needs of 
all students within their states. These new technologies and ubiquitous Internet 
availability promote the delivery of high-quality content to students in a wide 
range of geographical areas, including those in remote areas who previously may 
have been cut off from such resources. Students who temporarily or permanently 
are unable to attend their brick-and-mortar classrooms can remotely or virtually 
participate in some or all classroom activities, even in real time, via the Internet. 
This includes instructional activities as well as more social activities — via social 
networking, chat, or other tools. 


146 


Leveraging Technology 


Access is increased not only geographically but also temporally with con- 
tent and instruction available 24/7, including evenings, weekends, and sum- 
mers. Research indicates that students are spending substantial amounts of time 
learning outside of school (Mallya, Mensah, Contento, Koch, & Barton, 2012), 
and teachers now have the ability to integrate those learning opportunities with 
what is happening during school hours. Two notable examples of the tremen- 
dous benefit of technology to increase access are 1:1 technology initiatives and 
blended learning. 

The 1:1 model, which began over a decade ago and continues to grow across 
the country, promotes an approach where all students and teachers have access 
to at least one wireless device with up-to-date software and an Internet connec- 
tion at school, and the devices are used to improve outcomes in teaching and 
learning (Muir, Manchester, & Moulton, 2005; Penuel, 2006). One-to-one initia- 
tives support a personalized learning environment where teachers use and trust 
digital learning opportunities to give students access to activities tailored to 
their specific interests and needs, and the school or district actively supports and 
monitors the use of devices for digital learning. While research reveals mixed 
results overall, studies that involve carefully implemented 1:1 initiatives have 
been shown to increase general learning outcomes (Warschauer, 2006; Weston 
& Bain, 2010). Positive results seem to be tied to four crucial factors: access (to 
technology); emphasis on uses for learning; strong leadership; and professional 
development in context. A comprehensive report by Project RED (2010) provides 
greater detail on the essential components required in a successful 1:1 initiative. 

The Khan Academy, and its access to an on-demand library of educational 
videos and learning management infrastructure (Khan Academy, 2013; Noer, 
2012), is perhaps the most popular example of "blended learning” or "a formal 
education program in which a student learns at least in part through online 
delivery of content and instruction with some element of student control over 
time, place, path, and/or pace and at least in part at a supervised brick-and- 
mortar location away from home” (Staker & Horn, 2012, p. 3). For most K-12 
classrooms, the "blend” of online and bricks-and-mortar typically falls into four 
models: rotation, flex, self-blend, and enriched virtual (for a full description 
of these models, as well as subtypes, see Staker, 2011; Staker & Horn, 2012). 
Blended learning exists within the continuum, from traditional full-time bricks- 
and-mortar instruction without key features of online instruction to the full-time 
access of all educational content via online resources and may have any combi- 
nation of traditional and online learning. A critical feature, however, is that each 
form of instruction influences and impacts the other. Communication between 
teachers and students, or students and students, may be synchronous (i.e., occur- 
ring in real time) or asynchronous (i.e., interaction occurs intermittently online, 
with time between responses). Research indicates that models that promote 
communication and interaction between traditional instruction and online 


147 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


instruction produce better learning outcomes. In a meta-analysis of 51 studies 
and a review of literature, the U.S. Department of Education found that "blended 
instruction has been more effective, providing a rationale for the effort required 
to design and implement blended approaches (2009, p. xvii). 2 

The Use of Technology to Track, Measure, Analyze, 
Communicate, and Respond to Data 

Research has consistently shown that the frequent measurement of student 
progress before, during, and after teaching is reliably associated with improved 
outcomes (Wayman, 2005; West, 2011). Measurement indicates where students 
are or where they are starting from, guides teaching along the way, and, finally, 
shows when students have arrived at the intended destination. Historically, per- 
sistent barriers to measurement have included the difficulty of simultaneously 
teaching and measuring, the knowledge or awareness of what to measure, and 
the ability to use measurement and data to make instructional decisions. 

Technology tools can reduce many of these barriers by continuously tracking 
student performance in real-time and providing simultaneous feedback for both 
the student and the teacher. Student response systems that collect data (e.g., 
"clickers," digital devices, programs that use smart phones) have been found to 
improve student understanding and increase engagement (Kay & LeSage, 2009; 
Poole, 2012; West, 2011). Digital tools and applications such as computers, tab- 
lets, interactive video, and whiteboards have been shown to increase the ability 
to collect, manage, analyze, store, and communicate educational data (Mclntire, 
2002; Penuel, Boscardin, Masyn, & Crawford, 2007; Wayman, 2005). Course 
sequences may be offered online through course management systems (e.g., 
Blackboard, Moodle) or a learning platform (e.g., Knewton, DreamBox Learning). 
When these online learning systems use data to change in response to individual 
student performance, they are considered adaptive learning environments 
(Specht, 2013). 

As noted previously, "smart" algorithms provide teachers with instantaneous 
guidance on where students are struggling and what to do next. When embedded 
within an instructional program, the recommended intervention or next course 
of action can be automatically served up to the student (Corbett & Anderson, 
1992). The resulting picture or map of student learning can be shared online 
with other educators, administrators, or parents. This allows real-time data to 
truly direct continuous improvement. These data may also be used to help edu- 
cators group students with similar needs for more intensive instruction or pair 
students up for peer tutoring or group review. 

2 Innosight Institute has produced two comprehensive reports, The Rise ofK-12 Blended Learning: Profiles 
of Emerging Models (Staker, 2011) and Classifying K-12 Blended Learning (Staker & Horn, 2012), that detail 
the types of blended learning models and describe numerous K-12 blended learning implementations 
across the country. Schooling leaders and those interested in a better understanding of blended learning are 
encouraged to consult these resources. 


148 


Leveraging Technology 


The Use of Technology to Improve Teacher Training 

Technology can aid professional development in at least two ways: flexibility 
and familiarity. This is true regardless of content or instructional effectiveness. 
With regard to flexibility, teacher training or professional development activi- 
ties that are delivered via the computer, tablet, smart phone, or other device give 
educators and administrators greater leeway in determining when and where 
professional development activities occur. Webinars and other synchronous 
remote delivery of professional development allow training to occur across a 
district while minimizing costly travel expenses. This may be particularly valu- 
able in states with rural districts spread over large geographic areas. Tutorials, 
modules, trainings, or presentations, delivered asynchronously, allow educators 
to access content at times most convenient for their schedules, either inside or 
outside of schools. This flexibility also applies to professional development con- 
tent and level, allowing for a personalized education experience geared to each 
teacher and his or her own interests and needs. 

The use of technology in teacher training also benefits teachers by increas- 
ing familiarity. As previously inexperienced or reluctant teachers increase con- 
tact time with new technologies such as tablets or new software and content 
delivery tools such as screen casting, electronic whiteboards, video creation, 
or even online polling, they in turn may become more comfortable using these 
technologies in their classrooms (Chism, 2004; Grasha & Yanbarger-Hicks, 2000). 
Therefore, it is essential for schools and districts to incorporate technology con- 
tent delivery tools in their professional development efforts. 

A section on teacher training and technology cannot close without also 
addressing the need for formal training on the actual use of technology for 
educators and potentially all school staff. Thought leaders have expressed the 
need for preservice teacher training efforts related to how to use new technolo- 
gies; however, such efforts are in an early stage. Research indicates that teachers 
who receive professional development focused on integrating technology into 
teaching use technology more effectively (Robyler & Edwards, 2000; Watts & 
Hammons, 2002), especially when that training occurs in context (Chism, 2004). 
Schools, districts, and SEAs need to make a concerted effort to train their educa- 
tors in the fluent use of technology tools by providing both inside and outside of 
class experiences, preferably with experienced mentors. 

The Use of Technology to Streamline Systems and Processes 

Technology can streamline processes by promoting a continual multi-way 
flow of information between students, teachers, curriculum, subject area or 
other specialists, administrators, and parents within a single school, across the 
district, or throughout the state (Kosakowski, 1998). Learning management 
systems, digital grade books, educational data systems, and the linking of online 
assessments allow for the digitization of records and information for easy access 


149 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


at a variety of levels. Information, such as student portfolios, can now be stored 
in the form of searchable documents, images, audio, or even digital files. 

The Use of Technology to Understand Learning 
and Performance Analytics 

As noted previously, technology greatly assists our ability to collect data and 
make data-driven instructional decisions (Mclntire, 2002). The application of 
technology to the growing area of learning analytics is equally critical. Learning 
analytics focuses on the analysis of student interaction using online education 
tools and uses the information gleaned to predict outcomes and create a more 
integrated and customized learning experience (U.S. Department of Education, 
Office of Educational Technology, 2012). Using "intelligent data” on student per- 
formance, learning analytics dissect real-life data sets to find out how students 
learn and how to improve upon their experience. Analytics can help predict 
future student performance based upon patterns of learning across students, 
warn when students are struggling, and suggest unique feedback and interven- 
tion tailored to specific difficulties based upon collections of answers. 

One of the features of learning analytics, in contrast to "typical” data collec- 
tion and individualized data decision-making, is how analytics are designed to 
look at groups and patterns of responding in the aggregate to make bigger pic- 
ture statements about how various students respond to particular instructional 
materials or at particular times. They can detect performance difficulties due to 
either instructional content (curriculum) or instructional delivery (e.g., analysis 
of time spent on problems or sections, patterns of corrects or errors to iden- 
tify areas of concern, distinguish between guessing versus "knowing” answers; 
Hauger & Kock, 2007; Layng, Twyman, & Stikeleather, 2004). For example, 
learning analytics can identify common incorrect answers for a lesson, within 
or across students, and catalyze teachers to revisit the material for clarification 
during class or revise the material for use in future lessons. Predictive models of 
analytics are beginning to combine demographic information and student learn- 
ing data to report progress and predict future outcomes. Adaptive engines can 
now customize content delivery for an individual student’s performance or inter- 
est, further strengthening the personalization of learning. 

The following guidelines may assist SEAs in their efforts to use technology to 
accelerate school turnaround efforts in their states. 

Action Principles 

Appoint an expert to serve in the role of "tech visionary” 

• Identify an education leader with a solid, informed, and up-to-date opinion 
about where technology will be in the next few years to plan a roadmap for 
the state accordingly. 


150 


Leveraging Technology 


Use technology to personalize learning and improve instruction 

• Leverage the clout (e.g., influence, buying power) inherent in SEAs to struc- 
ture curriculum purchases directly tied to demonstrated learner outcomes 
(e.g., partial payment upfront with balance due upon agreed upon out- 
comes, partial or full refunds should expected outcomes not be attained). 

• Assume a critical role in helping to identify content and instructional pro- 
viders that align with the broader state curriculum and data systems. 

Use technology to increase motivation 

• Engender and encourage a statewide consideration of personalized learn- 
ing, and support effective technology products that include higher levels of 
personalization. 

• Establish a statewide culture of high performance expectations; leverage 
technology tools to provide appropriate level of performance reporting. 

Use technology to improve access 

• Reevaluate requirements and policies related to "seat time" to include con- 
sideration of both blended learning and fully online courses. 

• Create opportunities for linkages across the state — and across states — to 
leverage exemplary online course content/providers for statewide access. 

• Target rural and underserved areas for online access to unique content or 
specialized personnel. 

Use technology to track, measure, analyze, communicate, and respond to 

data 

• Identify measurement systems (tools or providers) that align with the 
statewide data systems and provide incentives for their use. 

• Provide public access — at the parent, teacher, school, district, and state 
level — to socially valid educational data and provide a forum for public 
comment and feedback as well as a review system for performance 
improvement. 

Use technology to improve teacher training 

• Support the recruitment, retention, and development of educators who 
have solid educational technical expertise and experience across technical 
domains, implementation domains, and content domains. 

• Develop statewide technology mentoring programs — at the preservice and 
in-service level. 

• Reevaluate credentialing requirements to include training and demonstra- 
tion of skills related to current technologies from creation to delivery to 
evaluation. 

• Partner with institutes of higher education and teacher preparation pro- 
grams to help them identify and include the necessary education technol- 
ogy knowledge and skills. 


151 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Use technology to streamline systems and processes 

• Develop statewide guidelines, rules, standards, implementation protocols, 
training mechanisms and materials, and technology tool kits to aid districts 
and schools in implementing technology at both the statewide and local 
level. 

• Provide statewide guidelines that help shape community (e.g., educator, 
administrator, parental) attitudes about technology, pedagogical beliefs, 
and potential resistance to change, while keeping the public informed of 
statewide technology initiatives. 

• Develop state-level guidelines, rubrics, or checklists that evaluate neces- 
sary or notable characteristics of technology products, aligned to state 
standards, that districts, schools, and teachers can use in determining what, 
when, and with whom to use them. 

• Designate an individual or team at the state level who is responsible for 
evaluating the efficiency and efficacy of technology implementations within 
the state, including a plan for limited tryouts in specific locations before 
systematic rollout across the state. 

Use technology to understand learning and performance analytics 

• Unify statewide student information systems that also take into account 
student learning, teacher performance, and the effectiveness of curriculum, 
as well as implementation fidelity. 

• Adopt statewide, or make available at low cost to districts, data system 
infrastructures that standardize, collect, and track K-12 student data. 

References 

Blanchard, ]., & Stock, W. (1999). Meta-analysis of research on a multimedia elementary 
school curriculum using personal and video-game computers. Perceptual and Motor 
Skills, 88, 329-336. 

Bloom, B. S. (1968). Learning for mastery. Evaluation Comment, 1 (2), 1-12. 

Blumenfeld, P., Fishman, B. J., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. W. (2000). Creating usable innova- 
tions in systemic reform: Scaling up technology-embedded project-based science in 
urban schools. Educational Psychologist, 35(3), 149-164. 

Burguillo, J. C. (2010). Using game theory and competition-based learning to stimulate 
student motivation and performance. Computers & Education, 55(2), 566-575. 

Chism, N. (2004). Using a framework to engage faculty in instructional technologies. 
Educause Quarterly, 27(2), 39-45. 

Clark, R. E., & Salomon, G. (1986). Media in teaching. In M. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of 
research on teaching (3rd ed.; pp. 464-478). New York, NY: Macmillan. 

Corbett, A. T., & Anderson, J. R. (1992). Student modeling and mastery learning in a 
computer-based programming tutor. In C. Frasson, G. Gauthier, & G. McCalla (Eds.), 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Second international conference proceedings (pp. 413- 
420). New York, NY: Springer-Verlag. 


152 


Leveraging Technology 


Dick, W., & Carey, L. (1996). The systematic design of instruction (4th ed.). New York, NY: 
Harper Collins Publishing. 

EdWeek. (2011). Technology in Education. Retrieved from http://www.edweek.org/ew/ 
issues/technology-in-education/ 

Ertmer, P. A. (2005). Teacher pedagogical beliefs: The final frontier in our quest for tech- 
nology integration? Educational Technology Research and Development, 55(4), 25-39. 

Ertmer, P. A., & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T. (2010). Teacher technology change: How 
knowledge, confidence, beliefs, and culture intersect .Journal on Research on 
Technology in Education, 42(3), 255-284. 

Fabry, D. L., & Higgs, J. R. (1997). Barriers to the effective use of technology in education: 
Current status .Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 385-395. 

Flecknoe, M. (2002). How can ICT help us to improve education? Innovations in 
Education and Teaching International, 39(4), 271-279. 

Fox, E. J. (2004). The personalized system of instruction: A flexible and effective 
approach to mastery learning. In D. J. Moran & R. W. Malott (Eds.), Evidence based edu- 
cational methods (pp. 201-221). San Diego, CA: Elsevier. 

Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Powell, S. R., Seethaler, P. M., Cirino, P. T., & Fletcher, J. M. (2008). 
Intensive intervention for students with mathematics disabilities: Seven principles of 
effective practice. Learning Disability Quarterly, 31, 79-92. 

Gammon, R. (2011, July 15). itunes app store educational apps2011 vs. 2009. [Web log 
comment]. Retrieved from http://lh-llc.com/itunes-edu-apps-2011-2009 

Grasha, A., & Yanbarger-Hicks, N. (2000). Integrating teaching styles and learning styles 
with instructional technology. College Teaching, 48(1), 2-10. 

Giilbahar, Y. (2007). Technology planning: A roadmap to successful technology integra- 
tion in schools. Computers & Education, 49(4), 943-956. 

Hauger, D., & Kock, M. (2007, September). State of the art of adaptivity in e-learning plat- 
forms. In Workshop Adaptivitat und Benutzermodellierung in interactiven Systemen 
(ABIS'07). Retrieved from http://users.informatik.uni-halle.de/~lwa07/abis07/ 
Hauger.pdf 

Khan Academy. (2013). A free world-class education for anyone anywhere. Retrieved from 
http://www.khanacademy.Org/about#faq 

Kay, R. H., & LeSage, A. (2009). Examining the benefits and challenges of using audience 
response systems: A review of the literature. Computers & Education, 53(3), 819-827. 

Keller, F. (1968). "Goodbye teacher..." Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 1, 79-89. 

Kosakowski, J. (1998). The benefits of information technology. ERIC Digest. Syracuse, NY: 
ERIC Clearinghouse on Information and Technology. (ED 420302) 

Kulik, C., Kulik, J., & Bangert-Drowns, R. (1990). Effectiveness of mastery learning pro- 
grams: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 60, 265-299. 

Layng, T. V. J., Twyman, J. S., & Stikeleather, G. (2004). Selected for success: How 
Headsprout Reading Basics™ teaches beginning reading. In D. J. Moran & R. Malott 
(Eds.), Evidence-based educational methods (pp. 171-200). St . Louis, MO: Elsevier 
Science/Academic Press. 


153 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Lemke, C., Coughlin, E., & Reifsneider, D. (2009], Technology in schools: What the research 
says. Culver City, CA: Commissioned by Cisco. Retrieved from http://www.cisco.com/ 
web/strategy/docs/education/tech_in_schools_what_research_says.pdf 

Lowther, D., Inan R, Strahl J., & Ross S. (2008). Does technology integration "work" when 
key barriers are removed? Educational Media International, 45(3), 195-313. 

Mallya, A., Mensah, F. M., Contento, I. R., Koch, P. A., & Barton, A. C. (2012). Extending sci- 
ence beyond the classroom door: Learning from students' experiences with the Choice, 
Control and Change (C3) curriculum. Journal of Research in Science Teaching. 

Mclntire, T. (2002). The administrator's guide to data-driven decision making. 

Technology & Learning, 22(11), 18-28, 32-33. 

Muir, M., Manchester, B., & Moulton, J. (2005, Summer). Special topic: Learning with lap- 
tops. Educational Leadership, 62. Retrieved from http://www.ascd.org/publications/ 
educational_leadership/summer05/vol62/num09/Special_Topic@_Learning_with_ 
Laptops.aspx 

NASA. (n.d.). Connect and collaborate with NASA. Retrieved from http://www.nasa.gov/ 
connect/apps.html 

Niemiec, R., Samson, G., Weinstein, T., & Walberg, H. J. (1987). The effects of computer 
based instruction in elementary schools: A quantitative synthesis. Journal of Research 
on Computing in Education, 20(2), 85-103. 

Noer, M. (2012, November 19). One man, one computer, 10 million students: How Khan 
Academy is reinventing education. Forbes. Retrieved from http://www.forbes.com/ 
sites/michaelnoer/2012/ll/02/one-man-one-computer-10-million-students-how- 
khan-academy-is-reinventing-education/ 

Penuel, W. R. (2006). Implementation and effects of one-to-one computing initiatives: 

A research synthesis. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 38, 329-348. 
Retrieved from http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ728908.pdf 

Penuel, W. R., Boscardin, C. K., Masyn, K., & Crawford, V. M. (2007). Teaching with stu- 
dent response systems in primary and secondary education settings: A survey study. 
Educational Technology Research & Development, 55, 315-346. 

Poole, D. (2012). The impact of anonymous and assigned use of student response 
systems on student achievement. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 23(2], 
101 - 112 . 

Project RED. (2011). The technology factor: Nine keys to student achievement and 
cost-effectiveness. Retrieved from http://www.pearsonfoundation.org/downloads/ 
ProjectRED_TheTechnolgyFactor.pdf 

Reiser, R. A. (2012). What field did you say you were in? Defining and naming our field. 

In R. A. Reiser & J. V. Dempsey (Eds.), Trends and issues in instructional design and tech- 
nology (3rd ed.; pp. 2-9). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education. 

Rosenshine, B. V., & Berliner, D. C. (1978). Academic engaged time. British Journal of 
Teacher Education, 4(1), 3-16. 

Robyler, M. D., & Edwards, J. (2000). Integrating educational technology into teaching and 
learning (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 


154 


Leveraging Technology 


Shuler, C. (2012], iLearn II: Addendum, an analysis of the games category of the iTunes 
App Store. New York, NY: The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop. 

Shute, V. (2008], Focus on formative feedback. Review of Educational Research, 78(1], 
153-189. 

Smith, P., & Ragan, T. [1999], Instructional design (2nd ed.]. New York, NY: John Wiley & 
Sons. 

Specht, M. [2013). Adaptive learning environment. Retrieved from http://dspace. 
ou.nl/bitstream/1820/4796/l/Adaptive%201earning%20environment%20-%20 
Telearn%20Thesaurus.pdf 

Spector, J. M. (2010], An overview of progress and problems in educational technology. 
Interactive Educational Multimedia, 3, 27-37 

Staker, H. C. (2011], The rise ofK-12 blended learning: Profiles of emerging models. San 
Mateo, CA: Innosight Institute. Retrieved from http://www.innosightinstitute.org/ 
innosight/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/The-Rise-of-K-12-Blended-Learning.pdf 

Staker, H. C., & Horn, M. B. (2012], Classifying K-12 blended learning. San Mateo, CA: 
Innosight Institute. Retrieved from http://www.innosightinstitute.org/innosight/wp- 
content/uploads/2012/05/Classifying-K-12-blended-learning2.pdf 

Staples, A., Pugach, M. C., & Himes, D. (2005], Rethinking the technology integration chal- 
lenge: Cases from three urban elementary schools. Journal of Research on Technology 
in Education, 37(3], 285-311. 

Thropp, S. E., Friedman, M., & Elliott, M. (2011, January], Personal Learning Environment 
(PLE): A learner and data centric approach. In The Interservice/Industry Training, 
Simulation & Education Conference (I/ITSEC; Vol. 2011, No. 1], Arlington, VA: National 
Training Systems Association. 

Tiemann, P. W., & Markle, S. M. (1990 ). Analyzing instructional content: A guide to instruc- 
tion and evaluation. Seattle, WA: Morningside Press. 

Twyman, J. S. (2011], Emerging technologies and behavioural cusps: A new era for 
behaviour analysis? European Journal of Behavior Analysis, 12(2], 461-482. 

Twyman, J. S., Layng, T. V. J., Stikeleather, G., & Hobbins, K. A. (2004], A non-linear 
approach to curriculum design: The role of behavior analysis in building an effective 
reading program. In W. L. Heward et al. (Eds.], Focus on behavior analysis in education 
(pp. 55-68], Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill/ Prentice-Hall. 

Twyman, J. S., & Sota, M. S. (in press]. Educational technology and Rtl: Affordances 
and considerations. In S. K. Jimerson, M. K. Burns, & A. M. VanDerHeyden (Eds.], The 
handbook of response to intervention: The science and practice of multi-tiered systems of 
support (2nd ed.]. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Science. 

U.S. Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation, and Policy Development. 
(2009], Evaluation of evidence-based practices in online learning: A meta-analysis and 
review of online learning studies. Washington, DC: Author. 

U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology. (2010], Transforming 
American education: Learning powered by technology. Washington, DC: Author. 


155 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology. (2012], Enhancing 
teaching and learning through educational data mining and learning analytics: An issue 
brief. Washington, DC: Author. 

Vogel, J. J., Vogel, D. S., Cannon-Bowers, J., Bowers, C. A., Muse, K., & Wright, M. (2006], 
Computer gaming and interactive simulations for learning: A meta-analysis. Journal of 
Educational Computing Research, 34, 229-243. 

Warschauer, M. (2006], Going one-to-one: The experiences of cutting-edge schools sug- 
gest the whys, the why nots, and the hows of laptop learning programs. Learning in the 
Digital Age, 63(4], 34-38. Retrieved from http://pdonline.ascd.org/pd_online/tis_tb/ 
el200512_warschauer.html 

Wayman, J. C. (2005], Involving teachers in data-driven decision-making: Using com- 
puter data systems to support teacher inquiry and reflection. Journal of Education for 
Students Placed At Risk, 10, 295-308. 

West, D. [2011], Using technology to personalize learning and assess students in real-time. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 

Weston, M. E., & Bain, A. [2010], The end of techno-critique: The naked truth about 
1:1 laptop initiatives and educational chang e. Journal of Technology, Learning, and 
Assessment, 9(6], Retrieved from http://escholarship.bc.edU/jtla/vol9/6/ 

Wireless Generation. [2009], Science to solution: Research support for the Burst®: Reading 
Approach to reading intervention. Retrieved from http://www.wirelessgeneration. 
com/pdf/white-papers/BR_White_Paper_0510.pdf 

Wolf, M. A. (2012], Culture shift: Teaching in a learner-centered environment powered 
by digital learning. Digital Learning Series. Washington, DC: Alliance for Excellent 
Education. 

World Wildlife Fund. (n.d.). The world’s most amazing animals in one app. Retrieved from 
http://worldwildlife.org/pages/the-world-s-most-amazing-animals-in-one-app 

Zorfass, J. [2001], Sustaining a curriculum innovation: Cases of make it happen! In J. 
Woodward & L. Cuban [Eds.], Technology, curriculum, and professional development: 
Adapting schools to meet the needs of students with disabilities (pp. 87-114], Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. 


156 


Evaluating the State Turnaround Strategy 

Daniel Aladjem 

Evaluation resources, especially for evaluating school reform, improvement, 
and turnaround, abound and are readily available on the internet. Resources 
range from general, introductory, evaluation texts (e.g., Wholey, Hatry, & 
Newcomer, 2010) to resources focused directly on helping states evaluate their 
turnaround efforts (Herman, Aladjem, & Walters, 2011). Both types of resources 
can play important roles in improving the implementation as well as outcomes of 
turnaround efforts. Wholey, Hatry, and Newcomer provide a concise introduction 
to all aspects of evaluation. As such, it is an invaluable resource for every evalu- 
ation effort. Herman, Aladjem, and Walters, on the other hand, provide specific 
examples of how a state might think about evaluation of federally funded School 
Improvement Grants (SIG). This chapter takes a different approach. Aside from 
avoiding replicating prior work, this chapter seeks to address a different aspect 
of evaluation. Rather than explore how to evaluate SIG efforts per se, this chapter 
will provide examples of how states evaluate their own work to implement SIG. 
The object of evaluation for this chapter is not the schools, teachers, or students 
who ultimately benefit from SIG, but the work of states themselves. The central 
questions motivating this chapter are: "How can states be reflective about their 
own practice?" and "What lessons can states learn from other states?" 

This chapter consists of three main sections. The first section will review 
briefly the literature on evaluating SIG and provide a simple conceptual frame- 
work for this chapter. Next, the heart of the chapter will provide examples from 
several states of how they have thought about their own work supporting SIG 
implementation and outcomes and present lessons learned from these efforts. 
This section is organized topically, rather than by state, as what individual 
states learned is less important than the patterns of their lessons that might be 


157 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


generalized to benefit all states. Finally, a brief summary precedes a few pointed 
action principals for states. 

Literature Review 

The literature on evaluating school turnaround focuses primarily on the 
implementation and outcomes of turnaround interventions in schools. Within 
the literature on school turnaround (for the purposes of this chapter we ignore 
the broader literature on school reform and improvement that clearly has impli- 
cations for any school turnaround effort), there are two categories of scholarship 
that bear directly on the question of evaluating state turnaround efforts. First is 
the broad analytic work on turnaround. Second are the few empirical studies to 
date of state turnaround efforts. In lieu of evaluation guidance, the federal gov- 
ernment has enumerated a set of indicators of school performance and required 
states to submit data reflecting these indicators. While important metrics, these 
federally required data do not — and do not purport to — shed much light on the 
contribution of state activities to the accomplishment of desired turnaround 
outcomes. 

The broad literature on school turnaround goes further than the federally 
required turnaround indicators by providing more context and nuance on the 
selection, application, and interpretation of indicator and evaluation strategies. 
Two reviews on evaluating turnaround are particularly useful. First is Kowal and 
Ableindinger’s (2011) look at leading indicators of school turnaround. Kowal 
and Ableindinger approached the problem of identifying leading indicators by 
examining the process used outside education, including venture capital, fran- 
chising, and industrial research and development. From the experience of these 
other fields, they identified "key principles and processes to guide the design 
and use of leading indicators in education"(p. 1): identify a set of starting leading 
indicators, "zealously" monitor, and act on the data. To select leading indicators, 
Kowal and Ableindinger recommended selecting indicators that are "based on 
known success factors," "constantly evolving” to better predict success, "tailored 
to specific circumstances," and "based on specific timetables" (p. 2). School and 
districts in turn should monitor progress frequently and on an ongoing basis. 
Program monitors need to be hands-on in monitoring activities, and monitors 
need to tailor monitoring based on the information they collect. With data from 
leading indicators in hand, Kowal and Ableindinger recommended actions rang- 
ing from state and/or district intervention that may take varied forms from 
targeted assistance to major changes, such as withdrawing financial support to 
providing increased autonomy for successful progress. They applied these prin- 
ciples and provided an initial set of leading indicators. 

Kutash et al. (2010) provided an overview of school turnaround more 
broadly, examining not only indicators and metrics of success but also funding, 
prevalent models of turnaround, and key actors. The objective was to provide 


158 


Evaluating the State Turnaround Strategy 


a primer on turnaround in order to promote the success of turnaround efforts. 
They based the report on interviews with turnaround experts and published 
reports and articles. Looking only at the treatment of measuring success, Kutash 
et al. defined school and system success. They defined school success as deter- 
mining what to measure, identifying how to measure it, setting benchmarks, and 
establishing a timeline. They defined systems success as setting turnaround-spe- 
cific goals, tracking performance of all schools, evaluating districts’ support for 
turnaround, and finding and sharing best practices. 

While neither Kowal and Ableindinger (2011) nor Kutash et al. (2010) 
directly address the thrust of this chapter, they present worthy starting points for 
looking at turnaround evaluation issues generally. Two empirical studies directly 
inform the central issue of this chapter. First is a look at Washington’s early expe- 
rience implementing its SIG award. The second study, which is ongoing, examines 
Michigan’s SIG experience. 

Washington’s early experience stands as a cautionary tale of potential imple- 
mentation pitfalls. Yatsko, Lake, Nelson, and Bowen (2012) described imple- 
mentation of the SIG awards as being very much like prior school reform efforts, 
with few, if any, of the bold or transformative changes one might have expected 
to see in SIG schools. They attributed this disappointing observation primarily 
to rushed and tentative implementation at the district level, driven by "politics, 
fear of controversy, lack of knowledge, and the constraints of collective bargain- 
ing" (p. 6). They observed, moreover, districts too focused on compliance and 
generally lacking the capacity to undertake the ambitious agenda of turnaround. 
Schools were found lacking focus on turnaround strategies and mired, instead, 
in "'kitchen sink’ improvement strategies" (p. 17). They observed the SEA as a 
compliance monitor rather than a problem-solving turnaround partner support- 
ing districts. 

Contrast Washington’s experience with Michigan’s. Bojorquez, Rice, Hipps, 
and Li (2012) examined the first year of Michigan’s SIG awards. In contrast to 
Washington, Bojorquez et al. documented changes to governance and leader- 
ship in SIG schools, although district level changes to governance and leadership 
were more limited. They reported changes to human capital management and 
monitoring consistent with their expectations for the first year of SIG awards. 
Additionally, they noted changes in teacher expectations about reform in the 
guise of turnaround; turnaround was not to be "business as usual." One mani- 
festation of this was reportedly higher levels of collaboration among school 
stakeholders. 

Taken together, this literature suggests a simple framework for this chapter. 
Figure 1 shows the path by which state evaluation efforts can improve turn- 
around implementation and outcomes. States specify certain turnaround/SIG 
activities that they implement directly and through third parties. These imple- 
mentation activities lead to outcomes. State-sponsored evaluations collect data 


159 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


from the implementation activities and outcomes (the arrows pointing to the 
state evaluation box). Evaluation, in turn, informs state decision makers and can 
result in revised turnaround/SIG activities and ultimately better outcomes. 

Figure 1: Conceptual Framework 


State 


Turnaround/SIG 

Activities 


Implementation 


Outcomes 





State 


Evaluation 


States will vary in their approaches to turning around low performing 
schools, even when doing so with resources from the federal SIG program. 
Approaches to evaluating school-level turnaround are many (see, e.g., Herman, 
Aladjem, & Walters, 2011). The literature on school improvement, both more 
traditional whole school approaches (Aladjem et al., 2006) as well as early work 
on school turnaround (Aladjem et al., 2010), suggest the importance of external 
support, particularly from states and districts. What states do to support reform, 
particularly ambitious reforms like turnaround, matters. Evaluation of school 
level activities, challenges, and successes is incomplete without also looking at 
how states support turnaround. 

Lessons Learned 

While the research literature offers much about evaluation of turnaround and 
a bit about the experiences of some states, preliminary stories from additional 
states offer lessons for state leaders thinking about the implications of their own 
activities. Four broad lessons are emerging from the states: 

• Data are key, but turning data into information requires thought and care. 

• Strong, professional relationships between and among key actors at all 
levels (school, district, state) that are focused on turnaround can greatly 
facilitate progress. 

• Turnaround involves many aspects of the system, thereby making align- 
ment and coherence within states even more essential. 

• Timing is everything. 

This section describes each of these lessons learned. 

Data Do Not Necessarily Provide Information for Action 

Federal data requirements focus less on end outcomes than putative leading 
indicators. The federal government requires states to submit data informing nine 
leading indicators of turnaround performance. These metrics count activities/ 
events at the school level and district level. None speaks to the role of any key 


160 


Evaluating the State Turnaround Strategy 


actor in achieving improved school performance. Information about the role of 
state or other technical assistance to turn around low-performing schools is not 
one with a broad base of support. A further challenge to states hoping to track 
and use data from these indicators is that some states have faced difficulty col- 
lecting quality data. There are multiple sources of data quality issues. Among 
the sources of data quality issues are varying/inconsistent definitions of some 
of the metrics within and across districts and states, existing data reporting 
systems were not designed for some of the indicators (e.g., the distribution of 
teachers by performance level), and the fact that most schools are not subject to 
these reporting requirements, so schools and districts lack the incentive to build 
the capacity to provide high-quality data. Consequently, many states have found 
themselves awash in data but lacking information upon which to act based on 
those data. 

Michigan, for example, has managed to collect substantial data on student 
achievement and school progress, but it has not always been clear how to use 
the data, especially to reflect on state activities. Even using the data at the school 
level has demonstrated the need to have someone translate the data into mean- 
ingful information for teachers and schools. 

In Massachusetts, the wealth of data on school turnaround has highlighted 
the importance of knowing when to listen to the data and knowing when it might 
be misleading. Leaders in Massachusetts have seen multiple case studies of 
schools that appeared to make quick, dramatic gains, only to regress. The most 
interesting data to policymakers tend to be lagging indicators — student achieve- 
ment — not the leading indicators that practice or school conditions may have 
changed. 

Virginia’s experience similarly highlighted the importance of caution in 
interpreting many indicators. Virginia has found many leading indicators dif- 
ficult to interpret and use because the research underlying them is questionable 
or missing. For example, Virginia officials have expressed concern over how to 
interpret teacher attendance rates: is 80% attendance high or low? Who is in the 
classroom when the teacher of record is absent? Instead, Virginia places greater 
emphasis on lagging indicators, especially reading at grade level. By simplifying 
the data used, Virginia can streamline data collection, improving not only their 
own decision making, but reducing unnecessary burdens on all. 

While collecting and using data presents certain challenges, building robust 
relationships between districts and states seems critical to successful evaluation 
of state SIG grantmaking. 

States Can Move Beyond Compliance Monitoring to Sharing Responsibility 
for Turnaround 

States have addressed data issues in part by changing the nature of their 
relationships with districts. These transformed relationships can be powerful 


161 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


ways to improve state practice. Traditionally, states would focus on monitoring 
district compliance with grant regulations. Monitoring visits and reports can be 
important tools and need to be part of a state’s turnaround plan. Massachusetts, 
for example, has found it helpful to conduct structured monitoring site visits 
early in the school year and use the findings to support the renewal application 
process. By using monitoring in this way, schools in Massachusetts have been 
able to reflect on the monitoring findings and tell the state how they plan to 
address issues and build on successes identified through monitoring. In this way, 
Massachusetts has used compliance monitoring as more than a simple checklist 
with little effect on practice. 

As Massachusetts has, other states have found that by moving from purely 
compliance monitor to the role of technical assistance provider or broker, they 
can better support district and school turnaround. Addressing turnaround as a 
problem for both the state and districts to solve jointly can build self-reliance at 
the district level and model for districts how they in turn can work with schools 
to drive turnaround. Mississippi ensures that districts have staff dedicated to 
each turnaround school to support and sustain turnaround. This is partly how 
Mississippi has forged relationships early on — by being candid with schools that 
are receiving turnaround funding because the schools are not where they need to 
be. The state makes clear that turnaround is something that can only be accom- 
plished by schools, districts, and the state working together. Mississippi has been 
successful in building the trust required through honest dialog and following 
through on assurances made to districts and schools. 

By building trust and shared ownership, states benefit from more open 
feedback on their own performance and are better able to improve the services 
they provide to districts. Massachusetts, for example, actively seeks feedback 
from districts about what schools need from the state and has committed itself to 
listening carefully to the feedback. Mississippi, moreover, has been candid with 
districts about the stakes involved in turnaround and has used public reporting 
of data to improve the transparency and trust of the system. Mississippi did so 
in part by establishing a separate office dedicated to turnaround, making turn- 
around a clear priority. 

Turnaround Involves Many Aspects of the System, Thereby Making 
Alignment and Coherence Even More Essential 

Trust and shared ownership have paid dividends for states moving from com- 
pliance to partnership. Partnerships between states and districts serve a pur- 
pose: school turnaround. Trust and ownership play vital roles but do not obviate 
the need for and importance of accountability. States have not partnered with 
districts for the sake of partnering. Rather, states have partnered with districts as 
a means to the end of successful turnaround and improved feedback to states on 
their own performance. The lessons from states that have successfully balanced 


162 


Evaluating the State Turnaround Strategy 


trust and shared ownership on the one hand with accountability on the other can 
be distilled into the importance of establishing alignment and coherence within 
a state. Aligned expectations and coherent practices and objectives have allowed 
states to establish trust and shared ownership while creating a statewide culture 
of reciprocal accountability: schools and districts are accountable for turning 
around underperforming schools, and districts and the state are accountable for 
resources and support for schools and districts. 

As noted, Massachusetts actively seeks feedback from districts about its own 
performance. Massachusetts does not shy away from pushing back if schools 
are not equally forthcoming about the challenges they face and their plans for 
meeting the challenges. Massachusetts insists that districts also need to reflect 
on their support for grantee schools around what works, how they differentiate 
support for low-performing schools, and how they plan to sustain the work once 
federal SIG grants end. 

In North Carolina, the state has worked diligently to bring districts and 
schools into alignment. The importance of this became most evident as districts 
that had strong ties to all stakeholder groups made greater progress than dis- 
tricts that lacked full stakeholder buy in. Working with the latter group of dis- 
tricts became a priority for North Carolina. Similarly, just as some districts had 
great district level support, some schools in North Carolina demonstrated strong 
principal leadership which necessitated everything go through the principal. In 
other districts, schools were supportive, but districts were not. Getting districts 
and schools aligned and behind turnaround became a critical priority. 

Data can be a key tool in aligning the major actors. North Carolina uses an 
online planning tool (Indistar®) that provides schools and districts with indi- 
cator data that school level teams as well as the district can use to ascertain 
where each school is on the federal indicators as well as their own indicators. 
Assessing these indicators (which are easily accessed online) has been required 
for each school level team, including district representatives). Many of the indica- 
tors target district, school improvement team, or principal actions. What North 
Carolina has found to be so effective about this is that rather than each stake- 
holder looking at the data independently (or worse, discussing plans without any 
data), schools and districts have to look at the data together. Instead of working 
in isolation, districts and schools can move beyond the basic question of who 
is responsible to the more important question of what to do. Indicators like, 

"The principal is a change leader" yields conversations and planning that move 
beyond simplistic notions of accountability towards the heart of real accountabil- 
ity. Best of all, from the state’s perspective, the work of turnaround is guided in 
the direction the state wants without the state having to mandate certain activi- 
ties in a heavy-handed or arbitrary way. 


163 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Timing Is Everything 

State approaches to evaluation and understanding of their progress have 
changed over time. Massachusetts began its SIG turnaround effort uncertain how 
exactly to approach evaluation. The uncertainty came from the realization that 
first year data on student achievement would likely not yield much meaningful 
information. The question quickly became what could they know about both the 
progress of school turnaround efforts as well as how to check themselves. What 
kind of hard data to use was central to the dilemma Massachusetts faced. 

Both Massachusetts and Mississippi resolved the dilemma by viewing both 
turnaround and its evaluation as a continuous process, not a single, point in time 
event. Mississippi knew that schools, districts, and state staff were accustomed 
to "someone looking over [their] shoulders." Mississippi took the attitude of not 
wanting to wait for perfect end outcome data but sought data to drive forma- 
tive evaluation and adopted a willingness to reflect deeply on their progress and 
listen to outside expertise, even when outside experts delivered uncomfortable 
news. Mississippi found external formative evaluation particularly helpful in 
the process. Not only did outside expertise provide SEA personnel with much 
needed insight, it also modeled for districts how they needed to be open to 
external feedback. Mississippi accomplished this through a series of "roundtable" 
meetings between state officials and district staff, focused on data and conversa- 
tions about the extent to which the state was meeting the needs of districts and 
what those district needs were. 

Mississippi also credits the U.S. Department of Education with linking states’ 
turnaround initiatives to resources for improvement. Mississippi replicated the 
state-to-state turnaround network with its own district-to-district network. 

The key for Mississippi, however, was the widespread, shared sense of urgency 
for turnaround. The size of the SIG grants alone made clear that results were 
expected, while understanding that change takes time. 

One official in North Carolina summed up the importance of timing well by 
observing that year one was about cultural shifts, year two was about imple- 
mentation of turnaround strategies and ensuring the fidelity of turnaround, and 
year three was about student achievement. Evaluation activities need to remain 
attuned to that cycle. 

Summary 

With so much invested in school turnaround and so much at stake in terms of 
students’ futures, states can ill afford not to take every opportunity to ensure the 
success of their turnaround efforts. An important tool for doing so is the use of 
evaluation — evaluation that looks not just at how schools and districts are imple- 
menting turnaround and the outcomes those efforts are yielding, but evaluation 
that looks critically and reflectively at what states themselves are contributing to 
the process. This analysis leads to a discussion of how states can improve their 


164 


Evaluating the State Turnaround Strategy 


own support and assistance to districts and schools. In this chapter we have 
seen that the literature by and large ignores this important perspective, focusing 
instead on equally important issues of measuring implementation and outcomes. 
From a review of the turnaround activities of a small set of states, this chapter 
identified four lessons learned for states from turnaround evaluations: 

• Data are key, but turning data into information requires thought and care. 

• Strong, professional relationships between and among key actors at all 
levels (school, district, state) that are focused on turnaround can greatly 
facilitate progress. 

• Turnaround involves many aspects of the system, thereby making align- 
ment and coherence within states even more essential. 

• Timing is everything. 

Next we offer action principles for SEAs. 

Action Principles 

The Goldilocks Data Principle 

• Evaluations are about data, analysis, and use of the findings. Most SEA staff 
have seen evaluations that collected the wrong data (too few data) and 
evaluations that collected too much data. 

• The challenge is to collect the right amount and right quality data. An 
important tool for identifying the right data and ensuring collection of high 
quality data is to engage districts in structured conversations about data. If 
schools and districts are using the data and thereby demand the data, they 
are likely to provide SEAs with quality data on time. If schools and districts 
see data requests as just another compliance activity, SEAs (and the federal 
government) are not likely to get quality data and are not likely to get them 
in a timely fashion. 

Twenty-first Century Accountability Principle 

• As the states described here can testify, accountability need not be punitive. 
SEAs can establish (and some have done so) systems in which SEAs and dis- 
tricts share responsibility for turning around low performing schools. 

• The Goldilocks Data Principle can be a useful way to begin to reshape the 
relationship between SEA and district such that each sees the other as play- 
ing an important role in turnaround. 

• SEAs can model for districts how districts need to work with schools by 
working with districts in the same way they would have districts work 
with schools: acting professionally, focusing on data, taking ownership for 
outcomes, reflecting on practice, and committing to revised plans based on 
data and analysis. 


165 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


References 

Aladjem, D. K., Birman, B., Harr Robins, J., Orland, M., Heredia, A., Parrish, T. B., & Ruffini, 
S. [2010). Achieving dramatic school improvement: An exploratory study. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Education. 

Aladjem, D. K., LeFloch, K. C., Herman, R., Zhang, Y., Taylor, J. E., Kurki, A., ...Carter, K. R. 
(2006). Models matter — The final report of the National Longitudinal Evaluation of 
Comprehensive School Reform. Washington, DC: American Institutes for Research. 

Bojorquez, J. C., Rice, J., Hipps, J., & Li, J. (2012). Evaluation of Michigan’s 1003(g) School 
Improvement Grants: Implementation trends in the first year. San Francisco, CA: 

WestEd. 

Herman, R., Aladjem, D. K., & Walters, K. (2011). Evaluating strategies to turn around 
low-performing schools. In I. Perez-Johnson, K. Walters, & M. Puma (Eds.), Evaluating 
ARRA programs and other educational reforms: A guide for states [pp. 39-49). 

Retrieved from http://www.mathematica-mpr.com/publications/PDFs/education/ 
ARRA_eval_guide.pdf 

Kowal, J., & Ableidinger, J. (2011). Leading indicators of school turnarounds: How to know 
when dramatic change is on track. Charlottesville: University of Virginia's Darden/ 
Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education. Retrieved from http://www.darden.vir- 
ginia.edu/web/uploadedFiles/Darden/Darden_Curry_PLE/UVA_School_Turnaround/ 
Leading_Indicators_of_School_Turnarounds.pdf 

Kutash, J., Nico, E., Gorin, E., Rahmatullah, S., & Tallant, K. (2010). The school turnaround 
field guide. San Francisco, CA: FSG Social Impact Advisors. 

Wholey, J. S., Hatry, H. P., & Newcomer, K. E. (Eds.) (2010). Handbook of practical program 
evaluation. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons 

Yatsko, S., Lake, R., Nelson, E. C., & Bowen, M. (2012). Tinkering toward transformation: 
a look at federal School Improvement Grant implementation. Seattle, WA: Center on 
Reinventing Public Education, University of Washington. 


166 


Section D 

Provide Technical 
Assistance to LEAs and 
Schools 



Engaging State Intermediate Agencies to Support 
School Turnaround 

Eileen Reed and Sally Partridge 

The impact of increased accountability in public education is not limited 
to classroom teachers, principals, and district staff. The responsibility of state 
education agencies (SEAs) to directly support school turnaround has expanded 
under No Child Left Behind (NCLB), while at the same time, budget cuts and 
consequent staff reductions have decreased the resources available for SEAs to 
engage in direct technical assistance to districts and schools. In light of these 
contextual realities, SEAs must acknowledge the increased demands on their 
internal capacity and explore possible collaboration with external entities to 
build local capacity to support school turnaround. 

A valuable partner for the SEAs consideration is the educational service 
agency (ESA). 1 Also referred to as intermediate agencies, ESAs can provide a 
critical bridge between SEAs and local education agencies (LEAs). According to 
the Association of Educational Service Agencies (AESA), ESAs exist in 45 of 50 
states and play an important role in direct services and technical assistance to 
districts and schools. 

These organizations provide SEAs and the LEAs they serve with additional 
capacity, amplified expertise, increased efficiency, expanded geographical 
impact, and expanded collaboration in the education community. Examples of 
services include LEA cooperatives for high cost programs, such as special educa- 
tion and career and technology education, and purchasing cooperatives for items 
such as food services, utilities, and instructional supplies. Many ESAs provide 

Education service agencies typically have state specific names, such as Texas regional education service 
centers, New York Board of Cooperative Education Services (BOCES), Pennsylvania intermediate units, and 
Illinois regional offices of education. For additional information on ESAs, visit the Association of Education 
Service Agencies website at http://www.aesa.us 


169 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


professional development services to LEAs and, in some cases, manage central 
office functions, such as payroll and state reporting functions. 

For an SEA charged with fulfilling a variety of roles, the ESA serves as a con- 
duit from the SEA to the LEA. State level initiatives can be quickly deployed to the 
LEAs through the ESAs. For example, implementation of a statewide initiative, 
such as a new approach to teaching reading, can be deployed through profes- 
sional development provided by the ESAs to the LEAs. 

While the scope of work, funding, available resources, and relationship 
between the SEA and the ESA varies from state to state, and sometimes even 
within a state, the opportunity exists for a more productive collaboration than 
is the current norm. In particular, we encourage SEAs to tap into the talent and 
resources of the system of ESAs to better meet the needs of low-performing 
schools. 

Our recommendation is based largely on our experience in Texas where we 
both served in senior leadership roles at the Region 13 Education Service Center 
in Austin, Texas. Region 13 is one of 20 ESAs in Texas, and a very strong partner- 
ship exists between the Texas system of ESAs and the Texas Education Agency 
(TEA). The strength of the partnership between the Region 13 ESA and the TEA 
will be illustrated later in the chapter within the context of a school turnaround 
leadership development initiative. 

This chapter focuses on the role of ESAs to influence the interpretation and 
implementation of policies and practices to turn around low-performing schools 
and districts. We first present a brief review of the literature regarding the role 
and potential of ESAs and then describe a successful partnership between an 
SEA, an ESA, local school districts, and an external provider as an example of 
what is possible when the SEA and an ESA engage in creative collaboration to 
address the needs of a state’s lowest performing schools. We conclude the chap- 
ter with a set of recommended action principles we propose will help SEAs effec- 
tively leverage ESAs to support their district and school turnaround priorities. 

Education Service Agencies 

As the traditional capacity of SEAs is hit with increased demands from 
national federal requirements and state legislative statutes, including developing 
revised systems of standards and assessment and monitoring district, campus, 
and teacher performance, the necessity to rely on a network of expertise and 
knowledge is paramount. ESAs are one resource that can assist SEAs in provid- 
ing guidance and support to districts and campuses facing academic challenges. 
Based on her research on ESAs, University of Washington Professor Meredith 
Honig (2004) explains, "school district central office administrators, school 
principals, and other education leaders face contemporary policy demands that 
exceed their traditional capacity for action and, increasingly, they call on 'inter- 
mediary organizations’ to help with implementation"(p. 65). This relationship is 


170 


Engaging State Intermediate Agencies 


evident where SEAs often work with organizations that provide interpretation 
of policy and applicable resources and support for educational practitioners 
charged with implementing such policy. 

Honig documented that ESAs provide "new resources — knowledge, political/ 
social ties, and an administrative infrastructure — necessary for implementation 
but traditionally unavailable from school district central offices or school- 
community partnerships and that they faced different constraining and enabling 
conditions in carrying out these functions" (2004, p. 66). 

At one end of the continuum, ESAs may provide limited services to promote 
the financial efficiency of the member school districts, such as the creation and 
management of purchasing consortiums. At the other end of the continuum, 
agencies like the Board of Cooperative Education Services (BOCES) in New York 
state provide direct services to students. ESAs can be an invaluable partner to 
the SEA, especially when focused on filling the gap between the SEA capacity 
and LEA needs. For example, Pennsylvania’s intermediate units serve the edu- 
cational needs of assigned geographic areas and function as a step of the orga- 
nization between the public school district and the Pennsylvania Department of 
Education by providing "cost-effective, instructional, and operational services to 
school districts, charter schools, and over 2,400 non-public and private schools” 
(Pennsylvania Association of Intermediate Units, n.d). 

Based on our experience, the most successful partnerships have occurred 
when there is a process of co-creation between the SEA and the ESA. For exam- 
ple, in the Texas leadership development initiative (illustrated later in this chap- 
ter), the SEA identified the area of need, secured the funding, and then worked 
side-by-side with ESA staff to design the specifics of the service provided to 
school districts. As a result of the collaborative development process, all mem- 
bers of the partnership were invested in the success of the initiative, and a rela- 
tionship of mutual respect and accountability was established. 

Leveraging an ESA to Extend SEA Capacity 

Partnerships with ESAs are essential to increase both the cost-effectiveness 
and the quality of the technical assistance provided to school districts. The geo- 
graphic distribution of ESAs allows SEAs to leverage resources across the state. 
The geographic proximity of ESAs to their local school districts cultivates a level 
of knowledge that fosters a heightened responsiveness to specific school district 
needs. 

When an SEA decides to partner with an ESA, it is essential there is clarity 
around the scope of work and that the SEA conducts a careful assessment of 
the ESA’s ability to deliver the requested services. Additionally, the SEA needs 
to assess the extent to which the requested service matches the existing mis- 
sion of the ESAs. For example, many states prohibit ESAs from engaging in LEA 
monitoring and evaluative activities. In this case, designing a scope of work for 


171 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


the ESA that requires evaluating and making recommendations for the continued 
employment of a principal in a low-performing school would be in direct conflict 
with the purpose and authority of the ESA. 

Once an SEA outlines a clear scope of work and conducts an assessment of 
the ESA’s ability to provide the service, the next step in the partnership is to 
develop accountability measures for both organizations. This is ideally accom- 
plished through the development of a performance contract that clearly articu- 
lates the expected services and metrics for performance, as well as communi- 
cation and reporting requirements. The establishment of a project budget is 
an integral part of the performance contract and should be part of the ongoing 
reporting requirements. 

The Texas Story 

Texas has a long established (i.e., since 1968) system of 20 regional education 
service centers (RESCs) that work closely with the SEA. The role and authority of 
the system of RESCs is defined in statute with their mission and priority clearly 
articulated in the Texas Education Code (TEC) §8.002: 

PURPOSE. Regional education service centers shall: 

1. assist school districts in improving student performance in each region of 
the system; 

2. enable school districts to operate more efficiently and economically; and 

3. implement initiatives assigned by the legislature or the commissioner 

(p. 1). 

The TEA, with limited technical assistance capability relative to the size of 
the geographic region for which it is responsible, relies on the system of RESCs 
as one of its key partners for disseminating and supporting statewide educa- 
tion initiatives. The collaborative relationship between the SEA and the system 
of RESCs is an essential and well-embedded component of the public education 
infrastructure in Texas. 

A unique feature of the collaboration between the Texas RESCs and the SEA 
is the designation of lead centers for "decentralized functions." For example, the 
Region 13 Education Service Center (RESC 13), located in Austin, Texas, serves 
as the state’s primary technical assistance provider for schools in improvement 
under NCLB. These services are provided through the Texas Center for District 
and School Support (TCDSS) housed within RESC 13. The TCDSS, while funded 
by the TEA, is physically located within and operates under the direction and 
supervision of RESC 13. A TEA created performance contract clearly outlines the 
roles and responsibilities of each entity as well as the major activities and deliv- 
erables. The staffs of the TEA and TCDSS meet regularly to review progress and 
address ongoing and anticipated needs. 


172 


Engaging State Intermediate Agencies 


Due to the number of statewide initiatives located at RESC 13, including 
improving the technical assistance capability of all 20 regional education service 
centers to better serve their region’s lowest performing schools, a division (i.e., 
Texas Initiatives) uniquely devoted to managing statewide projects for the TEA 
was established by the Executive Director of RESC 13. It is led by a senior level 
executive who reports directly to the Executive Director. 

The Texas Turnaround Leadership Academy 

An example of a statewide initiative, the Texas Turnaround Leadership 
Academy (TTLA), was the direct result of collaboration between an ESA and the 
SEA and illustrates the potential benefit to local school districts when the two 
organizations enter into purposeful collaboration. The following sections intro- 
duce the approach Texas took to leverage ESAs to extend the SEA’s capacity and 
describes how one of these regions served as the key force driving turnaround in 
the state. 

An advantage of designating lead centers for special projects is the synergy 
of funding, expertise, and resources that can be leveraged to address identified 
needs. The TTLA is an example of this synergy. As the number of projects and 
programs at RESC 13 focused on serving the lowest performing schools in the 
state grew, RESC 13 recognized the need for a leadership development program 
focused on building the capacity of principals of low-performing schools and 
their district central office teams to improve the academic performance of their 
chronically underperforming schools. 

In 2008, members of the leadership team of Texas Initiatives at RESC 13 
presented a proposal to representatives of the TEA. The proposal described the 
need to improve the leadership skills of principals and central office staffs and 
outlined a concept for a leadership development program. With encouragement 
from the TEA, RESC 13 leaders developed a preliminary budget, and agency staff 
worked to successfully secure funding to develop and implement a two-year 
leadership development program focused on turning around some of the state’s 
lowest performing schools. 

Following funding approval by TEA, a collaborative process of co-creation 
with RESC 13 program staff and the TEA developed a more detailed design for 
the turnaround leadership development program. As in all other projects man- 
aged by RESC 13 on behalf of the TEA, performance contracts outlined the scope 
of work, timeline for implementation, expected outcomes, evaluation criteria, 
program budget, and reporting requirements. With this foundation in place, 

RESC 13 staff went to work to gather district input and to finalize and implement 
the TTLA. 

Design of the Texas Turnaround Leadership Academy 

The TTLA was designed by a team at RESC 13 in partnership with the 
University of Virginia’s Darden School of Business and Curry School of 


173 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Education’s Partnership for Leaders in Education (PLE) turnaround special- 
ist program. The PLE program is a two-year executive education program that 
focuses on building district and school leader capacity to drive and sustain dra- 
matic change efforts in low-performing schools. RESC 13 personnel selected the 
PLE because of its track record of success as well as its unique focus on devel- 
oping district leadership teams in addition to the campus principal. 2 The PLE 
program emphasizes developing district and school level leadership capacity 
through the implementation of policies and practices that establish the neces- 
sary environment and support needed to effectively turn around low-performing 
schools. 

In consultation with the TEA, RESC 13 identified districts with multiple 
low-performing schools or schools that had been failing for multiple years. The 
key criteria were schools identified as 1) Title I School Improvement Program, 

2) SIG recipients, and 3) those identified under the state accountability system 
as "academically unacceptable." RESC 13 personnel made an effort to consider 
geographic and district size diversity and to consider district leadership to 
ensure that the district would support participation in a turnaround leadership 
program. Once these criteria were finalized by RESC 13, eligible districts were 
invited to participate in the program. In the first year, 5 districts and 29 schools 
participated in the TTLA. After the first year, recognizing that the program did 
not align with the district’s current school improvement strategy, one district 
exited the program, leaving 23 schools and 4 districts in the program. 

An additional goal of the TTLA was to establish aligned leadership and sys- 
tems of support at the state, regional, district, and campus level to better serve 
the participating schools. In designing the program, RESC 13 placed a special 
emphasis on reducing and streamlining reporting and other redundant require- 
ments, such as district and school site visits and mandatory technical assistance. 
To accomplish this, teams from RESCs with districts participating in the program, 
technical assistance providers working with the schools because of their federal 
or state accountability designation, as well as TEA representatives, attended the 
various activities of the two-year program in Virginia and Texas along with the 
participating district and campus leaders. 

The program consisted of summer training sessions at UVa and school team 
training sessions in Texas. The following graphic provides a snapshot of the pro- 
fessional development activities the participating districts engaged in over the 
two years of the program. 

In addition to the professional development sessions, program representa- 
tives from the UVa and the TTLA formally visited districts and schools at least 
twice a year. Throughout the program, RESC personnel provided targeted profes- 
sional development based on identified need. To provide focus to the school’s 

2 For a detailed analysis of the inaugural School Turnaround Specialist Program, see Duke et al. (2005) and 
Darden/Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education (2009). 


174 


Engaging State Intermediate Agencies 


Superinte nt 
orientation 
Spring2010 


District 

Readiness 

Meeting 

Summer 

2010 


Year 1 
Summer 
Session 

Summer 

2010 


January 

Support 

Team 

Training 


January 

2011 


Ar 


V 


Spring 

District 

Institute 

Spring2011 




Year 2 
Summer 
Session 

Summer 

2011 




Year 2 
Support 
Team 
Training 
January 
2012 


Year 2 
Spring 
District 
Institute 


Spring2012 


turnaround work and site visits, principals crafted 90-day action plans through- 
out the two years of the program. The 90-day plan breaks the turnaround work 
into clear, actionable steps. Additionally, the 90-day plans were helpful for moni- 
toring purposes and holding the principal and school teams accountable for 
progress. 

An important design feature of the PLE is the designation of an individual 
to serve in the role of district shepherd. TTLA asked each participating district 
superintendent to designate a senior level staff member as the district shepherd. 
The shepherd served as the liaison between the superintendent’s office and 
the campus principal to 1) ensure that district departments were responsive 
to campus turnaround efforts, 2) provide a direct line of communication to the 
superintendent, and 3) monitor the principal’s progress on 90-day plans. 

In addition to the district shepherd, TTLA assigned each participating district 
a case manger from the TTLA staff and an RESC liaison from the participating 
regions. Case managers maintained regular contact with the district shepherd 
and the PLE program staff. The RESC liaison assisted with access to professional 
development and technical assistance from the participating district’s RESC. 

Implementation Challenges 

Leveraging the RESC network in Texas proved to be an effective approach 
to leveraging state resources to support a high priority initiative: school turn- 
around. Yet, reflecting the extent to which school change efforts rely heavily on 
the individuals charged with the effort, the initiative in Texas revealed two key 
challenges: district buy-in and identifying the right district shepherd. States 
interested in utilizing their ESA network to support turnaround should keep 
these challenges in mind. 

District commitment to the TTLA project was essential to effective imple- 
mentation of the program. Although each district superintendent agreed to 
participate in the project and meet the expectations of the program design, the 
high expectations for active central office engagement in the turnaround efforts 


175 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


produced some consternation at the district level. For example, the district 
shepherd was expected to conduct meaningful weekly campus visits and hold the 
central office accountable for providing needed support at the campus level. For 
some districts, this represented a significant change in the relationship between 
the central office staff and campus principals. 

Effectively leveraging the role of the district shepherd was a significant 
hurdle of the TTLA process. For instance, a number of districts named a district 
shepherd without fully appreciating the expectations of the role. In response to 
this challenge, TTLA restructured the support and technical assistance originally 
planned by the ESA for the turnaround campus leader to increase the training for 
the district shepherd and central office staff around responsibilities and purpose 
of the shepherd role. 

Program Lessons to Date 

The districts involved in the TTLA completed the program in May 2012. The 
lessons that emerged for TEA, RESC 13, and the participating districts were 
meaningful and impactful. Texas introduced new assessments in the middle 
of the TTLA program thereby making it difficult to discern absolute or valid 
impact on student outcomes. Overall, some schools demonstrated strong gains 
while others, in particular those schools in which the program was not fully 
implemented for a variety of contextual reasons, did not. While academic out- 
comes after two years were not as strong as anticipated, we culled lessons that 
have shaped practice that we anticipate will have a positive impact on schools 
across the state. For instance, a direct outcome at the SEA level is the redesign of 
accountability and support systems to enhance the district’s ability to improve 
their own schools. The Texas Accountability Intervention System now clearly 
outlines commitments and provisions expected of districts regarding support for 
their low-performing schools, and there is a renewed emphasis on the vital role 
of districts in the improvement process. 

The participating RESC turnaround teams directly improved their services 
to districts based on new learning including redesigning their school support 
services to reflect a greater emphasis on engaging the district central office in 
the improvement process. Participating districts adopted many of the practices 
learned in the TTLA for all of their low-performing schools such as the enhanced 
use of data and district-wide adoption of 90-day plans to monitor implementa- 
tion of school improvement efforts. 

An area that exceeded expectations as a crucial component of the TTLA was 
the participation of potential campus and district leaders in the Behavior Event 
Interview based on the identification of competencies for turnaround leader- 
ship identified by Public Impact (2008). All districts responded positively to this 
component of the program and voiced a need for more support about ways to 
effectively develop pipelines of turnaround leaders at the local and state level 


176 


Engaging State Intermediate Agencies 


based on the identification of competencies unique to working in a turnaround 
environment. Improving district recruitment and hiring practices for principals 
serving in low-performing schools has a far-reaching impact and is an area of 
future work for the TEA. 

The TTLA is one example of how SEAs can leverage their ESAs to create 
initiatives to address SEA priorities. While the funding was for only one cohort 
of districts, the lessons learned have been far-reaching and continue to impact 
and inform the direction of the TEA and the RESCs as they work to meet their 
responsibilities in the area of school turnaround. The TEA is designing future 
statewide turnaround projects that build on the experiences from the TTLA and 
incorporate lessons learned from the Title I School Improvement Program and 
the federal SIG program. 

Action Principles 

Strengthen the role of ESAs to support the SEAs work 

• Build funding for ESAs into the SEA appropriations budget. 

• Define rigorous performance expectations and responsibilities of ESAs in 
statute in return for funding. 

Promote accountability 

• Create performance contracts that clearly state the scope of the turnaround 
work, the roles and responsibilities of each party, clear outcomes, and per- 
formance measures. 

• Establish regular and ongoing reporting requirements between SEA and 
ESA to maintain ongoing communication, ensure project milestones are 
met, and to make any necessary midcourse corrections. 

• Establish realistic performance measures that acknowledge the unique role 
and limits of the ESA. 

• Establish consequences for failure to meet expectations (e.g., award con- 
tract for services to a different entity). 

Select an ESA with the core competency for turnaround work 

• Contract with ESAs with proven experience and ability in turning around 
districts and campuses. States with multiple ESAs may partner with differ- 
ent ESAs for individual projects, dependent on each ESAs specific areas of 
expertise. Include sharing of resources and information to other ESAs as 
part of the project requirements. 

• Connect multiple ESAs, based on their strengths, into a web or network that 
works collaboratively to accomplish the work. For larger states, one ESA 
may facilitate the statewide approach to turnaround work while regional 
ESAs provide coordinated support to local districts and campuses. 


177 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Anticipate and prevent role confusion between the SEA and the ESA 

• Clearly define how roles and responsibilities within the entities will change 
as new partnerships are defined. For example, will school and district site 
visits historically performed by SEA staff transition to ESA staff? 

• Ensure the policy guidelines of the ESA support the function that the SEA is 
requesting the ESA to perform. 

References 

Christiansen, L. (2010, December], History: Association of Education Service Agencies. 

Retrieved from http://www.aesa.us/about/aesa-history.cfm 
Darden/Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education. [2009], The University of Virginia 
School Turnaround Specialist Program: 2008 annual report. Charlottesville, VA: 
University of Virginia. 

Duke, D. L., Tucker, P. D., Belcher, M., Crews, D., Harrison-Coleman, J., Higgins, L.,...West, 

J. [2005], Lift-off: Launching the school turnaround process in 1 0 Virginia schools. 
Retrieved from http://www.darden.virginia.edu/web/uploadedFiles/Darden/ 
Darden_Curry_PLE/UVA_School_Turnaround/LiftOff.pdf 
Honig, M. I. (2004, Spring], The new middle management: Intermediary organizations 
in education policy implementation. Educational and Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 
26(1], 65-87. 

Pennsylvania Association of Intermediate Units, (n.d.] What is an intermediate unit? 

Retrieved from www.https://paiu.org/ius.php 
Public Impact. (2008], School turnaround leaders: Competencies for success. For the 
Chicago Public Education Fund. Retrieved from http://www.publicimpact.com/publi- 
cations/Turnaround_Leader_Competencies.pdf 
Texas Education Code Chapter 8, Section 8.002. Regional Education Service Centers. 
Retrieved from http://www.statutes.legis.state.tx.us/Docs/ED/htm/ED.8.htm 


178 


Navigating the Market: How State Education Agencies 
Help Districts Develop Productive Relationships 
with External Providers 
Julie Corbett 

Despite being perceived as wholly public entities, schools, districts, and states 
have long utilized private companies to provide specific educational, capital, and 
operational services (e.g., construction, curriculum development, after-school 
programs, food services, entire school management; Hill, 1997). In particular, 
external partners have joined forces with school districts in the effort to turn 
around persistently low-achieving schools for decades. Generations of school 
improvement efforts have utilized external partners to provide a variety of 
supports, such as instructional strategies, social and emotional health services, 
and tutoring services. The engagement of external partners for the purpose of 
turning around schools underwent a radical shift in 2010 with the advent of 
the revised federal School Improvement Grant (SIG) program. The revamped 
SIG program encourages the use of external partners in a different and more 
comprehensive way to support the implementation of the restart, turnaround, 
and transformation improvement models (Corbett, 2011a; U.S. Department of 
Education, 2010). 

Lessons culled from contracting apply to external partners working in 
the turnaround environment, especially the use of performance contracts. 
Performance contracting ensures relationships between districts and their exter- 
nal partners are based on an explicit stipulation of desired outcomes and conse- 
quences for not meeting goals (e.g., cancellation of the contract). Several aspects 
of performance contracting are applicable to turnaround efforts and include: 
performance-based relationships; timelines for improvement; public reporting 
of results; consequences; and fiscal incentives (Center for Comprehensive School 


179 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Reform & Improvement, 2005). In effect, external partners are provided auton- 
omy and financial profit for responsibility to meet achievement goals. 

An important caveat underlying performance provisions is that these provi- 
sions are a first step, but consequences must be enforced to improve the quality 
of the market as a whole. With the additional scrutiny that accompanies federal 
grants to fund turnaround efforts, states and districts should begin to better 
enforce consequences for inaction or lack of improvement. 

The revamped federal SIG program emphasizes the use of external enti- 
ties that provide comprehensive services and are accountable for results, often 
referred to as a Lead Turnaround Partner (LTP). 1 LTPs are one of many types of 
external partners able to assist and/or facilitate turnaround. While a variety of 
external partners support school turnaround and many of the promising prac- 
tices described in this chapter apply to all types of partners, several of the exam- 
ples provided focus specifically on LTPs. The types of partners working at the 
school or district level have varying levels of responsibility and accountability 
and are described in the following graphic. 

Types of Turnaround Partners for Schools & Districts 


Full autonomy 

Essentially manages the school (much 
like a charter school) 

Provides comprehensive services, may 
subcontract out for a few specialized 
services 

Frequently includes national networks 
and expertise 

School is still under district-purview, 
butthe LTP has the ability to hire, 
place, and remove staff; adjust the 
schedule; and essentially alter the 
working conditions of the school 
environment. 

Contract usually exchanges autonomy 
for full accountability, which is 
supported by performance and 
process benchmarks and goals 


Partial autonomy 

Shared management of the school 

Strong collaboration with LEA and 
school principal 

Provides comprehensive services, may 
subcontract out for a few specialized 
services 

Contracts usually include performance 
and process benchmarks and goals 
The majority of LTPs fall into this 
category 


‘The concept of a Lead Turnaround Partner (LTP) was first coined in Mass Insight Education & Research 
Group's 2007 publication The Turnaround Challenge and is an external partner capable of managing a 
comprehensive school turnaround effort. While first explicitly mentioned in 2007, the LTP model resembles 
early contracts and partnerships between education management organizations (EMOs) and some school 
districts (e.g., Baltimore, Hartford, Philadelphia, Chester Upland; Rhim, 2005). 


c: 

Partner 


Specialized service area, (e.g., 
data analysis, special population 
supports, and literacy coaching) 

Limited autonomy, but contract 
could include performance 
benchmarks and goals 

Could be multiple per 
turnaround effort 

Hired by the school, the district, 
the SEA, or a Lead Turnaround 
Partner 



180 


Productive Relationships with External Partners 


In addition to external partners working directly with schools and dis- 
tricts, SEAs also use external partners to support their turnaround efforts. With 
changes in the federal program, SEAs adapted their own practices, processes, 
and supports to better manage and support school turnaround efforts (Corbett, 
2011a). Given limited financial and staff resources, SEAs leveraged their capac- 
ity by utilizing external partners to fill a number of specific turnaround-related 
roles. Such providers — companies, nonprofits, and individual consultants — 
assist SEAs with a variety of short- and long-term contracts, which could include: 

• Developing a Request for Proposals (RFP) to screen select LTPs; 

• Grading and selecting preapproved LTPs; 

• Scoring SIG applications from schools and districts; 

• Providing technical assistance and support directly to schools or districts; 

• Helping the SEA develop a Statewide System of Support (SSOS) for turn- 
around; or, 

• Strategic planning for building a turnaround office or division (Rhim, 

2011). 

These consultants function much like supporting partners that work directly 
with schools or districts and assist with targeted, well-defined projects. In addi- 
tion to the more traditional consulting role, some SEAs are providing external 
partners with significant responsibility and authority. A number of states have 
hired external partners to closely collaborate with the SEA to provide the state’s 
system of support for schools identified as in need of improvement. In theory, the 
external partner manages some of the roles and tasks the SEA or regional offices 
performed in the past. For instance, Illinois recently awarded a contract to an 
external provider to support schools across the state (see more details below). 

Defining the SEA Role 

External partners play many different roles in school turnaround, but SEAs 
use similar — albeit with varying levels of intensity — practices to recruit and 
manage the use of external partners. On the light-touch side of the intensity spec- 
trum, SEAs maintain a relatively hands-off approach and leave the selection of 
and contracting with providers to LEAs. With a moderate level of intensity, SEAs 
focus on recruiting and vetting partners, monitoring, and evaluating the imple- 
mented models. With increasing intensity, involvement, and oversight, a few 
SEAs also work to build the relationships among vendors, schools, and the state 
itself. While the intensity varies, the SEA’s role typically falls into two primary 
categories: 

• Recruiting and vetting external partners, and 

• Monitoring relationships and holding LEAs accountable. 


181 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Recruiting and Vetting External Partners 

A state-initiated RFP inviting external partners to become approved provid- 
ers enables the SEA to set specific selection criteria and attract suitable, high- 
capacity providers for districts across the state. In addition, it allows districts 
to focus on establishing the right set of conditions for turnaround, as opposed 
to spending time recruiting and vetting partners on their own. Once an RFP 
is released, the SEA must evaluate the responses against an evaluation rubric 
aligned to the SEA’s supports and needs. 

Many states (e.g., Illinois, Massachusetts, Tennessee) that encourage or 
require districts to engage external partners for turnaround created a screened 
or approved list of providers from which districts choose (Corbett, 2011a; Rhim, 
2011). However, SEA roles in recruiting and vetting external partners evolved 
throughout implementation of the revised SIG program. For example, some 
states that initially recruited and selected approved partners to work with their 
school turnarounds stopped providing that initial screening process for districts 
(e.g., Colorado; Corbett, 2011a). To maximize the potential for successful part- 
nerships, states need to determine if they want to preapprove providers at the 
onset of the process to ensure a degree of quality control statewide. 

States can increase the likelihood that the RFP process will lead to a compre- 
hensive list of high-quality partners that can meet the needs of their schools and 
LEAs by: 

• Engaging staff from multiple SEA departments in the creation and critique 
of both the RFP and the evaluation rubric to ensure they are clear, thought- 
ful, aligned to SEA goals and programs, and that they require the most 
relevant information from respondents, including providers’ track records 
with similar projects; 

• Setting a reasonable deadline and a response period of at least four weeks 
to allow for thoughtful submissions; 

• Training reviewers for the application review process and ensuring they 
understand the role of external partners in turnaround and how to read 
between the lines and evaluate a high-quality partner versus a well-written 
response; and, 

• Conducting a thorough and anonymous review of proposals. 

Steps states have taken, and currently take, to evaluate potential providers 
include: holding in-depth conversations with key leaders, observing the orga- 
nization in action, and discussing results with past clients. Conversations with 
former clients, especially those who have received similar services, are par- 
ticularly valuable to determine whether partnerships succeeded or if contracts 
ended because services were no longer needed or if other issues led to the termi- 
nation of contracts. While many partners collect performance data, such referrals 
and background checks are especially useful due to the lack of scientifically valid 
data for providers implementing the federal turnaround models. It is also useful 


182 


Productive Relationships with External Partners 


to assess the quality of the provider’s management team, as well as the proposed 
on-the-ground staff. The latter is a particular challenge as external partners 
maintain a limited "bench" of field staff. 

A variety of resources that focus specifically on the development of RFPs 
and interview questions, as well as evaluating responses to RFPs, exist and are 
available to assist districts and states in this field. For instance, Mass Insight 
Education & Research Institute published documents that provide extensive 
detail on the creation of state-initiated RFPs and the evaluation of responses 
(Cunningham, 2011; Mass Insight, 2010). The state of Colorado published a 
guide that includes a variety of useful tools to evaluate, interview, and select 
external partners (Colorado Department of Education, 2011). 

SEA Example: Massachusetts 

In Massachusetts, the SEA created a network of prequalified and approved 
partners who demonstrated specialized expertise in specific areas of improve- 
ment and an understanding of Massachusetts’ guiding principles, known as the 
Conditions for School Effectiveness. The SEA vetted the Priority Partners through 
a rigorous three-step review process (see text box on next page). Partners must 
also take part in an annual evaluation process to assess if they added value to the 
school’s and district’s improvement efforts. Massachusetts created a comparison 
document to further assist school and district staff in understanding the differ- 
ences between Priority Partners who specialize in turnaround and more tradi- 
tional Title I service providers. The SEA website also includes a search function, 
which allows users to select specific areas of expertise and see which providers 
are preapproved. 

After Massachusetts completed the review process, the SEA approved four 
partners to assist with social and emotional health, eight partners for maximiz- 
ing learning time, 10 partners for the effective use of data, and five partners 
for district systems of support. All approved Priority Partners are included in a 
"Summary List and Profiles” published by the SEA that included philosophical 
and historical information, as well as a general cost structure. Understanding 
that turnaround requires a different set of skills than traditional improvement 
efforts, the SEA also created a comparison chart to help explain the difference 
between Partners for Title I Support and Intervention and Priority Partners for 
Turnaround. In addition, the Priority Partners Network meets with SEA staff 
quarterly to share concerns, network, and receive updates from the state. 

Monitoring and Holding LEAs Accountable 

Once the work with external partners begins, some SEAs closely moni- 
tor the relationships and the progress of the partnerships. Monitoring is cru- 
cial to ensure the turnaround team (i.e., external partner, school, and district) 
implements a model with fidelity, works together, equally contributes to the 


183 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Massachusetts 7 Priority Partners Review Protocol 


o 

5 

QJ 

’> 

0 

CH 

’6 

c 

O 

Q. 

0) 


The Massachusetts SEA 
conducted a formal review of each 
proposal using a standard pro- 
cess and scoring rubric to assess 
the following qualification areas: 
defined theory of action; experience 
and willingness to collaborate for 
turnaround; ability to build capacity 
for sustained improvement; proven 
outcomes-based measurement plan; 
demonstrated record of effective- 
ness; and financial capacity. A subset 
of the review team read and scored 
each written proposal. The outcome 
of each review included: 

• A written proposal score, based 
on the combined scores of the 
reviewers; 

• A summary of strengths and 
weaknesses; 

• A set of questions and/or areas 
for further clarification. 

The full review team convened 
after reviewing and scoring all 
the proposals to develop a shared 
understanding of each proposal's i 
combined score, strengths and 
weaknesses, and areas in need of 
further clarification. Based on this 
information, the review team deter- 
mined which applicants’ references 
they would contact for interviews. 


For all proposals that met 
initial screening requirements, 
the SEA proceeded to conduct a 
more thorough evaluation of the 
applicant’s demonstrated record of 
effectiveness by contacting refer- 
ences. A Review Team member, 
using a standard protocol and 
reference interview rubric, con- 
ducted interviews with at least one 
school or district reference. The 
interviewer scored the results and 
shared detailed notes with at least 
one other member of the Review 
Team to score as well. The results 
of the review included: 

• A Step Two evaluation score 
based on the combined scores 
of the team members; and 

• A set of additional questions 
or areas in need of further 
clarification, if not already 
identified through the written 
review process. 

Based on the combined results 
of the written evaluation and 
reference interviews, the SEA then 
invited applicants to participate in 
a management interview. 


c 

ro 

u 

"5. 

Q. 

< 


Based on the results of the 
written proposals and refer- 
ence interviews, the SEA invited 
management teams from the top- 
scoring organizations to participate 
in an interview with the Review 
Team. Based on the first two steps 
of the review process, the Review 
Team identified both standard 
and customized questions for all 
applicants. The interview process 
clarified key issues, solicited addi- 
tional information, and provided 
the SEA the opportunity to evaluate 
if the applicant had a strong plan to 
enter the district. 


Q. 

CD 


Source: Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
Appendix 2: Review Protocol. Retrieved from http://www.doe.mass.edu/apa/ 
framework/level4/PriorityPartners.pdf 


partnership, meets goals, and builds local capacity. This monitoring can be done 
in a variety of ways, including: 

• Tracking and reporting key indicators of progress; 

• Analyzing data; 

• Conducting partner network meetings; and, 

• Planning for sustainability. 

Most states require regular reporting from the schools and districts but not 
from the external partners themselves. SEAs could also require districts to build 
in a monitoring structure at the local level to better ensure accountability When 
creating regular reports at either the district or state level, it may be useful to 
include specific questions that evaluate the relationships with external partners. 
Such questions could include: 

• Please describe the relationship with each of your external partners sup- 
porting turnaround. 

• How often do school leaders communicate with partner staff? 

• How often do district leaders communicate with partner staff? 

• Reflect on the progress towards the projected benchmark goals, includ- 
ing leading and lagging indicators that monitor climate and academic 
performance. 


184 


Productive Relationships with External Partners 


• How are you and the partner building a plan for sustainability (i.e., what 
steps are you and the partner taking to ensure growth is sustained once the 
current contract ends)? 

• What are the major areas of concern about your external partner(s)? 

• Are there areas of support the state could provide to facilitate the 
relationship(s) with your external partner(s)? 

SEAs are also able to monitor implementation and plan for sustainability by 
analyzing budgets. If a district uses significant federal resources to fund numer- 
ous full-time — internally or partner-based — staff positions, it is unlikely the 
district is building sufficient capacity or planning an adequate phase-out process 
to sustain turnaround efforts. For example, if a school received a federal school 
improvement grant, funds are renewable for up to three years. In theory, con- 
tracts with external partners, especially an LTP, should decrease in total cost 
and intensity over the course of the three-year period. If a partner provides the 
same level of services in year three as it did in year one, the state could question 
if local capacity was built and if the partner met specified goals, in particular, the 
goal of sustainability. 

In addition to planning for sustainability, LEAs and states should maintain 
focus on their lowest-achieving schools even after the relationships with the 
partner(s) ends. Without continued attention, schools shift from receiving sig- 
nificant external supports (e.g., staff, expertise, funding) to the receipt of no 
additional supports, and progress may backtrack. While the external partners 
may decrease their services, a small role may be continued, and the conditions 
for success should remain in place until the school is fully sustainable (e.g. staff- 
ing flexibility, consistent and stable leadership, extended time). In effect, altered 
practices become embedded throughout the system to the point that a change in 
school or LEA leadership or the removal of external partners does not derail the 
improvement or reverse growth (Corbett, 2011a). 

Arguably, the most difficult challenge in monitoring relationships and build- 
ing sustainable systems is creating a way to determine what to do when partner- 
ships do not produce expected results. Frequent questions include, "When do 
we pull the plug?” and "Whose fault is it anyway?" These issues align with the 
SEA’s monitoring strategies, but most SEAs and LEAs also struggle with deter- 
mining who is ultimately accountable for failures. Is the vendor providing less 
than adequate services? Is the school not implementing strategies completely 
or appropriately? Or, is the LEA preventing implementation or limiting school- 
based autonomies? If an LEA terminates a provider on the SEAs approved list, 
how should the SEA respond? Are the partners removed from the state’s list 
automatically, or does the state complete additional analysis to ensure the pro- 
vider has the right skills and resources to do the work to assess if they could suc- 
ceed in another school or LEA? 


185 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


SEAs can streamline the process of resolving performance issues if the SEA 
and schools carefully establish clear expectations and accountability provi- 
sions during the development of the RFP and subsequent contract and if there is 
ongoing communication between all entities. Ultimately, in the majority of SEAs, 
the responsibility falls most heavily on the LEAs, as they contract directly with 
the providers. An SEA can provide additional support by working directly with 
superintendents, encouraging LEA involvement and improvements, and serv- 
ing as a mediator in negotiations between LEAs and providers. The more an SEA 
knows about a partnership during implementation, the more likely SEA staff can 
assist both the partner and the district in resolving problems as they arise. 

Supporting Implementation 

State agencies historically focused on monitoring and compliance, but the 
revised SIG program encourages SEAs to be more involved in the actual imple- 
mentation and turnaround process (Corbett, 2011a; Rhim, 2011). In effect, SEAs 
support implementation in a variety of ways, from creating a "how to" guide to 
actively building relationships of and capacity in the turnaround teams. 

SEA Example: Colorado 

Colorado is one of the states that released an RFP for turnaround partners 
at one point, but ceased providing that service to districts in subsequent years. 
While the state no longer creates an approved provider list, leaders recognized 
the need for additional guidance to districts on how to recruit, select, and work 
with external partners. The resulting Resource Guide covers working with 
external partners, completing a needs assessment, releasing an RFP, evaluat- 
ing responses, selecting a partner, performance contracting, best practices for 
implementation, and monitoring and evaluating performance. The descriptive 
and explanatory information is then supported by a variety of appendices that 
include additional resources and tools districts can use, including an RFP tem- 
plate, sample interview questions, and model contract language. While Colorado 
stepped back from providing a screened set of providers for districts, the SEA 
realized that districts and schools needed additional SEA supports to move for- 
ward on their own. 

SEA Example: Virginia 

The Commonwealth of Virginia developed a turnaround model that builds 
strong relationships with LTPs. Virginia first released an RFP and created a list of 
approved providers for all schools receiving SIG funds. All SIG recipients imple- 
menting the turnaround or transformation improvement models are required to 
select an LTP to assist in the development and the implementation of the model. 
After taking this first step, leaders at the Office of School Improvement (OSI) 
recognized that LEAs, school principals, and the external partners needed addi- 
tional supports to build positive working relationships and to understand the 


186 


Productive Relationships with External Partners 


requirements of the federal improvement models — as implementing turnaround 
was a new role for most of the external partners as well. Many of the external 
partners also confirmed that Virginia provides some of the strongest supports to 
SIG teams of any of the states they work in as LTPs (Corbett, 2011b). The major 
components of Virginia’s system of support includes: 

• Technical Assistance Sessions — Each SIG team (i.e., external LTP staff, 
school principal, and district representative) attends a series of TA sessions 
together throughout the course of the three-year grant. 

• State Facilitators — SEA assigns each SIG team a State Facilitator to oversee 
the ongoing work and to act as a liaison between the school, district, exter- 
nal partner, and SEA (Corbett, 2011b). 

In addition, the OSI works diligently to develop open communication with 
the districts, principals, and the external partners. OSI oversaw contract/MOU 
negotiations between districts and the LTPs, assisted districts if legal or person- 
ality conflicts with the LTPs occurred, and assisted the LTPs when district and/or 
school leadership undermined the turnaround efforts. To date, LTPs utilized this 
close relationship and contacted OSI when they encountered significant politi- 
cal issues with a district. In another case, SEA staff directly contacted a part- 
ner’s regional director to discuss statewide staffing concerns. OSI staff clarified 
to all entities that their role is to assist implementation, and they will work to 
remove whatever barriers — conditions or personalities — that stand in the way of 
improvement for students. 

Building the External Provider Market 

Several Education Management Organizations (EMOs) and charter school 
operators have utilized private social venture funds to incubate or scale up 
turnaround-type partners in specific regions, but SEAs mostly remained on the 
sidelines of marketplace development. Tennessee’s Achievement School District 
is piloting a program that combines venture capital with district needs, with 
support from the Investing in Innovation (13) fund and New Schools for New 
Orleans, to build the marketplace of turnaround-capable charter operators at the 
district level (Tennessee, 2011). Recently, several states have taken a more active 
role in building the external partner marketplace. While using different strate- 
gies, Massachusetts and Virginia are building the external partner marketplace 
to support their turnaround efforts, and their efforts are profiled below. 

SEA Example: Massachusetts' Investment Fund 

Ensuring an adequate supply of partners exists for the entire state and that 
those providers meet the specific needs of the LEAs and schools is a constant 
challenge. To expand the pool of both services and providers, Massachusetts allo- 
cated a portion of its Race to the Top dollars to increase the capacity of providers 
and to bring needed services to scale across the Commonwealth. Providers could 
apply for up to $500,000 each in the following areas of need: 


187 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


• Expansion of geographic focus; 

• Specialized or expansion of services; 

■ Targeted middle and high school interventions, 

■ English language learner solutions, 

■ Special needs services, 

■ District-level support and coordination, 

■ Support for districts/schools in providing effective tiered instruction, 

■ Grade level expansion; or 

• Collaboration between partners to better serve schools and districts. 

As stated previously, Massachusetts first approved 23 Priority Partners 

in four service areas that align to the Massachusetts Conditions for School 
Effectiveness: 1) addressing students’ social, emotional, and health needs; 2) 
maximizing learning time; 3) effective use of data; and 4) district systems of sup- 
port (e.g., human resources, leadership, financial management). As the comfort 
level with the initial Priority Partners increased, an RFQ was released to apply 
for the Priority Partners Investment Fund (PPIF). 

The selection process for the investment fund was less about proving a pro- 
vider’s data, as that was a primary consideration during the initial acceptance to 
the Priority Partners Network, but instead asked the partners to "sell" an idea. 
The review team first evaluated the written proposals and then called the speci- 
fied partner districts to gauge the level of commitment to the initiative. The state 
used these calls to address: Was the district involved in the proposal creation? 
Did the district do more than write a letter of support? Is the district prepared 
to make systemic and sustainable changes? Is the initiative aligned to what the 
district is already doing? A total of 19 providers submitted proposals, and the 
review committee, which included experts who had previous experience with 
venture investment funds, approved seven awards totaling $2.5 million (SEA 
staff, personal communication, February 7, 2013). 

Once the SEA approved the providers, it separated the proposed activities 
into a series of subsequent work orders. Dividing the funds over the course of 
each year allowed the state to increase its monitoring capabilities, and staff were 
able to proactively catch any issues or concerns as they arose. Each work order 
covered a span of time (usually three to six months), was customized to each pro- 
vider, reflected the provider’s proposal, highlighted the major proposed activi- 
ties, expected deliverables, and noted whether the provider was responsible for 
providing the SEA with any information or tools (SEA staff, personal communica- 
tion, February 7, 2013). 

Early analysis of the investment fund shows promising results. While year 
one focused on planning for the majority of projects, an SEA staff member 
reflected, "It’s sometimes difficult to not get impatient, but we knew we were 
funding thoughtful planning. Other [partners] are doing really intensive work, 
and they are showing results that are more tangible. But, it’s challenging work, 


188 


Productive Relationships with External Partners 


Quarterly Reports 

In addition to regular contact with the SEA and the district, pro- 
viders also submit a quarterly report to the state. Quarterly follow-up 
calls and/or meetings also occur to ensure all parties are on the same 
page and to triangulate information. Required report components 
include: 


A. Project Tracker 


B. Project Reflections 

• Goals and Objectives 


• Successes 

• Activities 


• Challenges 

• Timeline 


• Upcoming Priorities 

• Budget 


• Impact 


C. Supporting 
Documentation (to 
show additional 
evidence of progress) 


Source: Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. (2012c). MA Priority 
Partner Investment Fund: 2nd Quarterly Progress Report. 


and we asked them to target high-needs areas, meaning it’s more difficult to get 
the right conditions for success in place" (SEA staff, personal communication, 
February 7, 2013). 

Several suggested practices and early lessons learned from the Priority 
Partners Investment Fund include: 

• Craft the RFQ/RFP broadly enough so that the providers come up with 
ideas that the SEA hasn’t thought of, or wouldn't normally think of itself; 

• Include external expertise on investing in new ventures; 

• Prescreen applicants to eliminate applications and providers who do not 
understand the state context or who have not demonstrated success in the 
past; 

• Truly evaluate a district’s level of commitment before awarding funds; 

• Chunk out work orders to track and monitor progress; 

• Build sustainability into the application — that is, a focus on building capac- 
ity and district commitment; and, 

• Develop a way to share what has been learned with both the SEA and the 
broader partner network. 


189 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


State Example: Virginia's Lead Turnaround Partner Partnership 

Virginia also recognized the limitations of the current partner marketplace 
and worked with the Virginia Foundation for Educational Leadership (VFEL) to 
develop a new LTP. VFEL acts as the LTP but subcontracts with other external 
partners to supply the various services to the schools. Some of the subcontrac- 
tors utilized in this partnership already serve as LTPs in Virginia schools and 
therefore understand Virginia’s SIG program. The various initial partners and the 
skills or programs they contributed included: 

• Cambridge Education — School Quality Reviews, principal and teacher 
observation training, and the Tripod survey; 

• College of William & Mary — Principal and teacher observation training; 

• EdisonLearning — Content coach training and supervision, professional 
development, and data analysis; 

• National Institute for School Leaders (NISL) — Intensive training for coaches 
and key district staff; and 

• Northwest Evaluation Association (NWEA] — Measures of Academic 
Progress (MAP) assessment. 

While VFEL acts as the lead partner, each of the other supporting partners 
works with VFEL to develop a comprehensive set of services. While the partner- 
ship is still in its infancy and it is too early to evaluate the relationship or the 
results, it is a promising model to follow. 

State Example: Illinois' State System of Support 

Illinois is in the process of launching a new organizational structure for its 
statewide system of support (SSOS). As opposed to running all supports, tech- 
nical assistance, and monitoring of school improvement including turnaround 
through the SEA, the Illinois State Board of Education (ISBE) released an RFP 
to external partners to manage and coordinate the state’s Center for School 
Improvement (Center). The Center is fully integrated within the SEA, but man- 
aged by an external partner. The Center Director is charged with overseeing 
a variety of divisions including: Curriculum and Support, Regional Supports 
(which include Content Directors and District Assistance Teams), Priority 
School Interventions (which includes Rapid Response Teams), and District 
Accountability and Oversight. The latter position also reports to the SEA’s Deputy 
Superintendent. 

The primary functions of the Center include: 

• Provide oversight and management to the SSOS with a focus on bringing 
coherence and coordination to the regional delivery systems and SSOS part- 
ners in the state; 

• Work with the ISBE Roundtable to maintain alignment with the agency’s 
vision and reform initiatives; 


190 


Productive Relationships with External Partners 


• Deploy staff to work with identified districts on the development and 
implementation of customized continuous improvement plans; 

• Design and support the use of a connected set of tools and resources to 
increase district-level capacity to improve teaching and learning; and 

• Develop a robust system-wide evaluation process for the SSOS to promote 
its continuous improvement to better serve districts and schools (Illinois, 
2012). 

While communication between the Center and SEA leadership is crucial to 
the success of the Center, the SEA describes its role as the fiscal agent respon- 
sible for the contract with the winning bidder. ISBE will conduct all necessary 
fiduciary and fiscal audits and monitoring of work done under the contract. In 
addition, ISBE will have regular communication and ongoing collaboration with 
the Center Director and all other necessary personnel through the Roundtable 
(a cross-divisional advisory committee comprised of ISBE senior staff members 
that will set agency direction and provide leadership to the Center’s governance; 
Illinois, 2012). While external partners provided significant turnaround sup- 
ports to SEAs in the past, this is the first time an external partner is managing 
and coordinating an SSOS in collaboration with the SEA. 

Emerging Lessons from the Field 

Successful turnaround efforts must be sustained and supported with corre- 
sponding changes at all levels. Turnaround efforts will not be successful if they 
are only school-focused and not supported by district changes (Corbett, 2011; 
Kowal, 2011). External partners may help establish those systems and processes, 
but it is likely that their level of involvement may be restricted due to funding 
limitations and because the supports of external partners will decrease as the 
school, LEA, and SEA build their own capacity. External partners are often more 
nimble than SEAs and are able to make rapid organizational changes to respond 
to policy changes and the needs in the field. As a result of this flexibility, external 
partners will continue to be utilized in the ever-changing and ever-growing niche 
of school turnaround. SEAs and LEAs must work together and in collaboration 
with external partners to determine how to ensure the work moves forward as 
planned and that the sought after long-term gains in student achievement are 
achieved and sustained. 

Over the past several years, SEAs have increasingly recruited, approved, and 
contracted with external partners for turnaround, but there is substantial room 
for growth. Areas for further improvement include tracking results of various 
providers, developing networks of external partners to share best and promising 
practices within and across states, and developing more capacity of turnaround 
providers themselves. As states develop plans for the use of external partners, 
leaders should consider the following action principles. 


191 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Action Principles 

Acknowledge that supporting schools, districts, and external partners 
with contracting and implementation is a new role for SEAs 

• Determine the level of involvement the SEA desires and has expertise to 
provide. 

• Determine the extent the SEA should support development of external part- 
ner capacity. 

• Develop strategies and practices to support a strong and positive working 
environment with shared accountability and structures. 

• Align expectations and supports among all the SEA divisions or programs 
involved (e.g., Race to the Top, SIG, turnaround/innovation, school improve- 
ment, Title I, regional offices). 

• Engage outside supports, organizations, national associations, or state-level 
partners to build SEA capacity. 

• Determine which supports the SEA should phase out, maintain, or shift to a 
different division. 

• Monitor engagements with external partners with fidelity, frequency, and 
consistency. 

Develop quality control mechanisms throughout the system of support 

• SEAs must be involved in some degree of quality control — either with a 
preapproval process, ongoing monitoring, and/or evaluating efforts prior 
to grant renewal. 

• As a condition of SIG funding, require districts/schools to complete an MOU 
or scope of work with each external partner that clearly defines: proposed 
activities, responsibilities, expectations, benchmarks, goals, and conse- 
quences or termination for lack of performance. 

• If the SEA has an approved provider list, it is important to update that list 
based on performance. In order to remove a partner due to a lack of perfor- 
mance, the SEA must monitor external providers' performance. 

• Develop processes to accurately assess whom to attribute failing or unsuc- 
cessful strategies or partnerships (i.e., to ensure a partner is only removed 
from the list for their own performance and is not being used as a scape- 
goat for school or district problems). 

• Be proactive and don’t wait until problems arise — SEAs with ongoing inter- 
nal communication as well as communication with external partners and 
districts are better able to address problems in a timely manner and proac- 
tively address concerns. 

• Work with external partners to build their capacity to enhance services to 
existing schools or to scale up to additional schools. 


192 


Productive Relationships with External Partners 


Resources 

Center for Comprehensive School Reform and Improvement. (2005 ). School 
restructuring options under No Child Left Behind: What works when? Contracting 
with education management organizations. Washington, DC: Learning Point 
Associates. Retrieved from http://www.centerforcsri.org/pubs/restructuring/ 
KnowledgeIssues3Contracting.pdf 

Colorado Department of Education. (2011], Engaging external providers resource guide. 
Retrieved from http://corbetteducation.com/CDEresourceguide.pdf 

Corbett, J. [2011a]. Lead turnaround partners: How the emerging marketplace of 
lead turnaround partners is changing school improvement. Lincoln, IL: Academic 
Development Institute. Retrieved from http://www.adi.org/about/downloads/ 
LeadPartners.pdf 

Corbett, J. [2011b]. The Virginia story: Forging strong working relationships among 
the state, district, school, and external lead partners for the implementation of school 
improvement grants. Lincoln, IL: Academic Development Institute, http://www.adi. 
org/about/downloads/Promising_practice_Virginia.pdf 

Cunningham, J. [2011], Forging partnerships for turnaround: Emerging lessons from 
state RFP processes. Boston, MA: Mass Insight Education & Research Institute. 
Retrieved from http://www.massinsight.Org/publications/turnaround/127/file/l/ 
pubs/2011/02/07/STG_Lessons_from_State_RFP_Processes_Feb_2010.pdf 

Hill, P, James, L., & Guthrie, J. [1997], Reinventing public education: How contracting can 
transform America’s schools. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

Illinois Center for School Improvement. [2012], Frequently asked questions for the Center 
for School Improvement. Retrieved from http://www.isbe.net/grants/center/pdf/faqs. 
pdf 

Kim, J. [2012], Lead partner playbook. Boston, MA: Mass Insight Education & 

Research Institute. Retrieved from http://www.massinsight.org/publications/ 
stg-resources /161/ file/ 1 / pubs /20 1 2 /05/23/Mass_Insight_STG_Lead_Partner_ 
Playbook_l.pdf 

Kowal, J., & Ableidinger, J. [2011], School turnarounds in Colorado: Untangling a web of 
supports for struggling schools. Retrieved from http://www.dkfoundation.org/sites/ 
default/files/files/SchoolTurnaroundsInColorado-Jan2011.pdf 

Learning Point Associates. [2010], Guide to working with external partners: Partnerships 
to improve teaching and learning. Retrieved from www.learningpt.org/pdfs/External_ 
Provider_Guide.pdf 

Mass Insight Education & Research Institute. (2010, February], Using RFPs to select 
lead partners. Boston, MA: Author. Retrieved from http://www.massinsight.org/ 
publications / stg-resources/9 0 / 

Mass Insight Education & Research Institute. [2010], The lead partner: A new partner- 
ship model. Boston, MA: Author. Retrieved from http://www.massinsight.org/publica- 
tions / stgresources /1 08/ file /l/ pubs/201 0/07/ 09/STG_Lead_Partner_master_deck_ 
March_2010.pdf 


193 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. (2012a], 
Massachusetts Priority Partner comparison chart. Retrieved from http://www.doe. 
mass.edu/apa/partnership/comparison.pdf 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. [2012b], MA 
Priority Partners for turnaround: Summary list and profiles. Retrieved from http:// 
www.doe.mass.edu/apa/framework/level4/PriorityPartners.pdf 
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. (2012c], MA 
Priority Partner Investment Fund: 2nd quarterly progress report. 

Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. (2012d], 
Massachusetts Priority Partner Investment Fund: Highlights document. 

Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. (2012e], MA 
Priority Partners Investment Fund RFQ. Retrieved from http://corbetteducation.com/ 
MApriority partnersinvestmentRFQ.pdf 

Rhim, L. (2005 ). School restructuring in Philadelphia: Lessons from 2002 to 2005. Denver, 
CO: Education Commission of the States. 

Rhim, L., & Redding, S. (2011], Fulcrum of change: Leveraging 50 states to turn around 
5,000 schools. Lincoln, IL: Academic Development Institute. Retrieved from http:// 
www.adi.org/about/downloads/Fulcrum_of_Change.pdf 
Tennessee Government. (2011], ASD launches charter school application and start-up 
funding program. Retrieved from http://news.tn.gov/node/7556 
U.S. Department of Education. (2010]. Guidance on School Improvement Grants under 
section 1003(g) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965. Washington, 
DC: Office of Elementary and Secondary Education. Retrieved from http://www. 
ed.gov/ programs /sif/. 


194 


Turnaround Communities of Practice: Addressing the Urgency 

Kelly Stuart, Julie Duffield, and Sylvie Hale 

with contributions by An u Advani and Libby Rognier 

Communities of Practice (CoPs) can be an important component of a state’s 
turnaround-focused technical assistance efforts through peer-to-peer, face- 
to-face, and online collaborative activities within states, districts, and schools. 
CoPs play a vital role in responding to pressing, constantly evolving needs while 
building capacity and accelerating knowledge critical to the turnaround effort. 
Using CoPs provides states with a technical assistance approach to seek out solu- 
tions to the complex issues of school turnaround and gain support from stake- 
holders in implementing those solutions. When well implemented across state 
and within state, CoPs are positioned to serve as an important means to spread 
knowledge and expertise, build networks, develop collaborative solutions, and, 
ultimately, transform practice. 

This chapter highlights the use of CoPs by states to collaborate with mul- 
tiple stakeholders to strengthen technical assistance, curate best practices, and 
support the implementation of these practices within local district and school 
contexts. Below we review the salient literature on CoPs, describe a conceptual 
framework for SEAs to establish and support CoPs, provide examples, and offer 
key principles for action. Coupled, and perhaps integrated, with existing states’ 
systems of support, CoPs have the potential to transform how states support 
their turnaround LEAs by increasing the SEAs’ capacity to deliver technical assis- 
tance, disseminate key resources, develop networks, and foster collaborative 
relationships. 

Review of Literature: What Do We Know? 

The literature on communities and their utility in changing practice dates 
back several decades; however, steady evolution and growth in communication 


195 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


technologies is rapidly changing the landscape of how CoPs can influence and 
sustain change. Below, we describe not only the concepts of CoPs, on- and off- 
line, but also the role technology can play in supporting how an SEA designs and 
delivers its technical assistance collaboratively for community members. 

Research on CoPs has provided a conceptual understanding of how com- 
munities form and succeed. The concept of CoPs has its roots in the educational 
theory of situated learning. Early research (Lave & Wenger, 1991) referred to 
situated learning as communities where learning and practice work together 
in a social environment and rely on a collaborative novice/expert relationship. 
Later research (Wenger, 1998, 2002, 2011) examined the focus on relationships 
between individuals and the participation of people engaged in creating and 
sharing knowledge, as well as transforming practice. 

The literature on CoPs and situated learning (Wenger, 1998) assert that 
people learn best in communities rather than as isolated individuals. Specifically, 
a community of practice is a group of people "who share a concern, a set of 
problems, or passion about a topic, and want to deepen their knowledge and 
expertise in an area by interacting on an ongoing basis” (Wenger, McDermott, 

& Snyder, 2002, p. 4). Further, Wenger’s research (2002, 2009) describes three 
characteristics crucial to any effective CoP: 

1. The domain: Members are brought together by a learning need they 
share. In the context of turnaround, the domain is to explore what works 
in turning around low-achieving schools and building capacity to imple- 
ment change. 

2. The community: The collective learning of the members becomes a bond 
among them over time with shared needs and goals. 

3. The practice: The community interactions produce new knowl- 
edge and resources as well as offer problem solving and support for 
implementation. 

An SEA-led community of practice may be created to solve problems, build 
collective learning, and, ultimately, share the effective practices to encourage 
wider adoption. The domain can be as broad as school turnaround or as specific 
as teacher and leadership pipelines. The community could include a specific 
workgroup (affinity group such as English learners), which has a shared identity 
and passion for its work and is bonded through the mutual need to learn. The 
practice focuses on intentional sharing and reviewing for understanding — exam- 
ining which turnaround practices are working and for what reasons. 

Most recently, Wenger et al. (2009) describe how technology has changed 
what it means for communities to "be together," now that digital tools are part of 
most communities’ "habitats." Habitats are not just a configuration of technolo- 
gies, but also a dynamic, mutually defining relationship dependent on the culture 
of the community. Communities that exist online give educators access to human 


196 


Turnaround Communities of Practice 


and informational resources not available locally and provide the opportunity 
for new knowledge creation (Booth, 2011; U.S. Department of Education, 2010; 
Wang, Yang, & Chou, 2008). Connect and Inspire (Connected Educators, 2011) 1 
calls for educators to be more than information experts; they must be collabora- 
tors in learning, seeking new knowledge and constantly acquiring new skills. 

Online communities are at their heart "social learning spaces" (Booth, 2011; 
Schlager et al., 2009). However, as Booth highlights, the challenge for most online 
communities is recognizing that simply building a platform and inviting educa- 
tors will not translate into productive communities. Virtual communities don’t 
just happen. Ameliorating the challenge of a "post and hope" community can be 
addressed by attending to consistent dimensions present in successful online 
communities. These include: 

• Collective identity and clear purpose provide a common bond. 

• Leadership and effective moderation build trust, make participants feel com- 
fortable, and develop joint ownership. 

• Opportunities for sharing knowledge, expertise, and experiences contribute 
to building capacity and knowledge as well as problem solving. 

• Governance structure and guidelines for participation create norms and 
common agreements that guide participant interactions. 

• Community sociability and usability help provide a sense of community 
through frequent and personalized communication. 

• Measuring success establishes accountability and a feedback process to sup- 
port further growth and learning. 

Conceptual Framework for State-Initiated CoPs: A Blended Approach 

With increased accountability, coupled with significant flexibility, now more 
than ever states play a crucial role in disseminating emerging and best practices 
on school turnaround. States have implemented major reforms to develop scal- 
able solutions to human capital and operator capacity issues, creating conditions 
for success through policy change, assessing the quality of turnaround providers 
and operators, and investing in the information technology and accountability 
infrastructure that supports turnaround success (Kutash et al., 2010). 

SEAs have numerous opportunities to leverage both in-person and virtual 
communication to maximize reach and impact through CoPs. There is no sub- 
stitute for face-to-face meetings, but online connections can play a critical role 
before, during, and after in-person CoP convenings to delve deeper into topi- 
cal areas, build collaborative relationships, and continue group learning. When 
CoPs emerge from or leverage face-to face-interactions, they are likely to grow 
(Nichani & Hung, 2002). 

‘The Connected Educators website (http://connectededucators.org/) and associated publications offer 
resources, reports, and briefs that detail step-by-step support in understanding key components of effective 
CoPs, considerations for technology, how to lead a community, and how to measure the success of a com- 
munity. 


197 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Research is evolving on this blended approach of in-person and virtual inter- 
action for CoPs. Currently, Connected Educators is conducting ongoing design 
research on the intersection of online and face-to-face professional engagements 
across multiple contexts. The focus is on examining different levels of interaction 
or how to measure connectedness. Results of this research will inform future edi- 
tions of Connect and Inspire reporting. 

The table below illustrates a framework that identifies the major characteris- 
tics of CoPs, with questions for consideration to guide an SEA in establishing and 
supporting CoPs. This framework incorporates what is known about effective 
CoPs, both off- and online, and assumes the use of technology as applicable in 
responding to many of the considerations listed below. 


Framework for Building and Maintaining SEA-Led Communities of Practice 


Characteristic 

Considerations 

Domain: the shared definition of the 
learning need that brings members 
together 

• What is the shared interest of the com- 
munity? What is the purpose for the 
group? 

• What do members hope to gain from 
sharing and social interactions? 

Community: the relationship that bonds 
the group around the collective learn- 
ing, built over time through its members' 
regular interaction 

• What level of interaction will facilitate 
community building? 

• Does the group have sufficient levels of 
trust and willingness to share to facili- 
tate collective learning? How can the 
community ensure that all members feel 
a sense of belonging? 

Practice: the various community inter- 
actions to build a body of knowledge, 
including shared and produced learning 
activities, resources, and tools 

• What interactions will best engage and 
meet the needs of the community? (e.g., 
workgroups, discussions, shared pre- 
sentations, content development, and/ 
or curation] 

• How can these learning activities lead to 
problem solving and change in practice? 

• What new body of knowledge results 
from the CoP for others interested in the 
same domain? 


198 


Turnaround Communities of Practice 


Characteristic 

Considerations 

Venue: the setting(s) of the community's 
interactions 

• When, where, and how will community 
members interact? (e.g., in-person, 
virtual, synchronous, asynchronous, or a 
blended approach) 

• Which venues are most successful for 
this community, in terms of participa- 
tion and productivity? 

• What types of interactions and explora- 
tion are best suited to various face-to- 
face and online environments? 

Success Factors: the components that 
support successful communities 

• How will the following be defined, 
addressed, and maintained in the 
community? 

■ Identity and purpose 

■ Leadership and moderation 

■ Knowledge sharing and expertise 

■ Governance and protocols 

■ Roles and responsibilities 

■ Communication 

■ Accountability and feedback 

As the sponsor of a community, the S 

iA provides or guides CoP leadership 


through a facilitation and moderation role. In addition, the SEA guides the cura- 
tion and dissemination of critical content as well as offers consultations and 
technical assistance. The learning activities and venues might include exchanges 
via webinars and online convenings, in-person events, consultations, discussions, 
and social curation of content. The challenge is to go beyond the exchange of 
resources to engagement in deeper problem-solving and reflective conversations. 

It is important to build joint ownership by defining specific roles within the 
community and opportunities to participate through explicit protocols and pro- 
cesses. It is through social learning that a community comes together, and this is 
the main differentiator between CoPs and task forces or teams. Recognizing that 
the SEA must be in partnership with LEAs in fostering the community, defined 
roles assist in keeping the community focused. Clear roles and responsibilities 
increase the possibility that the community can maintain and sustain changes 
in leadership as the responsibility is shared among key members. The Wenger- 
Tayners 2 suggest different roles within the community to enable distributed 
leadership and ensure joint ownership. For example, "agenda activists" in a 
school turnaround administrators’ CoP would take the lead in maintaining the 
community’s learning agenda based on issues, challenges, and opportunities 


2 Etienne and Beverly Wenger-Trayner (http://wenger-trayner.com) are known for their seminal work 
on communities of practice and social learning theory, learning across boundaries, and the use of social 
media. 


199 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


facing turnaround leaders. Other members might elect to be "community keep- 
ers/connectors" and take the lead in ensuring all voices are heard at the table and 
monitoring group interaction dynamics. 

Potential for Communities of Practice 

CoPs offer tremendous potential to transform low-performing schools. 
Through CoPs, an SEA can disseminate best practices and support capacity build- 
ing. Bringing stakeholders together through their common need to share, imple- 
ment, and evaluate practices holds great promise for transforming the lives of 
millions of students throughout the country. Wenger and his colleagues said it 
best: 

A salient benefit of communities, in fact, is to bridge formal organizational 
boundaries in order to increase the collective knowledge, skills, and profes- 
sional trust and reciprocity of practitioners who serve in these organizations. 
Because they are inherently boundary-crossing entities, communities of 
practice are a particularly appropriate structural model for cross-agency and 
cross-sector collaborations. (Synder, Wenger, & Briggs, 2003, p. 3) 

Examples of State-Created Communities of Practice 

SEAs are sponsoring different types of communities in order to support 
turnaround stakeholder needs to build connections between people, resources, 
and practice. Profiled below are three examples of communities which SEAs have 
created within their states to support school turnaround efforts: 

• Nevada SIG Group highlights a combination of face-to-face and online 
communication to leverage expertise among the community of SEA and 
districts and to facilitate districts’ sharing of resources and practices. 

• Washington Leadership Network provides an example of cultivating 
professional connections in an established online environment where state 
leadership shares responsibilities with districts to leverage resources and 
partner around practices. 

• Michigan DOE Partnership focuses on convening CoPs to improve high 
school learning and engagement. These CoPs were developed over sev- 
eral years based on partnership model principles of leading by convening, 
coalescing around issues, ensuring relevant participation, and doing work 
together. 

Nevada SIG Group 

Nevada has two cohorts of SIG schools. Best practices and lessons learned 
from cohort one were used to inform and enhance the cohort two applications. 
The SEA connected SIG leaders in districts across the state to share successful 
practices for working with teachers’ unions, community outreach, and involv- 
ing parents in the SIG proposal process. Nevada Department of Education (NDE) 
conducts regular in-person SIG conferences to bring districts with SIG-identified 


200 


Turnaround Communities of Practice 


schools together. Topics addressed during the meetings have included building 
high performing collaborative cultures, effective teaching, coaching partnerships 
and processes, family and parent engagement, STEM initiatives, and effective 
learning. State and national experts presented in their fields to attendees, includ- 
ing school and district leadership and classroom teachers. Through these meet- 
ings, NDE is brokering important peer-to-peer connections for the SIG imple- 
menters, as well as providing resources and training around common topics of 
interest. 

During the 2011-12 school year, the NDE SIG director launched a Nevada- 
specific community space on the School Turnaround Learning Community web 
site (STLC) for the SIG schools to have ongoing access to updated school turn- 
around resources and to complement connections between face-to-face conven- 
ings. The STLC website offers resources, online training, and discussion tools 
enabling users to share school turnaround practices and lessons learned and 
facilitates networking to support schools more effectively. The STLC online plat- 
form allows for state-specific groups or workspaces for CoPs to curate their own 
resource collections as well as share their experiences. 

This venue of a private community was employed to share Nevada-specific 
information on turnaround, important calendar dates, and host webinars specific 
to Nevada’s turnaround needs. Webinar topics included the use of data and pre- 
paring for the Common Core State Standards in literacy. Nevada’s group within 
the School Turnaround Learning Community provides a forum for ongoing com- 
munication among the Nevada SIG practitioners within a national site that high- 
lights vetted resources and spotlights practices via large webinars to support 
two-way communication between the SEA and LEAs. 

Washington Leadership Network 

In December 2012, the Office of School and Student Success at the 
Washington State Office of the Superintendent of Public Instruction launched 
a community in Edmodo 3 for educators in Washington State to network, share 
ideas, collaborate, and explore best practices for improving student and school 
achievement. Led by two staff members reporting directly to the chief state 
school officer, this network is a resource for educators throughout the state to 
connect with other peers who are also focusing on the domain of improving 
student achievement. The purpose of this community is to gain insight into the 
challenges faced by schools working to meet goals and benchmarks and to share 
successful models and strategies that have worked, as well as to network and col- 
laborate with educators from across the nation. 

3 Edmodo (https://www.edmodo.com/) is an educational social media platform for teachers, students, and 
parents. Uses include posting assignments and quizzes, creating polls for student responses, embedding 
video clips, creating learning groups, and creating a calendar of events and assignments. Students can also 
turn in assignments or upload assignments for their teachers to view, grade, and provide instant feedback. 
Edmodo houses many CoPs for teachers and students. 


201 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


The Office of Student and School Success employed the following dissemina- 
tion strategies to help educators learn about the network: 

• Sent emails to school and district administrators and staff throughout the 
state inviting them to join the network. 

• Leveraged Edmodo as the online platform with the Leadership Network as 
a component of the outreach presentation conducted at each of the nine 
Educational Service Districts throughout the state for identified schools 
and districts. 

• Conducted conversations about the intent and vision of the network with 
Technical Assistance Contractors and School Coaches assigned to the 
Priority and Focus schools. 

The network CoP facilitators quickly learned the importance of using focused 
conversations for affinity-based groups to address an issue-specific domain 
topic, as well as the need to support joint facilitation in enrolling other com- 
munity members in the CoP. For example, one of the community members, 
the Director of Multilingual Programs of a district in western Washington, vol- 
unteered to conduct a focus group on English learners that offered educators 
throughout the state access to expertise and conversations about their individual 
needs. These kinds of focused conversations, generated from community mem- 
bers, are an essential ingredient in developing a network that focuses on mem- 
bers’ needs and leverages social learning. 

The Office of Student and School Success is continuing to implement its 
vision for using Edmodo to support CoPs through shared activities such as curat- 
ing school turnaround resources. Building on their success, they plan to eventu- 
ally launch an Emerging Schools group with the Office’s Online Emerging School 
Coach to facilitate a conversation to support schools with this designation. The 
K-12 Director of Learning and Leadership plans to use Edmodo as a tool to 
help facilitate monthly meetings conducted with the Office’s School Coaches 
and Technical Assistance Contractors. The use of Edmodo as a means to stay 
informed and connected will be a component of a statewide Teacher Leadership 
Symposium that the Office will facilitate during the summer. The Office will 
continue to seek partners and build joint leadership roles to support additional 
issue-specific groups for educators in Washington to share ideas, collaborate, 
and explore best practices for improving student and school achievement. 
Washington’s Leadership Network demonstrates an example of an SEA building 
its state-specific network inside an existing larger educational online community 
space as a way to share resources, make connections between members, and a 
way for members to take on leadership roles to share their own challenges and 
promising practices. 

Michigan DOE CoPs Partnership 

In 2005, the Michigan Department of Education Office of Special Education 
and Early Intervention Services (OSE-EIS) collaborated with the IDEA 


202 


Turnaround Communities of Practice 


Partnership 4 to support state leadership in Michigan. The state leaders formed 
a CoP, engaging a range of stakeholders to build capacity for secondary school 
redesign and prepare for the adoption of the new high school graduation 
requirements. 

A pilot project, Reach and Teach for Learning, was designed to support 
middle and high school teams as they explored what it would take to assist their 
struggling learners, including their students with disabilities, to make prog- 
ress in the general curriculum. The design team leaders of this CoP work group 
included state leaders and associations (Michigan Education Association — MEA, 
Michigan Association of Secondary School Principals — MASSP). The pilot was so 
successful that the sponsors wanted to continue deepening their learning and 
reaching out to the field to strengthen secondary school improvement. 

Leisa Gallagher, Director of the Reaching and Teaching Struggling Learners 
(RTSL) initiative in MDE’s Center for Educational Networking, attests that 
because state leadership learned how to relate according to what is now identi- 
fied as the "Partnership Way" — leading by convening, coalescing around issues, 
ensuring relevant participation, and doing work together — these methods 
showed significant data improvements and smoothed the path for the creation of 
two major efforts in the MDE: the Superintendent’s Dropout Challenge and a new 
mandated dropout prevention initiative funded by OSE-EIS for RTSL. 

The Superintendent’s Dropout Challenge currently reaches 1,800 elementary, 
middle, and high schools and was formally integrated into Michigan’s 2012 ESEA 
Flexibility Waiver system, requiring Focus and Priority schools to participate in 
the Challenge. It was launched with the support of the original CoP partners who 
worked together from 2005-2008. It is a testament to the longevity of the com- 
munity that, eight years later, the current Challenge CoP workgroup is staffed by 
several of the same colleagues who participated in the original IDEA Partnership 
learning community. The community workgroup includes former department 
members who participate on a voluntary basis; strong relationships and joint 
leadership have helped ensure the community’s sustainability despite changes 
in formal MDE roles. This authentic engagement is a sign of a strong collective 
identity, effective leadership and moderation, and well-understood norms for 
community participation. 

RTSL continues to partner with MASSP and has worked with two cohorts of 
secondary schools since its launch. RTSL and its success in increasing student 
achievement was highlighted on the PBS NewsHour. 

Educators who are part of this state CoP ask themselves deep questions: 

"How is our personal identity engaged in the work? How can we share our dif- 
ficult experiences to transform our schools and communities?" By learning with 


4 With the Office of Special Education Programs in USDE, the IDEA partner organizations form a community 
with the potential and intention to transform the way they work to improve outcomes for all students, espe- 
cially students with disabilities, (http://www.ideapartnership.org/) 


203 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


others, Michigan’s state-level educators have formed a sustainable CoP which has 
expanded to address new school improvement domains. 

Action Principles 

Below we provide specific action principles as recommendations to get 
started with a community of practice, based on best practices shared in literature 
and examples in practice. 

Build joint leadership and membership for active participation within the 
state 

• Identify leadership roles and responsibilities and provide training and 
support to ensure effective facilitation and interactivity. (See Connected 
Educators for examples). 

• Develop governance structures and guidelines for various stakeholder 
groups to contribute. 

• Cluster members around a common identity (domain), purpose, and need. 

• Utilize protocols to ensure participation among members for regular ongo- 
ing communication to problem solve on similar turnaround challenges. 

• Focus on the work and recognize the importance of building trust among 
members; this will help build reciprocity between members. 

• Include both the chief state school officer and the local community in the 
development process to help ensure different stakeholder sponsorship. 

Implement peer-to-peer learning activities to further curate and commu- 
nicate best practices 

• Use the expertise, including tools and resources, of existing communities 
and regional and national technical assistance organizations to codify and 
disseminate best practices (e.g., The Center on School Turnaround, the 
State Implementation and Scaling Up of Evidence-based Practice Center 
[SISEP] at UNC, Doing What Works). 

• Leverage resources and allow time for members to apply best practices in 
their own local context. Encourage sharing and analysis of successes and 
failures. 

• Identify specific activities appropriate for the community by blending both 
synchronous and asynchronous collaboration to foster sharing of knowl- 
edge, expertise, and experiences, such as scheduled webinars, impromptu 
communications, discussions, and content development. 

• Recognize that communities have different needs and evolve in a variety of 
ways, ranging from informal to formal. 

• Remember a community is not website; it is the convening, coalescing 
around issues, ensuring relevant participation, and doing work together. 


204 


Turnaround Communities of Practice 


Resources 

State Implementation and Scaling Up of Evidence-Based Practice Center 

(http://sisep.fpg.unc.edu) offers several tools and an Active Implementation Hub 
to assist stakeholders involved in active implementation and scaling up of pro- 
grams and innovations. The site’s goal is to increase the knowledge and improve 
the performance of persons engaged in actively implementing any program or 
practice and offers several protocols for engaging stakeholders in conversation. 

The Connected Educators (http://connectededucators.org/) website and 
associated publications offer resources, reports, and briefs that detail step-by- 
step support in understanding key components of effective CoPs, considerations 
for technology, how to lead a community, and how to measure the success of a 
community. 

IDEA Partnership Model: The Partnership Way. With the Office of Special 
Education Programs, USDE, the IDEA partner organizations form a community 
with the potential and intention to transform the way they work to improve 
outcomes for all students, especially students with disabilities (http: //www. 
ideapartnership.org/building-connections/the-partnership-way.html). This 
work includes an online community site (www.sharedwork.org) that focuses on 
approaches fostering two-way communication, offering accessibility to all stake- 
holders, presenting the work through a community lens, and serving as a vehicle 
for inviting participation. 

The Center on School Turnaround (www.centeronschoolturnaround.org) is 
part of a federal network of 15 Regional Comprehensive Centers, serving individ- 
ual states or clusters of states, and seven national Content Centers. Together, the 
22 Comprehensive Centers are charged with building the capacity of state educa- 
tional agencies (SEAs) to assist districts and schools in meeting student achieve- 
ment goals. Staff of the Center have years of experience in designing, launching, 
and facilitating online interactions, including CoPs. The Center is developing a 
comprehensive toolkit on CoPs that will complement this chapter. 

The School Turnaround Learning Community (www.schoolturnaround- 
support.org) offers a platform to set up a state-specific group or workspace. The 
online space includes a number of features such as discussions, resource sharing, 
and a newsletter. States can host state-specific webinars, disseminate effective 
practices, and offer two-way communication between the state and districts. 
States interested in utilizing the STLC for their own work can contact info@ 
schoolturnaroundsupport.org to request an initial discussion with STLC staff 
about their state needs and aspirations for leading a CoP. 

References 

Booth, S. (2011). Cultivating knowledge sharing and trust in online communities for edu- 
cators: A multiple-case study (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh. 


205 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Burns, M., & Dimock, K. V. (2007], Technology as a catalyst for school communities: 
Beyond boxes and bandwidth. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 

Kutash, J., Nico, E., Gorin, E., Rahmatullah, S., & Tallant, K. [2010], The school turnaround 
field guide. New York, NY: Carnegie Corporation of New York, Wallace Foundation. 

Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New 
York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Nichani, M., & Hung, D. (2002). Can a community of practice exist online? Educational 
Technology, 42(4), 49-54. 

Synder, W., Wenger, E., & Briggs, X. (2003). Communities of practice in government: 
Leveraging knowledge for performance. Retrieved from http://www.ewenger.com/ 
pub/pubCoPs_in_government_PM_wrd.doc 

Treacy, B., Kleiman, G., & Peterson, K. (2002). Successful online professional develop- 
ment. Learning & Leading with Technology, 29(4), 6-9, 57-59. 

U.S. Department of Education. (2010). Connect and inspire: Online communities of prac- 
tice in education. Washington, DC: Author. 

U.S. Department of Education. (2011). Resources and tools for evaluation of online com- 
munities of practice. Washington, DC: Author. 

Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York, 
NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Wenger, E., & Snyder, W. (2000). Communities of practice: The organizational frontier. 
Harvard Business Review, 78(1), 139-145. 

Wenger, E., McDermott, R., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice: A 
guide to managing knowledge. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. 

Wenger, E., White, N., & Smith, J. (2009). Digital habitats: Stewarding technology for com- 
munities. Portland, OR: CPsquare. 

Wenger, E., Trayner, B., & de Laat, M. (2011). Promoting and assessing value creation 
in communities and networks: A conceptual framework. Rapport 18, Ruud de Moor 
Centrum, Open University of the Netherlands. 


206 


Fostering Success for English Learners in Turnaround Schools: 
What State Education Agencies Need to Know 
and Be Able to Do 

Robert Linquanti 

English learners (ELs) constitute one of the fastest growing K-12 public 
school student populations in the United States. Over the past 12 years, the 
EL population has grown by two-thirds to over 5 million students, and in sev- 
eral states, particularly in the southeast and midwest, it has grown by several 
hundred percent (NCELA, 2010). The broader category of language minority 
students (ages 5-17) — those from homes where a language other than or in 
addition to English is spoken — now totals nearly 12 million (Migration Policy 
Institute [MPI], 2011). This population is expected to grow to almost half the 
total U.S. K-12 public school population by the middle of this century. 

ELs also constitute a sizable subpopulation of many low-performing and 
turnaround schools (Taylor et al., 2010). For reasons explained below, this is 
not surprising: ELs are most often by definition low-performing on academic 
assessments given in English, and current definitions of the EL cohort as well 
as the structure and rules of most states’ test-based accountability systems 
effectively over represent ELs' underperformance (Ho, 2008; Hopkins et al., 
2013; Saunders & Marcelletti, 2013). 

Beyond these definitional and reporting dilemmas, there is substantial evi- 
dence that the preparation and ongoing professional development of educa- 
tors (teachers and administrators) regarding ELs is insufficient and that the 
capacity of current school systems to meet ELs’ instructional needs is often 
weak (Gandara et al., 2003; Koelsch et al., 2010). This is particularly the case 
with schools under corrective action or restructuring: Two-thirds of educators 
in these schools nationally reported needing help addressing EL instructional 


207 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


needs, and half indicated those needs were insufficiently met (Taylor et al., 

2010). ELs’ "opportunity gap" is further exacerbated by poverty, as they are 
almost twice as likely to be from low-income households as compared to their 
native English-speaking counterparts and to attend schools with higher con- 
centrations of poverty, which also have fewer educational resources and quali- 
fied teachers (Gandara et ah, 2008; MPI, 2011). The advent of next-generation 
standards and assessments — in academic content areas and English language 
proficiency (ELP) — offer both promise and peril for ELs (Linquanti, 2011) and 
heighten the urgency of addressing these issues, particularly in turnaround 
schools. 

This chapter lays out a framework of fundamental considerations with 
respect to ELs in order to foster greater understanding of their strengths and 
needs; examines the opportunities and risks for improving EL instruction and 
learning in the current context of next-generation standards and assessments, 
as well as of ESEA flexibility and Race to the Top Program requirements; and 
provides examples of innovative SEA practices for supporting local district and 
school improvement. The chapter concludes by providing key principles for SEA 
action with respect to this population in turnaround schools. 

Defining English Learners and the EL Subgroup: 
Fundamental Considerations 

In federal law, ELs are defined as students from an environment where a 
language other than or in addition to English is spoken and whose difficulties 
in speaking, reading, writing, or comprehending English may be sufficient to 
deny them the ability to effectively perform in classrooms where English is the 
medium of instruction; to achieve on state academic content assessments, or to 
participate fully in society (ESEA, Sec. 9101 (25)). Often referred to monolithi- 
cally, ELs are in reality very diverse and exhibit a wide range of language and 
academic competencies, both in English and their primary language. Importantly, 
most ELs are U.S.-born, and vary in their initial English proficiency on entry and 
time in the school system. 

A Dynamic Subgroup 

Unlike other designated student subgroups which are based on fairly stable 
student characteristics, EL subgroup status is by design temporary. ELs are 
expected to leave the category as a result of effective, specialized language 
instruction and academic support services they are legally entitled to receive. 
Moreover, EL status is operationalized typically using both linguistic and aca- 
demic performance standards, so the most linguistically and academically 
accomplished students exit the EL category over time, while those not making 
sufficient progress remain and are joined by newly entering ELs, who are by 
definition at low ELP levels (National Research Council, 2011; Wolf et al., 2008; 


208 


Fostering Success for English Learners 


Working Group on ELL Policy, 2011). Under federal accountability rules, states, 
districts, and schools are allowed to count former "exited" ELs in the EL sub- 
group for up to two years after they exit but not beyond. This inherent "revolv- 
ing door" phenomenon systematically skews EL subgroup membership toward 
lower-performing students and under represents academic performance and 
growth as reported by subgroup statistics, thereby undermining meaningful 
accountability. In particular, educators are not credited — or held accountable — 
for the long-term outcomes of all initial EL students, particularly at the second- 
ary level. 

Language Proficiency, Academic Performance, and Time 

An English learner’s ELP level clearly affects her ability to learn academic 
content in English and to demonstrate academic knowledge and skills on assess- 
ment events carried out in English — two of the defining characteristics of an EL 
in federal law. While EL students at every ELP level can access and engage with 
rigorous, grade-level content if appropriately supported to do so, ELs at higher 
levels of English proficiency are better able and more likely to learn and dem- 
onstrate knowledge and skills using English (Cook, Linquanti, Chinen, & Jung, 
2012; Walqui & Heritage, 2012). Most English learners will take four to seven 
years on average to develop the academic English capacities they need to fully 
handle grade-level content demands. The actual time required depends on such 
factors as initial English language proficiency, age/grade on entry to U.S. schools, 
and prior educational experiences (Cook et al., 2012; Cook & Zhao, 2011; Hakuta, 
Butler, & Witt, 2000; Thompson, 2012). 

Moreover, language proficiency becomes increasingly complex as students 
move through school. The kind of proficiency required for academic work in 
Grade 2, for example, is very different from that required in Grade 9, as the 
language demands of academic subject matter increase substantially each 
grade level. Typically, students at lower grade levels and lower ELP levels prog- 
ress faster than students at higher grade levels and higher ELP levels (Cook et 
al., 2008). This suggests that the characteristics and needs of ELs will change 
between lower and upper grades. In particular, it is important to distinguish ELs 
that are relative newcomers (first one or two years in the system) from current 
ELs that are "normatively" progressing and from longer-term ELs whose prog- 
ress has stalled. The proportion of longer-term ELs in secondary grades can vary 
considerably across districts and states, depending upon student characteristics, 
monitoring practices, quality of instruction, and the number and kind of exit 
criteria used (see NYC Department of Education, 2009; Thompson, 2013). Their 
stalled progress requires careful analysis to determine the underlying causes. 
Doing so typically uncovers weaknesses in progress expectations, curricular 
focus, instructional delivery, and assessment practices and can afford opportuni- 
ties to improve each. 


209 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


Finally, though perennially controversial for its association with such 
lightning-rod issues in the U.S. as immigration policy, national identity, and 
multiculturalism, the use of ELs’ primary language in instruction in addition 
to English has a strong evidence base. When well-implemented, bilingual 
instructional methods facilitate access to early literacy development and 
academic content instruction while EL students develop English language 
proficiency (Francis, Lesaux, & August, 2006). Substantial research evidence 
also highlights equivalent or modestly greater long-term academic achievement 
results in English using well-implemented bilingual instructional methods 
(Slavin & Cheung, 2005; Slavin et al., 2011). There is also solid evidence that 
bilingualism confers cognitive benefits regarding executive function, as well 
as metalinguistic and metacognitive benefits (Bialystock & Peets, 2010). Often 
overlooked, bilingualism and biliteracy also yield tangible crosscultural and 
economic value in a globalized world (Saiz & Zoido, 2005). Indeed, several states 
have recently instituted "seal of biliteracy" recognition programs 1 to signal 
their valuing of graduating students’ ability to perform academically in more 
than one language. Viewing ELs’ home language and culture as resources to be 
cultivated and leveraged, rather than as problems to be solved or eradicated, is 
a distinguishing feature of an assets orientation to EL students’ education and 
development (Ruiz, 1984; Understanding Language, 2012a; Valenzuela, 1999). 

Clearly, then, ELs are a diverse group, and important relationships exist 
among EL students’ English- and primary-language proficiency, time in the 
school system, and academic progress and performance. Before exploring the 
implications of these, it is important to briefly consider the current policy con- 
text and the significant changes underway in SEA expectations of educators and 
students. 

Next-Generation Standards, Assessment, and Accountability 

Turnaround schools and the SEAs charged with supporting them must enact 
their strategies to improve instructional practices in a policy environment 
of increasing performance expectations. These expectations have enormous 
implications for ELs, their educators, and their families, and so merit a brief 
discussion. 

First, the new college- and career-ready academic standards greatly increase 
disciplinary language demands and deeply intertwine language use with the acqui- 
sition and demonstration of content knowledge, skills, and abilities. The Common 
Core State Standards (CCSS) for English language arts, for example, expect stu- 
dents to comprehend and evaluate complex texts, construct effective arguments 
using textual evidence, discern a speaker’s key points, request clarification, ask 
relevant questions, articulate and build on ideas, and confirm that they have 
been understood (CCSS ELA standards, p. 7). Similarly, the new Math standards 

‘See http://sealofbiliteracy.org/ 


210 


Fostering Success for English Learners 


require sophisticated language uses to enact mathematical practices, such as 
constructing arguments, building a logical progression of statements to explore 
conjectures, justifying conclusions, communicating them to others, and respond- 
ing to others’ arguments (CCSS Math standards, p. 6). Also, the recently-released 
Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) delineate practices that expect stu- 
dents to ask questions and define problems, construct explanations, engage in 
argument from evidence, and communicate information effectively. Obviously, 
competence in a subject area will necessarily include mastering the language- 
related practices of that subject, and teachers will be expected to foster all stu- 
dents’ opportunities to engage in these practices and develop these language- 
intensive competencies. 

Second, next generation English-language proficiency ( ELP ') standards that 
have recently or are currently being developed reflect these increased academic 
language demands. Federal law (ESEA Titles I and III) requires states to establish 
ELP standards that correspond to the academic language demands expressed in 
the new content standards. Therefore, many states — alone or in consortia — are 
carefully delineating the language functions associated with disciplinary prac- 
tices in the content standards and increasing the rigor and relevance of their ELP 
standards to focus instructional practice on these more complex language uses, 
both during designated English language development (ELD) time and during 
content instruction (see CCSSO, 2012 for further explanation). 

Third, next generation academic content and ELP assessments will incorporate 
and assess these more rigorous language and content demands. As test develop- 
ment blueprints, pilot testing, and publicly available related resources are reveal- 
ing, the new assessments aligned to these new content standards will signifi- 
cantly increase the receptive and productive language uses required to enact the 
assessed disciplinary practices (ETS, 2012; Linquanti & Hakuta, 2012). In fact, 
at least one of the academic assessment consortia has been tagging its test items 
and performance tasks for level of linguistic complexity as part of an effort to 
understand how ELs at different ELP levels interact with items and tasks of dif- 
ferent linguistic complexity (see Cook & McDonald, 2012). 

Fourth, state agreements regarding ESEA flexibility, Race to the Top Program 
requirements, and academic content and ELP assessment consortia participation 
will all affect school and district accountability policy and practices toward ELs 
and their teachers in varying ways. Two examples illustrate the potential implica- 
tions of this dynamic and evolving policy environment: Teacher evaluation prac- 
tices need to reflect the special knowledge and skills required to effectively edu- 
cate ELs and build capacity for providing formative feedback and professional 
development support to improve instructional practice (August et al., 2012); 
and states participating in any of the federally funded consortia (PARCC, Smarter 
Balanced, ELPA21, or WIDA ASSETS) need to move toward a common definition 
of EL, which will very likely require changes in EL identification, classification, 


211 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


and reclassification policies and procedures (Linquanti & Cook, 2013). These 
substantial policy shifts will need to be very carefully managed in order to sup- 
port and not undermine effective instructional practices with ELs. 

Recommendations 

The foregoing discussion provides context and briefly highlights some of 
the key issues and substantial challenges facing school and district educators 
attempting to improve practice and outcomes for ELs. Systemic challenges 
require systemic responses. While instructional improvements must ultimately 
be enacted by teachers and students in classrooms, states should consider poli- 
cies, practices, and strategies that support district and school policies and prac- 
tices to strengthen the performance of administrators, teachers, and EL students 
in turnaround schools. Some specific recommendations for state action that 
follow from the above discussion are provided next. 

1. State actors — through policy development and resource investment — can 
promote evidence-based district and school practices that help all students, 
particularly ELs. 

There is evidence about what districts and schools that are effective with 
ELs do compared to their less effective peers (e.g., Goldenberg & Coleman, 2010; 
Horvitz et al., 2009; Parrish et al., 2006; Williams et al., 2007). They know who 
their ELs are, can clearly articulate expected linguistic and academic goals for 
these students, and design instructional programs and services around their par- 
ticular ELs’ strengths and needs. They implement standards-based instructional 
programs that are coherent and aligned within and across grade levels within 
schools and across schools within districts. There is shared responsibility and 
distributed leadership around improving the quality of instruction, addressing 
both ELD and appropriately scaffolded content instruction to ensure that stu- 
dents are developing academic language and literacy while engaging meaning- 
fully with grade-level content. Educators engage in timely and actionable assess- 
ment practices during the school year to focus instruction and regularly monitor 
and discuss student work, progress, and problems of practice. Students’ home 
language and culture are valued as resources and assets, and there is strategic 
use of the home language either to develop bilingualism and biliteracy or to build 
background knowledge, facilitate comprehension, and increase the meaning and 
relevance of grade-level content. 

States can incentivize and look for evidence of these practices in turnaround 
school plans and district support efforts and ensure that resources are dedicated 
to their development and implementation. How the latter is done is discussed 
next. 

2. State policymakers and leaders can leverage the technical assistance and 
professional development infrastructure to build teacher instructional 
capacity related to ELs. 

212 


Fostering Success for English Learners 


New college- and career-ready content standards necessitate a transforma- 
tion in teacher and administrator professional learning (Learning Forward, 
2013). Nowhere is this more important than for educators of ELs, as these stu- 
dents must master both content and corresponding English language develop- 
ment standards. States must work to ensure that their infrastructure of techni- 
cal assistance and professional development helps build teacher instructional 
capacity for ELs and other language minority students. Particular focus should 
be directed to unpacking and understanding the new state standards, recogniz- 
ing and fostering opportunities to develop sophisticated language uses through 
academic content instruction, and ensuring that ELD instruction focuses on com- 
municative competencies and strengthening language functions found within the 
content area practices. Several states are engaged in innovative efforts in these 
areas. While these initiatives are in early or experimental stages, they exemplify 
thoughtful, technology-enhanced practice that is responsive to the challenges at 
hand. Three examples follow. 

• California (the nation’s largest EL-enrolling state) is developing a first-of- 
its-kind, English Language Arts/English Language Development (ELA/ELD) 
Curriculum Framework that will guide instructional practice and curricu- 
lar materials development. This combined framework articulates guiding 
principles and provides instructional vignettes to show how teachers use 
the two sets of standards in tandem during content instruction and how 
designated ELD instruction can foster collaborative, interpretive, and pro- 
ductive language uses to engage in subject matter practices. Aligned with 
this effort, California is also funding and overseeing intermediate agencies' 
development of a series of online professional learning modules (PLMs) 
designed to help educators implement common core standards. Two of 
these PLMs focus on implementing the state ELD standards in conjunction 
with its content standards. These PLMs are designed to be used by teachers 
and administrators in facilitated professional learning communities focus- 
ing on key problems of instructional practice. The state is also funding, via 
federal Title III monies, a network of professional development and techni- 
cal assistance providers in intermediary agencies (county offices of educa- 
tion), who are also trained and supported by the state’s federally funded 
comprehensive center, to help underperforming districts and schools — 
including turnaround schools — identified under state and federal account- 
ability systems to utilize these tools in districtwide improvement efforts. 

• North Carolina, one of the southeastern states with the fastest-growing 
EL population, is partnering with Stanford University’s Understanding 
Language initiative to develop and support a statewide, networked com- 
munity of practitioners focused on strengthening teacher capacity to 
develop EL students’ disciplinary uses of language during content instruc- 
tion. Regional groups of district and school teams from across the state will 


213 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


be trained in implementing common core-aligned model units of study in 
English-language arts and mathematics. For example, the ELA exemplar 
five-week unit — already piloted in Charlotte-Mecklenburg, the state’s larg- 
est EL-enrolling district — features a multimedia, multimodal curriculum 
that focuses students on analyzing and producing persuasive oral and 
written texts (Understanding Language, 2012b). Teachers will be further 
trained as trainers and supported to develop additional units of study 
through a massive online open course (MOOC) and will receive ongoing 
support via the state’s Race to The Top regional support network. 

• Minnesota is partnering with the Academic Language Development (ALD) 
Network 2 — a research and professional development collaborative of 
universities, SEAs, educators, and service providers — to build instructional 
capacity statewide to develop the academic language, literacy, and cognitive 
skills called for under new content and ELP standards. Network techni- 
cal assistance providers are training Minnesota Department of Education 
design teams in ALD instructional practice frames and corresponding 
rubrics that articulate best practices for academic language and literacy 
development for ELs. In addition, Minnesota is working with the Network 
both to deliver webinars for educators and administrators statewide that 
explain and illustrate the practices, and to build capacity of regional profes- 
sional development centers to train and support teachers and leaders to 
enact these instructional practices with ELs at their school sites. 

3. State policymakers can refine accountability frameworks to be more mean- 
ingful, useful, and responsive to ELs and their educators. 

As described above, substantial empirical evidence demonstrates the connec- 
tion between students' English language proficiency and their ability to learn in 
English-medium classrooms and demonstrate knowledge on assessments using 
English. Since EL students enter at different levels of initial English proficiency, 
and it takes time to learn the more rigorous, academic uses of English signaled 
in new standards, new models of accountability are warranted to take these 
realities into account. NCLB helped shine a spotlight on the EL subgroup, but 
the law’s shortcomings — proficient status-bar progress standards, an unstable 
EL cohort definition, incoherence between expectations for ELP progress under 
Title III and academic achievement of all students (100%) under Title I — are 
now readily apparent. While ESEA reauthorization continues to stall, states 
have, through their ESEA waivers, proposed and are beginning to implement 
new accountability models that provide more meaningful expectations and send 
clearer signals to educators, students, and other stakeholders. Texas, for example, 
is proposing to define rigorous progress expectations for ELs’ English language 
development by initial language proficiency level and time in the state system 

2 See www.aldnetwork.org 


214 


Fostering Success for English Learners 


and to also benchmark ELs’ expected academic progress by time and initial ELP 
level. In this way, meaningful markers of linguistic and academic progress that 
are sensitive to ELs’ starting points can be defined and measured. Several other 
states are considering similar approaches. Many EL researchers and policy 
experts (e.g., Hopkins et al., 2013; Saunders & Marcelletti, 2013; Working Group 
on ELL Policy, 2011) have also proposed ways to stabilize the EL cohort in order 
to examine and report more accurately the long-term outcomes of all initial EL 
students, including current normatively-progressing ELs, longer-term ELs whose 
progress has stalled, and ELs who have met exit criteria. These more coherent 
frameworks increase the fairness and precision of the accountability system and 
allow it to send clearer signals to educators on which students are and are not 
progressing in rigorous and reasonable time frames. More refined accountability 
systems can also more accurately identify which underperforming schools and 
districts are improving at accelerating their students’ progress. 

4. State and local leaders can ensure teacher evaluation policies recognize the 
special knowledge and skills required to effectively educate ELs and build 
capacity to provide formative feedback and professional development sup- 
port to improve instructional practice. 

As implied by the instructional capacity building and accountability frame- 
work above, teacher evaluation policies need to recognize the interrelationship 
of ELP progress, time, and academic progress when considering the performance 
of ELs. Also, particularly at the secondary level, evaluation policies need to rec- 
ognize that ESL/ELD teachers contribute to an EL student’s ability to perform 
on academic content assessments in English. Recent rigorous research from the 
Measures of Effective Teaching (MET) project has demonstrated that teacher 
evaluation systems yield more valid and reliable results when they reach beyond 
student test scores and incorporate a more balanced set of multiple measures 
(MET, 2013). These include multiple observations of teacher practice over time 
by trained peers with opportunities for actionable formative feedback and self- 
reflection and student perception surveys that both "reflect the theory of instruc- 
tion defining expectations for teachers in the system" and that elicit student 
responses to their experience of teacher expectations, support, and feedback 
(MET, 2012, pp. 4-6). This approach to teacher evaluation also strengthens 
reciprocal accountability for instructional capacity-building and expected perfor- 
mance needed between educational policy makers and teachers (Elmore, 2002). 

Such large EL-enrolling districts as Denver and Los Angeles are currently 
implementing teacher evaluation systems that include these kinds of multiple 
measures, phased in over multiple years, and that reflect their districts’ focus on 
effective instructional strategies for ELs in all classrooms. Denver’s Framework 
for Effective Teaching, for example, provides the foundation for the district’s 
teacher evaluation system and targets pedagogical practices that are particularly 


215 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


important for ELs, such as scaffolding students’ interpretive, productive, and 
collaborative academic language uses, while also providing professional develop- 
ment to support teachers in using the new CCSS and ELP standards within the 
framework (see August et al., 2012, for more information). States can easily learn 
from these local efforts to apply the lessons from research evidence and adjust 
their state policies and frameworks accordingly. 

5. State policymakers can support dual-language instructional approaches 
where there are sufficient primary-language students, teacher expertise and 
materials, and community support. 

As noted earlier, there is substantial research evidence that use of dual- 
language instructional methods is beneficial to the development of EL students’ 
literacy and content performance in English. While the positive effects of these 
methods have been small to moderate, there are additional (typically unmea- 
sured) benefits of increased metacognitive and metalinguistic ability, as well as 
bilingualism and biliteracy. In schools without a sufficient primary language EL 
group, teacher expertise and materials, and community support to implement 
full dual-language programs, teachers with sufficient second language compe- 
tence can utilize instructional supports in the student’s primary language. For 
example, drawing attention to cognates, providing brief explanations in the home 
language, providing lesson preview and review, and teaching learning strategies 
in the home language all help to build background knowledge, facilitate compre- 
hension in ELs with beginning levels of English proficiency, and build stronger 
home-school connections (Goldenberg, 2013). 

Several states, including California, New York, and Illinois, have established 
"Seal of Biliteracy" programs to recognize those EL and native English-speaking 
students that are progressing toward and attaining communicative competence, 
literacy, and academic attainment in two languages. Some of these states are 
also framing college- and career-ready standards implementation for ELs using 
a bilingual/biliteracy development perspective. For example, New York has 
launched a Bilingual Common Core Initiative to provide resources and build the 
capacity of bilingual, ESL, and other language teachers to provide instruction that 
makes the Common Core state standards accessible to students at various lan- 
guage proficiency and literacy levels. The initiative explicitly values bilingualism 
both as a point of departure for language instruction and as goal for all language 
learners, including ELs and monolingual English speakers developing second 
language competence and biliteracy (NYS Bilingual Common Core Initiative, 
2013). As such, New York has produced both New and Home Language Arts 
Progressions, parallel sets of developmental language progressions that help 
students access grade level language arts content found in New York’s Common 
Core Learning Standards. Embedded within the progressions are clear articu- 
lations of the linguistic and academic content demands, as well as curricular 
examples to help teachers address the related linguistic demands in English and 


216 


Fostering Success for English Learners 


other languages. Innovative approaches such as these recognize and build on the 
assets of ELs and the inherent value of their home languages and cultures, which 
in turn help to strengthen home-school connections. 

Action Principles 

Supporting schools engaged in turnaround is a challenge requiring coher- 
ent, sustained, and focused effort. As many of these schools serve ELs and other 
linguistic minority students, state education agencies must align policies and 
resources to systematically build the capacity of educators in these schools to 
strengthen instructional practice with these students. Fortunately, what has been 
shown to be effective practice with all students generally is applicable to ELs as 
well, but additional instructional supports are also needed (Goldenberg, 2013). 
The foregoing discussion has laid out the fundamental considerations regard- 
ing the EL subgroup and briefly explored some critical factors in the current 
policy context, including most obviously the implementation of new college- and 
career-ready standards and assessments and aligned ELP standards and assess- 
ments, as well as emerging differentiated accountability and evaluation systems. 
As states move forward, they should consider the following principles for action, 
distilled from recommendations elaborated above: 

Promote evidence-based district and school practices that help all stu- 
dents, particularly ELs 

• Consider key practices evident in districts and schools that are more effec- 
tive with ELs, which include articulating clear linguistic and academic 
progress and achievement goals; implementing coherent and aligned 
instructional programs; distributing leadership and building internal 
accountability for developing students’ daily academic uses of language via 
carefully scaffolded content instruction, as well as rigorous and aligned ELD 
instruction; strengthening instructional practice through timely and action- 
able assessment practices and regular discussions of student work; and 
tapping students' home languages and cultures as resources and assets. 

• Incentivize and look for evidence of these practices in turnaround school 
plans and district support efforts, and ensure that resources are dedicated 
to their development and implementation. 

Leverage the state's technical assistance and professional development 
infrastructure to build teacher instructional capacity related to ELs 

• Ensure the technical assistance/professional development infrastructure 
supports teachers to unpack and understand the new state standards, 
recognize and foster opportunities to develop sophisticated language uses 
through academic content instruction, and ensure that ELD instruction 
builds communicative competencies and strengthens language functions 
found within content area practices. 


217 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


Refine accountability frameworks to be more meaningful, useful, and 
responsive to ELs and their educators 

• Recognize the relationship between EL students’ academic language devel- 
opment and their ability to learn in English-medium classrooms and dem- 
onstrate knowledge on assessments using English. 

• Set reasonable and rigorous, empirically informed expectations for ELD 
progress by initial ELP level and time and for academic progress and profi- 
ciency by time and expected ELP level (or actual if higher than expected). 

• Stabilize the EL cohort to examine and report more accurately the long- 
term outcomes of all initial EL students, including current normatively- 
progressing ELs, longer-term ELs whose progress has stalled, and ELs who 
have met exit criteria. 

Ensure teacher evaluation policies recognize the special knowledge and 
skills required to effectively educate ELs, and build capacity to provide 
formative feedback and professional development support to improve 
instructional practice 

• Conduct multiple observations of teacher practice over time using 
trained peers, with opportunities for actionable formative feedback and 
self-reflection. 

• Use student perception surveys that reflect the theory of instruction defin- 
ing expectations for teachers and that elicit student responses to their 
experience of teacher expectations, support, and feedback. 

Support dual-language instructional approaches where there are suf- 
ficient primary-language students, teacher expertise and materials, and 
community support to implement them effectively 

• Recognize that dual language instruction can enhance early literacy devel- 
opment and academic content instruction while EL students develop 
English-language proficiency, improve literacy and content performance 
in English, increase metacognitive and metalinguistic abilities, and foster 
bilingualism and biliteracy. 

• If dual language programs are not feasible, encourage primary-language 
support strategies (e.g., drawing attention to cognates, providing brief 
explanations or lesson preview/review, teaching learning strategies in the 
home language), which can build background knowledge, facilitate compre- 
hension in ELs with beginning levels of English proficiency, and strengthen 
home-school connections. 

• Consider supporting local or statewide "Seal of Biliteracy" recognition pro- 
grams to signal that EL students’ home languages and cultures are assets 
and resources to be developed. 


218 


Fostering Success for English Learners 


References 

August, D., Estrada, J., & Boyle, A. (2012], Supporting English language learners: A pocket 
guide for state and district leaders. Washington, DC: American Institutes for Research. 
Retrieved from http://www.air.org/files/ELL_Pocket_Guidel.pdf 

Bialystock, E., & Peets, K. (2010], Bilingualism and cognitive linkages: Learning to read 
in different languages. In M. Schatz & L. Wilkinson (Eds.], The education of English lan- 
guage learners: Research to practice (pp. 133-151], New York, NY: Guilford Press. 

Cook, G., Linquanti, R., Chinen, M., & Jung, H. [2012], National evaluation of Title III 
implementation supplemental report: Exploring approaches to setting English lan- 
guage proficiency performance criteria and monitoring English learner progress. 
Washington DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation and 
Policy Development. 

Cook, H. G., & MacDonald, R. [2013], Tool to evaluate language complexity of test items 
(WCER Working Paper No. 2013-5], Madison, WI: Wisconsin Center for Education 
Research. Retrieved from http://www.wcer.wisc.edu/publications/workingPapers/ 
Working_Paper_No_2013_05.php 

Cook, H. G., & Zhao, Y. G. (2011, April], How English language proficiency assessments 
manifest growth. Paper presented at annual meeting of the American Educational 
Research Association, New Orleans, LA. 

Cook, H. G., Boals, T., Wilmes, C., & Santos, M. (2008], Issues in the development of annual 
measurable achievement objectives for WIDA consortium states. (WCER Working 
Paper No. 2008-2], Madison, WI: Wisconsin Center for Education Research. Retrieved 
from http://www.wcer.wisc.edu/publications/workingPapers/Working_Paper_ 
No_2008_02.php 

Council of Chief State School Officers. (2012], Framework for English language profi- 
ciency development standards corresponding to the Common Core State Standards and 
the Next Generation Science Standards. Washington, DC: Author. 

Educational Testing Service. (2012]. Coming together to raise achievement: New assess- 
ments for the Common Core State Standards. Princeton, NJ: Center for K-12 Assessment 
& Performance Management at ETS. 

Elmore, R. (2002], Bridging the gap between standards and achievement: The impera- 
tive for professional development in education. Washington, DC: The Albert Shanker 
Institute. 

Francis, D., Lesaux, N., & August, D. (2006], Language of instruction. In D. August & 

T. Shanahan (Eds.], Developing literacy in second-language learners: Report of the 
national literacy panel on language-minority children and youth (pp. 365-410], 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Gandara, P., Rumberger, R., Maxwell-Jolly, J., & Callahan, R. (2003], English learners in 
California schools: Unequal resources, unequal outcomes. Education Policy Analysis 
Archives, 11(36], 1-54. 

Gandara, P., Maxwell-Jolly, J., & Rumberger, R. (2008], Resource needs for English learners: 
Getting down to policy recommendations. Santa Barbara, CA: University of California 
Linguistic Minority Research Institute Education Policy Center. 


219 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


Goldenberg, C. (2013). Unlocking the research on English learners: What we know — and 
don’t yet know — about effective instruction. American Educator, 37(2), 4-11. 

Goldenberg, C., & Coleman, R. (2010). Promoting academic achievement among English 
learners: A guide to the research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. 

Horwitz, A., Uro, G., Price-Baugh, R., Simon, C., Uzzell, R., Lewis, S., & Casserly, M. (2009). 
Succeeding with English language learners: Lessons learned from the great city schools. 
Washington DC: Council of the Great City Schools. 

Hakuta, K., Butler, Y., & Witt, D. (2000). How long does it take English learners to attain 
proficiency? (Policy Report No. 2000-1). Santa Barbara, CA: University of California 
Linguistic Minority Research Institute. 

Ho, A. (2008). The problem with “proficiency": Limitations of statistics and policy under 
No Child Left Behind. Educational Researcher, 37(6), 351-360. 

Hopkins, M., Thompson, K. D., Linquanti, R., Hakuta, K., & August, D. (2013). Fully 
accounting for English learner performance: A key issue in ESEA reauthorization. 
Educational Researcher, 42(2), 101-108. 

Koelsch, N., Walqui, A., Hamburger, L., Gaarder, D., Insaurralde, A., Schmida, M.,.. .Estrada, 
P. (2010). What are we doing to middle school English learners? Findings and recom- 
mendations for change from a study of California EL programs. Research report. San 
Francisco, CA: WestEd. 

Learning Forward. (2013). Seizing the moment: State lessons for transforming profes- 
sional learning. Retrieved from http://www.learningforward.org/docs/default- 
source / commoncore / seizing-the-moment.pdf 

Linquanti, R. (2011). Strengthening assessment for English learner success: How can 
the promise of the common core state standards and innovative assessment systems 
be realized? In D. Plank & J. Norton (Eds.), The road ahead for state assessments (pp. 
13-25). Palo Alto, CA and Cambridge, MA: Policy Analysis for California Education and 
Rennie Center for Education Research & Policy. 

Linquanti, R., & Hakuta, K. (2012). How next generation standards and assessments can 
foster success for California’s English learners (PACE Policy Brief No. 12-1). Palo Alto, 
CA: Policy Analysis for California Education. 

Measures of Effective Teaching Project. (2012). Asking students about teaching: Student 
perception surveys and their implementation (Policy and Practice Brief). Seattle, WA: 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. 

Measures of Effective Teaching Project. (2013). Ensuring fair and reliable measures of 
effective teaching: Culminating findings from the MET project’s three-year study (Policy 
and Practice Brief). Seattle, WA: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. 

Migration Policy Institute. (2011). The United States fact sheet: Language and education. 
Retrieved from http://www.migrationinformation.org/datahub/state2. cfm?ID=US 

National Clearinghouse on English Language Acquisition [NCELA]. (2010). Data and 
demographics population map. EL student growth over 1 0 years, by county, 1 999/2000- 
2009/10. Retrieved from http://www.ncela.gwu.edu/content/42_elgrowth00_10 


220 


Fostering Success for English Learners 


New York City Department of Education, Office of English Language Learners. (2009], 
Diverse learners on the road to success: The performance of New York City’s English 
Language Learners. Retrieved from http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/3B377E6B- 
5E22-4E63-A4DA-2B7FD14E5D62/57000/ELLPerformanceReport2009.pdf 

New York State Bilingual Common Core Initiative. [2013], Teacher’s guide to implement 
the bilingual common core progressions. Retrieved from http://www.engageny.org/ 
resource/new-york-state-bilingual-common-core-initiative 

Parrish, T., Perez, M., Merickel, A., & Linquanti, R. (2006], Effects of the implementation 
of Proposition 227 on the education of English learners, K-12: Findings from a five-year 
evaluation (Final Report]. Palo Alto, CA and San Francisco, CA: AIR and WestEd. 

Ruiz, R. [1984], Orientations in language planning./ourna/ of the National Association of 
Bilingual Education, 2, 15-34. 

Saiz, A., & Zoido, E. [2005], Listening to what the world says: Bilingualism and earnings 
in the United States. Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(3], 523-538. 

Saunders, W., & Marcelletti, D. (2013], The gap that can't go away: The Catch-22 of 
reclassification in monitoring the progress of English learners. Educational Evaluation 
and Policy Analysis, 35(2], 139-156. 

Slavin, R., Madden, N., Calderon, M., Chamberlain, A., & Hennessy, M. (2011], Reading 
and language outcomes of a multiyear randomized evaluation of transitional bilingual 
education. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 33(1], 47-58. 

Slavin, R., & Cheung, A. (2005], A synthesis of research on language of reading instruc- 
tion for English-language learners. Review of Educational Research, 75, 247-281. 

Taylor, Stecher, B., O'Day, J., Naftel, S., & Le Floch, K. C. (2010], State and local imple- 
mentation of the No Child Left Behind Act (Volume IX — Accountability under NCLB: 
Final Report], Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. 

Thompson, K. (2012], Are we there yet? Exploring English learners’ journey to reclassifica- 
tion and beyond (Unpublished doctoral dissertation], Stanford University, Stanford, CA. 

Thompson, K. (2013, April], Questioning the long-term English learner label: How catego- 
rization can blind us to students’ abilities. Paper presented at the annual conference of 
the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA. 

Understanding Language Initiative. (2012a], Principles for ELL instruction. Retrieved 
from http://ell.stanford.edu/policy 

Understanding Language Initiative. (2012b], Teaching resources/English Language Arts. 
Retrieved from http://ell.stanford.edu/teaching_resources/ela 

Valenzuela, A. (1999], Subtractive schooling: U.S.-Mexican youth and the politics of caring. 
New York, NY: SUNY Press. 

Walqui, A., & Heritage, M. (2012], Instruction for diverse groups of English language 
learners. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Understanding Language Initiative. 

Williams, T., Hakuta, K., Haertel, E., & Kirst, M. (2007], Similar English learner students, 
different results: Why do some schools do better? A follow-up analysis, based on a large- 
scale survey of California elementary schools serving low-income and EL students. 
Mountain View, CA: EdSource. 


221 


Handbook on School Turnarounds 


Wolf, M. K., Kao, J., Griffin, N., Herman, J., Bachman, P., Chang, S., & Farnsworth, T. (2008], 
Issues in assessing English language learners: English language proficiency measures 
and accommodation uses (Practice Review; CRESST Report No. 732], Los Angeles, CA: 
UCLA. 

Working Group on ELL Policy. [2011]. Improving educational outcomes for English 
language learners: Recommendations for the reauthorization of the Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act: Questions and answers. Stanford, CA: Author. Retrieved from 
http:/ /ellpolicy.org/wp-content/ uploads / QA.pdf 


222 


Building Rural District Capacity for Turnaround 

Sam Redding and Herbert J. Walberg 


Rural schools generally hold their own compared with urban and subur- 
ban schools when it comes to student achievement. However, when a rural 
school persistently underachieves, turning it around presents challenges unlike 
those in more populated settings. Especially, rural schools tend to be situated 
within small, rural districts with lean central office staff, geographic separa- 
tion from external resources, and limited capacity for the heavy lifting of school 
turnaround. 

The Center on School Turnaround (CST) administered a questionnaire on 
what senior state education agency (SEA) staff from 13 states observed about 
the implementation of turnaround strategies in rural SEAs. 1 An analysis of the 
questionnaire responses and the literature on rural schools shows that many of 
the problems rural educators face overlap considerably with those of urban and 
suburban educators, but some of their problems are distinctive and even unique. 
This chapter considers the strengths and unique challenges of rural local educa- 
tion agencies (LEAs) and schools and focuses on solutions for those identified to 
be turned around. The recommendations for the SEA address rural LEAs’ per- 
ceived disadvantages and leverage the advantages of rural settings. 

Background 

This chapter draws on the previous review of the characteristics and opti- 
mal procedures and policies for improving rural schools (Redding & Walberg, 

'Unpublished research of Redding, S. (2013, January): Turnaround in Rural LEAs and Schools. To protect 
their privacy, neither the names of the staff nor the states are disclosed here since their responses to ques- 
tions were given with an understanding of confidentiality. Their answers, moreover, should not be con- 
strued as official SEA policies. 


223 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


2012) and the responses to the CST's recent questionnaire administered to SEA 
officials. The Redding and Walberg review pointed out that before 1900, most 
American students went to small schools in small school districts in small, rural 
communities. Over recent decades, however, both schools and districts grew 
dramatically in size. 

Districts merged and consolidated to grow in size as they decreased in 
number, from about 115,000 school districts at one time, many responsible for 
a single, sometimes one-room school a century and more ago, to about 15,000 
districts today. In the half-century from 1940 to 1990, the size of the average 
U.S. school district rose from 217 to 2,637 students — a factor of more than 10 — 
and the size of the average school rose from 127 to 653 (Walberg & Walberg, 
1994). In the last two decades, districts (including those in rural areas and not 
including charter districts) grew smaller in number and larger in enrollment. 

Strengths of Rural Communities 

The fact that students in rural schools, across the board, achieve as well as 
their counterparts in suburban and urban areas attests to assets of rural commu- 
nities that may be leveraged in school turnarounds. Among other studies of the 
impact of school district size on achievement, Walberg and Fowler (1987) ana- 
lyzed the relationship between average test scores of third, sixth, and ninth grad- 
ers in all New Jersey rural, suburban, and urban districts. Controlling for district 
socioeconomic status (SES) and taking per-student expenditures into account, 
the smaller the district, the higher the achievement. It is certainly true that small 
districts exist in urban and suburban areas and that some rural districts are 
large. This chapter’s focus on the capacity of rural districts to manage school 
turnaround will assume that low-capacity rural districts are typically small. 

What leads to generally higher achievement of smaller districts at reasonable 
cost? Close oversight of the school by a school board with strong commitment 
to the community can be an advantage. Although close community ties can also 
undermine a school board’s impetus to make necessary changes in personnel 
who might be kin or close neighbors, school boards in small districts benefit 
from familiarity with the internal operations of their schools and the people who 
staff them. 

The "social capital" inherent to communities in which people live in close 
proximity, bound by multiple relationships, and with personal connections to 
one another and each other’s children is of immeasurable value. In a study of 
high-performing, high-needs rural schools, Barley and Beesley (2007) found that 
supportive relationships with families were strongly associated with the success 
of rural schools. Teachers in rural schools exhibit an impressively high concern 
for their students’ lives beyond the classroom and accept responsibility for sup- 
porting their students’ social and behavioral needs (Roeser & Midgley, 1997). 


224 


Building Rural District Capacity for Turnaround 


In all rural schools, moreover, certain characteristics may accrue positively 
to student motivation to learn and to their levels of achievement. Witte and 
Sheridan (2011) write: 

Because of their centrality within the community, rural schools routinely 
connect with families in multiple capacities as part of typical daily routines. 
Rural schools provide opportunities for community communication and 
participation. In many rural communities, the local school building is a point 
of pride for the community and houses sporting and cultural events, civic 
activities, and shelter during severe weather. Teachers serve as coaches 
and club sponsors, which means that they have frequent and varied contact 
with students at multiple age and academic levels and with their families. 
Administrators are often highly accessible, active members of the community, 
allowing them to connect with families in a variety of ways. (p. 153) 

Although the opportunity for frequent contact among school personnel and 
students’ families may be significant in rural communities, the quality of the 
interaction cannot be taken for granted. School personnel must intentionally take 
advantage of their interactions with families and community members to influ- 
ence prevailing attitudes and behaviors that impact student learning. 

Obstacles to School Turnaround in Rural LEAs and Schools 

Some rural communities and schools may present unique challenges for 
educators, particularly when the district is small (low capacity to manage turn- 
around), remote (distant from support services), and serving a high-poverty 
population. Poverty rates are rising in some rural schools (Schafft, Prins, & Movit, 
2008), and their communities suffer from a paucity of social and behavioral 
services for families (DeLeon, Wakefield, & Hagglund, 2003). Rural schools may 
experience high teacher turnover, with their teaching staff consisting of a dis- 
proportionate number of newly credentialed teachers who replace the teachers 
who leave (Monk, 2007). The pattern of school closures and district and school 
consolidation has disrupted many small communities and distanced families 
from their children's schools (Barley & Beesley, 2007). Limited resources require 
schools to do more with less (Monk, 2007). 

Though the centrality of the school to rural community life may be an asset, it 
also places added demands on educators to serve functions beyond that of their 
primary purpose of education (National Education Association, 2008). Parents in 
rural schools attend school events more often than in urban and suburban com- 
munities, but they also talk less often with their children about school programs 
and interact less frequently with teachers than parents in other settings (Prater, 
Bermudez, & Owens, 1997). In closely knit rural communities, a distrust of "out- 
siders" often places barriers to collaboration between new school personnel and 
families (Owens, Richerson, Murphy, Jageleweski, & Rossi, 2007). This tendency 


225 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


may be further aggravated by the high teacher turnover and some teachers’ 
desire to live outside the community and commute to work. 

Successful school turnaround seldom occurs due to the school’s own change 
in direction without external pressure and support. The LEA is the likely chan- 
nel for pressure and conduit for support, but the capacity of small, rural LEAs to 
manage the turnaround of its schools is limited by the size and narrow span of 
expertise of the central office and the distance from service providers. Studies 
of rural turnaround and the insights of SEA respondents to the Center on School 
Turnaround’s questionnaire cite additional obstacles to school turnaround in 
rural districts. 

Student Motivation to Learn in Rural Schools 

Employment in rural areas has traditionally been linked to agriculture, and 
farm-related jobs did not require post secondary education. This has certainly 
changed over the years, as agribusiness has increasingly demanded a skilled 
and educated workforce. But community attitudes toward education sometimes 
lag behind the requirements of the workplace. Perhaps as a consequence of the 
depopulation in rural areas, rural educators often attest to a dampening effect on 
student aspirations where families do not see education as an essential vehicle 
to advancement in life, and the improved life chances an education provides 
require relocation away from a shrinking rural community. Many of the issues 
they face also confront urban and suburban educators, and rural communi- 
ties offer several distinctive educational advantages. Low student motivation to 
learn is a problem often cited by rural educators, although the research does not 
clearly substantiate that this problem is greater in rural schools than in nonrural 
schools (Yang & Fetsch, 2007). Rather, it seems a widespread problem in most of 
the nation’s schools — rural, urban, and suburban (Christensen & Horn, 2008). 

Motivation to learn is typically defined as the interaction between the stu- 
dent’s value for the learning task and the student’s perception of self-efficacy in 
mastering the task (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). Although Yang and Fetch (2007) 
found the perception of self-efficacy among rural students to be no less substan- 
tial than that of nonrural students, other studies indicate that rural students are 
inordinately inclined to not value the learning goals of their schools (Hardre, 
Crowson, DeBacker, & White, 2007). For rural students inhibited by a "low hori- 
zon" mindset, the educational remedies are similar as those for students in other 
settings. The centrality of the school to rural community life, however, places 
a greater responsibility on the rural school to elevate students’ aspirations. 
Likewise, the avenues to higher academic achievement are largely the same in 
rural as in urban and suburban schools. 

A few respondents to the SEA questionnaire shifted the "low horizon" prob- 
lem from the students to the community and the school personnel. One respon- 
dent stated simply that there is a "lack of urgency about 'why our kids need to 


226 


Building Rural District Capacity for Turnaround 


be prepared for college.’" Another noted: "Many of the community members had 
a 'small town’ mentality that they didn’t think their school could be on a list for 
Persistently Lowest Achieving Schools." In the opinion of a third respondent, 
in many rural areas there is a deficiency in the "community appreciation of the 
value of an education." 

Professional Practice in Rural Schools 

With little district capacity to support its schools’ improvement efforts and 
few education service providers, including SEAs nearby, the rural school may rely 
more heavily on its own resources and ingenuity to drive its improvement than 
elsewhere. That is not necessarily a bad thing, but it requires teaming, defined 
purposes, ample planning, and disciplined work. Schools improve when profes- 
sional practice improves, and good leadership and teaching practices are not 
different in rural than in nonrural schools. 

When the remoteness of a rural community is a barrier to attracting and 
retaining educational leaders and teachers, the school’s internal systems for 
ensuring consistent application of effective practice is paramount. The policies, 
programs, procedures, and practices must be engrained in the daily operations 
of the school in ways that optimize the productivity of current staff and readily 
assimilate new staff. 

Lean and Low-Capacity LEAs and Schools 

The process of recruiting, hiring, placing, evaluating, and supporting the 
improvement of school staff is typically a chief responsibility of the LEA. In rural 
LEAs, however, the central office itself is small and lacking in expertise for per- 
sonnel management. "Rural LEAs often have smaller central office structures, 
with fewer leaders overseeing multiple programs. In some cases, the individual 
had the experience and capacity to manage the implementation of a School 
Improvement Grant (SIG) locally, but in many, SIG proved to be an overwhelm- 
ing task initially," is how one questionnaire respondent explained the problem. 
Another state official explained how a lack of specialized skills impacts rural 
schools: 

Rural schools may not have curriculum directors, data specialists, assessment 
coordinators, subject-specific instructional coaches, or assistant principals. 
These roles either go unmet or fall to the person whose assignment most 
closely aligns. Or, it all falls to the principal, who is soon overwhelmed and 
cannot focus on the classroom instruction. That is where the SIG grant helps 
level the playing field a bit, allowing these schools to fund these positions for 
at least the duration of the grant and gives them a chance to think about how 
to sustain them after the grant funding ends. Some of these roles are just not 
filled. 

Evaluation of SIG in rural schools and follow-up studies that track the sus- 
tainability of gains when resources are reduced will shed light on the impact 


227 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


specialized personnel have on a turnaround and the ability of schools to retain 
such personnel or perpetuate their influences beyond the SIG grant period. 

Human Capital in Rural Schools 

Asked to name the biggest challenges facing turnaround efforts in rural 
schools, the SEA respondents to the questionnaire overwhelmingly cited mat- 
ters of human capital. Recruiting, retaining, evaluating, and elevating the per- 
formance of leaders and teachers proves especially problematic in rural LEAs 
and particularly so in remote areas. One state official expressed concern about 
the requirements in the federal SIG program to replace principals and, in some 
models, a majority of school staff: 

The SIG requirement to replace the principal was very damaging to the 
process of building trust and partnership between the SEA and the LEAs and 
ignored rural challenges to recruit and retain quality, committed staff. There 
has been teacher and staff turnover that has occurred over time, with more 
strategy and intention than outlined by SIG requirements. Hiring and retain- 
ing high-quality staff and teachers continues to be a challenge with rural 
school environments. At the same time, maintaining support for and shared 
ownership of the SIG process has been difficult to establish and maintain 
with some school staff. Some staff and teachers have not been receptive to 
professional development or new instructional opportunities, hampering the 
progress of the effort. 

This state official succinctly states the human capital problem that other offi- 
cials named in pointing to challenges encountered in rural school turnaround. 
Another official in a largely rural, Western state, elaborated on this theme. 

Rural LEAs struggle with human capital issues in ways that seem to differ 
substantially from urban locations. Rural LEAs are often situated much 
farther away from universities and metropolitan areas from which they can 
recruit new and effective personnel. Therefore, they often find themselves in 
a situation in which they must strategically develop the human capital that 
they already have, when possible, and only let go of those who are the most 
difficult to improve. It makes the SIG turnaround model a very unlikely option 
in rural settings. 

An additional element of human capital management in rural settings is the 
organizational structure. Though SIG expects collaboration among teachers for 
data analysis, many rural schools are very small. Many only have one teacher per 
grade level. This makes organizational change in the system very difficult. As an 
example, in a larger school, it is easier to develop structures and schedules that 
capitalize on the assets of the "many" in order to provide collaboration time for 
the "few" (e.g., scheduling PE and pull-out classes so multiple teachers can have 
a common collaboration time). This economy of scale is more difficult with small 
workforces. 


228 


Building Rural District Capacity for Turnaround 


"The pool of applicants for both leadership and teaching positions is signifi- 
cantly smaller in rural areas," a state official noted. For younger and older poten- 
tial recruits at all levels, rural areas may be perceived to lack the economic and 
cultural advantages of cities and suburbs including, for example, shopping malls 
or religious and other social organizations (American Institutes for Research, 
2012). 

Human Capital in Rural LEAs 

The LEA staff is usually smaller in rural school districts, but their responsi- 
bilities are just as important as those in cities that can afford large numbers of 
specialized staff, for example, those in several kinds of special education and 
second-language learning. Dedicated specialists may be reluctant to carry out 
responsibilities beyond their ken and even to work in the absence of colleagues 
in their own specialty. 

An additional human capital issue in rural districts is related to community 
dynamics. In an urban setting, people are often "anonymous" in relation to their 
local school. However, in rural communities, everybody knows everyone. ..and 
their business. The school board chair may be married to or the cousin of or the 
brother-in-law of the worst teacher in the district. The principal may also be the 
elder at the local church. In other words, influence can be unduly disseminated 
because of the social structures, making the organizational politics of rural dis- 
tricts more challenging than in some of their urban counterparts. Thus the prob- 
lem of human capital is deeper than the paucity of candidates for recruitment. 
The nature of rural communities, itself, complicates personnel decisions. As 
one SEA official observed: "Changing the culture of the school is harder because 
staff members are alumni or other long-term residents who don’t always have a 
broader vision of what K-12 education can/should provide." 

Access to Technical Assistance and Professional Development 

Rural LEAs are usually far from key resources such as technical assistance 
easily accessed by urban schools. Service providers may have to drive for sev- 
eral hours to reach rural schools, which makes their recruitment difficult and 
may add to service costs. Being smaller, moreover, rural LEAs and schools have 
smaller budgets from federal and state sources to purchase services. Thus, rural 
educators may face higher costs and fewer services. Rural education leaders 
cannot easily send staff to urban centers since substantial transportation and 
ground costs may be incurred, and substitute pools are likely to be smaller in 
their communities. 

One SEA respondent noted: "In rural LEAs, there are fewer opportunities for 
professional development. Due to multiple job-related assignments, the district/ 
school may not have internal specialists to provide ongoing PD. In addition, these 
schools must travel longer distances to participate in PD when available in the 
state or region. Smaller budgets and juggling the LEA needs among a small staff 


229 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


makes it difficult to find substitutes and/or release staff to attend off-site PD." 
Another respondent emphasized the paucity of time available for instructional 
improvement: "With a small amount of staff in some of the rural schools, it is 
hard to find the time to meet and work on strategies/interventions when one 
teacher wears many hats." 

Overcoming the Obstacles 

The obstacles to school turnaround faced by rural LEAs are largely those of 
human capital, which includes recruitment and retention of quality staff, access 
to resources for professional development, lack of specialized staff, and limita- 
tions in exposing students to a rich curriculum, expertly provided. 

Staff Recruitment and Retention 

SEAs can be helpful in solving these problems by allocating special resources, 
staff, and time. SEA staff can inform LEA and school staff about solutions that 
have worked well in rural schools. Young, idealistic Teach for America teachers, 
for example, have been helpful as beginning teachers with special assistance 
from school, district, and state professionals, as well as serving as co-teachers 
with successful teachers before assuming their full responsibilities similar to 
those of conventionally trained teachers. 

Similar examples for an SEA role in recruiting leaders and teachers for rural 
and other hard-to-staff schools have also proven worthwhile. Some rural recruit- 
ers travel to college job fairs and inform potential recruits that they will them- 
selves be taught and given experiences to begin a highly successful professional 
career. Their recruitment conversation makes clear what the LEA can do for the 
new teacher and vice versa. Even though they may not keep beginners long, they 
seek the best beginners with positive attitudes toward school turnaround. An 
SEA questionnaire respondent put it this way: 

Many of our rural LEAs have employed "Teach for America (TfA)" teachers. 
These teachers have proven to be very effective in a number of our settings. 
Realizing the time limitation around TfA, our LEAs have been encouraged to 
engage in team teaching, allowing for a new teacher to teach alongside a TfA 
teacher, work collaboratively, and prepare to "take over." 

One of our rural LEAs travels to job fairs at colleges that are out of state and 
has developed a recruitment approach that says they will teach new teachers 
how to be really good. They make it about what the LEA can do for the new 
teacher and vice versa. They know they won’t be able to keep the teachers 
long, so they plan for it and just expect to try and get new, young teachers 
fresh out of college who have a can-do attitude. 

Also, successful rural LEAs have district and school leaders who work strate- 
gically with the board of trustees to ensure community politics don’t interfere 
with school improvement. For example, they report regularly on progress and 
success to keep the conversations oriented toward the right things. 


230 


Building Rural District Capacity for Turnaround 


An environment of success and collaboration is attractive to potential 
recruits. "The environment of success that one of our districts has achieved in a 
small rural town in the delta has caused a 'line-up' of teachers wanting to now 
teach in that district when they used to not be able to find enough teachers," a 
state official observed. 

SEAs can encourage district boards and central office leaders to discourage 
community politics that interfere with staff recruitment and replacement neces- 
sary for school turnaround. Montana (see next chapter) intentionally included 
school board development in its SIG and related school turnaround programs. 

Differential pay regimes enable rural districts to attract candidates for hard- 
to-fill positions. "Some schools have had to offer a stipend or additional pay 
to get the appropriate staffing” a state official offered. Another state official 
explained the state’s role in salary differentiation: "We conducted a statewide 
salary study that recommended efforts to shift funding structures statewide to 
support a differentiated scale to support recruitment and retention.” One state 
official stated: "We encourage rural districts to provide bonuses for hard-to-find 
certification area teachers.” Other questionnaire respondents noted that SIG 
funds were used to incentivize employment, reward staff who increase achieve- 
ment, and contract with Teach for America and The New Teacher Project — a 
nonprofit organization established in 1997 to place effective teachers in schools 
with poor and minority students. 

One state official reported on the state’s incentive program to repay teachers’ 
student loans and pay moving expenses when they took positions in hard-to-staff 
districts. Rural districts are among the most obvious recipients of this benefit. 

Careful assignment of staff to optimize the available pool of talent is also 
important. "A lot of time it is shifting current staff around to make the teacher 
work at his or her best ability and strengths," a questionnaire respondent noted. 

Expanding the pool of available school leaders through regional Leadership 
Academies is how one state increases the likelihood that rural districts can select 
leaders prepared for the work: 

These programs were approved to offer professional development and 
alternative administrative licensure to aspiring principals who will lead 
low-performing and high-needs schools. Participants meet weekly to learn 
from each other and focus on a case-study curriculum. These principals-to-be 
also get hands-on learning as they complete a full-time, year-long clinical 
residency experience in an area school. Thanks to special partnerships 
among participating school districts, community colleges, and universities, 
many of these aspiring principals can earn credit toward a Masters in School 
Administration when they complete this program. 

One state official explained the combination of SEA efforts to expand the 
talent pool and incentivize employment in rural districts. "The SEA has devel- 
oped programs to license nontraditional teachers and to encourage the use of 


231 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Teach for America. The SEA and LEAs are also providing financial incentives to 
master principals to relocate into rural areas." 

Finally, states are assisting LEAs with the hiring process. One respondent 
noted that the SEA provided "organized materials for principal hiring including 
a job posting, principal competency resources, and interview questions/process. 
These are available electronically by email or flash drive.” The salient point is 
that the SEA can play a strong and helpful role in assisting rural LEAs with the 
recruitment of effective leaders and teachers. 

Staff Development 

Encouraged by SEAs, rural LEAs in a given geographical area can create 
formal and informal consortia to plan common professional development days 
in which they bring in providers and share the costs. Rural LEA leaders can also 
seize opportunities to network professionally with other leaders to help them 
improve their knowledge and skills. For example, they can take advantage of the 
SEA-sponsored professional development networks of support offered in locali- 
ties throughout the state. 

A state official described the efficiency of district consortia. "Some of our 
rural LEAs have begun to form informal consortia and develop common profes- 
sional development days, in which they bring in providers and share the costs. 
This reduces travel costs for personnel and maximizes the leverage they have 
for the expenses they incur." Another questionnaire respondent added: "The 
rural LEAs that seem most successful seem to take the opportunities to network 
professionally with other leaders in order to help them improve their knowledge 
and skills. For example, they take advantage of the state-offered professional 
development networks of support that we offer. This helps the ones that are 
committed long term to have a network of peers to reach out to in their regions 
to be able to bounce ideas off of." 

Intermediate agencies in states are natural organizational structures through 
which the SEA can influence and incentivize the formation of cooperatives that 
provide services for rural LEAs that they are not able to provide themselves. In 
many states, regional or intermediate agencies are well established (e.g., Board 
of Cooperative Education Services in Colorado, Intermediate School Districts in 
Michigan). In other states, new regional structures have been established for 
the purpose of promoting school turnaround and improvement. For example, 
Tennessee recently created Centers for Regional Excellence to focus on turn- 
around and improvement in each region of the state. 

The SEA officials reported various state-provided professional development 
opportunities, including training in specialized skill areas for SIG school person- 
nel, typically delivered regionally to accommodate the travel barriers in rural 
districts. One state official described a Teacher Leader Development Symposium 
"to grow capacity in local schools/districts that the state facilitates in alignment 


232 


Building Rural District Capacity for Turnaround 


with our teacher growth work statewide through the new evaluation system. 
Also, our Turnaround Leadership Cadre is designed to develop principals who 
have the knowledge and skills to do the work." 

Coherence in state capacity-building initiatives results from the SEA’s internal 
coordination across its various departments with respect to all aspects of K-12 
schooling but especially professional development. One state official explained: 
We’ve attempted to develop an integrated strategy that pulls together a 
few different things to meet the needs of rural schools. First, we recognize 
that building the capacity of existing personnel is the number one need. 
Therefore, we focus on building the leadership capacity of administrators 
and teacher leaders to turn around and support their own teachers rather 
than rely on outsiders. The delivery mechanism has to overcome the prob- 
lem of distance, though. Therefore, we retain school improvement funds 
(with LEA permission) and operate a system of technical assistance in 
which we can control the costs (e.g., the [State] Building Capacity Project, 
the Superintendents Network of Support, the Network of Innovative School 
Leaders). In that way, we can be deliberate about when and how to send 
technical assistance to the LEA versus when to bring the leaders together in a 
central location. 

SEAs in states with rural LEAs involved in turnaround work are taking a vari- 
ety of approaches to overcome the human capital obstacle in rural areas, particu- 
larly employing distance technologies that can deliver large amounts of useful 
information and insights relevant to rural education. The SIG program has given 
particular focus to these efforts. 

Staff Evaluation 

Almost by definition, the shortcomings of rural districts and schools in turn- 
around are at least partly attributable to inadequacies of leadership, teachers, 
and other staff. At the same time, it is difficult to fairly and accurately identify 
those who are not performing well, and their replacements can be traumatic for 
all schools and districts. SEAs can be helpful in developing and supplying the 
policies and practices to evaluate LEA and school personnel. Alternatively, LEAs 
themselves can develop the means for staff evaluation. In either case, the means 
to be successful should be expeditious, objective, fair, as humane as possible, and 
in conformity with SEA policy and the law. The U.S. Department of Education, 
through Race to the Top, SIG, and ESEA flexibility, has stressed the importance of 
robust teacher and leader evaluation systems for all districts and has encouraged 
states to lead the way with this reform. 

As one questionnaire respondent stated: "The teacher evaluation system 
helped raise awareness of the need for some staff transitions and provided an 
opportunity for focused professional development plans, both for individual 
teachers and whole-staff training.” Ideally, formative evaluation would be 


233 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


employed, that is, weaknesses would be identified, improvements suggested and 
checked, and periodically reevaluated. Turnaround situations, however, make 
formative evaluation insufficient, and summative evaluation must be chosen. 
This often necessitates dismissal, which raises the question of how a rural LEA 
can attract high-quality replacement staff. 

Distance Technologies 

SEAs potentially can have their greatest positive impact on rural LEAs and 
schools by developing distance programs crafted to the state’s education needs 
and curriculum requirements and making the programs suitable for rural educa- 
tors. As pointed out in the research review in the opening pages of this chapter, 
the distinctive characteristic of rural schooling is low population density, which 
means that, generally, rural districts have smaller schools and that resident fami- 
lies are often remote from one another. Various forms of distance education have 
long served rural families starting with written correspondence instruction, still 
employed in Australia’s "outback." 

Computer and internet technology, particularly instantly interactive meth- 
ods tailored for individual abilities and interests of students, makes distance 
methods increasingly attractive, feasible, and employed as evidenced by "virtual 
schools" and other modern developments. Academics continue to study these 
technological transformations (Walberg & Twyman, 2013). At the Harvard 
Business School, Clayton Christensen revived such thinking about industries in 
general and argued that "disruptive technologies" are likely to transform schools 
(Christensen, 2006; Christensen & Horn, 2008). 

Such developments reflect the broad changes in the American economy and 
society and are widely appealing to young people who are often much more 
facile with computers and the internet than older adults. Since a fundamental 
obstacle to rural education is distance, distance education is perhaps the most 
promising solution to their problem (Walberg & Twyman, 2013). 

Technological change is leading to new products, services, and forms of orga- 
nization, management, transportation, advertising, and financing. The internet is 
replacing traditional publishing; digital is replacing film photography; television, 
cable, DVDs, and downloadable media are replacing theaters; mobile cell phones 
are replacing pay phones and hardwired home phones. 

Today, Google, Yahoo, iTunes, and other internet technologies challenge 
newspapers, book publishing, and music distribution. Contrary to the views 
of some long experienced educators, computer-based methods are at least as 
effective as traditional classroom teaching. As pointed out in Improving Student 
Learning (Walberg, 2011), the most extensive synthesis of research covering 
232 control-group studies found that student achievement, attitude, and reten- 
tion in online instruction were at least as high and often superior to traditional 
classroom teaching. Eight separate meta-analytic reviews revealed that offline 


234 


Building Rural District Capacity for Turnaround 


computer-based instruction had superior effects on student achievement. On 
average, students gained more knowledge in computer-based instruction and 
took more pleasure in learning than their counterparts in standard classrooms. 
Much of this research was decades old, and the newer technologies undoubtedly 
are becoming more effective and cost-efficient (Walberg & Twyman, 2013). As 
exemplified by Khan Academy, they are also becoming much more widely used. 

A recent survey of the public, moreover, showed about a quarter thought 
middle and high school students should get credit for online courses (Howell, 
Peterson, & West, 2011). Expanded access to electronic media offers today’s 
teachers and students, especially those in rural areas, effective and potentially 
cheaper new ways to teach and learn. In the long run, instructional technology 
is likely to prove increasingly more effective, cost efficient, and time saving than 
regular classroom teaching since technologies, particularly computer and inter- 
net technologies, are generally improving with time. 

New electronic media can add sound, color, animation, and interactivity to 
text, adding stimulation for engagement. The internet can offer instantaneous 
and free, or inexpensive, access to content. When low-speed internet connec- 
tions, slow computers, or both are a concern, CDs or DVDs provide large amounts 
of material which can be distributed at a low cost. Providers’ websites or files on 
local servers also can provide access to materials for individual students or staff 
in education centers, schools, libraries, and classrooms — both for small-scale 
specific distribution and for uniform, large-scale curriculum adoption. However, 
CDs and DVDs cannot be easily updated like material on the internet — material 
that, like printed matter, should be vetted for accuracy, currency, and appropri- 
ateness of content (Walberg, 2011). 

Policymakers at the state and national levels increasingly seem to agree on 
the value of having a stable set of specific curriculum offerings and standards, 
and some emphasize a core curriculum for the whole country. 2 This would 
make it far more worthwhile to develop online programs carefully designed and 
matched to the agreed-upon content and standards. As shown by many studies 
in economies of scale, spending sufficient funds for high-quality programs would 
increase learning and reduce the unit costs to the extent that increasingly large 
numbers of students are taught using this technology. 

Conclusions 

Being small is not necessarily a handicap for a school or a district, and 
neither is being rural. In fact, small, rural districts and schools generally perform 
well. But when a persistently low-achieving school is remotely located in a low- 
capacity, rural district, the district encounters unique challenges in managing 
a turnaround. These low-capacity, rural LEAs with persistently low-achieving 
schools stand in the greatest need of support from their SEAs. Listed below are 

2 Common Core State Standards Initiative. (2012). Retrieved from http://www.corestandards.org/ 


235 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


action principles for SEAs with low-capacity LEAs attempting to turn around 

their low-achieving schools. 

Action Principles 

• Disseminate information and sponsor conferences on ways rural LEAs and 
schools can best leverage the strengths of rural communities, such as the 
close attention of local school boards, the centrality of the school to com- 
munity life, and the multiple connections among families. 

• Help LEAs and schools ameliorate the "low-horizon mindset" that may 
restrict the aspirations of rural students and their families through distance 
learning, travel exchanges, college- and career-awareness programs, and 
similar initiatives. 

• Provide training and information for rural school board members and 
administrators on human capital management and school improvement 
and turnaround. 

• Expand the pool of leader and teacher talent available for recruitment by 
rural schools through alternate routes to certification, in-service leader- 
ship preparation programs, and state-fostered relationships with Teach for 
America, Troops to Teachers, and other human capital groups. 

• Encourage college and university education programs to include course- 
work on rural education and collaborate with rural LEAs for regional job 
fairs. 

• Incentivize employment in rural LEAs through salary differentiation, 
bonuses, loan repayment, and payment for travel expense. 

• Organize and incentivize regional consortia, including those through inter- 
mediate agencies, of rural LEAs to coordinate their professional develop- 
ment activities. 

• Expand and leverage distance technologies for professional development as 
well as student access to rich curriculum. 

References 

American Institutes for Research. (2012], Hiring quality school leaders: Challenges and 
emerging practices. Naperville, IL: Author. 

Barley, Z. A., & Beesley, A. D. (2007], Rural school success: What can we learn? Journal of 
Research in Rural Education, 22, 1-16. 

Christensen, C. M. (2006, December). Disruptive innovation for social change. Harvard 
Business Review, 94-96. 

Christensen, C. M., & Horn, M. B. (2008). How do we transform our schools? Education 
Next, 8(3), 13-19. 

DeLeon, P. H., Wakefield, M., & Hagglund, K. J. (2003). The behavioral health care needs of 
rural communities. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 


236 


Building Rural District Capacity for Turnaround 


Hardre, P. L., Crowson, H. M., DeBacker, T., & White, D. (2007], A multi-theory study of 
high school students’ beliefs, perceptions, goals, and academic motivation. Journal of 
Experimental Education, 75(4], 247-269. 

Howell, W. G., Peterson, P. E., & West, M. R. [2011], PEPG Survey-2011. Education 
Next. Retrieved from http://educationnext.org/files/EN-PEPG_Complete_Polling_ 
Results_2011.pdf 

Monk, D. (2007, Spring], Recruiting and retaining high-quality teachers in rural areas. 
Future of Children, 17(1], 155-174. 

National Education Association. (2008], Rural education. Washington, DC: Author. 

Owens, J. S., Richerson, L., Murphy, C. E., Jageleweski, A., & Rossi, L. (2007]. The parent 
perspective: Informing the cultural sensitivity of parenting programs in rural commu- 
nities. Child Youth Care Forum, 36, 179-194. 

Prater, D. L., Bermudez, A. B., & Owens, E. (1997], Examining parental involvement in 
rural, urban, and suburban schools. Journal of Research in Rural Education, 13, 72-75. 

Redding, S., & Walberg, H. J. (2012], Promoting learning in rural schools. Lincoln, IL: 
Academic Development Institute. Retrieved from http://www.adi.org/about/publica- 
tions.html 

Roeser, R., & Midgley, C. (1997], Teachers' views of issues involving students' mental 
health. Elementary School Journal, 98, 115-133. 

Schafft, K. A., Prins, E., & Movit, M. (2008], Poverty, residential mobility, and persistence 
across urban and rural family literacy programs in Pennsylvania. University Park, PA: 
Goodling Institute for Research in Family Literacy. 

Walberg, H. J. (2011], Improving student learning. Charlotte, NC: Information Age 
Publishing. 

Walberg, H. J., & Fowler, W. J. (1987], Expenditure and size efficiencies of public school 
districts. Educational Researcher, 16, 5-15. 

Walberg, H. J., & Twyman, J. S. (2013], Advances in distance education. In M. Murphy, 

S. Redding, & J. Twyman (Eds.], Handbook on innovations in learning (pp. 167-180], 
Philadelphia, PA: Center on Innovations in Learning, Temple University; Charlotte, NC: 
Information Age Publishing. Retrieved from http://www.centeril.org/ 

Walberg, H. J., & Walberg, H. J., Ill (1994, June-July]. Losing local control. Educational 
Researcher, 25(5], 19-26. 

Witte, A. L., & Sheridan, S. M. (2011]. Family engagement in rural schools. In S. Redding, 
M. Murphy, & P. Sheley (Eds.], Handbook on family and community engagement (pp. 
153-156], Lincoln, IL: Academic Development Institute. Retrieved from www.school- 
communitynetwork.org 

Yang, R. K., & Fetsch, R. J. (2007, June 15]. The self-esteem of rural children. Journal of 
Research in Rural Education, 22(5], Retrieved from http://www.jrre.psu.edu/arti- 
cles/22-5.pdf 


237 


238 


Big Sky Hope: How Montana's SEA Supports Turnaround in 
American Indian Schools 

Denise Juneau, Mandy Smoker Broaddus, and Deborah Halliday 

Six months before the U.S. Department of Education announced the School 
Improvement Grant program in 2010, newly elected Office of Public Instruction 
(OPI) State Superintendent Denise Juneau convened her cabinet to develop a 
new strategy for improving student achievement in the state’s lowest performing 
schools. Aware that most of the struggling schools were located on or adjacent 
to the seven Indian reservations in Montana, Juneau, a member of the Mandan 
and Hidatsa tribes, launched Montana Schools of Promise to turn these schools 
around. 

The schools identified for attention through Montana Schools of Promise 
shared a common set of characteristics: all were very small and very rural — two 
of the schools’ districts lacked cell phone service and several struggled with 
internet connectivity — and all were located on an Indian reservation. School 
management was often chaotic, and staff turnover resulted in inconsistent and 
dysfunctional work environments. Graduation and attendance rates were the 
lowest in the state, and students suffered from an entrenched culture of low 
achievement and low expectations. As with many other reservation communi- 
ties, local families struggled with high rates of unemployment, substance abuse, 
domestic violence, and suicide. However, these communities also presented 
unique opportunities, strengths, and resiliency factors that could be leveraged 
for positive turnaround efforts. 

Juneau appointed a three-person team — consisting of the Title I Director, 
Director of Indian Education, and a Policy Advisor to the Superintendent expe- 
rienced in community and family engagement — to develop an approach that 
would be research-based and have the potential to be effective with schools 


239 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


serving American Indian students. The team reviewed existing research, con- 
vened an interagency workgroup to share information and efforts of different 
programs working with the school systems, and hosted stakeholder meetings 
on-site at several reservations with tribal councils, elected officials, teachers and 
school staff, students, schools board trustees, community members, and families 
to review student achievement data and to seek local input. 

OPI staff recognized that any approach to improving these schools needed to 
involve an "all hands on deck" approach to support improved instruction, better 
decision making at the administrative and board level, more engagement with 
students and their families, and a shared sense of responsibility from the school, 
the local community, and OPI. Staff adapted the High-Poverty High-Performing 
(HPHP) Readiness Model from Mass Insight, a Boston-based research orga- 
nization (Calkins, Guenther, Belfiore, & Lash, 2007). The model seemed most 
promising because it recognized the importance of social supports and shared 
responsibility among stakeholders: Readiness to Teach (instructional prac- 
tices), Readiness to Act (school board efficacy and community engagement), and 
Readiness to Learn (student social/emotional/behavioral supports; Calkins et al., 
2007). 

In 2010, the state received $11.5 million through the SIG program which 
gave the Montana Schools of Promise initiative a much-needed boost. Montana 
became the only state in the country to use SIG funds to work solely with public 
schools on reservations: Frazer High School on the Fort Peck Reservation, Pryor 
K-12 on the Crow Reservation, and Lame Deer 7-12 on the Northern Cheyenne 
Reservation. All three districts chose to use the turnaround model, one of the 
four approaches to school turnaround available under the federal SIG program. 

Early signs show the effort is working. Two years into the SIG grant, student 
performance outpaces the state: reading scores are up 15.5 points (state mean 
1.6 points); math scores are up 3.6 points (state mean 0.7 points); science scores 
are up 2.3 points (state mean 1.6 points). The achievement gap is beginning to 
close. 


Montana CRT Reading Means 
Percentage change from previous year in parentheses 


2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

Statewide 

277.1 

278.7 

279.6 

280.3 


(+1.6%) 

(+1.6%) 

(+0.9) 

(+0.7) 

SIG Schools 

239.6 

239.1 

245.6 

254.6 


(-0.3%) 

(-0.5%) 

(+6.5%) 

(+9.0%) 


240 


Fostering Success for English Learners 


Montana CRT Math Results 


2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

Statewide 

262.5 

(+1.4%) 

264.6 

(+2.1%) 

264.9 

(+0.3%) 

265.3 

(+0.4%) 

SIG Schools 

225.8 

(+1.7%) 

226.1 

(+0.3%) 

227.2 

(+1.1%) 

228.7 

(+1.5%) 


Montana CRT Science Results 


2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

Statewide 

253.7 

(+1.1%) 

255.0 

(+1.3%) 

254.8 

(-0.2%) 

256.6 

(+1.8%) 

SIG Schools 

218.6 

(+2.4%) 

222.0 

(+3.4%) 

220.2 

(-1.8%) 

224.3 

(+4.1%) 


There are other indications that the turnaround effort is bearing fruit. For 
instance, reflecting noticeable improvements in both expectations and quality of 
instruction, students told OPI staff that their "school now feels like a real school, 
where real learning happens." The OPI's work with school board trustees has 
won the respect and trust of school board members, who are now working with 
updated board policies and following meeting protocols that result in more effi- 
cient meetings that truly focus on student achievement. 

Launching Montana Schools of Promise 

Juneau introduced Montana Schools of Promise through a series of visits to 
local communities titled Communities Coming Together for Education, during 
which Juneau and her staff met with tribal councilors, key tribal program staff 
(e.g., health services, tribal colleges), school staff, students, and elected offi- 
cials. In several of the communities Juneau visited, it was the first time a State 
Superintendent had ever visited the local school. The visits culminated in com- 
munity dinners and discussion, during which parents, families, and community 
members were asked to discuss their hopes and dreams for their children’s 
education and to explore how schools and communities can work together to 
improve local schools. 

To help guide the work between OPI and local schools and communities, OPI 
staff developed four core values: transparency, collaboration, vision, and capacity 
building. By developing these core values and sharing them with each school, OPI 
strove to establish a culture of open communication and trust. 

This groundwork was critical to build the trust that was needed to imple- 
ment the SIG grant because OPI developed a strategy that required an unprec- 
edented level of state agency engagement with locally controlled public schools. 
From the onset of planning, OPI staff knew that the local schools lacked capacity 
to implement the requirements of SIG. Instead of granting money to districts, 


241 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


OPI developed a unique structure which was allowable within SIG guidelines, 
but which took time and effort to receive approval from the U.S. Department of 
Education: in Montana, OPI maintained control of the SIG funds, awarded SIG 
funds to participating districts, and staffed the effort with OPI employees. 

To formalize local commitment to the work, the OPI developed implementa- 
tion agreements and memorandums of understanding with each school district 
that required the school board and the local teachers’ union to agree to work 
with OPI to implement the requirements of SIG. Because the SIG requirements 
included controversial elements (e.g., teacher evaluation) and innovative ele- 
ments (e.g., extended learning time for teachers and students), Juneau reached 
out to the leadership of the Montana Education Association- Montana Federation 
of Teachers to discuss both the requirements of SIG and the opportunity SIG rep- 
resented for the state: an opportunity to truly help school districts that had been 
troubled for years. These early conversations, and a foundation of goodwill that 
existed between Juneau and the union, resulted in the union’s support for the 
initiative and their participation in site visits to each school to discuss the agree- 
ments and to reach consensus on moving forward. 

Strategic Approaches 

The OPI structured the staffing of the SIG program along the lines of the 
HPHP Readiness Model. The Readiness to Learn component calls for student 
social/emotional/behavioral supports and increased parental and community 
engagement. OPI hired a Community Liaison for each school — someone who 
works on a daily basis with students, families, and community/tribal organiza- 
tions to coordinate student supports and to engage families through home visits, 
community gatherings, and regular communications. Youth-driven programming 
has flourished as OPI staff work with students and community organizations to 
develop after school clubs, attendance incentives, and a statewide youth council. 

To more directly impact the social and mental well-being of students and 
staff, the OPI brought in agency supports such as the Montana Behavioral 
Institute (positive behavioral supports) and contracted with the University of 
Montana’s National Native Children’s Trauma Center to work with adults and 
students on issues related to trauma, safe school climate, and respect. 

In addition, the OPI secured a two-year, $600,000 grant from the Montana 
Mental Health Trust to pilot school-based mental health wraparound services in 
the communities being served by SIG. The wraparound model OPI employed is 
a strengths-based, community-driven approach to providing supports for strug- 
gling youth. Local community members work with OPI to identify and prioritize 
students who are in need of intensive support and help to build a team of people 
who work with the youth and family to build strategies and approaches for the 
youth’s well-being. This work is proving to be a critical component to supporting 
students’ ability to learn and to stay in school. 


242 


Fostering Success for English Learners 


The Readiness to Teach component specifies curriculum, instructional 
planning and delivery, and classroom management supports to help improve 
classroom instruction. For each school, OPI hired an Instructional Leader who 
works with teachers daily. After consulting with curriculum experts, OPI staff 
introduced new math and language arts curriculum and a literacy interven- 
tion in the SIG schools. OPI staff selected the programs based on a track record 
of demonstrated success in schools across the country, including schools that 
work with American Indian populations. The Instructional Leader assists in the 
implementation of the curriculum and works with all teachers on strategies to 
improve instructional practices. The on-site staff are supported by a Teaching 
and Learning Coordinator who works at the state level, planning, supporting, and 
coordinating the focus and the flow of professional development. 

The Readiness to Act component includes support for administrative and 
board decision-making practices and structures, as well as support for school- 
based teams who help to plan and implement SIG requirements and other locally 
identified improvement priorities. OPI hired a Transformational Leader for each 
school, who coordinates the local OPI staff and works with school administra- 
tors to implement the SIG requirements and to integrate improvements into the 
school system. OPI also provided each school with a School Board Coach who 
attends every board meeting and works with the trustees to revise school board 
policies and to support decision-making processes that are focused on student 
achievement. 

The Instructional Leader and Transformational Leader work hand-in- 
hand with teaching staff and administrators to build local capacity to make 
data-driven decisions. All SIG Schools of Promise are trained in Response to 
Intervention (Rtl) to assist school teams’ use of data to inform instruction and to 
determine when and if to use interventions. OPI staff on-site guide the learning 
process with school staff and ensure schools participate in statewide Rtl train- 
ing to lessen discomfort with data. Now, the use of data to inform discussions is 
much more routine in the schools. 

To build capacity for ongoing school improvement efforts, as well as to ensure 
local engagement with the work of SIG, each school develops an implementation 
plan called the District Action Plan (DAP), which is an annual process of identify- 
ing the year’s goals and priorities for meeting SIG requirements. Each SIG school 
has a school improvement team consisting of teachers, staff, board members, and 
students. This team, assisted by on-site OPI staff, develop their DAP each year. 
The DAP is organized around the four recommendations from the Institute of 
Education Sciences’ (Herman et al., 2008) practice guide on school turnaround: 

1) signal the need for dramatic change with strong leadership; 2) maintain a con- 
sistent focus on improving instruction; 3) provide visible improvements early in 
the turnaround process (quick wins); and 4) build a committed staff. 


243 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


This on-the-ground staffing support has enabled the OPI to ensure that SIG 
requirements are implemented. Direct side-by-side coaching of teachers and 
staff has allowed for the implementation of professional development to be more 
tailored and responsive to staff needs. The OPI worked with the state’s teach- 
ers’ union and local school personnel to develop a teacher and staff evaluation 
system that is helping to guide ongoing professional development. School board 
policies and procedures have been brought up to date and board meetings made 
more functional and focused on increasing student achievement. 

Ongoing Challenges 

The SIG program has provided OPI staff with an unprecedented opportu- 
nity to learn more about what works — and what doesn’t work — to dramatically 
improve struggling schools. There have been many components of the SIG work 
that have met with success, as outlined above. 

Yet while student test scores are steadily improving, and students and adults 
in the schools and in the community are commenting on increased functional- 
ity, there are ongoing challenges. Student attendance continues to be a real 
challenge. Efforts ranging from student-led incentive programs to Community 
Liaisons working with school staff to contact students when they do not show up 
for school have had only modest impacts. 

A core focus OPI staff have employed throughout the SIG implementation 
is motivational and team-building programming to keep school staff and com- 
munity members engaged with the very difficult, demanding work of targeted 
school improvement. This has proved to be a constant challenge, and OPI has 
experienced mixed success in its efforts to turn around years of difficult relation- 
ships, poor communication, and a sense of "initiative fatigue" at the schools. 

The four core values OPI developed to guide the SIG work — transparency, col- 
laboration, vision, and capacity building — were very helpful in that they "raised 
the bar" of what a typical agency-to-school relationship can be. It proved to be 
challenging to set a new path of working together, however, because the OPI is 
both a collaborator and the enforcer of the SIG requirements. OPI staff strove to 
develop a culture of mutuality, yet there were times throughout the grant where 
OPI staff had to push hard on reforms that SIG required and would otherwise not 
be priorities for the school districts. 

Two specific components of the structure of the SIG program hampered OPI's 
efforts. First, the turnaround model requires that principals who have served the 
school for more than two years be replaced. This blanket requirement caused 
the removal of a popular principal in one high school, and it proved challenging 
to find a replacement principal. Rural communities disproportionately suffer 
from a small pool of talented candidates for demanding jobs, such as a school 
administrator, in a struggling school where the nearest movie theatre can be over 
an hour away and housing is often well below substandard. In addition, rural 


244 


Fostering Success for English Learners 


communities tend to foster close-knit relationships, and an influential subset of 
the local community rejected the SIG work on the grounds that the principal had 
been removed. The work at this particular school slowed down to such an extent 
that OPI ended its agreement with the school to implement SIG. Soon after, the 
school board reinstated the principal. OPI requested the USDOE provide a rural 
exception to the principal replacement requirement, yet that request was denied. 

A second challenge is the three-year time frame for the SIG grant. As 
described, there have been success stories in all aspects of the project. Students 
now enter schools where they are appropriately placed in courses that meet 
their instructional needs. School teams are engaged in Rtl training and work on- 
site with their data. School administrators participate in monthly school finance 
calls. School board trustees focus on student achievement. The challenge is to 
ensure these efforts continue beyond the grant period, when financial resources 
diminish and OPI's capacity to support the schools lessens dramatically. The OPI 
has been approved for an extension of SIG funding to a fourth year to support 
sustainability efforts, yet OPI staff know turning around a school that is strug- 
gling at the level in which these schools started will take more time and effort 
than the SIG program is structured to provide. 

Where Do We Go From Here? 

Daily work with the schools has given OPI staff a much keener understand- 
ing of the challenges and the opportunities that exist to help struggling schools 
succeed. The insight gained is allowing OPI to differentiate its school improve- 
ment efforts with SIG schools, keeping in mind existing capacities and supports. 
The experience is also informing OPI's approach to school improvement at the 
agency level, which will eventually benefit all schools in the state identified as in 
need of improvement. 

Capacity building and sustainability have been central components of the 
work of SIG. Starting in the second year of SIG, the OPI embedded capacity 
building into its training, on-site support, and planning with local SIG teams, 
such as using an annual planning process through the District Action Plan. The 
job-embedded coaching strategy that OPI utilized is also geared to invest in 
the people who work at the schools and live in the community — supporting a 
broader vision and expression of what it means to be a successful school and 
equipping them with tools to use to get to that vision. 

In addition, the OPI is collaborating with federally funded education-related 
programs like GEAR UP 1 and Jobs for Montana Graduates to share the strate- 
gies of SIG so that these programs can build on the work that SIG has begun. 

‘GEAR UP (Gaining Early Awareness & Readiness for Undergraduate Programs) is a federal program that 
works to increase students' college and career readiness through academic preparedness, postsecondary 
planning, and financial aid knowledge. Jobs for Montana Graduates is affiliated with Jobs For America's 
Graduates and assists students to stay in school, graduate, and successfully transition from school into 
employment, postsecondary education, other training or the military. 


245 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


For instance, the OPI contracted with a Montana college to provide professional 
development to turnaround school administrators on issues such as budgeting, 
addressing tough issues head on, and developing a vision for school improve- 
ment. GEAR UP requires administrators to participate in ongoing professional 
development, and OPI is encouraging GEAR UP to build off of the curricula and 
approach the SIG funds helped to create. 

Another initiative of Superintendent Juneau’s is Graduation Matters Montana 
(GMM) which seeks to increase the number of Montana students who graduate 
from high school college and career ready. GMM is an innovative approach that 
incentivizes the development of local school-community-business partner- 
ships to focus on current and promising strategies that will have a real impact on 
student success in Montana. OPI is incorporating its adoption of common core 
standards into its GMM work. 

Since Juneau launched GMM in 2010, 33 communities have started a GMM 
initiative, representing 70% of Montana’s high school students. While early signs 
indicate the approach is working (e.g., dropout rates are down, local businesses 
and community organizations are partnering with schools at an unprecedented 
rate), the graduation rates for American Indian students are not going up — they 
decreased slightly in the past year. The OPI is preparing to develop a series of 
strategies and interventions to support more American Indian students through 
high school graduation, and OPI staff are looking at the experiences of the SIG 
program to glean effective strategies to employ in this statewide effort. 

Action Principles 

Actively engage the chief state school officer in targeted turnaround 

efforts 

• Personally visit schools and communities and commit state staff and 
agency resources to signal that change is required. 

• Communicate clearly and consistently why turnaround is required and 
involve the local community in the creation of a vision that includes a sense 
of urgency needed for change. 

Approach the work holistically and provide hands-on support 

• Attend to the interconnecting systems that create a functioning school 
system — effective instruction, solid administrative decision-making and 
leadership, and an engaged, safe student culture. 

• Provide on-site, side-by-side coaching support to customize professional 
development and to strengthen individual aspects of the system so they can 
work in greater harmony and efficacy. 

Maintain focus on instructional supports 

• Recognize that the teacher-student relationship is critical and work to 
introduce programs that directly or indirectly build positive, supportive 
school relationships. 


246 


Fostering Success for English Learners 


• Assign adequate staff — such as an on-site Instructional Leader — to provide 
direct support as well as to help coordinate outside supports on how to use 
evaluation processes, the implementation of common core, and use of other 
levers to support a continuous improvement effort in instruction. 

References 

Calkins, A., Guenther, W., Belfiore, G., & Lash, D. (2007], The turnaround challenge. 

Boston, MA: Mass Insight Education & Research Institute. Retrieved from http:// 
www.massinsight.org/publications/turnaround/51/file/l/pubs/20 10/04/15/ 
TheTurnaroundChallenge_MainReport.pdf 

Herman, R., Dawson, P., Dee, T., Greene, J., Maynard, R., Redding, S., & Darwin, M. (2008], 
Turning around chronically low-performing schools: A practice guide (NCEE #2008- 
4020], Washington, DC: National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional 
Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved 
from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/publications/practiceguides 


247 


248 


Building Leadership Capacity in Native American Schools: The 
Principal Leadership Academy 
Pam Sheley 


The Need for Change 

On a warm fall day in November 2012, 30 principals and 8 mentors gathered 
for a three-day Basic Leadership Training in Albuquerque to launch the Principal 
Leadership Academy (PLA), a collaboration between the Bureau of Indian Educa- 
tion (BIE) and Academic Development Institute (ADI). The PLA is a 9-month long 
training and support initiative for principals. The PLA’s mission is to improve 
the performance of schools by building principals’ skills and practices. The BIE 
"oversees a total of 183 elementary, secondary, residential and peripheral dor- 
mitories across 23 states. 126 schools are tribally controlled under P.L. 93-638 
Indian Self Determination Contracts or P. L. 100-297 Tribally Controlled Grant 
Schools Act. 57 schools are operated by the Bureau of Indian Education" (Bureau 
of Indian Education website). 1 This cohort only included principals in BIE-oper- 
ated schools. The principals in the BIE cohort all serve predominantly American 
Indian students. Some of the schools were identified as the lowest 5% and were 
receiving School Improvement Grant funds, and some schools had been in either 
school improvement, corrective action, or restructuring status for many years. 

The BIE cohort included high school, elementary, and middle school princi- 
pals. The schools in the cohort included dormitory as well as day schools. There 
were schools in heavily populated areas as well as a school located at the bottom 
of the Grand Canyon. School enrollment ranged from 110 students to 400 stu- 
dents. While all these factors are relevant, the bottom line — and the premise of 
PLA — is the same: All schools need good leadership, and that leadership starts 

‘httpy/www.bie.edu/ 


249 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


with the principal. The PLA was designed by ADI, in partnership with the BIE, to 
significantly bolster principals’ leadership skills in order to support their efforts 
to markedly improve student outcomes. The program’s web-based tools docu- 
ment principal actions, the work of the leadership team, a portfolio of projects, 
and mentor-principal interactions. 

The need to build the skill sets of principals already serving in BIE schools — 
as opposed to principal replacement — is symptomatic of the difficulty these 
schools have typically experienced attracting and retaining highly qualified 
candidates for their leadership roles (Knapp, Copland, & Talbert, 2003). When 
no principal candidate is available, other staff members are "detailed” to fill an 
"acting” principal position. These staff members may be ill-prepared to step into 
the role of an instructional leader while also trying to organize and operate the 
day-to-day functions of the school (Levine, 2005; Young & Fox, 2002). 

BIE schools suffer the same challenges as other rural schools in which the 
population is impoverished in resources, supports, organizations, or other 
educational institutions that may be available in more urban areas (see Redding 
& Walberg in this book; see also Johnson & Strange, 2007; Mackety & Linder- 
VanBerschot, 2008; Monk, 2007). While these issues are not unique in rural 
schools, BIE schools face additional challenges. For instance, many BIE schools 
are located in very isolated rural areas, and policies governing Native American 
Reservations (e.g., limitations regarding who is permitted to own property) can 
make it difficult to attract or retain personnel who would like to settle in the 
community long-term. Schools may also have a Native preference stipulation 
attached to hiring principals and teachers in their schools. Consequently, for 
most BIE-operated schools, hiring new teachers or principals is extremely diffi- 
cult. Whereas other communities may have access to a labor pool to replace staff, 
it is imperative for BIE schools to focus on improving the capacity and perfor- 
mance of their existing staff (Barley, 2009; Idaho Rural Education Task Force, 
2008; McCullough & Johnson, 2007). All of these factors contribute to the need 
for BIE schools to invest in the principals they have and raise their skill levels to 
support the schools they are serving. 

Topics and Components of PLA 

To strategically tackle raising the skill sets of all principals while taking into 
account that every principal begins the PLA with varying levels of skills already 
present, the PLA centered around four major topics and utilized four key compo- 
nents. The major topics were (a) Setting the Direction of Change: Rapid Improve- 
ment Leader Plan; (b) Managing Change: Leadership and Decision Making; (c) 
Engaging People: Culture and Language Project; 2 and (d) Instruction: Seeing 
Change Through to the Classroom. Cutting across all four topics were these key 

2 A culture and language project was selected because of the significance and relevance to BIE schools. The 
topic of Engaging People could be centered around any number of topics relevant to the SEA/LEA/organiza- 
tion using the PLA. 


250 


Principal Leadership Academy 


components of the PLA: mentoring, site visits, leadership teams, and a rapid 
improvement leader plan. 

Mentoring 

The PLA leadership team designed the program to take principals through 
nine months of intensive work to receive certification as a rapid improve- 
ment leader. Principals who meet the program’s rigorous requirements will be 
awarded a certificate from Temple University. Each principal was paired with a 
mentor who supported the principal through the nine months. Bhatt and Beh- 
rstock (2010) identified seven factors to address when hiring and retaining 
qualified and effective staff. These include: preparation, recruitment and hiring, 
induction and mentoring, professional development, compensations and other 
financial incentives, working conditions, and performance management. In the 
most common scenario, however, principals go through preservice preparation 
programs to learn a set of skills and knowledge that research demonstrates they 
should have to effectively lead a school. Their continuing professional develop- 
ment is left to their own discretion with the assumption that they will seek out 
the appropriate training opportunities to continue to develop and refine their 
skills. However, what is missing in the equation is the complexity of individual 
and very different educational environments (Zellner et al., 2002). Schools serv- 
ing American Indian students on remote reservations are unique on two fronts — 
the students they serve and the governance context in which they operate. The 
PLA mentors are principals and administrators selected by the BIE for their 
demonstrated leadership in BIE schools. Therefore, the mentors are very familiar 
with the settings and circumstances the BIE principals face in their own schools. 

Leadership mentoring can foster reciprocal learning as well as develop col- 
legial relationships. Principals and administrators are able to work with veteran 
practitioners in their own schools; they can observe leadership in action, and 
they can develop a deeper understanding of their own professional expectations 
(Browne-Ferrigno & Muth, 2001, 2004, 2006; Heck, 1995; Parkay & Hall, 1992). 
Mentoring enhances role-identity transformation, provides concurrent profes- 
sional development both for the mentor and the principal, and expands leader- 
ship capacity throughout the organization (Crow & Matthews, 1998; Milstein, 
Bobroff, & Restine, 1991; Mullen & Lick, 1999). 

Effective mentors provide professional feedback, role clarification, and social- 
ization while lessening the sense of isolation that can be a byproduct of the role 
of leadership (Daresh, 2001). Principals can often feel caught between the needs 
of students, teachers, and district offices. Mentors become someone the principal 
can openly talk to about what he or she experiences and receive feedback and 
guidance. Mentorship is also an opportunity to provide customized, individual- 
ized, and embedded professional development (Browne-Ferrigno & Muth, 2004). 
Crow and Matthews (1998) found that principals cited mentors as their primary 


251 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


source of assistance in becoming successful school leaders. Well-designed, 
properly implemented, and adequately monitored mentoring programs can lead 
to principals having more confidence in their professional competence, more 
effectively translating educational theory into practice, developing improved 
communication skills, and feeling more comfortable in their leadership role 
(Daresh, 2004). All of this leads to increased job satisfaction and retaining effec- 
tive leaders. 

The PLA provided structures for the mentors to be in constant communica- 
tion with their principals. Through a custom-designed online system developed 
by ADI, the mentor and principal interacted; the mentor could view the work 
and progress of the principal; and the principal could review comments entered 
by the mentor relating to the work the principal had entered. Within the scope 
of the PLA, the principal was assigned tasks under each of the four major topics 
(setting direction, managing change, engaging people, and improving instruc- 
tion). Principals were required to create two projects: a Culture and Language 
project to address engaging people and a roll out of the Common Core to improve 
instruction. They also developed plans with their school leadership teams using 
indicators of effective practice to improve leadership skills, teaming, and the 
instruction practices in their schools. Principals recorded their work via online 
systems; mentors reviewed the work via the online systems and were able to 
enter comments related to the quality and scope of the plans and projects. Men- 
tors also met with their principals monthly via a webinar to discuss progress and 
address any challenges or celebrate successes. Mentors were the glue that held 
everything together, kept the principals on track, and provided support and guid- 
ance for the principals. 

Site Visits 

The second key component of the PLA was the two-day site visit. Principals 
were asked to arrange for the mentor to visit classrooms and meet with parents, 
tribal councils, school boards, and teachers. Mentors used a protocol to guide 
meetings and an observation form for each classroom visit. For the principals, 
the site visit was an opportunity to have the mentors walk in their shoes for a 
day — a chance to show off their schools and their staff. For the mentors, it was 
a chance to see the challenges and triumphs of their principals first hand, get to 
know the communities in which the schools reside, and meet the students and 
the staff. PLA participants identified the site visits as a rewarding experience for 
both principals and mentors. Based on the findings from the site-visits, mentors 
and principals collaboratively developed an action plan, keyed to the program’s 
components, for moving the principal and school forward. 


252 


Principal Leadership Academy 


Leadership Teams 

The third key component of the PLA was the work the principals did with 
their school leadership teams, guided by BIE's Native Star 3 online improvement 
system. Principals cannot change a school alone. The work of the leadership 
team was guided by a set of indicators of effective practices and nested within 
a culture of candor. The role of the principal as the captain of the ship was to be 
open and honest with the staff — to celebrate those practices that the school does 
well and to target those practices which needed shoring up. To be an instruc- 
tional leader, the principal was expected to spend 50% of his or her time working 
with the staff on instructional practices. The leadership team assessed the school 
on the indicators of effective practice and then set a plan in motion to improve. 
The principal was responsible for ensuring the work progressed and that the 
plan supported improved outcomes for students. The principals in the PLA were 
required to assess indicators centered on leadership and decision making and 
instruction, create plans for the indicators, and implement the indicators with 
high quality. 

Rapid Improvement Leader Plan 

The final key component of the PLA was the work principals did individu- 
ally, with the guidance of the mentors, on their personal leadership practices. 

This work was guided by a set of 14 indicators drawn from School Turnarounds: 
Actions and Results (Brinson, Kowal, & Hassel, 2008). School Turnarounds ana- 
lyzed the habits of highly effective turnaround leaders and grouped these actions 
into four major areas: analysis and problem solving, driving for results, influenc- 
ing stakeholders, and measuring and reporting improvement. For the PLA, the 
principal developed a personal plan based on the 14 indicators for turnaround 
leadership and implemented the plan throughout the project. 

The Wrap Up 

The PLA was structured to give principals a heavy dose of information right 
at the beginning in a three-day Basic Leadership Training. Mentors arrived two 
days before the principal to get an overview of the content and to become famil- 
iar with the online project management tool. Principals came for three days of 
intensive training. When the principals left after the three days, they had their 
assignments — work on indicators of effective practice with their leadership 
teams, plan a site visit with their mentors, design and implement a Culture and 
Language project, design and implement a project around the Common Core, and 
work on a set of indicators of effective practice for rapid improvement leaders. 

3 Native Star is the BIE's custom-developed version of Indistar®, ADI's web-based school improvement plat- 
form based on indicators of effective practice. Within PLA, principals worked on Leadership and Decision- 
making indicators and Instructional indicators with their leadership teams. As individuals, principals 
were required to create personal plans in the Rapid Improvement Leader indicators, all housed within the 
Indistar® platform. 


253 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


The PLA design then required principals and mentors to come back together 
mid-year for two days to reenergize and refocus efforts that can begin to go adrift 
when principals get back in the trenches of their daily work in their schools. This 
is not unique to American Indian schools; efforts to change schools can often be 
derailed when insufficient attention is given to managing the change. Heath and 
Heath (2010) comment on this drift: 

Many leaders pride themselves on setting high-level direction: I'll set the 
vision and stay out of the details. It’s true that a compelling vision is critical. 
But it’s not enough. Big-picture, hands-off leadership isn’t likely to work in a 
change situation, because the hardest part of change — the paralyzing part — 
is precisely in the details, (p. 53) 

In order for the principals to carry through with implementing changes 
required to be a rapid improvement leader in their schools, they had to stay 
focused on the details of school improvement. The PLA was carefully structured 
to give training in the beginning, a boost in the middle, structured activities, and 
mentoring throughout the process to keep principals focused. 

The final entries have been made in the PLA project management system, and 
portfolios of the principals’ work are being created for a final review to deter- 
mine those principals who were able to not just cross the finish line, but were 
able to document clear evidence that their schools were changing. Comments 
about the PLA submitted in the system were encouraging. One principal wrote, 
"One of the things that I enjoy and appreciate the most is our [mentor and prin- 
cipal] discussions that we have about the situations that each of us go through 
at our schools. I feel that with [my mentor’s] experience and knowledge that he 
truly understands what I deal with at the school level. I've learned not only from 
the PLA but also from the knowledge and experience of [my mentor]." Another 
principal commented that "it has been pointed out that there are other groups 
of stakeholders I need to include in this change process. I tend to get so tied 
up working with the staff that I forget to involve parents and community." One 
principal commented on the need to develop his leadership skills in light of the 
school’s recent history: 

My leadership skills need to improve before others can reach their.. .poten- 
tial. Due to the fragmented leadership that has been in place. ..for the last ten 
years or so. ..those in the leadership roles have created a survival attitude. 
Each has done what they felt is the correct thing to do for the department 
they oversee. Within each of these strands are personnel that are insecure of 
the needed changes to reach our potential. Building a professional attitude 
that delivers the best in education will require that I create a collaborative 
attitude within this team. 


254 


Principal Leadership Academy 


Lessons Learned for Future Cohorts 

At the conclusion of the first cohort of the PLA, clear lessons emerged. The 
original structure of the PLA was to include three face-to-face meetings: a Basic 
Leadership Training, Mid-Year Training, and a Summative Meeting. Each meet- 
ing had a specific purpose — Basic Leadership Training was to introduce as much 
information as needed to get principals started; Mid-Year Training was to revive 
and encourage principals to stay the course; and the Summative Meeting was 
to celebration and provide a chance for principals to present their projects and 
receive certification. Due to sequestration, the travel budget for the BIE was 
essentially eliminated. Consequently, the Mid-Year Training was cancelled, and 
the Summative Meeting was held via webinars for principals to present their 
projects. Also, a few mentors were not able to conduct a site visit for their prin- 
cipals as planned (prior to the Mid-Year Training), so those principals received 
an abbreviated site-visit by someone other than their mentor at the conclusion 
of the PLA due to the travel restrictions. While still of some value, the timing of 
the site visit and not having it carried out by the mentor negated most of the 
intended value of the site visit. These cuts significantly changed the structure 
and scope of the PLA and reflect a practical reality that has historically under- 
mined many change efforts; competition for time and resources. That being said, 
the principals who completed the PLA and made it to the finish line found value 
in the process, as stated by one principal, 

The Principal Leadership Academy experience has helped my leadership 
at the school level be more focused. The PLA reinforced the ideas that I had 
been implementing and provided support for my plans moving forward. I was 
able to focus on setting directions, managing changes, and engaging people 
while improving instruction. The PLA has allowed me to continue to lead for 
change with confidence. 

Another principal said: "As a leader I have been more open to suggestions, I 
have learned to delegate more. Through the delegating of tasks I have learned 
that team members like to feel that they are contributing in a positive way." For 
another principal, she realized the value of change: 

For many years, my job has felt like a juggler with 10 plates that are thrown 
into the air, and each one caught just before it crashes to the floor. I pick it up, 
and throw it really high so I have time to catch the next plate before it crashes 
to the floor.. ..Changing one area always impacts other areas of the school, 
and making changes for improvement is constant. A school that stays static 
cannot improve, and can’t even stay on the same level. Change is essential, 
and managing that change is an essential part of a Principal's job. 

References 

Barley, Z. A. (2009). Preparing teachers for rural appointments: Lessons from the mid- 
continent. The Rural Educator, 30(3), 10-15. 


255 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Bhatt, M. P., & Behrstock-Sherratt, E. (2010, September], Managing educator talent: 
Promising practices and lessons from Midwestern states. Retrieved from http://www. 
learningpt.org/pdfs/MET_Promising_Practices_Regional.pdf 

Brinson, D., Kowal, J. & Hassel, B. [2008], School turnarounds: Actions and results. Lin- 
coln, IL: Academic Development Institute. 

Browne-Ferrigno, T. [2004], Principals Excellence Program: Developing effective school 
leaders through unique university-district partnership. Education Leadership Review, 
5(2], 24-36. 

Browne-Ferrigno, T., & Allen, L. W. (2006, February 10]. Preparing principals for high- 
need rural schools: A central office perspective about collaborative efforts to trans- 
form school leadership. Journal of Research in Rural Education, 21(1]. Retrieved from 
http://www.umaine.edu/jrre/21-l.htm 

Browne-Ferrigno, T., & Muth, R. (2001a, November], Becoming a principal: Role transfor- 
mation through clinical practice. Paper presented at annual meeting of the University 
Council for Educational Administration, Cincinnati, OH. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED465225] 

Crow, G. M., & Matthews, L. J. (1998], Finding one's way: How mentoring can lead to 
dynamic leadership. Newbury Park, CA: Corwin Press. 

Daresh, J. C. (2001]. Leaders helping leaders: A practical guide to administrative mentor- 
ing (2nd ed.]. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. 

Daresh, J. C. (2004], Mentoring school leaders: Professional promise or predictable 
problems? Educational Administration Quarterly, 40, 495-517. 

Heath, C., & Heath, D. (2010]. Switch: How to change when change is hard. New York, NY: 
Random House. 

Heck, R. H. (1995], Organizational and professional socialization: Its impact on the per- 
formance of new administrators. The Urban Review, 27(1], 31-49. 

Idaho Rural Education Task Force. (2008], Idaho’s rural education initiative: A report to 
the Idaho legislature, January, 2008. Boise, ID: Idaho State Department of Education. 

Johnson, J., & Strange, M. (2007, October]. Why rural matters 2007: The realities of rural 
education growth. Arlington, VA: The Rural School and Community Trust. 

Knapp, M., Copeland, M., & Talbert, J. E. (2003], Leading for learning: Reflective tools for 
school and district leaders. Seattle, WA: University of Washington. 

Levine, A. (2005], Educating school leaders. Retrieved from http://www.edschools.org/ 
pdf/Final313.pdf 

Mackety, D. M., & Linder-VanBerschot, J. A. (2008, August]. Examining American Indian 
perspectives in the Central Region on parent involvement in children’s education. (Issues 
& Answers Report, REL 2008-No. 059], Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, 
Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional 
Assistance, Regional Educational Laboratory Central. 

McCullough, P, & Johnson, J. (2007]. Quality teachers: Issues, challenges, and solutions for 
North Carolina’s most overlooked rural communities. Arlington, VA: The Rural School 
and Community Trust. 


256 


Principal Leadership Academy 


Milstein, M. M., Bobroff, B. M., & Restine, L. N. (1991]. Internship programs in educational 
administration: A guide to preparing educational leaders. New York, NY: Teachers Col- 
lege Press. 

Monk, D. (2007, Spring], Recruiting and retaining high-quality teachers in rural areas. 
Future of Children, 17(1], 155-174. 

Mullen, C. A., & Lick, D. W. (Eds.]. (1999], New directions in mentoring: Creating a culture 
of synergy. London, UK: Falmer Press. 

Parkay, F. W., & Hall, G. E. (Eds.]. (1992], Becoming a principal: The challenges of begin- 
ning leadership. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 

Young, I. P., & Fox, J. A. (2002, October], Asian, Hispanic, and Native American job candi- 
dates: Prescreened or screened within the selection process. Educational Administra- 
tion Quarterly, 38(4], 530-554. 

Zellner, L., Ward, S. M., McNamara, P., Gideon, B., Camacho, S., & Edgewood, S. D. (2002], 
The loneliest job in town: Sculpting the recruitment and retention of the principal. Paper 
presented at the Annual Meeting of the Southwest Educational Research Association, 
Austin, TX. 


257 


258 


Authors' Biographies 

Daniel Aladjem has over ten years of experience leading large-scale, mixed- 
methods studies focused on school improvement, especially whole school reform 
and school turnaround. He directed the National Longitudinal Evaluation of Com- 
prehensive School Reform, an Institute of Education Sciences-funded, large-scale 
study of the implementation and outcomes of comprehensive school reform. 

He currently leads an evaluation of the University of California Office of the 
President’s college readiness and access partnership program. Aladjem earned 
his PhD in public policy/public administration from the University of Southern 
California and holds a BA in history and MA in education/secondary teaching 
from Stanford University. Aladjem began his career in education as a high school 
teacher. 

Mandy Smoker Broaddus is the School Transformation Director for the 
Montana Office of Public Instruction. She is an enrolled member of the Fort Peck 
Assiniboine and Sioux tribes in north eastern Montana. Before coming to OPI 
in 2005, Mandy worked as a Principal and Dean of Students in her home com- 
munity of Frazer, Montana, a rural K-12 school district with a 100% American 
Indian population. 

C.C. Clark is a talent management consultant, working with organizations to 
consider their staffing and development needs over the long term and act with 
purpose to meet them. She has worked with corporations and nonprofits for 
many years and began focusing much of her work in education over the last sev- 
eral years. She has worked with school districts and education nonprofits across 
the country and is very humbled by the work being done by many educators. 
C.C.’s work is behind the scenes and designed to optimize the use of talent so that 
every child can have great learning opportunities. Specifically, she helps districts 
consider their talent needs and determine where to find candidates; conducts 
and trains others to conduct and analyze structured interviews; helps districts 
assess how to best deploy their principals; advises on the creation of new organi- 
zational structures; and maps out change strategies for rolling out new initiatives 
or organizational structures. C.C. holds a PhD in industrial and organizational 
psychology from Pennsylvania State University. 

Justin C. Cohen is president of the Mass Insight Education School Turn- 
around Group (STG). Mass Insight Education works with state education agen- 
cies, school districts, and partner organizations to develop the organizational 
strategies and capacity necessary to turnaround our nation’s lowest performing 
schools. Prior to launching the STG, Justin was director of the office of portfolio 
management and senior advisor to the Chancellor at the District of Columbia 
Public Schools (DCPS). While at DCPS, Justin led the district’s work in creating 
long-term strategies for fostering quality, innovation, and growth in the schools 
portfolio. His office managed a diverse selection of school reform models, and 
upon his departure, almost half of the district’s schools had adopted at least 


259 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


one of those models. Before that, Justin was director of industry support and 
development for the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools and spent time 
at Edison Schools. Justin has served on the national boards of the Yale Alumni 
Fund and Students for Education Reform, and he is a trustee of the Cesar Chavez 
Public Charter Schools in Washington, DC. His writing on school turnaround has 
appeared in the Stanford Social Innovation Review and the NationalJournal.com. 
Justin has a BA in cognitive science from Yale. 

Julie Corbett, President and Founder of Corbett Education Consulting LLC, 
specializes in school and district education reform and works with clients 
throughout the country. She works with school management organizations, 
school districts, state education agencies, and nonprofit organizations on a 
variety of turnaround-related projects. She is the author of several publications, 
is part of USED’s Race to the Top Reform Support Network, is a member of the 
Center on School Turnaround’s Scientific Council, and was a peer reviewer for 
USED’s Race to the Top — District competition. Before founding her own com- 
pany, Ms. Corbett was a Program Manager in Mass Insight Education’s School 
Turnaround Group. Previously, she was a Research Assistant with The Rodel 
Foundation of Delaware and assisted with the Vision 2015 education reform. Ms. 
Corbett also completed one year of service with Americorps VISTA (Delaware 
Mentoring Council), where she led the creation of a Governor’s Executive Order 
in support of state employee youth mentoring. Ms. Corbett is a Senior Fellow in 
the Institute for Educational Leadership's Global Education Policy Fellowship 
Program (IEL-GEPFP) and was a Fellow in Northeastern University’s 2008 EPFP 
cohort. She has an MPA from the University of Delaware and a BA from Denison 
University. 

Julie Duffield is a Senior Research Associate at WestEd. She works on fed- 
eral and state school improvement projects as a member of the Comprehensive 
School Assistance Program. She manages SchoolsMovingUp, WestEd’s award- 
winning school improvement initiative that helps schools and districts address 
the challenge of raising student achievement in low-performing schools. Duffield 
also collaborates with multiple stakeholders as part of the School Turnaround 
Learning Community and the Center on School Turnaround. One of her key roles 
is supporting educators in building and sharing their knowledge of implemen- 
tation practices by convening both virtually and in person. Duffield brings over 
30 years of experience both in and out of the classroom, including working with 
technology in education. Duffield has been an early adopter of using technology 
to support educator learning, engagement, and communities of practice. She has 
also worked on state and federal initiatives, such as WestEd’s Distance Learning 
Resource, applying technology to support diverse learners. Duffield received a 
BA in psychology from the University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, a teach- 
ing diploma from Kedron College, Brisbane, Australia, and a technology in educa- 
tion certificate from the University of California, Santa Cruz. 


260 


Authors' Biographies 


Dr. Ken Futernick began his career as an elementary school teacher near 
Sacramento and received an MA and PhD from the University of California at 
Berkeley. Futernick is currently the director of WestEd’s School Turnaround 
Center (not to be confused with the Center on School Turnaround), which pro- 
vides direct assistance to schools and districts. The Center also shares knowl- 
edge and recommendations on school turnaround strategy and policy with state 
and federal policymakers. Prior to joining WestEd, Futernick chaired the depart- 
ment of teacher education and was a member of the faculty at California State 
University, Sacramento for 20 years. Futernick served as Director of the Center 
for Teacher Quality at California State University’s Chancellor’s Office where he 
conducted a study titled, A Possible Dream: Retaining California Teachers So All 
Students Learn. In 2012, Futernick co-authored a report titled, Forward Together: 
Better Schools Through Labor-Management Collaboration and is the lead author 
of a soon-to-be-released publication titled, Labor Management Collaboration in 
Education — An Analysis of Research. In 2010, he published an article in Kappan 
titled, Incompetent Teachers of Dysfunctional Systems? Futernick has testified on 
numerous occasions before California state assembly and senate committees 
on issues pertaining to teacher quality, teacher retention, and school reform. He 
presents frequently on these subjects to teachers, administrators, and education 
officials. 

Sylvie Hale is Director of Special Projects for WestEd’s Comprehensive 
School Assistance Program, overseeing the development of strategic planning 
processes with focus on incorporating innovative technology services. She com- 
bines deep knowledge of school and district improvement with experience in 
applying technology to complex educational issues. She is currently working 
on several projects that integrate online tools with school and district improve- 
ment activities. Previously with WestEd, Hale was Director of WestEd Interac- 
tive, managing web-based and multimedia technologies that provided clients 
with solutions to complex data and information management needs. Hale was 
an original developer of SchoolsMovingUp, an initiative that helps schools and 
districts address the immense challenge of raising student achievement in low- 
performing schools. Hale has also provided technical assistance to numerous 
struggling schools. These services included workshop series on data analysis, 
reform planning, and implementation. Hale has worked closely on school reform 
with federal, state, county, and district staff through consultations, collaborative 
projects, and planning activities. Prior to joining WestEd in 1988, Hale worked 
as a Mathematics Content Area Specialist at Dominican College Learning Center. 
She received an MA in international educational administrative policy analysis 
from Stanford University and a BA in international relations with an emphasis in 
cross-cultural communication. 

Deborah Halliday is the Community Learning Partnerships Policy Advi- 
sor to the Montana State Superintendent. As a policy advisor to the State 


261 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


Superintendent of the Montana Office of Public Instruction, her work includes 
launching Graduation Matters Montana, a unique public-private partnership 
that seeks to increase the number of Montana students who graduate from 
high school, and Montana Schools of Promise, which is working to dramatically 
improve the state’s most struggling schools. Ms. Halliday is a graduate of Colum- 
bia University’s School of International and Public Affairs’ Master’s program in 
Public Administration, where she focused on Social Welfare Policy, and she has 
over 20 years of experience working with local, state, and national organizations 
on social welfare policy initiatives. 

Dr. Susan Hanes has extensive experience in public education, including 
information management services, assessment development, research, program 
evaluation, and high school mathematics teaching. Her experience includes 12 
years in the Georgia Department of Education in assessment development, direc- 
tor of statistical services and electronic data collection for statewide systems, 
and program evaluation. She has worked in local school systems as the director 
of assessment, research and evaluation. She was the Director of Standards and 
Research for the Georgia Office of Education Accountability. She has conducted 
consulting services for the IES Longitudinal Data System Grants, technical assis- 
tance for the Performance Based Data Management Initiative (PBDMI), and 
consulting services and site visits with the Center for Education Leadership and 
Technology and CCSSO for the Decision Support Architecture Consortium. She 
is a consultant with the Building State Capacity and Productivity Center where 
she works with states on their statewide systems of support. She has served as 
a peer reviewer for the U.S. Department of Education for Accountability Reviews 
and State Assessment System reviews since 1999 and has been a member of 
Title I State Monitoring teams. She served as a reviewer for the U.S. Department 
of Education for the flexibility requests. She has worked on committees for the 
CCSSO and National Center for Education Statistics including Chair, Implemen- 
tation Task Force — National Forum for Education Statistics, 1990-1991; Task 
Force on Confidentiality, National Center for Education Statistics — Member, 
1994-95; and Chair, Education Information Advisory Committee for the Council 
of Chief State School Officers, 1994-1995. 

Denise Juneau, State Superintendent of Public Instruction, began her second 
term as Superintendent on January 7, 2013. Under her tenure, test scores are 
up and dropout rates are down. Her initiative, Graduation Matters Montana, has 
schools and communities working together to implement locally developed plans 
to keep more students in school. Additionally, the state has raised standards in 
English and Math and is providing more opportunities for students to access 
higher education. Denise is the first American Indian woman to serve in a state- 
wide elected office in the nation’s history. She graduated from Browning High 
School in Browning, Montana. She earned her Bachelor's degree in English from 
Montana State University, her Masters of Education degree from the Harvard 


262 


Authors' Biographies 


Graduate School of Education, and her Juris Doctorate from the University of 
Montana. 

Michael Right is the senior project director for the Darden/Curry Partner- 
ship for Leaders in Education. Prior to joining the PLE, Michael served as the 
principal of a high-performing urban middle school in the city of Richmond, 
Virginia for seven years. Under his leadership, student test scores increased from 
the 50th percentile to the 93rd percentile in English, mathematics, science, and 
history. In 2009, Michael was awarded the R.E.B. Award for Distinguished Edu- 
cational Leadership for Richmond City Schools. In 2011, he was one of only two 
principals in the City of Richmond who earned the Level II Principal of Distinc- 
tion Endorsement from the Virginia Department of Education for improving 
student achievement, displaying effective instructional leadership, and creating 
a positive effect on school climate and culture in a Virginia public school. Michael 
received his BS in elementary and middle education from West Virginia Univer- 
sity and his MEd in education administration and supervision from Virginia Com- 
monwealth University. 

Robert Linquanti is Project Director for English Learner Evaluation & 
Accountability Support and Senior Researcher at WestEd’s California Compre- 
hensive Center. He helps states and school districts review and strengthen their 
assessment, evaluation, and accountability policies, practices, and systems for 
English learners (ELs). He recently co-authored a study to define and measure 
EL linguistic and academic progress as part of the U.S. Department of Education’s 
national Title III evaluation and is coauthoring guidance for the Council of Chief 
State School Officers (CCSSO) to assist states in federally funded assessment 
consortia to move toward a common definition of English learner. He has pub- 
lished and presented widely on evaluating EL education policies, EL assessment 
and reclassification, and improving accountability and equity for ELs. Linquanti 
currently serves on the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium EL Advisory 
Committee, the CCSSO ELL Assessment Advisory Committee, the Texas State 
Assessment Technical Advisory Committee; Stanford University’s Understanding 
Language Initiative, and the national Working Group on ELL Policy. He regularly 
advises the U.S. Department of Education, U.S. Congressional staff, and CCSSO on 
assessment and accountability policy and practices related to ELs. Linquanti has 
also taught as invited faculty at the Aspen Institute and Stanford University. 

Sally Partridge serves as the Associate Commissioner for Accreditation and 
School Improvement at the Texas Education Agency. Her current focus is on pro- 
viding tools and resources to assist districts in supporting school turnaround ini- 
tiatives, and promoting the continued development of a quality charter commu- 
nity in Texas. Her experience includes facilitating the development of the Texas 
Accountability Intervention system to emphasize the vital role of the district in 
the continuous improvement process, developing interventions to meet state 


263 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


and federal improvement statues, and integrating monitoring and compliance 
requirements into a cohesive approach to improving student learning. Special- 
ized areas of focus include the development of a statewide Educator Pipeline, the 
launch of a District Turnaround Leadership Initiative, and the implementation of 
the Charter School Technical Assistance Network. 

Carole L. Perlman, a consultant to the Academic Development Institute, has 
participated in ADI's work with the NCLB Center on Innovation & Improvement, 
the Building State Capacity and Productivity Center, and the Illinois Center for 
School Improvement. She served as School Improvement Coordinator for the 
Chicago Public Schools from 2003 to 2006. Prior to that, she directed student 
assessment programs for the Chicago Public Schools for 20 years. A past presi- 
dent of the National Association of Test Directors, and past board member of 
the National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME), Dr. Perlman also 
served on the Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Test- 
ing (CRESST) National Advisory Board and represented NCME for two terms on 
the Joint Committee on Testing Practices. She has served on numerous state and 
federal advisory panels, including the NAEP Reading Framework Steering Com- 
mittee, the first NAEP Mathematics Standard-Setting Panel, the Education Infor- 
mation Advisory Committee’s Assessment Task Force, and the Voluntary National 
Test Technical Advisory Committee. She co-edited the Handbook on Effective 
Implementation of School Improvement Grants and co-wrote the Toolkit for Imple- 
menting the School Improvement Grant: Transformation Model. Dr. Perlman has 
been a frequent presenter at professional conferences and is the recipient of the 
American Educational Research Association (AERA) Division D Research Report 
Award, AERA Division H Outstanding Publication Award, National Association 
of Test Directors Career Award for Outstanding Contributions to Educational 
Assessment, and the UIC College of Education’s Distinguished Alumna Award. 

She holds a BS in Mathematics with honors from the University of Illinois at Chi- 
cago, an MS in Statistics from the University if Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and 
a PhD in Public Policy Analysis from the University of Illinois at Chicago. 

Daniel Player (PhD, Economics, University of Washington) is a research 
assistant professor at the Curry School of Education and is affiliated with the 
Darden/Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education at the University of Virginia. 
His research focuses on district readiness to support school turnaround, school 
leader career paths, and the distribution of teacher quality. Prior to joining UVa, 
Dr. Player was a Senior Researcher at Mathematica Policy Research where he 
worked on several large-scale evaluations of education interventions for the 
U.S. Department of Education, including a study of teacher preparation programs, 
a study of teachers from highly selective routes to alternative certification, an 
evaluation of the Teacher Incentive Fund, and an evaluation of Teacher Residency 
Programs. Dr. Player publishes in peer-reviewed journals such as Economics of 


264 


Authors' Biographies 


Education Review, Education Finance and Policy, and the Journal of Policy Analysis 
and Management. 

Eileen Reed specializes in large-scale improvement and school turnaround 
initiatives. Her areas of expertise include technical assistance for multidistrict 
and regional school turnaround initiatives, district readiness assessment for 
change, district site visits related to district support for campus turnaround, 
and select professional development. Dr. Reed’s recent consulting experience 
includes a FL DOE Race to the Top Grant to develop a statewide cadre of turn- 
around leaders as well as continued work with the acclaimed University of 
Virginia’s School Turnaround Specialist Program. Dr. Reed served as the Deputy 
Executive Director of Texas Initiatives at Education Service Center (ESC) Region 
13. In this role she directed statewide projects administered in collaboration 
with the Texas Education Agency. Primary projects included assistance to dis- 
tricts in meeting the accountability requirements of state and federal programs, 
developing the capacity of the system of ESCs to support low-performing schools, 
high school redesign programs, and initiatives focused on supporting the state’s 
efforts to graduate all students career and college ready. Specialized areas of 
focus included the design, implementation, and oversight of the state interven- 
tion and support system for schools in improvement under NCLB and the estab- 
lishment of a state turnaround center to support the state’s efforts to improve 
the performance of schools and districts in improvement under the state 
accountability system. 

Sam Redding is the executive director of Academic Development Institute, 
associate director of the Center on School Turnaround, senior learning special- 
ist for the Center on Innovations in Learning, and a consultant to the Building 
State Capacity and Productivity (BSCP) Center. A former high school teacher 
and college dean, Dr. Redding has published in the areas of statewide systems of 
support, school improvement, change leadership, innovations in education, and 
family and community engagement. 

Lauren Morando Rhim is president of LMR Consulting, an education policy, 
research, and evaluation consulting firm dedicated to leveraging research to 
inform practice in K-12 education. She consults with state departments of edu- 
cation, school districts, and nonprofits committed to creating high-quality public 
schools for all students and is affiliated with the Academic Development Institute 
and a strategic partner of the Center on School Turnaround. Rhim is the Vice 
Chairperson of her school board in Norwich, Vermont and the Chairperson of the 
Ledyard Charter School in Lebanon, New Hampshire. 

William Robinson is the Interim Executive Director of the University of 
Virginia Darden/Curry Partnership for Leaders in Education (PLE) where he is 
responsible for strategic direction, thought leadership, program delivery, busi- 
ness development, program results, and financial performance. In previous 
roles, Robinson led redesign and implementation of PLE's external support to 


265 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


districts, served as primary consultant to 20 districts leading turnaround efforts, 
and oversaw PLE’s financial strategy. Robinson is a graduate of Harvard Busi- 
ness School and earned his BA in Economics from Princeton University. Prior to 
joining the Darden/Curry Partnership, he completed consulting work for various 
education organizations including the DC Public Education Fund, the Center for 
Better Schools, and Stand for Children. Robinson began his career at McMaster- 
Carr Supply Company, where he helped manage its supply chain operations in 
Atlanta. 

Alison Segal is a project coordinator at the Mass Insight Education School 
Turnaround Group (STG), where she supports the State Development Network, 
Mass Insight Education communications and strategy, and research projects. 
Prior to joining the STG, Alison worked as a preschool teacher outside of Boston, 
MA, and worked at Rhode Island Kids Count and the Rhode Island State House 
Legislative Research Council, focusing on education policy. In graduate school, 
she collaborated with other Master’s students to create a business plan to spur 
social and entrepreneurial development in Appalachian Kentucky, examined the 
feasibility of introducing Social Impact Bonds in Rhode Island, and worked as 
a Graduate Research Assistant to Dr. Kenneth Wong. Alison has a BA in Human 
Development & Family Studies from UConn and a Master of Public Policy from 
Brown University. 

Pam Sheley is the vice president of business and client services for the Aca- 
demic Development Institute. For the past four years, she has been the liaison to 
the Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) for services provided through the federal 
Center system as well as the online Indistar application (called Native Star for 
the BIE). She was the project manager for the Principal Leadership Academy. 

Pam earned her BS in Psychology and her MA in English. 

Kelly Stuart is the Director of Dissemination for Developmental Studies 
Center (DSC), a nonprofit organization based in Oakland, California. Stuart facili- 
tates the national efforts to bring DSC’s in-school and afterschool programs to 
over 100,000 students annually. From 2010 to 2013, Stuart worked as a Senior 
Research Associate at WestEd. Stuart led dissemination efforts for Doing What 
Works (DWW) and led the School Turnaround Learning Community (STLC). 
Sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education, the STLC is an online community 
for states, districts, and schools involved in turnaround efforts. She facilitated 
and supported state-level peer-to-peer meetings that enabled state departments 
overseeing School Improvement Grants to share promising practices and coordi- 
nate planning activities to better support their districts. Before working at Devel- 
opmental Studies Center and WestEd, Stuart was the Director of Special Pro- 
grams and Area Manager at the Success for All Foundation, overseeing program 
implementation in over 120 schools in California and Hawaii. Stuart began her 
career as an elementary school teacher. Stuart received a BS from the University 
of the State of New York at Albany; an MA, EdD, and administrative credential 


266 


Authors' Biographies 


from San Francisco State University; and a teaching credential from Simpson 
College. 

Janet S. Twyman, PhD, BCBA, is a noted proponent of effective instructional 
practices. She is committed to evidence-based instruction and has a strong 
record in the transfer of instructional technology and developing web-based pro- 
grams for wide-scale distribution. A career educator, she has been a preschool 
and elementary school teacher, a principal and administrator, and university 
professor. She has worked directly with typically developing students, preschool- 
ers with intellectual disabilities, young adolescents with emotional and behav- 
ioral problems, and learners with autism spectrum disorders. As Vice President 
of Instructional Development, Implementation, and Research at Headsprout, 
she led the design, development, and dissemination of the company’s highly 
regarded online educational programs and oversaw program implementation 
in over 1,000 public and private schools. Dr. Twyman has served on the boards 
of numerous organizations including the Cambridge Center for Behavioral Stud- 
ies (where she chaired the Education Group) and PEER International (assisting 
township schools in Port Elizabeth, South Africa). In 2007-2008 she served as 
President of the Association for Behavior Analysis International. As Associ- 
ate Professor of Pediatrics at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
she focuses her time on evidence-based innovations in education and the sys- 
tems that support them to produce meaningful differences in learners’ lives. Dr. 
Twyman also recently became the Director of Innovation & Technology for the 
U.S. Dept, of Education’s national Center on Innovations in Learning. 

Dr. Adam Urbanski is the president of Rochester (NY) Teachers Association 
and a vice-president of the American Federation of Teachers. A native of Poland, 
he immigrated to the United States in 1960 at the age of 14. He earned his PhD in 
American Social History from the University of Rochester. A former high school 
teacher and college professor, Dr. Urbanski is an active proponent of change in 
education. In Rochester, he proposed and designed an internship program for 
new teachers; a peer review intervention plan; a career ladder; and a homework 
hotline service for students. Dr. Urbanski is the founding director of the Teacher 
Union Reform Network (TURN) aimed at creating a new vision of teachers’ 
unions that supports needed changes in education. Dr. Urbanski has appeared on 
several nationally broadcast television programs, including the NBC Today Show, 
ABC News World Report, CBS Newswatch, and PBS MacNeil-Lehrer News Hour. 
His most recent publication, Improving Student Learning Through Collective Bar- 
gaining, appeared in the May/June issue of the Harvard Education Letter. 

Herb Walberg is Distinguished Visiting Fellow at the Hoover Institution, 
Stanford University. He formerly taught at Harvard University and is Emeritus 
University Scholar and Professor of Education and Psychology at the University 
of Illinois at Chicago. He was awarded a PhD from the University of Chicago, 
where he is a member of the Fellows Society. He has written or edited more than 


267 


The State Role in School Turnaround 


55 books and written about 300 articles on such topics as educational effective- 
ness and exceptional human accomplishments. Among his recent books are the 
International Encyclopedia of Educational Evaluation-, Narrowing the Achievement 
Gap-. Strategies for Educating Latino, Black, and Asian Students (with Susan Paik); 
and Testing Student Learning — Evaluating Teaching Effectiveness and School 
Accountability (both with Williamson M. Evers). 

Dennis Woodruff is founder and president of ClearView Consulting Com- 
pany, focused on bringing excellent talent management practice to public educa- 
tion. Dennis’s expertise is in leadership assessment and organizational develop- 
ment. ClearView Consulting has assessed hundreds of school administrators in 
the last three years, in over 15 states. Before starting ClearView Consulting in 
2010, Dennis worked for Hay Group for 17 years as a managing consultant in 
Leadership Development and Talent Management. At Hay Group, Dennis led con- 
sulting engagements with several high profile clients, including CNH Global, IBM, 
Novelis, and BAE Systems. Dennis received his MA in Organizational Psychology 
from the Massachusetts School of Professional Psychology. 


268 



West 

WestEd.org 



http://centeronschoolturnaround.org/ 




