DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 427 914 



RC 021 810 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Kidwell, Clara Sue 

The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Curriculum. 
1999-00-00 

23p.; Chapter 12 in: "Next Steps: Research and Practice To 
Advance Indian Education"; see RC 021 798. 

Historical Materials (060) -- Information Analyses (070) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

Activism; American Indian History; American Indian 
Languages; American Indian Literature; * American Indian 
Studies; *College Curriculum; Cultural Maintenance; 
Culturally Relevant Education; Ethnography; Higher 
Education; interdisciplinary Approach; Politics of 
Education; Scholarship ; Stereotypes; Tribal Sovereignty 
Ethnohistory ; *Native American Studies 



ABSTRACT 



The first Native American studies programs, created in the 
rising political consciousness of the late 1960s and early 1970s, arose from 
a rejection of traditional curricula and challenged stereotypes of Indians 
and their history. During the 1980s, Native studies programs became vehicles 
to recruit and retain American Indian students, reflecting concerns over 
minority attrition rates and affirmative action. In the late 1980s and into 
the 1990s, the increasingly multicultural makeup of American society and the 
emerging global economy focused attention on multiculturalism and cultural 
diversity in college curricula. One of the most notable trends in Native 
American studies has been the emergence of tribal colleges fostered by the 
American Indian Higher Education Consortium. These colleges offer courses 
that play an important role in preserving tribal cultural identity. From 
political confrontation to affirmative action to multiculturalism, the 
presence of American Indians as both subjects of scholarship and scholars in 
their own right has created a new field of study that incorporates ideas such 
as tribal sovereignty, the relationship of cultural identity to land, the 
importance of culture in understanding the effects of first contacts between 
Europeans and Native Americans, the significance of Native languages as 
cognitive structures, and treaties and treaty rights. Several disciplines are 
involved, primarily anthropology, history, literary criticism, and legal 
studies. Native American studies has thus promoted a model of truly 
interdisciplinary learning. Contains endnotes and a bibliography. (TD) 



***************************************************************************** 
* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

from the original document. 



* 







gam i i i 




^r 

o\ 

r- 

<N 



s 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 



B^Th 



CENTER (ERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



® Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Chapter 12 







The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the 
College Curriculum 

Clara Sue Kidwell 1 



S ince their inception in the late 1960s, Native American or 
American Indian studies programs have served as outlets for 
student political activism; as affirmative action programs to 
increase the number of Indian students at colleges and universities; 
and as intellectually coherent, interdisciplinary, academic programs. 
Their development and persistence in college curricula has both 
contributed to and been made possible by a growing body of scholar- 
ship that encompasses key themes of tribal sovereignty, cultural 
integrity, relationship with the land, and importance of Native lan- 
guages for American Indian communities. 



The History of Native American Studies 

Native American studies programs in college curricula have 
changed significantly from their early inception in the late 1960s and 
early 1970s. The first programs were created in the ferment of Indian 
activism and rising political consciousness marked by the Civil Rights 
movement and anti-Vietnam War sentiment of the time. The Civil 
Rights movement raised issues of equal access and affirmative ac- 







iii i r 




Clara Sue Kidwell 



tion in higher education. The political activism spawned by U.S. 
involvement in the Vietnam War increased sensitivity to racism. Not 
without reason, activists compared the massacre of Vietnamese vil- 
lagers by U.S. soldiers at My Lai with the massacres of Cheyenne 
families at Sand Creek, Colorado, in 1864 and Big Foot’s band of 
Lakota (Sioux) at Wounded Knee, South Dakota, in 1890. 

For American Indians, the abridgement of rights guaranteed in 
long-standing treaties was also a cause for activism. Yakamas, 
Puyallups, Makahs, and members of other local tribes staged “fish- 
ins” in Washington state in 1964 to assert fishing rights guaranteed 
by treaties. Iroquois people blockaded bridges between Canada and 
the United States to assert treaty rights of international free passage. 
Urban Indians in Minneapolis established the American Indian Move- 
ment to monitor police brutality against Indian people in the Franklin 
Avenue area of the city. 2 

The takeover of Alcatraz Island gave the burgeoning Red Power 
movement national visibility. On November 9, 1969, a small group of 
Indian students from the University of California at Berkeley and 
San Francisco State University occupied the abandoned federal prison 
on the island. Although they were forced off the island by federal 
marshals, a larger group retook the facility on November 20. The 
occupation lasted until June 11, 1971, attracting widespread media 
attention and sympathy for Indian causes. 3 

Creating a Center for Native American Studies at Alcatraz was one 
of the proposals made by the occupiers. The center would “train our 
young people in the best of our native cultural arts and sciences, as 
well as educate them in the skills and knowledge to improve the lives 
and spirits of all Indian peoples.” The proposal echoed earlier de- 
mands by Indian college students that had resulted in the creation of 
the first academic Native American Studies programs in major uni- 
versities throughout the country. The students involved in the Alcatraz 
takeover had been taking courses in the programs at Berkeley and 
San Francisco State. Many left the classroom to participate in a real- 
life learning experience on “the Rock.’ M 

These early Native American studies programs arose from a rejec- 
tion of traditional curricula that ignored or misrepresented Native 
Americans, their cultures, and their place in American history. Indi- 
ans wanted to learn about their own cultures and ways of serving 
their own communities. At Berkeley, the Native American studies 



The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Cuppiculum 





program was part of an Ethnic Studies Department approved by the 
faculty senate in response to the Third World Student Strike that 
shut down the university for about three weeks in the spring of 1969. 
At the University of Minnesota, students and administrators negoti- 
ated a proposed curriculum that would offer “an education that is 
adequate to deal with the complexities of contemporary Indian af- 
fairs.” 5 

The complexities, however, were often submerged in rhetoric and 
polemic. The widespread popularity of Dee Brown's Bury My Heart 
at Wounded Knee evoked waves of White middle-class guilt. The 
book was a catalog of injustices and massacres that contributed 
significantly to the idea that all Indians died out after 1890. Vine 
Deloria, Jr. countered the myth of the vanishing Indian in Custer 
Died for Your Sins, a critique of Indian stereotypes that left anthro- 
pologists dismayed and Indians with a new sense of righteousness. 

Demands for Native American studies programs often grew out of 
the political and sometimes physical confrontations that accompa- 
nied the demands of Black students for Afro-American studies. In 
this atmosphere of hostility and challenges to the legitimacy of exist- 
ing curricula, faculty and administrators were often highly suspi- 
cious of the academic content of newly formed programs. Conse- 
quently their support was lukewarm at best and nonexistent at 
worst, and many programs faded rather quickly from the academic 
scene. 6 At Minnesota, the Department of American Indian Studies 
was dismantled after a period of internal turmoil, and its faculty 
members were distributed throughout other departments. At the 
University of California at Davis, the Native American studies degree 
program was suspended for a time when faculty retirements seemed 
to threaten the stability of the department. 

During the 1980s, however, Native American studies programs 
were given a new academic role. The initial fervor of Civil Rights 
protests settled into the more mundane routine of court cases and 
legislative processes that institutionalized newly asserted rights: 
affirmative action programs emerged out of national concern over 
equal employment opportunities and access to education. In 1982 
Alexander Astin published an influential study, Minorities in Higher 
Education , and college administrators, confronted with appalling 
statistics on minority attrition rates, saw Indian Studies programs as 
vehicles to recruit and retain American Indian students. If Native 





273 



g&JRil I 



m 



n 




Clara Sue Kidwell 



American students could take courses relevant to their own experi- 
ences, they reasoned, these students would flock to campuses in 
greater numbers, reversing their statistical underrepresentation. 
Many colleges and universities advertised Native American or Ameri- 
can Indian studies programs that consisted of one or two history, 
anthropology, or English courses and perhaps a part-time student 
services person designated as an American Indian counselor. 

In the late 1980s the rhetoric justifying recruitment of under- 
represented groups shifted to issues of demography and American 
competitiveness in a global economy. In 1988 the Commission on 
Minority Participation in Education and American Life produced an 
influential report on higher education, One Third of a Nation. It 
projected that by the year 2000, one-third of the U.S. population 
would be composed of members of minority groups— Asian, Black, 
Hispanic, and American Indian. The report brought home to politi- 
cians the fact that unless minorities became more involved in higher 
education, U.S. competitiveness in the world economy would suffer. 

The increasingly multicultural makeup of American society also 
focused attention on issues of multiculturalism in the college cur- 
riculum. As the numbers of minority students increased, adminis- 
trators and faculty turned to the rhetoric of cultural diversity in the 
curriculum. The administration of the University of California at 
Berkeley adopted the motto “Excellence in Diversity,” and the fac- 
ulty senate adopted a new graduation requirement— completion of a 
course comparing the experiences of at least three major ethnic 
groups in the United States. Stanford University gave instructors 
greater latitude to include new materials on their reading lists in the 
Western Civilization course required of all students for graduation. 
The call for multiculturalism resulted in a backlash against diversity 
of curricular offerings {Black Elk Speaks had joined and sometimes 
displaced Shakespeare in English course reading lists) and led to 
sometimes heated debates over the nature of the canon. 7 

In the 1990s legislation ended many affirmative action programs, 
discontinuing race-based scholarships and admissions programs. 
The fact that scholars continue to debate the very notion of race as a 
biological way of categorizing human beings only complicates the 
political issues of affirmative action. 

Despite the changing academic politics of Native American stud- 
ies, a number of programs still exist, and they have gained academic 



mu i n 




The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Curriculum 

legitimacy. The University of Arizona established a master’s degree 
program in 1982 and added a doctoral degree in the area in 1996. 
The University of California at Los Angeles established the first 
master’s degree program in Native American studies in 1985. Pro- 
grams at the University of Minnesota and the University of Califor- 
nia at Davis have been revived after periods of decline. Although a 
number of universities offer a minor in Native American or Ameri- 
can Indian studies (e.g., University of Wyoming, University of Mon- 
tana, Montana State University, University of South Dakota, and San 
Diego State University), only a few offer a full bachelor’s degree 
program (University of Oklahoma, University of Minnesota, Bemidji 
State University, University of California at Berkeley, and University 
of North Carolina at Pembroke). 8 

One of the most notable trends in the development of Native 
American studies programs has been the emergence of the American 
Indian Higher Education Consortium. Beginning with the establish- 
ment of Navajo Community College by the Navajo Tribal Council in 
1968, the number of colleges controlled by tribal councils or tribal 
boards has grown to 31. Although the colleges generally emphasize 
basic college courses and vocational education, many include courses 
that relate specifically to the history, language, and culture of the 
tribe. For example, Little Big Horn College offers a curriculum in 
Crow Studies, and Salish Kootenai College has a tribal studies cur- 
riculum. Staff members often include Native speakers of tribal lan- 
guages and practitioners of traditional arts and cultural activities. 
These college courses play an important role in preservation of tribal 
cultural identity. 9 

Scholarship in Native American Studies 

The establishment of Native American studies programs has re- 
sulted from and promoted the emergence of serious scholarly atten- 
tion to Native American history, culture, and literature. The rhetoric 
of early Native American studies often challenged the stereotypes of 
Indians and their history (e.g., the hostile savage, the virgin land) 
that prevailed in traditional American history texts. Robert Berkhofer, 
noting the resurgent interest in Indians in the early 1970s, examined 
White perceptions of Indians in The White Man’s Indian and illus- 
trated how these perceptions had affected Indian-White relations in 



I I IT 





Clara Sue Kidwell 

the twentieth century. Richard Slotkin’s monumental study of Ameri- 
can literature Regeneration Through Violence traced the emergence 
of a uniquely American consciousness out of frontier contact and 
conflict with Indians. 

Although various reports on the social, political, and legal condi- 
tions of Indian people appeared in the first half of the twentieth 
century, it was not until 1971 that the first major historical study of 
American Indian legal status appeared. Wilcomb Washburn's Red 
Man s Land, White Mans Law examined legal attitudes from Fran- 
cisco de Vitoria (1526) to John Marshall (1831) to Supreme Court 
decisions of the 1950s and 1960s. In 1987 Charles Wilkinson empha- 
sized the importance of legal status by pointing out that, except for 
Civil Rights legislation, “Indian law has been the vehicle for the 
modern analysis of laws enacted during the nation's first century of 
existence more frequently than any other body of law.” 10 

Prompted by the demands of tribal leaders and militant activists 
for true self-government on Indian reservations, Congress reversed 
its policy of terminating congressional recognition of Indian tribes 
(enunciated in House Concurrent Resolution 108 in 1954) by pass- 
ing the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Active 
1975. This act was a major step forward in the assertion of Indians' 
rights to administer their own programs rather than relying upon 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and it helped crystallize the concept of 
tribes as exercising aboriginal sovereignty as nations. In 1984 Vine 
Deloria, Jr. and Clifford Lytle examined the concept of tribal sover- 
eignty in The Nations Within: The Past and Future of American 
Indian Sovereignty . They discussed the development of Indian tribal 
governments and assessed the impact of activism that produced the 
takeovers of Alcatraz in 1969, the Wounded Knee trading post in 
1973, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs building in Washington in 
1992. They called for reform of Indian tribal governments and re- 
newal of Indian cultural traditions as bases for true tribal sover- 
eignty. 

In the field of history, new interpretations of American Indians 
emerged. Until the 1970s, the history of Indian tribes was generally 
political/military history of Indian defeats. In 1972, however, Wilbur 
Jacobs published Dispossessing the American Indian: Indians and 
Whites on the Colonial Frontier, and in 1975 Francis Jennings pub- 
lished The Invasion of America: Indians, Colonialism, and the Cant 



The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Curriculum 




of Conquest. These works portrayed the English settlers of New 
England as rapacious land grabbers and detailed the process of 
dispossession of New England’s Indians and the effects of Christian- 
ity upon them. 

Alfred W. Crosby, Jr. introduced the biological dimensions of 
contact in The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Con- 
sequences of 1492, demonstrating that disease played a major factor 
in the destruction of Native habitats and populations. Henry Dobyns 
offered new assessments of the demography of Native American 
populations before European contact, dramatically revising esti- 
mates of Aboriginal population figures for the Americas to upward of 
100 million. His work spawned a vigorous response in scholarly 
circles, and debates continue concerning the size of the Native popu- 
lation at the time of contact. 11 

Ethnohistory emerged as a dominant methodology in the study of 
American Indians in the early 1950s, when historians writing about 
Native Americans discovered their ties with anthropologists as stu- 
dents of culture. Their work was prompted by the establishment of 
the Indian Claims Commission, which allowed Indian people to 
press claims against the federal government for infringement of 
treaty rights to land. The investigation of claims required Indians to 
present testimony concerning their traditional land areas, subsis- 
tence patterns, and land usage. Scholars preparing testimony for 
tribes had to use both original documents and testimony by Native 
people about their pasts. Historians learned about the importance of 
culture in historical study, and anthropologists learned the value of 
historical documentation for cultural study. 12 

The development of ethnohistory shifted the focus of scholarship 
in anthropology from studies of acculturation (e.g., the total dis- 
placement of cultural values of a subordinate group by those of a 
dominant group) to studies of cultural survival, adaptation, and 
renascence. James Axtell addressed the need to consider situations 
of cultural contact from the perspectives of both cultures in The 
European and the Indian: Essays in the Ethnohistory of Colonial 
North America (1981). His book The Invasion Within: The Contest 
of Cultures in Colonial North America (1985) highlighted the re- 
sponses of Indians in New France and New England to Jesuit and 
Puritan missionaries. Anthony F. C. Wallace’s The Death and Re- 
birth of the Seneca (1969) described the Handsome Lake religion 



Clara Sue Kidwell 



among the Seneca in the first years of the nineteenth century and 
demonstrated the power of religious revitalization movements in 
reshaping and reasserting Indian cultural values. James Merrell 
studied the adaptation and survival of the Catawbas on the East 
Coast in The Indians’ New World \ 

During the 1970s Indians emerged not as passive and disappear- 
ing cultural victims but as dynamic entities in history. Although 
environmentalists adopted the Indian almost as a mascot of conser- 
vation (e.g., Iron Eyes Cody, an Indian actor, shed a silent tear on the 
banks of a polluted stream in a television commercial and widely 
distributed poster), serious scholars examined Indian uses and con- 
trol of their environments. The early work of Carl Sauer on the use of 
fire for environmental management was complemented by such 
studies as Henry Lewis’s Patterns of Indian Burning in California; 
Ecology and Ethnohistory. Calvin Martin, in Keepers of the Game , 
moved the discussion of Indian relationships with nature in a new 
direction, analyzing the role of Indian hunting in the decline of fur- 
bearing animal populations in the Northeast woodlands in terms of a 
spiritually inspired war on the animals. William Cronon examined 
the interaction of New England culture and environment in Changes 
in the Land \ He stressed the dynamic nature of Indian cultures, their 
control of their environments, and their strategies of adapting to 
changing patterns of subsistence after European colonists arrived. 

The emerging field of archaeoastronomy has shown that Indians 
were keenly aware of celestial cycles associated with seasons; they 
recorded the cycles in rock paintings, in medicine wheels, and in 
patterns of light and shadow, such as that displayed by the Sun 
Dagger, which marks the sun’s solstice points at Fajada Butte near 
Chaco Canyon in New Mexico. The movement of star clusters such as 
the Pleiades and the three bright stars of Orion’s belt was used to 
determine the timing of certain ceremonies or to mark planting 
seasons for many tribes. 13 Studies of Indian plant domestication and 
agricultural practices reached new levels of sophistication with the 
development of flotation techniques to recover plant materials from 
archaeological sites and electron microscopes to detect changes in 
seed form that indicate domestication. 14 

Because language is an essential cultural marker, language stud- 
ies played an important part in the development of Native American 
studies programs, whose curricula have generally included Native 



EBEn I I 1 




rrm 



The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Curriculum 

language instruction. The University of Minnesota offers Ojibwa and 
Lakota classes. At the University of Oklahoma, Cherokee, Creek, 
Choctaw, and Kiowa are currently taught. In the field of 
sociolinguistics, scholarly studies by Gary Witherspoon of the Na- 
vajo language and by Keith Basso of Western Apache introduce new 
ideas demonstrating aspects of Native languages as a cognitive sys- 
tem. 

Renewed scholarly attention has been paid to Indian voices in 
autobiographies. Several personal narratives collected by ethnogra- 
phers in the 1930s were reissued in the 1960s and 1970s, most 
notably Black Elk Speaks , whose genesis demonstrates both the 
promise and problems of autobiographies as anthropological, his- 
torical, and literary sources. 15 

Black Elk Speaks can be read as a collaboration between a non- 
Indian novelist and poet, John Neihardt, and a Native holy man, 
Black Elk, who represents a truly Lakota sensibility. This book can 
also be viewed as the product of Neihardt’s romanticized vision of 
the Lakota and their tragic decline. If the truth lies somewhere 
between these two extremes, the book demonstrated the importance 
of oral history for Native American studies. It also became the sub- 
ject of numerous critical literary studies and a major exegesis, The 
Sixth Grandfather , by Ray Demallie, which placed it in historical 
and cultural context. Demallie offered a sophisticated critique that 
analyzed traditional Lakota religious beliefs and history— White in- 
teraction in the late nineteenth century and Black Elk's life history, 
including his conversion to Catholicism. 

On another level, Black Elk Speaks demonstrates the conjunction 
of history and memory reflected in much of the literature produced 
by contemporary Indian writers and poets. If the reality and impact 
of visionary experiences in traditional Lakota society are essential to 
Black Elk’s narrative, the reality of the mystical world is necessary 
too in the powers that Fleur, the medicine woman, commands in 
Louise Erdrich’s Tracks . The ghost of John Stink plays a prominent 
role in the history of the Osage Indians in the late nineteenth cen- 
tury, the subject of Mean Spirit by Linda Hogan. 

The recognition of American Indian fiction as a distinctive genre 
in contemporary literary studies effectively began with N. Scott 
Momaday’s House Made of Dawn, which won the Pulitzer Prize in 




i , i i i n > 




Clara Sue Kidwell 

1968. Momaday mixes memory and history with vivid descriptions 
of the New Mexico landscape to convey the alienation the protago- 
nist Abel feels in Los Angeles. 

Native American art has been the subject of scholarly study for a 
number of years, but in the early 1970s studies of ledger art became 
important in portraying the transition of Indian cultures from tradi- 
tional lifestyles to confinement on reservations in the mid-nine- 
teenth century. Art becomes history, as in the work of Karen Petersen, 
Helen Blish, and Candace Green. 

In the field of fine arts, several scholars began to focus on the 
aesthetic qualities of American Indian material culture. Christian F. 
Feest, an Austrian scholar working in Vienna, produced Native Arts 
of North America, providing a counterpoint to the older anthropo- 
logical interpretative framework of Franz Boas. Feest contributed 
significantly to the development of a history of American Indian art, 
shifting the analysis from the collection of ethnographic materials as 
cultural curiosities to discussion of the stylistic techniques and aes- 
thetic qualities of these works. The establishment of the Institute of 
American Indian Arts in Santa Fe, New Mexico, in 1962 encouraged 
the development of new artistic styles by Indian artists. Allan Houser 
and Fritz Scholder taught at the institute and influenced a genera- 
tion of students to break away from the flat, pictorial style that had 
characterized the work of artists trained at The Studio, the institute’s 
predecessor in Santa Fe. Scholarly attention to the history of these 
developments in Indian painting and sculpture has produced a num- 
ber of recent works. 16 

Intellectual Coherence in Native American Studies 

In 1978 Russell Thornton suggested a group of unique intellectual 
areas as the bases for developing American Indian studies as an 
academic discipline: oral traditions, treaties and treaty rights, tribal 
government, forms of social organization, group persistence, Ameri- 
can Indian epistemology, and contemporary issues. 17 As a result of 
the trends in scholarship inspired by and contributing to the devel- 
opment of Native American studies as an academic area, I propose 
that an intellectual framework is now emerging. It incorporates 
Thornton’s concepts into paradigms from several disciplines, prima- 
rily anthropology, history, literary criticism, and legal studies. 



r rn i i 




The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Curriculum 

The key ideas that constitute an intellectually coherent statement 
of the nature of the field of Native American or American Indian 
studies include tribal sovereignty, the importance of relationships to 
land in cultural identity, the importance of culture in understanding 
the effects of first contacts between Europeans and Native Ameri- 
cans, and the significance of Native languages as cognitive struc- 
tures. These ideas have inspired scholarly studies and have been 
refined by the results of those studies. 

Tribal sovereignty is essential to the continued existence of Ameri- 
can Indian tribes in contemporary society. It both depends on and 
contributes to the cultural integrity of tribes, as Deloria and Lytle 
pointed out in 1984. The idea of tribal sovereignty is thus critical to 
studies of past and present Indian cultural and political identity. 
Tribes have asserted their rights to self-government based on Ab- 
original occupancy of lands in North America and on treaty rights 
negotiated with colonial governments and the United States. These 
latter rights have given tribes a unique legal and political status, but 
one that has evolved over time. The study of Indian-White relations 
through history has an intellectually distinctive dimension that must 
be acknowledged. 

Tribal sovereignty implies that Indian nations have the right to 
choose their own forms of government, pursue their own cultural 
forms of governing, determine their own membership, and retain 
government-to-government relationships with federal and state gov- 
ernments. Each of these powers is, however, complicated by both 
historical circumstances and the political positions of tribes in con- 
temporary American society-taxation, regulation of gaming, eco- 
nomic development, and membership complicated by the intermix- 
ing of blood among Indian nations and between Indians and Whites. 
Indian gaming, a very modern phenomenon, is an interesting ex- 
ample. The Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988 mandated that 
states and tribes enter into agreements with regard to casino gam- 
bling on reservations, a requirement that imposes federal regula- 
tions upon tribal governments. A recent Supreme Court decision 
{Seminole Tribe of Florida v. United States) has denied the constitu- 
tionality of the requirement because it imposes a federal mandate on 
state governments. Although the Supreme Court decision gives tribes 
freedom from state constraints, it also throws into significant doubt 
the mechanisms by which Indian gaming is to be implemented and 



■■■■- I l l I I I 




Clara Sue Kidwell 



regulated. Understanding the complex issues of sovereignty depends 
upon recognition of the unique status of Indian tribes, the dynamics 
of cultural change and adaptation, and the historical evolution of 
legal systems within which tribal identities are embedded. 

The importance of sovereignty to culture is demonstrated in the 
National Museum of the American Indian Act (1989) and the Native 
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (1990), which 
mandate the return to Native people of Indian human remains and 
cultural materials from museums and other federally funded reposi- 
tories. These laws are premised on inherent tribal rights of owner- 
ship of those materials; both require museums to send information 
on their collections to federally recognized tribes and to consult with 
tribes in the process of determining tribal affiliation and usage. In 
terms of scholarship, repatriation legislation and practice requires 
examining in detail a range of information to determine affiliations, 
particularly for materials that predate European contact. Archaeolo- 
gists will be asked to determine lines of descent that link contempo- 
rary tribal groups with precontact habitation sites and skeletal re- 
mains. 18 

Another key concept is that American Indians have a unique 
cultural and legal relationship with land. Although ethnographers 
and anthropologists have long acknowledged the critical role of 
environmental factors in shaping cultures, for contemporary Indian 
people, studies of religion and philosophy generally start from the 
premise that Indian cultures both shaped and were shaped by their 
environments. 19 The relationship is embedded historically in treaty 
rights. It is also essential in terms of contemporary literature and 
aesthetics. The Southwestern landscape plays an integral part in 
Momaday’s House Made of Dawn. What characterizes Indian litera- 
ture is its situatedness in place. Landscape is part of the story in a 
distinctive way. Indian painting, sculpture, crafts, and performance 
arts derive significantly from cultural affiliation with land. 

Another key paradigm for Native American studies is that contact 
between cultures must be examined from the viewpoints of both 
cultures. If Indians disappeared from American history and largely 
from American consciousness in the early twentieth century, it was 
because the writing and study of history was embedded in a pecu- 
liarly Western European consciousness. As anthropologist Eric Wolf 



282 





13 



wtmm i~T 




The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Curriculum 

points out, “We have been taught, inside the classroom and outside 
of it, that there exists an entity called the West, and that one can 
think of this West as a society and civilization independent of and in 
opposition to other societies and civilizations.” 20 

History written from a particular cultural viewpoint essentially 
disregards the reality of other views. Ethnohistorians have attempted 
to construct the differing worldviews of historical actors in situa- 
tions of initial contact. The study of contact situations has been 
enriched by the realization that culture is not sui generis but a fluid 
and changing phenomenon that constitutes webs of meaning within 
which people act. 21 The interpretation of historical encounters be- 
tween Europeans and American Indians reveals much about not 
only Indian cultures but the cultural values of early European colo- 
nists. 22 

The study of Native languages is a critical part of a Native Ameri- 
can studies curriculum. There is a resurgence of interest in preserv- 
ing and reviving languages in Indian communities, and the federal 
Administration for Native Americans supports community efforts 
with limited federal grants. Although linguists have collected Native 
language materials for many years, Indian languages have been 
forcibly suppressed by boarding schools and federal policies aimed 
at assimilating Indians into American society. There are still ap- 
proximately 209 Indian languages spoken in North America, but 
nearly 80 percent are in danger of extinction within the present or 
next generation. Although it is impossible to save many of these 
languages, the study of a Native language offers unique insights into 
a different way of organizing one’s world conceptually. Studies about 
language can provide some of those insights. 23 

Indian cultures were strictly oral cultures before European con- 
tact and remained largely so even while European missionaries and 
explorers tried to reduce them to written form. The distinctive quali- 
ties of Indian languages— their attention to action, relationships, 
and frequent lack of precisely defined pronouns— derive from their 
dependence upon face-to-face contact between speaker and listener 
(e.g., social context is vital to understanding). The work of translat- 
ing texts and the influence of speech styles on contemporary litera- 
ture by Indian authors, even those who do not speak Native lan- 
guages, are functions of the orality of Indian cultures. 24 

283 



414 






Clara Sue Kidwell 

Tribal sovereignty and cultural integrity, relationship to land, 
problems of intercultural interpretation of history, and the centrality 
of language in understanding culture are essential themes in the 
developing discipline of Native American or American Indian stud- 
ies. This is not an exhaustive list of ideas. It is broad enough, how- 
ever, to subsume many ideas that have emerged throughout the 
history of Indian studies programs— the destructive power of stereo- 
types, diasporas of Indian tribes, and historical sources of contem- 
porary social and economic problems on reservations and in urban 
communities. These themes interweave a coherent approach to the 
study of historical and contemporary American Indian communi- 
ties. 



Native American Studies in the Contemporary 
Academic World 

Scholarship focused on Native Americans appears in a number of 
scholarly disciplines and with many of the trappings of conventional 
academic life. In the field of literature, Native American studies has 
developed the self-reflexivity that characterizes literary studies. N. 
Scott Momaday, Leslie Marmon Silko, James Welch, and Gerald 
Vizenor are subjects of critical analyses, doctoral dissertations, and 
articles in two journals devoted to new scholarship in Native Ameri- 
can studies, The American Indian Quarterly and American Indian 
Culture and Research Journal , 25 

Although Indian people will proclaim “There is no word for art in 
our language,” the discussion around the creation of works of aes- 
thetic beauty by Indian people, in both past and contemporary soci- 
ety, continues to produce new scholarship. The Native American Art 
Studies Association meets biennially. At its last meeting, scholars 
presented papers on rock art sites, ledger book art, and the work of 
contemporary Indian artists. Here, as in the field of literature, criti- 
cal analysis is being applied to forms of Indian artistic expression. 

Native and non-Native historians and anthropologists meet regu- 
larly at professional meetings to present research on Indian topics, 
albeit in relatively small numbers and generally on panels devoted 
exclusively to Indians. Degree-granting programs, including several 
at the master’s degree level and one at the doctoral degree level, exist 
in colleges and universities in various parts of the country. 



284 




-/mV 



15 




WMM i n 




The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Curriculum 

From political confrontation to affirmative action to 
multiculturalism, the presence of American Indians as both subjects 
of scholarship and scholars in their own right has created a new field 
of study that focuses a number of disciplinary viewpoints on a par- 
ticular group (or groups) of people. As part of this process, disciplin- 
ary lines of inquiry have begun to blur. Anthropologists appear on 
panels at meetings of the American Historical Association and the 
Organization of American Historians, and historians join anthro- 
pologists at meetings of the American Anthropological Association. 
The American Society for Ethnohistory brings together both disci- 
plines. Linguistics and anthropology meld in studies of cognitive 
systems in language. Native American studies has thus promoted a 
model of truly interdisciplinary learning. 

In 1977 a group of scholars working in or familiar with American 
Indian studies programs gathered at the University of California at 
Los Angeles (UCLA) to discuss the development of a master’s degree 
program in American Indian studies at UCLA and, in a broader 
context, to discuss the future of the field. There was general agree- 
ment that Indian studies was not an academic discipline, but that it 
had the potential to develop an intellectual framework to become 
one. 26 In the intervening 20 years, the development of new ideas, 
new approaches to the study of American Indians, and new forums 
for the exchange of ideas have given academic credibility to the study 
of American Indians in traditional disciplines and to the field of 
American Indian studies as an intellectual enterprise in its own 
right. 27 



Notes 

1. Clara Sue Kidwell (Choctaw and Chippewa) directs the Native Ameri- 
can Studies program at the University of Oklahoma. 

2. Smith and Warrior, Like a Hurricane, 127-30. 

3. Forbes, “Native Struggle for Liberation,” 123-30; Talbot, “Indian Stu- 
dents,” 93-102; Garvey and Johnson, “Government and the Indians,” 151-88. 

4. Fortunate Eagle, “Urban Indians,” 46; Kemnitzer, “Personal Memo- 
ries,” 103-09. 

5. Miller, “Involvement in an Urban University,” 327, 331. 

6. Given the highly variable definitions of what constitutes a Native 



Clara Sue Kidwell 




+ 



o n 



American or American Indian studies program, it is difficult to say how many 
have actually existed over time. A measure of their shifting fortunes is found in 
three studies: a survey of 100 programs in 1974 conducted by the Western 
Interstate Commission on Higher Education (WICHE), a second WICHE sur- 
vey in 1976-77, and a survey of 107 institutions conducted in 1980-81 by the 
American Indian Culture and Research Center at UCLA. The overlap between 
the second WICHE survey and the UCLA survey was only 57 institutions, from 
which we can infer that although new programs had emerged, many programs 
that existed in 1976-77 had changed or disappeared by 1981. For more informa- 
tion, see Locke, Survey of College and University Programs (1974); Locke, 
Survey of College and University Programs (1978); and Heth and Guyette, 
Issues for the Future. 

7. See Bloom, Closing of the American Mind; Schlesinger, Disuniting of 
America; and D’Souza, Illiberal Education. 

8. Information on the programs was gleaned from a selective search of 
college and university Internet sites, identified through the Infoseek Web 
browser and personal knowledge. The American Indian Studies Center at 
UCLA has recently conducted a survey of 12 programs; results are available 
from Dr. Duane Champagne, director of the center. Dr. Robert Nelson at the 
University of Richmond has conducted a survey for the Association for the 
Study of American Indian Literature and produced a new guide listing 69 
Native American studies programs. An electronic version of the guide is avail- 
able at http://www.richmond.edu/~melson/guide.html (12 December 1998). 



9. See Carnegie Foundation, Tribal Colleges and Boyer, Native Ameri- 
can Colleges . 

10. Wilkinson, American Indians, 14. Earlier studies that focused on 
American Indians include Lindquist, Red Man in the United States; 
Schmeckebier, Office of Indian Affairs; Institute for Government Research, 
Problem of Indian Administration; Cohen, Handbook of Federal Indian Law; 
and Brophy, Aberle, and others, The Indian. 

11. Dobyns, “Estimating Aboriginal American Population,” 395-416. See 
also Dobyns, Native American Historical Demography and Thornton, Ameri- 
can Indian Holocaust. 

12. Tanner, “Erminie Wheeler-Voegelin,” 65-68. 

13. See Aveni and Urton, Ethnoasti'onomy; Aveni, Native American 
Astronomy; Ceci, “Watchers of the Pleiades”; Chamberlain, When Stars 
Came Down to Earth; and Williamson, Archaeoastronomy in the Ameri- 



14. See Struever, “Flotation Techniques” and Ford, Prehistoric Food 
Production. 

15. See Linderman, Red Mother; Neihardt and Black Elk, Black Elk 
Speaks; Plenty-Coups, American; Left Handed, Son of Old Man Hat; Left 
Handed, Left Handed; and Talayesva, Sun Chief 

16. See Highwater, Song From the Earth; Wade, Arts of the North 
American Indian; and Archuleta and Strickland, Shared Visions. 

17. Thornton, “American Indian Studies,” 10-18. 




ERIC 




286 




m TTT 




fc!51 









The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Curriculum 



18. Trope and Echo-Hawk, “Native American Graves Protection,” 38-43, 
54-59. 

19. See Bennett, Ecological Tmrtsition; Oliver, Ecology; Steward, Evolu- 
tion and Ecology; and Basso, Wisdom Sits in Places . 

20. Wolf, Europe, 5. 

21. Geertz, Interpretation of Cultures, 5, 144. 

22. See, for example, Galloway, “The Chief Who is Your Father.” 

23. Goddard, “Introduction,” 3. Studies about Native language include 
Hymes, In Vain and Hinton, Flutes of Fire. 

24. See Kroeber, Traditional Literatures. 

25. See Velie, Four American Indian Literary Masters. 

26. The results of the meeting were published as a special issue of the 
American Indian Culture and Research Journal, vol. 2, nos. 3 and 4 (1978). 

27. For current listings of Native American studies programs, visit the 
ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools on-line Native 
Education Directory at http://www.ael.org/eric/ned.htm (12 December 
1998). 



Bibliography 



Archuleta, Margaret, and Rennard Strickland. Shared Visions: Native Ameri- 
can Painters and Sculptors in the Twentieth Century. Phoenix: Heard 
Museum, 1991. 

Astin, Alexander W. Minorities in American Higher Education. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 1982. 

Aveni, Anthony, ed. Native American Asti'onomy. Austin: University of Texas 
Press, 1977. 

Aveni, Anthony F., and Gary Urton, eds. Ethnoastronomy and Archaeoas- 
tronomy in the American Tropics. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, vol. 385. New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1982. 

Axtell, James. The European and the Indian: Essays in the Ethnohistoiy of 
Colonial North America. New York: Oxford University Press, 1981. 

. The Invasion Within: The Contest of Cultures in Colonial North America. 

New York: Oxford University Press, 1985. 

Basso, Keith H. Western Apache Language and Culture: Essays in Linguistic 
Anthropology. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1990. 

. Wisdom Sits in Places: Landscape and Language Among the Western 

Apache. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1996. 

Bennett, John W. The Ecological Transition: Cultural Anthropology and 
Human Adaptation. New York: Pergamon, 1976. 



287 





IS 





aaa i i i 





Clara Sue Kidwell 




Berkhofer, Robert F., Jr. The White Man's fnd/an: Images of the American 
Indian from Columbus to the Present. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1978. 

Blish, Helen H., and Amos Bad Heart Bull. Pictographic History of the Oglala 
Sioux. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1967. 

Bloom, Allan David. The Closing of the American Mind. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1987. 

Boas, Franz. Primitive Art. Oslo: H. Aschehoug & Co.; Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1927. Reprint, New York: Dover, 1955. 

Boyer, Paul. Native American Colleges: Progress and Prospects. Princeton, 
NJ: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, 1997- 

Brophy, William A., Sophie D. Aberle, and others, comps. The Indian: America's 
Unfinished Business: Report of the Commission on the Rights > Liberties , 
and Responsibilities of the American Indian. Norman: University of Okla- 
homa Press, 1966. 

Brown, Dee. Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian History of the 
American West. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1970. 

Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. Tribal Colleges: Shap- 
ing the Future of Native America. Princeton, NJ: Carnegie Foundation for 
the Advancement of Teaching, 1989. 

Ceci, Lynn. “Watchers of the Pleiades: Eth noastronomy among Native Cultiva- 
tors in Northeastern North America.” Ethnohistory 25 (1975): 301-17. 

Chamberlain, Von Del. When Stars Came Down to Earth: Cosmology of the 
Skidi Pawnee Indians of North America. Los Altos, CA: Ballena; College 
Park, MD: Center for Archaeoastronomy, 1982. 

Cohen, Felix. Handbook of Federal Indian Law. Washington, DC: U.S. Gov- 
ernment Printing Office, 1942. Reprint, Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press, 1971. 

Commission on Minority Participation in Education and American Life. One 
Third of a Nation: A Report of the Commission on Minority Participation 
in Education and American Life. [Washington, DC]: American Council on 
Education in association with the Education Commission of the States, 
1988. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 297 057. 

Cronon, William. Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of 
New England. New York: Hill and Wang, 1983. 

Crosby, Alfred W., Jr. The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural 
Consequences of 1492. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1972. 

Deloria, Vine, Jr. Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian Manifesto. New York: 
Macmillan, 1969. 

Deloria, Vine, Jr., and Clifford M. Lytle. The Nations Within : The Past and 
Future of American Indian Sovereignty . New York: Pantheon Books, 1984. 

Demallie, Raymond. The Sixth Grandfather: Black Elk's Teachings Given to 
John G. Neihardt. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1984. 

Dobyns, Henry F. “Estimating Aboriginal American Population: An Appraisal 



288 




T 



19 






The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Curriculum 

of Techniques with a New Hemispheric Estimate.” Current Anthropology 
7(October 1966): 395-416. 

. Native American Historical Demography: A Critical Bibliography. 

Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1976. 

D’Souza, Dinesh. Illiberal Education: The Politics of Race and Sex on Campus. 
New York: Free Press, 1991. 

Erdrich, Louise. Tracks. New York: Henry Holt, 1988. 

Feest, Christian F. Native Arts of North America. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1980. 

Forbes, Jack D. “The Native Struggle for Liberation: Alcatraz.” American In- 
dian Culture and Research Journal 18(4): 123-30 (1994). 

Ford, Richard I., ed. Prehistoric Food Production in North America . Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology, 1985. 

Fortunate Eagle, Adam (Nordwall). “Urban Indians and the Occupation of 
Alcatraz Island . ” American Indian Cidtu re and Research Journal 18(4): 46 
(1994). 

Galloway, Patricia. “‘The Chief Who is Your Father : Choctaw and French Views 
of the Diplomatic Relation.” In Powhatan s Mantle: Indians in the Colonial 
Southeast , edited by Peter H. Wood, Gregory A. Waselkov, and M. Thomas 
Hatley. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1989. 

Garvey, John, and Troy Johnson. “The Government and the Indians: The 
American Indian Occupation of Alcatraz Island, V)69’l97l” American In- 
dian Culture and Research Journal 18(4): 151-88 (1994). 

Geertz, Clifford. The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. New York: 
Basic Books, 1973. 

Goddard, Ives. “Introduction.” In Languages: Handbook of North American 
Indians , vol. 17. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1996. 

Greene, Candace S. “Women, Bison and Coup: A Structural Analysis of Chey- 
enne Pictographic Art.” Ph.D. diss., University of Oklahoma, 1985. 

Heth, Charlotte, and Susan Guyette. Issues for the Future of American Indian 
Studies: A Needs Assessment and Program Guide. Los Angeles: University 
of California at Los Angeles, American Indian Studies Center, 1985. ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 316 374. 

Highwater, Jamake. Song from the Earth: American Indian Painting. Boston: 
New York Graphic Society, 1976. 

Hinton, Leanne. Flutes of Fire. Berkeley, CA: Heyday Books, 1994. 

Hogan, Linda. Mean Spirit. New York: Atheneum, 1990. 

Hymes, Dell. In Vain I Tried to Tell You: Essays in Native American 
Ethnopoetics. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1981. 

Institute for Government Research. The Problem of Indian Administration: 
Report of a Survey Made at the Request of Honorable Hubert Work , 
Secretary of the Interior, and Submitted to Him, February 21, 1928. Balti- 
more: Johns Hopkins Press, 1928. Reprint, New York: Johnson Reprint, 
1971. 




- 4 > 



20 




289 



CUD 




Clara Sue Kidwell 



Jacobs, Wilbur R. Dispossessing the American Indian: Indians and_ Whites on 
the Colonial Frontier. New York: Scribner, 1972. 

Jennings, Francis. The Invasion of America: Indians, Colonialism, and the 
Cant of Conquest. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1975. 

Kemnitzer, Luis S. “Personal Memories of Alcatraz, 1969.” American Indian 
Culture and Research Journal 18(4): 103-09 (1994). 



Kroeber, Karl, ed. Traditional Literatures of the American Indian. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1981. 

Left Handed. Left Handed: A Navajo Autobiography , recorded and edited by 
Walter Dykand Ruth Dyk. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1938. Reprint, 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1980. 



. Son of Old Man Hat: A Navaho Autobiography , recorded by Walter 

Dyk. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1938. Reprint, Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press, 1967. 



Lewis, Henry T. Patterns of Indian Burning in California: Ecology and 
Ethnohistory. Ballena Press Anthropological Papers, no. 1. Ramona, CA: 
Ballena, 1973. 



Linderman, Frank Bird. Red Mother. Rahway, NJ: John Day, 1932. Repub- 
lished as Pretty-Shield: Medicine Woman of the Crows . New York: John 
Day, 1972. Reprint, Alexandria, VA: Time- Life Books, 1991. 

Lindquist, G, E. E. The Red Man in the United States: An Intimate Study of the 
Social, Economic, and Religious Life of the American Indian . New York: 
George H. Doran, 1923. Reprint, Clifton, NJ: A. M. Kelley, 1973. 



Locke, Patricia. A Survey of College and University Programs for American 
Indians. Boulder, CO: Western Interstate Commission for Higher Educa- 
tion, 1974. 



. A Survey of College and University Programs for American Indians. 

Boulder, CO: Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education, 1978. 



Martin, Calvin. Keepers of the Game: Indian-Animal Relationships and the 
Fur Trade. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978. 

Merrell, James H. The Indians' New World: Catawabas and their Neighbors 
from European Contact through the Era of Removal. Chapel Hill: Univer- 
sity of North Carolina Press, 1989. 

Miller, Frank C. “Involvement in an Urban University.” In The American 
Indian in Urban Society, edited by Jack O. Waddell and O. Michael Watson. 
Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1984. 



Momaday, N. Scott. House Made of Dawn. New York: Harper & Row, 1968. 

Neihardt, John G., and Black Elk. Black Elk Speaks: Being the Life Story of a 
Holy Man of the Oglala Sioux. New York: W. Morrow & Co., 1932. Reprint, 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1961. 

Oliver, Symmes C. Ecology and Cultural Continuity as Contributing Factors in 
the Social Organization of the Plains Indians. Berkeley: University of Cali- 
fornia Press, 1962. 



290 




21 



SUEZ) I I I 




The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Curriculum 



Petersen, Karen Daniels. Howling Wolf: A Cheyenne Warrior's Graphic Inter- 
pretation of His People. Palo Alto, CA: American West, 1968. 

. Plains Indian Art from Fort Marion. Norman: University of Oklahoma 

Press, 1971. 

Plenty-Coups. American: The Life Story of a Great Indian, recorded by Frank 
Bird Linderman. New York: John Day, 1930. Republished as Plenty-Coups: 
Chief of the Crows. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1962. Reprint, 
New York: John Day, 1972. 

Sauer, Carl Ortwin. Man In Nature: America Before the Days of the White 
Men. New York: C. Scribner s Sons, 1939. 

. Sixteenth Century North America: The Land and the People as Seen by 

the Europeans. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1971. 

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. The Disuniting of America. New York: W. W. 
Norton, 1992. 

Schmeckebier, Laurence F. The Office of Indian Affairs: Its History, Activities 
and Organization. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1927. Reprint, New 
York: AMS, 1972. 

Slotkin, Richard. Regeneration Through Violence: The Mythology of the Ameri- 
can Frontier, 1600-1860. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1973. 

Smith, Paul Chaat, and Robert Allen Warrior. Like a Hurricane: The Indian 
Movement from Alcatraz to Wounded Knee. New York: The New Press, 
1996. 

Steward, Julian Haynes. Evolution and Ecology: Essays on Social Transfor- 
mation. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1977. 

Struever, Stuart. “Flotation Techniques for the Recovery of Small-Scale Ar- 
chaeological Remains.” American Antiquity 33 (1968): 353- 62. 

Talayesva, Don C. Sun Chief: The Autobiography of a Hopi Indian. 1942. 
Reprint, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1963. 

Talbot, Steve. “Indian Students and Reminiscences of Alcatraz.” American 
Indian Cidture and Research Journal 18(4): 93*102 (1994). 

Tanner, Helen Hornbeck. “Erminie Wheeler-Voegelin (1903-1988), Founder 
ofthe American Society for Yfhv\o\\\s\oTy. n Ethnohistory 38(1): 65-68 (1991). 

Thornton, Russell. American Indian Holocaust: A Population History Since 
1492. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1987. 

. “American Indian Studies as an Academic Discipline.” American Indian 

Culture and Research Journal 2(3- 4): 10-18 (1978). 

Trope, Jack F., and Walter R. Echo-Hawk. ‘The Native American Graves 
Protection and Repatriation Act: Background and Legislative History.”^4/7- 
zona State Law Journal 24(1): 38-43, 54-59 (1992). 

Velie, Alan R. Four American Indian Literary Masters: N. Scott Momaday, 
James Welch, Leslie Mar monSilko, and Gerald Vizenor. Norman: Univer- 
sity of Oklahoma Press, 1982. 

Wade, Edwin. The Aits of the North American Indian: Native Traditions in 



Clara Sue Kidwell 



Evolution. New York: Hudson Hills Press in association with Philbrook Art 
Center, Tulsa, 1986. 

Wallace, Anthony F. C. The Death and Rebirth of the Seneca. New York: Knopf, 
1969. 

Washburn, Wilcomb E. Red Mans Land, White Mans Law: A Study of the 
Past and Present Status of the American Indian. New York: Scribner, 1971. 

Wilkinson, Charles F. American Indians, Time, and the Law: Native Societies 
in a Modem Constitutional Democracy. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 1987. 

Williamson, Ray A., ed. Archaeoastronomy in the Americas. Los Altos, CA: 
Ballena, 1981. 

Witherspoon, Gaiy. Language and Art in the Navajo Universe . Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 1977. 

Wolf, Eric R. Europe and the People Without History. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1982. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





292 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket) form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form 
(either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 




EFF-089 (9/97) 




