DOCUMENT RESUHE 



ED 338 466 



RC 018 383 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

TUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



Gardner I Susan 

One's Peers or "The People"? Audience (s) in 
Multi-Cultural Teaching* 
91 

21p.; An earlier version of this paper was presented 

at the Annual Conference of the Society for the Study 

of Multi-Ethnic Literature of the United States (5th, 

Minneapolis, MN^ April 13-15, 1991) \ 

Viewpoints (Opinion/Position Papers, Essays, etc.) 

(120) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

^American Indian Literature; American Indians; 
♦Audiences; *Conununity Involvement; ^Curriculum 
Development; Feminism; *Higher Education; 
♦Multicultural Education; Politics of Education; 
Public Service; Teacher Role 



ABSTRACT 

This paper probes the challenges of a white feminist 
instructor in teaching a course, "Native North American Indian 
Literatures: An Introduction," at the University of North Carolina 
(UNC) -Charlotte, A teacher's major audiences are typically one's 
students and one's peers, the tenure and publication audience. 
However, multicultural teaching has other audiences as well, such as 
the communities addressed in the teaching. The UNC-Charlotte English 
Department's multicultural policy is essentially additive rather than 
inclusive: a few new staff, a few new offerings. Because the 
instructor is not part of the culture about which she teaches, she 
enlisted the aid of American Indian colleagues outside the university 
in designing the course. Components of the course include community 
service, attendance at a pow-wow, a journal, a research paper, and 
Indian guest speakers. The instructor found pressures from critical 
colleagues within the institution, who perceived multicultural 
teaching as lacking intellectual rigor. Various requests for travel 
pertaining to enhancing the course were denied. The instructor 
believes that a multi-cultural advisory board should be set up for 
the university in the community. Students seemed indifferent to the 
fact that a non-Indian was teaching American Indian material. The 
instructor observed a lack of activities and services for American 
Indian students on campus, A commitment to multicultural education 
should include the community of study as an audience of peers, 
(KS) 



************ 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



One's Peers or 'the People?' 

Audience(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 

Susan Gardner 
Department of English 
The University of North Carolina at Charlotte 

Charlotte, NC 28223 



U.S. OIMRTMENTOf EOUCATION 
Otlic* of Educational (lettarch improvemem 



■PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



EDUCATIONAL RESOURCFS INFORMATION 
CENTER (FHia 




• Pointa ot v«0w or opinions %iai»d in this docu 
mant do not n«cesaan»y rapra»i»ni official 
OERi poiition or policy 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERICJ - 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE ^ 



One's Peers or ••The People'^? 
Audience(s) in Mul ti*-Cul tural Teaching 

••I learned that Indians had a bad rap and that they can write. 

Big deal ! •• 

••The course changed my life, and I think it should not just be a 
choice for an Eng 1 ish major , rather an absolute [graduation ] 

requirement • " 

At a time when multi-cultural course offerings are under attack, 
many of us whose very life-work (as opposed to a career, in the con- 
ventional job^ ladder-to-success understanding) are finding our 
energies sapped by the diversity vs» quality debate. Reading anything 
from graduation addresses by the •'Education President" to our profes- 
sional Bible, "The Chronicle," one would think that universities and 
their curricula have been overcome by "political correctness;'* the 
values of Western "civilization" (sometimes, to my mind, a contradic- 
tion in terms) have been tossed into a hi'storical dustbin. Rather 
than engaging in a debate characterized not by the genuine explora-- 
tion of alternatives, but rather by false oppositions, I would 
rather, in this paper, using my course Native North American Indian 
Literatures; an Introduction, probe some of the challenges which it 
uncovered, and which remain largely unresolved. Far from having taken 
over, multi-cultural te<aching is in its infancy; mul ti-cul tural ism is 
a bu22 rnd snarl word, not a reality. If it were, the diversity ver- 
sus quality debate would not exist; it would serve no one's purposes. 



AudiBnce(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 



Elsewhere I have discussed pedagogical implications of non-Western 
literatures; in this paper, my focus is professional and community 
relations. 

Of course, when one is a teacher, one's students are the primary 
audience. Traditionally, this statement would be so obvious as to be 
banal. Teachers teach students (subject-verb- 
object; from higher to lower), almost unilateral ly.* The other major 
constituency is "one's peers," the tenure and publication audience. 

But multi-cultural teaching has other audiences as well. The 
Odyssey I sketch here will focus on introducing the study of American 
Indian literatures at a mainstream white. Southern university, UNC- 
Charlotte, after being denied the opportunity to teach them for two 
years running at Marquette University; the former head of its English 
Dept. regarded this subject as "eccentric and irrelevant, of no in- 
terest to undergraduate teaching." When hired at UNCC to teach e)s- 
actly what I wished to teach — and where Am. Indian literatures can 
fulfill the American Literature requirement for the major, as African 
Am. and Jewish Am. literatures can— one might think that, like Odys- 
seus, I was home at last. Instead, the journey has only just begun. 



3 



Formulated in October, 1983, and revised in January, 1989, the 
English Dept.'s multi-cultural policy reads as follows: 



Audi«nce(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 

We, the faculty of the UNCC English Dept. in accord with our 
belief that literature and language both reflect and shape 
culture, affirm the importance of representing in our courses 
the complementary contributions of both sexes and also of 
diverse cultural perspectives. 

"We, therefore, adapt the policy that: 

a) we will make a genuine effort to appropriately include 
both men and women, as creators and critics, in our course 
curricula; 

b) we will make a genuine effort to include works repre- 
senting the various cultural perspectives appropriate to each 
course; 

c) we will make a genuine effort to heighten, in any works we 
teach, our students' awareness of tendenciea to stereotype 
differences in culture, religious beliefs, gender, class, 
age, race -^nd sexual orientation, and will at the same time 
encourage understanding of the above differences. 

Just who the "we" of the document are is in flux (and who is its 
audience, apart from our captive students?). The department is slowly 
changing from a wholly conventional American and British curriculum. 
It now offers such courses as Post-Colonial Literatures in English, 
Post-Colonial Women's Writing, Pan-African Literatures, and Multi- 



Audif>nce(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 



ERIC 



Ethnic US Women's Writing. In addition to the two Black female 
professor* who pioneered the "browning" of (very few of) the tradi- 
tional courses, two new positions were recruited last year: my own 
(advertised as "Third World," but which I altered to "post- 
colonial"), and Prof, doris davenport's. I was assured when inter- 
viewing that the African American professors were by no means con- 
fined to the literatures of their communities, but that is very 
largely the case. Their energies are also absorbed by teaching volun- 
tary sections of composition for African American students only. As 
the rhetoric of the policy implies, it is essentially aoditive: a few 
new staff, a few new offerings. The "we" (since most of us who 
"specialize in diversity" were not here in the 19805) begins to sound 
like the "We the people" in another exclusionary document; and it is 
"we" who do the acting upon. 

One of my first concerns was: what is the role of a teacher 
dedicated to introducing literatures from communities/cultures of 
which she is not originally a part? Should she? Throughout the course 
planniiig ray experience as a Vfestern- -formed feminist in various post- 

colonial and/or non-Western societies (Southern Africa, China, Papua 
New Guinea) served as a gui^e. Western feminism, in race, class and 
culture-bound forms, r^n be as imperialist an import as Coke, white 
sugar, and foreign diseases. A teacher venturing into post-colonial 
territory must be willing to examine her own presuppositions, her 
relationship to the culture which produced her. Above all, she must 
■ be willing to listen, which often means: to shut up. Thus, when work- 



Audience(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 



ing with or teaching about women from othe- cultures, the relation- 
ship cannot be directive; it is dialogic, relational. 

Moreover, my conception of a teacher (and this would include 
Shakf?speare, Chaucer, or eighteenth-century British literature 
courses as well) has to do with enabling and mediating, not with con- 
stituting final authority. As a firm believer and member of coali- 
tions and networks, it did not occur to me to design "Native North 
American Indian Literatures: an Introduction" entirely by myself. 
This was done with the help of a Lumbee colleague in the Charlotte- 
Mecklenburg Public Schools, Rosa Winfree, Coordinator of American In- 
dian Education, and with Nay Howell, Coordinator of Minority Achieve- 
ment Programs. From the start, none of us regarded the course as con- 
fined to "Indian" materials; they became simply a specific instance 
of multi-cultural teaching. 

We built in a community service dimension: my students formed a 
Speakers' Bureau to present "Indian" materials within the public 
schools, and received academic credit for so doing. (When the course 
is next offered, we are considering a mentoring relationship between 
my students and Ms. Winfree' s.) Attendance at the pow-wow of the 
United Indians of North Carolina was mandatory. So were con-rl.ant, 
conceptual-critical journalling, and a research paper. Members of the 
Ph.^rlRttP Indian CQim.mnity were guest-speakers within the course, as 
was an African American. 



AudienceCs) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 



This tactic was once dismissed as "yo"«" houseniggers and cigar 
store Indians," which was profoundly insulting, less to myself than 
to my colleagues, who are fully capable of making their own deci- 
sions. They understand the elitist university framework for what it 
is, and welcome the chance to address its aud iences/ f ora ; the class- 
room is turned over entirely to them. The days of native informants 
and collaborators are overj my guest-friends, like myself, simply 
feel that complete separation from the mainstream/"malestream" 
society is impossible, and try to influence institutions through 
their politic participation within them. Not for a moment, though, do 
any of us think curricular change equals social change, or will 
guarantee it. Or, as Jonathan Jansen argues, "Curriculum change is 
more a reflector than a generator of social change or development." 
("Curriculum Policy," in Mokubung Nkomo, ed.. Pedagogy of Domination 
330) In other words, the "quality versus diversity" debate may oe ad- 
dressing curricular change, as a Southern expression has it, "bass- 
ackwards." In its present state(5), multi-cultural education risks 
cooptation and domestication. It in no way represents, as its detrac- 
tors fear, reverse colonization of the canon; the aim of multi- 
cultural education is to enlarge and share, not to oppress in turn. 

It became clear, however, that having a multi-cultural policy 
and teaching a single, elective, third-year course (with an impos- 
sible brief, generically and culturally) do not in any way change the 
institution. Indeed, it is more likely that those who are committed 
to nulti-cul turalism serve the institution while taking a number of 

6 

er|c 8 



Audience(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 

risks as far as research (presented, of course, in conferences like 
this one to "one's peers"), promotion, and tenure are concerned. 
Simply to add a course to the university catalog within a pre- 
existing framework accomplishes little except, perhaps "maintenance 
of the status quo through incremental improvements in existing 
curricula" (Jansen, 327). Instead, the framework has to be rethought. 
Otherwise ghettoization and marginal ization will increase, and 
mainstream teaching will be unaffected. 

Sadly, multi-cultural teaching may be perceived as marginal and 
unimportant, a concession to keep women and visibly ethnic students 
quiet. Their intellectual rigor wilJ be questioned. If one is a white 
middle-class woman, moreover, the old white boy network may well 
treat her as a, dissident daughter of the patriarchy who is easier to 
chastise than a visibly ethnic colleague. Anger which colleagues feel 
helpless and afraid to vent at, say, African American women may well 
be addressed to oneself j or, as I have found as a white feminist in 
the South, indulgently pitted pn the head for interests no longer 
perceived as "eccentric" but as potentially "unacademic . " Incidents 
such as the following began to rear their wgly hpdde, leading me to 
reconsider whether the present system of academic rewards, itself a 
product of European university systems, is appropriate to profes- 
sional multi-cultural activities. 

» Dept. travel money: as a non-Indian, I wanted, of course, to con- 
sult with American Indian colleagues at a neighboring state unive.— 



7 

9 



Audience(s) in Mul ti-Cul tural Teaching 

sity, historically an "Indian school" before desegregation. The ob- 
ject of the visits vgas to liaise vgith Indian academics and plan for 
more institutional cooperation in future. Would I be speaking to my 
"peers"? Not unless I give « formal academic paper. Travel request 
initially denied. (In contrast, my request to present a paper at a 
conference on West Indian literature — enormously more expensive, in 
the Caribbean — Mas supported.)* 

* Having taught both Black Elk Speaks and Lame Deer: Seeker of Vi- 
sions, as well as having read all I could about these texts, I wanted 
to spend the summer, not studying Beckett's personal library in 
Dublin, for example, but attending the Lakota Summer Institute at 
Sinte Gleska College in South Dakota. My "peers" most certainly would 
not be there, since I would be a pupil. Request denied, also because 
such an activity is not regarded as "research." 

# Having attended an NEH/Newberry Library vgorkshop on oral literature 
the preceding year (and benefitting so much that it would be incon- 
ceivable to teach about oral cultures without it), I was invited to 
atto.jd the next workshop, on sacred texts. The university contributed 
the *200. that NEH asks for the previous year, but there has been a 
change of chair, and this request was, again, initially denied. As 
can be imagined, much energy was consumed in these requests and 
defense of themj energy better spent elsewhere* 



e 

iO 



Audience(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 

As these incidents forced me to rethink conventional definitions 
of one's "peers" and other appropriate professional relationships, 
Rayna Green's description of the import of her academic credentials 
for (in her case) the Western Cherokee immediately came to mind. Yet, 
if analogous, our situations are not identical. On behalf of her 
people, she has become a figure in the mainstream; on behalf of 
people who are not "mine," I find myself also facing two directions, 
but from the mainstream: 



Leadership for us is not achievement in the normative 
mainstream sense. That I have a doctorate makes not a damn 
bit of difference in Indian country. That I ever write a line 
makes no difference. What makes a difference for me, and for 
all the other native women... is what we give to our com- 
munities. If I never do a thing that counts in this 
forum... if I never do these things again, it won't matter to 
me or to my community, if I have not done what is demanded 
and expected of a person with real leadership ability in my 

community, which is to give to it Degrees, lists of 

achievements, high-powered jobs, the wearing of power suits 
I look ridiculous in one — are nothing. What counts is how 
much we give. And how much we are a part of the com- 
munity This creates difficulties for us in the mainstream. 

world. Because very often our notions of credibility and our 
notions of how we will be evaluated and judged in that world 
don't match with the other world. Our achievements on 



ERIC 



9 

11 



Audience(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 

paper, our jobs, our awards, our grades... oar civil-service 
ratings, our chairmanships ... are roles of leadership that can 
count for nothing in our communities if they do not translate 
back to good health and survival for Indian communities, and 
so that makes for a difficulty. With someone like me, I 
write, and I write for myself, primarily. But when I write 
and publish, if that publication has no use in Indian com- 
munities or in the communities to which the publication is 
directed... I feel a failure. And yet in the scholarly world, 
such a utility is the last thing that is valued. Service — 
service publications, service jobs, you know, all those of 
you in academia, you understand this — are not valued, but in 
our communities they are deeply valued. What I do with my 
scholarship has got to work for peop le . . . CWhat I do] cannot 
be for someone who is my 'supervisor.' It cannot be for 
someone who is my boss. It has to be for other people, or it 
does not work for me. It has to work for Indian people and it 
has to work in those commun i ties .... The credit counts, the 
names count. I love seeing my name in print — we all 
do... [But] It is in fact the message and not the author which 
is validated in the Indian canimunity ("American Indian Women: 
Diverse Leadership for Social Change", in Bridgss af Paiy/er, 
68-71) . 

Who, then, are the audience(s) for multi-cultural teaching? Stu- 
dents initially and then "one's peers", criteria worked out in rela- 



ERIC 



10 

12 



Audience(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 



tion to a traditional curriculum? Who has authority to "review" and 
"evaluate" multi-cultural teaching, when the subject matter is not a 
long-oead writer, but very living people? People who are neighbors, 
with whom we live? When "research" may lead as naturally to a reser- 
vation or a tribal college as to a library, tho' it does not exclude 
the latter? Where participation at a pow-wow, or a festival of Native 
writers, co-exists with conference hotels? Where "sustaining" profes- 
sional development involves creating and maintaining reciprocal, 
egalitarian relationships with "the people"? 

Ine more I explored the paradox of a non-Indian "teaching" In- 
dian materials to a largely non-Indian audience, I began to think: my 
true extra-university audience is the people whose literatures are 
being taught. I am above all accountable to them. They are not 
specimens and cannot be dissected. They must know who I am and what I 
am doing, as well as feeling free to contribute to the course(s). I 
do not want to be the literary equivalent of an archaeologist col- 
league who offered credit for a dig in Cherokee Country without con- 
sulting with the local Cherokees. In short, I want neither my 
scholarship nor my career to be at others' expense. 

Such considerations hdve led me to think that a multi-cultural 
advisory board should be set up for the university in the community. 
This suggestion makes most of my colleagues wary since, they say, I 
could lose my academic freedom, and certainly my objectivity, if I 
treat Indians not only as peers but as, indeed, elders. » Since 



11 



Audience(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 

"academic freedom" frequently fieems as oxymoronic as "military 
intelligence" or "college education," I then ask: who is in fact cen- 
soring here, thP dcddeftuc community or the Native community? Which is 
the more likely to cooperate, participate, mediate and share? This is 
not to reject "my peers," who can be met at any academic conference, 
but to enlarge their population. The either-or thinking exemplified 
in my title is not characteristic of tribal societies, and Western 
norms of classif ic>ation and evaluation (polarized; hierachical ) can- 
not adequately recognize or reward those whose primary commitment is 
to multi-cultural teaching. The latter I regard as truly inclusive: 
African Americans or American Indians need not be confined to their 
own cultures, and neither need Euro-Americans. Ethnic belonging, un- 
der most circumstances, is a plus, but our students also need models 
of people who cross cultures, not only in their reading, but in their 
daily lives. 

From the first day of the course, I raised the question of 
WhPthPr and how a non-Indian should teach American Indian materials. 
Thf^j Rf FnWF^P? F^i^ed the further question of whether multi- 
cultural teaching should be ethnically distinct, either in its 
teachers or its student population. I expected students to feel 
short-changed; instead, they seemed indifferent. Then, at a con- 
ference panel on multi-cultural pedagogy. Prof, davenport stated 
categorically: "Your course would not be as popular if taught by an 
American Indian." I asked students to journal about this. By this 
stage of the semester, they knew the value I put on honesty. Some 



ERIC 



12 

14 





Audience(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 

said what their teacher wanted to hear — that they would leap to take 
a course taught by an Indian. One white, male student wrote: 
"Actually I was a little disappointed, at first, that this course 
wasn't taught by a Native American. Obviously, no offense, Ms. G., 
you're a kook and take this course seriously, not as part of your 
job, but as part of you. This was apparent after the first two or 
three sentences on the first day. That's what matters to me: how much 
does the teacher care as well as know?"*- 



But other patterns emerged: some thought an Indian would be like 
an Asian professor or TA , speaking inadequate English (as they 
think); some white students were emphatic that a personable Indian 
would be all right, BUT: and then recounted their "minority" ex- 
periences in Afro-Am. Studies classes. Accepting "minority" anger, or 
simply a focus on different cultures, makes them defensive. Interest- 
ingly, a difference in cultural allegiances may be expressed as 
gender hostility. A Black female colleague was physically threatened 
by a white male student who accused her of reverse discrimination; in 
a survey of story-telling worldwide, a student wrote in the open- 
ended evaluation: "Dr. Gardner looks like she buys her clothes off 
the AfriP^n AniPriP<^n r^^Pk 4t k:-Mart. This SiKties dinosaur should be 
extinct." Although such attitudes can be received as back-handed com- 
pliments, all four of us who "specialize in diversity" are women, 
and, apparently, perceived as women first, not professors who are 
also women. That there is diversity within diversity is scarcely 




13 



15 



Audience(s) in Mul ti -Cul tural Teaching 

acknowledged: we are perceived as a bloc, perhaps all the more 
threatening because we are female? 

I then thought back to the hiring game last year: of the three 
candidates for the post-colonial position, two were Caribbean women. 
I was told I was hired because of my interest in pedagogy (which the 
chair later made clear does not lead to tenure), but began to suspect 
that I was, indeed, hired as a "safe" white person. A feminist col- 
league on the affirmative action committee later stated that the 
deciding factor was my American birth. But tne re-sult of many happy, 
productive years — half my lifetime, the adult half — in the 
"Third'VFirst World is that, as the chair of the campus Black faculty 
caucus put it, I cannot be depended upon to ao the "white" thing. My 
consciousness has become off-color and extra-territorial, a "foreign 
insider's" or a "native outsider's". As Paula Gunn Allen demonstrates 
so ably in her introduction to Spider Moman's Grand-Daughters, West- 
ern society has a horror of mixing, whethe?r of race, gender, or 
genre. To which I would add that we are not teaching in universities, 
as we should be doing (better still: pluriversities) , but in m lover- 
sities. This is again made clear by our multi-cultural teaching 
policy, which is clearly additive but not truly inclusive. In the 
Southeast, moreover, despite the presence of Southeast Asians, 
American Indians and Hispanics, cultural differences are still con- 
ceptualized in literal Black-white terms; hence, I suspect, the hos- 
tility of many to the Lumbee Indians, who are racially mixed but have 
clung to their Indian identity. 



ERIC 



14 

IB 



AudiBnce(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 



This observation introduces another audience, entirely absenti 
the 86 American Indian students at a campus of 14,000+. UNCC does not 
present a particularly welcoming campus climate for them, insofar as 
special recruitmen*- and retention activities are addressed to African 
American students primarily. There is no American Indian counselor, 
nor is there a student organization. Yet North Carolina has the 
highest concentration of Indians east of the Mississippi; the in- 
digenous Lumbee are the largest Federally-unrecognized tribe in the 
country. In future, I. shall contact all self-identified American In- 
dian students individually, so that they at least know that the 
course exists, leaving to them whether they wish to be involved in 
any way. 

Nor do I intend to forrjet the audience with whom I began: stu-. 
dents at a predominantly white, mainstream university who need to en- 
counter "other" cultures on terms different from tr ivia 1 i zat ion , 
romanticism, and exoticism. That an American Indian should be hired 
goes without saying; without any desire to eliminate myself as inter 
preter or bridge, I cannot envisage such courses taught in future un- 
less in partnership. 

Fir>v=ally, there is the audience for this document, which I con- 
strue as anyone interested in multi-cultural teaching, with access to 
the educational resources in which it appears. In arguing for an ex- 
panded definition of "peers," not necessarily of academic status al- 
though including them, I hope that a new community will form, one 



ERIC 



15 

17 



Audience(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 

that includes "tho" people, rather different from the "we" in the 
document with which I began. This community, unlike so many others, 
will not be confined by ethnicity, gender, or class. As with 
"sisterhood," its uni ty-wi thin-diversity must be achieved, not as- 
sumed. If the personal is the political, this is a case of ine 
professional being both. When I asked Ms. Winfree what a non-Indian 
friend of Indians would be like, she said without hesitation, "First 
that you understand us, then that you make a commitment to us." 
Together, those of us forming the new tribe of multi-cultural 
teachers will be able to evolve curricula, teaching techniques, and 
programmatic changes which will make future initiatives less re- 
active and more pro-active. And, unlike the national debate in which 
arguments are presently taking place, this will not be about defend- 
ing privileged sets of interests. The future of a truly multi- 
cultural society can only come about through reciprocal dialogue, on 
which my concept of peers as partners rests. 

NOTES 

1. See my "Imperialism Begins at Home: Canonization and Coloniza- 
tion," presented at the Philological Association of the Carolinas, 
Charlotte, March 1991, for discussion of including culturally sensi- 
tive practices and values in multi-cultural teaching. Nothing, for 
example, could be further from traditional American Indian learning — 
via imitation, repetition and participation — than the passive, formal 
lecture format. My third paper will concern institutional and 
programmatic transformations. 



ERIC 



Audience(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 



2. Paulo Freire's Pedagogy of the Oppressed, of course, thoroughly 
explains his "banking concept" of education. 

3. I should stress here that I regard UNCC as in no way atypical; 
rather, representative of many state institutions with a commitment 
to diversity, but not yet with the substance. This paper is one out- 
come of many conversations with colleagues. 

4. A further irony: Pembroke State University has recently decided to 
"mainstream" itself, its administrators being convinced readers of 
Bloom and Hirsch. Colleagues there have been wishing themselves in my 
place (being "allowed" to teach Indian and post-colonial materials)! 
There, the American Indian and Lumbee Indian (as well as African Am.) 
literature courses do not fulfill a general education graduation 
requirement, nor do they count for the English major. 

5. In a post-apa-theid Southern African context, Mokubung Nkomo 
states that "cofr.nitted research and scholarship ... must eschew 
neutrality and detachment where the human condition demands drastic 
amelioration—a scholarship that is catalytic and cathartic is 
imperative" ("Post-Apartheid Educations Preliminary Reflections," in 
Pedagogy of Domination, 303). The essays in this volume are by no 
means regionally limited; by implication and extension, a liberatory 
education in South Africa could provide a model for our own attempts 
to end discrimination in our education systems, in all aspects. As 
Nkomo defines mu I ti -cu 1 tural education in South Africa, it would 



Audience(s) in Multi-Cultural Teaching 



"fairly represent the contributions of all cultures in South Africa 
in a fair and just manner while it unambiguously promotes the forma- 
tion of a unitary national democratic culture. It should go beyond 
the mere juxtaposition of cultural practices. It must move toward the 
transformation of the old paradigms and correlation of power rela- 
tions." (305) The new "common national identity [would be] "attended 
by a cooperative cultural diversity." (316) 

6. Imafedia Okhamafe's "How to Teach In-Class Conflicts of Values," 
presented at the fifth. annual MELUS conference at the Univ. of Min- 
nesota, 13 April 1991, similarly addressed a pedagogy of caring know- 
ing, of intelligent feeling. 

7. Cf. this statement by Bakhtin concerning Dostoyevsky, which ap- 
pears on the course syllabus: "The consciousness of other people can- 
not be perceived, analyzed, defined as objects or as things— one can 
only relste to them dialogicsl ly. To think about them means to talk 
^ith them: otherwise they immediately turn to us their objectivized 
side! they fall silent, close up, and congeal into finished, objec- 
tivized images," qtd. in Emily A. Schultz, Dialogue at the Margins: 
Whorf, Bakhtin, and Linguistic Relativity, 77). 



20 

le 



WORKS CITED 

■ 

Allen, Paula Gunn. "Introduction" to her edited Spader Woman's 
Granddaughters: Traditional Tales and Contemporary Writing by Native 
American Women [1989]. NY: Fawcett Columbine, 1990, 1-25. 

Green, Rayna. "American Indian Women: Diverse Leadership for So- 
cial Change," in Albrecht, Lisa, and Rose M. Brewer, eds. Bridges of 
Po^er: Women's Multicultural Alliances. Philadelphia: New Society 
Publishers/National Women's Studies Association, 1990, 61-73. 

Jansen, Jonathan. "Curriculum in a Post-Apartheid Dispensation," 
in Nkomo, Mokubung , ed . Pedagogy of Domination: Toward a Democratic 
Education in South Africa. Trenton, NJ : Africa World Press, 1990, 
325-39. 

Nkomo, Mokubung. "Post-Apartheid Education: Preliminary Reflec- 
tions," in Nkomo, Mokubung, ed . Pedagogy of Domination: Toi^ard a 
Democratic Education in South Africa. Trenton: NJ : Africa World 
PrpR^, 1990, 291-323. 

gwhuUii, Emily A. Di^iQQU^ at the Margins: Whorf, Bakhtin, and 
Linguistic Relativity. Madison: U of WI , 1990. 



ERIC 



1^ 



^1 



