DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 428 423 



CS 510 047 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Carithers, Eve R. 

Native American Stories Enhancing Multicultural Education in 
Elementary Schools. 

1999-00-00 

19p. 

Reports - Descriptive (141) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

♦American Indian Culture; * American Indians; *Childrens 
Literature; Class Activities; Elementary Education; *Ethnic 
Stereotypes; Multicultural Education; * Reading Material 
Selection 

♦Multicultural Literature; *Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 



This paper describes the use of unbiased Native American 
stories as part of a multicultural perspective in elementary schools. The 
inclusion of a multicultural perspective will help teach social acceptance 
rather than separation. Emphasis is placed on developing an antibias 
curriculum using books from a Native point of view. Well-intentioned 
non- Indian authors produce award-winning and entertaining children's books 
about Native Americans, but "tragically, there is little in their stories 
that tell much about the Native experiences." Unfortunately, the omission of 
facts, and perpetuation of teaching stereotypes of the American Indian in 
popular books, have the ultimate effect of dehumanizing Indian people. 
Teachers should utilize their creativity to provide literature-based 
experiences that become meaningful. Webbing is suggested as a practical 
technique in which students fill in gaps of knowledge through discussions and 
activities webbing out from a central theme. There are some blatant and some 
subtle signs to recognize as criteria for teachers, parents, librarians, or 
students when choosing a children’s book about Native Americans. Contains 18 
references . ( Author/RS ) 



***************************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



S5 10047 ED 428 423 



Native American 1 



15 5T7 



Running Head: NATIVE AMERICAN STORIES 



Native American Stories Enhancing Multicultural Education in 
Elementary Schools 



Eve R. Carithers 



California Lutheran University 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

f This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 




• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

£. _ 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

1 



2 



Native American 2 



Abstract 

This paper describes the use of unbiased Native American stories as part of a multicultural 
perspective in elementary schools. The inclusion of a multicultural perspective will help teach 
social acceptance rather than separation. Emphasis is placed on developing an antibias curriculum 
using books from a Native point of view. Well-intentioned non-Indian authors produce award- 
winning and entertaining children's books about Native Americans, but tragically, there is little in 
their stories that tell much about the Native experiences. Unfortunately, the omission of facts, and 
perpetuation of teaching stereotypes of the American Indian in popular books, have the ultimate 
effect of dehumanizing Indian people. Teachers should utilize their creativity to provide 
literature-based experiences that become meaningful. Webbing is suggested as a practical 
technique in which students fill in gaps of knowledge through discussions and activities webbing 
out from a central theme. There are some blatant and some subtle signs to recognize as criteria for 
teachers, parents, librarians, or students when choosing a children’s book about Native 
Americans. 




3 



Native American 3 



Native American Stories Enhancing Multicultural 
Education in Elementary Schools 

"This is a story about a little Indian girl who...." Non-Indian children may find the teacher's 
introduction to this story alluring and would most likely predict an exotic, mystical story with 
tipis, feathers, and tomahawks. Unfortunately, the omission, misinformation, and distortion of the 
American Indian experience in films, television, and popular books, have the ultimate effect of 
dehumanizing Indian people (Charles, 1996). A Native American teacher asks, “Why do you have 
to say, ‘This is an Indian story’? Why not say, ‘This is a story about a little girl who...’" (Slavin, 
1997, p. 141)? If the content of a story does not apply to the classroom, then do not use it. This 
paper is intended to describe the benefit of children's literature as a learning tool for an antibias 
perspective in curriculum and instruction. Specifically, Native American literature will be 
ensampled to illustrate ways to unteach generalizations about other people that leads to 
stereotyping, rather than understanding (Almeida, 1996). In this paper the terms "Native 
American" and "Indian" are used to represent a diverse group of peoples. However, when 
teachers are approaching the study of American Indians, the specific name of the tribe is preferred 
(Farivar, 1993). 

Multicultural Education 

The American educational experience today no longer works as a melting pot. Students 
sharing the same classroom do not share the same lifestyle. America’s culturally diverse 
classrooms represent more of a tossed salad (Ramirez & Ramirez, 1994)! Students should 
discover and appreciate all of the ingredients in their salad, which is the thrust of multicultural 
education. Effective teaching of critical thinking depends on designing a classroom that 
encourages the acceptance of different perspectives. 

Multicultural education has become an important part of school curriculum, yet it 
embodies no single program, but a philosophy (Slavin, 1997). However, the programs share four 
main goals, including tolerance of other cultures, elimination of racism, to teach multicultural 
content, and to view the world with different perspectives (Spring, 1998). Banks (1993) believed 




4 



Native American 4 



that the process of cultural shaping and interaction should enrich both the teachers and students. 
He defines multicultural education as “an idea stating that all students, regardless of the group to 
which they belong, such as those related to gender, ethnicity, race, culture, social class, religion, 
or exceptionality, should experience educational equality in the schools" (Banks, 1993, p. 23). 

The objective is to not only teach about other groups or countries, which is Banks' (1993) 
simplest dimension of multicultural education. The higher levels of inclusion is to teach students 
about knowledge construction or to think critically about their personal views and become 
accustomed to the idea that there are many lifestyles, languages, cultures, and perspectives. The 
challenge for teachers is to present an effective multicultural education foundation by means of 
which all children can learn to accept others (Gomez, 1991). Teachers can assess their 
effectiveness in achieving multicultural goals by considering the following questions (Baruth & 
Manning, 1992, as cited in Slavin, 1997, p. 143): 

• Have there been efforts to understand and respect cultural diversity among learners not as a 
problem to be reckoned with, but as a challenging opportunity and a rich gift? 

• Have there been efforts to provide a classroom in which learners feel free to speak and 
express diverse opinions? Are students free to express opinions that are contrary to middle 
class European American beliefs? 

• Do the walls, bulletin boards, and artwork of the classroom demonstrate respect for cultural 
diversity, or do the contents of the classroom indicate an appreciation or valuing of only one 
culture? 

• Have there been efforts to allow (and indeed encourage) all students to work in cross-cultural 
groups, to carry on conversation and meaningful dialogue, and to feel a valued member of the 
group? 

• Have there been efforts to treat each learner with respect, to consider each learner as equal to 
other students, and to treat each learner as a valued and worthwhile member of the class? 




5 



Native American 5 



Educators need to respect young learner's abilities to think, speak, read, and act. 

Educators should respect their abilities to comprehend, construct, and communicate meanings in 
various contexts. These should be the aims, process, and result of education (Vandergrift, 1998). 

Children's attitudes toward ethnicity begins to form early in the preschool years through 
caretakers attitudes. The inclusion of multicultural perspectives in education should begin in the 
elementary grades, when children can be taught social acceptance, rather than separation as the 
norm. These are crucial years in development when a sense of belonging can strongly influence 
future achievements. The promotion of a positive self-concept is essential, along with activities 
that show the similarities and differences of all children's lives. When teachers fail to show the 
differences, they carry the message that differences are not appreciated or are negative 
(McMahon, Saunders, & Bardwell, 1996). Each child should be treated as a unique individual 
with something special to contribute to everyone's experiences. The feeling of connection is 
crucial to the child's acceptance of the similarities and differences of others (Gomez, 1991). 

Children's Literature in Multicultural Education 
Vandergrift (1998) cleverly states that "we all need to learn about life both literally and 
literarily, eflferently and aesthetically." One of the first ways that children make sense of what it is 
to be human is through meeting characters in stories. As the child wonders at the lives in the 
story, he or she makes connections with his or her own life and the world. A child's love for 
pretension and talent of imagination helps him or her reach out to see what he or she may become. 

Banks (1993) suggests the use of children’s literature as excellent vehicles for 
introducing the simple concepts of similarities, differences, prejudice, and discrimination in 
kindergarten and the primary grades. Through stories by children, teachers, and professional 
authors, characters, given life through words and pictures, enter the classroom, and in so doing 
they bring new life experiences and points of view (Dyson & Genishi, 1994, p. 5). Moreover, as 
the new language and experiences enter the classroom, the children get to connect themselves into 
the diverse sociocultural world. Multiethnic children's literature will teach white majority children 
to respect the contributions of people who belong to different groups. This understanding is 




6 



Native American 6 



important as we make a transition from predominantly white students to more and more African 
American, Latino, Asian American, and Native American representation in schools. Related to 
this transition, is the importance of multicultural literature providing a sense of value to children 
of color, who will become our future leaders. Because culture plays such an important role in the 
evolution of a child's sense of self, multiethnic children's books will be beneficial as they allow 
children to see themselves in literature (Ramirez & Ramirez, 1994). 

Understanding the Indian Culture 

It is the hope of believers in multicultural education that teachers appreciate Native 
American values to better communicate these values, not headdresses and arrows, when 
discussing children’s literature. Following are a few of the rich and celebrated cultural values that 
Native American have to share (classroom handout 10.8). 

The relationship between parents and children is a special one. Parents share the messages 
of hope and inspiration, the appreciation of beauty, sharing, and physical strength, so as to be of 
service to each other. Respectfulness is a value observed throughout the culture. Respect is paid 
to parents, grandparents, members of the extended family, elderly, various totem a nim als and 
objects, natural beauty, dignity, and modesty. Native Americans have different learning styles 
from mainstream American styles. Native American philosophy is based on completeness, 
wholeness, and one must be in tune creation, nature, and man. Introjection is commonly practiced 
in conversation. Patience and the encouragement of others is emphasized. Native Americans 
discipline children using fear of shame as a punishment or control device, but physical punishment 
is rare. An individual’s contribution to the group is important, while the group needs are 
considered more important than individual needs. “If there is not enough to go around, then you 
should not have it,” is a common phrase. 




7 



Native American 7 



Native American Children's Literature 
I wish for the reader to imagine a Seneca storyteller. 

He is a hard-working man with signs of advancing age on 
his face.... It is eveningtime.... He waits for us, and we 
come up to him and say, "Grampa, tell us ghost stories." 

He would blow out a big puff of smoke, and he would 
begin: "Now this happened one time...." 

-Duwayne Leslie Bowen, Seneca (The Reader's 
Digest Association, Inc, 1995, p.7) 

The oral storytelling tradition has enriched Native American lives from the beginning. 
Stories are gifts given from an elder to a younger person. Children watch the fecial expressions 
and gestures of the tellers and imagine the settings, animals, dwellings, costumes, and designs 
depicted in the stories (Stott, 1995). How can written stories recreate the unique voices, body 
language, and various adaptations of the performers? Storytellers, unlike books, are able to use 
voice pitch, tone, and volume, and empower expressions and drama to communicate feelings. 
Each storyteller could adapt the performance to be best received for the particular audience. In 
addition, Stott (1995) explains that while the basic plot remains unchanged, the stories would 
evolve from telling to telling, and over the years as a result of changes in social conditions, 
customs and tales of other cultures. Native American storytelling is a shared, communal event, 
meaningful to the involved audience. It is obvious that recreating this social, storytelling 
experience is extremely difficult, for Native authors, and maybe impossible for non-Native 
authors. 

Most non-Native children can probably identify best with the traditional stories through 
picture books. The picture book can suggest detail, tone, and gestures of the teller. Teachers will 
find library and bookstore shelves filled with picture book adaptations of traditional Native tales. 
However beautiful the picture book may be, a book must be rejected if it is inaccurate or 
disrespects the culture. Sometimes an author is well-intentioned, yet is inaccurate. For example. 




8 



Native American 8 



Stott (1995) discusses a beautiful book. The Rough-Faced Girl . (Rafe & Shannon, 1992, as cited 
in Stott, 1995) which is as the “author’s note” states, about an Algonquin Indian Cinderella. The 
term “Cinderella” implicitly brings with it just the European cultural values which teachers would 
like to differentiate. One way for teachers to check if the book is geographically and culturally 
accurate, as well as sympathetic, is to check the original sources on which the modem retelling is 
based. It is also important for the reader to be aware of the differences between the original and 
modem version. Stott (1995) emphasizes that no matter how accurate and sympathetic a story, 
there must be a marriage between words and pictures. It takes a special talent to successfully use 
visual elements with the story. The works of Goble and McDermott have received acclaim among 
Native and non-Native adults and children. Both author-illustrators utilize extensive research into 
the literature, customs, and art styles of the originating culture. This research along with their 
personal talents results in books that are culturally accurate, yet universal and distinctively 
personal (Stott, 1995). While using different approaches to recreating the stories, they are 
successful in precisely communicating the factual, social and spiritual elements of each story. 

Children should be aware that the Native way of life is not dead! There is a great appeal 
for traditional Native tales, however, there are also many good picture books of realistic stories 
about historical and modem Native life. A Salmon for Simon (Waterton & Blades, 1978, as cited 
in Stott, 1995), reflects the life of a Nootka boy of Canada’s west coast. The author only uses one 
direct reference to identify the main character as a Native. Otherwise the story is a favorite type of 
children’s story in which a young person befriends a wild animal. Yet, the plot is also implicitly 
culture specific. The illustrator uses no traditional Native artifacts; but Simon’s facial features and 
jet black hair indicate that he is a Native, and the settings are those where the Nootka live. The 
author and illustrator have presented the universal conflicts and emotions of the hero while, at the 
same time, firmly, but implicitly basing them on contemporary west coast Native life (Stott, 

1995). Other authors may use details that explicitly refer to Native traditions. Through creative, 
thoughtful use of these stories, teachers can help children develop fuller, more sympathetic and 
respectful understanding of the histories and present lives of Native American people. 




9 



Native American 9 



Developing Antibias Native American Curriculum 

Non-Native educators typically have been just as influenced by Native American 
stereotypes prevalent in movies and television as their students. Periodically, society’s fascination 
with Native Americans causes a flood of films, literature and art that spills into popular culture- 
clothing, jewelry, home decor, and children’s toys - all depicting American Indian motifs (Charles, 
1996). Charles (1996) urges educators to be skeptical of all the “Indian hoopla.” He states that 
“beneath the surface of movies, TV, and kids’ books, lurks cultural distortion through the 
perpetuation of myths that serve to dehumanize American Indian people” (Charles, 1996, p.169). 

A typical mistakes that well-intentioned educators make when teaching about Native 
Americans is the “dead-and-buried culture approach” as described by Almeida (1996) and Charles 
(1996). Many people today believe that the Native Americans are extinct. Teachers speak of the 
cultures in the past tense such as, “they lived in tipis, they hunted buffalo.” Most students learn 
that American Indian history ended in 1890, when chief Big Foot of the Lakota died following the 
massacre of his band at the hands of the United States Army’s soldiers. A related issue is the 
belief that because today’s Indians engage in modem activities such as going to school, earning a 
living, operating businesses, that they are not real Indians. Students are often disappointed to see 
contemporary Indians wearing blue jeans and driving pickup trucks. 

Another common, but inappropriate, method of teaching about Native Americans is the 
“tourist approach” as described by Almeida (1996). The tourist, or student, visits only the exotic 
components of life. The miseducation occurs because what students learn is not necessarily what 
was meant to be taught. Cultures of minority people should not be presented as entertainment, nor 
as painful histories of victimized peoples. This is the teaching of simplistic generalizations and 
leads to misunderstanding. Teachers must be aware of replacing one unrealistic portrayal of 
primitives or savage with another as only noble and good. Doris Seale (1992) describes how she 
feels about romanticizing Indians by saying it is no less insulting to people who want to be seen as 
real. 




s- 

1 



0 



Native American 10 



Once teachers begins examining their own underlying beliefs and ideologies about Native 
Americans, then they will be better prepared to assess the knowledge and attitudes of their 
students (Almeida, 1996).Teachers can use this knowledge to develop a curriculum that 
challenges students to develop multicultural education critical thinking skills. 

Integrating Native American Stories into the Classroom 

Integration into the classroom should begin in pre-school and continue throughout the 
educational process. Teachers utilize various creative techniques to integrate Native American 
storytelling into interdisciplinary learning. With careful planning, teachers can achieve the goals of 
an elementary social studies curriculum-knowledge, values, skills, and participation (Franklin, 
Roach & Snyder 1 993). “It has been said that in order to understand a culture, it is necessary to 
understand the stories the members of that culture tell each other” (Stott, 1995, p.203). 
Incorporating Native stories in the curriculum should have the following philosophy and 
objectives according to Stott (1995). 

Teachers should introduce the wide variety of story types from the many Native culture 
groups. Students will get a better understanding of how Native stories differ from all other 
cultures, as well as among specific Native culture groups. After reading the stories, students will 
better understand beliefs of the groups of the characters or of the tellers of the stories. 

As emphasized in the opening of this paper, the story should be of value regardless of it 
being Native. Native stories, like others, teach students to recognize character growth, setting to 
develop a mood, theme, conflict. Also, illustration use should help communicate these ideas 
through color, design, setting. 

Picture books can naturally be extended into the language arts curriculum. Students have 
the opportunity to use the vivid pictures to create their own text and interpretations. Discussions 
can develop to extend the study from the content of the story into other areas of the curriculum. 
For example, students can listen to Native music from the culture associated with the story being 
read. 




11 



Native American 1 1 



Almeida (1996) suggests one practical technique called webbing. Webbing 
involves four steps to evaluate current knowledge and “web out” to new directions. A theme of 
study, or the center of the web, is decided. An example could be the the study of Arctic food. The 
students could study the importance of the sea and lakes to the Eskimo people and the positive 
and negative character traits the story’s characters portray during their adventures. 

Students then brainstorm possible issues to study that web out from the theme at the 
center of the web. The students may wonder about the types of food harvested from the ocean 
and the possible uses of the animals hunted. The danger and hazards of hunting would be 
interesting issues to the children. 

The teacher must determine the level of awareness held by each student, and determine 
specific antibias issues of study. Stories, role-playing, and other exercises can be used to begin 
thinking. The Eve of the Needle, by Teri Sloat or Nessa’s Fish by Nancy Luenn could be a 
meaningful stories for this theme (as cited in Stott, 1 995). 

Students then brainstorm possible activities to pursue to fill in the gaps in Native American 
knowledge. In The Eve of the Needle , an Alaskan Eskimo is given adult responsibility for the first 
time. Students can discuss questions about how well he fulfills his responsibility, or how can the 
lessons be applied to their own lives. In Nessa’s Fish , an Alaskan Eskimo girl relates to the 
animals she encounters. Students can retell the story from their own perspective, using animals of 
their locale (Stott, 1995). 

Typically, students study about the Indians in the elementary social studies curriculum. 
Even if the textbooks are accurate, students often permit stereotyped beliefs to override the more 
accurate information (Franklin, Roach, & Snyder, 1993). The dry style of writing of many 
textbooks tends to diminish interest in learning about Native American culture. Franklin et al. 
(1993) suggest remedying this diminished interest through use of children’s literature to 
supplement the textbooks. The story, Blue-Wines-Flving by E.W. Dehuff, is the example given by 
Franklin et al. (1993) as a lesson to teach students that they, like the Hopi boy in the story, can 
appreciate and value the world in which they live. In this story, the boy wants to find the suitable 




12 



Native American 12 



name to be given to his baby sister on naming day. The following lesson plan is an effective 
example. 

Factual texts or other resources are examined prior to reading the story. Knowledge is 
increased by examining pictures of items from the Southwest region such as, pottery, kachina 
dolls, or Indian com. The students can learn new vocabulary words by discussing terms that are in 
the story such as, Hopi words for the word, sister, or usage of familiar words such as, cornstalk, 
in a new context. Familiar naming ceremonies can be discussed or students can share the origin of 
their names. 

The anticipatory set is realized and the children read the story to find out how a Hopi child 
is named. The children enter the world of a Hopi boy and make this knowledge a part of them. 

After reading the story, the children can discuss the basic story plot and relate the 
behaviors and values. They can now be aware of and appreciate beliefs and customs of Ho pi 
people, environment, and character traits such as trust, love, and respect for others. 

During these discussions, students are valuing the lifestyle of the Hopi people. The 
children are developing critical thinking skills and communication skills. Other skills emphasized 
include learning to collect and interpret information, to state personal reactions, reading and 
writing. Types of participation can include group discussions, brainstorming, cooperative 
activities, independent study, and teacher-led discussion. 

Many teachers concerned about multicultural education, approach each fall with 
trepidation. In most classrooms, children “learn” about Thanksgiving by dressing up as Pilgrims 
and Indians and sitting down to a feast of pumpkins, com , squash and turkey. A chapter in the 
book. Through Indian Eves (Slapin & Seale, 1992) is titled, “Why I’m Not Thankful for 
Thanksgiving.” The author states that “Thanksgiving could be a time for appreciating Native 
American peoples as they were and as they are, not as either the Pilgrims or their descendant 
bureaucrats might wish them to be” (Slapin & Seale, 1992, p.21-22). 

Farivar (1993) discusses how teachers in an elementary class effectively used the above 
techniques to celebrate Thanksgiving. The teachers chose the concept of interdependence as the 




13 



Native American 13 



theme to help the children understand the diversity among the different American Indian groups of 
North America, rather than studying about generic Indians. A wide variety of picture books 
helped tell the story. The children were told to try to imagine what the descriptions were saying. 
Long pieces of paper were placed on the wall, and small groups of children sponge-painted a 
background for each of the three regions-plains, coastal area, and woodland. Bit by bit, as 
students learned more about food, shelter, animals, pictures were drawn and added to the mural. 
Students could easily “read” the mural and tell their story! Students could eat a nice meal and tell 
about what they know about the American Indians in each region. 

The possibilities of study units are almost limitless. Teachers should provide literature- 
based experiences to provide opportunities for meaningful conversation regarding Native culture 
(McMahon et al., 1997). For example, the story The legend of the Indian paintbrush (de Paola, 
1998, as cited in McMahon et al., p.106) describes the life of a child as he follows his destiny to 
become an artist for his people and eventually bring the colors of the sunset down to earth. 
Students could create their own set of paintbrushes utilizing strips of red, pink, orange and yellow 
paper and sticks. The classroom could be decorated with the Indian paintbrushes and become 
meaningful. 

Resources 

As the need for convenient access to good books of Native stories has increased, groups 
of Indian educators have developed and published units, books, audio-visual material, games, and 
teacher’s guides.. Slapin and Seale (1992) in Through Indian Eves provide a wonderful listing 
and ordering addresses for these materials. These publishers, cultural centers, newspapers, and 
more are all dedicated to issues and articles about Native people. They also provide a selected 
bibliography of good, recommended Native stories. Grade levels are given but may not be very 
useful. Since Native stories were meant to be told, and to be comprehended at different levels, 
the grade levels are meaningless. A unique index is included listing recommended American Indian 
authors. 




14 



Native American 14 



The foreword for Stott’s Native Americans in Children’s Literature given by Abenaki 
storyteller Joseph Bruchac, states the importance of this book in describing the “poetics and 
problems of transmitting and adapting Native stories” and “should be read not only by every 
teacher, but also by every children’s writer and every storyteller who has chosen to tell traditional 
Native stories” (Stott, 1995, p.xiii). 

Another reference book was written for librarians to identify fiction books whose main 
themes are the social life and customs of Native Americans. Native Americans in Fiction: A 
Guide to 765 Books for Librarians and Teachers. K-9 is a collection arranged alphabetically by 
over 115 different tribes (Anderson, 1994). There is an author and title index with the tribe 
represented by each title listed, and a thorough subject index. This book is not only useful to find 
stories about Native Americans, but it is a source of ethnic material which can be used to analyze 
a collection for balance. It is not intended as a buying guide but as a tool to easily find specific 
fiction books to fit a reader’s needs (Anderson, 1994). 

Selecting Good Native American Children’s Literature 

"...So, they feel 
sorry for us 
and write 
more books 
for themselves." 

-Lenore Keesig-Tobias (Slapin & Seale, 1992, p.58) 

Whatever books teachers use, whether they be Native American, African-American, or 
mainstream American, it is important to ensure that the writing is accurate to and respectful of the 
cultures they depict (Stott, 1995). Just as importantly, the stories should be meaningful regardless 
of them being of a Native culture, by being applicable to non-Native stories dealing with similar 
themes. Stott (1995) states the importance of introducing a variety of books of Native cultures 
throughout the school years to students can become respectful towards a people who have a 




15 



Native American 15 



proud history and heritage. But he finds it disrespectful to teach that people are historical artifacts 
or museum specimens. 

There are some blatant and some subtle choices to use as criteria for teachers, parents, 
librarians, or students when choosing a children’s book about American Indians (Slapin & Seale, 
1992). The following examples are truly helpful because they tell not only what is wrong, but 
what to look for (Slapin & Seale, 1992, p. 242). 

Blatant and hurtful errors are seen in ABC books when, “E” is for “Eskimo” and “I” is for 
“Indian”, or when children are shown “playing Indian”. Or, words like “victory,” “conquest,” or 
“massacre” are manipulated to justify Euro-American conquest of the Native homelands. Instead, 
history should be put in proper perspective, showing the Native struggle for self-determination. 
There is typically an ethnocentric Western focus on material objects, such as baskets, pottery, 
rugs. Better is a writer who can show any understanding of the relationship between material and 
non-material aspects of life. Women are shown as completely subservient to men rather than being 
portrayed as the integral and respected part of Native societies that they really are. It is crucial to 
wonder if there is anything in the story that would embarrass or hurt a Native child. There needs 
to be positive roles in which a Native child can identify. 

Such an evaluation can be illustrated with an award-winning story, popularized recently 
by film. The Indian in the Cupboard by Lynn Reid Banks. Teachers may select this book with 
good intentions because it does portray a boy who initially holds stereotypical views about 
American Indians which change through his relationship with Little Bear, the Indian in the story. 
The book is exciting, full of adventure and the moral dilemma is real-that it is wrong to 
manipulate people for personal gains. Unfortunately, the novel has serious limitations in the 
portrayal of the Indian. The Indian in the Cupboard transmits unacceptable viewpoints and 
messages to young white and Native readers alike (Stott, 1995, p.18). Slapin & Seale (1992) 
describe the book as “brutal, and the Indians are horrifying” (p.122). For example, neither the 
author or illustrator made an attempt to have the Iroquois look or behave appropriately. He is 
dressed and acts more like a Plains Indian (Slapin & Seale, 1992). The Indian’s speaking can best 




Native American 16 



be described by Stott (1995) as “generic Pidgin English” (p.16): he barks, growls, snarls, says 
phrases such as..."y° u Great White Spirit" (Banks, 1980, p. 21). The emotional response by 
Slapin and Seale (1992, p. 122) tells the story, “How could a white child fail to believe that he is 
far superior to the bloodthirsty, sub-human monsters portrayed here?” 

A beautiful and emotionally moving book. Two Old Women bv Velma Wallis, is based on 
an Athabascan Indian legend passed along for many generations from mothers to daughters. 
Velma Wallis was bom and raised in the upper Yukon area of Alaska with traditional Athabascan 
values. One day, her mother remembered this story and because it was appropriate to their 
moment, told it to her daughter. It is the suspenseful, adventuresome, and inspirational tale of two 
old, whining women who have been abandoned by their tribe during a terrible winter famine. The 
two old women must overcome physical and emotional hardships, stop complaining and learn to 
survive on their own. The story is appealing to young and old because of its simple, but vivid style 
of writing, and ability to speak to the heart. In the introduction, Wallis explains what the story 
meant to her, 

...there is no limit to one’s ability-certainly not age-to accomplish in life what one must. 
Within each individual... there lives an astounding potential of greatness. Yet it is rare that 
these hidden gifts are brought to life unless by the chance of fate (Wallis, 1993, p.xiii). 

Far too many well-known children's books about Indians have been based upon stories 

collected by European-American men who saw Indians as savages, ignorant, exotic subhumans. 

Bibliographies of good books written by Native Americans for children, as described above, are 

short. The prevalence of subtle stereotypes has led to rejection of many titles. It is hoped that 

publishers will show more interest in developing American Indian authors. 




17 



Native American 17 



References 

Almeida, Deirdre A. (1996). Countering prejudice against American Indians and Alaska 
Natives through antibias curriculum and instruction . (Report No. EDO-RC-96-4). Charleston, 
WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 400 146). 

Anderson, Vicki. (1994). Native Americans in fiction : A guide to 765 books for 
librarians and teachers . K-9. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland. 

Banks, J. A. & McGee Banks, C. A. Eds. (1993). Multicultural education: Issues and 
perspectives (2nd ed.) . Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 

Charles, Jim. (1996). Out of the cupboard and into the classroom: Children and the 
American Indian literary experience. Children's Literature in Education, 27(3) , 167-179. 

Dyson, Anne Haas & Genishi, Celia Eds. (1994). The need for story: Cultural diversity in 
classroom and community . Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 

Farivar, Sydney. ( 1993). American Indians: Alternative ways of approaching the study. 
Social Studies Review. 33(1). 38-41. 

Franklin, Mary R., Roach, Patricia B., Snyder, Juanita K. (1993). Beyond feathers and 
tomahawks: T.essons from literature. Social Studies and the Young Learner, 6(2) , 13-17. 

Gomez, Rey A. (1991). Teaching with a multicultural perspective . Urbana, 111. 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early Childhood Education. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 339 548). 

McMahon, Rebecca, Saunders, DeLaura, & Bardwell, Tracey. (1997). Increasing young 
children’s cultural awareness with American Indian literature. Childhood Educat ion , (73,2) 105- 
108. 

Ramirez, Gonzolo, Jr. & Ramirez, J. L. (1994). Multiethnic children's literature . Albany, 
NY: Delmar Publishers Inc. 




1 



Native American 1 8 



Reid Banks, Lynne. (First published in 1980). The Indian in the cupboard . New York, 
NY: Avon. 

Slapin, Beverly, & Seale, Doris. (1992). Through Indian eves: The Native experience in 
books for children . Philadelphia, PA: New Society Publishers. 

Slavin, Robert. (1997). Educational psychology theory and practice . Needham Heights, 
MA: Allyn and Bacon. 

Spring, Joel. (1998). American education (8th ed.) . Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill. 

Stott, Jon C. (1995). Native Americans in children's literature . Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press. 

The Reader's Digest Association, Inc. (1995). Through Indian eves . Pleasantville, NY: 
Author. 

Vandergrift, Kay. (1998). Vandergrift's Special Interest Page . [On-Line]. Available: 
http://www.scils.rutgers.edu/special/kay/kayhp2.html. 

Wallis, Velma. (1994). Two old women . New York, NY: HarperCollins. 

(1998, April). Classroom Notes . No. 10.7, 10.8, 18.2. 




19 



ERIC Reproduction Release Form - HTML 



Page 1 of 3 



CS5 10047 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCA TION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 

xitle: 

Author(s): 

Corporate Source: 

Publication Date: 







IL REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the 
educational community, documents announced in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, 
Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper 
copy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
(EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction 
release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following 
options and sign the release below. 

Check Here, Please 

J Check here for Level 1 Release, permitting reproduction and dissemination in microfiche 
and other ERIC archival media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. 



or 



Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction and dissemination in microfiche 

and in electronic media for ERIC archival collection subscribers only. 

or 



Check here for Level 2B release, permitting reproduction and dissemination in microfiche 

only. 



Sign Here, Please 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission to 
reproduce is granted, but neither box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1. 



"I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to 
reproduce this document as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or 



0 



ittp://www.cec.sped.org/ericec/reprofrm.htm 



1/17/99 



ERIC Reproduction Release Form - HTML 



Page 2 of 3 



electronic/optical media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system contractors requires 
permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and 
other service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries." 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC 
SOURCE): 



If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of this 
document from another source, please provide the following information regarding the availability of 
the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly available, and a dependable 
source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are 
significantly more stringent for documents which cannot be made available through EDRS.) 

Publisher/Distributor: 

Address: 

Price Per Copy: 

Quantity Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS 
HOLDER: 



If the right to grant a reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please 
provide the appropriate name and address: 

Name and address of current copyright/reproduction rights holder: 



V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 

Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 

You can send this form and your document to the ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted 
Education. They will forward your materials to the appropriate ERIC Clearinghouse. 

ERIC Acquisitions 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education 

1920 Association Drive 

Reston, VA 20191-1589 

(800) 328-0272 

ericec@cec.sped.org 



Signature: ^ Position: 

Printed Name: B»<- ft. Organization: 

Address: CA. Telephone Number: 




'~TVywv*vA cA Date: o 






Name: 



Address: 



Q http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec/reproftm.htm 



1/17/99 



ERIC 



