2011 6 th Annual International Conference on Foreign Literature Teaching 
Title: Literature as an organic language learning tool 



Abstract 

This is a conceptual paper, based on several semesters of collaboration in which 
the American author interacted with students in the Taiwanese author’s EFL classes in 
Taiwan. The best native language users are typically those who read extensively, 
especially reading for pleasure in their youth. This gives them a large vocabulary and 
an intuitive feel for how words and ideas should connect together that they then 
naturally apply to future reading comprehension and writing tasks. Literature can, 
similarly, be a vehicle for foreign language learning, but how can the natural learning 
stemming from reading for pleasure be replicated in the more structured classroom? 
The authors explore approaches that employ student-centered methodologies and 
foster positive motivation. The metaphor “organic” language learning refers to learning 
that is natural, without being forced or contrived, and without artificial characteristics. 
This approach parallels other foreign language learning subjects in which authentic 
source materials are valued by students. However, use of literature for language 
learning comes with pitfalls. Culture as portrayed in literature may not be accurate, in 
order to make literary points, leaving students with serious misunderstandings about the 
target culture, which teachers must be able to address and explain. The authors 
present a framework of best practices for teachers of foreign language literature that 
attempt to mirror the process of learning language via reading for pleasure, and also 
draw on techniques used in native language literature courses when the text is 
challenging. 



Keywords: distance technology, culture, foreign literature, authentic experiences, 
motivation 



Authors: 

1 . Michael Marek (corresponding) 

Associate Professor, Communication Arts Department 
Wayne State College, USA 
mimarekl @wsc.edu 

2. Pin-hsiang Natalie Wu (^bp?W) 

Assistant professor, Department of Applied Foreign Languages 
Chien-kuo Technology University, Taiwan 
natalie@ctu.edu. tw 



Literature as an organic language learning tool 



Problem Statement 

The best native users of English are typically those who read extensively, especially 
reading for pleasure in their youth (Lerkkanen, Rasku-Puttonen, Aunola & Nurmi, 2004; 
Nippold, 1999; Sinatra, 2008). This gives the reader a large vocabulary and an intuitive 
feel for how words and ideas should connect together which they then naturally apply to 
future reading comprehension and writing tasks. Literature can also be a vehicle for 
foreign language learning, but how can the natural learning stemming from reading for 
pleasure be replicated in the more structured environment of the classroom? 

This conceptual paper draws on several semesters of collaboration in which the 
American author interacted via the Internet with students in the Taiwanese author’s EFL 
classes in Taiwan. The interaction included live videoconferences, YouTube-type 
videos prepared specifically for the class, and blog entries and comments. Over several 
semesters, the techniques used by the authors were shown to strengthen the motivation 
of students to study English as a Foreign Language (EFL) (Wu, Marek & Wu, 2009a; 
Wu, Marek & Wu, 2009b; Wu & Marek, 2009; Wu, Marek & Wu, 2009c). 

Purpose of inquiry and inquiry questions 

In this paper, the authors draw on their own experiences and the EFL literature to 
suggest answers to the following questions: 

1 . What are the goals that motivate students to study EFL, and what are the 
motivations that should be encouraged? 

2. How can cutting-edge educational theory inform the complex problems of EFL 
literature instruction and learning? 




3. How can instructors help students learn EFL literature in a way that is as 
natural and easy as possible? 

In this analysis, the authors use the metaphor “organic” language learning to 
describe learning that is natural, without being forced or contrived, and without artificial 
characteristics (Beckett, & Hager, 2000; Moss, 2000). The benefits of organic language 
learning parallel other foreign language learning research in which authentic source 
materials have been shown to be valued by students and therefore contribute to 
motivation. 

Significance of inquiry 

This exploration of organic learning, and how the concept intersects with research 
about motivation and teacher-centered versus student-centered instruction, is highly 
relevant for EFL programs in the second decade of the 21 st Century. In countries where 
there is no surrounding population of English speakers, EFL students often struggle with 
grammar, vocabulary, and with cultural references in source materials that are 
unfamiliar to them. Therefore, the more natural and painless English learning can be 
made, the more likely students are to engage themselves and actually acquire 
advanced skills. 

Summary of Theoretical Framework 

The following theoretical framework informs this consideration of the inquiry 
questions: 

English Environment in Taiwan 

The lack of a surrounding community of English speakers means that, for 
Taiwanese students, there is little practical opportunity to use English for actual 




communication (Lan, 2005). The Taiwanese educational system, therefore, treats 
English as a classroom subject, similar to math or geography (Wu, 2006). 

English is often taught in Taiwan using traditional pedagological principals, in 
which learning is conceptualized as being for future application. In traditional pedagogy, 
the classroom is teacher-centered and the teacher has full responsibility for making all 
decisions about what is to be learned, how it will be learned, when it is to be learned, 
and whether it has been learned (Knowles, Holton & Swanson, 2005). Many EFL 
teachers in Taiwan, therefore, use lecture/memorization methodologies and students 
rarely have meaningful interaction with native speakers or authentic materials relating to 
English-speaking cultures (Su, 2008; You, 2003). English in Taiwan, therefore, has not 
historically been taught using andragological (adult learner) principals in which learning 
is conceptualized as being for immediate application, the classroom is student centered, 
and students hold significant power to determine what and how they will learn (Knowles, 
Holton & Swanson, 2005). The result is that students are often not highly motivated to 
pursue their study of English, resulting in lower proficiency and, therefore, less desirable 
student outcomes. 

Motivation and Confidence in EFL Learning 

Motivation, confidence, and ability interact with each other (Butler & Lumpe, 2008; 
Phillips & Lindsay, 2006). The cumulative experiences of the student, both in and out of 
the classroom, drive the three learning variables. They strengthen and weaken as a 
result of the student’s experiences in the use of English, both positive and negative 
(Sakai & Kikuchi, 2009). Learners may have instrumental motivation, integrative 
motivation, or both and it has long been accepted that learners who possess integrative 




motivation are most successful because their learning goal is to achieve personal 
satisfaction and enjoyment (Gardner, 2001 ; Wang, F. X., 2008). Learners who are only 
instrumentally motivated generally make the minimum effort required to avoid 
punishment or to gain rewards. 

While the integrative/instrumental motivation framework has been widely cited, 
Dornyei’s (2005) more complex model of motivation is growing in popularity. Dornyei 
said the EFL learner imagines an idealized future English-speaking self, based in part 
on real-life encounters (or lack thereof) with other English speakers and in part on the 
desire to function in international society. Dornyei’s framework is based on the 21 st 
Century reality that students may need to use their English skills not only with native 
speakers, but with a wide range of people who speak English as a first or second 
language. 

Authentic materials and interaction 

Research has shown that even a fairly small amount of authentic interaction in the 
target language changed the perception of students about how well they were able to 
apply their skills, made students more comfortable with information they had already 
learned, and inspired them to make global, cross-cultural connections (Wu & Marek, 
2010). The challenge for EFL professionals and students in Taiwan, the site of this 
study, is the lack of a consistently available authentic language-learning environment to 
supplement in-classroom learning (You, 2003). Therefore, innovative instructors 
constantly look for new instructional techniques and source material that students will 
perceive as authentic in order to create a learning environment as integrated with the 
target culture as possible. 




Authentic Experiences 

This has led to a growing body of literature about use of the Internet and 
technology to provide authentic enrichment of EFL instruction (Liu & Chen, 2007; Payne 
& Ross, 2005; Tudini, 2003). The literature contains the general theme that such 
channels of communication provide authentic, interactive experiences that are much- 
desired by students. 

Previous research using the Internet to provide authentic source materials has 
shown clearly that when the instructional methodology stresses authentic and 
interactive engagement, it builds confidence and, in turn, produces increases in student 
knowledge on the target culture; and also that student centered, active learning, 
including use of technology and Internet-based cross-cultural interactions, contributes to 
improvement in learners’ English proficiency level (Wu & Marek, 2010). 

As shown by the data, even a relatively small amount of authentic interaction in the 
target language made students more comfortable with information they had already 
learned, changed their perception of how well they were able to apply their skills, and 
inspired them to make global, cross-cultural connections (Wu & Marek, 2010). 

Natural and organic language learning 

The concept of organic learning, if not the actual terminology, goes back to 
Aristotle in Nichomachean Ethics (Aristotle, 1941), who writes extensively about how 
practical knowledge is constructed, holding that practical wisdom is the “true and 
reasoned state of capacity to act with regard to the things that are good or bad for man” 
(p. 1026). Modern ideas about experiential learning are centered in Constructivism, an 




application of Cognitive Psychology (Bruning, Schraw & Ronning, 1999), and have the 
following characteristics (Beckett, 2001): 

• A focus on the capacity for critical thinking in individuals in order to judge new 
information and fit it together with what is already known, 

• A belief that self-direction will motivate learners, and, 

• A philosophy that teachers and trainers serve as facilitators of learning, not 
unquestionable experts. 

Cognitive Psychology and Constructivism were developed as an alternative to the 
older Behaviorism model, which holds that we are the product of our external 
conditioning. Behaviorists reject ideas of internal factors and discount the possibility 
that different people may perceive reality differently (Malott, 2011). Thus, Behaviorism 
is associated with Realism (Ozman & Craver, 2007) and operates under the 
assumption that once students are told something, such as via lecture, they should 
internalize and remember it without further effort. 

Many studies have shown that in young children learning English as a primary 
language, reading is an independent variable affecting vocabulary, writing proficiency, 
spelling, and conversational ability (Lerkkanen, Rasku-Puttonen, Aunola & Nurmi, 2004; 
Miller and Gildea, 1987; Nippold, 1999; Sinatra, 2008). Sinatra, for example, 
recommended that the rich vocabulary found in children’s books be used to teach 
vocabulary. He said (p. 178) that “early reading acquisition of high-frequency and 
function words are critically important for both conceptual understanding and early 
reading success” and are particularly good at teaching grammatical relationships. 




Using authentic texts is a growing trend in L2 instruction because they are true 
representations of the L2 culture, however O’Donnell (2009) noted that others argue 
that authentic materials can be too difficult for students with limited language 
proficiency, and should be presented modified reading texts. O’Donnell found that use 
of authentic texts that have been created or modified to support student pedagogical 
needs appear to be better understood by intermediate level L2 readers, however text 
difficulty played a pivotal role he found. 

Analysis and Discussion 

The theoretical framework provides a context for the discussion and analysis of the 
inquiry questions. 

Question 1 : What are the goals that motivate students to study EFL, and what are 
the motivations that should be encouraged? 

Students clearly have multiple motivations for studying English as a Foreign 
Language; some are internal and some are external. External factors, generally 
associated with instrumental motivation, include degree program or course 
requirements, hopes about future job quality and income, and family pressure. Internal 
factors, generally associated with integrative motivation, include enjoyment of the 
subject; a perception that English is a worthwhile topic to study; past success at using 
English for practical purposes; and the goal, ah la Dornyei, of functioning in the multi- 
cultural international society, which uses English as a common language. 

However it is a mistake to consider that internal-versus-external factors, and 
integrative-versus-instrumental motivation operate as either-or aspects of motivation. 
None of these types of motivation functions to the exclusion of the others. Some 




instrumental motivation is valuable, so the student understands learning objectives set 
by the teacher, keeps deadlines, focuses on tasks to be accomplished, and other 
elements of the learning environment. Integrative motivation has long been held to 
have value, because it causes the students to want to study, i.e. to select improving 
English ability over other things that compete for the attention of the students. 



Instrumental Motivation: 

- Degree program or course 
requirements 



Best 
Students: 



Integrative Motivation: 

- Enjoys subject 
• English is worthwhile to study 



- Hopes about future job quality 
and income, 


Motivations 


- Strengthened by past success 


- Famity pressure 


reinforce 


- Anticipates role in international 



Reduces procrastination 
Focuses on tasks 



each other / society 

- Forward looking 

- Wants to study 



Synergy Zone 

Figure 1 : Conceptual model of reinforcing motivations. 



Figure 1 presents a conceptual model of how these alternative motivations work. 
When healthy instrumental motivation is reinforced by integrative motivation, the result 
is, that is, the combined action of the two forms of motivation becomes greater than 
their effects individually. The authors believe that it is this “Synergy Zone” in which 
students are most open to the perspective Dornyei described in which students want to 




reside in a cosmopolitan international culture in which proficiency in English is a 
fundamental requirement. 

Motivation, therefore, must be seen as a multidimensional construct, including 
internal and external dimensions, as well as temporal considerations that reflect past 
positive or negative experiences in use of English and future expectations. The teacher 
plays a central role in determining where the student resides in these multiple 
dimensions. The teacher ideally sets and explains instrumental requirements to which 
students logically agree, demonstrates integrative benefits appealing to the enjoyment 
of students, and presents a role model of functioning in international society in a way 
that has strong emotional appeal to students. 

Question 2: How can cutting-edge educational theory inform the complex 
problems of EFL literature instruction and learning? 

Contemporary learning theory is rooted in Constructivism, however many EFL 
instructional methodologies remain rooted in Behaviorism, typified by a lecture- 
memorization classroom structure and little discretion on the part of the learner about 
what and how to learn. Constructivism, on the other hand, emphasizes the practical 
application of skills to fit new information in to that which is already known. Therefore 
constructivism dovetails perfectly with research that shows that students benefit from 
methodologies that stress active versus passive learning, student centered learning 
environments, and critical thinking. For many EFL teachers in Taiwan, however, this 
means a dramatic change in direction and loss of some control, as the students take 
more control over elements of their learning. 

Methodologies built on the foundation of Constructivism solve many of the 
problems of EFL learning and teaching by allowing students to exercise judgment about 




what and how they learn under the guidance of the teacher, using authentic materials to 

replicate natural communicative interaction as much as possible, and emphasizing 

active learning via critical thinking. In particular, students in this environment are less 

likely to be bored and to find source material to be too difficult. They are more likely to 

be engaged in the learning process because they much more often are called upon to 

apply what they are learning and to improve their skills thereby. 

Question 3: How can instructors help students learn EFL literature in a way that is 
as natural and easy as possible? 

EFL students frequently cite the need for more authentic instructional materials, 
however source materials prepared for native speakers are often far too difficult for EFL 
learners. The literature has shown, therefore, that literature written for younger readers 
can be adapted for use in the EFL literature classroom. 

This clearly replicates the natural elementary school or kindergarten learning 
environment of a native speaker in the United States who first learns a handful of words, 
and then reads them in short sentences derived from the very limited vocabulary at the 
command of the students. As the students continue to read, over time, new vocabulary 
is incorporated carefully into the texts allowing the students to learn word meaning from 
the context of the sentence and paragraph, from illustrations accompanying the text, 
from “sounding out” the words (applying the sounds of the individual letters to determine 
the pronunciation of the entire word), and from external definitions. When they still do 
not understand a word, young children usually ask an adult for help, thus providing a 
respected external definition. The authors note that young children in the United States 
also learn to read as a side product of educational television programs such as Sesame 




Street (Sesame Street, 2011) in which instruction is strategically included in 
entertainment content. 

Steen Krashen (1988) drew on this natural learning process when he 
recommended the Comprehensible Input Plus One strategy for second language 
acquisition, “i+1”, in which the students are always pressed to interact slightly above 
their current ability, or “one level higher.” This continually encourages the students to 
improve their ability while not overwhelming them with unfamiliar content that could 
reduce their confidence and cause an undesirable drop in motivation. In reading, this 
means always reading at a level in which there is a carefully managed number of 
unfamiliar words which students will come to understand from the content and from 
external definition checks. 

However, use of authentic literature for EFL learning comes with pitfalls. Culture 
as portrayed in literature may not be accurate, because of literary points the author 
intended to make, leaving students with serious misunderstandings about the target 
culture, which teachers must be able to understand and explain. The authors 
encountered such serious misunderstandings in teaching the classic short story “The 
Lottery” by Shirley Jackson to Taiwanese college students. Almost every student in the 
class concluded that the New England villagers in the story were unfair and immoral 
because they chose to stone a fellow citizen to death to ensure good crops. This 
judgment was certainly the intent of the author, however, many of the students also 
tended to assume that such stoning events actually happen today in New England, until 
both the Taiwanese and the American instructors stressed the differences between the 
fictional text and reality. The students were confused because the author advanced her 




artistic purposes through metaphors that did not mirror reality, requiring a more nuanced 
understanding than the Taiwanese students possessed. If the teachers had not 
possessed full understanding of the reality of the American culture, lasting 
misunderstanding might have resulted. 

Conclusions & Recommendations 

The discussion of the practical applications of the theoretical framework leads to 
several key conclusions: 

1 . Constructivist classrooms, employing student-centered methodologies, active 
learning and authentic source material, are the clear choice for effective EFL instruction. 

2. Carefully chosen literature can benefit Constructivist language learning by 
providing authentic source materials valued by students. 

3. The authors concur with O’Donnell (2009) that modified “children’s versions” of 
notable texts, or texts created by native-speaking authors with EFL students in mind, 
can often be beneficial because they allow the instructors to manage the level of 
difficulty of the class. If unaltered texts are used, they must be very carefully selected to 
meet the learning needs of the students. 

4. Such texts for EFL learners should reflect relatively recent cultural elements. 
American children are often provided simplified versions of historical literature, such as 
Robinson Crusoe, Swiss Family Robinson, Dracula, Treasure Island, Gulliver’s Travels, 
The Jungle Book, and The Prince and the Pauper, however EFL learners will likely 
consider these works to be outdated stories and would be more interested in stories 



reflecting culture today. 




5. Even when simplified versions of literature are used, enrichment of the texts is 
necessary to check cultural understanding and to provide a basis for Constructivist 
activities stemming from the text. 

6. Just as the i+1 concept is applied to the degree of linguistic difficulty of a text, 
i+1 should also be applied to the degree of cultural difficulty of the text, or how 
challenging the cultural elements of the story will be for EFL learners to compare and 
contrast to their own culture. 

7. Multimedia support materials have been shown to be more engaging for 
students, therefore there is a market for creation of such materials, once a new 
standard reading list is developed that meet the recommendations of this paper. 

These conclusions represent a challenge for the EFL community in Taiwan. In 
many cases, the required literary texts may not be available “off the shelf” and 
enrichment source materials may also not be easy to find for teachers who are not 
highly experienced in Western culture. The authors believe that textbook publishing 
companies must be cognizant of the modern requirements of the EFL environment and 
work with international partners to develop texts that are authentic for students, yet 
address the i+1 needs of vocabulary and cultural content. 

EFL research is clear that the more authentic the learning environment is, the 
better students will learn and improve their ability, confidence, and motivation, and the 
more they will enjoy their learning. This approach to the use of literature for EFL 
language learning has the potential to provide a true organic means of learning that 
bypasses the challenges of the traditional lecture-memorization educational context. 




References 



Aristotle (1941). Basic Works. (A. McKeon, ed.) New York: Random House. 

Beckett, D., (2001). Hot action at work: A different understanding of “Understanding.” 
New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, 92, 73-84. 

Beckett, D. & Hager, P. (2000). Making judgments as the basis for workplace learning: 
towards an epistemology of practice. International Journal of Lifelong Education, 
19(4), 300-311. 

Bruning, R. H., Schraw, G. J., & Ronning, R. R. (1999). Cognitive psychology and 
instruction (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 

Butler, K., & Lumpe, A. (2008). Student Use of Scaffolding Software: Relationships with 
Motivation and Conceptual Understanding. Journal of Science Education & 
Technology, 77(5), 427-436. doi:1 0.1 007/si 0956-008-91 1 1-9 

Dornyei, Z. (2005). The psychology of the language learner: Individual differences in 
second language acquisition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Gardner R. C. (2001). Integrative motivation: Past, present and future. Retrieved 

February 05, 2006, from http://publish.uwo.ca/~gardner/GardnerPublicLecture1.pdf 

Knowles, M. S., Holton, E. F. Ill, & Swanson, R. A. (2005). The Adult Learner (6 th Ed.). 
Elsevier: London. 

Krashen, S. D. (1988). Second Language Acquisition and Second Language Learning. 
Prentice-Hall International: Upper Saddle River, NJ. 

Lan, R. L. (2005). Language Learning Strategies Profiles of EFL Elementary School 
Students in Taiwan. University of Maryland, College Park. 




Lerkkanen, M., Rasku-Puttonen, H., Aunola, K., & Nurmi, J., 2004). The developmental 
dynamics of literacy skills during the First Grade. Educational Psychology, 24(6), 
793-810. 

Liu, G., & Chen, A. S. (2007). A taxonomy of Internet-based technologies integrated in 
language curricula. British Journal of Educational Technology, 38(5), 934-938. doi 
1 0.1 1 1 1/j.l 467-8535.2007.00728.X 

Malott, C. S. (201 1 ). Critical Pedagogy and Cognition: An Introduction to a Postformal 
Educational. Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg, London. 

Miller, G.A. & Gildea, P.M. (1987). How children learn words. Scientific American 257 , 
94-99. 

Moss, C. M. (2000). Professional learning on the cyber sea: What is the point of 
contact? Cyberpsychology & Behavoir, 3(1), 41-50. 

Nippold, M., (1999). Word definition in adolescents as a function of reading proficiency: 
A research note. Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 15(2), 171-176. 
doi: 10.1177/026565909901500205 

O’Donnell, M. E., (2009). Finding middle ground in second language reading: 
Pedagogic modifications that increase comprehensibility and vocabulary 
acquisition while preserving authentic text features. The Modern Language 
Journal, 93(4), 512-533. doi: 10.1 1 1 1/j.l 540-4781 ,2009.00928.x 

Ozman, H. A. & Craver, S. M. (2007). Philosophical Foundations of Education (8th 
Ed.). Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ. 

Payne, J. S., & Ross, B. M. (2005). Synchronous CMC, working memory, and L2 oral 
proficiency development. Language Learning and Technology, 19(3), 35-54. 




Phillips, N., & Lindsay, G. (2006). Motivation in gifted students. High Ability Studies, 
77(1), 57-73. doi:1 0.1 080/1 35981 306009471 19 

Sakai, H. & Kikuchi, K. (2009). An analysis of demotivators in the EFL classroom. 
System, 37, 57-69. 

Sesame Street (2011). Why our site works. Retrieved March 5, 201 1 from 
http://www.sesamestreet.org/parents/howtouse/why_our_site_works 

Sinatra, R. (2008). Creating a culture of vocabulary acquisition for children living in 
poverty. Journal of Children and Poverty, 14{ 2), 173-192. doi: 

1 0.1 080/1 07961 20802336001 

Su, Y.C. (2008). Promoting cross-cultural awareness and understanding: incorporating 
ethnographic interviews in college EFL classes in Taiwan. Educational Studies, 
34(4), 337-398. doi: 10.1080/03055690802257150 

Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning and Technology, 
7(3), 141-159. 

Wang, F. X. (2008). Motivation and English achievement: An exploratory and 

confirmatory factor analysis of a new measure for Chinese students of English 
learning. North American Journal of Psychology, 70(3), 633-646. 

Wu, W. V. (2006). EFL optimal learning environment: perspectives of faculty and 
students in a Taiwanese technical university, USA, Vermillion: The University of 
South Dakota. 

Wu, W. V., & Marek, M. W. (2010). Making English a “habit”: Increasing confidence, 
motivation, and ability of EFL students through cross-cultural, computer-assisted 
interaction. Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 0(4), 1 00-1 1 2. 




Wu, W. V., Marek, M. W., & Wu, N. P. (2009a, June). Lessons Learned from Three 
Years of Videoconferencing between EFL Classrooms and a Native English 
Speaker. Presented at the meeting of ED-MEDIA 2009 -- World Conference on 
Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia & Telecommunications, Association for the 
Advancement of Computing in Education, Honolulu, Hawaii, June. 

Wu, P. N., Marek, M. W., & Wu, W. V. (2009b, June). Enriching the EFL literature 

classroom in Taiwan with videos and blogs from a native speaker. Presented at the 
meeting of ED-MEDIA 2009 - World Conference on Educational Multimedia, 
Hypermedia & Telecommunications, Association for the Advancement of 
Computing in Education, Honolulu, Hawaii. 

Wu, P. N. & Marek, M. W. (2009). Using distance technology to provide cultural 

information from a native speaker to EFL Literature students. Paper presented at 
the 4 th Annual International Conference on Foreign Literature Teaching, May 22, 
2009, Department of Foreign Languages and Literature, Asia University, Taiwan. 

Wu, P. N., Marek, M. W., & Wu, W. V. (2009c). The role of the teacher using a web-blog 
as a cultural teaching resource in an EFL literature course. Paper presented at the 
Asian EFL Journal International Conference, April 10-11, 2009, Pusan, South 
Korea. 

You, Y. H. (2003). A study on motivation to learn English among the freshmen in the 
four-year program. Project Report on Improvements on Faculty Members of St. 
John's Institute of Technology. 




