DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 460 797 



RC 021 627 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Roy, Loriene, Comp. 

Native American Cultural Groups. 

1997-00-00 

143p.; In: Pathfinders for Four Directions: An Indigenous 
Educational Model; see RC 021 622. Nine pages contain light 
or broken type . 

Collected Works - General (020) -- Guides - Non-Classroom 
(055) -- Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC06 Plus Postage . 

♦American Indian Culture; American Indian Education; 
♦American Indian History; American Indian Literature; 
♦American Indians ; Cultural Background; Cultural Education; 
Elementary Secondary Education; Foreign Countries; 
♦Information Sources; Internet; Maori (People); ♦Search 
Strategies; ♦Tribes 
♦Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 



Part of a larger report on the Four Directions Project, an 
American Indian technology innovation project, this section includes 13 
"pathfinders" to locating information on Native American and other indigenous 
cultural groups. The pathfinders were designed by students in the Graduate 
School of Library and Information Science at the University of Texas at 
Austin in response to specific requests by educators in reservation schools. 
The pathfinders are bibliographic instructional aids that outline methods to 
locate information on topics of interest to a particular client. Each 
pathfinder includes an introduction that describes the nature of the topic, 
scope of the pathfinder, assessment of client needs, and steps taken in 
identifying and evaluating relevant resources; an annotated bibliography of 
15-25 resources, including print reference works, monographs, indexes, 
journal titles, electronic resources, and organizations; and the pathfinder 
proper, a guide to locating resources on the topic. The pathfinders are: (1) 

"Cheyenne Culture: Pathfinder" (Wade E. Osburn) ; (2) "Lakota Sioux 

Pathfinder" (Timothy Bullard); (3) "Introduction to the Maori Culture: A 
Pathfinder" (Candice Weaver); (4) "Introduction to the Navajo Culture: A 
Pathfinder" (Jeffrey A. Sewell) ; (5) "Information on Early Navajo Leaders in 

the 1800s" (Michelle Beattie); (6) "Introduction to the Oneida Culture: 

People of the Standing Stone. A Pathfinder" (Rex G. Pyle); (7) "Introduction 
to Penobscot Culture: A Pathfinder" (Christina Holmes); (8) "Introduction to 
Potawatomi Culture: A Pathfinder" (Britt A. Johns en ) ; (9) "Introduction to 

the Culture of Santa Clara Pueblo: A Pathfinder" (Lisa Bier) ; (10) "An 

Introduction to Seminole Culture: A Pathfinder" (Arlene Lucio) ; (11) "History 

of Animals in the Seminole Culture: A Pathfinder" (Jeffrey A. Sewell); (12) 
"Seminole Wars (1815-1900) : A Pathfinder. For 6th- 8th Grade Students and 
Their Teachers of the Ahfachkee School, Big Cypress Reservation, Clewistbn, 
Florida" (Jennifer M. Payne) ; and (13) "Twentieth Century History of the 
Seminole Indians: A Pathfinder" (Michelle L. Gonzales). (SV) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



Native American Cultural Groups 



a^ 

r-* 

o 

VO 



Q 






In: Pathfinders for Four Directions: An Indigenous Educational Model 



Dr. Loriene Roy (Comp) 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE educational RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

M Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this i 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. ' 








2 



BESTCOPYAVAILABLE 



Table of Contents 



Cheyenne Culture (Wade E. Osbum) 315-324 

Lakota Sioux Pathfinder (Timothy Bullard) 325-336 

Introduction to the Maori Culture (Candice Weaver) 337-347 

Introduction to the Navajo Culture (Jeffrey A. Sewell) 348-358 

Information on Early Navajo Leaders in the 1800’s 

(Michelle Beattie) 359-370 

Introduction to the Oneida Culture (Rex G. Pyle) 371-382 

Introduction to Penobscot Culture (Christina Holmes) 383-392 

Introduction to Potawatomi Culture (Britt A. Johnsen) 393-401 

Introduction to the Culture of Santa Clara Pueblo 

(Lisa Bier) 402-413 

An Introduction to Seminole Culture (Arlene Lucio) 414-422 

History of Animals in the Seminole Culture 

(Jeffrey A. Sewell) 423-433 

Seminole Wars (1815-1900) (Jennifer M. Payne) 434-443 

Twentieth Century History of the Seminole Indians 

(Michelle -L- Gonzales) 444-454 




o 

o 



315 



PATHFINDER 
“Cheyenne Culture” 



prepared 

by 

Wade E. Osbum 



LIS 382L.3 



December 3, 1997 




4 



316 



PATHFINDER PREFACE 

The topic for this pathfinder is Cheyenne culture: an introduction. The Cheyenne culture, 
like the culture of any group of people, consists of numerous aspects, such as religious customs, 
economic conditions, family relations, education, etc. Intertwined with the tribe’s culture is its 
history. This pathfinder will give attention to both. 

As an introduction, the pathfinder presents a broad description of the Cheyenne culture 
without much detail. The paper begins with an introduction to the tribe itself, covering its 
history, language, and geographic location. The Cheyenne people are Plains Indians, so attention 
was given in the second section to life as a Plains Indian. From there, the paper explores several 
aspects of the Cheyenne culture, such as its language, family, and religion. The paper ends with a 
look at the tribe in the twentieth century, including the population of the tribe, its economic 
conditions, and art. 

Sources for this project were chosen based on two questions: (1) Is the content about the 
Cheyenne? (2) Does it pertain to their culture? If the answer was “yes,” then the source was 
considered for addition to this paper. Internet and print sources were considered for this project. 
My work began with searches on the World Wide Web for content under the subject headings, 
“Cheyenne,” “Cheyenne culture,” or “Native American Culture.” Once these sites were accessed 
and evaluated, my attention switched to print materials. An online library catalog was helpful in 
locating items listed under the subject, “Cheyenne.” 

The Cheyenne people live today in two locations. North and South. For the purpose of 
this pathfinder, the group was treated as one tribe and not two separate groups. Their similarities 




5 



317 



greatly exceed their differences. In only one pathfinder source are the two segments of the tribe 
treated separately. 

The audience for this pathfinder is the student body at the Takini School, a Four 
Directions participant. Due to the ages of these elementary students, information sources 
containing technical language were not selected for inclusion. Also, since an introduction to the 
culture was requested, overly in-depth items were not listed. Essentially, this pathfinder was 
intentionally designed to be simple, straight-forward, and non-intimidating. 

The questions the pathfinder attempts to answer are those considered important to the 
Native American student user. Some of the questions might be, “What is life like on the 
reservation for the Cheyenne?” “Are the Cheyenne families similar to my own?” and “What kind 
of ceremonies do they observe?” If the user is curious about how similar another Indian tribe is 
to their own, those questions will be answered by this project. Cheyenne family life, their 
language, and ceremonies are the kinds of cultural topics that students at the Takini School can 
likely relate to because the same aspects of culture exist in their own community. 




'6 



318 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1. Academic American Encyclopedia . Danbury, CT: Grolier Incorporated, 1992. 

ISBN 0-7172-2064-8 

This is a 21 -volume encyclopedia intended for junior high readers through adults. It 
provides quick access to factual information on numerous topics. It includes short entries and 
illustrations. Its 150+ word entry on “Cheyenne” includes an illustration of a Cheyenne chief and 
a brief history of the people. 

2. Alta Vista , (accessed 17 November 1997); available from http.V/altavista. digital. com; Internet. 

Functioning as an online search engine, this site scans the World Wide Web using key 
words. With this search engine one can look for exact phrases, such as “Cheyenne culture.” 

3. Champagne, Duane, ed. Native America: Portrait of the Peoples . Detroit, MI: Visible Ink 

Press, 1994. ISBN 0-8103-9452-9 

This reference work contains information about Native peoples from various 
geographical perspectives (e.g.. Northeast, Southeast, Alaska, California, and Canada). The 
volume includes discussion about Native North American languages, religion, health, arts, and 
more. It has an entry for “Native Peoples of Oklahoma” and biographical information on 
Cheyenne leaders from the past. 

4. Champagne, Duane, ed. The Native American Almanac . Detroit, MI: Gale Research, Inc., 

1994. ISBN 0-8103-8865-0 

This reference work provides factual information about Native American peoples, 
including chronologies of Native American Indians. The volume explores economic conditions 
of reservations and cultural areas, subdivided by geographical locations. Regarding the 
Cheyenne, the work includes information about their art. 

5. Chemow, Barbara A. and George A. Vallasi, eds. The Columbia Encyclopedia. 5“’ ed. New 

York: Columbia University Press, 1993. ISBN 0-395-62438-X 

This one volume adult encyclopedia contains numerous concise entries on a variety of 
topics, meant for fast reference. Its 300+ word entry of the “Cheyenne” summarizes the history 
of the tribe, including a brief bibliography of significant works on the Cheyenne people. 

6. Cheyenne Indians. An Intro , (accessed 17 November 1997); available from 

http://www.uwbg.edu/~galta/mrr/cheyenne/index.htm; Internet. 



O 

ERIC 



7 



319 



This introductory site to the Cheyenne Indians provides a series of links to topics such as 
Cheyenne ceremonies, religion, and views of marriage and death. 

7. Cheverme Language Web Site , (accessed 17 November 1997); available from 

http://www.mcn.net/~wkeman/cheyerme.htm; Internet. 

This website provides insight into the Cheyerme culture by providing an introduction to 
their language. It includes a description of he Cheyerme language and a pronunciation guide for 
the Cheyerme alphabet. 

8. The Cheverme State of Being , (accessed 18 November 1997); available from 

http://www.mcn.net/~coyote/chystate.htm; Internet. 

This website provides the reader with a list of links that explore various aspects of 
Cheyerme life and culture. Among the topics explored are life on the reservation, the Cheyerme 
diet, and how Cheyerme receive their names. 

9. Davis, Mary B., ed. Native America in the Twentieth Century . New York: Garland Publishing, 

1994. ISBN 0-8240-4846-6 

This one volume encyclopedia is alphabetically arranged and includes information about 
life for Native Americans at present. It has extensive information about numerous tribes and 
various aspects of their everyday existence. On the topic of Cheyerme, the volume describes the 
tribe’s history, government, and economic development and conditions. 

10. Dictionary of Indian Tribes of the Americas . 2"‘* ed. Newport Beach, CA: American Indian 

Publishers, Inc., 1993. ISBN 0-937862-28-2 

This is an encyclopedic work that provides information on Native American Indian tribes, 
with entries on Indian language, technology and arts, and social and religious culture. Its entry on 
the Cheyerme people provides information about the tribe’s economy and social and cultural 
boundaries and subdivisions. 

1 1 . The Encyclopedia Americana: International Edition . Danbury, CT : Grolier Incorporated, 

1994. ISBN 0-7172-1025-2 

This is a 30-volume encyclopedia geared for high school to adult readers, including black 
and white illustrations. Its 400+ word entry for “Cheyenne Indians” contains information about 
the tribe’s history, organization, and customs and ceremonies, plus a bibliography for further 
reading. 

12. Excite , (accessed 17 November 1997); available from http://www.excite.com/; Internet. 




8 



320 



Excite functions as an Internet search engine using key words to locate information on the 
World Wide Web about subjects such as “Native America” and “Reservations.” 

13. Grinnell, George B. The Indians of Today . New York: Duffield and Company, 1911. ISBN 

0-404-11857-7 

This work contains information about life for Indians from the early part of the twentieth 
century. It describes life for Native Americans on the reservation. It also includes historical 
information on the Tongue River Reservation in Montana (a Cheyenne reservation). 

14. Hirschfelder, Arlene and Paulette Molin. The Encyclopedia of Native American Religions . 

New York; Facts on File, 1992. ISBN 0-8160-2017-5 

This is a reference work that contains brief entries on numerous aspects of Native 
American religion with a helpful subject index and many black and white illustrations. The work 
includes information on Cheyenne rituals such as the Spirit Lodge Ritual and the Massaum 
Ceremony. 

15. Hoebel, E. Adamson. The Cheyenne . New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1960. 

This monograph provides an extensive examination of Cheyenne culture. Topics included 
are ceremonies, family, government, and religion of the Cheyenne. 

16. Hotbot . (accessed 17 November 1997); available from http://www.hotbot.com/; Internet. 

Hotbot is an Internet search engine that uses keywords to locate websites on the World 
Wide Web that contain information about innumerable topics. One such topic is “Cheyenne 
Religion.” 

17. Hoxie, Frederick E., ed. Encyclopedia of North American Indians . New York: Houghton 

Mifflin Company, 1996. ISBN 0-395-66921-9 

This is an alphabetically organized, one-volume encyclopedia dealing with North 
American Indians. It covers various Indian tribes and different aspects of North American Indian 
life and history. This volume offers helpful information about the language of the Cheyenne 
people, “Language (Algonquian).” 

18. Leitch, Barbara A. A Concise Dictionary of Indian Tribes of North America . Algonac, MI: 

Reference Publications, Inc., 1979. ISBN 0-917256-09-3 

This dictionary contains brief entries about Native American Indian tribes, including 
maps, tribal history, and biographical information. It is arranged alphabetically and contains 
helpful entries for both the “Northern” and “Southern Cheyenne” tribes. 



O 

ERIC 



■9 



321 



19. Lycos , (accessed 17 November 1997); available from http://lycos.cs.cmu.edu/; Internet. 

Lycos is an Internet search engine that uses keywords to locate websites on the World 
Wide Web containing information on a variety of subjects. Through this site one can locate exact 
phrases existing in the content of a website, such as “Cheyenne families.” 

20. Markowitz, Harvey, ed. American Indians . Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, 1987. ISBN 0- 

89356-757-4 

This is a three-volume reference work that deals with Native American Indian tribes, their 
culture, and their history. It is alphabetically organized and includes helpful information about 
Native American political organization and leadership. 

21. Moore, John H. The Cheyenne Nation . Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1987. 

ISBN 0-8032-3107-5 

This textbook on the Cheyenne people provides in-depth coverage of the tribe’s history 
and the records preserving that history. Included in this survey is a chapter on “Patterns of 
Marriage.” 

22. The New Encyclopedia Britannica . 15* ed. Chicago: Britannica Inc., 1997. 

ISBN 0-85229-633-0 

This is a 29-volume adult encyclopedia with a “micropaedia” for quick reference and a 
“macropaedia’ with broader entries. This encyclopedia is alphabetically arranged with 
illustrations. Its 400+ word entry for “Cheyenne” includes information about the history of the 
tribe, its culture and religion, and its tribal organization. 

23. Powell, Father Peter J. The Cheyenne. Maheoo’s People . Bloomington, IN: Indiana 

University Press, 1980. ISBN 0-253-30416-4 

This is a volume containing biographical essays on a variety of topics pertaining to the 
Cheyenne Indians, including chapters on the tribe’s struggle to preserve their culture. Two topics 
that receive brief coverage are Cheyenne language and art. 

24. Waldman, Carl. Atlas of the North American Indian . New York: Facts on File, 1985. 

ISBN 0-87196-850-9 

This reference work includes maps tracing early Indian history. It contains descriptions 
of Indian culture, religion, and language. Its maps show reservation locations of Cheyenne 
tribes. 

25. Waldman, Carl. Encyclopedia of Native American Tribes . New York: Facts on File, 1988. 



O 

ERIC 



10 



322 



ISBN 0-8160-1421-3 

This encyclopedia is alphabetically arranged and contains information on numerous 
Native American tribes. Its 6 page entry on the “Plains Indians” provides descriptions of life and 
customs of Plains Indians that include the Northern and Southern Cheyerme peoples. 

26. The World Book Encyclopedia . Chicago, IL: World Book, Inc., 1994. ISBN 0-7166-0094-3 

This is a general reference encyclopedia for elementary to adult readers, including many 
color illustrations. Its 125+ word entry for “Cheyerme Indians” contains factual information 
about the tribe’s history, its population and location of current Cheyerme reservations. 

27. Yahoo , (accessed 17 November 1997); available from http://www.yahoo.com/search.html; 

Internet. 

Yahoo is an Internet search engine that uses keywords to locate websites on the World 
Wide Web that deal with a variety of subjects, such as “Cheyerme.” 



This bibliography was formatted using the guidelines found in Kate L. Turabian’s A Manual for 
Writers of Term Papers. Theses, and Dissertations . 6* ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 



1996. 




11 



323 



CHEYENNE CULTURE: 

A Pathfinder 

As a Native American young person, you are familiar with the culture of the tribe you are a part 
of You are undoubtedly aware of the ceremonies, religion, family relations, language, political 
organization, and customs of your particular tribal group. What about the Cheyenne? How much 
do you know about their customs and culture? This pathfinder is designed to give you a short 
introduction to the culture of the Cheyenne people. 

Where did the Cheyenne come from and where are they now? 

American Indians edited by Harvey Markowitz. Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, 

Inc., 1995. Pages 158-160 of this work answers this question by tracing the 
history of the Cheyenne people, detailing how large the tribe is today and 
where their reservations are located. 

The New Encyclopedia Britannica Chicago, IL: Britannica, Inc., 1997. The 
“Cheyenne” entry in the third volume of this set will give you some quick 
information on where they are today. 

What was it like to live as a Cheyenne? As a Plains Indian? 

Encyclopedia of Native American Tribes by Carl Waldman. New York: 

Facts on File, 1988. Life on the plains of North America is described in 
detail on pages 188-193 of this book. If you want to know why the horse 
and buffalo were so important to the Plains people, what they wore for 
clothing, and what their dances looked like check out these pages. 

Are there really two groups of Cheyenne: Northern and Southern? 

Encyclopedia of North American Indians edited by Frank E. Hoxie. New York: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1996. The answer is “Yes.” In this book you will find 
entries for both groups on pages 110-114. All your questions about the 
differences and similarities between these groups will be answered here. 

Where can I find out about Cheyenne 

Language? 

Cheyenne Language Web Site : an Internet Web site found at 
http://www.mcn.net/~wleman/cheyenne.htm. Their alphabet, how you pronounce 




12 



324 



the words they speak, it is all here at this handy Web site. 



Family? 

The Cheyenne by E. Adamson Hoebel. New York; Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1960. All you want to know and more can be found in the 
chapter titled “Family, BCindred, and Band” on pages 20-32. 

Religious Beliefs? 

The Cheyenne by E. Adamson Hoebel. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 

Winston, 1960. The chapter titled “World View and Religion” on pages 
82-89 will fill you in with the details. You will find that the tribe’s religion 
is an integral part of its culture as yours may be to your own tribe. 

All the Rest? 

Dictionary of Indian Tribes of the Americas . 2"‘* ed. Newport Beach, CA: 

American Indian Publishers, 1993. The article on pages 265-271 will fill in all 
the gaps concerning Cheyenne culture past and present. If you only have time 
to check one source, look here. 

What is going on with the Cheyenne today? 

Native America in the Twentieth Century edited by Mary B. Davis. New York 
Garland Publishing, 1994. This book is one of the best at giving information 
about all of the Indian tribes, including the Cheyenne. Check out pages 100-103 
if you want to find out how many Cheyenne are still around, and what life is like 
on the reservation today. 

The Cheyenne State of Being : an Internet site found at 

http ://www .mcn.net/~co VO te/chystate . htm . Finding some current information on 
the Cheyenne is just a few clicks away on the World Wide Web. Check out this 
site for updated information on what the Cheyenne eat, what life is like on the 
reservation, and how Cheyenne receive their names. 

The Cheyenne people, as you have likely discovered, are a proud people who are striving 
to preserve their culture. Important parts of their culture exist in Cheyenne language, family life, economic 
conditions on the reservations, religion, and a variety of other areas. This pathfinder is intended to be an 
introduction to the life and culture of the Cheyenne. Hopefully it will also be used as a starting point for future 
research. 

Prepared by Wade E. Osbum 




13 



325 



University of Texas at Austin 
Graduate School of Library and Information Science 
LIS 382 L.3 

Information Resources in the Social Sciences 



Dr. Loriene Roy 



* * * 



Lakota Sioux Pathfinder 



Timothy Bullard 



Fall 1997 




1 /I 



jL 4 



326 



Lakota Sioux Pathfinder 



This pathfinder is intended as an introduction to the Sioux-Lakota culture and to 
help answer questions related to the Sioux tribes. Who are the Sioux? Where do they 
reside? What are their values and customs? What do they hold sacred? What is their 
culture and traditions? Where do find materials and information about them? 

The Sioux, also called Dakota, Dakota, or Nakota are a North American Plains 
Indian people, of Siouan linguistic stock. It is customary to identify tribes on the basis of 
the native languages spoken by them. Today, the language of the Sioux is called Dakota. 
The name Dakota means "allies" or "fnends". The name Sioux, an abbreviation of 
Nadouessioux means "snakes" or "enemies", a name originally applied to them by their 
rivals, the Ojibwa. There are three main divisions of the Sioux: Santee, Yankton, and 
Teton, calling themselves, respectively, Dakota, Nakota, and Dakota. The Santee, or 
Eastern Sioux, comprised the Mdewkanton,Wahpeton,Wahpekute, and Sisseton; the 
Yankton included the Yankton and Yanktonai; and the Teton, or Western Sioux, had 
seven main divisions-the Sihasapa, or Blackfoot; Brule (Upper and Dower); Hunkpapa; 
Miniconjou; Oglala; Sans Arcs; and Oohenonpa, or Two-Kettle. 

Before the middle of the 17th century, the Santee Sioux lived in the area around 
Dake Superior, where they gathered fhiit and vegetables, hunted deer and buffalo, ^d 
fished. Continued and persistent battle with the Ojibwa drove the Santee into southern 
and western Minnesota; the Teton and Yankton divisions were forced forever fi-om 
Minnesota onto the Great Plains (in present North and South Dakota), where they stopped 
their traditional agricultural livelihood and embraced the Plains way of life, which 

centered on the nomadic hunting of buffalo and other big game. 

The Sioux shared many cultural characteristics with other Plains Indian tobes. 

They lived in tepees and relied on hunting as their mainstay. Men gained standing by 
accomplishing brave feats in battle; horses and scalps obtained in a raid were evidence of 
their courage. Warfare and shamanism were closely connected, to the extent that designs 
suggested in mystical visions were painted on war shields to safeguard the bearers from 
their attackers. The Sioux practiced an elaborate form of the sun dance, a tribal festival 
lasting several days during summer solstice. They also incorporated the ghost dance, a 
mystic messianic ritual calling for the return of the buffalo and fiieir former ways. Their 
religious order recognized four powers as presiding over the universe, and each power m 
turn was divided into hierarchies of four. The buffalo figure also had a prominent place 
in their religion. Among the Teton Sioux the bear was important; bear power obtained m 
a vision was regarded as curative. The Santee Sioux engaged in a ceremonial bear hunt to 
protect their warriors before their departure on a raid. Sioux women were skilled at 
porcupine-quill and bead embroidery bearing geometric designs. Police functions were 
performed by military societies, the most significant duty of which was overseeing the 
buffalo hunts. Other groups included dance, dream, shamanistic, and women’s societies. 




15 



327 



Two of the schools participating in the Four Directions Program, Marty Indian 
School and Standing Rock Community School, are the intended audience. Both of these 
schools are K- 12 and are located on Sioux reservations. The Marty School is part of the 
Yankton Sioux tribe and Standing Rock Community School belongs to the Hunkpapa 
tribe of the Teton branch. Sources were specifically selected if they dealt with these 
tribes. 

The search began with a UTCAT subject search [typing s Lakota Sioux], This 
produced no relevant records. A new subject search [typing 5 Lakota] returned only a 
few records on the Lakota dialect and two cross references: Lakota Indians, indexed as 
Teton Indians; Lakota language indexed as Dakota language. The subject search of 
Sioux [typing 5 Sioux] finally revealed a cross reference to see Dakota Indians with 104 
records to access. After viewing many of the subject headings in the bibliographic 
records, the search was expanded by using related, broader, and narrower Library of 
Congress subject headings: Indians of North America-Great Plains 

Siouan Indians 
Santee Indians 
Yankton Indians 

Other subject headings considered: Dakota literature 

Dakota philosophy 
Dakota women 
Dakota youth 

The search continued to indexes. Indexes consulted using Dakota Indians as a 
successful subject search included: Readers Guide Abstracts , Humanities Abstracts , and 
Arts & Humanities Citation Index . Using Sioux as a subject search in Britannica online 
and The New Grove Dictionary of Music produced insightful articles. Special care 
should be taken in spelling of subject access points, some sources add an /i to produce 
Dakhota and Lakhota; also the plural form of Sioux is Siouan. 

A plethora of information is on the Internet. A search using Lakota Sioux on any 
of the search engines will access thousands of records. There are web pages on learning 
the Dakota language to buying Dakota art and literature. Scholars and enthusiast have 
created several excellent Web pages linking Sioux sources together. 




16 



328 



Sources listed on the Pathfinder 



< 1 > 

The World Book encyclopedia . Chicago: World Book, Inc., 1989. 

AE 5 W55 1989 Youth Collection PCL Stacks 6C 

An encyclopedia designed especially to meet the needs of elementary, middle, and 
senior high school students. 



< 2 > 

Britannica Online 

http://www.eb.com: 1 80/ 

A folly searchable collection of authoritative references, listing a brief history of 
the Sioux including hypertext links to related articles. 

<3> 

Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk. The Sioux . New York: Holiday House, 1993. 

E 99 D1 S6277 1993 Youth Collection PCL Stacks 6C 

Identifies the different tribes of the Sioux Indians and discusses their beliefs and 
traditional way of life. 

<4> 

Ewers, John C. Teton Dakota. Ethnology and History . Berkeley: U.S. National Park 
Service, 1938. 

970.3 Un3t 1938 

Comprehensive work containing information on food, clothing, hunting methods, 
decorative arts, religion, transportation, language, and periods of history of the 
Teton Indians. 

<5> 

Dakota Wowani Oti Kin. 

http ://maple. lemoyne.edu/~bucko/lakota.html 

From the Anthropology department of Le Moyne College of Central New York, 
the most inclusive reference page for Dakota Sioux bibliographic information. 



< 6 > 

Legends of the miehtv Sioux . Chicago: A. Whitman, 1941. 

970.6 W939L PCL Stacks 

An attempt is made here to present a collection of the most interesting and most 
important stories of the Sioux. Young readers should enjoy the simple text and 
large print. 




17 



329 



<7> 

Standing Bear, Luther. Stories of the Sioux . Boston; Houghton Mifflin, 1934. 
970.6 ST24S PCL Stacks 

This is a collection of twenty stories told by the older tribe members to the 
younger ones. Intended for a juvenile audience with illustrations featured 
throughout the book. 



LaPointe, James. Legends of the Lakota . San Francisco: Indian Historian Press, 1976. 
E 99 D1 L36 PCL Stacks 

A collection of twenty descriptive and enchanting stories told by the author as he 
remembers them from his childhood. 



<9> 

The Lakota Creation Myth. 

http://www.sju.edu/~dcarpent/1141/Lakota/CreationMyth.html 

A general overview of the Lakota beliefs and how it all started, according to 
Sioux legend. 



< 10 > 

Highwater, Jamake. Eves of darkness, a novel . New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard 
Books, 1985. 

PZ 7 H5443 EY 1 985 Youth Collection PCL Stacks 6C 
A Santee Sioux Indian named Yesa, after being taken at age seventeen to live 
among white men, becomes a doctor and then returns to the reservation to live. 



< 11 > 

Bennett, James. Dakota dream . New York: Scholastic Inc., 1994. 

PZ 7 B43989 DAK 1994 Youth Collection PCL Stacks 6C 
After being shuttled between foster homes and institutions for most of his life, 
fifteen-year-old Floyd Rayfield escapes from a mental institution to a Sioux 
reservation, desperately seeking a family and a home. 



< 12 > 

Sioux Heritage 

http://www.lakhota.com/default.htm 

An excellent source for actually learning the "Lakhota" language, it includes an 
online language course. 



<13> 

Sota Iva Ye Yapi 

http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/earthsky/sotahome.htm 

The online newspaper of the Sisseton-Wahpeton Sioux Tribe featuring local news 
in both Dakota and English. 




18 



<14> 

Red Cloud School . 

http://vsww.redcloudschool.com/ 

Operated by the Jesuits since 1 889, this is the Red Cloud School's official home 
page. 



<15> 

Pine Ridge High School . 

http://shaman.unm.edu:80/schools/prhs/prhs.htm 

Located in the administrative center of the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, here is 
Pine Ridge High School's web page stating its policies and goals. 



Sources not listed on the Pathfinder 



<16> 

American Indian Culture Research Center. 

http://vsww.bluecloud.org/dakota.html 

Topics of interest at this wed site include culture, education, myths and story 
telling, spiritual heritage, Indian colleges, crafts and gifts and more. 



<17> 

The Great Sioux Nation. 

http://vsww.state.sd.us/state/executive/tourism/sioux/sninap.htm 

This wed site features points of interest in the Sioux Nation, such as tribal 
headquarters and sacred lands. 

<18> 

Katz, Bill. Magazines: Indian Country Today. Library Journal . 1 18 (7), Apr. 15, 1993. 
p. 134. 

Review of Indian Country Today, the largest Native American-owned weekly in 
the US. It encompasses a national coverage of news but focuses on traditional 
Lakota-Sioux interests. 

<19> 

Lincoln, Bruce. A Lakota Sun Dance and the problematics of sociocosmic reunion. 
History of Religions . 34(1), Aug. 1994. p. 1-14. 

The Sun Dance of the Lakota Sioux, an awaited four-day event in late July or 
early August, is examined. 



331 



< 20 > 

Netscape: Style and Writing Manuals 

http://www.lrc.edu/www/library/SWmanual.htm 

Style manual for print and electronic formats. 

< 21 > 

Young Bear, Severt, and R. D. Theisz. Standing in the light: a Lakota wav of seeing. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1994. 

E 99 D1 Y688 1994 PCL Stacks 

A Dakota Indian family traces and examines its history, philosophy, and religious 
rites. 

< 22 > 

Dudley, Joseph Iron Eye. Choteau Creek: a Sioux reminiscence . Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1992 
E 99 Y25 D833 1992 PCL Stacks 

This is a story of the author's upbringing by his maternal grandparents. He learns 
the social, cultural, and spiritual values of the Dakota way of life. 




<23> 

Doll, Don. Vision quest: men, women, and sacred sites of the Sioux Nation . 

New York: Crown Publishers, 1994. 

E 99 D 1 D65 1994 PCL Stacks 

This beautifully photographed album portrays Lakota, Dakota and Nakota 
prominent figures in their communities. 

<24> 

Erdoes, Richard. Crvine for a dream : the world through native American eves . 

Santa Fe, N.M.: Bear & Co., 1 990. 

E 99 T34 E73 1990 PCL Stacks 

This pictorial montage depicts the world as seen through various Indian personal 
experiences. 

<25> 

Paige, Harry W. Songs of the Teton Sioux . Los Angeles: Westemlore Press, 1970. 
970.1 PI 52S PCL Stacks 

The origins and methods of Indian poetry are investigated in this scholarly work. 
The songs of the Teton constitute its primary subject matter. 

<26> 

Powers, William K. Sacred language : the nature of supernatural discourse in Lakota . 
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1986. 

E 99 D1 P83 1986 PCL Stacks 

Essays on Lakota religion and descriptions of the religious rituals fill this book 

20 



332 



Arden Harvey. Nnhie Red Man : T .^kota Wisdomkeeper Mathew 
’ Hillsboro, Ore.: Beyond Words Publishing, 1994. 

E 99 T34 N635 1994 PCL Stacks 

This is a collection of Indian prose and poetry. 



<28> 

Readers Ah«;trar.ts - Web Access. , . . .u. i 

Indexes and abstracts a core lisi of popular penodicals published in the United 
States and Canada; it also cites book reviews. Current articles can be accessed 
with Dakota a subject search. 



Attracts . [CD-ROM] H.W^ WJson Company. 

Contains citations to articles and book reviews in over 330 penodicals. Contains 
citations on the dispute between the Sioux and the U.S. government over the 
Sioux sacred lands. 




21 



333 



Lakota Sioux Pathfinder 



Welcome! Or as they say in Lakota -- Hau, Mitakuyepi! (Greetings, Friend!) 

The Sioux, also called Dakota, Lakota, or Nakota are a North American Plains Indian 
people, of Siouan linguistic stock. It is customary to identify tribes on the basis of the 
native languages spoken by them. The name Dakota means "allies" or ' friends . The 
name Sioux, an abbreviation of Nadouessioux means "snakes" or "enemies", a name 
originally applied to them by their rivals, the Ojibwa. There are three main divisions of 
the Sioux: Santee, Yankton, and Teton, calling themselves, respectively, Dakota, Nakota, 
and Lakota. This pathfinder was prepared at the Perry-Castaneda Library at the 
University of Texas at Austin by Timothy Bullard; hopefully the information given here 
will help readers at other libraries too. 

/VVWWWWVWWWWWWWWWVAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA/ 

The first step in becoming acquainted with the Lakota Sioux culture is to search 
under Sioux Indians in an encyclopedia like: 

The World Book encyclopedia . Chicago: World Book, Inc., 1989. 

AE 5 W55 1989 Youth Collection PCL Stacks 6C 



If you prefer using the Internet, try typing the word Sioux into the search engine for 
the online encyclopedia. 

Britaimica Online . 

http://www.eb.com: 1 80/ 



To find works about the Sioux and its various tribes, do a subject search (s Dakota 
Indians) on your OP AC or card catalog. If you received to many records, tiy 
narrowing the topic by tribe and resubmit your search (s Santee Indians or Teton 
Indians or Yankton Indians). If the initial search produced to few records, tiy 
broadening your search (s Indians of North America-Great Plains) 



A short cut to finding books about the Sioux is to go directly to their locations in the 
library stacks. Look under the call numbers 970.1, 970.3, and 970.6 
If your library uses the Library of Congress classification then search under E99D1, 
E99Y25, and E99T34. 




Where could you find a tribal newspaper? Examine: 

Sotalva Ye Yapi 

http://ourworld.conipLiserve.com/homepages/earthsky/sotahome.htm 



22 



334 



To find more about the history of the Sioux nation, look at these sources. 

Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk. The Sioux . New York; Holiday House, 1993. 

' E 99 D1 S6277 1993 Youth Collection PCL Stacks 6C 
Ewers, John C. Teton Dakota. Ethnology and History . Berkeley; U.S. National 

Park Service, 1938. 

970.3 Un3t 1938 
T.akota Wowaoi Qti Kin. 

http;//maple.lemoyne.edu/~bucko/lakota.html 



If you are interested in Sioux myths and legends investigate; 

Legends of the mighty Sioux . Chicago; A. Whitman, 1941. 

970.6 W939L PCL Stacks 

Standing Bear, Luther. Stories of the Sioux . Boston; Houghton Mifflin, 1934. 
970.6 ST24S PCL Stacks 

LaPointe, James. Legends of the Lakota . San Francisco; Indian Historian Press, 
1976. 

E 99 D1 L36 PCL Stacks 
The T.akota Creation Myth. 

http;//www.sju.edu/~<icarpent/1141/Lakota/CreationMyth.html 



For literature with Sioux characters, check out these books: 

Highwater, Jamake. Eves of darkness, a novel . New York; Lothrop, Lee & 

Shepard Books, 1985. 

PZ 7 H5443 EY 1985 Youth Collection PCL Stacks 6C 
Bennett, James. Dakota dream . New York; Scholastic Inc., 1994. 

PZ 7 B43989 DAK 1994 Youth Collection PCL Stacks 6C 



If you are interested in learning the Lakota language, then investigate: 

Sioux Heritage 

http;//www.lakhota.com/default.htm 



Want to see what some high schools are doing on the Internet? Check out. 

Red Cloud School . 

http;//www.redcloudschool.com/ 

Pine Ridge High School . 

http;//shaman.unm.edu;80/schools/prhs/prhs.htm 

AAAA 

FOR MORE INFORMATION OR ASSISTANCE - ASK A REFERENCE 

LIBRARIAN 



O 

ERIC 



23 



335 



Dakota in Minnesota 



A pathfinder designed to aid researchers in finding information about Dakota 

people living in Minnesota; 

To get general information and names of Sioux tribes that live in Minnesota, use 
dictionaries and encyclopedias. 

Leitch, Barbara A. Concise Dictionary of Indian Tribes of North America. 

Algonac, MI; Reference Publishers, Inc, 1979. 

Walsman, Carl. Encyclopedia of Native American Tribes. New York: Facts 
on File, 1988. 

Use directories to locate information on associations, museums, and libraries. 

Klein, Barry T. Reference Encyclopedia of American Indians. West Nyack, NY: 
Todd Publication, 1995. 

Native American Directory. San Carlos, AZ: National American Cooperative, 
1982. 



To find in depth coverage of Dakota in Minnesota find books by searching the card 
catalog using the terms Indians of North America— Minnesota, Dakota— Minnesota, or the 
spedfic names of Sioux tribes in Nfiimesota, such as Santee, Mdewakantonwan, and 
Wahpetons. 

Landes, Ruth. The Mystic Lake Sioux. Madison: University of Wisconsin, 1968. 
Meyer, Roy W. History of the Santee Sioux. Lincoln : University of Nebraska, 
1993. 




24 



336 



For detailed lists of sources available on Sioux in general, consult bibliographies. 

Marken, Jack W. and Herbert T. Hoover. Bibliography of the Sioux. Metuchen, 
NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1980. 

Hoover, Herbert. The Sioux: A Critical Bibliography. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1979. 

To find current information, use indexes to locate journal articles and government 
information. 

Anthropological Literatre.Ca.mbndg,Q, MA: Tozzer Library, Harvard, 1984- . 
Monthly Catalog of United States Government Publications. Washington, D.C. : 
U.S.G.P:0., 1951- . 

Use the World Wde Web to locate Internet information on Dakota in Minnesota. 

Great Lakes Regional American buiian NeWork. 

Address: http://www.cic.net/glrain/— 

A Guide to the Great Sioux Nation . 

Address:http://www.state.sd.us/state/executive/tourism/sioux/sioux.html 

For more information on Dakota Sioux in the state, contact oi^anizations in Minnesota. 
Lower Sioux Commuraty Council Morton, MN 56270 (507)697-6416 
Upper Sioux Board of Trustees Granite Falls, MN 56241 (612)564-4504 
Minnesota Historical Society 345 Kellogg Blvd. W., St. Paul, MN 55102-906 

For additional assistance, please ask a librarian 




25 



337 



Introduction to the Maori Culture: 
A Pathfinder 



Candice Weaver 

Information Resources in the Social Sciences 
LIS 382L.3 
3 December 1997 




26 



338 



Preface 

In the years between 800 and 900 A.D., the Maori people migrated by 
canoe to the islands they called “Aotearoa.” They brought with them a rich 
culture which flourished in their new home. In 1642, the first Europeans 
arrived, and from then on the history of the Maori is intertwined with the history 
of the pakeha (whites) in their country. The British felt it urgent to stake claim 
to the land before other Europeans could, and in 1840 pressed Maori chiefs to 
sign the Treaty of Waitangi. The intent of the British in this exchange of land for 
sovereignty was misrepresented because of translation errors, and soon the Maori 
were a “minority” (in status, not in number) within the modem state of New 
Zealand. Since that time, the Maori have stmggled to define themselves and their 
culture in the context of a white-dominated New Zealand. 

In 1999, Maori and aboriginal librarians will host a conference for 
indigenous librarians, to be held in New Zealand. This conference is sponsored 
by Te Ropu Whakahau, the Maori Library and Information Workers Association, 
and the Aboriginal/Torres Strait Islander Library Resources Network 
(ATSILAN). Members of the American Indian Library Association (AILA) will 
be participating in the conference, and this pathfinder provides sources that will 
aid participants in understanding issues in Pacific indigenous librarianship which 
will be addressed during the conference, including the issues of cultural 
misappropriation and intellectual property. AILA members want a basic 
introduction to the Maori culture, including Maori language, mythology, history, 
and current affairs. These topics are covered in this pathfinder, and AILA 
participants will be able to draw from these sources in establishing a general 




27 



339 



familiarity with the Maori culture, as it has existed in the past and how it survives 
today. 

I began to select sources for the pathfinder by searching UTCAT, the 
online catalog of the University of Texas at Austin, as well as OCLC WorldCat. 
For both, I used the Library of Congress subject heading; “Maori (New Zealand 
people).” I located a large number of books at UT that I examined in detail; I 
found many others cataloged by the Library of Congress, and included those I 
could not examine in a supplementary note to the bibliography. The annotated 
bibliography consists not only of books, but also included one major motion 
picture release on video. I wanted to include reference works instead of 
monographs, whenever possible; fortunately, there has been a fair amount of 
recent publishing activity on Maori subjects, by Maori publishers as well as 
others. 

Next, I searched the World Wide Web, beginning with Yahoo!. I used the 
word “Maori” as a search term. I located “Maori.Com,” a site whose links 
enabled me to find other quality Web sites, including an English-Maori online 
dictionary and a monthly newsletter. These sources are included to supplement 
the print materials; most of the information is available in print, but those 
participants with Internet access may find the Web sites more current. They may 
also use the general ‘links’ pages to find specific topics of interest to them. 

For both print and non-print materials, I included items that provide an 
introduction to the Maori culture, but also lead the user to further study. Since 
the target audience for this pathfinder consists of information professionals, their 
skills will serve them well in researching the Maori. 




28 



340 



Sources'^ 



1. Barlow, Qeve. Tikanga Whakaaro: Key Concepts in Maori Culture . Auckland: 

Oxford U. Press, 1991. ISBN 0-19-558212-8. 

Seventy Maori cultural terms are explained in both Maori and English. 

Entries include a definition of the term and its significance in Maori tradition and 
ritual. 

2. "Books Pasifika" 1997. http://www.ak.planet.gen.nz/pasifika/index.html (2 Dec. 

1997). 

Books Pasifika is a bookseller and publishing house specializing in Pacific 
Islands, Maori, and New Zealand literature since 1976. One can e-mail with 
inquiries on a particular subject area or author, and in return Books Pasifika will e- 
mail a list of titles, with abstracts and price information. Ordering may be done by e- 
mail or fax. Discounts are available for libraries, schools, and government agencies. 

3. Binney, Judith and Gillian Chaplin. N ga Morehu: The Survivors . Auckland: 

Oxford U. Press, 1986. ISBN 0-19-558135-0. 

Nga Morehu is a collection of life histories. The eight women whose lives 
are profiled in this book are related in different ways to Ringatu, a Maori religious 
movement. Their personal stories combine to form a portrait of Te Kooti, the 
leader of this group, and the path of Maori religious history. The role of women in 
transmitting history is emphasized. Includes an extensive glossary and references. 



* GihaLdi, Joseph. MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers . 4th ed. NY: ML A, 1995. 

^ Wagner, K. "Guide for Citing Electronic Information/' Aug. 1995. 

http:/ /www.wilpaterson.edu/wpcpages/library/citing.htm (17 November 1997). 




29 



341 



4. Blythe, Martin. Naming The Other: Images of the Maori in New Zealand Film 

and Television . Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow, 1994. ISBN 0-8108-2741-7. 

The essays in this volume discuss films and television programs as allegories 
of the Maori historical and cultural experience. Materials dted are reviewed and 
analyzed for their representations of power dynamics in New Zealand. 

5. Cox, Lindsay. Kotahitanga: The Search For Maori Political Unity. Auckland: 

Oxford U. Press, 1993. ISBN 019-558-280-2. 

Cox explores the recent movements towards collective Maori sovereignty. 
This book, influenced by the formation and work of the National Maori Congress, 
includes the history of these movements and their common themes. 

6. King, Michael. Maori: A Photographic and Social History. Auckland: 

Heinemann Reed, 1984. ISBN 0-7900-0094-6. 

With this work. King provides a look at Maori experience from the 
perspective of photography as a social catalyst. Europeans began photographing the 
Maori in the late 1850s, and King uses photographs and text to explore Maori 
attitudes towards the process and the effects it had on the Maori. 

7. "Learn Maori Language." 1996. http://lc.b5a1h.edu/Maori/lml.html (2 Dec. 1997). 

A friendly, easy-to-use site, "Learn Maori Language" is a series of 13 lessons 
designed to provide an introduction to Maori. Lesson topics include pronunciation, 
greetings, numbers, and other subjects of interest to the beginner. 

8. MacDonald, Robert. The Fifth Wind: New Zealand and the Legacy of a 

Turbulent Past . London: Bloomsbury, 1989. ISBN 0-7475-0356-7. 

The author, a pakeha, writes of his experience accompanying yotmg Maori 




30 



342 



militants and tribal elders on their 1984 march to Waitangi. Their goal: to draw 
attention to the government's failure to honor the conditions of the 1840 treaty. An 
interesting biographical perspective on modem Maori political activity. 

9. "Maori Organisations in New Zealand." 1997. http://www.ma 0 ri. 0 rg.n 2 / (2 Dec. 

1997). 

This website hosts a variety of groups, including those promoting carving, the 
performing arts, language, hxii (gatherings), and myths. Also includes links to other 
Maori sites. This site is searchable. 

10. Metge, Joan. The Maoris of New Zealand: Rautahi . London: Routledge & 

Kegan Paul, 1976. ISBN 0-7100-8352-1. 

This work is an effective, if slightly dated, overview of Maori society. The 
first chapters give a brief history of Maori settlement in New Zealand, relationships 
with the British, and basic concepts in Maori culture. With this background in 
place, the author's primary goal is to address issues in Maori society and culture 
today, including land, kinship, education, and leadership. A glossary and extensive 
bibliography are included. 

11. "Nga Korero o Te Wa." November 1997. http://webnz.com/tekorero/ 

korero-pl.html (18 Nov. 1997). 

This site presents back issues of N ga Korero o Te Wa. "a monthly summary of 
Maori news and views from throughout Aotearoa." Subject areas include 
education, politics, business, arts, health, and race relations. Issues from 1995- 
present are provided, along with hard-copy subscription information. Reading Nga 
Korero o Te Wa is an excellent method of following current Maori issues. 




31 



343 



12. "Ngata-Base: The H.M. Ngata English-Maori Dictionary Online." 1997. 

http:/ / www.leamingmedia.co.nz/nz/nd/ndindex.htm (2 Dec. 1997). 

This is the online version of a comprehensive English-Maori/ Maori-English 
dictionary with the goal of demonstrating Maori language in use, rather than 
merely translating words. It is intended for those learning the Maori language, 
especially classroom-based learning, but it is also valuable for those already familiar 
with the Maori language. 

13. Once Were Warriors . Dir. Lee Tamahori. Perf. Rena Owen, Temuera Morrison. 

1994. Videocassette. New Line, 1995. 

This powerful movie depicts the troubles of the urban Maori. A family's 
tragedy serves as an allegory for those Maori who have lost touch with their past. 
Based on the novel by Alan Duff. 

14. Orbell, Margaret Rose. The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Maori Myth and Legend . 

Sydney: U. of New South Wales Press, 1996. ISBN 0-908812-45-0. 

This work is a comprehensive reference tool for exploring the rich body of 
Maori myth. Includes illustrations and photographs. Entries range in length from 
several paragraphs to a few pages. The encyclopedia is well-indexed and documents 
sources from which entry information has been taken. 

15. Orbell, Margaret. The Natural World of the Maori . Auckland: David Bateman, 

1985. ISBN 0-908610-30-0. 

This is a beautiful book of (mostly) color photographs of the land, animals, 
and environment of Aotearoa. The text highlights the relationship between Maori 
culture and this environment. Includes maps, bibliographical references, and a 
glossary. 



ERIC 



32 



344 



16. Puna Wairere: Essays by Maori . Wellington, N.Z.: New Zealand Planning 

Council, 1990. ISBN 0-908601-72-7. 

This collection of essays provides Maori perspectives on sovereignty and 
cultural issues. Published by the government, it reflects the desire of the Planning 
Council to "incorporate a Maori perspective in all [its] work." Titles include: 

"Maori language today," "Maori women reclaiming autonomy," and "Maori 
survival in the 1990s." Contributors include lawyers, educators, and other Maori in 
public roles. 

17. Salmond, Aime. Two Worlds: First Meetings Between Maori and Europeans, 

1642-1772 . Auckland: Viking /Penguin, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83298-7. 

Salmond attempts to bring together anthropology and history in this 
examination of the earliest encounters between Maori and pakeha. She explores the 
idea of "mirror-image ethnography - in which each side saw the other through a 
haze of their own reflections" and tests its limits. Includes an extensive 
bibliography and explanation of Salmond's research methodology. 



18. Stirling, Eruera (as told to Anne Salmond). Eruera: The Teachings of a Maori 

Elder . Wellington, N.Z.: Oxford U. Press, 1980. ISBN 0-19-558069-9. 

This book is a life history of Eruera Stirling, a Maori elder. Stirling's goal is to 
compile the traditional knowledge which he feels the yoimger generation needs to 
know. Salmond discusses her oral history and writing methodology in a closing 
chapter. Includes many photos and Maori text vvdth translation. 

19. Te Kanawa, Kiri. Land of the Long White Cloud: Maori Myths, Tales and 

Le gends . NY: Arcade Publishing, 1989. ISBN 1-55970-046-7. 

This collection of stories for children was written by Dame Kiri Te Kanawa, 




33 



world-famous opera singer. Beautifully illustrated by Michael Foreman, the book 
includes tales of creation, nature, monsters, and spirits. 



345 



20. Walker, Ranginui. Ka Whawhai Tonu Matou: Struggle Without End . 

Auckland: Penguin, 1990. ISBN 0-14-013240-6. 

Walker has written a history of New Zealand from a Maori perspective. It is 
intended for a New Zealand audience of both Maori and pakeha, but provides an 
interesting perspective even for those who are less familiar with the political 
enviromnent of Aotearoa. 



Titles not available for review: 



Mangan, Hinureina and Chris Szelely, comp. Te Reo Maori In Librarie s: A Maori 
T language Resource For Librarians . Wellington, NZ: Te Ropu Whakahau, 
1995. 

Menzies, Trixie Te Arama. He Wai: First Nation's Women's Writing. 

Auckland: Waiata Koa, 1996. 

Salmond, Anne. Hui: A Study of Maori Ceremonial Gatherings. Wellington, N.Z.: 
Reed, 1975. ISB]^ 0-589-00749-1. 




34 



346 



introduction to the A/I/40RI culture 

In the years between 800 and 900 A.D., the Maori people migrated by canoe to the islands they called 
“Aotearoa.” They brought with them a rich culture which flourished in their new home. In 1642, the first 
Europeans arrived, and from then on the history of the Maori is intertwined with the history of the pakeha 
(whites) in their country. The 1840 Treaty of Waitangi established the modern New Zealand state (and 
cemented the Maori place within it as one of minority status). Since then, the Maori have struggled to 
define themselves and their culture in the context of a white-dominated New Zealand. 

This pathfinder will point you to several valuable sources which may answer your questions about the Maori 
and their culture. For searching on your own, remember that the Library of Congress subject heading to use 
is “Maori (New Zealand people)”; others are structured like “Maori art.” 

For a basic oueruieiv of Maori culture, you might try the folloiving: 

Metge, Joan. The Maoris of New Zealand: Rautahi . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1976. 

ISBN 0-7100-8352-1. 

Barlow, Cleve. Tikanoa Whakaaro: Key Concepts in Maori Culture . Auckland: Oxford U. Press, 1991. 

ISBN 0-19-558212-8. 



These sources examine the history and government of Maori Neuv Zealand: 

Salmond, Anne. Tyyo Worlds: First Meetings Between Maori and Europeans. 1642-1772 . Auckland: 
Viking/Penguin, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83298-7. 

King, Michael. Maori: A Photographic and Social; History . Auckland: Heinemann Reed, 1984. 

ISBN 0-7900-0094-6. 

Walker, Ranginui. Ka Wfiawhai Tonu Matou: Struggle Without End . Auckland: Penguin, 1990. 

ISBN 0-14-013240-6. 

Cox, Lindsay. Kotahitanga: The Search For Maori Political Unity . Auckland: Oxford U. Press, 1993. 
ISBN 019-558-280-2. 



The Maori language remains a vital force In Aotearoa. In your reading you will encounter It 
frequently. These sites can help you with the basics: 

“Learn Maori Language.” http://lc.byuh.edu/Maori/lmLhtml 

“Ngata-Base: The H.M. Ngata English-Maori Dictionary Online.” 
http://www.learningmedia.co.nz/nz/nd/ndindex.htm 




35 



347 



These works can provide a familiarity with Maori mythology, essential for understanding the 
Maori culture of yesterday and today: 

Orbell, Margaret Rose. The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Maori Myth and Legend . Sydney: U. of New South 
Wales Press, 1996. ISBN 0-90881245-0. 

Te Kanawa, Kiri. Land of the Long White Cloud: Maori Myths. Tales and Legends . NY: Arcade Publishing, 
1989. ISBN 1-55970-046-7. 



One of the best ways to encounter Maori culture is through stories about the Maori people, 
whether true life history or fiction: 

Binney. Judith and Gillian Chaplin. NoaMorehu: The Survivors . Auckland: Oxford U. Press, 1986. 

ISBN 0-19-558135-0. 

Stirling, Eruera (as told to Anne Salmond). Eruera: The Teachings of a Maori Elder . Wellington, N.Z.: Oxford 
U. Press, 1980. ISBN 0-19-558069-9. 

Once Were Warriors . (1994) Directed by Lee Tamahori. Available on videocassette from New Line Home 
Video, 1995. 



These sources can provide you with current Moor/ social and political opinion: 

Puna Wairere: Essays by Maori . Wellington, N.Z.: New Zealand Planning Council, 1990. 

ISBN 0-908601-72-7. 

“Nga Korero o Te Wa: A Monthly Summary of Maori News and Views From Throughout Aotearoa." 
http://webnz.com/tekorero/korero-p1.html 



These sources are a good introduction to the Maori culture, and can lead you on to other 
interesting materials. Enjoy your adventure into the Maori culture, and remember: 

Mauria ko oku painga, waiho ko oku wheruu. 

Take Lufiat is good in this, and leave the rest behind. 




JU 



Candice Weaver 
December 1997 



348 



INTRODUCTION TO THE NAVAJO CULTURE 
A PATHFINDER 



INFORMATION RESOURCES IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES 

(LIS 382L.3) 

FALL 1997 

INSTRUCTOR: PROFESSOR LORIENE ROY 



SUBMITTED BY: - 

JEFFREY A. SEWELL 
DECEMBER 3, 1997 




r> 



349 




INTRODUCTION 

The Navajo are the largest Indian tribe in the United States with an estimated 
population of over 225,000. As they settled in the desert Southwest, the Navajo came into 
contact with the Pueblos and adopted many of their customs. During this period, they 
acquired new farming techniques and learned to plant com, squash, and beans successfully. 
The name Navajo is actually a Tew?. Puebloan word that means "cultivated fields." 
Nevertheless, these Native Americans often refer to themselves as the Dine or the "People." 

Navajo country extends into parts of three states: Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah. 
Traditionally, the Navajo did not establish towns or villages but lived in semi-permanent 
camps near agricultural resources. Women cultivated the fields or herded sheep while the 
men hunted wild animals. Shelter for these Native Americans often meant residing in a 
"hogan" — a round domed house built of logs and adobe. To cure the sick among them, the 
Navajo developed elaborate ceremonies involving chants and sandpainting. The Navajo are 
also known for weaving rugs and blankets and for designing jewelry out of silver and 
turquoise. 

The overall scope of this pathfinder is to assist the user with finding information 
about the Navajo culture using resources available at a research or academic library. Many 
of the items can also be found in a public library or through an interlibrary loan service. 
Specifically, this pathfinder was prepared for the following schools: Dilkon Boarding 
School; Seba Dalkai Boarding School; Rock Point Community School; and Cottonwood 
Day School. All of these schools are participating in the Four Directions Program that 
integrates the teaching of Native American cultures with current technologies. 

When deciding on materials to add or exclude from the pathfinder, I focused 
primarily on sources like surveys and bibliographies that an educator might use for 
preparing a class. An equally important objective was to find books suitable for younger 
children. Generally speaking, people interested in this topic will want answers to the 
following questions: 



350 



1) What is the history of the Navajo tribe and how did their culture develop?; 

2) What are some of the important aspects of Navajo culture that make it unique?; 

3) What is present day life like for the Navajo -- are they able to maintain their 
native traditions in a modem society?; and 

4) Are there opportunities to visit the Navajo and experience their customs 
firsthand? 

I began looking for appropriate materials by conducting searches on UTCAT Plus, 
the electronic library catalog of The University of Texas at Austin. To locate items in 
UTCAT and other sources, I combined the subjects "Indians of North America" and 
"Navajo Indians" with these terms; "Art"; "Dances"; "Drama"; "Folklore"; "History"; 
"Juvenile Literature"; "Legends"; "Music"; "Mythology"; "Pictorial Works"; "Poetry"; and 
"Social Life and Customs." 

Next, to obtmn a better background for this topic matter, I looked for reference 
sources at the Perry-Castaneda Library by browsing the shelves. After finding some useful 
titles, I reviewed entries concerning the Navajo in specialized encyclopedias and dictionaries 
such as the Encyclopedia of North American Indians. Then, I scanned the Internet by using 
search engines like Yahoo! and Infoseek to find electronic resources. By inputting the terms 
"Native Americans" and "Navajo Indians," I retrieved relevant websites. 




r\ 






351 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Encyclopedias: 

1. Encyclopedia of North American Indians. New York: Houghton, 

Mifflin Company, 1996. 

Articles covering factual information on Native Americans can be found in the 
Encyclopedia of North American Indians. Indian social life and customs are analyzed in 
sufficient detail. There is a separate three page entry about the Navajos written by Rex Lee 
Tim, a member of the Navajo tribe. Features a general index. 

2. The Encyclopedia of Native America. New York: Viking, 1995. 

The Encyclopedia of Native America is a general reference source designed with older 
children and adolescents in mind. The first chapter provides an introductory background 
about North American Indians; subsequent chapters are organized by culture areas. For 
example, information concerning the Navajos is located in the section entitled "The 
Southwest." Articles are printed in large type face and include color photographs and 
drawings. An index and a list of additional readings appear at the end of the volume. 

3. Markowitz, Harvey, ed. Recufy Reference: American Indians. Vol2. 

Pasadena, C A; Salem Press, 1995. 

Recufy Reference: American Indians, a three volume set, contains data on a wide range of 
Native American topics. Articles are arranged alphabetically and often illustrated. Many of 
them conclude with cross-references and a bibliography. Volume 3 has a series of eight 
appendices and an index. A good source for background information on the Navajos. 

4. Ortiz, Alfonso, ed. Handbookof North American Indians: Southwest. Vol. 10. 

Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1983. 

This volume provides scholarly articles on the history and culture of Native Americans from 
the southwestern United States. Sixteen chapters deal specifically with the Navajo, 
covering subjects such as "Navajo Social Organi 2 :ations," "Navajo Ceremonial Systems," 
and "Navajo Arts and Crafts." Includes maps, illustrations, and a bibliography. 

Dictionaries: 

5. Dictionary of Indian Tribes of the Americas. 2nded. Vol. II. Newport Beach, CA: 

American Indian Publishers, 1993. 

The Dictionary of Indian Tribes of the Americas is a general reference work covering the 
native peoples of the Western Hemisphere. Bibliographical references follow most of the 
entries. This three volume set includes an extensive collection of maps and illustrations. 




40 



The article on the Navajo discusses many cultural issues: language, technology and arts, 
society and social relations, etc. 

General Histories and Surveys: 

6. Downs, James F. The Navajo. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1972. 

As part of the series "Case Studies in Cultural Anthropology," The Navajo explains to 
students the social structure and cultural values of these Native Americans. It focuses on 
the important role that sheepherding plays in the history of the Navajo along with other 
interesting aspects of the culture. The author provides a list of selected additional readings. 

7. Garbarino, Merwyn S. and Robert F. Sasso. Native American Heritage. Srded. 

Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1994. 

This book discusses, in broader terms, the socio-cultural development of North American 
Indians. Native American tribes are first analyzed in terms of "culture areas." Another 
section looks at the similarities of cultural traits. Includes a glossary, a list of films and 
\ddeos about Native American cultures, and charts that depict the characteristics and 
languages of Indian tribes. Specific information concerning the Navajo can be found in the 
chapter "The Great Basin and the Southwest." 

8. Kluckhohn, Clyde and Dorothea Leighton. The Navaho. Rev. ed. Cambridge, MA: 

Harvard University Press, 1974. 

Clyde Kluckhohn devoted much of his life to studying Native Americans. As a popular 
survey, this source offers a good background into the values and world view of the Navajo 
through 1946. It is written at a level for older students to comprehend. 

9. Underhill, Ruth M. TheNavaJos. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1956. 

Considered by many scholars the "definitive source" about the Navajo people. Its principal 
value lies in recounting the history and culture of the Navajos from their beginnings in the 
Southwest until approximately 1950. The book is based largely on interviews and 
reservation records. Photographs and maps highlight the text. 

Bibliographies: 

10. Hirschfelder, Arlene B., May Gloyne Byler, and Michael A. Dorris. Guide to Research 

on North American Indians. Chicago, IL: American Library Association, 1983. 

Although dated, the Guide to Research on North American Indians is still a good resource 
to consult when beginning a search for materials about Native Americans. This work is 
organized under four broad subject headings: Introductory Material; History and Historical 
Sources; Economic and Social Aspects; and Religion, Arts, and Literature. Subject 



353 



headings are further divided into chapters that deal with specific topics. Items related to 
each topic are then listed by geographic areas; i.e., Navajo sources are mentioned under the 
heading "Southwest." Concludes wth author-title and subject indexes. 

11. Iverson, Peter. TheNavajos: A Critical Bibliography. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 

University Press, 1976. 

This bibliography is part of a series produced by the Newberry Library Center for the 
History of the American Indian. It recommends a list of works for the beginning reader and 
for inclusion in a basic library collection. Materials suitable for students are indicated 
throughout. One hundred eighty-nine sources are cited. 

Abstracts and Indexes: 

12. Abstracts in Anthropology. Amityville, NY: Baywood, 1970- . 8 issues/yr. 

This research tool summarizes books, articles, and conference papers in four subject areas: 
archaeology, linguistics, cultural anthropology, and physical anthropology. It features 
author and subject indexes. Information about the Navajo Indians can be located by using 
the terms "Native American" and "Navajo." 

13. Anthropological Literature. Pleasantville, NY: Redgrave, 1979-1983; Cambridge, 

MA: Harvard University, Tozzer Library, 1984- . Quarterly. 

Anthropological Literature is an author and subject index for periodical articles and essays 
in the fields of anthropology, archaeology, and linguistics. Related disciplines such as 
Wstory, sociology, and geography are also indexed. This resource is available in print and 
electronic versions. To find articles on the Navajos, search under the headings "Indians of 
North America," and "Navajo Indians." 

Periodicals and Journals: 

14. American Anthropologist. Arlington, VA: Anthropological Association, 1888- . 

Quarterly. 

American Anthropologist is known for its scholarly articles and essays covering diverse 
subjects in the field of anthropology. Brief summaries of featured articles appear at the 
beginning of each issue. Includes reviews of current films and books. This journal is 
indexed or abstracted in Abstracts of Anthropology, Anthropological Literature, Social 
Science Citation Index, and other similar tools. Recent case studies and reports on the 
Navajo. 




42 



354 



15. Atnerican Indian Culture and Research Journal. Los Angeles, C A: American Indian 

Studies Center (University of California, Los Angeles), 1974- . Quarterly. 

The American Indian Culture and Research Journal is a scholarly publication that provides 
interdisciplinary articles and essays about Native Americans and their way of life. Articles 
are indexed in Sociological Abstracts, Current Index to Journals in EJiucation, Arts & 
Humanities Citation Index, and Social Sciences Index. Contains a large number of book 
reviews about Native American subjects. 

16. American Indian Quarterly. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1974- . 

Quarterly. 

American Indian Quarterly is a multidisciplinary journal of history, anthropology, literature 
and the arts. It is available in print and electronic formats. Includes articles on Native 
American topics in addition to book reviews. 

17. Annual Review of Anthropology. Palo Alto, C A: Annual Reviews, 1972- . Annual. 

This publication contains articles on five major topics within anthropology: archaeology, 
biological anthropology, linguistics, regional studies, and sociocultural anthropology. Most 
authors are invited to submit their work by the editorial committee which is composed of 
scholars from major universities — Stanford, Michigan, NYU, etc. Each volume has author 
and subject indexes as well as cumulative indexes of contributing authors and titles. Search 
terms to use: "Native Americans" and "Navajo." 

18. Cultural Anthropology: Arlington, VA: American Anthropological Association, 

1986- . Quarterly. 

This is the official journal of the Society for Cultural Anthropology. As the title suggests, it 
reproduces essays or reports that deal exclusively with cultural anthropology. It can be 
searched in major humanities or social science indexes. 

Internet Resources: 

19. Alta Vista, http://www.altavista.digital.com/ 

Alta Vista permits both simple and advanced searches. It ranks results by the number of 
matching words and date controls. Searches web pages and news groups. 

"Navajo Nation — Department of Tourism." 
http://www.atiin.com/navajolandAndex.html 

(November 1997) 

This is an excellent site for those interested in visiting "Navajo Country." One page gives a 
brief overview of Navajo culture and history. Other links include a list of attractions and a 




43 



355 



calendar of upcoming events. Features photographs of Navajo individuals at work and 
spectacular views of the Southwest region. 

20. Infoseek. http://www.infoseek.com/ 

Infoseek offers both a free search option of general information and a fee-based service for 
more extensive and detailed material. It is a large database consisting of indexes from web 
pages, news groups, and computer periodicals. Allows "natural language" searching. 

"Southwest Tribes and Reservations Guide" 

(Encyclopedia of Southwest Native American Indian Tribes and Reservations.) 
http ’.//www. t hememall . com/T ribes/indians. html-ssi 
(November 1997) 

This website offers introductory information on Indian tribes located in the American 
Southwest. The creators actively solicit contributions from Native Americans. A separate 
page specifically discusses the Navajo. Provides opportunities to participate in Internet 
discussion groups. 

21. Yahoo!, http://www.yahoo.com/ 

Yahoo! is one of the best and well-known online collections of Internet resources. The 
home page includes a list of broad, subject areas to aid users with refining their searches. 
Individuals can re-execute queries by "linking" to other search engines. 

"Welcome to the Navajo Nation." 
http ://ccry stal. ncc. cc. nm. us/~vino/NN 
(November 1997) 

This is the "official website" for the Navajo people. It is a good source for directory 
information — addresses, telephone numbers, committee memberships. There is a link to a 
detailed map of the Navajo reservation. Another link gives a listing of Navajo books, 
publications, and videos. 

Children's Resources: 

22. Gridley, Marion E. Indian Nations: The Story of the Navajo. New York, NY: 

G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1971. 

Indian Nations: The Story of the Navajo is a general introduction about the Navajo people 
for younger children. This book briefly describes Navajo legends, customs, and history. 
One chapter mentions famous tribal members. 




356 



23. Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk. The Navajos. New York, NY: Holiday House, 1993. 

Written for elementary students, The Navajos provides information on the tribe's history, 
culture, and present day life. A map of the Four Comers Area shows the approximate 
location of the Navajo Nation. Richly illustrated. 

24. Thomson, Peggy. Katie Henio: Navajo Sheepherder. New York, NY: Cobblehill 

Books/Dutton, 1995. 

Katie Henio: Navajo Sheepherder is a biographical account of a Native American 
grandmother who raises sheep and weaves rugs. Through her life experiences, children are 
introduced to basic Navajo customs and traditions. Color photographs show Katie 
weaving, gardening, and spending time with her family. 

Style Manual: 

Gibaldi, Joseph. MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers. 4th ed. New York: 

The Modem Language Association of America, 1995. 







357 



INTRODUCTION TO THE NAVAJO CULTURE 
A PATHFINDER 

Prepared by: Jeffrey A. Sewell 



The Navajo are the largest Indian tribe in the United States. Although these Native 
Americans refer to themselves as the Dine or the "People," they acquired the name Navajo 
(which means "cultivated fields") because of their superior farming methods. Other 
important elements of Navajo culture include; herding sheep, ceremonial sandpainting, 
weaving, and designing Jewelry. This pathfinder can assist you in finding resources on this 
subject. 



=> FIRST, begin looking for reference books and other resources by examining your 
library's card catalog or computer catalog. Combine the subject "Indians of 
North America" or "Navajo Indians" with the following terms; 

Art Folklore Legends Pictorial Works 

Dances Histoiy Music Poetiy 

Drama Juvenile Literature Mythology Social Life and Customs 

=» SECOND, consult encyclopedias and specialized dictionaries for general 
information on the Navajo people. 

Encyclopedia of North American Indicms. New York: Houghton, 

Mifflin Company, 1996. 

Brief, factual articles about the Navajos and Native American social customs. 

Dictionary of Indian Tribes of the Americas. 2nd ed. Vol. II. Newport Beach, 
CA; American Indian Publishers, 1993. 

The section on the Navajo discusses many cultural issues. 

=> THIRD, study general histories and surveys for more in-depth knowledge about 
Navajo culture. 

Garbarino, Merwyn S. and Robert F. Sasso. Native American Heritage. 3rd ed. 

Prospect Heights, IL; Waveland Press, 1994. 

Specific information about the Navajo can be found in the chapter "The Great Basin 
and the Southwest." 

Underhill, Ruth M. The Navajos. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 
1956. 

Examines the histoiy and culture of the Navajo people from their beginnings until 
approximately 1950. 



O 

ERIC 



46 



358 



=> FOURTH, expand your research on this topic by reviewing bibliographies. 

Iverson, Peter. The Navajos: A Critical Bibliography. Bloomington, IN; Indiana 
University Press, 1976. 

Recommends works for inclusion in a basic library collection and materials suitable 
for students. 

=> FIFTH, refine your understanding of this subject and keep informed of current 
developments by reading articles in specialized journals. 

American Indian Culture and Research Journal. Los Angeles, C A: American 
Indian Studies Center (University of California, Los Angeles), 1974- . 
Quarterly. 

Interdisciplinary articles and essays concerning Native American cultures. 

=> SIXTH, be sure to scan the Internet for additional data using search engines like 
Yahoo! and Infoseek. Websites can be retrieved by inputting terms such as 
"Native Americans" and "Navajo Indians." 

"Navajo Nation — Department of Tourism." 
http://www.atiin.eom/navajoland/index:html 
(November 1 997) 

Follow the links for a list of attractions and a calendar of upcoming events. 

"Welcome to the Navajo Nation." 
http://crystal.ncc.cc.nm.us/~vino/NN/ 

(November 1997) 

A good source for directory information such as addresses and telephone numbers. 

=> SEVENTH, if you are interested in teaching Navajo stories to children, locate and 
obtain the appropriate age-level materials. 

Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk. The Navajos. New York, NY: Holiday House, 
1993. 

Explains Navajo history, culture, and present day life to elementary students. 

Thomson, Peggy. Katie Henio: Navajo Sheepherder. New York, NY; Cobblehill 
Books/Dutton, 1995. 

Introduces children to basic Navajo customs and traditions through the life 
experiences of a Native American grandmother. 

FINALLY, if you need further assistance, remember to ask your librarian for 
help! 




47 



INFORMATION ON EARLY NAVAJO LEADERS IN THE 1800s 



Michelle Beattie 
LIS 382L3 
Dr. Loriene Roy 
Pathfinder 2 
3 December 1997 




360 



Introduction 

The Navajo (Dine) tribe in the Southwestern United States somehow survived the 
turbulent 1 800s, emerging to grow into the largest strongest tribe in the country. Obstacles faced 
by the Navajo in the nineteenth century included a massacre by United States government troops, 
annexation of the Navajo land by the United States from Mexico in 1846, and the Civil War. 

The Navajo weathered removal from their traditional lands in 1864, called "The Long Walk," 
and resettlement on a reservation in 1867. Who led the Navajo people through this treacherous 
century? 

In traditional social and political organization, the Navajo lived in small residence 
communities. Informal local groups formed around a local headman (naat’anii) for the purpose 
of dealing with outsiders, but no "tribal chief’ nor "Chief of the Navajo" presided over the entire 
Navajo people. Government officials mistakenly entered into treaties with these leaders thinking 
that they cemented the agreement of the entire Navajo people. This misconception led to 
distrust, occupation by military forces, and the aforementioned “resettlement." In the 1800s, 
excellent communicators and negotiators emerged as leaders to represent the Navajo in contact 
with the United States government. Cultural and artistic innovators are also recognized as 
leaders. 

To find information about Navajo leaders in the 1800s, researchers must face problems 
unique to Native American biography. Few biographies of native individuals exist. The 
biographies one can find are often repetitions of stories about the same few famous Native 
Americans. Researchers may also encounter difficulty establishing heritage, the custom of 
referring to one native individual by several names, and the inconsistent translation of names. 

This pathfinder is intended for use by participants of the Four Directions program and 
designed specifically for the kindergarten to eighth grade students and educators at the Dilcon, 
Cottonwood, and Seba Dalkai Boarding Schools. Some of the sources included in the 




49 



361 



bibliography and pathfinder are scholarly, such as the in-depth histories and the primary sources, 
and should be utilized by educators. Students should be able to use the general encyclopedias 
and the biographical encyclopedias. One section of the bibliography and pathfinder includes 
sources accessible to students, including a bibliography and two in-depth histories. 

The sources selected will answer the anticipated questions "what is a leader in the 
Navajo culture?" "what does a leader do?" "who were the major leaders of the Navajo in the 
1800s?" and "what is the historical context surrounding Navajo leaders in the 1800s?" To find 
materials to answer these questions, I began my search by reading articles about the Navajo in 
the general Native American encyclopedias such as American Indians and Handbook of North 
Americans. These sources gave the historical context of the 1 800s and outlined the Navajo 
territory. Reading about the political structure and the Navajo's loose definition of a leader based 
on ability to communicate with outsiders assisted the search process. Next, I looked through 
Native American and American biographical dictionaries, finding much pertinent material. Most 
of the dictionaries included indexes that listed individuals' names by tribal affiliation. 

A search of the online catalog of University of Texas at Austin libraries, using subject 
headings "Navajo Indians — Biography" and "American Indians — Biography" found no 
individual biographies (in fact, I have concluded that none exist). I looked through 
bibliographies and found Hoffman and Johnson's collection of Navajo biographies and the 
respected in-depth histories. Researchers will have to rely on these in-depth histories for the 
bulk of their specific biographical information. I selected only those histories that concentrated 
on political and military history and mentioned historical figures by name. I chose one primary 
source for inclusion in my bibliography because it is an impressive scholarly work that anyone 
researching the Navajo should explore and it has wonderful pictures of Navajo leaders. Web 
searches for Navajo biographical and historical material yielded no worthy sites. 




50 



362 



Annotated Bibliography^ 

General Native American Encyclopedias 

1 . Champagne, Duane. Native North America: Portrait of the Peoples. Detroit, MI: Visible 
Ink Press, 1994. 

An abridged version of the Native North American Almanacf this source covers native history 
and culture, protest movements, language, religion, health practices, art, literature, and media. 
The organization of this source is well suited for finding biographies of Navajo leaders and 
background information on the Navajo people. A chapter on “Native Peoples of the Southwest” 
includes a short description of the Navajo Nation and history. The chapter concludes with a 
collection of biographies of tribal leaders in the southwest region, including Barboncito, 
Manuelito, and Ganado Mucho (ca. 1809-1893). 



2. Markowitz, Harvey, ed. American Indians. Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, 1995. 

This three volume set offers well written articles on a wide range of topics including tribes, 
people, places, history, cultural traditions, and contemporary issues. An excellent article 
summarizes Navajo history and culture and gives further readings. Short biographical entries for 
Delgadito (fl. 1860s), Barboncito (ca. 1820-1871), Manuelito (ca. 1818-1984), and Henry Chee 
Dodge (1860-1947) give birth and death dates, variant names, historical significance, and 
drawings or photographs. 

3. Ortiz, Alfonso, ed. Handbook of North American Indians. Vol. 10, Southwest, 
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1983. 

Published by the Smithsonian, this highly regarded work includes lengthy articles providing 
background on the Navajos and their history. Important articles related to Navajo leaders in the 
1800s are: “Navajo Pre-History and History to 1850,” “Navajo History, 1850-1923,” and 
“Navajo Social Organization.” Navajo leaders are mentioned in context along with a few 
photographs. 



* Style Manual used in creating citations: Turabian, Kate. A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, 
and Dissertations, 6th edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996. 

^ Champagne, Duane. Native North American Almanac. Detroit, MI: Gale Research Inc., 1994. 




51 



363 



Native American and American Biographical Dictionaries 

4. CISCO, Biographical Dictionary of Indians of the Americas. Newport Beach, CA; 
American Indian Publishers, 1991. 

This two volume set contains hundreds of short biographies of native people of North and South 
America. Biographies include a photo of the subject, variant names, and further readings. A 
variant name index and index to tribes simplified searching. Fifty-nine biographical entries were 
listed in the Index to Tribes under Navajo; the source offers extensive coverage. 

5. Dockstader, Fredrick. Great North American Indians: Profiles in Life and Leadership. 
New York: Van Nostrand, 1977. 

This well respected work contains substantial (one to three pages) entries with photographs for 
individuals of native heritage who contributed to history. Cultural and artistic leaders 
accompany military and political leaders. A tribal listing shows nine entries under “Navajo” 
including Atsidi Sani (ca. 1830-1870), Barboncito, Henry Chee Dodge, Ganado Mucho, and 
Manuelito. 

6. Johansen, Bruce E. and Donald A. Grinde, Jr. The Encyclopedia of Native American 
Biography. New York: Henry Holt and Co., 1997. 

This excellent source includes both native and non-native peoples influential in Native American 
history. Short entries contain superior heritage, language, and variant name information along 
with further readings. Several less well known Navajo such as Armijo (fl. mid-1800s), Herrero 
Grande (fl. mid- 1800s), and Hosteen Klah (1867-1937) are covered. 

7. Malinowski, Sharon, ed. Notable Native Americans. New York: Gale Research, 1994. 

Malinowski writes 465 substantial (one to four pages) entries, including photographs, on notable 
Native Americans throughout history. Historical entries comprise thirty percent and 
contemporary or twentieth century individuals make up seventy percent of the entries. Signed 
narrative essays include name variants, photographs or illustrations, and a list of reference 
sources. The Index of Tribal Groups/Names points the reader to Navajo biographies, including 
Henry Chee Dodge, Barboncito, and Manuelito. 




52 



364 



8. Waldman, Carl, ed. Who Was Who in Native American History: Indians and Non- 
Indians for Early Contacts Through 1900. New York: Facts on File, 1990. 

Short entries include name variants and see references in a short description of pivotal events and 
influence in individual’s life. Included are non-natives involved in native history and individuals 
from the United States and Canada. An appendix lists biographical entries for Armijo, 
Barboncito, Delgadito, Henry Chee Dodge, Ganado Mucho, and Manueilto under “Navajo.” 



Native American Biographical Compilations (Monographs) 

9. Hoffman, Virginia and Broderick H. Johnson. Navajo Biographies. Rough Rock, AZ: 
Navajo Curriculum Press, 1974. 

Hoffman and Johnson’s work is cited in almost every biographical dictionary and has been 
reprinted several times. It is one of the few biographical monographs covering only Navajo 
individuals. This source includes lengthy articles on Narbona, Antonio Cebolla Sandoval, 
Zarcillos Largos, Manuelito, Barboncito, Ganado Mucho, Jesus Arviso, Henry Chee Dodge, and 
Sam Ahkeah. 

10. Moses, L. G. and Raymond Wilson, eds. Indian Lives: Essays on Nineteenth and 
Twentieth Century Native American Leaders. Albuquerque, NM: University of New 
Mexico Press, 1985. 

This sources offers seven essays on Native American leaders from many tribes, chosen because 
their lives illustrate the complicated state in which Native Americans live, balancing loyalties, 
history, and modernity. Articles include bibliographies and photographs. Henry Chee Dodge is 
the only Navajo included. 




b3 



365 



Navajo In-depth Histories 

1 1 . Frink, Maurice. Fort Defiance and the Navajos. Boulder, CO: Pruett Press, 1 968. 

Frink's book describes the events surrounding Fort Defiance, "the storm center of the Navajo 
Wars"^ and the United States Army fort built on the Navajo lands in 1851. Fort Defiance later 
became the government administrative headquarters and the site of the first day school for 
Navajo children in 1 869. Frink's book includes valuable information about leaders, including 
photographs and the role they played in historical events. 

12. McNitt, Frank. Navajo Wars: Military Campaigns, Slave Raids, and Reprisals. 
Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1972. 

McNitt recounts the conflicts between the Navajo and the Spanish, Mexican, and American 
disputants, starting with the first Spanish contact in 1541 up to 1861 when the American Civil 
War came to New Mexico. He describes the United States Army officers and their policies 
towards the Navajo. Navajo leaders are recognized and consistently referred to by name. 



13. Underhill, Ruth M. The Navajos. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1956. 

Underhill’s goal in The Navajos is to show the evolution of the Navajo people from nomads to 
pastorialists to “modem wage earners.” History in the 1800s is illustrated in detail with 
emphasis on the contributions of various Navajo leaders. The scholarly work is often quoted and 
referenced in encyclopedias and articles and called the "standard one volume history of the 
Navajos."" 



’ Frink, Maurice. Fort Defiance and the Navajos. Boulder, CO: Pruett Press, 1 968: 1 . 

Iverson, Peter. The Navajos: A Critical Bibliography. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1976: 
2 . 




54 



366 



Navajo and Native American Bibliographies 

14. Hirschfelder, Arlene B., Mary Gloyne Byler, and Michael A. Dorris. Guide to Research 
on North American Indians. Chicago: American Library Association, 1983. 

This guide to the literature on Native Americans for the general reader offers detailed 
descriptions of over 1,100 books, articles, government documents, and other written materials. 
The arrangement places entries into twenty-seven chapters under four broad subject headings, 
rather then by tribe. Several important Navajo-related works can be located using the index, 
looking under "Navajo" or the author/title index. 

15. Iverson, Peter. The Navajos: A Critical Bibliography. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 1976. 

This guide to reliable sources in the study ofNavajo history contains bibliographic essays and an 
alphabetic listing of items. The author denotes materials appropriate for secondary school 
students with an asterisk. Iverson points out the most important texts and identifies hard to 
locate, but valuable materials. 



Periodical Indexes 

16. America, History and Life. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. Database available on CD- 
ROM. 

An indexing and abstracting service covering Canadian and United States history, America, 
History and Life includes scholarly journals, book reviews, dissertations, and books. To search 
for biographical information on Navajo leaders on the CD-ROM version, try terms such as 
"Navajo," "leader," "history," or the name of the leader. Searching this database uncovered 
articles with titles such as "Gravestones for Ganado Mucho: A Contribution to Navajo 
Ethnohistory" from the journal Masterkey and "The Origins of the Navajo Indian Police" from 
Arizona and the West. 




Tz tr 



367 



Sources of Primary Materials 

1 7. Correll, J. Lee. Through White Men ’s Eyes A Contribution to Navajo History. A 

Chronological Record of the Navajo People from Earliest Times to the Treaty of June I, 
1868. Window Rock, AZ: Navajo Heritage Center, 1979. 

An expanded seven volume version of the Navajo Historical Calendar, published in 1968, this 
source is a collection of accounts of the daily events constituting Navajo history in the 1800s. 
Most of the historical documentation come from the United States government agents and 
soldiers on the Navajo land, allowing an interesting perspective on history. Sources include 
newspaper accounts, journals, treaties, and other government documents compiled with little 
comment or editing. Each volume is indexed; historians or students can look up an individual’s 
name and find primary materials related to him or her and lots of beautiful photographs. 



Sources Appropriate for Students 

18. Bighorse, Tiana. Bighorse the Warrior. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1990. 

A fascinating account of the life ofGus Bighorse (18467-1939), a member of the Navajo tribe 
and eyewitness to the tumultuous late- 1800s. Bighorse listened to the famous leaders found in 
the literature. His daughter recounts the effect leaders had on the members of the tribe. The 
reading level is accessible to middle school or high school. 

19. Kuipers, Barbara J. American Indian Reference Books for Children and Young Adults. 
Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited, Inc., 1991. 

This outstanding bibliography consists of two parts. One is a collection of essays about 
selecting, publishing, and incorporating into the curriculum Native American materials for 
school-age students. The second part is a collection of detailed annotations of Native American 
materials arranged by Dewey Decimal classification numbers. The index lists sources 
specifically related to the Navajo in the index under "Navajo Indians," but general sources will 
lead to information about Navajo history and leaders as well. 




56 



368 



20. Roessel, Ruth, ed. Navajo Stories of the Long Walk Period. Tsaille, AZ: Navajo 
Community College Press, 1973. 

Roessel edits a collection of anecdotes and stories as told to the descendants of participants of 
events in 1 864. The United States Government removed the Navajo from their land to Fort 
Sumner, causing despair and sickness among the people. Stories of other events around the same 
period give an interesting perspective to Navajo history and insight into the actions of leaders. 




57 



INFORMATION ON EARLY NAVAJO LEADERS OF THE 1800s 

A Pathfinder Prepared by Michelle Beattie 



369 



In traditional social and political organization, the Navajo (Dine) lived in small residence communities. 
Informal local groups formed around a local headman (naat’anii) for the purpose of dealing with outsiders. 
In the 1800s, excellent communicators and negotiators emerged as leaders in the contacts between the 
Navajo people and the United States government. Cultural and artistic innovators are also recognized as 
leaders. This pathfinder will assist you in locating information on Navajo leaders in the 1800s. 



^ First, gain a background knowledge of Navajo history in the turbulent 1 800s. Examine some general 
Native American encyclopedias and handbooks, looking for articles under the subject “Navajo.” 
These encyclopedias may also contain entries for specific Navajo leaders. 

Ortiz, Alfonso, ed. Handbook of North American Indians. Vol. 10, Southwest, Washington, D.C.: 
Smithsonian Institution, 1983. 

A respected work covering Native Americans of the Southwest, provides a strong 
introduction to Navajo culture and history. 

Markowitz, Harvey, ed. American Indians. Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, 1995. 

Three volumes of clear articles on a wide range of topics including tribes, people, places, 
history, and more. A few Navajo leaders are represented in this source. 

$ Second, explore biographical dictionaries of Native Americans. Most offer indexes where the 
individual’s name is listed by tribe. 

Biographical Dictionary of Indians of the Americas. Newport Beach, CA: American Indian 
Publishers, 1991. 

Two volumes of hundreds of short biographies of native people of North and South 
America. Entries include a photo of the subject, further readings, and other names by which 
the person is known. 

Johansen, Bruce E. and Donald A. Grinde, Jr. The Encyclopedia of Native American Biography. 
New York: Henry Holt and Co., 1997. 

An excellent source including both native and non-native peoples influential in Native 
American history. Lesser known leaders are included. 

Dockstader, Fredrick. Great North American Indians: Profiles in Life and Leadership. New York: 
Van Nostrand, 1977. 

A well respected work containing substantial entries for individuals of native heritage who 
contributed to history. Cultural and artistic leaders accompany military and political 
leaders. 

^ Third, check your library’s card catalog or online catalog for books that are individual biographies or 
collections of biographies of Native American leaders. Look in your card catalog under the subject 
headings: “Indians of North America — Biography” or “Navajo Indians — Biography.” 



ERIC 



Moses, L. G. and Raymond Wilson, eds. Indian Lives: Essays on Nineteenth and Twentieth Century 
Native American Leaders. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1985. 

Offers several essays on Native American leaders from many tribes. Articles include 
bibliographies and photographs. 



58 



370 



Hoffman, Virginia and Broderick H. Johnson. Navajo Biographies. Rough Rock, AZ; Navajo 
Curriculum Press, 1974. 

An often-cited compilation of biographies of Navajo leaders. 

Fourth, read in depth histories of the Navajo people in the 1 800s. Histories place leaders in context 
and add to your understanding of their significance. You can find these in the card catalog under the 
subject headings: “Navajo Indians — History,” “Navajo Indians — History — 19* Century,” or “Navajo 
Tribe.” 

Frink, Maurice. Fort Defiance and the Navajos. Boulder, CO: Pruett Press, 1968. 

An account of the Navajo and the United States Army Fort built on the Navajo lands in 
1851. Includes valuable information about leaders, including photographs. 

McNitt, Frank. Navajo Wars: Military Campaigns, Slave Raids, and Reprisals. Albuquerque, NM: 
University of New Mexico Press, 1972. 

A description of conflicts between the Navajo and the Spanish, Mexican, and American 
disputants up to 1861. 

^ Fifth, look at bibliographies and research guides to locate titles and descriptions of more books and 
periodicals on Navajo history and leaders. 

Hirschfelder, Arlene B., Mary Gloyne Byler, and Michael A. Dorris. Guide to Research on North 
American Indians. Chicago: American Library Association, 1983. 

A guide to the literature on Native Americans for the general reader providing detailed 
descriptions of the sources reviewed. 

Iverson, Peter. The Navajos: A Critical Bibliography. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 
1976. 

A guide to reliable sources in the study of Navajo history. 

^ Sixth, periodical indexes will allow you to search for articles on a specific leader or Navajo history in 
general. For help searching, ask your librarian. 

America, History and Life. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 1 989 

Article abstracts from of historical sources in the United States and Canada. 

^ Seventh, if needed, check for resources appropriate for students. Look under the same subject 
headings in the card catalog with the extension "Juvenile" on the subject headings or look at 
bibliographies of children and young adult materials, such as: 

Kuipers, Barbara J. American Indian Reference Books for Children and Young Adults. 

Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited, Inc., 1991. 

Contains detailed annotations of Native American materials for students. 

Bighorse, Tiana. Bighorse the Warrior. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1990. 

An account of the life of Gus Bighorse (1846?- 1939), a member of the Navajo tribe and 
eyewitness to the tumultuous 1800s as told to his daughter. 

skskskskJkskskJksksklf you need any assistance, ask your librarian. 







53 



371 



Introduction to the Oneida Culture: 
People of the Standing Stone 

a pathfinder 



Rex G. Pyle 
LIS 38L.3 
Social Sciences Reference 
Dr. Loriene Roy 
December 3, 1997 



o 

ERIC 



60 



372 



Introduction to the Oneida Culture: People of the Standing Stone 

The Oneida Indians are one of the original five tribes of the Iroquois 
Confederacy. Originally located in New York state, in the 1 800's they dispersed 
into Ontario and Wisconsin, with a small number remaining in New York. During 
the Revolutionary War, they fought with the Colonists against the British, and it is 
legend that an Oneida woman fed Washington's army during the winter at Valley 
Forge. This important group has remained as vital today as it was then, being the 
first Native American Indian tribe to have its own World Wide Web site. 

This pathfinder, created for participants in the Four Directions project, is 
intended to provide a means to research the Oneida people and their culture. In 
keeping with the Four Directions project's mission to explore the educational uses 
of technology, I have included a number of Web sites in addition to the more 
traditional print resources. In addition, I have tried to include sources for use by 
both students and teachers. My primary criterion in choosing sources for inclusion 
in this pathfinder was currency. While the topic of traditional Oneida culture may 
not have changed much over the last ten or twenty years, the manner of treatment 
it receives certainly has. I examined the sources while keeping ethnic sensitivity in 
mind at all times. However, I did choose to include some older materials due to 
their comprehensive nature. In choosing Web sites, I tried to stay with those that 

o 

ERIC 



61 



373 



dealt specifically with the Oneida, though I did include several sites that had 
comprehensive listings of links to other Native sites. I did this in the hopes that as 
more Oneida sites are created in coming months and years, they will be linked to 
by these general sites. Finally, I tried to keep in mind some basic questions that 
people might have about Oneida culture, such as "What is the Oneida religion 
like?" and "What kind of foods do the Oneida eat?" 

My search for appropriate sources began at the Perry-Castaneda Library at the 
University of Texas at Austin. I browsed in the reference room in the E90's and 
located several excellent general reference sources on Native Americans. A 
number of these have been included in the annotated bibliography. In addition, the 
bibliographies and "For Further Reading" lists of these sources provided a starting 
point for locating appropriate monographs. I also looked in UTCAT under the 
subjects "Oneida" and "Indians of North America— New York (and Wisconsin and 
Ontario)." Some more general sources were found by searching under "Iroquois" 
in UTCAT. Finally, I conducted a search on the Web using the search engines 
HotBot and AltaVista, using search terms such as "Native Americans" and 
"Oneida." These resulted in often startlingly large numbers of hits, which I then 
slowly waded through, using the previously mentioned criteria. 

Hopefully, this pathfinder will only be the beginning of many forays into the 
interesting and long-lived culture of the Oneida people. 

o 

ERIC 



62 



374 



Annotated Bibliography 

Note: I have used the following style manual for my entries; 

Gibaldi, Joseph. MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers. New York; 

The Modern Language Association of America, 1995. 

General Reference Sources 

1. Cisco, ed. Dictionaryof Indian Tribes of the Americas. Newport Beach: 

American Indian Publishers, Inc., 1993. 

This dictionary (really more of an encyclopedia) is comprised of three volumes. 
Though the entries are unsigned, they do have rather lengthy bibliographies. The 
entry on the Oneida is three pages long, has one photograph, and is focused on 
history. 

2. Hoxie, Frederick E., ed. Encyclopedia of North American Indians. 

Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1996. 

According to the introduction to this one-volume encyclopedia, the book 
explores four themes; Indians are people; Indians change; Indians are a 
permanent part of American life; and Indians have voices. The quality of writing in 
the brief signed entries is fairly even and satisfactory. The Oneida entry, which 
again focuses on history, is one-and-a-half pages long and was written by a 
member of the Oneida Nation of Wisconsin, which lends a note of validity to the 




63 



375 



information contained therein. 

3. Leitch, Barbara. A Concise Dictionary of Indian Tribes of North America. 

Algonac: Reference Publications, Inc., 1979. 

This one-volume work consists of short entries which cover basic history and 
culture of various tribes. The Oneida entry is two pages long and is quite concise 
and informative. Though this is a good source of basic information on Indian tribes, 
in-depth information must be sought elsewhere. 

4. Markowitz, Harvey, ed. Ready Reference: American Indians. Pasadena: 

Salem Press, Inc., 1995. 

This three-volume set is comprised of short unsigned entries. At the beginning 
of each entry is a listing of basic information: culture area, language group, primary 
location, and population size. One major bonus for this book is that it contains 
many more photos than any other reference book examined. 

5. Sturtevant, William, ed. Handbook of North American Indians. 

Washington: Smithsonian Institute, 1978. 

As the name "Smithsonian Institute" implies, this vast (yet incomplete) 
multivolume set is a scholarly masterpiece, the Encyclopaedia Britannica for Native 
American studies. The volume on Indians of the Northeast, which contains a 
ten-page entry on the Oneida, is nearly 1000 pages of signed articles which can be 




64 



accessed using the volume's comprehensive index. The inclusion of many 
illustrations and maps alongside excellent articles make this an indispensable tool 
for Native research. 

6. Waldman, Carl. Encyclopedia of Native American Tribes. New York: 

Facts on File Publications, 1988. 

This volume of unsigned articles is ideal for younger audiences (upper 
elementary through high school). The focus is on history, and the inclusion of lots 
of full-color illustrations will make this popular with younger readers. The only 
drawbacks to this work are lacks in both depth of coverage and "For Further 
Reading" lists. 

Books on Indians with Information on the Oneida 

7. Bieder, Robert E. Native American Communities in ]Msconsin, 1600-1960: 

A Study of Tradition and Change. Madison: The University of 
Wisconsin Press, 1995. 

While this book does not focus on the Oneida tribe, it does provide some good 
information on the tribe's migration from New York to Wisconsin after the American 
Revolution. The book also includes a great deal of information about the other 
tribes residing in Wisconsin, some of which were forced to give up land upon the 
Oneidan migration. Finally, the book's currency and extensive bibliography make it 




6 ^ 



377 



a valuable resource. 

8. Hertzberg, Hazel W. The Great Tree and the Longhouse: The Culture of 

the Iroquois. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1966. 

Though the subject of this book is the Iroquios and not specifically the Oneida 
tribe, it does contain a number of references to the Oneida. With many illustrations 
and a story-like text, this is a good introductory book for junior high and high school 
students interested in the mythology, customs, and history of these northeastern 
Indians. The fact that the book is a product of the American Anthropological 
Association and the National Science Foundation lends a certain amount of 
authority to this title. 

9. Richter, Daniel K. The Ordeal of the Longhouse: The Peoples of the 

Iroquios League in the Era of European Colonization. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1992. 

This recent scholarly text contains vast amounts of information on the Iroquios 
and a number of references specific to the Oneida tribe. In addition to the main 
body of the text, this book also has nearly 150 pages of notes and bibliographic 
citations. Like the previous book, its authority is cemented by its association with a 
scholarly institute, this time the Institute of Early American History and Culture. 




c n 

U KJ 



Books on the Oneida 



378 



10. Campisi, Jack and Laurence M. Hauptman, eds. The Oneida Indian 

Experience: Two Perspectives. Syracuse: Syracuse University 
Press, 1988, 

This recent text is a collection of articles by professors and Oneidans. The 
book is divided into two distinct sections, the first covering the "Time of Troubles," 
from 1784-1934, and the second covering "the Oneida Reemergence," from 1900 
to the present. The book has a lengthy bibliography and information on all authors 
included. 

11. Pratt, Peter P. Archaeology of the Oneida Iroquois, Vol. 1. George's 

Mills: Man in the Northeast, Inc., 1976. 

This book provides a methodical analysis of the archaeological record of the 
Oneida in New York state. While it is extremely technical in the writing style in its 
discussion of the archaeological record, the earlier sections of the book describing 
the physical setting and the history of the Oneida are quite helpful. In addition, the 
book has about thirty pages of plates showing Oneidan artifacts. 

12. Richards, Cara E. The Oneida People. Phoenix: Indian Tribal Series, 

1974. 

An excellent book about the history and culture of the Oneida people. Though 
the book is not currently up-to-date, it does offer much insight into the problems the 




U / 

u « 



379 



Oneida have faced over the past centuries since first contact with Europeans. The 
book also has many nice photos which offer a first-hand glimpse into the world of 
this tribe. 

13. Ritzenthaler, Robert E. The Oneida Indians of Wisconsin. Milwaukee: 

Public Museum of the City of Milwaukee, 1950. 

Though quite out of date and most likely out of print, this fifty-page publication 
does provide some good in-depth information oh the Oneida people. It covers 
history, economy, religion, politics, and general culture (housing, clothing, food, 
occupation, and material culture). Finally, the book includes an orthography to aid 
in pronunciation of Oneidan words and a fairly lengthy, though out of date, 
bibliography. 

Web Sources 

14. Lisa Mitten's Native American Sites. Internet. Online. 

http://info.pitt.edu/~lmitten/indians.html. 

While the only Web source on the Oneidas that this Web site links to is the 
one listed next in this bibliography, this Web source does link to many other more 
general Web sources. Truly a labor of love, Lisa Mitten has created what may be 
the most valuable site on the Web for Native resources. A good place to start for 







DO 



any Native research. 



380 



15. Oneida Indian Nation Home Page. Internet. Online. 

http://www.one-web.org/oneida/index.html. 

The Oneida Indian Nation was the first Indian tribe to create their own Web 
site. This attractive site contains many links, including links to web exhibits (of 
arts, crafts, and cultural artifacts) and a language page that pronounces several 
Oneida words. The only problem that I have with the site is that sometimes the 
quality of writing is rather poor. 




CQ 



yj vy 



381 



The People of the Standing Stone: 

A Pathfinder to the Culture of the Oneida People 



One of the original five tribes of the Iroquios Confederacy in what is now New York state, the Oneida people 
are today distributed among three primary k>cations: Wisconsin, New York, and Ontario. Though over the 
years they have suffered many of the same injustices as other Native American Indian tribes, their rich culture 
has endured. Today, as the first Indian tribe to embrace technology through the creation of a World Wide 
Web site, they are as vital as they were before the coming of the Europeans. 



For some good introductory material on the Oneida people, try these reference 
sources: 

Markowitz, Harvey, ed. Ready Reference: American Indians. Pasadena; 

Salem Press, Inc., 1995. 

Hoxie, Frederick E., ed. Encyclopedia of North American Indians. Boston: 

Houghton Mifflin Co., 1996. 



For more in-depth coverage, try this reference source: 

Sturtevant, William, ed. Handbook of North American Indians. Washington: 
Smithsonian Institute, 1978. 



For younger readers, check out this reference source: 

Waisman, Carl. Encyclopedia of Native American Tribes. New York: Facts on 
File, 1988. 

if you'd like to read about the Iroquios Confederacy, of which the Oneida were 
one of the five original member tribes, look at these books: 




r\ 



( yj 



382 



Hertzberg, Hazel W. Great Tree and the Longhouse: The Culture of the Iroquios. 

New York; The MacMillan Company, 1966. 

Richter, Daniel K. The Ordeal of the Longhouse: The Peoples of the Iroquios 

League in the Era of European Colonization. Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press, 1992. 

These books offer a lot of Information specific to the Oneida, their history, and 
their culture: 

Campisi, Jack and Laurence M. Hauptman, eds. The Oneida Indian Experience: 

Two Perspectives. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 1988. 

Richards, Cara E. The Oneida People. Phoenix. Indian Tribal Series, 1974. 

Finally, for current information on the Oneida people, check out their Web site: 

Oneida Indian Home Page. Internet. Online. 
http://www.one-web.org/oneida/index.html 

If your library does not have these books, ask your librarian about 
interlibrary loan. 




n 1 

( X 



Rex Griffin Fyie 
December 3, 1997 



INTRODUCTION TO PENOBSCOT CULTURE: 
A PATHHNDER 



CHRISTINA HOLMES 
LIS 382L.3 
DECEMBER 3, 1997 



384 



The Penobscot are a Native American tribe who live in Maine on the Penobscot 
River and Bay. They were one of the first tribes encountered by Europeans in the 17th 
century. Culturally and linguistically, the Penobscot are closely related to the Abenaki who 
live nearby in Maine and Canada. Together with the Malaseet, Micmac, and 
Passamaquoddy they form the Wabanaki or "People of the First Light." In 1995 the 
Penobscot Tribal Census showed a membership of three thousand people with 
approximately four hundred living on Indian Island, the Penobscot Reservation. The entire 
reservation comprises all two hundred islands in the Penobscot River between Old Town 
and Medway. The United States Federal Government recognized the Penobscot Indian 
Nation in 1980 as a result of the Maine Indian Land Claims Act 

My purpose in creating this pathfinder is to lead the information seeker to both print 
and Internet sources that present an introduction to the history and culture of the Penobscot. 
The clients for this pathfinder are the kindergarten through eighth grade students and the 
faculty of Indian Island School on Indian Island, Maine involved in the Four Directions 
Project. The sources and references are those that the students and teachers can hopefully 
find in a public library, school library, or academic library, and on the Internet This 
pathfinder attempts to provide sources to which students and teachers can refer for answers 
to questions about the Penobscot concerning their history, both before and after the 
Europeans made contact, what kind of clothing they may have traditionally wore, how they 
subsisted, who was and may still be important in their community, and what life is like on 
Indian Island today. Students and faculty may want to know what kind of traditional 
stories the Penobscot or Abenaki have. They may also want modem literature either 
written about or written by Penobscot or Abenaki individuals. Criteria for titles included in 
the bibliography include the amount of information a source devotes to the Penobscot, 
Abenaki, or Wabanaki. All sources have more than a single paragraph. Another criteria is 
the authority of the work. All authors and contributors of materials are either Native 
American, experts in the field, or used primary sources to write their work. Because part 




73 



385 



of the audience for this pathfinder are children, none of the sources are scholarly or 
technical and all are suitable for a popular audience. The only exception is the 
Encyclopedia of World Cultures, which speaks from an anthropological standpoint. Not 
knowing what kind of library the audience has access to, I include sources found at both an 
academic and public library. 

I started my search on the Penobscot with a subject search in UTCAT, the online 
catalog at the University of Texas at Austin, using the subject heading "Indians of North 
America" and qualifying it with such terms as "bibliographies," "encyclopedias, and 
"handbooks." This yielded such sources as Encyclopedia of N orth American Indians and 
The Native North American Almanac . Looking in the indexes of these books, I found that 
the Penobscot are often linked with the Abenaki . Because of their close relationship, I 
used both as subject terms. I also scanned the shelves from E 76.2 to E 98 in the Perry- 
Castaneda Library, the graduate library on campus. I found web sites using the "Hot Bot" 
search engine with the keywords "Penobscot Indians," "Abenaki," and "Wabanaki." This 
was a successful search and yielded a few good web sites with links to more specific sites 
such as "Wabanaki & Abenaki Internet Resources." 




kM a 

va 



386 



Bibliography * 



1. Annance, Lxjuis. "Alnombak/Wabanaki Links." Oct. 1997. 

http://members.aol.com/Alnombak/wabanaki.html (Nov. 18, 1997). 

Annance compiles a list of links to other websites about Malaseet, Micmac, 
Passamaquoddy, and Penobscot history, crafts, literature, and music. Among the sites 
listed are the University of Maine, a document from the Library of Congress' American 
Memory Project entitled "A Visit With Henry Mitchell" who was a Penobscot canoe 
maker, and the "Penobscot Indian Art Homepage" in which the viewer can see examples of 
Penobscot crafts and hear samples of native music. This is a list of links the user has only 
to click on to find more information on the Penobscot or Wabanaki. 

2. Bowman. "Index by Tribe." http://nativeauthors.com/search/tribe/abenaki.html 

(Oct. 25, 1997). 

This website contains a bibliography which includes Abenaki, Sokoki, Penobscot, 
Passamaquoddy, Micmac, Maliseet, and Pennacook titles. A special link lists books by 
Joseph Bruchac. Other title headings include legends on cassette, history, history- 
anthologies, biography, education and resources, poetry, and music on cassette. Prices for 
each title are listed and can be ordered online. This is a great resource for educators. 

3. Bruchac, Joseph. Dawnland. Golden, CO: Fulcrum, 1993. 

Bruchac, an Abenaki writer, tells the story of Young Hunter in this fictional novel 
for young adults. A threat hangs over his people and Young Hunter, an Abenaki, is called 
to defend them from this shadow. He sets out on a journey with his dogs and Long 
Thrower, a special weapon with powers he must learn to use. The reader will come away 
with a greater understanding of the ways of native peoples, ways built on preserving the 
balance and harmony with nature. Bruchac combines toth historical facts and native myths 
to create this story. 

4. . Gluskabe and the Four Wishes . New York: Cobblehill, 1995. 

In this book for children, Bruchac retells a traditional story of Gluskabe, an 
Abenaki culture hero, and his grandmother. Woodchuck. In this particular sto^, four 
Abenaki men seek out Gluskabe, having heard that he will grant anyone one wish. Three 
of the men are selfish and ask for wishes for themselves, while the fourth man wishes to be 
a great hunter to feed his people. Bad luck befalls the three selfish men and the fourth has 
his wish granted becoming a great hunter. The story is enhanced by beautiful illustrations 
by Christine Nyburg Shrader. Bruchac states in an author's note that these stories are 
strong teaching stories, but are meant to entertain as well. 

5. Champagne, Duane, ed. The Native North American Almanac: A Reference Work on 

Native North Americans in the United States and Canada . Detroit, MI: Gale 
Research, 1994. 




n n 

( O’ 



387 



This work covers a broad scope of topics about Native North Americans. Topics 
include history and historical landmarks, health, law, legislation, environment, l^guages, 
religion, and arts. Signed essays, annotated directory information, and documentary 
excerpts comprise the first sixteen chapters of this work followed by a chapter of 
biographies of prominent Native Americans. There is a glossary, general btbltography, as 
well as both an occupation and general index. For iriformation about the Penobscot, 
mainly about their land claims, the user should look in the general index under 
"Penobscot." 

6. Cisco, ed. Biographical Dictionary of Indians of th e Americas. Newport Beach, CA: 
American Indian Publishers, 1991. 



This two volume work collects nearly two thoiosand biographies as well as <^e 
thousand portraits of Native Americans on whom "heritage could be well estobhshed. 
Volume one contains an alphabetical biography list and ready reference. Volume two lists 
variant name spellings of individuals and an index to tribes to which individuals belong. 
For information on prominent Penobscot, Abenaki, or Wabanaki individuals the v^er ^ 
should look under the variant spelling "Abnaki" and "Pennacook" in the "Index to Tribes. 



. Dictionary of Indian Tribes of the Americas . 2nd ed. New Port Beach, CA. 
American Indian Publishers, 1995. 



This is a three volume work with approximately 1,1^ entries that cover language 
and culture, history, and population figures of Native American tribes. Volume three is an 
index in which the reader can find the subject terms "Abnaki," a v^ant spelling of 
Abenaki, and "Wabanaki Confederacy." The article on the Abnaki is two and a halt pages 
with a short bibliography. The article includes photos. 

8. Dill, J.S. "Abenaki History." July 1997. http://www.dickshovel.com/aben.html 

(Nov. 25, 1997). 

This website is part of the "First Nations" website, a reference source of Native 
Americans. The author is in the process of compiling short histories of all the tnbes of 
North America from contact to 1900. The viewer can find information on where the 
Abenaki lived, their population and how it was affected by Europeans, different names the 
nation is known by, their language, divisions, culture, and an abbreviated history. There 
are further links of reference at the end of the page, including links to other tnbes 
mentioned in the Abenaki history. 

9. Gill, Sam D. and Irene F. Sullivan. Dictionary of Native American MytholoRY- 

Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 1992. 

The authors compile an alphabetical list of people, animals, and objects im^rt^t in 
Native American mythology. Entries are brief and most have cross references. There is a 
bibliography at the back of the book and most entries refer to this bibliography lor turther 
reading. In the "Index by Tribe," the subject term "Abenaki" has references to the 
bibliography list, while the subject term "Penobscot" refers the reader to entries in the 

dictionary. 





388 



10. Hendon, Julia A., ed. Anthrotx>logical Literature: An Index to Periodical Articles and 

Essays . Cambridge, MA: Tozzer Library, Harvard University, 1979- . 

This quarterly index is available in paper, online, and in CD-ROM format. It 
covers a wide range of topics including archeology, physical anthropology, culturd and 
social anthropology, and linguistics. It also reviews books and journals, films, videos, 
and sound recordings. There is a subject index in the paper format, with a list of authors 
and a list of journals indexed. For specific articles and reviews about the Penobscot, the 
researcher can use the subject terms "Penobscot," "Penobscot Indians," "Abnaki," or 
"Abnaki Indians." 

11. Hoxie, Frederick E., ed. Encyclopedia of North American Indians. New York; 

Houghton Mifflin, 1996. 

This encyclopedia compiles an alphabetical list of entries of tribes, biographies, and 
interpretive entries that present a brief overview of these topics. The entries cover historical 
eras and cultural traditions while defining terms and events "frequently misunderstood." 
Each entry has a short bibliography for further study. The genei^ index includes the 
subject terms "Abenaki" and "Passamaquoddy/Penobscot" which leads the reader to fairly 
lengthy, signed articles presenting a historical overview of these closely connected people. 
It also contains a list of contributors. 

12. "Indian Island School." 1997. http://challenge.ukans.edu/lndian-lsland/index.htm 

(Nov. 18, 1997). 

This website is the homepage of the Indian Island School on the Penobscot 
Reservation of Indian Island. Indian Island School comprises early education and grades 
kindergarten through eighth. The browser can find information about programs at the 
school, the students, and the faculty. By clicking on "Community," the user can scroll 
down that page and again click on "Brief History" to get a short essay on Penobscot 
history. There are also links to such prominent Penobscots as "Louis Sockalexis," a major 
league baseball player who played for the Cleveland Spiders, changed to the Cleveland 
Indians after Sockalexis. This source is excellent for current information on the 
Penobscots of Indian Island. 

13. Johansen, Bruce E and Donald A. Grinde, Jr. The Encyclopedia of Native American 

Biography: Six Hundred Life Stories of Important People From Powhatan to 
Wilma Mankiller . New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1997. 

This encyclopedia is a reference guide with six hundred entries of both Native 
Americans and non-Natives important to Native Americans in some way. Some entries 
include a short bibliography for further reading. The alphabetical index lists both 
"Abnaki," a variant spelling of Abenaki, and "Penobscot." 

14. Klein, Barry T., ed. Reference Encyclopedia of the American Indian . 7th ed. 

West Nyack, NY: Todd Publications, 1995. 



389 



This is a fairly comprehensive work covering a wide range of topics. The first few 
sections contain directory type information about reservations, communities and tribal 
councils, other Indian tribes and groups. Federally recognized tribes, government agencies, 
national associations, schools, Indian education programs, Indian health services, 
museums, monuments and parks, and libraries and research centers. These sections are 
generally divided by state. For Abenaki and Penobscot, the researcher should look under 
"Maine." Others sections contain bibliographies of audiovisual aids and books. "Abenaki 
Indians" are listed in the "Bibliography Subject-Index" on page 539. This is an excellent 
reference source for educators. 

15. McBride, Bunny. Mollv Spotted Elk: A Penobscot in Paris . Norman, OK: 

University of Oklahoma Press, 1995. 

Using personal diaries, letters, personal interviews with family members and 
friends, as well as secondary resources, McBride tells the life story of Molly Spotted Elk, a 
Penobscot bom in 1903 on Indian Island, Maine. The oldest of eight children, Molly grew 
up in a poor household learning about hard work. She left home at a young age to pursue a 
life on stage as a vaudeville dancer. Molly eventually found her way to Europe, only to 
have to flee with her young daughter when the Germans occupy France. Throughout her 
life, Molly Spotted Hk was committed to learning and keeping her Penobscot heritage. 

Not only does McBride's work chronicle Molly's life, but also chronicles a history of life 
on the Penobscot Reservation in the first half of this century. 

16. Mead, Alice. Crossing the Starlight Bridge . New York: Bradbury Press, 1994. 

In this juvenile fiction book. Mead tells the story of Rayanne Sunipass, a young 
Penobscot girl ,who must move away from the island where she has always lived. She 
promises herself and her pet rabbit. Hop, that she will return. Rayanne learns to adapt to 
her new life and friends in town and wonders if she can keep the promises she made. The 
author, while not native herself, is interested in Wabanaki culture, including art works and 
traditional legends. 

17. Miller, Steve. Aug. 1997. "Abenaki Home Page." 

http://millennianeLcom/slmiller/abenaki/index.htm (Oct. 25, 1997). 

Miller compiles a list of Abenaki related links on this website. These links cover 
history, people, contacts, maps, and teachings about Native Americans. The user can click 
on "links" to find more specific links to sites about the Penobscot, Wabanaki, and a large 
selection on Abenaki sites. All of these sites are strong on community and history. Miller 
also includes a "People Page" designed as "a common meeting ground for all Abenaki 
tribes and their relatives." 

18. O'Leary, Timothy J. and David Levinson, ed. North America . Vol. 1, Encyclopedia 

of World Cultures . Boston, MA: GK Hall, 1991. 

This encyclopedia is a ten volume anthropology work ordered by g^graphical 
regions of the world. Volumes one through nine contain about 1, 500 entries with maps, 
glossaries, and indexes of alternate names for the different cultural groups. The tenth 
volume is an index to the other nine. Volume one covers cultures of North America with 
lengthy articles covering such topics as histoiy and culture, settlements, economy, kinship, 
marriage and family, sociopolitical organization, and religion. There is also a short 




78 



390 



bibliography at the end of each entry. A helpful feature of this work is a section called 
"Filmography," which lists films and videos on groups discussed in the volume and a list 
of the producers. The reader can look up "Penobscot" in the index to find a "see" reference 
for "Abenaki." 



19. Reddy, Marlita A., ed. Statistical Record of Native North Americans . Detroit, MI: 

Gale Research, 1993. 

This source contains 1,007 statistical tables covering a broad range of topics in 
twelve different chapters. These topics include history, demographics, family, education, 
culture and tradition, health, social and economic conditions, bi^iness and industry, and 
law and law enforcement Besides tables, information is also laid out in graphs and charts. 
Statistics come from federal and state agencies, tribal governments, and associations and 
other organizations. The editor includes a list of sources for further research and 20th 
century estimates of pre-European contact to the year 2040. In the index, the reader will 
find the subject terms "Penobscot" and "Penobscot Reservation." 

20. Sturgeon, Angela, ed. America: History and Life . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 

1964- . 

This index comes in paper form and online. It covers the history and culture of the 
United States and Canada from prehistoric times to present The index groups the entries 
by subject and historical period in six major sections. In the paper form, there are five 
issues per volume. Issues 1-4 cover abstracts and citations, while issue 5 is an annual 
index. To find specific article abstracts and citations of reviews and dissertations covering 
the Abenaki and Penobscot, the researcher should search the index with the terms 
"Penobscot Indians," "Abenaki Indians," and "Wabanaki Indians." 

21. Sturtevant, William C., ed. Northeast Vol. 15, Handbook of North American 

Indians . Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1978. 

This twenty volume work is divided by geographical region. The researcher can 
find the Abenaki and Penobscot in volume fifteen entitled Northeast The signed essays are 
lengthy and cover such topics as language, territory, culture in 1610, and a history to the 
1970s. There are some photographs and a good bibliography of sources for further study 
as well as sources that the reader should avoid. The index lists "Penobscot" with a "see" 
reference to the "Eastern Abenaki." 

22. "Wabanaki & Abenaki Internet Resources." 

http://www.brooks.simplenet.com/wabanaki.html (Oct. 25, 1997). 

This website is a list of major sites with histories and other links pertaining to Ae 
Abenaki and Wabanaki. Site topics include literature and legends with links to such sites as 
"Gluscabi and the Wind Eagle," a traditional Abenaki story. There are also links to people 
sites, reservation information, a powwow schedule, selected reading lists which include a 
bibliography on writings of Abenaki Indians, non-profit organizations, businesses and 
organizations, and legal information. The user will find this an extremely helpful site and 
easy to navigate. 



*Turabian, Kate L. A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations . 
5th. ed. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1987. 




79 



391 



Introduction to Penobscot Culture: 

A Pathfinder 

The Penobscot are a Native American tribe who live in Maine on the Indian Island 
Reservation as well as elsewhere in the United States. They are closely related to the 
Abenaki and were one tribe of the Wabanaki or "People of the First Light" 

Getting Started...Looking in your school or public library catalog using 
terms such as Penobscot Indians or Abenaki Indians, you may find: 

Bruchac, Joseph. Dawnland. Golden, CO: Fulcrum, 1993. 

. Gluskal^ and the Four Wishes . New York: Cobblehill, 1995. 

McBride, Bunny. Molly Spotted Elk: A Penobscot in Paris . Norman, OK: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1995. 

Specialized Encyclopedias, Dictionaries, and Handbooks.. .are a 
good starting point for a general overview of your subject and a jumping 
off point for further research. Search in the library catalog for "Indians of 
North America" combined with "Encyclopedias," "Dictionaries," and 
Handbooks." 

Cisco, ed. Dictionary of Indian Tribes . 2nd ed. New Port Beach, CA: American Indian 
Publishers, 1995. 

Search in the index in volume three under "Abnaki" and "Wabanaki Confederacy" 
for information on the history, culture, language, and population figures of the Abenaki. 

Hoxie, Frederick E., ed. Encyclopedia of North American Indians . New York: 

Houghton Mifflin, 1996. 

For a historical overview of the Penobscot and Abenaki, search in the general index 
under "Abenaki" and "Passamaquoddy/Penobscot." 

O'Leary, Timothy J. and David Levinson, ed. North America . Vol. 1, Encyclopedia of 
World Cultures. Boston, MA: GK Hall, 1991. 

Search in the index under the term "Abenaki" to find an essay covering such topics 
as Abenaki history and culture, economy, kinship, and religion. 

Sturtevant, William C., ed. Northeast Vol. 15, Handbook of North American Indians . 
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1978. 

For a historical overview of the Abenaki and Penobscot until the 1970s and a good 
bibliography for further research, search the index in this volume for "Eastern Abenaki." 

Indexes.. .lead to research articles and book reviews on your topic. 

Hendon, Julia A., ed. Anthropological Literature: An Index to Periodical Articles and 
Essays . Cambridge, MA: Tozzer Library, Harvard University, 1979- . 

Search terms such as "Penobscot," "Penobscot Indians," "Abenaki," and "Abenaki 
Indians" will find specific articles and book reviews in this index. 




80 



392 



Sturgeon, Angela, ed. America: History and Life . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 

1964- . 

Using the search terms "Penobscot Indians," "Abenaki Indians," and "Wabanaki 
Indians" will produce articles on the culture and history of these people. 

Biographies...tell about important Abenaki and Penobscot individuals. 

Johansen, Bruce E. and Donald A. Grinde, Jr. The Encyclopedia of Native American 
Biography: Six Hundred Life Stories of ImtK)rtant People From Powhatan to 
Wilma Mankiller. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1997 . 

Use the subject terms "Abnaki" and "Penobscot" in the index to find entries on 
individuals important to this community. 

Educator Resources...aid in teaching others about the Penobscot and 
Abenaki. 

Klein, Barry T., ed. Reference Encyclopedia of the American Indian . 7th ed. West 
Nyack, NY: Todd Publications, 1995. 

This useful source lists directory information by state and bibliography information 
by tribe. Try searching under "Maine" and "Abenaki Indians." 

http://nativeauthors.com/search/tribe/abenaki.html 

This website contains a bibliography of books and cassettes both by and about the 
Abenaki and Penobscot. 

Internet sites...provide links to great sites about Penobscot, Abenaki, and 
Wabanaki history, culture, arts, crafts, literature, and resources. 

"Abenaki Home Page." http://millenianeLcom/slmilIer/abenaki/index.htm 

"Alnombak/Wabanaki Links." http://members.aol.com/Alnombak/wabanaki/htmI 

"Indian Island School." http://challenge.ukans.edu/lndian-lsland/index.htm 

"Wabanaki & Abenaki Internet Resources." 

http: //WWW . brooks, simplenet. com/wabanaki . html 

Some of these sites may overlap, but together provide a good overview of what is available 
about the Penobscot, Abenaki, and Wabanaki on the Internet 

Other ways to find information on Native Americans is to search the catalog combining 
"Indians of North America" with many different terms such as "Social Life and Customs," 
"Mythology," "Folklore," "Religion," "Art," and "Dance." If you still cannot find what 
you are looking for, ask the librarian for help. 




r\ -0 

Oi 



Christina Holmes 



393 



Introduction to Potawatomi Culture: 
A Pathfinder 



Britt A. Johnsen 
December 3, 1997 
LIS 382L.3 



394 



Introduction 

This pathfinder explains how to find resources for an introduction to Potawatomi culture. 
The Potawatomi are also called the Fire Nation because their name means “people of the place of 
the fire.” They were originally members of the Chippewa and Ottawa tribes, and have similar 
cultural characteristics to Central Algonquian peoples. The Potawatomi had settled in the lower 
peninsula of Michigan by the time French explorers arrived in the 1600s. At different times during 
the 1700s, they joined forces with the French, the British, and other tribes to preserve and expand 
their lands, as well as to control trade. By the 1800s many Potawatomi were forced by poverty 
and hardship to move to Missouri, Iowa, and then Kansas. The Potawatomi developed their own 
language, and have folklore, rituals, and tribal organization that is distinct from other Algonquians. 

The resources described in this pathfinder are intended to help high school students and 
teachers at the Nah Tah Wahsh School in Hannahville, Michigan identify a process of learning 
about their own native culture. Hannahville is participating in the Four Directions Project 
(http://4directions.org), a program which integrates Native American culture and technology into 
education, and has developed their own web pages in conjunction with it. 

An introduction to the Potawatomi culture imphes that many aspects of the culture will be 
covered in a rather cursory fashion, but that no one element will be emphasized over another. The 
object of the pathfinder is to help the user explore appropriate and interesting resources which will 
provide even further information, not to overload the user with exhaustive research. 

The pathfinder is designed for a high school library that has access to the Internet. It 
addresses questions users might have about the origins and movement of the Potawatomi, their 
interaction with others, and distinguishing characteristics about their social organization. The 
pathfinder also provides resources for Potawatomi language, ritual, folklore, music, and dance. 

In order to be included on this pathfinder the resources, both print and electronic, had to 
contain more than just a mention of the Potawatomi. They also had to be written by an authority 







83 



395 



on the topic, and have a reputable publisher. Format was also important; the resource had to have 
a pleasing and easy-to-use arrangement. 

My first step in finding resources was to search UTCAT, the online catalog at the 
University of Texas at Austin. I performed subject and title keyword searches using the heading 
“Potawatomi,” as well as the variant spellings “Potawatzuni,” “Pottawatami,” and “Pottawatomie.” 
These searches produced a number of books and lengthier articles. Satisfied with these resources, 
I then searched UTCAT for reference titles, using combinations of the headings “Native,” 
“Indian,” and “reference” in title keyword searches. I found books in two areas of reference; the 
E 76 - E 98 in Library of Congress classification, and the Z 1209 section. I browsed these two 
sections, and selected most of my reference works. 

My final task was to find Internet resources. I selected the search engine Hotbot and 
searched with the heading “Potawatomi.” After sifting through fifty of the over 2,000 resulting 
sites, I had found what seemed to be the best sites that met my criteria. I spent some time sorting 
through links on the fifteen pages I thought were the best, to ensure I would not miss any good 
web sites. I also looked at the Four Directions page under the “Native American Sites” link, but 
found no further relevant sites. 




84 



396 



Annotated Bibliography* 



1. The American Indian: A Multimedia Encyclopedia. Vers. 2.0. CD-ROM. USA: Facts on 
File, Inc., 1995. 

Excellent resource for a broad overview of Native American tribes. Entries include historical 
information, migratory information, and some cultural details, with hyperlinks to mentioned 
tribes. Most tribes have links to biographies, photographs, and drawings. The Potawatomi 
section included seven biographies. 

2. Campbell, Susan. (Text and graphics copyright Smokey McKinney 1997) “Potawatomi 

Genealogy.” Internet. ht^://www.ukans.edu/~kansite/pbp/gen/g_intro.html. 

Designed for Native Americans interested in genealogy who have never begun a genealogical 
project. The “how-to” section leads the user through the process, and links to other sites are 
provided for both the novice and experienced researcher. A perfect starting place for 
Potawatomis interested in family and oral history. 

3. “Citizen Potawatomi Nation.” (Last Update 21 Nov. 1997) Internet. 

http://www.potawatomi.org 2 Dec. 1997. 

The official web page for the Potawatomi. Includes news, events, and current tribal programs 
and enterprises. Gives a user a general idea of what the Potawatomi Nation is doing, as well as 
links to other Potawatomi sites. 

4. Clements, William M. and Frances M. Malpezzi. Native American Folklore, 1879-1979: 

An Annotated Bibliography. Athens, OH: Swallow Press, 1984. 

Wonderful resource to find little known literature on folklore. Folklore is defined as texts and 
performances of verbal art, and entries include primary and secondary sources. Arranged by 
tribe within geographic regions. Potawatomi is listed in the Midwest section - check the index 
for all references. 



' All sources are cited according to: 

Citing Electronic Sources (Austin, TX: University of Texas at Austin, 1996). 

Joseph Gibaldi, ed., MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers, 4th ed. (New York: Modern 
Language Association of America, 1 995). 



O 




85 



397 



5. Clifton, James A. The Prairie People: Continuity and Change in Potawatomi Indian Culture 

1665-1965. Lawrence, KS: Regents Press of Kansas, 1977. 

Covers the Potawatomi tribal experience as a whole, but focuses on the Prairie Band of 
Potawatomi. Clifton also contributed the cuticle on the Potawatomi for the Handbook of North 
American Indians (see below). A very extensive well-written narrative for the student who needs 
historical and migratory details. Use the index to find information on specific topics. Includes 
photographs and maps. 

6. Edmunds, R. David. The Potawatomis: Keepersof the Fire. Norman, OK: University of 

Oklahoma Press, 1978. 

A history of the Potawatomi from the 1600s to the 1840s. The style is not as scholarly as 
Clifton’s book (see above), but may be more appropriate for the high school reader. Contains 
illustrations and maps, and a well-constmcted bibliography divided into primary and secondary 
sources. Includes more cultural details. 

7. Haas, Marilyn L. Indians of North America: Methods arul Sources for Library Research. 

Hamden, CT: Library Professional Publications, 1983. 

Haas’ book guides tribal persons unfamiliar with library research strategies through the process 
of finding and using library resources. Helpful sections for the beginning researcher are the 
Subject Headings, Classification Systems and Call Numbers chapter and the Indexes chapter. 
Useful source for developing research skills for Native American materials. 

8. Johansen, Bruce E. and Donald A. Grinde. The Encyclopedia of Native American 

Biography. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1997. 

Brief but inf ormative biographical information on important Native Americans. Alphabetical 
arrangement by name - look under “Potawatomi” in the index. Especially useful is the “For 
More Information” sections at the end of each entry. Photographs included sporadically. 

9. Klein, Barry T. Reference Encyclopedia of the Native American. 7th ed. West Nyack, NY: 

Todd Publications, 1995. 

Serves as a directory, biographical dictionary, and bibliography for Native Americans. Useful 
for local information, support, and contacts. Look under your state in the first section to find 
directory information on libraries and research centers, state and local organizations, and more. 
The subject bibliography (section three) contains a Potawatomi section. 



O 




86 



398 



10. Landes, Ruth. The Prairie Potawatomi: Tradition and Ritual in the Twentieth Century. 

Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1970. 

The best resource for rituals, customs, and social organization of the Potawatomi. A sociological 
and anthropological analysis based on extensive research of the Prairie Potawatomi. Not too 
technical - very much a narrative of Landes’ observations. Includes topics such as “medicine 
bundles” and “the Peyote Cult.” Excellent when used in conjunction with an historical account. 

11. Morrison, John.' (Last modified 27 Mar. 1997) “Grass Dancing.” Internet. 

http://www.up.net/~hvl/grass.htm 2 Dec. 1997. 

Origins, costumes, and history of the “Grass Dance.” Includes an image of a Grass dancer, as 
well as how to do the dance. The only web site I found that describes a Potawatomi dance. 

12. Perrot, Don. (27 Mar. 1997). “Potawatomi Language.” Internet. 

http://www.up.net./hvl/lang.htm 2 Dec. 1997. 

Designed for a beginner, this site encourages the user to practice Potawatomi and gives basic 
information on the structure of the language, as well as grammar and pronunciation hints. Each 
loudspeaker icon indicates an audio representation of the word or syllable. Perrot presents 
information in a user-friendly fashion - his approach is to encourage, not to overwhelm. 

13. “Potawatomi Dictionary.” (Updated 2 July 1997) Internet. 

http://www.ukans.edu/~kansite/pbp/books/dicto/d_frame.html 2 Dec. 1997. 

Divided into three frames - the dictionary, a help frame, and a pronunciation guide. Multimedial 
dictionary - click on the hypertext and a window will appear that will allow you to hear the word 
pronounced. Can switch from Eng-Pot to Pot-Eng by clicking on a link. Very interactive and 
easy to use, but takes a lot of time to download. 

14. “Potawatomi Web: Mzenegenek - Books.” Internet. 

http://www.ukans.edu/~kansite/pbp/books/b_frame.html 2 Dec. 1997. 

An ideal opportunity to practice Potawatomi. Includes both Potawatomi language documents and 
materials on Potawatomi history and culture. Total of five documents. Gospel According to 
Matthew has Potawatomi and English verses side by side. 




0 ( 



399 



15. “Prairie Band Potawatomi: Language - Orthography.” Internet. 

http://www.public.iastate.edu/~jsmckinn/pbp_orthography.htnd 2 Dec. 1997. 

Fairly technical discussion of vowels, consonants, semivowels, and intersegmentals. Explains 
symbols, and provides a link to a short reference version of this page. Each sphere enclosed in a 
box indicates a link to a sound file. Links to the online Potawatomi dictionary. 

16. Smith, Huron H. “Ethnobotany of the Forest Potawatomi Indians.” Bulletin of the Public 

Museum of the City of Milwaukee 7:1 (1933): 1-230. 

An interesting publication that details plants used by the Potawatomi in their rituals, medicines, 
food, and materials. Rather dated, but still valid in its examination of the variety of plants used 
by the “Forest” Potawatomi in Wisconsin. Plants are grouped alphabetically by family name, 
and each plant description includes the scientific name, the Potawatomi name, and its uses. 
Includes several black and white plates. 

17. Sultzman, Lee. “Potawatomi History.” Internet, http://www.dickshovel.com/pota.html 

2 Dec. 1997. 

Listed on the official Potawatomi Nation web site - the best online historical site. Extensive, fair, 
and well-written narrative covering 1600s to 1900. Hyperlinks provided throughout the 
document to other mentioned tribes. No images. Lack of table of contents and index is a 
problem. Sultzman welcomes comments as a sort of peer review. 

18. Trigger, Bruce' G., vol. ed. Northeast. Washington: GPO, 1978. W o\. \5 of Handbook 

of North American Indians. William C. Sturtevant, gen. ed. 20 vols. 1978- . 

The most complete reference work on the Potawatomi from a very authoritative source 
(Smithsonian Institution). Volume 15 contains a twenty page article by James Clifton (see 
above) on Potawatomi language, environment, culture, and history. Includes photographs, 
diagrams, and maps. References to the Potawatomi throughout Volume 15 can be found in the 
volume’s index. Especially useful is the final section, “Sources,” which gives a scholar’s 
opinion of the major resources on the Potawatomi. 

19. University of Michigan, Museum of Natural History. “Native American Dioramas.” 

Internet. http://www.exhibits.lsa.umich.eduA^irtual.Museum/Anthro/Nat.Am./ 
Nat.Amindex.html 2 Dec. 1997. 

A virtual museum site that provides two-dimensional dioramas of a sampling of ancient Native 
American cultures. Many of the fourteen dioramas are connected to Michigan; one of these is a 
Potawatomi fall harvest scene. Captions are provided, but not any extensive textual information. 



O 




88 



400 



Introduction to ^otawatomi Culture 
m (PatHfinder 

Created by Britt Johnsen 



The Potawatomi, often called Keepers of the Fire, are a Native American people originally 
from the Great Lakes region, who now live in many Midwestern states. This pathfinder 
will help you find places to look for information on many aspects of their culture. 



Step 1: For a good overview of the Potawatomi, start with encyclopedias, usually found in the 

reference section of your library. The librarian will help you find these, and be able to 
direct you to other good reference sources, such as the following: 

* The American Indian: A Multimedia Encyclopedia. Vers. 2.0. CD-ROM. USA: 

Facts on File, 1995. 

* Sturtevant, William, gen. ed. Handbook of North American Indians. Washington: 

GPO, 1978- . 

For a lengthy article about the Potawatomi, look in Volume 15, Northeast. 

Step 2,'. Look in your library’s card catalog or online catalog for reference books and general books. Try 
looking under the subject “Potawatomi.” Watch for its different spellings: “Potawatami,” 
“Pottawatami,” and “Pottawatomie.” 

* Haas, Marilyn. Indians of North America: Methods and Sources for Library Research. 

Hamden, CT: Library Professional Publications, 1983. 

This book will help those unfamiliar with libraries and how to search for information. 

Step 3: No luck? Try the subject “Indians of North America.” Then look in the indexes of these 

books for information on the Potawatomi. A nice trick is to go to the areas in the library 
where your books are and browse the shelves around them for related books. If you are 
getting a lot of information, you might want to narrow your interests. Combine the 
subjects you have been using with the following terms: 

History Treaties Children Social life and customs 

Missions Biography Language Government relations 

Step 4: If you have found no information and are feeling fmstrated - ASK A LIBRARIAN FOR 

HELP! 

Step 5: Do you have a periodicals index at your library? If so, try steps 2 and 3 in this index. If there is 

more than one index in your library, use whichever one indexes the more scholarly publications in 
the humanities and socid sciences. 

Step 6: Attempt an Internet search. Select a search engine, such as Yahoo! or Hotbot. Type in subject 

terms you have been using. If you get a lot of “hits,” do not spend all day looking through them. 
Try scanning the first thirty or so. Caution: information on the Internet is not always reliable or of 
very good quality - consult your librarian on how to evaluate web sites. 

* “Citizen Potawatomi Nation.” Internet, http://www.potawatomi.org 

This site is the official site for the Potawatomi Nation, and provides news, contacts, and links 
to other Potawatomi sites of interest. 




83 



401 



Step 7: Explore an area that interests you! Below are print and Internet resources which pertain to a 

certain aspect of Potawatomi culture. 

^History 

* Clifton, James A. The Prairie People: Continuity and Change in Potawatomi Indian Culture 
1665-1965. Lawrence, KS: Regents Press of Kansas, 1977. 

* “Potawatomi History.” Internet, http://www.dickshovel.com/pota.html 

‘BiogTapHy 

* Johansen, Bruce E. and Donald A. Grinde. The Encyclopedia of Native American Biography. 
New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1997. 

Look in index under Potawatomi. Note the “For More Information” sections. 

Latigua^e 

* “Prairie Band Potawatomi Language.” Internet. 
http://www.public.iastate.edu/~jsmckinn/pbp_orthography.html 
Links to a dictionary. Able to hear words pronounced. 

Literature and JeOi^ore 

* “Potawatomi Web Mzenegenek - Books.” Internet, 
http ://www.ukans .edu/ ~kansite/pbp/books/b_frame .html 

Potawatomi language documents and materials on history and culture, all online. 

* Clements, William M. and Frances M. Malpezzi. Native American Folklore, 1879-1979: An 
Annotated Bibliography. Athens, OH: Swallow Press, 1984. 

Potawatomi folklore is under the “Midwest” heading. 

SFine Sifts 

* “Native American Dioramas.” Internet, http://www.exhibits.lsa.umich.edu/ 
Virtual.Museum/Anthro/Nat.Am./Nat. Amindex.html 

Pictures of Native American cultures, including Potawatomi, Chippewa, and Ottawa. 

* “Grass Dancing.” Internet, http://www.up.net/~hvl/grass.htm 

S^tuaC 

* Landes, Ruth. The Prairie Potawatomi: Tradition and Ritual in the Twentieth Century. 
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1970. 

Step 8: Use local resources for more information. Be creative in discovering community members as 

sources for oral history and cultural information. 

* “Potawatomi Genealogy.” Internet, www.ukans.edu/~kansite/pbp/gen/g_intro.html 
Provides research information, Potawatomi family trees, and the opportunity to share family 
stories. Might provide you with ideas to research your own family. 



SiClUays remember tfie bSrarian is there to assist you! 
Lion't hesitate to asl^questionsi 




90 



402 



Lisa Bier 
LIS 382L.3 
October 8, 1997 
Dr. Loriene Roy 
Pathfinder Assignment 




Q1 



-O. 



403 



Introduction to the Culture of Santa Clara Pueblo: 
A Pathfinder 



Santa Clara Pueblo is located thirty miles north of Santa Fe, New Mexico. Santa 
CliU'a is one of nineteen villages, or pueblos, in the state, the people of which are 
collectively referred to as Pueblo Indians. 

The Pueblo Indians of the American Southwest are unique in American 
indigenous populations in the fact that many of them still live in the same permanent 
pueblos or villages that their ancestors built before the time of European colonization. 
The pueblos were originally politically and linguistically separate from each other. Each 
pueblo has retained its individuality. The people of these pueblos subsisted until recently 
through farming and some hunting. Today the pueblos are known for their beautiful 
traditional pottery, casinos, and as popular destinations for tourists. That these groups 
have retained at least some of their ancestral land as well as many traditional ways is only 
one of the intriguing facets of the Pueblo world. 

The pueblos have a rich archaeological, cultural and artistic record, and much has 
been written about them as an associated cultural group. Unfortunately, information 
written unique to each pueblo is more limited (except in the cases of the larger or more 
well-known pueblos, such as Zuni, Acoma, and Taos). 

The purpose of this pathfinder is to assist students, educators, and the general 
public in locating information about Santa Clara Pueblo. This pathfinder is being 




n n 






404 



compiled for the Four Directions Project, which focuses on technology and cooperation 
among Native American schools, in hopes that it will be a useful resource for them. 

Appropriate sources for this pathfinder will include the following types of 
material: 

A) Those dealing with Santa Clara Pueblo specifically. 

B) Those providing background and/or historical information on the 

Pueblo culture. 

C) Ready-reference works such as encylopedias. 

D) Those which will lead the reader to more indepth material, including 
contact information of organizations. 

Methodology: 

I began the search for sources with UTNetCAT, the online catalog of the University of 
Texas at Austin, which yielded a large number of items pertaining to the Pueblo culture 
as a whole, but very few were specific to Santa Clara. More useful were the reference 
books, such as encyclopedias, which contained bibliographies specific to Santa Clara. I 
looked at the online version of Books in Print, which confirmed the small amount of 
publications dedicated to Santa Clara. Then I looked at Anthropological Literature on UT 
Library on Line. Finally, I looked on the World Wide Web. I am only including contact 
information from the Web, since I am not personally qualified to evaluate the reliability 
of sites. 



ERIC 



93 



405 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Encyclopedias 

Sturtevant, William C., editor. Handbook of North American Indians. 17 vols. 
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institute, 1978- . 

This work is tmly more of an encyclopedia than a handbook and is an excellent 
resource. Articles by subject experts range from archaeology and art to sociology and 
ethnobotany. Volume 9, edited by anthropologist Alfonso Ortiz (a Pueblo Indian himself) 
is dedicated entirely to the Pueblo Indian culture. It contains a ten page section on Santa 
Clara and a bibliography. 

Johansen, Bruce E. The Encyclopedia of Native American Biography: Six Hundred Life 
Stories of Important People from Powhatan to Wilma Mankiller. New York: Henry Holt, 
1997. 

This biographical work brings together the life stories of over 600 significant 
Native Americans. Some of the brief sketches include photographs. Indexed by name as 
well as tribe. 

Statistical Reference 



Reddy, Marlita A. Editor. Statistic Record of Native North Americans. Washington, DC: 
Gale Research, Inc., 1993. 

Contains statistical data on many aspects of Native American life, broken down 
by tribe, age group, etc. Topics covered include family, history, education, culture, health 




94 



and health care, and business and industry. Section on culture includes a table on 
traditional occupations held by residents of reservations. Indexed by tribe or reservation 
and subject of table. 



A06 



Indexes 

Hendon, Julia A., editor. Anthropological Literature: An Index to Periodical Articles and 
Essays. Cambridge, MA: President and Fellows of Harvard College, 1979- . 

This index is available in print format as well as online. Indexes anthropological 
literature, which may provide more 

Subject Guide to Books in Print. New York; R.R. Bowker, 1996. 

This is a listing of all books currently in print and is indexed by subject. Gives 
complete ordering information if the title is not available at a library. 

RUN Bibliographic File. Stanford, CA; Research Libraries Information Network, 1997. 

This is an online database which contains the titles of over 27 million works held 
by university libraries and historical societies, among other places. Can be searched by 
subject. The works may not all be available, but many can be accessed via inter-library 
loan. 

Monographs 

Brody, J.J. Beauty from the Earth; Pueblo Indian Pottery from the University Museum of 
Archaeology and Anthropology. Philadelphia: The Museum, 1 990. 

This is a museum catalog of a collection of Pueblo pottery. Covers the 
archaeological background of the area and its earliest artists. Commentary is primarily 




A07 



from an art and art history point of view, and discusses pottery technology, changes in the 
pottery in relation to known historic events, and the patron-artist relationship. 

Dittert, Alfred E., Jr. and Fred Plog. Generations in Clay: Pueblo Pottery of the 
American Southwest. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland Press, 1980. 

This book describes two thousand years of potteiy- making by the Pueblo Indians 
and their ancestors. The book is approximately evenly divided between precontact pottery 
and that created since colonization. A large section focuses on the revitalization of the 
craft which occurred late in this century. 

Hill, W.W.. An Ethnography of Santa Clara Pueblo. Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press, 1982. 

Most of the fieldwork which yielded this book was conducted before the 1960's. It 
is an exhaustive report of the minute details of life at Santa Clara. It would probably be 
best used as a reference work due to its compulsively meticulous style, and is equipped 
with a good index and glossary. Covers most conceivable aspects of Santa Clara life. 

Knaut, Andrew L. The Pueblo Revolt of 1680: Conquest and Resistance in Seventeenth 
Century New Mexico. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1995. 

The Pueblo Indians were the only indigenous group in North America to repel 
colonizers from the New World for any length of time. In 1680, the Spanish were 
expelled from what was then New Spain, and did not return for twelve years. This book 
relates that era. Indexed. 

Mails, Thomas E. The Pueblo Children of the Earth Mother. 2 vols. New York: 
Doubleday and Company, Inc., 1983. 




<r\ 



yb 



408 



A vast and indepth look at the Pueblos covering from preconttact times to the 
early 1980's. Covers art, architecture, material culture, ritual, and social aspects. Contains 
a brief section specific to Santa Clara. Good index and many illustrations. 

Ortiz, Alfonso, editor. New Perspectives on the Pueblos. Santa Fe: School of American 
Research, 1972. 

This is a compilation of scholarly articles which study the linguistics, ethnology, 
ritual, culture, and world-view of the Pueblos. Intended audience is mostly college level. 
Indexed with much information specific to Santa Clara. 

Sando, Joe. Pueblo Nations: Eight Centuries of Pueblo Indian History. Santa Fe: Clear 
Light Publishers, 1992. 

This book is a survey of the history and culture of the nineteen groups which 
together make up the Pueblo people. Covers pre-history, the Spanish conquest, dealings 
with the United States from territorial times on, and current issues. The pueblo viewpoint 
is particularly well represented, as in a chapter dealing with native feelings toward the 
Columbus Quincentenary. Also contains a chapter of short biographies of notable Pueblo 
people. Appendix includes an historical outline, the All-Indian Pueblo Council 
Constitution, and population statistics. No index. 

Lonewolf, Joseph and Peter Bloom. Pottery Jewels of Joseph Lonewolf. Scottsdale, AZ: 
Dandick Company, 1975. 

A mostly photographic essay on Joseph Lonewolf of Santa Clara Pueblo, here 
referred to as the finest Pueblo potter who ever lived. Includes Lonewolf s philosophy of 
pottery, in terms of both the mechanics of pottery making and in relation to tradition and 
mythology. Detailed look at Lonewolf s techniques of pottery forming, glazing and firing, 







y I 



409 



Juvenile Literature 

Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diana. Pueblo Storyteller. New York: Holiday House, 1991. 

The story of April, a young girl from Cochiti Pueblo who lives with her 
grandparents and learns about traditional ways, such as cooking, dancing, legends, and 
making pottery, from them. Uses many Cochiti words and has a glossary of the words 
and their pronunciation. 5th to 6th grade reading level. 

Keegan, Marcia. Pueblo Boy: Growing Up in Two Worlds. New York: Cobblehill Books, 
1991. 

Gives a good introduction to Pueblo life from a ten-year old boy's point of view. 
Emphasizes that retaining the traditional lifestyle is not incompatible with appreciating 
aspects of modem life. About 4th grade reading level. 

Additional Titles Which Were Not Available for Review 



Monographs 

Blair, Mary Ellen and Laurence R. Margaret Tafoya: A Tewa Potter's Heritage and 
Legacy. West Chester, PA: Schiffer Publishing, 1986. 

Frank, Larry and Francis H. Harlow, Historic Pottery of the Pueblo Indians. Boston: 
New York Graphic Society, 1980. 

Gutierrez, Ramon. When Jesus Came, the Com Mothers Went Away: Marriage, Sexuality 
and Power in New Mexico, 1500-1846. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1991. 




n o 



uo 



410 



Hughes, Phyllis;. Pueblo Indian Cookbook: Recipes from the Pueblos of the American 
Southwest. Santa Fe: Museum of New Mexico Press. 

LeFree, Betty. Santa Clara Pottery Today. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico 
Press, 1975. 

Ortiz, Alfonso. The Tewa World: Space, Time, Being, and Becoming in a Pueblo Society. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969. 

Scully, Vincent. Pueblo: Mountain, Village, Dance. New York: Viking Press, 1975. 

Silverberg, Robert. The Pueblo Revolt. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1994. 

Trimble, Stephen. Talking with the Clay: The Art of Pueblo Pottery. Santa Fe: School of 
American Research, 1987. 

Wormington, H.M. The Story of Pueblo Pottery. Denver: Denver Museum of Natural 
History, 1965. 

Juvenile Titles 

Clarke Mott, Evelyn. Dancing Rainbows: A Pueblo Boy's Story. New York: Cobblehill 
Books, 1996. 

Yue, Charlotte and David. The Pueblo. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1986. 

Videos 

Pueblo Renaissance. New York: Cinema Guild, 1976. 




99 



411 



Surviving Columbus: The Story of the Pueblo People. Albuquerque: KNME-TV and the 
Institute of American Indian Arts, 1992. 

The Pueblo Peoples: First Contact. KNME-TV and the Institute of American Indian Arts, 
1990. 




1 n A 

JL U U 



412 



INTRODUCTION TO SANTA CLARA CULTURE: 

*A PATHFINDER* 

Santa Clara Pueblo is a small Native American village located in Northern New Mexico. The 
people of Santa Clara live a lifestyle that is rich in traditional ways and art. They are part of a 
larger group, the Pueblo Indians. 

For Introductions and Overviews : 

Sturtevant, William C., editor. Handbook of North American Indians. 17 vols. Washington, DC: 
Smithsonian Institute, 1978- . 

Volume 9 is dedicated entirely to the Pueblo people. Pages 296-307 pertain to Santa 
Clara and list a bibliography of other works. 

Johansen, Bruce E. The Encyclopedia of Native American Biography: Six Hundred Life Stories 
of Important People from Powhatan to Wilma Mankiller. New York: Henry Holt, 1997. 

Contains short biographies of prominent Native Americans. Look in the index under 
Santa Clara. 



To Find Articles and Books: 



Hendon, Julia A., editor. Anthropological Literature: An Index to Periodical Articles and Essays. 
Cambridge, MA: President and Fellows of Harvard College, 1979- . 

An index to articles about anthropology, art history, demography, economics and more. 
The online version only goes back to 1984; the print version goes further. 

Subject Guide to Books in Print. New York: R.R. Bowker, 1996. 

List of all books currently in print indexed by subject. Provides ordering information so a 
bookstore or library can easily order them. 




i n 1 



413 



For More Indepth Information; 

Dittert, Alfred E., Jr. and Fred Plog. Generations in Clay: Pueblo Pottery of the American 
Southwest.. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland Press, 1980. 

Describes two thousand years of pottery making by the Pueblo Indians and their 
ancestors. 

Hill, W.W.. An Ethnography of Santa Clara Pueblo. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico 
Press, 1982. 

Extremely detailed book on all aspects of Santa Clara life before 1965 or so. Indexed 
very well. 

Knaut, Andrew L. The Pueblo Revolt of 1680: Conquest and Resistance in Seventeenth Century 
New Mexico. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1995. 

Covers the period of time during which the Pueblo peoples expelled the Spanish 
colonizers from New Spain, the only time a North American indigenous group has done this. 

Ortiz, Alfonso, editor. New Perspectives on the Pueblos. Santa Fe: School of American Research, 
1972. 

This is a compilation of scholarly articles which study the linguistics, ethnology, ritual, 
culture, and world-view of the Pueblos. Intended audience is mostly college level. Indexed with 
much information specific to Santa Clara. 

Sando, Joe. Pueblo Nations: Eight Centuries of Pueblo Indian History. Santa Fe: Clear Light 
Publishers, 1992. 

Covers Pueblo pre-history, the Spanish conquest, dealings with the United States from 
territorial times on, and current issues. The pueblo viewpoint is particularly well represented. 

Organizations; 

The Pueblo Indian Cultural Center, 2401 12th St. NW, Albuquerque, NM 87102 
1-800-843-7270, http://hanksville.phast.umass.edu/misc/PCC.html 

A cultural center and museum owned cooperatively by the nineteen pueblos which is a 
good source for further information. 

***** 




1 nP 

KJ ^ 



414 



University of Texas at Austin 
Graduate School of Libraiy' and Infonnation Science 



An Introduction to Seminole Culture 

A Pathfinder 



LIS 382L.3 

Information Resources in the Social Sciences 
Dr. Loriene Roy 



By 

Arlene Lucio 



Austin, Texas 
October, 1997. 



Citation manuals: 

Gibaldi, Joseph. Ml .A Handbook for Writers of Research Papers . New York: Modem 
Language Association of America, 1995. 

Li, Xia and Nancy B. Crane. Electronic Styles; A Handbook for Citing Electronic 
Information . New Jersey: Information Today, Inc., 1996. 




103 



415 



I. Introductory Information 

The word “Seminole” is believed by historians to be derived from the Spanish word 
“Cimmaron”, or “out cast”. The Seminole are an indigenous people of the Eastern Woodlands 
who speak a Muskogean language. They separated from the Creek tribe in the 18th century. To 
escape white infiltration they fled to Florida where they absorbed remnants of the Apalachee 
tribe and runaway slaves. They fought Andrew Jackson (1817-1818) and, led by Osceola, again 
battled U.S. forces in the Seminole War (1 835-1 842). After the war most of the Seminole 
Nation was moved to Indian territory in Oklahoma, where they became one of the Five Civilized 
Tribes. As of 1990 there were 13,797 Seminoles in the United States. 

The purpose of this pathfinder is to identify introductory information (e.g., history, customs, 
dress, art, foods, way of life, literature) on the culture of the Seminole tribes of Florida and 
Oklahoma, through sources and reference tools available in a public library setting. The 
pathfinder was written specifically for the use of Four Directions participants and Ahrachkee 
Day School. Sources were chosen with a specific audience of upper elementary students (grades 
3 through 5) and their teachers. For the students, I felt reference sources like specialized and 
general encyclopedias, dictionaries, almanacs, other basic reference books, and Internet, would 
serve them best in their search for information concerning the tribe’s dress, art, dance, and way 
of life. The sources would also offer the students information about the tribes historical 
background. For the teachers, I still included the basic reference tools and Internet, with which 
they could acquaint themselves with the topic. But they might need children’s literature books 
to supplement their teaching about the tribe or Native Americans in general. Being fully aware 
that the client’s library probably would not have the exact book I had access to, I supplied the 



terms that could be combined with 


“Indians of North America” 


to find comparable sources that 


would meet their needs. 


Dictionaries 


Oklahoma 


Art 


Pictorial works 


Bibliography 


History 


Social life and customs 


Florida 


Wars 


Encyclopedias 


Folklore 


Music 


Juvenile Literature 


Chronology 


Food 


Directories 


Legends 


Dances 




1 n/i 

JL \j ^ 



416 



Here are some suggestions as to how combined subjects term searches would look like; 

Indians of North America— Pictorial works 

Indians of North America-Juvenile Literature-Bibliography 

Indians of North America-maps 

Indians of North America— Encyclopedias 

Indians of North America— History 

To address the needs of teachers, I searched AskERIC, available online, and which has search 
capabilities, for any curriculum guides that might have been submitted for the purpose of 
teaching the topic. I was not able to include ERIC because my pathfinder’s setting is for a 
public library. For this group, basic reference tools would be just as helpful to familiarize 
themselves with the necessary information about the tribe. I also looked at reference books 
listing children’s literature that could be incorporated into teaching the unit. In creating this 
reference tool, I strived to supply appropriate sources that would: 

A. ) assist students (grades 3 through 5) and teachers at the elementary level in attaining basic 

information and material about the tribe’s culture. 

B. ) assist teachers in locating children’s literature to incorporate into the unit. 

C. ) give teachers some ideas and curriculum guides on how to go about teaching a umt about 

the tribe. 

Ta begin my search, I did what I do many times when I can not find enough material a patron 
needs. I pull reference books, like the reference book Encyclopedia of Native American Tribes, 
or circulating books I know have the information the patrons are looking for. I will look up their 
cataloging records to see what subject headings the cataloger used to classify them. If no books 
are in our collection on the topic, I must then turn to searching subject heading terms supplied in 
the Library of Confess Subject Headings. In this case I used it to cover as many subject 
heading possibilities as possible. 




105 



417 



II. Annotated Bibliography 

Style Manuals: 

1. Gibaldi, Joseph. MI .A Handbook for Writers of Research Papers . New York: Modem 

Language Association of America, 1995. 

This book helped me in properly documenting by print sources in my bibliography. It also 
provides instruction for citation formats in other media formats like videos, soundrecordings, 
etc. It also includes miscellaneous sections concerning choosing a topic, using a library, 
common abbreviations, etc. 

2. Li, Xia and Nancy B. Crane. Electronic Styles: A Handbook for Citing Electronic 

Information . New Jersey; Information Today, Inc., 1996. 

This book helped me in citing web pages, giving the necessary information for a user to go back 
to works cited. It provides insmction on documenting all types of electronic sources (e.g. 
videos, radio shows, televison shows, etc.) It also provides formats in APA and MLA styles. 

Encyclopedias: 

3. Ready Reference: Native Americans . Pasadena: Salem Pres, Inc., 1995. 

This source provides basic information for each tribe in the United States. I chose this source 
primarily for teachers, who would need to get acquainted with the topic. Aside from just basic 
information, the coverage of all aspects of Seminole life are covered. 

4. Waldman, Carl. Encyclopedia of Native American Tribes . New York: Facts on File 

Publications. (1988). 

I chose this source primarily for the students. The source is readable, with colorful illustrations, 
larger print, and provides basic information for each tribe. Articles are arranged alphabetically 
according to the tribe’s name. 

Directories: 

5. Jaszczak, Sandra, ed. Encyclopedia of Associations . 32nd ed. Detroit; Gale Research, 1992. 

A valuable source for finding information on nonprofit organizations and what organizations 
exist according to user’s interest. Entries are arranged alphabetically under 18 broad topics. 
Entries include organization name, address, description of organizations, publications, and other 
key information about each entry. In the title keyword index, several entries appear under 
“Native Americans”. But teachers can make valuable use by getting in contact with these 
organizations to get information or material not generally available elsewhere. 




1 on 

JQ_ Vy 



418 



6. I.ihrarv of Congress Subject Headings . 20th ed. Washington; Cataloging Distribution 

Service, 1997. 

Since most libraries use LSCH in cataloging, I utilized this source in locating other possiblities 
of subject headings that can be used to find materials in card catalogs or online catalogs. 

Under “Indians of North America” I found endless possiblities. 

7. Scanlon, Christopher P., ed. The Video Source Book . 19th ed. Detroit; Gale Research, 

1997/98. 

This source is a directory of video products on more that 125,000 subjects including business, 
entertainment, the arts, health, and education. Title entries are arranged alphabetically by title. 
Three indexes provide access to titles by subject, credits, and format indexes. Looking under 
“Native Americans”, I found a number of pertinent titles, one good example being Seminole 
Indians. Many entries include information like description of the program, audience, level, 
format, and ordering information keyed to a list of publisher addresses located at the back of the 
second volume. 

8. Standard Directory of Periodicals . 20th ed. New York; Oxford Communications, Inc., 1997. 

This source was able to give me any existing publications by or about the Seminole Indians. It 
also listed many general Native American publications. The book lists title of periodicals by 
248 subject categories. It provides a cross reference index to assist the patron in locating a topic. 
I had to go to ETHNIC first, then Native Americans. Newspapers are listed alphabetically under 
state, city. I felt that a copy of a publication would serve as an interesting teaching tool. 

Bibliographies: 

9. Children’s Catalog . 17th ed. New York; H.W. Wilson Company, 1996. 

This work looks much like other Wilson publications. The catalog consists of four parts; (1) 
Classified Catalog— arrangement is by Dewey Decimal Classification; easy readers, fiction, etc.; 
(2) Author, Title, Subject, and Analytical Index; (3) Select List of Recommended CD-ROM 
Reference Works— consists mostly of multimedia resources of high quality and reference value; 
(4) Directory of Phiblishers and Distributors— includes fuller information about the publishers of 
the books listed. 

10. Gillespie, John T. And Corrine J. Naden. Best Books for Children; Preschool through 

Grade 6 . 4th ed. New York; R.R. Bowker, 1990. 

This book provides excellent access to children’s literature on many given topics and disciplines. 
Books are listed under subject headings like Biography, Arts and Language, Literature, etc. An 
alphabetical index allows users to look for books on a given topic. On my particular topic, the 
source indexed many aspects of Indians of North America— cookbooks, folklore, history, art, etc. 




1 n 



419 



Indexes: 

1 1 . AskERIC (Online). http://ericir.syr.edu/cgi-bin/markup_infoguides/CRESS/Indians_Alaska 

In searching AskERIC using the same subject headings (“Native Americans” and “curriculum 
guide”), I located a number of documents that would be of interest to teachers concerning Native 
Americans and curriculum. They were not necessarily the same documents I found in my ERIC 
search. 

12. Books in Print Plus (CD-RONf). R.R. Bowker. Series v6.25 1 196. 

I consulted this source to get some titles of books that a patron might like to see, but their library 
would not have a copy of. The title could always be ordered through Interlibrary Loan. BIP Plus 
has the capability of searching by title keyword or subject. Users can even browse by subject 
keyword (kw=) 

Internet Search Engines: Here I listed what search engine I used and then what webpage I 
foimd that would be helpfiil to my patron: 

13. InfoSeek . http://www.infoseek.com/ 

Allows free and fee-based searches. Results displayed by ranked relevancy. Displays term(s) in 
context. There are 12 browsable subject trees. Useful if looking for broader topics or terms 
likely to produce many hits. I searched using “Seminole” and “Oklahoma”. 

14. Johnson, Joe D. “Oklahoma Image Map” 

http://www. mstm.okstate.edu/students/jj ohnson2/ ok-nati ve . htm 
September 1997. 

This sight listed and described the Five Civilized Tribes: Cherokee, Chicksaw, Choctaw, Creek, 
and Seminole. It also provided a number of hyperlinked sights under four headings: Education, 
Tribes and Nations, Collections, Art, and Culture, Other Native American Links. One very 
useful hyperlink is to AskERIC. It would be very useful for teachers looking for teaching ideas; 
it does have search capabilities to documents. This page concentrates on tribes in the Oklahoma 
area. 

15. Yahoo! http://yahoo.com7 

Yahoo stands for Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle. This search engine has good 
response time. It is searchable by field and includes links to other search engines. It also has 
browsable subject trees of 14 broad categories. I searched using “Seminole” and Florida”. 

16. Florida Department of State. “Seminoles of Florida” 




i n 

JL U 



8 



420 



http://www.dos.state.fl.us/flafacts/seminole.html 
September 1997 

This page would be interesting to elementary level students. It provides straight forward 
information about the tribe, their wars, and biographies about prominent Seminole leaders. The 
page provides nice hyperlinks to pictures, which would appeal to younger students. And as the 
title of the page suggests, it focuses on the Seminole tribes in Florida. 

17. Excite , http://excite.com/ 

This Search engine searches 1.5 million of the most popular Web sites. It also searches Usenet 
news groups; It also includes a browsable subject tree. I searched using “Seminole” and 
“Florida”. 

18. “The Seminole Tribe of Florida” 
http://www.seminoletribe.com 
September 1997. 

I found this page more in-depth concerning the Seminole tribes in Florida. It was divided into 
five sections; History, Culture, Economic Devlopment, Government, and Gift Shop. The Gift 
Shop is still in the process of being constructed, but this would be a great way for teachers to 
have access to Seminole art that illustrates a rich part of their culture. 




1 n Q 

JL V 



421 



INTRODUCTION TO SEMINOLE CULTURE 



Seminole tribes reside in Oklahoma and Florida. They originated from a tribe known as 
Creeks. This pathfinder will assist you in locating infomiation about this tribe’s culture. ^ 

A good place to start looking for reference books and circulating books available at your 
library is it’s library’s card catalog or online catalog. Use the terms below to combine with 
**Indians of North America” 



Poetry 


Directories 


Biography 


Food 


Pictorial works 


Dictionaries 


History 


Music 


Government relations 


Chronology 


Florida 


Art 


Juvenile Literature 


Encyclopedias 


Mythology 


Dances 


Social life and customs 


Bibliography 


Oklahoma 


Legends 



Combine terms to focus search to your specific needs. Here are some suggestions: 

Indians of North America-Juvenile Literature— Bibliography 
Indians of North America— Encyclopedias 
Indians of North America-History 

^ For general information about the Seminoles and their culture, begin by consulting a 
reference work like specialized and general encyclopedias and dictionaries like; The 
way to locate a similar work that may be available at your library is to search using 
Indians of North America— Encyclopedias 
Indians of North America— Dictionaries 

Ready Reference: Native Americans . Pasadena: Salem Pres, Inc., 1995. 

Waldman, Carl. Encyclopedia of Native American Tribes . New York: Facts on File 

Publications. (1988). 

^ To aid in the teaching of the topic, teachers should start by locating books on the tribe 
or Native American tribes in general. Using combinations of the subject terms listed 
above, teachers and students will be able to locate useful books to learn and teach with. 

Check for more recent books available, but may not be owned by your own library. 
First start by looking up children’s books available on the topic, either ‘TSlative Americans”, 
“Seminole Indians”, or “Indians of North America”. If after checking your library’s catalog 
and finding out the book is not owned, one may be able to borrow these books by 
borrowing from another library system through Interlibrary Loan Service, or purchase a 
copy through a book store. Three good sources for searching children’s books are: 




422 



Children’s Catalog . 17th ed. New York; H.W. Wilson Company, 1996. 

Gillespie, John T. And Corrine J. Naden. Best Books for Children: Preschool through Grade 6 . 
4th ed. New York: R.R. Bowker, 1990. 

Books in Print Plus (CD-ROMl R.R. Bowker. Series v6. 25 1 196. 

•S’ Teachers will want to check out education indexes. They could provide information on 
what material should be covered. Also through the use of curriculum guides concerning the 
given topic, teachers can get an idea about how to go about teaching a unit on this tribe or 
Native Americans in general. 

AskERIC. http://ericir.syr.edu/ 

Teachers can access AskERIC online. It does have some search capabilities to ERIC 
documents. Use the search terms “Native Americans” and “curriculum guide”. 

Videotapes can be great resources in teaching and learning about topics. In the 
particular source listed below, search using the heading “Native Americans”. 

Scanlon, Christopher P., ed. The Video Source Book . 19th ed. Detroit: Gale Research, 
1997/1998. 

^ Organizations might be able to provide additional information and/or materials not 
generally available. Consulting the Encyclopedia of Associations, I was able to find a list 
of countless organizations under “Native Americans”. 

^ The Internet can be a great source for general information. Using the search terms 
“Seminole” and “Native Americans” through Yahoo! (http://www.yahoo.com). Excite 
(http://www.excite.com), and Infoseek (http://www.infoseek.com), I was able to 
locate the following three webpages. 

Johnson, Joe D. “Oklahoma Image Map” 

http:// WWW. mstm . okstate . edu/students/jj ohnson2/ ok-nati ve . htm 

September, 1997. 

Florida Department of State. “Seminoles of Florida” 
http://www.dos.state.fl.us/flafacts/seminole.html 
September, 1997. 

“The Seminole Tribe of Florida” 
http://www.seminoletribe.com 
September, 1997. 

If you have any further questions, ask your librarian for help. 




Ill 



423 



fflSTORY OF ANIMALS IN THE SEMINOLE CULTURE 
A PATHFINDER 



INFORMATION RESOURCES IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES 

(LIS 382L.3) 

FALL 1997 

INSTRUCTOR: PROFESSOR LORIENE ROY 



SUBMITTED BY: 

JEFFREY A. SEWELL 
OCTOBER 8, 1997 




1 1 O 



JL J. ^ 



424 



INTRODUCTION 

The Seminoles, a Native American tribe located in the southeastern section of the 
United States, are actually of Creek origin. During the eighteenth century, migrants left the 
Creek towns in Georgia and settled in the swamplands of present day Florida. These 
individuals were given the collective name "Seminole" which means "separatist" or 
"runaway." Population of the Seminole tribes increased when slaves joined their ranks to 
escape the harsh treatment from European colonizers. 

According to history and tradition, animals played an important role in Seminole 
culture. This was largely due to the surrounding environment. Because the land proved to 
be unsuitable for farming, the Seminoles lived more by hunting and fishing than by 
agriculture. A typical "Seminole diet" consisted of small mammals, fish, fowl, and even 
reptiles. Dependent upon animals for their own survival, these Native Americans developed 
legends and myths about them. In addition, the Seminoles employed animal characteristics 
in their dances and organized their clans by animal type including Panther, Otter, and 
Alligator. 

The overall purpose of this pathfinder is to assist the user with finding information 
about the history of animals in Seminole culture using resources available at a research or 
academic library. Many of the items can also be obtained in a public library or through an 
interlibrary loan service. Since animals appear frequently in Seminole folklore, this area is 
strongly emphasized. Specifically, this pathfinder was prepared for Ms. Marisa Schnirman, 
an elementary school teacher at the Ahfachkee School in Clewiston, Florida. Situated on 
the Big Cypress Reservation, the Ahfachkee School is participating in the Four Directions 
Program which integrates the teaching of Native American culture with current 
technologies. 

When deciding on materials to add or exclude from the pathfinder, I focused 
primarily on sources that an educator might use for preparing a class. An equally important 

O 

ERIC 



1 1 O 

±±o 



425 



objective was to find books suitable for younger children. Generally speaking, people 
interested in this topic will probably want the following information: 

1) actual Seminole myths or legends consisting of animal references; 

2) dictionaries and encyclopedias that define and explain important animal 

characters; and 

3) articles or essays discussing animal symbolism and imagery in Seminole culture. 

I began looking for appropriate sources by conducting searches on UTCAT Plus, 

the online catalog of The University of Texas at Austin. To locate items, I combined the 
subject "Indians of North America" with these terms: Art; Dances; Drama; Folklore; 
History; Juvenile Literature; Legends; Music; Mythology; Pictorial Works; Poetry; and 
Social Life and Customs. Next, to obtain a better background for this topic matter, I 
reviewed entries in Native American encyclopedias and specialized dictionaries such as the 
Encyclopedia of North American Indians and the Dictionary of Native American 
Mythology. Then, I browsed the Internet by using search engines like Yahoo! to find 
electronic resources. 

Two other factors guided me while compiling this pathfinder. First, even though the 
Seminoles originated in Florida, many of them were forcibly relocated to the "Indian 
Territory" in what is now present day Oklahoma. Nevertheless, because the actual client for 
this project is a tribal school in Florida, I purposefully limited my search to sources dealing 
with this state and its surrounding area. Second, the Seminoles adopted many customs and 
legends from neighboring tribes. As one scholar noted, "It is difficult to speak of a distinct 
Seminole mythology and folklore since their tales have recognizable elements common to 
the entire region of the Southeast."^ Consequently, to trace the history of animals in 
Seminole culture, it is often necessary to look at other Native American cultures within the 
same part of the country (Creek, Cherokee, etc.). 




^Robert F. Greenlee, "Folk Tales of the American Seminole," Journal of American 
Folklore SZ (\9AS) \ 140. 



426 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Encyclopedias; 

1. Dixon-Kennedy, Mike. Native American Myth & Legend. London: 

Blanford, 1996. 

Native American Myth & Legend is a work of major characters found in Indian folklore. A 
large portion of the entries refer to animals. Subjects are arranged in alphabetical order 
with cross references to related topics. This source does not have an index, but does have 
maps of Indian populations and a bibliography of works on Indian myths and legends. 

2. Encyclopedia of North American Indians. New York: Houghton, 

Mifflin Company, 1996. 

Articles covering factual information on Native Americans can be found in the 
Encyclopedia of North American Indians. Indian social life and customs are analyzed in 
sufficient detail. There is a separate entry about the Seminoles. 

General Histories and Surveys; 

3. Bierhorst, John. The Mythology of North America. New York: William 

Morrow and Company, 1985. 

In The Mythology of North America, the author, John Bierhorst, offers a general overview 
of the myths found among Native American regions. An entire chapter devoted to the 
"Lost Worlds of the Southeast," discusses the "rabbit trickster," the "council of animals," 
and other themes that are a part of Creek and Seminole legends. This book also has maps 
of Indian cultures and an index. 

4. Burland, Cottie. North American Indian Mythology. London; 

PaulHamlyn, 1965. 

North American Indian Mythology reviews the patterns and elements that run through 
American Indian legends. The book is divided into twelve chapters based upon geographic 
areas. One section entitled "The Mound Builders in the Southeast" sheds some light on 
animal stories that parallel Seminole folktales. This source has beautiful photographs of 
animal objects and a list of the chief gods and spirits referred to in Native American 
mythology. 

5. Weisman, Brent Richards. Like Beads on a String: A Culture History of 

the Seminole Indians in Northern Peninsular Florida. Tuscaloosa, 

AL: University of Alabama Press, 1989. 




111 ^ 



JL X 



427 



A multidisciplinary work. Like Beads on a String examines the Seminole tribe's past 
through the fields of history, anthropology, and archaeology. The importance of animals in 
Seminole culture is mentioned throughout the book. Hunting, cattle herding, and the use of 
animals in rituals are examples of the information discussed. 

Dictionaries; 

6. Gill, Sam D. and Irene F. Sullivan. Dictionary of Native American Mythology. 

Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO Inc., 1992. 

An extremely impressive work, the Dictionary of Native American Mythology explains the 
subjects, symbols, and rituals which are a part of native. North American legends. Each 
entry is followed by a particular tribe or culture area to identify the term's origin. Cross 
references appear in the text of entries to assist in locating information. One of the more 
useful features is the "Index by Tribe." This index facilitates research on specific tribes 
(such as the Seminole) and is arranged alphabetically. 

Anthologies; 

7. Lankford, George E. Native American Legends. Southeastern Legends: Tales from 

the Natchez, Caddo, Biloxi, Chickasaw, and Other Nations. Little Rock, AR; 
August House Inc., 1987. 

Ascertaining the central themes in Indian mythology is the purpose behind Native American 
Legends. This anthology is organized by introducing a general subject, like "Tricksters," 
followed by stories from different tribes related to the subject. Seminole legends are not 
represented, but there are a large number of tales from the Creeks and the Cherokees. 

8. Sturtevant, William C., ed. A Seminole Source Book. New York: Garland 

Publishing Inc., 1987. 

In A Seminole Source Book, William C. Sturtevant collects major, anthropological reports 
concerning the Seminole Indians. The coverage of these reports is rather broad. 
Nevertheless, they explore topics such as the Seminole clans (many of which were named 
after animals); Seminole dances (the "Turkey Dance," the "Catfish Dance," etc.); and the 
pronunciation of animal names in Seminole languages (Okeechobee and Miami). 

9. Swanton, John R. Myths and Tales of the Southeastern Indians. Bureau of American 

Ethnology Bulletin 88. Washington DC; Government Printing Office, 1929. 

Myths and Tales of the Southeastern Indians is a highly respected source of southern Indian 
myths and legends. The author, John R. Swanton, worked as an anthropologist with the 
Bureau of American Ethnology. During his tenure, Swanton obtained stories from the 
Creeks, Choctaws, and Chickasaws. While this volume does not contain Seminole 




116 



428 



folktales, there is a substantial amount of material from the Creek Indians who are directly 
related to the Seminoles. 

Bibliographies; 

10. Haywood, Charles. A Bibliography of North American Folklore and Folksong. 

Volume Two: The American Indians North of Mexico, Including the Eskimos. 

2nd ed. New York: Dover Publications Inc., 1961. 

Although this resource is retrospective in coverage, Haywood's A Bibliography of North 
American Folklore and Folksong provides a wealth of information on Native American 
cultures. It is well organized and easy to use. The volume on American Indians begins with 
a general bibliography about subjects such as folklore, music, and dance. Haywood 
arranges the second part of this source by culture areas (Southeastern Area), then by 
specific tribes (Seminole, Creek, etc.). 

1 1 . Kersey, Harry A., Jr. The Seminole and Miccosukee Tribes: A Critical Bibliography. 

Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1987. 

Written in essay form. The Seminole and Miccosukee Tribes: A Critical Bibliogrcqjhy, is a 
selective listing of works on these Native Americans who are indigenous to Florida. This 
bibliography actually reads like a short history; important sources are set off wth italics in 
the text. Sources also appear in the index under the last name of the author. 

12. UUom, Judith C., comp. Folklore of the North Americcm Indians: An Annotated 

Bibliography. Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 1969. 

The bibliography. Folklore of the North American Indians, is unique in that it describes 
resources which are appropriate for children. It is divided into two sections -- "General 
Background" and "North American Culture Areas." An entire chapter is dedicated to the 
Southeast region, the habitat of the Seminoles. Children's works featuring animal characters 
are highlighted. 

Periodicals and Journals; 

13. Florida Historical Quarterly. Tampa, FL: Florida Historical Society; University of 

South Florida, (published quarterly). 

Florida Historical Quarterly includes essays, documents, and reviews that pertain to 
Florida's history. While all aspects of this state's history are covered, a significant number 
of articles focus on the Seminole Indians. An author-title index appears at the end of each 
volume. 

14. Journal of American Folklore. Arlington, VA: American Folklore Society, 

(published quarterly). 




117 



429 



Journal of American Folklore, first published in 1888, is an important resource for this 
field of study. It contains scholarly articles from disciplines like anthropology, history, and 
sociology. In addition, there are reviews of current books, films, and videotapes. American 
Folklore is available in paper and microfilm formats and can be searched in major 
humanities or social science indexes. The following articles, found in American Folklore, 
deal directly or indirectly with animals in Seminole culture; 

Robert F. Greenlee. "Folk Tales of the Florida Seminole." Journal of 
American Folklore 58(1 945): 138-1 44. 

John R. Swanton. "Animal Stories from the Indians of the Muskhogean 
Stock (Natchez, Alabama, Koasati, Hichiti, and Creek)." 

Journal of American Folklore 26 (1913): 193-218. 

Internet Resources: 

15. "The Seminole Tribe of Florida" 
http ://www. seminoletribe. com 
(October, 1997). 

"The Seminole Tribe of Florida" is an excellent website. It is composed of separate 
webpages each designed around a certain area of study. Three pages are directly related to 
the topic of animals in Seminole culture: http://www.seminoletribe.com/culture; 
http ://www. seminoletribe. com/culture/legends, html; and 

http://www.seminoletribe.com/culture/storyteller.html. Another feature of this website is an 
"electronic bibliography" of resources about the Seminoles. 

16. "Seminole Storytelling" 

http ://www.gate. net/~semtribe/legends/backcvr. html 
(October, 1997). 

The site, "Seminole Storytelling," offers a virtual look at Legends of the Seminoles, written 
by Dr. Betty Mae Jumper. Highlights include excerpts from Dr. Jumper's book. 

17. "Seminole Tribe of Florida Email Composer" 

http ://www. gate. net/~semtribe/template/sendit. html 
(October, 1997). 

Information can be accessed through the Internet in various ways. One form that should 
not be overlooked is electronic mail. The "Seminole Tribe of Florida Email Composer" 
allows individuals to send messages directly to this tribe. Responses to questions are sent 
by email or by telephone. 




118 



430 



Children's Resources: 

18. Amott, Kathleen, comp. Animal Folk Tales Around the World. London: 

Blaclde& Son Limited, 1970. 

As the title implies, this book is a collection of animal stories from various nations. Older 
elementary students will find the tales easy to read. Of particular interest are two Native 
American legends which originated in the Southeastern United States — "The Chief of the 
Water Snakes," and "Why Rabbits have Short Tails." 

19. Brown, Virginia Pounds and Laurella Owens, comps, and eds. Southern Indian Myths 

and Legends. Birmingham, AL: Beechwood Books, 1985. 

Southern Indian Myths and Legends brings together the stories developed by Native 
American tribes living in the Southeastern section of the United States. A majority of the 
tales were rewritten from anthropological sources. Six of the legends are of Seminole 
origin. Each story is short enough to be read to younger children. Older children can enjoy 
reading them on their own. This book contains illustrations, a map of Southern tribes, and a 
bibliography. 

20. Hausman, Gerald, comp. Haw Chipmunk Got Tiny Feet: Native American Animal 

Origin Stories. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1995. 

BeautiftiUy illustrated. How Chipmunk Got Tiny Feet includes seven Indian folktales 
devoted to animals. Although there are no Seminole legends, two of the stories come from 
the Creeks (the forefathers of the Seminoles); namely, "How Bat Learned to Fly," and 
"How Possum Lost His Tail." 

21. Jumper, Betty Mae. Legends of the Seminoles. Sarasota, FL: Pineapple Press, 1994. 

Dr. Betty Mae Jumper, the author of Legends of the Seminoles, is a Native American and a 
member of the Seminole Tribe. She is also an avid storyteller. In Legends of the 
Seminoles, Dr. Jumper recounts actual folktales she listened to as a child. The value of this 
book lies in its authenticity. 

22. Scheer, George F., ed. Cherokee Animal Tales. New York: Holiday House, Inc., 

1968. 

Cherokee Animal Tales is a collection of thirteen short stories that younger children can 
listen to or read by themselves. The introduction discusses the role of animals in Cherokee 
folklore such as the Rabbit, also known as the "Trickster" or "Deceiver." Pencil sketches of 
animal characters complement the book. (The Cherokee are a neighboring tribe of the 
Seminole.) 




r» 



IIU 



431 



Style Manual: 

22. Gibaldi, Joseph. MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers. 4th ed. New York; 
The Modem Language Association of America, 1995. 

I used the MLA Handbook for documenting sources in my bibliography. This resource 
provides instmction for properly writing citations. 




120 



432 



fflSTORY OF ANIMALS IN THE SEMINOLE CULTURE 
A PATHFINDER 

Prepared by: Jeffrey A. Sewell 



Animals played a large role in Seminole culture. Legends about animals have been passed 
down through generations by tribal elders. These Native Americans emulate animal 
movements in their ceremonial dances and organize their family units according to animal 
species. This pathfinder can aid the user in finding resources on this topic. 



=> FIRST, begin looking for reference books and other resources by examining your 
library's card catalog or online public access catalog, also known as an OPAC. 
Combine the subject "Indians of North America" with the following terms: 

Art Folklore Legends Pictorial Works 

Dances History Music Poetry 

Drama Juvenile Literature Mythology Social Life and Customs 

=> SECOND, consult encyclopedias and specialized dictionaries for general 
information on the history of the Seminoles and their culture. 

Encyclopedia of North American Indians. New York: Houghton, 

Mifflin Company, 1996. 

Brief, factual articles about the Seminoles and Native American social customs. 

Gill, Sam D. and Irene F. Sullivan. Dictionary of Native American Mythology. 

Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO Inc., 1992. 

Definitions of characters, symbols, and rituals found in North American legends. 

=> THIRD, review scholarly essays on the use of animals in Seminole culture and the 
subject of animals in Native American mythology. 

Sturtevant, William C., ed. A Seminole Source Book. New York: Garland 
Publishing Inc., 1987. 

Reports and studies concerning the social life of the Seminole Indians. Contains 
references to clans, "animal-type" dances, and hunting methods. 

Swanton, John R. Myths and Tales of the Southeastern Indians. Bureau of 
American Ethnology Bulletin 88. Washington DC: Government 
Printing Office, 1929. 

Collection of southern Indian myths and legends. 




121 



433 



=> FOURTH, expand your research on this topic by studying comprehensive 
bibliographies. 

Haywood, Charles. A Bibliography of North American Folklore and Folksong. 
Volume Two: The American Indians North of Mexico, Including the 
Eskimos. 2nd ed. New York: Dover Publications Inc., 1961. 

An extensive listing of sources on Native American folklore, music, and dance. 

Kersey, Harry A., Jr. The Seminole and Miccosukee Tribes: A Critical 
Bibliography. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1987. 

Selective bibliography of historical works. 

=> FIFTH, refine your knowledge of this subject and keep informed of current 
developments by reading articles in specialized journals. 

Journal of American Folklore. Arlington, VA: American Folklore Society, 
(published quarterly). 

Scholarly essays from the social sciences (anthropology, history, sociology) and the 
humanities (art, literature, music). 

=> SIXTH, be sure to scan the Internet for additional data using search engines like 
Yahoo! and Infoseek. Websites can be retrieved by inputting terms such as 
"Native Americans" and "Seminole Indians." 

"The Seminole Tribe of Florida" 
http://www. seniinoletribe. com 
October, 1997. 

Internet site consisting of separate webpages explaining Seminole history and 
culture. 

=> SEVENTH, if you are interested in teaching Seminole animal stories to children, 
locate and obtain the appropriate age-level materials. 

Brown, \%ginia Pounds and Laurella Owens, comps, and eds. Southern Indian 
Myths and Legends. Birmingham, AL: Beechwood Books, 1985. 
American Indian folktales "rewritten" for children to enjoy. 

Jumper, Betty Mae. Legends of the Seminoles. Sarasota, FL: Pineapple Press, 
1994. 

Real stories compiled by a Native American and member of the . Seminole Tribe. 

=> FINALLY, if you need further assistance, remember to ask your librarian for 
help! 




122 



SEMINOLE WARS (1815-1900): A PATHFINDER 



For 6th-8th grade students and their teachers 
at the Ahfachkee School, 

Big Cypress Reservation, 

Clewiston, Florida. 



By 

Jennifer M. Payne 



Social Science Reference 
Fall 1997 
Dr. Loriene Roy 
October 7, 1997 




123 



435 



The Seminole Wars of the Nineteenth Century were a series of conflicts that 
involved the American, Native American, and African populations of the territory that 
became Florida. At beginning of the Nineteenth Century, tensions between the United 
States and the Seminole increased as Americans trespassed onto tribal territory and 
slave-owners accused the Seminole of illegally sheltering their runaway slaves. These 
conflicts with the Seminole continued to escalate until war was declared in 1817. 
General (later President) Andrew Jackson distinguished himself during the First 
Seminole War (1817-1821). Seminole leader Billy Bowlegs proved a formidable 
opponent to Jackson whose fame was only overshadowed by that of the great Osceola 
who led the Seminole during the Second War (1835-1842). During this conflict, the 
Seminole fought to remain on their lands in Florida, but they were defeated and most 
were removed to reservations in Oklahoma. The Third Seminole War (1855-1858) 
involved the few remaining Seminole who wanted to protect the last lands under 
their control: the wetlands of Southern Florida. Their determination wore down the 
United States; the Florida Seminole were ultimately allowed to remain on their lands. 
The chronology of these hostilities can be misleading for while three distinct periods 
of warfare are recognized, the Seminole continued to resist American hegemony 
throughout the Nineteenth Century. Students, therefore, should probably consider 
studying the entire century of struggle and not just the few years of actual warfare. 

This pathfinder was developed for the students of the Ahfachkee School on the 
Big Cypress Reservation in Clewiston, Florida. It is a tribal institution made up of 
nearly 100 students in grades k-12. While the school's web page did not indicate the 
extent of its library facility, the students do have access to at least two online 
computers. The Seminole Tribal Library also has a branch in Clewiston thus students 
and teachers can utilize this resource for acquiring information. 




ik:a 



436 



In preparing this pathfinder, I considered two levels of inquiry. The first level 
is designed for students who want basic information about the events, people, and 
locales involved in the Seminole Wars. Resources selected for this Basic Search are 
written in a clear, easy to understand style and are likely to be available at a school or 
public library. Encyclopedias, atlases, biographical sources, library catalogs, and back- 
of-book bibliographies are emphasized for this type of research, and are indicated by 
a • on the pathfinder. More advanced searches for students and teachers build on this 
basic level using indexes, published bibliographies, and online searches to access 
scholarship on the Seminole Wars, the history of Native Americans, and Florida 
History. This Advanced Search can uncover more in-depth sources such as first-hand 
battle accounts by veterans of the Seminole Wars, United States government 
documents relating to the treatment of the Seminole prisoners, or lesson plans that 
incorporate the Seminole Wars into classroom projects. Resources for this Advanced 
Search are indicated by a 

I accessed the materials represented in this pathfinder through either the 
online catalog and online indexes at the University of Texas' Perry Castaneda Library 
or through the online catalog of the Austin Public Library. The juvenile reference 
section at the Little Walnut Creek branch of APL was particularly useful as was the 
general reference section in PCL at UT. Internet resources are also included because 
several were found to be both informative and eye-appealing; they are also a low-cost 
alternative to books that can be easily accessed by the teacher or students. Overall, I 
focused on those materials that included bibliographies because the ultimate purpose 
of this project is to guide middle school students and their teachers to resources on 
the Seminole Wars beyond those found in the classroom or school library. 




125 



437 



Annotated Bibliography for the Seminole Wars Pathfinder* 



ENCYCLOPEDIAS and other basic reference works. 

1. Ciment, James. Scholastic Encyclopedia of the North American Indian . New York: 

Scholastic Reference, 1996. 

This work incorporates compact articles with high-tech graphics and boldfaces the 
many terms used that are featured in a mini-dictionary/ glossary at the back of the 
book. While the content may not be highly detailed, it is a good quick-reference and 
is formatted with a layout that should appeal to the pre-teen student. Look under 
Seminole for a two-page spread that tells the history of the Seminole through tables, 
photographs, and profiles of tribal leaders. 

2. Dictionary of the Indian Tribes of the Americas . Newport Beach, CA: American 

Indian Publications, 1995. 

This three volume set is a comprehensive history of all of the major and many lesser 
known tribes of native North Americans. Entries provide geographical location, 
biographical information on noted members, descriptions of rituals, dress and 
customs, and illustrations where possible. Profiles of pueblos, reservations, and other 
communities are also featured. Perhaps the most useful aspect of this dictionary is 
the inclusion of bibliographical sources in all of the articles— even for more obscure 
tribes. The Seminole article's book list should be checked by the student wanting 
information on the tribe or the Seminole Wars. 

3. Handbook of North American Indians, Volume IV: History of Indian-White"^ 

Relations . Washington DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1988. 

This ambitious (incomplete) multi-volume work published by the Smithsonian 
Institution is probably the most comprehensive resource on the native peoples of 
North America. The fourth volume of the series. History of Indian-White Relations , 
includes the article "Indian-United States Military Situation, 1775-1848" by John K. 
Mahon, that discusses the Seminole Wars in a broader context. Mahon's entry 
includes maps and illustrations from the time of the Seminole Wars depicting pro- 
and anti- Seminole sentiments. 



4. Ready Reference American Indians . Vol. III. Harvey Markowitz, consulting editor. 

Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, Inc: 1995. 

A concise, two-page summary of the wars is located under the heading Seminole Wars. 
This three volume work is designed for the quick access of information on Native 
Americans. E^ch encyclopedic entry begins with a table indicating the culture's 
geographic area, the language group of the people, the primary location of the tribe, 
and the population of that tribe according to the 1990 Census. The article is then 
organized chronologically by century. Major works on the topic are featured in short 
bibliographies following each article and the editors included extensive cross listings 
to other relevant topics treated elsewhere in the work. Other subject headings to 
search under include Seminole; African~Americ&n/AmericBn Indian Relations; 

Bowlegs^ Billy; Creek War; and Osceola 

A HISTORICAL ATLAS will give the researcher an understanding of the 
geographical realities faced during the Seminole Wars. 

5. Waldman, Carl and Molly Braun. Atlas of the North American Indian . New York: 

Facts on File, 1985. 



12B 



438 



Xhe summary of the Seminole Wars on pages 122 and 123 is the most concise and 
well written of any researched during this project. While the maps were only two 
color, they featured the names and dates of what must have been all of the major 
battles of the Seminole Wars. This work also graphically recounts the struggles 
between Native Americans and the United States during the history of the Southeast. 



BIOGRAPHICAL SOURCES on the people who took part in the conflict. 

6. Waldman, Carl. Who Was Who in Native American History; Indians and Non-Indians 
from Early Contacts through 1900 . New York: Facts on File, 1990. 

In this Who Was Who, every key individual who fought in the Seminole Wars was 
listed and cross referenced against the other participants. Any featured illustrations 
were line drawings, but the entries more than made up for any lack of color or 
graphic power. Not only were the biographical portraits concisely written in an easy 
to read style, they were printed in a legible-size type. Ekisily overlooked warriors 
from all sides were granted respectably sized entries. This book gets the top prize. 
Look under the name of the Seminole tribesman or the American military leader you 
are interested in learning more about. Some good choices are "Osceola,” "Alligator,” 
"Jumper,” "Billy Bowlegs," "Major Frances Dade,” and "Greneral Duncan Clinch." 



BOOKS written for middle-school aged students. 

7. Andryszewski, Tricia. The Seminoles: People of the Southeast . Brookfield, CT: 

1995. 

Recounts the history of the Seminole peoples and the Seminole Wars in an easy to 
read format. Colorful photographs give a graphic account of life among the Florida 
tribes. Chapter four is devoted to the Second Seminole War focusing mainly on the 
tri um ph and later death of the great Seminole leader Osceola. 

8. Garbarino, Merwyn S. The Seminole . New York: Chelsea House Publishers, 1989. 

Written in a slightly more challenging style, this book covers the history of the 
Seminole tribe and the Seminole Wars more extensively than the Andryszewski work. 
While there are fewer color photographs, Gabarino incorporates several illustrations, 
including political cartoons, that were created during the time of the Seminole Wars 
thereby giving the student an idea of how the United States perceived its Seminole 
enemy. Unfortunately there are no cartoons depicting how the Seminole viewed the 
U.S. The Seminole also features an informative glossary and a "Seminole at a Glance" 
fact sheet at the end of the book. Its bibliography, while less comprehensive than 
that in the Andreyszewski work, mentions other resources suitable for middle school 
readers. 



RESEARCH METHODS are particularly useful for more advanced searches. 

9. Haas, Marilyn L. Indians of North America: Methods and Sources for Library 
Research. Hamden, CT: Library Professional Publications, 1983. 

An excellent resource on Native American history that outlines basic and advanced 
search strategies. Haas' landmark work begins with a comprehensive explanation of 
subject classification and call numbers with examples in the Library of Congress and 
Dewey Decimal systems. Online databases, library catalogs, handbooks, 
encyclopedias, and directories are discussed and described as are tips for best utilizing 




127 



439 



them. The last section of the book consists of two bibliographies: an annotated 
listing of books under subject headings such as Folklore , Captives, Libraries, and 
Missions, and an non-annotated bibliography on the Tribes of North America. While it 
is written in a clear style, younger students may balk at the methodology described. 
Teachers and older students may find this an invaluable resource. I would recommend 
it to anyone planning to study Native American history. 

10. Hill, Edward E. Guide to Records in the National Archives of the United States 

Relating to American Indians. Washington DC: National Archives and Records 
Service, 1981. 

Book outlines what resources on Native Americans are being preserved at the 
National Archives. While not every researcher will have the opportunity or need to 
travel to the National Archives, an awareness of what is available can be an asset to 
any project. Hill discusses the history and classification of many types of records 
such as those of the Land Management Bureau and the correspondence and of the 
Seminole Tribal Agency. Several sections were devoted to resources on armed 
conflict between the United States military and Native Americans including records 
from the Seminole Wars. Look under the heading Seminole Indians — Military and 
Naval Operations. 



SUBJECT BIBLIOGRAPHIES about the Seminole Wars and other Native American 
subjects. 

11. Hirschfelder, Arlene B. Mary Gloyne Byler, Michael A. Dorris. Guide to Research 
on North American Indians . Chicago: American Library Association, 1983. 

Compilation of English-language sources on Native American peoples from across the 
United States and Canada including a few important sources on Mexico, Central, and 
South America. Each title is accompanied by lengthy annotations that identify the 
author by organization of origin, the tribes associated or mentioned within, and 
information about the source's citations. The entire bibliography is arranged 
alphabetically by author and is divided into topics such as general studies, political 
organizations. Autobiographies, Biographies, Religion, Philosophy, Law, Education, 
and Literature. This book is best used in conjunction with Haas' Indians of North 
America, but is a good source for titles when used alone. 

13. Prucha, Francis Paul. Bibliographical Guide to the History of Indian-White 

Relations in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977. 

14. . Indian-White Relations in the United States: A Bibliography of Works 

Published, 1975-1980 . Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press, 1982. 

These companion bibliographies are the result of sources uncovered during a lifetime 
of research by a Jesuit professor of history at Marquette University. While not for 
the casual researcher, thy guide the reader to some unusual and useful sources such as 
newspaper citations from the time of the Seminole Wars, letters written by soldiers, 
and other first-hand accounts of battle. These two works, the original 1977 version 
and a 1982 update, include citations of many hard to find sources published over the 
past two centuries. All of the citations are arranged alphabetically by author under 
such subject headings as Military Relations, Indian E^ducation, Legal Relations, and 
Indian Affairs. Prucha also discusses the acquisition and use of materials from the 
National Archives and outlines a guide to sources such as Indian newspapers. Perhaps 
the most useful feature of Prucha's bibliographies is his extensive index; the lists can 
be searched using the name of an individual, an institution, or an event. 




i o 



J-CO 



440 



15. The American South: A Historical Bibliography . Volumes I & II. Jessica S. 

Browiiy editor. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-Clio, Inc, 1986. 

While not strictly a source on Native Americans, Seminole life and culture are part of 
Southern History and are well treated within this work. This publication by the 
historical reference service ABC-Clio includes over 8000 citations of resources 
covering the history of the American South and other specialized topics such as 
Images of the South and Southern Society, the Southern economy, and Southern 
Politics. An entire section in Volume II is devoted to Indians in Southern History. A 
search in the index under Seminole and Seminole Wars yielded several resources of 
potential use to a teacher or including several first hand accounts of veterans. 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES specifically geared for the educator are easily 
accessed through the ERIC family of indexes, abstracts, and reports. These are 
available on the World Wide Web and can be accessed through the UT Library Online 
Web Page at http://www.llb.utexa8.edu (select Indexes, Abstracts, and Full Text ) 

15. ERIC, an acronym for Education Resources Information Center, is the general 
term used for the government-sponsored service that indexes, abstracts, and publishes 
information on all aspects of education. ERIC information is available online through 
University of Texas as ERIC (OVID Online), but it can also be accessed through the two 
bound sources RIE (Resources in E^ducation) and CUE (Current Index to Journals in 
Education). Try using the subject headings Seminole, Seminole Wars, Seminole Tribe, 
Osceola. 



16. A superb JOURNAL, the Florida Historical Quarterly, has published several 
favorably reviewed articles in recent years concerning the Seminole Wars and it 
continues to be a viable resource for students of the American Southeast. This 
periodical is the organ of the Florida Historical Association and it publishes articles 
that have undergone peer-review, therefore the conclusions of its featured authors 
have been judged sound by fellow historians. Regular perusal will allow the reader to 
learn about the latest issues researched on Florida and its peoples. 

ONLINE RESOURCEiS give the student and teacher access to sources on the World 
Wide Web. Some web sites were found to have useful information and eye-catching 
graphics depicting the Seminole Wars, its battlefields, and heroes. They also all 
included bibliographies and links to other sources on the Seminole Wars. 

17. "Florida Seminoles and the Florida War Web Page." [No Dates]. Available [online]: 

www.geocities.com/yosemite/1743/seminole.html [Accessed 7 October 1997]. 

Features narratives on the Seminole Wars written by historian Christopher D. 
Kimball. Kimball adds a new article every month (click on the title of the article for 
its full text) and the site features links to other Seminole web pages of interest. This 
site would be best used to get detailed descriptions of some of the battles and for 
profiles of the personalities involved. Many of these two to three page articles have 
been submitted to newspapers and are written on a level that should be accessible to 
the middle school student. 

18. "The Seminole Tribe Web Page, History of the Seminole Wars." [No Dates]. 

Available [online]: www/seminoletribe.com/history [Accessed 7 October 
1997]. 

Features a history section that describes the battles of the Seminole Wars, Profiles 
the Leaders of both sides, and has pictures of the major events. Good graphics. Try 
searching under the headings Indian Removal , No Surrender!, Osceola and Abiaka , 
Survival in the Swamp, and The Council Oak for more informative pages that focus 

129 







441 



on particular events and personalities of the Seminole Wars. Click on Bibliography to 
get lists for books and materials recommended for the general public on this topic. 

19. *’Seminole Tribal Library System Web Page." [No Dates]. Available [online]: 
www.gate.net/^semtribe/library/library.html [Accessed 7 October 1997]. 

Describes the tribal library system that provides reading materials and other resources 
to Seminole reservations. Click on the graphics to view pictures of Osceola, Jumper 
and battle scenes from the Seminole Wars. Click on Bibliogra pb y to get lists of 
recommended books. Choose Branches for information on the address, hours, and 
phone numbers of all four branches in the tribal library system including those of the 
Willie Frank Memorial Library in Clewiston, Florida. While anyone can use the 
materials owned by the facility on-site, borrowing privileges are extended to tribal 
members only and interlibrary loan is not available. 



STYLE MANUALS. 

20. "Citing Electronic Information in History Papers." [11 September 1997]. 

Available [online]: www.people.memphis.edu/**mcrouse/elcite.html [7 October 

1997]. 

Gives examples of how to cite online resources in history papers and adds fuel to the 
debate over exactly who should decide the citation format. 

21. Turabian, Kate L. A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and 

Dissertations. . Fifth Edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987. 
Classic work used most often in social science track courses. My favorite. 




130 



442 



SEMINOLE WARS (1815-1900): A PATHFINDER 




The Seminole Wars were a century-long struggle between the Seminole Tribe and 
the United States over the rights of the Seminole to remain on their Florida lands. 
This pathfinder will help the Ahfachkee School 6th-8th grade student perform a 
BASIC SEARCH to find information on the events of and persons involved in the 
Seminole Wars. Students wanting more in-depth information and teachers may wish 
to continue with the ADVANCED SEARCH to locate more detailed and 
educational sources. 



To perfom a BASIC SEARCH, follow the steps marked by a •. 
The ADVANCED SEARCH continues with steps indicated by a •• 



• ENCYCLOPEDIAS are a great place to start. This way you can understand the 
basic chronology of the conflicts and identify some of the major personalities for 
later study. Suggested headings include: Seminole, Seminole IVars, and Osceola. 

Dictionary of the Indian Tribes of the Americas . Vol. 111. Newport Beach, CA: 
American Indian Publications, 1995. 

Search under Seminole^ pages 810-814, and check the extensive bibliography included in 
the Seminole article. 

Ready Reference American Indians . Vol. 111. Harvey Markowitz, consulting 
editor. Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, Inc: 1995. 

Look under the heading Seminole Wars, pages 704-705, for a good summary of events. Other 
subject headings to search under include Seminole; Aftican^American/American Indian 
Relations; Bowlegs, BiJIy; Creek War; and Osceola 



• A HISTORICAL ATLAS will provide maps of the Seminole Wars. 

Waldman, Carl and Molly Braun. Atlas of the North American Indian . New 
York: Facts on File, 1985. 

This reference work features a very good summary of the Seminole Wars and maps of the 
msgor battles on pages 122-123. 



• BIOGRAPHICAL SOURCES describe the people who took part in the wars. 

Waldman, Carl. Who Was Who in Native American History: Indians and Non- 
Indians from I^rly Contacts through 1900 . New York: Facts on File, 
1990. 

Look under the name of the Seminole or American military leader you are interested in 
learning more about. Some good choices are **Osceola,** ** Alligator,** **Jumper,** **Billy 
Bowlegs,** **M^jor Frances Dade,** and **General Duncan Clinch.** 

• LIBRARY CATALOG search your school or public library’s catalog by the titles of 
books mentioned in bibliographies or under these Library of Congress subject 
headings: 



Seminole Wars 

Seminole War, 1st (2nd, or 3rd) 
Indians of North America — Seminole 



Osceola 
Bowlegs, Billy 



131 



.443 



• INTERNET REiSOURCE^ include World Wide Web pages that have information on 
the Seminole Wars. Most have links to other sites on the web with information on 
the Seminole Tribe. 

The Seminole Tribe Web Page, History of the Seminole Wars, 
http:// WWW/ 8emlnoletrlbe.com/ history 

Seminole Tribal Library System Web Page. 

ht t p: // www.gat e.net/'**8emtrlbe /library / llbrary.html 

Florida Seminoles and the Florida War Web Page 

http://www.geocltle8.com/yo8emlte/ 1 743 /se mlnole.html 



•• Sources that describe RESEARCH METHODS, or how to research efficiently, are 
particularly useful for more advanced searches. 

Haas, Marilyn L. Indians of North America; Methods and Sources for Library 
Research. Hamden, CT: Library Professional Publications, 1983. 

This resource describes how books on Native American history are arranged in a library and 
gives good tips on researching Native American topics. 



•• SUBJECT BIBLIOGRAPHIES lead the researcher directly to scholarly books and 
articles written about the Seminole Wars and other Native American subjects. 

Hirschfelder, Arlene B. Mary Gloyne Byler, Michael A. Dorris. Guide to 
Research on North American Indians . Chicago: American Library 
Association, 1983. 

English-language sources on Native American peoples from across the United States and 
Canada are listed in this work. Check in the index under Seminole. 

The American South: A Historical Bibliography . Volumes I & II. Jessica S. 

Brown, editor. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-Clio, Inc, 1986. 

An entire section in Volume n is devoted to Indians in Southern History. Search in the 
index under Seminole and Seminoie Wars . 



•• Teaching materials and other EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES specifically geared 
for the educator are easily accessed through the ERIC family of indexes, abstracts, and 
reports. These are available in print form and on the World Wide Web. The online 
version can be accessed through the UT Library Online Web Page at 

http://www.llb.utexa8.edu (select Indexes, Abstracts, and Full Text ) 



By now you should have Information from a variety of sources on the 
Seminole Wars. If you need to request a book through Interllbrary Loaut 
ask your school or public librarian for assistance. 

— Jennifer M. Payne 
October 8, 1997 




1 Q9 

JL 



444 



Twentieth Century History of the Seminole Indians 
A Pathfinder 



Michelle L. Gonzales 
LIS 382L.3 Roy 
December 3, 1997 




1 

_a_ w 



Gonzales, Michelle 



445 



Twentieth Century History of the Seminole Indians 
— A Pathfinder — 

The Seminole Indians, a tribe descended from the Creeks, have lived in the Florida 
Everglades since the 1700s. During the Federal Indian removal efforts of the 1800s, many were 
driven from their native land into Oklahoma Indian Territory; a few remained hidden in the 
Everglades. From then on, the tribe was divided between two separate communities, one in 
Oklahoma and one in Florida. In the 1960s, a branch of the tribe split off to become the 
Miccosukee Tribe. 

This pathfinder is designed to guide the user to information on the 20^'’ century history of 
the Seminole and Miccosukee Indians. The client is Lee Zepeda, a high school instructor at the 
Ahfachkee School on the Big Cypress Seminole Reservation in Florida. Mr. Zepeda teaches 
students at the Alternative Education High School, one unit of Ahfachkee. The pathfinder is 
designed to help 9*'’-12‘'’ graders locate information in the political, cultural, social, and economic 
history of the Seminole and Miccosukee Indians in the 20‘'’ century. It aims to facilitate an 
introduction to the topic, as well as to provide guidance for further, more comprehensive 
research. Because the school is a member of the Four Directions Project, an initiative designed to 
increase the use of technology in Native American schools, it identifies electronic as well as print 
resources. 

I began my search for information by reviewing entries on the Seminole Indians in 
several reference works, including Encyclopedia Americana. American Indians, and Native 
America in the Twentieth Century: An Encyclopedia . These sources identified the origins of the 




134 



Gonzales, Michelle 



446 



tribe and key events in its history, and many included helpful bibliographies. They also 
suggested the following terms with which I searched for pertinent information: 

• Indian, American or Indians of North America 

• Seminole Indian(s)/tribe/nation 

• Miccosukee/Micosukee/Mikasuki 

• Five Civilized Tribes 

• Florida or Oklahoma 

Using these terms and the citations I obtained from bibliographies in the reference works, 
I searched the online public-access catalog of the University of Texas at Austin General 
Libraries, UTCAT, for books on the Seminoles and on Native Americans generally. This 
identified approximately 80 works owned by UT General Libraries; from this group I selected 
and reviewed those works whose titles suggested they might cover 20*** century Seminole history. 
Finally, I conducted an Internet search using Alta Vista. HotBot. Yahoo!, and Excite . From the 
sources reviewed I selected those that answered one or more of the following questions: 

• How have the demographics of the tribe changed, and why? 

• How has the political situation of the tribe changed, and why? 

• How has Seminole culture and lifestyle changed, and why? 

• What major events in Seminole history have been noted? 

• What is the condition of the Seminole tribe today? 

• Where can I find more information on Seminole History? 

Criteria for inclusion in the pathfinder were fourfold: depth of coverage, appropriateness for the 
audience, authority, and utility as a research guide. I sought sources that offered more than a few 
sentences on 20*'' century history but that written at a level appropriate for high school students. I 
did not include sources that were difficult to use (due to lack of an index, for example.) Also, I 
considered the author and/or the publisher of each work; I included only works by established 
authors or reliable publishing houses. Finally, I tried to include sources that provided 
bibliographies or suggestions for further reading. 




135 



Gonzales, Michelle 



447 



Annotated Bibliography 

Citation of sources follows the guidelines in MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers, 4''’ 

ed., by Joseph Gibaldi (New York: Modem Language Association of America, 1995.) 

1 

Academic American Encyclopedia . 22 vol. Danbury, CT: Grolier, 1997. 

Academic American is a general encyclopedia designed for high school students. Under 
the heading “Indians, American,” it contains a section on Indians in the 20‘*' century that 
covers population, land holdings, government policy, the American Indian Movement, 
claims, self-government, and education. This section provides excellent background for 
studying the 20‘** century history of American Indians. Under “Indians, American: 
Federal Reservations,” it contains a map and list of reservations by state (see Oklahoma 
and Florida). Under “Seminole” it contains a brief entry that focuses mainly on tribal 
origins and 19**’ c. history. Use the index to locate references to Seminoles in other 
entries. 



2 

American Indians . Ed. Harvey Markowitz. 3 v. Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, Inc., 1995. 

This encyclopedia contains a 3-page entry on the Seminole tribe, covering topics such as 
culture area, language group, location, population size, tribal origins, culture, and history. 
The essay provides respectable coverage of 20**’ century events. It includes see also 
references and a brief bibliography. 



3 

The American South: A Historical Bibliography . 2 v. Ed. Jessica S. Brown. Santa Barbara, CA: 
ABC-Clio, 1986. 

This lengthy bibliography covers many topics in Southern history. Volume II contains a 
section entitled “Indians in Southern History: The Twentieth Century,” which contains 
eight references to articles and books about the Seminoles. Also, the Index contains 
entries under “Seminole Indians,” “Seminole Wars,” and “Miccosukee Indians.” 



4 

Biographical Dictionary of Indians of the Americas . 2 v. Newport Beach, CA: American Indian 
Publishers, Inc., 1991. 

Use the index to this biographical dictionary to locate entries on notable Seminoles and 
Miccosukees. Includes historical as well as modem day figures. Illustrated with photos 
and drawings. Includes an alphabetical list of entries as well as an index of entries by 
tribal affiliation. 




136 



Gonzales, Michelle 



448 



5 

Chronology of the American Indian: A Guide to Native Peoples of the Western H emisphere. 
Newport Beach, CA: American Indian Publishers, Inc., 1994. 

A detailed chronology covering notable events in Native American history from 25,000 
BC to 1994. Use the index to locate events in Seminole history; look under “Seminole 
Indians” and “Five Civilized Tribes.” Entries are generally a few sentences long, and 
reflect both gradual changes as well as discrete events. Strong coverage of the history of 
Indian- White relations. 



6 

Encyclopedia Americana . 30 vol. Danbury, CT: Grolier, 1991. 

Americana is a general but scholarly adult encyclopedia. It contains a substantial chapter 
on American Indians that includes a discussion of Indian ways of life after European 
contact, and an inventory of govermnent provisions for (and against) the Indian. It is a 
good source for an overview of themes, trends, issues, and events in the 20* century 
history of Native North America. (It also contains a brief entry on the Seminoles, which 
provides only a brief mention of the Seminoles today.) 



7 

Garbarino, Merwyn S. Big Cvnress: A Changing Seminole Community . New York: Holt, 
Rinehart, and Winston, Inc., 1972. 

A cultural anthropologist’s report of his studies of the Seminole commumty on the Big 
Cypress Reservation. The author was interested primarily in the effects contact with 
outside society has had on Seminole lifestyle and culture. Specifically, he covers the 
changes following the introduction of the cattle industry and the development of a new 
political structure. Includes references and a list of recommended readings. 



8 

Handbook of North American Indians . Gen. ed. William C. Sturtevant. 20 v. Washington, D.C.: 
Smithsonian Institution, 1988. 

An exhaustive, scholarly work, this multi-volume encyclopedia is arranged by culture 
area. Unfortunately, the volumes covering Seminole culture areas (Plains and Southeast) 
have not yet been published. Volume 4, “History of U.S.-Indian Relations,” is a good 
source for information on 20*** century Indian- White relations, but not for detailed 
information on the Seminole tribe. Success with this source requires extensive searching 
and use of the index. 




137 



Gonzales, Michelle 



449 



9 

Kersey, Harry A. “Seminoles and Miccosukees: A Century in Retrospective.” In Indians of the 
Southeastern United States in the Late 20^^ Century . Ed. J. Anthony Paredes. Tuscaloosa, AL: 
University of Alabama Press, 1992. 

This 18-page essay covers developments of the two tribes in the 20‘^ century. Kersey 
discusses government relations and legislation, land claims, self-government, economics, 
education, and reservation life. It is authoritative and readable. 



10 

Kersey, Harry A. The Seminole and Miccosukee Tribes: A Critical Bibliography . Bloomington, 
IN: Indiana University Press, 1987. 

A lengthy bibliographical essay that combines a narrative on Seminole history with a 
bibliography of works on various topics in Seminole studies. Three sections provide 
significant emphasis on 20*'’ century Seminole history: “Withdrawal, Stabilization, and 
Re-emergence, 1858-1925;” “Reservations: The New Deal Through World War II, 1926- 
1956;” and “From Near-termination to Self-determination, 1857-1982.” Includes lists of 
reading “for the beginner” and “for a basic library. The extensive bibliography notes 
works appropriate for secondary school students with an asterisk. 



11 

Klein, Barry T. Reference Encyclopedia of the American Indian . 7'*’ ed. West Nyack, NY: Todd 
Publications, 1995. 

A single-volume work on American Indians comprised of fom main sections: (1) U.S. 
soiurce listings (i.e., directory), (2) Canadian soiurce listings, (3) bibliography, and (4) 
biographical sketches of notable people. Provides a wealth of current factual and 
directory information, such as lists of tribes, tribal councils, reservations, and Native 
American organizations. In sections arranged geographically, look for the Seminoles 
under Florida or Oklahoma. Use the subject index to the bibliography as a guide to 
fiuther reading. 



12 

Native America in the Twentieth Century: An Encyclopedia . Ed. Mary B. Davis. New York: 
Garland Pub., 1994. 

Contains a 3-page entry on the 20"’ centvuy history of the Seminole tribe and a separate 
entry the Miccosukee tribe. Each entry covers culture, economy, politics, leadership, 
education, and allotment. Includes see also references and lists of further reading. There 
are also maps showing the locations of Seminole reservations on p. 405 and 547. The 
index can be used to locate additional references to the Seminoles; look under 
“Seminole,” “Miccosukee,” and “Five Civilized Tribes.” 




138 



Gonzales, Michelle 



450 



13 

Native American Women: A Biographical Dictionary . Ed. Gretchen M. Bataille. New York: 
Garland, 1993. 

Provides detailed biographical information on notable Native American women. Includes 
an index of entries by tribal affiliation. Listed under “Seminole” are Susan Billie, Betty 
Mae Jumper, and Laura Mae Osceola. Includes references. 



14 

The Native North American Almanac . Ed. Duane Champagne. Detroit, MI: Gale Research, Inc., 
1994. 

This topically-arranged almanac is best accessed through its index. Look under 
“Seminole,” “Mikasuki,” and “Five Civilized Tribes.” Contains lengthy essays with 
bibliographical references on topics such as demography, language, law/legislation, 
administration, activism, environment, religion, health, education, and economy. There is 
an entry devoted to Seminoles under “Major Culture Areas.” Includes chronology, 
glossary, bibliography, index, and illustrations. 

15 

Seminole Nation of Oklahoma . < http://www.cowboy.net/native/seminole > Online. Internet. 
November 16, 1997. 

The official homepage of the Seminole Nation of Oklahoma presents a brief description 
of the current tribal government, religion, school system, geographical location, and 
population. It provides links to various agencies, departments, and projects. It does not 
yet contain any substantial historical information, but may later; the site is still under 
construction. 



16 

Seminole Tribe of Florida. < http://www.seminoletribe.com > Online. Internet. November 16, 
1997. 

As the official homepage of the Seminole Tribe of Florida, this site provides “information 
on tribal history, culture, backgrounds, and the entities that comprise the modem day 
Seminole Tribe of Florida.” Includes links to Seminole history, culture, government 
services, economic development, business, upcoming events, news and media, and the 
tribal newspaper. 

17 

The Seminole Tribune . <http:/www.seminoletribe.com/tribune/index.html> Online. Internet. 
November 16, 1997. 

The online version of the tribal newspaper, this site contains articles on current events 
and issues, as well as extracts from the 40^’’ anniversary edition of the Tribune, which 




139 



Gonzales, Michelle 



451 



contained lengthy articles on Seminole history. These articles provide extensive accounts 
of 20**’ century Seminole history from the perspective of the tribe itself 



18 

Seminoles . < http://www.dos.state.fl.us/flafacts/seminole.html > Online. Internet. November 16, 

1997. 

A site maintained by the State of Florida, this page presents a brief history of the 
Seminoles, including origins, relocation, and reorganization. It outlines only major events 
in 20**’ century Seminole history, but does provide links to other sources of information 
on topics such as Seminole biography, tribal flags, Seminole Wars, and American Indians 
in Florida. 

19 

Statistical Record of Native North Americans . Ed. Martha A. Reddy. Detroit, MI: Gale, 1993. 

Provides statistical information on all Native American tribes. Topics include history, 
demographics, the family, education, culture and tradition, health and health care, social 
and economic conditions, business and industry, land and water management, 
government relations, law and law enforcement. Contains 1980 census data as well as 
estimations of past and future conditions. Because each table is arranged differently, 
success in finding information on the Seminoles requires knowledge of various tribe 
names, locations, culture and language groups, reservation names, etc. Provides citations 
to original sources. 



20 

Waldman, Carl. Atlas of the North American Indian . New York: Facts on File, 1985. 

A topically arranged encyclopedia. Chapter 7, “Contemporary Indians,” discusses 
centralization, bureaucratization, removal, reservations, assimilation, allotment, tribal 
restoration and reorganization, termination, urbanization, self-determination, federal 
relations, social conditions, and cultural renewal. Appendices include a chronology and 
lists of tribes, reservations, museums, societies, villages, and archaeological sites. Use the 
index to locate specific references to Seminole, Miccosukee, and Five Civilized Tribes. 




140 



Gonzales, Michelle 



452 



Sources Not Examined 



1 

Covington, James W. The Seminoles of Florida . Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 1993. 
2 

Kersey, Harry A. An Assumption of Sovereignty: Social and Political Transformation Among 
the Florida Seminoles. 1953-1979 . Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press, 1996. 

3 

Kersey, Harry A. The Florida Seminoles and the New Deal. 1933-1942 . Boca Raton, FL: 
Atlantic University Press, 1989. 




141 



453 



Twentieth Century History of the Seminole Indians 
A Pathfinder' 



Tlie Seminole Indians, a Muskogean tribe descended from the Creeks, are natives of the Florida 
Everglades. During the federal Indian removal efforts of the 1800s, the tribe was divided in two, a small 
group remaining in Florida and the rest being driven into Oklahoma Indian Territory, Today there are three 
Seminole communities, the Oklahoma and Florida Seminoles and the Miccosukee, a tribe that branched 
away from the Seminoles in the 1960s, This pathfinder is designed to introduce 9^-12^ grade students to 
the 20 century history of the Seminole and Miccosukee Indians, and to provide a starting point for further 
research. 



When conducting a search in a library catalog, index, or on the Internet, use the 
following terms to locate information on the Seminole tribe: 

Indian, American or Indians of North America - Florida or Oklahoma 
Indian, American or Indians of North America — Twentieth Century 
Seminole Indian(s)/tribe/nation 
Miccosukee or Micosukee or Mikasuki 
Five Civilized Tribes 

Read a general essay on the Senciinole Indians for background on tribal origins, 
culture, and history. 

American Indians . Ed. Harvey Maricowitz. 3 v. Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, Inc., 1995. 
The 3-page entry on the Seminole tribe covers topics such as culture area, 
language group, location, population size, tribal origins, cultme, and history. 

Find an overview of 20* century events and issues in Native American history in 
one of the following general sources. 

Academic American Encyclopedia . Danbury, CT: Grolier, 1997. 

Under “Indians, American,” read the section “Indians in the 20* century.” 

Encyclopedia Americana . Danbury, CT: Grolier, 1991. 

Under “Indians, American: North American” read the section “Government 
provisions for and against the Indian.” 

Waldman, Carl. Atlas of the North American Indian . New York: Facts on File, 1985. 

Read ch^ter 7, “Contemporary Indians,” for a discussion of various 20**’ century 
issues, such as tribal restoration and reorganization, termination, urbanization, 
self-determination, federal relations, social conditions, and cultural renewal. 



' By Michelle Gonzales, University of Texas - Austin, GSLIS, LIS 382L.3, Fall 1997. 




142 



454 



Read essays on the ZO'*' century history of the Seminole and Miccosukee Indians. 

Kersey, Harry A. “Seminoles and Miccosukees: A Century in Retrospective. In Indians 
of the Southeastern United States in the Late 20**^ Century . Ed. J . Anthony Paredes. 
Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press, 1992. 

Covers 20**’ century government relations and legislation, land claims, self- 
government, economics, education, and reservation life. 

Native America in the Twentieth Century: An Encyclopedia . Ed. Mary B. Davis. New 
York: Garland, 1994. 

Read the entries for “Seminole” and “Miccosukee.” Covers culture, economy, 
politics, leadership, education, and allotment. Use the index to locate additional 
references to the Seminoles. 

Go to Seminole web sites on the Internet for historical information and a view of 

the Seminole tribe today. 

\ 

Seminole Tribe of Florida. < http://www/seminoletribe.com > 

The official homepage of the Seminole Tribe of Florida provides links to 
information on tribal history, culture, and government, economic development, 
and business. 

The Seminole Tribune . <http:/www.seminoletribe.com/tribime/index.html> 

Read the extracts from the 40**’ anniversary edition of the Tribime : they provide 
extensive accounts of 20**’ century Seminole history from the perspective of the 
tribe itself. 

If you need more information, consult a bibUography on Seminole history, or 
look for articles in an index such as America: History and Life. 

The American South: A Historical Bibliography . Ed. Jessica S. Brown. Santa Barbara, 
CA: ABC-Clio, 1986. 

See the section entitled “Indians in Southern History: The Twentieth Century” for 
references to articles and books about the Seminoles. 

Kersey, Harry A. The Seminole and Miccosukee Tribes: A Critica l Bibliography. 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1987. 

This book combines a nanative on Seminole history with citations to works on 
various topics. Read the three sections that cover the 20**’ century, then refer to the 
bibliography for the complete records of works cited in the text. 



If you can’t find what you need, consult a Ubraidan. If your library doesn’t own 
the materials you want, ask your librarian about inter-library loan. 




143 



D«C«: Trl, IJ S«p 1S9S -C40D 

Fran; Suean Vc»lk«l *ve»lk«l«3a*l -oro> 

To: lOrlanaSuts .cc.ucaxAS .edu 
Subjoct: Pathfinder* for Fajr Direct icn. 

Dear Loriene Xoy; 

The ERIC Central Procesaing facility aer.t tr.e atcve docATer.t to cs. in* 

ERIC Clearinghou** cn Rural Ed\:ceiicn ar.l Smal. cchacla (ESIC/CRSSSI . Ab 1 
vas preparing the dccuaient for prcceisinj, 1 ncticac that yoc had retarr.ad 
an outdated eaiC reproduction relaaea. Tr.iS i« particjlarly pertinent 
because you checked -eval 7, and cn the r.ew relea.e lorxs. Level 2 ha a baer, 
aplit into Levaie 2A and IB. . . . , ^ 

Level 2 a p«rn«ica 'rapfcdccticr. and die8«.T.»nfte»cn in 3u.crcf*che and xn 
elactronic icadia for ERIC archival collection «ub*cfiber. only.- Level 2B 
peraillB • raprcdoct ion and disaeciineticr, *r. microfiche onx.y.* 

X acn attaching an elactronic vtraicr. of the r.ev celeaca fcm. helov. 

Plaaaa check Level 2A or 23, eigr. the release, and return to ui by fax or “ill. 

Thank you for your cooperaticn. It yoj have any Quest tens, call r>e at 
l>e00'634>912a. 

Susan Vcalkel 
Precasaing Coerdir^tar 
ERIC /CRESS 
P.O. Box IJtiS 
Charleston, kv 2f225 
Itx: 304-347-0487 



U.S. Oaparunent of Educaticr. 

Office of Educational Raiaarch a.nc Iffiprcverer.t :CERI! 

ERIC REPRCDUC?IC» RELEASE 

1 . Oocuetenc Idanti flea tier,: 

Title: Pathfinders for Four Directions: An Icdiganous Educational Model 

Author: Loriene Roy, edttcr 

Corporate Bcurce: 

Publication Data: 19»B 



II. Reproduction Release; < check one; 

In order to disseniinate aa k-tdelv ae poasiols txr.ely and aigniJicer.t 
itateriala of interest tc the oducaticr.ai coowur.ity, dccurente announced in 
the lacnchly abstract journal of th* ERIC syatar. ReaOiroea in Education 
(RIEJ, ace usually irade available tc users tr. r.icrofichs. ceprcduced paper 
Copy, and electronic r.«dia. and solo through the ERIC Docunent .Reprcduccicn 
Service (EDRSJ . Credit is given to the scurc* cf each dccumer.t. 



If ptrmiseion la granted to repreduc* tn.1 diBae3.ir.»;* tr.a idantlfiad 
dccumant. plaaaa check cn* of th* following thr«* cation* and aign the 

1 1 1111111 r n« * * 

^ Level I - Pecnittir.s rcprcduction and disaeni.-iat icn in micrefithe or ’ 
other ERIC archival w*dia (o.g. elactronic) and in paper copy. 



M - ytrJaTLtxng roprcducticn a.id disseirtna: icn in ricrofiche and 
in electronic itedia for ERIC erchivol collection auoscrifcers only. 



y 



Level 2B - Perciitting raprcduction and diaeaiiir.ation in cicrofic.hc only. 



Sign Hare: "1 hartby grant to the Ecucational Rescurces Infcrrvaticn Center 
(ERIC) nonexclusive pery.lasion to reprcduco and diB8 8r.inate thia docxnen: as 
indicacad above. Reproduction frot> the ERIC c.icrofich« cr electronic r-.sdia 
by persons other than ERIC arplcye*a and ita eystem centractore requir«B 
permiasion frora the copyright hcldar. Excepticn ie tide fer non-profit 
reproduction by libraries and other service agerxiCB :o aatiefy infcrraticn 
needs of educators in respense to diccrece Inquiries.* 



Signature: 

(yCOAAj2 TdZ 

PriScad Dame: — ^ Cj 

Lo/ziene 

Address: / 

S’ 2 t 5 



dJi^cjucJbL 

Drgari ratiCn ; 



Pr-iyp:iAjQjy- 
^<0ad ^djMncJVLj i 

-39 r 5 > 



AUST7f^ TTry/B" ’7^^12-119% 

III. Docucient Availability Information (from Kcn-ERTC Source): * 



Cocplete if peraission to reproduce ie not granted tc ERIC, cr if you want 
ERIC to cite eveileoility cf this dccur,er.t fror. ar.cthar ecurce. 



Publ isher /Die cr ibu cor : 



Pric* pec cepy; Quanticy prtca; 

IV. Referral of ERiC to Copyright /Rep reduction Sights ’Holder; 

If the right to grant reprcducticn ralaiBC ie »^lc by so-»e.-.e ether than the 
addreBses, pleaes cc.T.pl«te the fcllcvir.g: 

Nanc: 

Address : 



V. Attach this fern to the docume.nt b*ing su'cr.itted ar.i send both tc : 

SEFifA LAHHXM. COCRTIXATOR CF SERVICES A1>T! ACO’-’ISITIOKS 

ERIC Claarlnghouse cr. Rural Educe: icr. and Srrali Schocls 

F.O. Box 13 4d 

1031 Quarrler street 

Charleston. W 253l5-13c£ 



rhona ar.d electronic rail r.-rrJeers; 

300 / 624 -5 120 (Clcari.-.c.ncute toll-free numbar) 
304/347-0487 (Clearlnshcuse FAR .nxiban 
a56el0wvnvn.wvr.Bt .ecu (3srrr3 Lsnha.T. cn the Internet; 



^ 6 - 1 2 1 %n 



o 

ERIC 



