i 



DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 259 385 



TITLE 



INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



CS 209 156 

Bilingual,, Bicuitural, and Bidialectal Studies 
Related to Reading and Communication Skills: 
Abstracts of Doctoral Dissertations Published in 
"Di csertation Abstracts International," January 
through June 1985 (Vol. 45 Nos. 7 through 12). 
ERIC Clearinghouse on Reading and Communication 
Skills, Urbana, 111. 
85 

9p. ; Pages may be marginally legible. 
Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC01 Flus Postage. 

Alaska Natives; American Indians; Annotated 
Bibliographies; *Biculturalism; *Bidialectali sm; 
*Bi lingualism; Blacks; Doctoral Dissertations; 
Educational Research; Elementary Secondary Education; 
English (Second Language); *Language Research; 
♦Language Skills; *Learning Strategies; Literature 
Appreciation; Reading Achievement; Reading 
Comprehension; Reading Skills; Teacher Response; 
Vocabulary Development 



ABSTRACT 

This collection of abstracts is part of a continuing 
sr^ies providing information on recent doctoral dissertations. The 10 
titles deal with a variety of topics, including the following; (1) 
the effects of bilingual memory on learning vocabulary through the 
device of semantic mapping? (2) native American and Anglo use of 
compliance-gaining strategies; (3) learning style preference and 
reading achievement of urban Alaskan native students; (4) prospective 
secondary school teachers' responses to student use of black English 
in written compositions; (5) reading, readability, and the ESL 
reader; (6) the effects of semantic mapping on vocabulary act;uisition 
and reading comprehension of black inner city students; (7) the 
b haviors accompanying the writing process in selected third and 
fourth grade native American children; (8) dialect usage and function 
word acquisition as related to readiness for formal school 
curriculum; (9) factors influencing the offering of minority 
literature in Colorado high schools; and (10) linguistic cues used by 
elementary school bilingual and monolingual readers. (HOD) 



****************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 
*********************************************************************** 



o 

ERIC 



U.S. DCPAHTMf m Of EDUCATION 

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 

>/ CENTER (ERIC) 

. Thts document hat been .reproduced as 
r«ceived from the person or organi/rtton 
originating it 

Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 

• Points of view or opinions stated in this docu 
mont do not necessarily represent official NlE 
position or policy 



Bilingual, Bicultural, and Bidialectal Studies 
Related to Reading and Communication Skills: 

Abstracts of Doctoral Dissertations Published in Dissertation 
Abstracts International , January through June .1985 (Vol. 45 
Nos. 7 through 12) . 

Compiled by the Staff 
of the 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Reading and Communication Skills 



■ PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GHAN TED BY 

urtl 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



2 



The dissertation titles contained here are published with 
oermission of the University Microfilms International, publishers 
of Dissertation Abstracts International (copyright © 1985 by 
University Microfilms International) and may not be reproduced 
without their prior permission. 



This bibliography has been compiled as part of a continuing 
series designed to make information on relevant dissertations 
available to users of the ERIC system. Monthly issues of Dissertation 
Abstracts International are re/iewed in order to compile abstracts of 
dissertations on related topics, which thus become accessible in 
searches of the ERIC data base. Ordering information for dissertations 
themselves is included at the end of the bibliography. 

Abstracts of the following dissertations are included in this 
collection : 

Ayala, Javier Kasten, Wendy Christina 

AN INVESTIGATION OF THE THE BEHAVIORS ACCOMPANYING 

EFFECTS OF BILINGUAL MEMORY THE WRITING PROCESS IN 

ON LEARNING VOCABULARY THROUGH " SELECTED THIRD AND FOURTH 

THE DEVICE OF SEMANTIC GRADE NATIVE AMERICAN 

MAPPING CHILDREN 

Burton, Charline Ladd Lau, Aileen C. Watson 

NATIVE AMERICAN AND ANGLO DIALECT USAGE, FUNCTION' 

USE OF COMPLIANCE-GAINING WORD ACQUISITION AS RELATED 

STRATEGIES TO READINESS FOR FORMAL 



Hamsik, Marie Jacqueline 
READING, READABILITY, AND 
THE ESL READER 

Jones, Sandra Trotman 
THE EFFECTS OF SEMANTIC 
MAPPING ON VOCABULARY 
ACQUISITION AND READING 
COMPREHENSION OF BLACK 
INNER CITY STUDENTS 




Clyne, Roger Dean 
LEARNING STYLE PREFERENCE 
AND READING ACHIEVEMENT OF 
URBAN ALASKAN NATIVE STUDENTS 



Palmer, Polly 
FACTORS INFLUENCING THE 
OFFERING OF MINORITY 
LITERATURE IN COLORADO 
HIGH SCHOOLS 



Griffiths, Anne Hansen 
PROSPECTIVE SECONDARY 
TEACHERS' RESPONSES TO 
STUDENT USE OF BLACK 
ENGLISH IN WRITTEN 
COMPOSITIONS 



Rivera, Maria Aceves 
LINGUISTIC CUES USED BY 
ELEMENTARY BILINGUAL AND 
MONOLINGUAL READERS 



9 

ERIC 



4 



AN INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECTS OF BILINGUAL 
MEMORY ON LEARNING VOCABULARY THROUGH THE 
DEVICE OF SEMANTIC MAPPING Order No. DA842191 3 
Av ma, Javicr, Ph.D. The University of Wisconsin - Madison, 1984. 
219pp. Supervisor: Professor Dale 0 Johnson 

The purpose of the present study was to investigate the effects of 
Bilingual Memory on the learning of new English words when the 
instructional strategy is Semantic Mapping. 

The subjects were 352 fourth grade bilinguala from the Rio Grande 
Valley of Texas. Subjects were assigned to one of th< oe treatment 
group* Bilingual Semantic Mapping (Group 1); Monolingual 
Semantic Mapping (Group 2); and Control Group (Group 3). Subject* 
in Group 1 were taught new English words using a bilinguaJ mode 
(Spanish and English) of Semantic Mapping. Subjects in Group 2 
were taught using a monolingual (English only) mode and subjects in 
Group 3 did not receive vocabulary instruction. Group 3 only took the 
Pre and Pastiest 

The dependent variable was the group's mean Pre to Posttest gain 
score A multiple-choice Pretest and Posttest consisting of 45 English 
target words was given to all of the subjects. 

Each week subjects in Gruups 1 and 2 were taught three semantic 
maps. Each map had five target words After thre* weeks of 
instruction, forty-five target words had been taught. On the fourth 
week alt of the sublets were given the Posttest and comparisons of 
gain scores between the groups were made to determine the relative 
tflloency of each mode. 

The research hypothesis had predicted that the subjects in Group 
1 would have a significantly higher mean Pre to Posttest gain score 
than the subjects in Group 2. The results showed that: (1) Subject^ in 
Group 1 did not have a significantly higher mean Pre to Posttest gam 
score than subjects in Group 2. (2) When subjects were grouped 
according to language dominance, additional analyses showed that: 
(a) Spanish dominant subjects had a significantly higher mean gain 
score when taught using a bilinguaJ mode, (b) English dominant 
subjects had a significantly higher mean gain score when taught 
using a monolingual mode. 

Bilingual instruction had an additive effect on the learning of new 
English words with Spanish dominant bilinguals but it interfered with 
the English dominant bilinguala' learning of the same English words. 
The results of the present study have shown that neither a 
monolingual or a bilingual mode of Semantic Mapping was the most 
effective mode for all of the Nllngual subjects. Language dominance 
was shown to he ft cnticai viriaWe in determining which mode of 
Semantic Mapping was best for learning new Engiieh words. 



NATIVE AMERICAN ANO ANGLO USE OF COMPLIANCE- 
GAINING STRATEGIES Order No. 0A8504319 
BurrON. Charlink L add. P* 0. The University of Oklahoma, 19&4. 
i51pp Major Professor: F dmund C. Nuttall 

This study examines Native *.mericans and Ang os as they 
approach compliance-gaming situations. The functional approach 
presupposes intentionality in which a communicator constructs a 
mas&ag* intended to bring aijout a specific goal. The research ra 
concerned with the attempts of people to exert verbal control over 
other people. 

Fotty eight Native Americans (representing twenty one tribes) and 
fixTy-eiyht Angioj completed questionnaires. The results confirm thatt 
Native Americans and Anglos do use different "seta of rules" for 
expressing themselves appropriately in the same situations 

The result* are offered with the assumption they are gensralu'Q^lo 
tn nt icmst the four and presumably more, situations used in thia frtwrly 
n n Significant OWw and an Insignificant Otfw contort 



ERIC 



While the samp to cannot be considered representative of the 
general population, it cuts acro^*. the age, academics, area* of 
interest, and tribes. Therefore, the results should ai^u be 
Qerveralizabie to the tribes investigated by, and participating In, this 
study, and presumably more. 

The things uncover some important information which hopefully 
will stimulate isseerchers to investigate population* in other locate* in 
the continent^ United State* 



LEARNING STYLtf PREFERENCE AND READING 
ACHIEVEMENT 01" URBAN ALASKAN NATIVE STUDENTS 

Order No. 0A8418152 

Clyne, RoGtsDt-AN, Ph.D. Oregon Stat* University, 1 984. 146pp, 

The American public school system has been delegated tha 
responsibility for providing alt children with an equal educational 
opportunity. For the state of Alaska, this charge is both unique and 
difficult. The academic performance of Alaskan Native students, tha 
state's largest min^'*, J s ? serious concern due to their relatively 
inferior performa: id exceedingly high dropout rate, A literature 
review revealed few Mudies dealinn with Natives' unique 
characteristics and none investigating preferred learning atyla. 

The purpose of this study was to determine the learning styiea of 
Native students, compare them with their White classrroies, 
determine whether or not sex differences exist and to ascertain tha 
relationship between learning styles and reading achiev >ment 

The Learning Style Inventory was administered to 141 Native and 
478 White urban Anchorage students, grade 4-6. Data analysis 
included one- and two-way analysis of variance (ethnic group and 
sex) and Pearson product-moment correlation coefficients (ethnic 
group and reading achievement). 

Data analysis led to the rejection of all four null hypothesaa (alpha 
* .05). Significant differences between ethnic groups included: 
Persistence; Authority Figures Present; Requires Intake; Lata 
Morning; and Consistency. Native .students were less persistant , 
preferred the presence of teachers, desired less intake and preferred 
working in the late morning, while revealing greater inconsiatancy of 
preferences. Native females were significantly better motivatad than 
males on both Self Motivation and Teacher Motivation. Two tow, but 
significant correlation* were found between Native prtferencee 
(Noise Level and Responsibility) and readirg achlavemant wh»e 
eleven were pgnrflcant for White students. 

it waa concluded that significant differencee do exist betwaan 
Alaskan Nativa and White students* learning styiea which may hava 
educational implications. The data also suggest that acculturation 
may modify Natives' preferred learning styles and that the unkjua 
northern environment shared by both groups may cause unique 
physiological responses which make Natives and Whites mora 
common on selected characteristics than either are to the normaliva 
group. 

Recommendations included replication of the present study wflh 
both rural and urban Natives, exploring the impact of acculturation 
upon learning styles, determining whether or not life in the far North 
causes physiological responses which result in unique commonalltlee 
for its inhabitant* and exploration of the construct of sequential- 
simultaneous information processing ability with ^ativAe. 



PROSPECTIVE SECONDARY TCACHCRS 1 RESPONSES TO 
STUDENT USE OF BLACK ENGLISH IN WRITTEN 
COMPOSITIONS Order No. DA0429433 

Griffiths, Anne Hansen. Ed D. Memphis State University, 1984. 
163pp Major Professor: Frank W. Markus 

Purpose. The purpose of this study wai to determine if prospective 
teachers recognize black English usage and other English usage 
- Toi a in written compositions of high school students. Specifically, 
Una study was conducted to determine if students were graded 
differently for using black English in written compositions and aiso if 
significant differences existed between grades assigned to these 
compositions by white and black prospective secondary teachers, 
female and male prospective secondary teachers, and underclass and 
upperclass prospective secondary teachers. 

Procedures. Prospective secondary teac* /crs enrolled in courses 
at a large, urban state university were given an opportunity to read 
and evaluate five written student compositions, which contained 
varying numbers and kinds of general usage errors, and black English 
usa^e examples. The sample consisted of one hundred prospective 
secondary t pchers. 

The data were subjected to either a one way analysis of variance 
or t two by five analysis of variance in an attempt to discover if the 
respondents' race, sex, or student classification in college were 
factor* in their recognition of black English usage and subsequent 
evaluation of written student compositions containing such usage. 
Two scores weie used in analyzing the data: percentage scores (total 
number of perceived errors compared to true errors and converted to 
a percentage) and holistic scores (perceived quantitative evaluation 
of compositions). Any possible significant differences in ceH m$ans 
between the groups were explained by the Newman-Keuls post-hoc 
teat, which was used to show batween-group differences. 

Findings. (1) Significant differences occurred between the 
number of black English usage errors and prospective secondary 
teachers' quantitative evaluations of these mistakes. (2) Significant 
differences occurred between white and black prospective teachers' 
evaluations of the compositions. (3) Significant differences occurred 
between female and male prospective teachers' evaluations of the 
composhions (4) There were no significant differences between 
underclassmen and upperclassmen in their evaluations of the 
compositions. (5) Race and sex appeared to be the two factors 
ahowfng greatest significant differences, based on percentage 
scores. 

Conclusions. There are a number of conclusions which may be 
drawn from this study. (1) Less discrimi* iation and, therefore, less 
penalty by teacher* mey occur with poo er paper*, poewbfy due to the 
sheer quantity or mats of snor* percerv *j by the evaluator. . . . 
(Author's abstract exceeds stipulated maximum length, Discontinued 
here with permission of author.) UMI 



READING, READABILITY, AND THE ESL READER 

Order NO. DA&424607 

KamSik, Marie Jacqueline, Ph.D. The Florida State University x 1954. 
fJ6pp Maior Professor Frederick Jenks 

This study reports ihe results of research to determine whether 
readability formulas developed for the measuring of reading difficulty 
lor native English readers are applicable to the measuring of 
readability for English as a second language learners The specific 
purpose of this study was to determine rf four widely used readability 
formulas (the Flcsch formula, the Dale-Chall formula, the Fry Graph, 
and the Lorg^j formula) measured reading diiflculty for ESL students 
enrolled m intensive hnghsh centers >n the Unwed States in 
O'epftiatton iior ftcwJflrrue work 



The Spearman iank order correlation coefficient was used to 
measure the correlation between the cloze test results of ESL 
student* on a series of passage* known as the Miller-Coleman 
Readability Scate and the readability formula results of those same 
passages The findings were presented in four parts, (a) theclore 
difficulty index and standard devation of the reading passages based 
on results of the cloze tests, (b) the difficulty index of the same 
passages using thefoui different readability formulas; (c) the 
relationship between the cloze difficulty index and the difficult: index 
of each readability formula; and (d) a method to enable teacher* to 
match a student to appropriate reading material given a known 
TOEFL score and a known readability level for a passage or text. 

From analysis of the data, It was determined that a correlation did 
exist between the ranh orders of the passages as measured by the 
cloze scores of the ESL students and by the readability formulas, end 
that this correlation was meaningful. 

According to the ddta of the sample, it now seems possible to stale 
that the four readability formulas and graph* used in this study do 
measure readability of ESL student* and that they can be used to 
select material appropriate to the reading level of ESL student*. 



THE EFFECTS oF 9EMANT!C MAPPING ON VOCABULARY 
ACQUISITION ANO READING COMPREHENSION OF BLACK 
INNuR CITY STUDENTS Order No, DA8417954 

Joncs, Sanoha Trotman, Ph.D. 77ie University of Wisconsin • 
Medison, 1984. 192pp. Supervisor: Professor Dale D. Johnson 

the purpose of this study w* * to examine the effects of two 
prereading vocabulary teaching strategies on the vocabulary 3 
acquisition and passage-specific reading comprehension of ftfth 
grade, black, inner city students. The students' attitudes toward the 
prereading strategies to which they were exposed were also 
examined. 

There were two experimental treatment groups and c 
comparison no-treatment group. The treatment conditions were 
semantic mapping and a conventional basal approach. Semantic 
mapping, a categorical structuring of information in graphic form, 
emphasized the relationship of target words to learners' prior 
knowledge. 

Sixty-seven, fifth grade, black, inner city students from a large 
mkiweatern public school district participated in a practice sess i o n 
and two experimental sessions of approximately forty-five minutes 
each. Each session consisted of subjects participating in a prereedtng 
activity, reading an expository passage and completing a multiple 
choice vocabulary test and a passage-specific reading 
comprehension test. Following the list experimental session, subjects 
completed an attitude questionnaire. 

Mean scores of intact classrooms were used as the unit of data 
analysis. Data were analyzed using the Welch Asptn and \ft Wifcoxon 
Test*. 

The three maior hypotheses compared tha performance of the 
subjects on the dependent measures of vocabulary acquisition, 
passage-specific reading comprehension and affective lesponsee at 

subjects to the two experimental strategies, The results indicated that 
the semantic mapping group scored significantly higher on the 
vocabulary acquisition and the passage-specific reading 
comprehension tests'. No statistically significant differences in 
attitudes toward the treatments were found between the two groups. 
An examination of the descriptive data indicated that both 
experimental groups had positive attitudes toward the vocabulary 
teaching strategies. 

Statistical findings revealed that semantic mapping, a direct 
instruction vocabulary strategy that capitalizes on the categorization 
o* concepts and students' prior knowledge, does positively affect 
vocabulary acquisition and passage specific comprehension of 
repository passagos. 



THE BEHAVIORS ACCOMPANYING THE WRITING PROCESS 
IN SELECTED THIRD AND FOURTH GRADE NATIVE 
AMERICAN CHILDREN Order No. DA8424905 

Kast«h, Wendy Christina, Ph D. The University of Arizona, 1984. 
227pp. Director* Yetta Goodman 

This study is designed to analyze in depth, the behaviors that 
accompany the writing process in six third and fourth grade Native 
American children. 1 he children's writing, collected over a two year 
period, was observed by a team of researchers who carefully 
recorded revisions, rereading, subvocalization, resource use, stop- 
and-thinks, interruptions, and related talk while writing was taking 
piece in the regular classroom setting. Four groups of questions were 
posed as a result of the observations focusing around the kinds of 
resources young writers use, the way they revised, the role of oral 
language during composing, and the relationship among ;he various 
observed behaviors. 

Young writers use both .uman resources and a wide variety of 
inanimate resources such as dictionaries, bulletin boards, and otrw 
classroom print to assist themselves and each other in spelling word*, 
and making various other decisions about their writing. T! te subjects 
have differing strategies for revising their texts, but have spelling and 
neatness as their highest priorities. Children use more resources 
more extensively when they are encouraged to t when the materials 
art accessible, and collaboration among classmates is promoted. 
Approximately 90% of all oral language that takes place as children 
writ* ia relates directly to theFr writing. OPal language is a part of and 
seems to be important to alt phases of writing, including strategies for 
consideration of what to write, collaboration with others and finding 
w audience. The use of oral language demonstrates that all aspects 
of the composing process including pre-writlng, text generation, and 
revision or reconsideration of text are dynamically interacting as 
writers compose. There art important co-occurrence of types of 
behaviors including atop- and • thinks with interruptions, revisions wlh 
subvocalization , and rtvisions with resource use. 



DIALECT USAGE, FUNCTION WORD ACQUISITION AS 
RELATED TO READINESS FOR FORMAL SCHOOL 
CURRICULUM Order NO. DAB419064 

Lau, Aiueen C. Watson. Ed.D. University of South Carolina, 1984. 
154pp. 

The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship 
between dialect usage, function word acquisition and readiness for a 
formal school curriculum. More specifically, the study investigated the 
relationship between the amount and percentage of dialect used 
when variance attributable to function word acquisition was held 
constant and performance on a readiness assessment battery. This 
study attempted to determine significant differences between the level 
of function word development and "ready" and M not ready" 
performance on the readiness assessment bettery The two major 
questions posed by this study were: Is there a significant relationship 
between dialect usage and readiness for a first grade curriculum 
when variance attributable to function word acquisition is held 
constant? Is there a significant difference between function word 
acquisition and ' ready" and M not ready" performance on a first grade 
readiness measure** 

The Sentence Repetition Task (Anastasiow & Hanes, 1973) and th^ 
Cognitive Skills Assessment Battery (Boehm & Slater. 1981) were 
administered to 72 children during the first thr*e weeks of first grade 
The chndren were randomly selected from a rural, poverty area 
located in upper South Carolina All the children were from rural 
families o< low socio economic Mfltus backgrounds Non-minority 
children were not included in th# sample. 



The results indicated that dialect usage as measj ed by frequency 
and percentage of dialect uaed was not significantly related to the 
readiness measure A significant difference (p < .0001) was found 
between function words used correctly and children who were 
ictantified "ready" on the readiness measure Fmaily, a significant 
difference (p < 0001) was found between function words omitted and 
children identified "not ready" on the readiness measure. 

This investigation did not support the hypothesis that dialect 
usage of low socio-economic status, minority children is related to 
performance on a readiness battery However, the investigation 
supported the hypothesis that there is a significant difference 
between level of language development of children identified "reedy* 
and/or M not ready" on a readiness measure. 



FACTORS INFLUENCING THE OFFERING OF MINORITY 
LITERATURE IN COLORADO HIGH SCHOOLS, 1971-1M3 

Order No. DA642263I 

Palmer, Polly, Ph D. University of Colorado at Boulder, 1**84. 
436pp. Director: Professor Richard J.Kraft 

The purpose of this study was to examine the offering of minority 
literature within separate courses in Colorado high schools from 
1971-1 983 and to determine the factors which affected its inclusion in 
or exclusion from the curriculum. Brief attention was also given to 
minority literature contained in general American Literature end 
American Studies courses. 

Data were collected through a survey questionnaire developed by 
the researcher and mailed to all language arts department heeds in 
Colorado high schools. Follow-up interviews were conducted with 
teachers and principals at five target schools. Further information w4 
gathered from North Central Association records for 1971-72, 1t?* 
77, and 1981-82. In addition, American literature textbooks west 
analyzed for their minority literature content, Additional sources of 
information included interviews with university personnel in Enfftsfc, 
education and admissions, examination of ACT, SAT, ONE, end ONI- 
English study guttee. 

Major conclusions of the study Included that In the middle 
seventies no more than one-ftfth of the high schools in Colorado 

offered minority literature as a separate course. After that time the 
number declined to a level almost equal to the schools which offered 
separate courses in 1971 -72. The number further declines in 1962-81 
In addition, rather than be included in traditional American Literature 
courses, minority literature has generally fadt J into obscurity. 

Seven factors emerged which influenced the offering of minority 
literature in separate courses: the community, building principal, 
district curriculum, budget, availability of books, student population, 
and, most signify antly, trie decision of the individual teacher. Factors 
which affected the offering of minority literature within American 
Literature coursee included: textbooks, teacher evaluation, district 
requirements, state requirements, and most crucial, teacher 
preparation. 



7 



LINGUISTIC CUSS USKO BY ELEMENTARY BILINGUAL AND 
MONOLINGUAL R6AD6RS Order No. DA841 501 2 

Rjvma, Maria Acsves, Ed 0. New Wxico State University, 1984 
16«pp. Chairman: Or Leon E. Williamson 

Prob/em. How do elementary bilingual students compare with 
elementary monolingual stude ts in using linguistic cues when 
reading aloud in Spanish and in English? 

Tha study investigated the subjects' effectiveness in using specific 
linguistic cues when reading material systematically eroded with 8 
morphologlcoK 8 syntactic, 8 grammatical and 8 semantic errors by 

(1) analysing tt>e differences In reading comprehension scores, total 

number of e> rore corrected and types ot errors corrected moet 
frequently by the four groups of readers in the *ti<dy** 
Spar sh/Engllsh bilinguals who read In Spanish, Spanish/English 
bilinguals who read in English, Spanish monolinguals who read in 
Spanish and English moro ,; nguala who racd in English; (2) exploring 
the possibility of t relatt wship between the quantity and the type c* 
errors corrected by the r -^ders and their reading comprehension 
scores; (3) making an interpretative analysis of some of ttie subjects' 
oral reading to interpret the use of visual and oonviaual information in 
attending to the encoded errors. 

Procedures. The Spanish/English bilingual S, were from 2 
elementary schools in Southern New Mexico. The English 
monolinguals were from the elementary school in Canutillo, Texas. 
The Spanish monolinguals were from an elementary school in Jutrez, 
Mexico. S s chosen to read in Spanish read from the CTBS Esparto* 
Level 1. S, chosen to read in English read from the CTBS Level 1 
Form 3. 

Findings. (1) Spanish monolinguals performed significantly lower 
in comprehension scores and in total number of errors corrected. 

(2) Subjects correcting more syntactic errors obtained the higher 
comprehension scores. (3) Morphological errors were most often 
corrected; semantic errors were least often corrected by all the 
readers. The interpretative analysis revealed the readers' use of 
linguistic competence. They used only the cues which carried the 
most information. Most readers were proficient in using nonvisual 
information. The paychotinguiettc theory of reading, that reeding to an 
active proceee where the reader usee Na language competence te 
»tefc comprehension, wee supported. 



8 



9 

ERIC 



Copies of the Dissertations may be obtained by addressing your 
request to: 

University' Microfilms International 

Dissertation Copies 

Post Office Box 1764 

Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106 

or by telephoning (toll-free) 1-800-521-3042 



9 



