DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 428 925 



RC 021 958 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



AVAILABLE FROM 
PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Rubin, Daniel S. 

Sm'algyax Language Renewal: Prospects and Options. 

1999-00-00 

17p . ; Chapter 3 in: "Revitalizing Indigenous Languages. 
Papers presented at the Annual Stabilizing Indigenous 
Languages Symposium (5th, Louisville, KY, May 15-16, 1998)"; 
see RC 021 955. 

Web site : http : // j an .ucc . nau . edu/~ j ar/RIL_Contents .html 
Reports - Evaluative (142) -- Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

♦American Indian Education; American Indian Languages; 

Canada Natives; Educational Needs,* Educational Practices; 
Elementary Secondary Education; Foreign Countries; *Language 
Maintenance; *Native Language Instruction; *Second Language 
Instruction; Teaching Methods 
British Columbia; *Tsimshian 



ABSTRACT 



School District 52 (Prince Rupert, British Columbia) is 
committed to providing support for the renewal of Sm'algyax, the language of 
the Tsimshian Nation. However, the Tsimshian Nation must provide guidance and 
establish a positive direction for Sm'algyax language programs. This paper 
examines language renewal issues and options as a basis for decision making 
by the Tsimshian Nation about language teaching and usage. Sections of 
background information cover: (1) the current state of Sm'algyax (precarious, 

with mostly elderly speakers) ; (2) differentiation between processes of 

language learning and language acquisition; (3) five possible levels of 
language fluency; (4) the need for a family and community component of 
language learning,* (5) the need to incorporate traditional oral literature 
that embodies the Tsimshian world view into language programs; and (6) the 
need to create a Sm'algyax Language Authority to make language policy and 
provide ongoing support for language renewal . An Internet search and 
communication with other educators yielded examples of effective language 
learning programs in indigenous communities in North America, Australia, and 
Pacific Islands. Practices in these programs included use of print-based 
materials, teacher-centered instruction, media-based instruction, 
computer-assisted instruction, Internet resources and hypertext, 
learner-controlled instruction, experiential approaches, cultural immersion, 
linguistic immersion, and mentorship or master-apprentice models. 
Recommendations and recent Tsimshian program developments are discussed. (SV) 



***************************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



Sm’algyax Language Renewal: Prospects and Options 

Daniel S. Rubin 



Z iTIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
„ ' CENTER (ERIC) 

ha s been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



This paper describes the Sm ’ algyax language program being imple- 
mented in School District 52 in Prince Rupert , British Columbia. It 
examines ways to support language renewal ranging from traditional 
forms of instruction and print-based materials to computer interaction 
and internet resources. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



Jon Allan 



Reyhner 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



School District 52, located in Prince Rupert, British Columbia, Canada, has 
made a major commitment to First Nations' language and culture programs. To 
follow through on the commitment to provide support for the renewal of 
Sm’algyax, the language of the Tsimshian Nation, followed by the Nisga’a and 
Haida languages, a well-informed and strongly supported approach to language 
programs is needed. The development of programs in the three traditional First 
Nations languages in District 52 is not a simple matter. Finding and training 
instructors, defining the approaches to be taken, and developing appropriate 
materials requires new partnerships and new ways of looking at language learn- 
ing. Nor does the responsibility for language renewal rest entirely with the schools. 
It is widely recognized and affirmed, by local and non-local, native and nonna- 
tive individuals, that responsibility for the renewal and spread of traditional lan- 
guages and cultural practices rests inherently with First Nations communities. 

Over the past decade, support for First Nations language learning within 
Brkish Columbia schools has created a range of language programs, but these 
programs have not produced a significant resurgence in fluency. It may be that 
no school-based program alone can have this effect (Cantoni, 1997; Fishman, 
1996). However, with the foundational work that has now been completed and 
support from new communications technologies, unprecedented possibilities are 
emerging, just as the hope for language continuity fades with the aging of those 
who still speak traditional languages. 

There was an immediate need for the Tsimshian Nation to provide guidance 
and to establish a positive direction for Sm’algyax language programs. At an- 
nual meetings in 1994 and 1995 the Tsimshian Tribal Council affirmed the im- 
portance of cultural and language continuity in its resolutions and supported the 
establishment of a Sm’algyax Language Authority. 

The urgency of the situation calls for teamwork and a commitment between 
the Tsimshian Nation and District 52 to find new contexts in which the language 
will be used on a daily and/or occasional basis. To be effective and legitimate, 
key decisions regarding the preservation and teaching of Sm’algyax must be 
made by the Tsimshian community. These decisions are needed quickly and 



'“First Nations” is a term currently used to describe indigenous (American In- 
dian) groups in Canada. 



2 



1 



Revitalizing Indigenous Languages 

should be informed by the best information available regarding the state of the 
language, language program options, and the urgency of the situation. 



State of the language T . . K - f - . 

The current state of Sm’ algyax, like other First Nations languages in British 

Columbia and across North America, is precarious after 100 years of interac- 
tions that have systematically undermined and discouraged language use and 
cultural continuity. At this time however, a resurgence of cultural pnde and au- 
tonomy is taking place. Since Sm’ algyax and Tsimshian cultural traditions have 
persisted in spite of the forces of assimilation, there is cause for optimism. With 
the active support of schools and other institutions, programs to support an- 
guage renewal have been established. Yet, even with this support, the continuity 
of Sm’ algyax is in jeopardy. District 52, like others in British Columbia has had 
language programs in place for two decades, and some evidence should exist of 
a basic increase in language use and fluency among the young if these programs 
have been effective. In fact, there is little evidence that a transfer of linguistic 

skills or usage to the younger generation has taken place. 

While it is inspiring and reassuring to see the public use of Sm algyax within 
the formal affairs of the Tsimshian Nation, and while many individuals have 
called for improved instruction in the language, there are few existing settings in 
which the use of Sm’ algyax is required. According to one knowledgeable local 
educator who has worked with the language over the past two decades only a 
few hundred fluent speakers remain, and almost all of these are over years 
old. The lack of young people speaking Sm’algyax threatens the survival of 
Tsimshian culture. According to Nisga’a linguists and educators Alvin and Bert 
McKay, “A people’s own language is a symbol of their ethnic identity as well as 
a repository of much of their cultural heritage; its loss threatens the life and 
vitality of the culture” (1987, p. 66). This is especially true because the language 
is more than a symbol. It embodies a way of seeing, which is expressed in its 
syntax and structure even more than in the particular words that make it up. 

It is understandable, with the complex issues facing First Nations commu- 
nities land claims, health issues, educational funding and academic parity, is - 

eries, forestry, and devolution toward self-government— that language renewa 
has not received more attention until now. However, language renewal may e 
one key to cultural integrity and effectiveness. For First Nations individuals 
who are becoming well established economically and socially within the larger 
society, maintaining a connection with the worldview and traditions of their 
people has become very important. For many First Nations students, their deeply 
felt interest in learning about and maintaining their cultural connections may be 
a source of motivation for language learning. But how can this motivation best 

be supported and extended? 



Learning vs. acquiring a language 

Language learning is a complex process, even though we recognize that 
young children accomplish it readily. Infants have the ability to make the full 




18 

3 



Sm’algyax Language Renewal: Prospects and Options 



range of sounds found in all the languages of the world, but this ability lessens 
as we grow older. Acquisition of a second language is more problematic for 
older people, and language learning in adult education is fundamentally differ- 
ent from language learning for children. 

Traditional instructional approaches based on rote instruction and repeti- 
tive practice have been used in District 52, as in other districts, but they have not 
been particularly successful in developing fluency. There is a crucial difference 
between accumulating words and phrases and knowing how to use them in a 
real life situation. As some educators and linguists have pointed out, this is the 
difference between “learning” a language and truly “acquiring” that language 
for daily use. 

T.L. McCarty (1988) notes that, “The distinction between acquiring and 
learning a language is... essentially a distinction between meaning and surface 
form.” (p. 74). Teacher-centered instruction has not helped learners acquire a 
deeper understanding of meaning, because (a) the approach to learning has been 
passive rather than communicative, (b) support for language use outside the 
school has been largely missing, and (c) students have limited opportunities to 
use the language communicatively in school. Again, McCarty writes. 

Classroom-based language development activities. . .frequently ignore 
what is known about the structure and acquisition of language, separat- 
ing out discrete linguistic tasks to be ‘taught’ as isolated tasks. Such 
approaches disembody language, depriving Indian children of the op- 
portunity to use their language... in real communication, (p. 81) 

As Steve Greymoming (1997 & this volume) attests from his experience 
with the teaching of Arapaho, the focus on learning vocabulary and a lack of 
opportunity for the daily practice of speaking that is found in much classroom 
language instruction limits children’s natural abilities to learn and use language. 
McCarty (1988) maintains that, “Language acquisition. . . is a much more com- 
plex and subconscious process than repeating, imitating, and practicing” (p. 71). 
There is a need to recognize the elusive, subtle, emotional, and personal aspects 
of language use. McCarty concludes that “the subconscious processes of mak- 
ing sense of language input, in purposeful communication, most influence oral 
language development in both first and second language situations. Conscious 
learning, on the other hand, has a more limited role” (pp. 74-75). On the struc- 
tural level, language is made up of units called phonemes (sound units), mor- 
phemes (units of meaning), syntax (word order), usage rules (how words are to 
be used), and interpretive rules (how to tell what words mean). However, in 
terms of actual language use, language is the vehicle for feeling, imagery, po- 
etry, story, and metaphor. To understand the essence, the life within the lan- 
guage, is the point of language learning. 

The most effective situations for language learning are communicative, natu- 
ral, interactive, creative, subtle, powerful, and metaphoric. Sylvia Ashton-Wamer 
(1963) built on this understanding of language in the programs she developed 




19 



Revitalizing Indigenous Languages 



while working with Maori students in New Zealand. She used a questioning 
technique she called “Key Vocabulary” to draw out words of great personal 
significance from students, then built her language program around using these 
personally potent words in sentences and stories. When I worked with Sylvia in 
the mid- 1 970s I saw that it was difficult for her to pass on her understanding to 
teachers. The traditions of the education system, based on rational deductive 
thinking and rote learning, break everything up into little bits, so we easily miss 
the point: what does this mean to the child? Without a personally meaningful 
reason for children to learn and use their language, why would we expect them 
to learn it? Thus, an effective language program design depends on defining 
meaningful outcomes for the program. 

Five levels of fluency 

Five possible levels of fluency can be identified as possible outcomes for 
language instruction. The same level may not be appropriate as a goal for all 
learners. 

• passive: able to understand common words or phrases, with or with- 
out deeper comprehension of their meaning 

• symbolic: able to use common phrases and sentences in formal set- 
tings, as symbols of language participation and cultural ownership 

• functional: able to speak the language, with basic understanding of 
its syntax, grammar, and rules of usage and a minimal vocabulary 

• fluent: able to understand and speak the language with confidence 
and skill, with understanding of normal syntax, grammar and rules 
of form, and an extensive and growing vocabulary 

• creative: able to understand and speak the language fluently in ways 
that create new word usage and structures, showing a deeper under- 
standing of the language and its potential new uses 

People who speak a language obviously operate at different levels at different 
times. But it should be possible to define general or minimum goals for school 
programs in Sm’algyax at different grade levels. Until we define the goals of the 
program, it will be extremely difficult to develop curricular scope and sequence 
or implement effective language programs. 

Need for a community dimension 

It is widely recognized that the main responsibility for traditional language 
learning must centre in the home. It is not appropriate for the school to take this 
responsibility away from families and communities who ultimately own the lan- 
guage. Schools can play a role by organizing and presenting opportunities for 
children to learn and use Sm’algyax, but any attempt to teach the language solely 
within the school will fail (Cantoni, 1997). This caveat has serious and immedi- 
ate implications for language programs in this district. 




20 



5 



Sm ’ algyax Language Renewal: Prospects and Options 

How will the community component be organized? Who will organize and 
present it? How will the language find its way into the homes of parents who do 
not presently speak Sm’algyax? How will embarrassment and the initial diffi- 
culty of learning the sounds and syntax of Sm’algyax be overcome? First Na- 
tions educators are aware that dialect differences and other issues can fragment 
the community, making the process of language renewal very difficult. Across 
three generations there can be elders with a traditional orientation, parents look- 
ing both forward and back, and youth caught up in MTV and being kids. All 
three generations must get together if First Nations cultures are to be saved. 

The community dimension of language programs has yet to be defined for 
the Tsimshian Nation. Until the village communities and urban groups, with the 
active and visible support of the Tsimshian Tribal Council, stand together to 
support language renewal, it is unlikely that any program School District 52 
implements will have a significant impact. 

Oral literature as curriculum 

Another reason it is difficult to teach the language in the schools is that 
Sm’algyax belongs to a real world setting that is natural, traditional, and imbued 
with its own set of meanings and ways of seeing. It embodies a different 
worldview from the Western scientific one around which schools are organized. 
Some attempts to record, document, and transmit the Tsimshian worldview have 
been made. These have ranged from anthropological and linguistic studies to 
illustrated books for children. Throughout British Columbia, First Nations groups 
have been authoring their own locally appropriate expressions of culture and 
traditions. 

District 52’s major project, undertaken in collaboration with Tsimshian com- 
munities, resulted in the completion of the Tsimshian Series, seven books based 
on traditional adawx (historical narratives) that help define the Tsimshian Na- 
tion. Although the stories presented within the Series were taken from oral lit- 
erature, they are certainly as valid a basis for curriculum as the teachings of 
math, biology, or eurocentric geography. As First Nations educators and leaders 
are increasingly pointing out, traditional ways of knowing do not necessarily 
have to be referenced to the European traditions to be valid. It will be important 
to actively support and validate the use of oral literature in the schools. 

There is also a deeper way of seeing the role and importance of these sto- 
ries, beyond their use in curriculum. The traditions of the Tsimshian, as ex- 
pressed in adawx, in stories recorded by William Beynon, Franz Boas, and oth- 
ers who have studied these traditional tellings, present a creative theme of re- 
birth and regeneration. 

We can look at the present desire to reaffirm and renew culture and lan- 
guage as an opportunity for creating new cultural forms. Within the feasting 
tradition that is so important to the Tsimshian people are models of how culture 
and language are to be passed on. The Tsimshian community can certainly draw 
on its own traditions to ensure its continuity, define who will pass on the lan- 



6 



21 



I 

I 

Revitalizing Indigenous Languages 

guage, and determine how this will be accomplished. To defer this responsibil- 
ity to the education system will likely lead to language loss. 

The development of well-organized, highly visible initiatives that capture 
the imagination and support of the community will be very important. This pro- 
cess may become easier once a Sm’algyax Language Authority is established. 

Establishing a Sm’algyax Language Authority 

The creation of a Sm’algyax Language Authority is an essential step toward 
language renewal. With a language authority in place, decisions regarding train- 
ing and certification of language teachers, maintenance of traditional patterns of 
grammar and syntax, and a screening process for new words and word forms 
can be made with input from representatives of the principal groups within the 
Tsimshian Nation. More fundamentally, this body can serve to unify and focus 
the cultural aspirations of the Tsimshian people at a time when unity and com- 
mitment are needed to keep the language from disappearing. As a body with the 
authority to review and develop language policy, the Sm’algyax Language Au- 
thority can move in a positive direction to elicit enthusiasm and support from 
village Band Councils and other Tsimshian community groups. It can also pro- 
vide guidance for the planning, development, implementation, and evaluation 
of new programs. 



Options for Language Learning 

I have found the Internet to be an invaluable tool for researching examples 
of effective language learning in indigenous communities in North America and 
elsewhere, and communication with educators in Australia, Vanuatu, Hawai i, 
California, South Dakota, Ontario, and throughout British Columbia revealed a 
range of programs and approaches from which to choose. Depending on the 
goals established for a language program, using one or more of the ways of 
supporting learning discussed below may be appropriate. 

Print-based materials 

Over the past decade, the major focus in District 52 and throughout First 
Nations education has been on developing print-based materials: books, 
worksheets, pamphlets, posters, and games. The quality of these materials has 
improved over the years, from hastily assembled scrapbook-like collections of 
stories, visual images, and word lists to published narratives and texts written in 
the traditional language, with or without English translations. 

Some print materials have been developed to a level that is high quality and 
effective. In a few instances, actual textbooks for traditional languages have 
been compiled. Daisy Sewid-Smith developed a Liq’wala/Kwak’wala instruc- 
tional grammar, which is being used in a secondary program in the Campbell 
River School District. When I visited the Campbell River program, I was im- 
pressed by its effectiveness. Its strength was its organization around the func- 



22 

ERIC 



7 



Sm ’algyax Language Renewal: Prospects and Options 



tional structure of the language, which helps new speakers respect and use the 
language in its traditional form, rather than modifying it into pseudo-English 
forms. 

Our own Tsimshian Series is the local result of an ambitious publishing 
venture. The Series is richly illustrated and presents a range of traditional adawx 
that embody and pass on the traditions and pride of the Tsimshian people. While 
the general reaction to the Series, both within and outside the district, has been 
quite positive, there have also been some issues raised, including concerns about 
the small sans-serif type, difficulty for non-speakers in pronouncing the 
Sm’ algyax text, and the fact that the text, although written at a lower intermedi- 
ate level in terms of word length, is actually more appropriate for use at the 
lower secondary level because of the complexity of the concepts that are pre- 
sented. 

Current projects of First Nations Education Services Department of School 
District 52 include development of a new series of illustrated books that include 
an intermediate level seaweed book and a carefully selected collection of pri- 
mary level Txamsm stories. Work is underway to develop a series of phrase 
books for basic conversation, as well as a “Seasonal Rounds” poster series that 
will bring 400 Sm’algyax words into classrooms and homes. 

Print materials are essential to develop literacy (reading and writing) in 
Sm’algyax. But even the best texts and storybooks do not ensure language con- 
tinuity. Future development of print materials should be guided by the goals of 
the entire program. The dictionary and grammar developed by linguist Dr. John 
Dunn represent first steps toward a comprehensive reference work on the 
Sm’algyax language that is urgently needed as the main reference for language 
learning. Consideration should be given to expanding these references and trans- 
ferring them to a computer data file, so they can be continuously expanded and 
improved. This work must be done while it is still possible to find living fluent 
speakers of Sm’algyax, individuals who are now of advancing age. 

Dr. Dunn has made available course materials from his UNBC course based 
on the adawx “Adaoga gan Sit’aataksa wil Baasaxga Gyemk.” This material has 
been reproduced and spiral bound and is now being used in the village schools. 

Teacher-centered instruction 

Based on visits to village schools, meetings, and discussions with the lan- 
guage teachers, it is clear that teacher-centered instruction is having limited ef- 
fectiveness in developing fluency in Sm’algyax. The teachers have pointed out 
the following issues and problems: 

• it is difficult to teach Sm’algyax effectively in short, intermittent 
half-hour sessions 

• issues of respect and focus arise while working with students 

• students are having difficulty retaining basic vocabulary 

• students do not use their language after they leave the classroom 

• there is little support from the home for language learning 




23 



Revitalizing Indigenous Languages 

• there is a need for more effective and vivid learning materials 
the traditional cultural context for learning the language is missing 
from schools 

None of these issues is the result of lack of training or commitment on the part of 
the language teachers. The teachers have been the backbone of this program for 
years and are doing a good job with their students. These frustrations are inher- 
ent to the general situation of language loss, and the difficulties are characteris- 
tic of all second language programs. 

The key reasons for limited success have been: (1) language and culture are 
not at the center of the curriculum, (2) instruction is repetitive and does not 
require students to actively develop and use their language, (3) approaches based 
on passive learning generate lower levels of commitment and interest than ac- 
tive student-centered learning, and (4) the quality of locally developed materials 
for language learning in Sm’algyax has been limited by the time and resources 
available in the past. 

The tendency to develop programs in which the teacher is the main or only 
source of the language should be seriously examined. This approach restricts 
the ways students learn the language and tends to limit interactions to passive 
listening, repetition, and imitation. This teacher-centered instructional approach 
may develop the lower levels of language use (passive and symbolic) but will 
certainly not encourage higher levels (functional, fluent, and creative). 

Additional inservice sessions for language teachers and training of new lan- 
guage teachers could address some of these issues and encourage the use of 
more learner-centered approaches, including games, interactive strategies, cul- 
tural immersion activities, new materials for use in the home, and the develop- 
ment of community-based programs to supplement and support school programs. 
New policies regarding the place of traditional culture and the Sm’algyax lan- 
guage in schools may be needed if traditional learning is to occupy a place of 
greater prominence within the school. 

While comfortable and familiar, the teacher-centered approach (especially 
with the present intermittent scheduling of language instruction) offers little hope 
of developing any higher level of fluency. 

Media-based instruction 

Other school districts and sites in other jurisdictions have begun to use elec- 
tronic media as a focus for language learning. Computer-interactive and com- 
puter-aided instruction are considered separately below, with the focus here be- 
ing audiotapes, videotapes, slide programs, and interactive language machines, 
such as those that play flashcards with audiotape affixed. 

These materials have been used mainly to supplement and support teacher- 
focused instruction. Media-based materials allow students to learn more inde- 
pendently, but scheduling constraints still impose severe limits on students’ ability 
to spend time with the materials, unless they are available for them to take home. 



24 



9 



Sm’algyax Language Renewal: Prospects and Options 

Taking these materials home can make them expensive, since a certain amount 
of loss or damage is inevitable. 

Videotapes, because of the protective design of the case and the familiarity 
of video, could readily bring language experiences into the home for both the 
students and parents. Videos in the home would also expose preschool children 
to spoken and written Sm’algyax. However, development of high quality video 
programming can be time-consuming and expensive. Through partnerships with 
other districts and tribes or with independent filmmakers, inexpensive, effective 
programming could be created. One possible format for such materials would 
be a children’s show, hosted by an elder, with segments to include a traditional 
story, some focus on basic vocabulary used in conversation, a segment high- 
lighting contemporary life in the villages (fishing, seaweed gathering, feasting, 
band council operations), and so forth. District 52 already has on hand two ex- 
amples of stories told in English by Ernie Hill, taped in Hartley Bay, that pro- 
vide simple but effective examples of videos for use in presenting traditional 
content through storytelling. A video series is one option to be further explored. 

Computer-interactive and computer-assisted instruction 

Computer learning programs are becoming common. They are being used 
at home, in schools, and in the workplace. The positive qualities of such pro- 
grams are that they are inexpensive, can be reproduced in large numbers, are 
predictable, often have self-evaluation built in, are (in a limited sense) interac- 
tive, and most schools have access to some computer hardware. However, few 
schools have enough computers at this time to give every student access to one 
on a daily basis. 

Computer-assisted instruction (sometimes the term is used to mean any in- 
teractive learning program on a computer) is probably more effective if the com- 
puter is used as a reference or supplementary source of linguistic information. 
For example, an interactive dictionary can help students look up word mean- 
ings, practice pronunciation, or check spelling. A computer-based language pro- 
gram can be used by a small group of students working as a team to solve a 
puzzle or play a game. 

First Nations Education Services has begun assembling the hardware and 
software required for CD-ROM production. Thus School District 52 will soon 
be able to develop and manufacture their own interactive CDs that play on a 
computer. This format offers several interesting possibilities: 1) Stories can be 
linked with a dictionary in the computer’s memory that would pronounce the 
story in Sm’algyax, translate words, phrases or the whole story into English, and 
provide visual images to accompany the story. 2) Games and puzzles can be 
developed that require language skills for their use or solution. This would pro- 
vide an added incentive for language learning by students. 3) Reference materi- 
als can be developed, such as a list of all recorded Sm’algyax texts, giving older 
students opportunities to become researchers, studying and developing new uses 
for Tsimshian narratives. 



25 



10 



Revitalizing Indigenous Languages 

Contact with other sites (such as the Carrier-Sekani and the Yinka Dene 
Institute) indicates that while they have been making use of this format, it was 
expensive to produce and is only one tool for language learning. Based on evalu- 
ation of a CD-ROM program for English language learning that I helped carry 
out for the Saanich School District, I would offer the same conclusion: a CD- 
ROM disk is a tool, not a complete program. As such, it may be worthwhile to 
develop the capacity for CD-ROM production, but the chief limitation is that 
once transferred to disk, materials are static and unchanging, at least until you 
revise and issue new versions. 

The Hawaiian language program, supporting immersion schools based on 
the Maori language nest model, has now moved into production of computer 
programs. The staff of the Hawaiian Language Center, based at the University 
of Hawai’i at Hilo, have produced a number of interactive programs written 
entirely in Hawaiian (no English ever appears onscreen). They are currently 
translating the Macintosh operating system into Hawaiian. This ambitious pro- 
gram can be accessed via the Internet as well (see hypertext section, below). 

A number of other computer programs for language learning and linguistic 
research have been developed, including a directory of aboriginal languages in 
Australia stored on a computer and accessible worldwide via the Internet. The 
resources at the Australian languages site include a manual for language work- 
ers, laying out a step-by-step procedure for recording and accessing linguistic 
information on computer. These resources suggest new computer-based possi- 
bilities that are made even more interesting with the introduction of the World 
Wide Web and html as a text format. 

Internet resources and hypertext 

Research has increasingly made use of the Internet, and specifically that 
aspect of the Net referred to as the World Wide Web. On the Web, text is written 
in hypertext markup language (html, for short). HTML allows the reader to jump 
from a word or phrase to another point on the Web automatically, just by click- 
ing on the highlighted text. So text written in html generates a nonlinear web of 
information. As First Nations education sites have begun to appear on the Web, 
they are being linked together into a constantly changing network of new possi- 
bilities that educators can access. 

Text written in html also has some special applications for language learn- 
ing. The wide range of possibilities includes a new type of dictionary, with words 
linked in a variety of ways (see e. g., Miyashita & Moll, this volume), including 
some that are more natural than alphabetic and are actively linked to texts such 
as stories. For language learners and researchers, the resulting hypertext docu- 
ment can begin to reflect the realities of the original culture, rather than a Euro- 
pean interpretation. One example of this is a program called “The Red Road,” 
which appears on the Web as a series of webpages complete with vivid First 
Nations imagery and links to a large amount of cultural information. 

We do need to find ways to embody the worldview and structure of the 
language visually. This is also important because Sm’algyax, like some other 



Sm’algyax Language Renewal: Prospects and Options 

First Nations languages, emphasizes relationship and action, rather than focus- 
ing on nouns as label words. A standard dictionary should still be developed, but 
the hypertext version could be much more flexible and responsive to the needs 
and interests of learners. 

Various types of sites exist on the Internet, including mail servers that de- 
liver personal e-mail, web homepages that represent companies, government 
offices, and educational sites, and listservers that “publish” discussions by send- 
ing comments out to a mailing list of subscribers and chatlines that provide for 
real-time discussion among several persons at once. A new and innovative type 
of site is called “Pow-Wow.” Pow-Wow allows up to seven people at once to 
link together and talk to each other, while moving through the Net as a group. 
This offers some exciting new possibilities for linking learners from different 
sites (say, two village schools and two schools in town) and allow them to use 
the Internet as a learning tool while sharing what they learn. 

A school district or even First Nations Education Services could establish 
its own homepage on the Web, allowing students, speakers, teachers, and lin- 
guists to continuously access and add information to it. In this way, the Internet 
would offer twenty-first century technology to the revival of an ancient lan- 
guage while helping learners acquire valuable contemporary job skills. 

The Silent Way: Letting learners learn 

Jim Green, a linguist and teacher who works with the Lakota language in 
South Dakota, has developed a method of language learning called the Silent 
Way after the work of Caleb Gattegno (1972). It is called this because the teacher 
does a minimum of talking, always speaks in the native language, and encour- 
ages learners to do the talking and the learning. Green describes this approach as 
“subordinating teaching to learning” and explains that this strategy is based on a 
deep respect for learners, a respect not always found in education. 

The Silent Way has been widely used in math teaching, where manipulable 
materials like attribute blocks and Cuisenaire rods allow learners to learn di- 
rectly. The approach is based on the ideas of Gattegno, a professor of mathemat- 
ics. Jim Green, who worked with Gattegno, uses these same colored wooden 
blocks to teach concepts like number, color, and simple language forms in Lakota. 
His internet site (http://www.geocities.com/Paris/9463/method.html) explains 
this method. The site includes color-coded phonics charts that help students learn 
the sounds of Lakota without a teacher having to model them. 

Although this approach sounds exotic, it is fairly simple and suggests that 
there are ways to create and use materials that encourage students to move at 
their own pace, building language skills in a nonthreatening environment. How- 
ever, ultimately they will need to begin using language interactively, so any 
approach based on materials, whether print, media-based, or computer-based, 
will benefit from an active, experiential component. 



I 



Revitalizing Indigenous Languages 

Experiential approaches to language learning 

During November and December of 1 995 a plan was completed for an inte- 
grated language and culture curriculum for Grades 8 and 9 in Lax Kw’alaams. 
Inspired by the idea that language and culture need each other to be meaningful, 
the program is an integrated Sm’algyax Language/Tsimshian Culture course with 
units focused on traditional seasonal activities. Copies of the outline of this course 
are available from First Nations Education Services (825 Conrad Street, Prince 
Rupert, BC VAJ 3B8 Canada). 

Experiential learning focuses on doing, rather than on passive listening and 
reading. There are many examples of successful experiential education in physi- 
cal education, outdoor education, cultural exchange, and apprenticeship pro- 
grams. For Sm’algyax to have meaning and relevance to learners, it may help to 
combine its use with traditional hands-on activities, such as berry picking, fish- 
ing, food preparation, smoking fish, hunting, drum making, dancing, carving, 
weaving, and feasting. These experiences provide opportunities for language 
use and place demands on students that are holistic and natural: to have respect 
for those with traditional knowledge and skills, to pay attention, to practice manual 
skills, and to remember important details. 

Experiential approaches, according to input from the members of the 
Sm’algyax Committee, the First Nations Role Models and the students them- 
selves, would be a preferred way to learn the traditions of the Tsimshian people 
and to begin to speak Sm’algyax. An initial, informal survey indicated Grade 8 
students in Lax Kw’alaams also support this option. 

Experiential programs generally take a good deal of preparation, resources, 
and scheduling to be successful. If strongly supported by the community and the 
school, they can provide memorable experiences for children, experiences they 
will carry with them for many years. The use of writing, reading, and speaking 
in the Sm’algyax language can be woven through such programs. Experiential 
programs may involve field trips, hands-on activities, and require a more flex- 
ible attitude toward scheduling on the part of school staff. 

Cultural immersion 

Cultural immersion carries the experiential approach to its logical conclu- 
sion: living and working in a traditional setting for a period of time. This ap- 
proach has been the basis for Rediscovery Programs, Culture Camps, and other 
immersion programs. By combining language and culture in an outdoor setting, 
students are given a chance to absorb and learn from their elders in natural sur- 
roundings. This is a powerful option, but one that will require an even stronger 
commitment from the local community and careful preparation to ensure the 
safety of participants, the availability of necessary resources, and positive expe- 
riences for participants. 

A great deal of expertise now exists regionally and locally, so there is no 
need to “reinvent the wheel” when it comes to organizing and setting up such a 
program. It would be up to each local community to provide space and resources 



28 

o 

ERIC 



13 



Sm’algygx Language Renewal: Prospects and Options 

for such a program, which probably would operate best during the summer 
months. 

Another variation on cultural immersion is a setting such as a fishing camp, 
traditional smokehouse, or carving shed in which language use and cultural learn- 
ing become natural parts of participation in a traditional activity. This type of 
approach should be encouraged because it is so motivating for learners and pro- 
vides a natural, rather than an artificial, academic setting to support learning 
about the traditions of the Tsimshian people. 

Linguistic immersion 

The best known, and probably most successful, immersion program for lan- 
guage learning among First Nations would probably be the Maori language nests, 
originally established over 20 years ago in New Zealand. Now extending into 
the university level, these immersion schools offer instruction in Maori in all 
subjects. Canada’s French immersion schools are based on the same premise: 
that to learn a language one must live and work in it on a full-time basis. 

Not everyone thrives in such a setting, but for some learners, with the en- 
thusiastic support of their parents, the language immersion setting has been very 
effective. However, any approach to schooling that separates and isolates a group 
of students will have some disadvantages as well as advantages. 

A complete immersion environment requires that teachers be fully fluent 
and supplied with materials that allow them to work in the language of choice. 
This is quite a challenge when the language is not a modem one in use within a 
large population. A careful look at the availability and cost of creating new ma- 
terials would be advisable before any commitment to an indigenous language 
immersion school is made. 

English as a Second Language (ESL) teachers, who deal with mixed groups 
of immigrant children in Canada and the United States, have become frustrated 
with standard learning materials and have led the way in creating some of the 
most exciting and effective materials for language learning. They focus on inter- 
actional strategies and games that allow learners to become more independent 
and to play while learning. This approach can be highly effective if students are 
encouraged to accept independence and responsibility. Many examples, mod- 
els, and strategies could be borrowed from the ESL field to create new materials 
for indigenous language learning. 

Mentorship and language continuity 

Presently, there is an immediate need for younger fluent speakers of 
Sm’algyax to act as linguists and teachers. Training these individuals through 
intensive mentorship may be one of the best investments that can be made at this 
time. The master-apprentice model developed in California is an excellent way 
to provide this training (Hinton, 1994). It has been suggested by Margaret Ander- 
son, a scholar who works with Tsimshian languages, that if the thousands of 
dollars previously spent on researching and writing dictionaries and grammars 
were allocated to such mentorships (through honoraria for mentors and students) 

29 

O 

ERJC 



14 



I 



Revitalizing Indigenous Languages 

the language would already have been passed on to a core group of younger new 
speakers. The work of language teachers and teachers who have included tradi- 
tional cultural elements in our schools has been invaluable. However, while hon- 
oring the work that has been done, it is now urgent that new approaches be 
considered. The development of mentorship programs to help create a core group 
of younger speakers should be seriously considered as an option for language 
renewal. 

Recommendations 

It is recommended that a high priority be placed on developing policy to 
support new approaches to language learning for Sm’algyax in School District 
52. A combination of approaches may provide the best solution and offer the 
best opportunity to develop and field-test new materials and instructional strat- 
egies. The key issues to be considered at this time are: 

1 . What level of fluency will be the goal for First Nations language 
programs? 

2. Who will provide instruction in Sm’algyax in the future and how 
will they be trained? 

3. When and where will spoken and written Sm’algyax be valued and 
used? 

4. What role will local communities and the home play in language 
renewal? 

An update: Two years later 

As of May 1998 we are much further down the road toward language re- 
newal in Tsimshian territory than we were in 1996. Some of the steps that have 
been taken are: 

1 . A regional language renewal conference Dm Sa Gatgyedm Algyaga 
Ts’msyeen (Strengthening the Tsimshian Language) was held in June 
1997 under the sponsorship of the Tsimshian Tribal Council. At that 
conference a strong endorsement for language renewal was received 
from those present, including chiefs, matriarchs, and elders. 

2. The Sm’algyax Year One Program was established in Prince Rupert 
schools, effectively doubling the number of children learning the lan- 
guage within School District 52. Sm’algyax is now an alternative 
option to French as a second language for all students in Grades 5, 6, 

7 and 8 in the town schools. There are four fluent speakers and four 
support teachers working in this program. Currently, more than 500 
students are enrolled in Sm’algyax, including enrollment in the vil- 
lage schools. 

3. Evening programs for adults are now being offered in two venues in 
Prince Rupert and also in the village communities of Metlakatla, 
Kitkatla, and Lax Kw’alaams. 



30 

o 

ERIC 



15 



Sm’algyax Language Renewal: Prospects and Options 

4. Development of a detailed curriculum plan and learning resources 
for Year One is well underway by a committee of fluent speakers and 
teachers collaborating with the Sm’algyax Language Curriculum 
Developer. 

5. Planning for the next three years of instruction within the Grade 5-8 
Program is proceeding. 

6. Drama programs utilizing English and Sm’algyax have resulted in 
the production of three original plays, which were supported by fund- 
ing from the provincial teachers’ association. 

7. The Ts’msyeen Sm’algyax Authority has been established and has 
incorporated with an earlier existing language authority for the lan- 
guage to provide guidance and authority as an arm of the Tsimshian 
Tribal Council. 

8. Tonya Stebbins, a doctoral student based at the University of 
Melbourne, working with a committee of elders and speakers, has 
completed a draft of a revised and updated set of dictionaries for 
Sm’algyax. The resulting document is also stored as a database, which 
may be updated on an ongoing basis into the future with the guid- 
ance of the language authority. 

9. The local Role Model Program continues to provide exposure and 
involvement in the language and the culture to all students in our 
district. 

10. Four storybooks about Txamsm, the Tsimshian trickster/transformer, 
were published with color illustrations by prominent Tsimshian art- 
ists and text in Sm’algyax. 

1 1 . A new curriculum guide Respecting the Salmon is currently under 
development with the support of the provincial Ministry of Educa- 
tion. This guide incorporates original stories in English and 
Sm’algyax and information, both traditional and contemporary, about 
the six species of salmon that are so important to the local culture. 



Note: This paper is based on a discussion paper submitted to the First Nations 
Education Council, School District 52, on January 10, 1996, and revised May 
10, 1998. 



References 

Ashton-Wamer, Sylvia. (1963). Teacher. New York: Simon & Schuster. 

Cantoni, Gina. (1997). Keeping minority languages alive: The school’s re- 
sponsibility. In Jon Reyhner (Ed.), Teaching indigenous languages. Flagstaff, 
AZ: Northern Arizona University. 

Fishman, Joshua. (1996). Maintaining languages: What works and what 
doesn’t. In Gina Cantoni (Ed.), Stabilizing indigenous languages. Flagstaff, AZ: 
Northern Arizona University. 



31 



16 



Revitalizing Indigenous Languages 



Gattegno, Caleb. (1972). Teaching foreign languages in schools the silent 
way (2nd ed.) New York: Educational Solutions. 

Greymoming, Steve. (1997). Going beyond words: The Arapaho immer- 
sion program. In Jon Reyhner (Ed.), Teaching indigenous languages. Flagstaff, 
AZ: Northern Arizona University. 

Hinton, Leanne. (1994). Flutes of fire: Essays on California Indian lan- 
I guages. Berkeley, CA: Heyday. 

Leavitt, Robert M. (1991). Language and cultural content in Native educa- 
tion. Canadian Modern Language Review, 47(2), 266-79. 

Marsden, Susan. (Ed.). (1992). Suwilaay’msga Na Ga’niiyatgm, Teachings 

of our grandfathers. Prince Rupert: First Nations Education Services, School 
! District 52. 

• McCarty, T.L. (1988). Oral language development for Indian students. In 

; Jon Reyhner (Ed.), Teaching the Indian child, A bilingual/multicultural approach. 

' Billings: Eastern Montana College. 

McKay, Alvin, & McKay, Bert. ( 1 987). Education as a total way of life: the 
Nisga’a experience. In Jean Barman, Yvonne Hebert, & Don McCaskill (Eds.), 
Indian education in Canada: The challenge (Vol. 2, pp. 64-85). Vancouver, BC: 
University of British Columbia. 

Sewid-Smith, Daisy. (1992). Liq’wala/Kwak’wala, Book I. Campbell River: 
Education Center, School District 72. 

Upper, Mary. (1993). Lessons from language acquisition: Reports on a study 
of Oji-Cree first language learning in the home. In Selected papers from the 
1988 and 1990 Mokakit conferences. Vancouver, BC: Mokakit Education Re- 
search Center. 




32 

17 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 



s 




REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: 



i/ / "/ ^ ^ ^ 



'5 



•<? .-i ^ i-t $ 






CL 



^ CA, ^ ^ ^ y 



Author(s): ^ 6,^ « £ ^ v , / /& /U / /V 3r <f A I vK *4 /■< 

T } y j '"y° 

Corporate Source: j Publication Date: 

/l/ ^ ^ fU * /) s- 1 -& 0*^ <k. CA ^ .■ u'-e ^ > i~t~y j / *) *) °7 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced 
in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, re proceed 
paper copy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is 
given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document please CHECK ONE of the following two options and sign at 
the bottom of the page. 



■pa 

t 

Check here 
For Level 1 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4* x 6" film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical) 
end paper copy. 



The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to ail Level 2 documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 


DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 




DISSEMINATE THIS 


HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 






COPY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


A0 




N0 


c$ 




J* 


J 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



□ 

t 

Check here 
For Level 2 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4* x 6* film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical), 
but not in paper copy. 



Level 1 



Level 2 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission 
to reproduce is granted, but neither box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1. 



Sign 

here-* 

please 




•/ hereby grant to the EducationaJ Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate 
this document as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optical media by persons other than 
ERIC employees and its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit 
reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. m 


Signature: 

JL 


Printed Name/Position/Title: 

/f] 5 5(7 i. / c*v / C o i'- 


^anization/A&ress: y .. U .V. 

/3c / f77V 

/"/ •) •; hi\ r v f ~ /) 2 tf <3 / / 

J J 


Telephone: 

f 1 c- f L 3 4? f if 0 


FAX: 

rz 3 ij z _ c ; 


E-Mail Address: 

U <.r~ 


Date: 

y / 2-r / 9 *7 



f) Li , edf 4-x 



( over ) 




