DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 396 901 



RC 020 662 



AUTHOR Alarcon, Rafael 

TITLE Proposition 187: An Effective Measure To Deter 

Undocumented Migration to California? 
INSTITUTION META (Multicultural Education, Training and 

Advocacy), Inc, San Francisco, CA. 

PUB DATE Oct 9A 

NOTE 39p. 

AVAILABLE FROM META, Inc., 225 Bush Street, Suite 751, San 

Francisco, CA 9A10A ($5). 

PUB IxsjL Information Analyses (070) — Reports ~ 

Evaluative/Feasibility (1A2) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

Access to Education; ^Economic Factors; Elementary 
Secondary Education; Higher Education; Human 
Services ; ^Immigration; Labor Market ; Mexican 
American Education; Mexican Americans ; Migrant 
Education; *Migrant Workers; Misconceptions; Public 
Education; Public Policy; School Law; ^Social 
Networks ; ^Undocumented Immigrants 

Access to Services ; *Cal i f ornia ; Immigration Impact ; 
Mexico; *Proposi tion 187 (California 199 A) 



ABSTRACT 

In 199A, California voters approved Proposition 187, 
which prohibits provision of publicly funded education and social 
services to undocumented immigrants, and which requires public 
schools to verify the legal status of students and their parents. 

This paper examines socioeconomic and immigration trends leading to 
the emergence of Proposition 187, and challenges assumptions about 
its ability to deter undocumented immigration. Analysis of two 
cost-benefit studies in San Diego and Los Angeles Counties finds that 
they invariably overstate the negative fiscal impacts of immigrants 
on local and state governments and omit parallel computations showing 
that native-born residents have a larger tax use "deficit” than 
immigrants. Effectiveness of the proposition depends upon assumptions 
that illegal immigrants are not well integrated into society and 
could be easily deported, that education and social services serve as 
a magnet for immigrants, and that "illegal families" could be easily 
detected when they apply for services. A social science literature 
review shows that labor migration is a social process. Permanent 
settlement has been encouraged by social networks, changes in 
California labor markets, and worsening Mexican economic conditions. 
Undocumented workers residing in California have deepened their roots 
in their communities and are unlikely to go back to their countries 
of origin even if education were denied. Also, many families have a 
complex legal status and contain a mixture of U.S. citizens, legal 
residents, and undocumented persons. Finally, the "unstoppable flow" 
of undocumented immigration is largely the result of policies 
implemented by the U.S. and Mexican governments. Contains 63 
references. (SV) 



ED 396 901 






CM t 
CO 

co 

o 

CM • 

O i 

A 



Proposition 187: An Effective Measure to Deter Undocumented 

Migration to California ? 



U.S. OCPARTMCNT or EDUCATION 

Offica o< Educational Raaaarcn and lmpfOvam«nt 

EDUCABONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIO 

documant hat b#«n raproducad at 
facaivad Irom tha p*fton or ocoamzation 
ong<natmg it 

O Minor changat hava baen mtda to impcova 
raproduction quality 



a Poinitol viaw or optnionaatatad in this docu- 
mant do not nacassarily rapraaant official 
OERl position or policy 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

T^uT Vn 

If^ciw jski 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



Rafael Alarcdn 

Department of City and Regional Planning 
University of California, Berkeley 



A REPORT PREPARED FOR META, INC. MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION, 

training AM) ADVOCACY 



San Francisco, California 
October 1994 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

2 



INTRODUCTION 



The U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service has estimated that as of October 1992, 
there were 3.379 million undocumented persons in the United States (Warren, 1994). According 
to this study, California was the place of residence of the largest portion of the undocumented 
population: 1.441 million persons or 43 percent of the total. Mexico, the largest contributor, 
provided 786,000 undocumented persons to California, followed by El Salvador with 205,000, 
Guatemala with 88,000 and the Philippines with 60,000. 

The arrival to California of a large number of unauthorized migrants from Mexico, Central 
America and Asia has ^gered a large sector of the state’s population which fears that illegal 
immigrants are taking jobs away from citizens and lawful residents. Similarly, the increased 
demand for public services has become the main concern for those who argue that California's 
fiscal deficit is caused by the arrival of a great number of undocumented immigrants, whom they 
perceive as public service consumers. 

Indeed, Governor Wilson on the basis of a report issued by the California Department of 
Finance in 1991, blamed the state's financial problems on the combination of the emigration of 
working taxpayers and the increasing demand for expensive government services by poor people 
and immigrants. This report stated that the imbalance between the number of tax payers and "tax 
receivers" was jeopardizing the state’s ability to maintain funding levels for state programs. 
According to the report, much of the growth of the tax receiver group reflected increases in the 
number of school age children resulting from immigration and a recent surge in the birth rate. The 
report also noted the slowdown in the growth of the working population, reflecting low birth 
rates during the 1960s and 1970s and a net domestic out-migration in the high-earning 45 to 64 
age group (California Department of Finance, 1991). 

Using the U.S. Census Bureau unofficial estimates. Governor Wilson stated in his 1994-95 
budget, that the number of illegal immigrants between the ages of 5 and 17 will be approximately 
456,000 in January 1995, with 392,000 of those estimated to attend public schools in California. 
According to the Governor, these children will be educated daily in the public schools at a cost of 
$ 1.7 billion'. 



' The unofficial estimate of the U. S. Census Bureau indicates that by April 1 993 the total undocumented 
immigrant population was 2.083 million in California. Interestingly enough, the Immigration and 
Naturalization Service’s estimate of California’s unauthorized population is lower; 1.441 million for October 
1992. Thus, if one uses this figure and follows the methodology of the Department of Finance to estimate the 
number of undocumented children attending public schools in California, one finds that there is an excess of 
1 1 1,528 undocumented children in the DOF's estimate. 




3 



2 




Proposition 187, the “Save our State” initiative originated in this political context in which 
political actors with a commitment to make undocumented immigration a priority electoral issue 
were successful in taking advantage of a negative public opinion concerning this problem. 
Supporters of Proposition 187 seek to challenge the Supreme Court’s 1982 decision in Plyler vs. 
Doe. In a 5 to 4 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that states could not deny public education to 
children who were not legally admitted to this country. 

Proposition 187 prohibits the provision of publicly funded social services to 
undocumented persons residing in California. In order to achieve this purpose, it contains five 
important measures regarding the provision of education, health care and other social services, 
law enforcement and the use of false immigration or citizenship documents. 

Public Elenicntary and Secondary Schools 

Proposition 187 includes provisions that prohibit public schools from admitting and 
allowing the attendance of children who are not: (1) citizens of the United States; (2) aliens 
lawfully admitted as permanent residents; and, (3) aliens admitted lawfully for a temporary period 
of time. Starting in January 1, 1995, each school district must verify the legal status of each child 
enrolling in the district for the first time. By January 1, 1996, each school district must also verify 
the legal status of every child already enrolled in the district as well as that of the parents or 
guardians of those students. If the district determines or “reasonably suspects” that a student, 
parent or guardian is not legally in the United States, then the district must take the following 
steps: (1) Within 45 days, it must report the apparent undocumented status of the person to the 
Superintendent of Public Instruction, the Attorney General, the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service and the affected parent or guardian. (2) Provide 90 days of additional instruction to 
undocumented students in order to accomplish an orderly transition to a school in the student’s 
country of origin. 

Public Postsecondarv Education 

The measure also prohibits public postsecondary educational institutions from enrolling or 
permitting the attendance of students who are not in the United States legally. Under the 
measure, each institution would be required to verify the legal status of every student at the 
beginning of every term after Januaiy 1, 1995. 



Health Care and Social Services 



The measure limits the provision of public social services and of publicly funded health 
care (except emergency care required by federal law) only to those persons who are citizens of the 
United States or lawfully admitted aliens. Agencies must notify the state Department of Social 
Services or the Department of Health Services as well as the state Attorney General and the 
Immigration and Naturalization Service regarding the applicant’s undocumented status and 
provide any additional requested information. 

Law Enforcement Agencies 

The measure requires every law enforcement agency in the state to attempt to verify the 
legal status of every arrestee who is suspected of being in the United States illegally, to notify the 
Attorney General and the Immigration and Naturalization Service of the apparent illegal status of 
arrestees. 

New Crimes 



Proposition 187 creates two new state crimes. Specifically, it makes the manufacture of 
false immigration or citizenship documents a felony punishable by a fine of $ 75,000 or 
imprisonment for five years. It also makes the use of false immigration or citizenship documents a 
felony punishable by a fine of $ 25,000 or a five-year prison term. 

The purpose of this pap'^r is threefold: (1) to describe the socioeconomic causes that led 
to the emergence of proposition 187; (2) to examine the assumptions behind the proposition and 
its alleged effectiveness as a deterrent to undocumented immigration; and (3) to review the 
current social science literature that challenges the assumptions of the proposition in the current 
socioeconomic context of California. 



5 



4 



O 



I 



PROPOSITION 187: AN ANALYSIS OF ITS CAUSES 



In addition to the role played by restrictionist individuals and organizations with record of 
presenting proposals to legislature, the emergence of Proposition 187 has been also partly the 
result of the following trends; 



1 ) The changing geographic patterns of immigration to the United States that took place 
in the last two decades. 

2) Failure of immigration law to deter illegal immigration, especially the Immigration 
Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA). 

3) The publication of advocacy reports to support the alleged negative economic impact 
of illegal immigration on the U.S. economy. 



1) Changing geographic patterns of immigration to the United States (1970 - 1990) 



International immigration to the United States has experienced a dramatic change in the 
last twenty years. Unlike in the past when most immigrants arrived from Europe, the vast 
majority now comes from developing countries in Asia and Latin America. Table 1 shows that 
legal immigration from Europe has declined substantially while legal immigration from Central 
America, Mexico, Africa, and Asia has grown rapidly in the period 1971-1990. 



b 



I i jai ^ w P I g iio g.. J.i.. . j.j im A ii j 






Tabic 1 

Legal Immigration to the US by Region of Last Residence, 
1971-80 and 1981-90. 





1971-80 


1981-90 


% Change 


Europe 


800,368 


761,550 


-4.9 


Asia 


1,588,178 


2,738,157 


72.4 


North America 








Mexico 


640,294 


1,655,843 


158.6 


Canada 


169,939 


156,938 


-7.7 


Caribbean 


741,126 


872,051 


17.7 


Central America 


134,640 


468,088 


247.7 


South America 


295,741 


461,847 


56.2 


Other in America 


995 


458 


-54.0 


Africa 


80,779 


176,893 


119.0 


Oceania 


41,242 


45,205 


9.6 


Not specified 


12 


1,032 


8500.0 


Total 


4,493,314 


7,338,062 


63.3 



Source: Statistical Yearbook, of the Immigration and Naturalization Service. 1 991. 
(INS, 1992). 



A more liberal immigration legislation that began in the mid-1965s has given rise to a more 
diversified pool of legal immigrants as shown in Table 1 . In 1965, the Immigration and 
Nationality Act abolished the national origins quota system established in 1924, thus eliminating 
national origin, race or ancestry as a basis for immigration to the United States. However, this 
legislation maintained the principle of numerical restriction, limiting Eastern Hemisphere 
immigration to 170,000 persons per year and for the first time placing a ceiling on Western 
Hemisphere immigration of 120,000 persons. In addition, the act provided a 20,000 persons per 
country limit and also established seven categories for relatives of US. citizens and permanent 
residents (fov the reunification of families) and for persons with special occupational skills needed 
in the US. Immediate relatives of US. citizens and special immigrants (certain ministers of 
religion, certain former employees of the US., etc.) were not subject to numerical restrictions. 
However, at the end, neither the preference system nor the per-country limit were applied to the 
Western Hemisphere (U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 1992; A. 1.14-1 5). 

During the 1980s, legal immigration from Central America reached the highest rate of 
growth of all regions primarily because of the civil wars in El Salvador, Nicaragua and 
Guatemala. In addition to this, during this period of time a large number of immigrants from 
Mexico and other countries became legal residents thanks to the enactment of the Immigration 









Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRC A) that included a liberal legalization program that 
benefited a substantial portion of the undocumented population already living in the United States 



2) Failure of immigration law to deter illegal immigration especially IRCA^ 



The image of the unstoppable flow of undocumented immigrants has intensified with the 
realization that IRCA failed to reduce illegal immigration. In 1986, US Congress enacted IRCA 
that contained three principal measures: (1) an amnesty for undocumented workers already 
residing in the United States, (2) sanctions against employers who knowingly hire undocumented 
workers, and (3) increased enforcement at US. borders. The amnesty was administered under 
two programs: The Section 245A program commonly known as the "general amnesty" program 
that was intended for persons who had lived continuously in the United States since January 1, 
1982 , and, the Special Agricultural Workers (SAW) program was designed for people who 
worked 90 days in perishable agriculture between May 1985 and May 1986. 

Congress passed IRCA to stem the flow of illegal immigration. Its supporters argued that 
this legislation would solve the illegal immigration problem since it contained measures that would 
affect both the supply and the demand side of the process, besides providing a generous amnesty 
program that would benefit a large number of undocumented people who were already in this 
countp. However, there is a growing consensus that IRCA has not brought about the sought- 
after reduction of undocumented immigration from Mexico. Apprehensions at the border —an 
imprecise measure of actual flows but a good indicator of trends— rose sharply in 1990, showing 
that the reduction in the number of apprehensions observed between 1987 and 1989 was only a 
fleeting result of legalization. 

In addition, several academic studies have found little evidence that the new law has 
deterred illegal immigration. In a study conducted in three traditional sending communities in 
Western Mexico in 1988, Cornelius (1990) found no evidence that IRCA had reduced the 
traditionally heavy flow of workers to the United States; on the contrary, he found that IRCA 
seemed to have augmented that flow, at least in the short term, through the legalization programs. 
Bean, Edmonston and Passel (1990) concluded that the studies they collected generally suggested 
a decrease in the flow of illegal migrants as a result of IRCA. However, they indicated that a 
large proportion of this decrease was due to the legalization programs and that some recent data 
suggested that undocumented migration flows continued to grow in the post-IRCA period. 
Donato and her associates (1992) more emphatically stressed the failure of IRCA. Their study 

^ This section is taken from Alarcon (1994a). 



0 



7 



based in seven Mexican communities showed little evidence that IRCA had significantly deterred 
undocumented Mexican migration. In their view, the few small effects that they uncovered were 
little to show for the millions of dollars and thousands of hours that IRCA invested in an effort to 
stem the tide of Mexican migrants to the United States. 

In this context, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari in 1991 proposed the establishment of 
a North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) that, among other things, would bring about 
a reduction of immigration from Mexico because "Mexico prefers to export its products rather 
than its people." President Salinas considered NAFTA essential for the creation of jobs in Mexico 
that would reduce the pressures for emigration to the United States. 

The debate over the ratification of NAFTA, which Congress narrowiy approved in 
November of 1993, generated a number of studies that examine the agreement's effects on 
migration patterns from Mexico. Calva (1991), for instance, foresees a chaotic situation for 
Mexico as a result of NAFTA. In his opinion, free trade in agricultural and livestock products 
will cause the virtual demise of Mexico's domestic production of its most important grains (corn 
and beans) since their production costs in Mexico are higher than those in the United States and 
Canada. Calva predicts that this liberalization of agricultural trade \vill eliminate 10 million 
cultivated hectares in Mexico, which in turn will lead to the emigration of three million campesino 
families who depend on the production of these grains. In Calva's view, if NAFTA permitted the 
free mobility of those expelled from the rural areas, nearly 15 million people would go to the 
United States and Canada. But since these governments are not willing to receive these displaced 
workers, they will emigrate clandestinely or go to Mexican cities where there are already 9 million 
people unemployed. 

On the other hand, Cornelius and Martin (1993) argue that, even with the anticipated 
dislocations in small-scale agriculture, future levels of total Mexican migration to the United 
States (both legal and illegal) tvill increase in the absence of trade liberalization. The authors 
provide four reasons to explain why Mexican emigration may not increase significantly despite 
restructuring and displacement from traditional agriculture. First, many rural dwellers already 
have diversified their sources of income, making them less dependent on income earned from 
producing agricultural commodities. Second, a free trade zone \vill induce more U.S. agricultural 
producers to expand in Mexico in the 1990s, creating additional jobs there, instead of in the 
United States as they did in the 1980s. Third, the links between internal and international 
migration are not as direct as is often assumed, so that, even if economic restructuring increases 
internal migration, this shift may not translate into a great deal of international migration. Finally, 
following the European experience, free trade and economic integration can be staictured so as 
not to cause significant emigration. 






8 



o 



Hinojosa-Ojeda and Robinson (1992), analyzing economic models that address the 
potential effects of NAFTA on wages and employment in Mexico and the United States, conclude 
that while complete liberalization will increase U.S. agricultural exports to Mexico, this will also 
speed up out-migration from rural areas of people who will show up in Mexican urban and U.S. 
labor markets. For this reason they propose a long transition period for Mexican agriculture to 
allow time for needed infrastructure investments in rural areas and to smooth the process of labor 
absorption in the Mexican industrial sector. 



3) The publication of advocacy reports to support the alleged negative economic 
impact of illegal immigration on the U.S. economy 



, Unlike several studies in the past that argued that immigrants in general have a positive 
effect in the U.S. economy, several economists have begun to change this image. In particular, 
George Boijas, an economist from UC San Diego, has been very influential in changing the 
perception of the impact of legal and illegal immigrants on the U.S. economy. He argues that the 
United States has become an importer of relatively unskilled labor and that ir migrants in recent 
waves, have relatively less schooling, weaker labor market attachment, higher unemployment 
rates, lower wage rates, higher poverty rates, and higher rates of welfare participation than 
immigrants in the waves that arrived in the 1950s and 1960s. In sum, according to Boijas (1990: 
219) immigrants do not perform as well in the U.S. labor market as do natives, or as did earlier 
immigrants. 

Boijas (1990: 97-1 14) contends that the pioneering study contrasting the earnings of 
immigrants to those of their native counterparts, conducted by Chiswick (1978) gave a tvrong 
impression of the assimilation process of immigrants. According to Boijas, the Chiswick's study 
and other similar works were extremely influential in forming the current conventional wisdom 
that legal immigrants perform quite well in the U.S. economy and therefore assimilate "too well." 

The results of Chiswick's study indicate that at the time of entry into the United States, the 
annual earnings of men are 1 5 percent lower than the earnings of natives with the same 
demographic characteristics. However, the earnings of immigrants grow at a much faster rate 
than earnings parity between the two groups is reached about fourteen years after amval. After 
thirty years, the typical immigrant actually earns 10 percent more than a demographically 
comparable native. Boijas argues that the results of this study came from a comparison of the 
! 969 earnings of newly arrived immigrants with the 1969 earnings of immigrants who arrived ten 
or twenty years earlier. He questions whether the cross section observation reflects immigrant 



I 0 

o 

ERIC 



9 



assimilation or the possibility that recent immigrant waves are substantially different from earlier 
waves. A statistical analysis that tracks specific immigrant cohorts across various censuses shows 
that at the time of entry into the United States (at age twenty) men who migrated between 1975 
and 1979 earned 21 percent less than comparable natives. After twenty years the wage gap vvdll 
narrow to 13 percent, but even after forty years in the United States the predicted wage 
differential will be 12 percent. By contrast, immigrants who arrived in the United states between 
1960 and 1964 entered the labor market with a wage disadvantage of 10 percent, and the wage 
gap disappeared after about two decades. Wage parity remains until retirement age. 

Based on his own research, Boijas argues that the socioeconomic characteristics of 
immigrants (mainly education, English-language proficiency, etc.) have deteriorated significantly 
in the last two or three decades and for this reason the actual wage of recent immigrants will 
remain far below that of natives throughout their entire working lives. 

Boijas (1990:151) also argues that a relatively generous welfare system increases the 
attractiveness of America's offer in the immigration market particularly for those potential 
migrants most likely to qualify for public assistance. "America of the 1980s is vastly different 
from America of the 1880s. Now we have social service and welfare programs that are easy to 
deceive and exploit. We have a cash-wage economy with high unemployment, vastly different 
from the empty frontier that greeted previous immigrants. And we have a new social phenomenon 
wherein all groups can "demand" almost instant entry into the American middle class, not as a 
result of hard work but as a matter of entitlement (Boijas, 1990:151). 

In this vein. Huddle (1993b) argues that the 7.4 million immigrants settling legally and 
illegally in California since 1970 caused total net public assistance costs to California taxpayers in 
1992 of $ 18.1 billion in excess of the $ 8.9 billion immigrants paid in taxes. Included in the 
$18.1 billion is $ 4.2 billion for costs of assistance to 914,000 California residents unemployed in 
1992 because of immigration. Passel (1994) provides a very intelligent critique of the studies 
conducted by Huddle (1993a and 1993b). 

The fiscal impact of undocumented persons on local and state governments has been 
examined in two cost-benefit studies conducted in San Diego and Los Angeles Counties. 

The San Dieeo Countv Study fRea and Parker. 1992) 

This study found that the cost to State and local governments associated vvath processing 
undocumented immigrants through the criminal justice system and with providing health services, 
education and social services for this population is $ 206,41 1,969. The state and local 
governments’ revenues associated vvith tax receipts derived from the employment and consumer 



11 



10 



o 



spending of undocumented immigrants is $ 60,490, 124. Thus, the excess of costs over revenues 
is equal to $ 145,921,845. 

According to this study, an average of 1 1 ,954 undocumented immigrant children are being 
educated in public elementary and secondary schools in San Diego County annually. These 
students represent 3.1% of the total San Diego Cointy student population and 19.0 % of all 
students categorized as Limited English Proficient (LEP). The annual average costs of providing 
basic education to these undocumented immigrant students is $ 49,214,61 8. 



The Los Angeles County Study (ISD. 19921 

Based on demographic estimates, this study found that recent immigrants, legal 
immigrants, amnesty persons, undocumented persons and the citizen children of undocumented 
persons accounted for about 25 percent of total population in Los Angeles County as of January 
1992, as shown in the next table: 



Size of Immigrant Groups and the Rest of Population in Los Angeles County, 
January 1, 1992. 



Recent Legal "mmigrants 


630,000 


6.9% 


Amnesty Persons 


720,000 


7.8% 


Undocumented Persons 


700,000 


7.6% 


Citizen Children of Undocumented 


250,000 


2.7% 


SUBTOTAL 


2,300,000 


25.0% 


Rest of Population 


6,890,000 


75.0% 


TOTAL 


9,190,000 


100% 



The study found that estimated net county costs for services provided to recent legal 
immigrants, amnesty persons, undocumented persons and their citizen children exceeded 
estimated county revenues generated from them in fiscal year 1991-92, as shown below. When 
comparing net County costs with revenues, it should be noted .hat revenues paid by businesses 
were not counted: 



Net County costs experienced 
County revenues generated 
Difference 



$ 946,706,000 
$ 139,100,000 
$ 807,606,000 



1 



‘y 



o 



11 



Educational costs for the three immigrant groups accounted for $ 1.5 billion, (23%) of 
total school districts cost in Los Angeles County. ^ The estimated costs for the studied 
populations compared to the rest of the population in 1991-1992 were as follows: 



According to the study, the three immigrant groups and the citizen children of 
undocumented persons’ share of total net county costs was 3 1 percent which exceeds both their 
25 percent share of County’s population and 10 percent share of total County revenues. 

Fix and Passel (1993: 5) state that these studies have been produced by government 
agencies interested in "recovering” the costs of immigrants and non-profit groups committed to 
reducing levels of immigration. The results of these studies uniformly find that immigrants impose 
fiscal burdens on governments and native-born taxpayers. Their own review has found that the 
studies vary in quality, but the results invariably overstate the negative impacts of immigrants for 
the following reasons; 

- They systematically understate tax collections from immigrants 

- They systematically overstate service costs for immigrants 

- None credit immigrants for the impact of immigrants-owned businesses or the fiall 
economic benefits generated by consumer spending from immigrants 

- Job displacement impacts and costs are overstated 

- They omit parallel computations for natives that, when done, show natives are net 
tax users, too 

- The size of the immigrant population - particularly the undocumented immigrant 
population - is overstated. 

^ Overall, an estimated 61 percent of school district's funding come from state funds, 2 percent from lotter>’ 

funds, 2 1 percent from local propertj’ tax levies, 8 percent from federal funds and 9 percent from other local 
sources. 



Recent Legal Immigrant Children 
Amnesty Children 
Undocumented Children 
Citizen Children of Undocumented Persons 



$331,100,000 
$ 123,500,000 
$ 367,900,000 
$ 662,300,000 



5.1% 

1.9% 

5.7% 

10.3% 



SUBTOTAL 



$ 1,484,800,000 



23.0% 



All Other Children 



$ 4,972,700,000 



77.0% 



TOTAL 



$ 6,457,500,004 



100 . 0 % 



12 




O 



Of the studies reviewed, the Los Angeles County study (ISD, 1992) seems to be the most 
careful and uses the best demographic assumptions regarding, for example, the number of illegal 
immigrants. Still, when evaluated, the study: 

- Understated revenues from immigrants by much as 30 percent because the study 
underestimated the income of recent legal immigrants; 

- Omitted the contribution of long-term legal immigrants, who represent 1 5 percent of the 
population and pay 18 percent of the taxes; 

- Overstated costs for recent legal immigrants by 60 percent or about $140 million 

- Failed to clarify the county-level "deficit" for natives is larger than for immigrants. 

In the same vein. Fix and Passel (1993) argue that the two studies of San Diego County by 
Rea and Parker (1992,1993) employ methods and assumptions that overstate costs and 
underestimate revenues. In this sense, the authors of the San Diego study assume that there are 
far more undocumented aliens in San Diego Coumy - over 200,000 - than is plausible or can be 
supported by data. This figure would imply, by the authors' own reasoning, over 4 million 
undocumented in California and 8-12 million in the United States, numbers which exceed by far 
any creditable estimates. 



II A CRITIQUE OF THE GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS BEHIND PROPOSITION 187 



The effectiveness of Proposition 187 to deter undocumented immigration to California lies 
on three main assumptions about the immigration process to California; 



1) Illegal immigrants are not well integrated into society in California, therefore they can 
easily be deported to their countries of origin. 

2) Since education and social services in general function as a magnet for large 
numbers of undocumented immigrants, limiting the access of undocumented 
persons to these services will discourage further undocumented immigration. 

3) There are “illegal families” in California which can be detected and easily deported when 
they apply for public education or any other social service. 



13 



O 



These assumptions contradict some of the most important features of current immigration 
patterns to California. Research in the social sciences has revealed that: (1) Labor migration is 
fundamentally a social process based on social networks. As a result of the formation of 
personal, social, and economic ties with the receiving society, increasingly legal and 
undocumented migrants are becoming “settlers” rather than sojourners” in California. This 
change also reflects transformations in labor markets in sending and receiving regions. (2) The 
denial of education will not force the return of many undocumented persons because 
undocumented migrants primarily come to work to California. In addition, the disparity in 
economic conditions between the United States and sending countries not only encourages further 
migration but also prevents the return of already settled immigrants in the United States. (3) 

Many immigrant families in California are mixed-status families in which there are citizens, legal 
residents and undocumented persons. This process has been accelerated by the legalization 
brought about by IRCA. 

As a result of all these trends, a large segment of the undocumented workers residing in 
California are people who are here for a more permanent stay because they have deep roots in 
their communities. Consequently, it is unlikely that these people would go back to their countries 
of origin even if education were denied in California. In light of the assumptions implied in 
proposition 187, these three arguments are developed in depth in the following section. 



1. Labor Migration; A Social Process based on Social Networks'* 



According to Massey et al (1987: 5) the idea that social networks are central to migration 
is not new. Research in the 1920s, demonstrated a tendency for migrants from particular sending 
areas to be channeled to specific districts in American cities (Zorbaugh, 1929; Gamio, 1930). 
Similarly, Tilly and Brown (1967) refer to the “auspices” of migration by which they mean “social 
structures which establish relationships between the migrant and the receiving community before 
he moves.” Others have called these relationships “migration chains.” (Me Donald and Me 
Donald, 1974; Graves and Graves, 1974; Tilly, 1978). Anthropological studies have long 
emphasized the importance of assistance provided to migrants by relatives and friends (Magnin 
1959, 1970; Jongkind, 1971; Lomnitz, 1975; Arizpe, 1978; Roberts, 1973, 1974, 1978). 
Economists have also demonstrated the importance of network connections in household 
migration decisions (Stark and Levhari, 1982; Taylor, 1984). 



This analysis of migration as a social process is a summary of hlasscy ct al. (1987). 



O 

ERIC 



15 



14 



Social Networks and the Formation of Linkages with the Host Society 



From this perspective, it has been observed that once international migration begins, social 
networks develop to make foreign employment increasingly accessible to all classes of the sending 
society. Similarly, the maturation of migrant networks is facilitated by an ongoing process of 
settlement, whereby migrants build personal, social, and economic ties to the receiving society as 
they accumulate time abroad. 

Migrant networks consist of social ties that link sending communities to specific points of 
destination in receiving societies. These ties bind migrants and nonmigrants within a complex web 
of complementary social roles and interpersonal relationships that are maintained by an informal 
set of mutual expectations and prescribed behaviors. The social relationships that constitute 
migrant networks are not unique to migrants but develop as a result of universal human bonds 
that are molded to the special circumstances of international migration These social ties are not 
created by the migratory process but are adapted to it and over time are reinforced by the 
common experience of migration itself 

The most important network relationships are based on kinship, friendship, and paisanaje 
(common origin) which are reinforced though regular interaction in voluntary associations. In 
moving to a strange and often hostile land, migrants naturally draw upon these familiar bonds to 
share the hazards and hardships of life in exile, and those left behind rely on the same ties to 
mitigate the loneliness and anxiety of having a loved one far away. As migration continues, 
however, these well-known social connections acquire new meanings and functions. They are 
transformed into a set of social relationships whose content and meaning are defined about what it 
means to be a friend, relative or paisano within a community of migrants. Eventually these 
understandings crystallize into a set of interrelationships that define the migrants network. 

Kinship forms one of the most important bases of migrant social organization and family 
connections are the most secure bonds within the networks. The strongest relationship are 
between male migrants interacting as fathers and sons. Faced with a hostile and alien 
environment, father and sons develop well-established conventions of mutual aid and cooperation 
in the United States, practices that transcend the stream household itself Long after sons have 
grown up to form their own families, fathers travel with them to El Norte, sharing the hardships 
and risks of undocumented life. From this common experience, the paternal bond is strengthened, 
and a new relationship between migrant fathers and sons develops, one that carries over into the 
home community. Throughout their lives, migrant fathers and sons are more likely to offer 
assistance, information, and services to one another. 



lb 



15 



Migrants brothers also establish a mutual collaboration that builds on and strengthens the 
fraternal tie. Facing many demands for assistance, from various friends and relatives while 
abroad, migrants naturally display a preference for the tie of brotherhood. Between brothers there 
is continual exchange of favors and help, one that cannot be measured in money alone. To a 
brother arriving in the United States without money, job, or documents, a series of obligations is 
owed. A place to stay, help in getting a job, the loan of money, or payment for the trip are just a 
few examples of how the ties of brotherhood are extended and tested in the migrant context. The 
next most important family tie within migrants networks is that between a man and his brother's 
sons. The strong relationships that brothers expect and maintain with respect to each other also 
extends to their sons. Nephews are thus given preference over other relations in the offering of 
assistance. Arriving in the United States for the first time a young man can generally count on the 
aid of his uncle; or an uncle may take it upon himself to accompany a young man on his first trip 
to el Norte. These ties also carry over to relationships between cousins. Among cousins linked 
though a common male relative there is a strong family identification, one reinforced by traditional 
practices of coresidence and mutual assistance between brothers . 

These kinship connections are reinforced though frequent interactions on important 
ceremonial occasions. Ritual associated with life milestones are specially important in linking 
settled migrants in the United States with their relatives back home. A wedding, a baptism, or the 
quince anos (fifteenth birthday) of a daughter provide opportunities for reuniting family members 
separated by migration. Relatives from Mexico are invited to share in the festivities, and friends 
and acquaintances from the home community who happen to be in the United States are also 
asked to join in, expanding the possibilities for communication and interchange. In this way, 
settled U.S migrants lend greater permanence and coherence to the networks. 

Kin assistance is generally extended freely and openly up through parallel cousins. Among 
relatives more distant than these, the strength of ties falls off rapidly, however, and their roles in 
the migratory process are correspondingly smaller. The most important kin relationship in migrant 
networks are those between fathers and sons, uncles and nephews, brothers and male cousins. 
Beyond these relationships, expectations more appropriate to friendship are relevant in governing 
behavior between two migrants. 

Friendship . Because of its explosive growth, migration has outgrown a social 
organization based solely on the limited confines of kinship, and networks have increasingly 
incorporated other close social relationships. The closest bonds outside the family are those 
formed between people as they grow up together. These are typically friendships between people 
of roughly the same age who lived near one another and joined together in play and shared 
formative experiences in church, school, or organized sports. If migration becomes frequent 



among a group of friends from the same community, their relationship will eventually overlap with 
other circles of friends with whom they are brought into frequent contact. 

Paisanaie. The feeling of belonging to a common community of origin or paisanaje is 
different from the other social relationships we have discussed in that it is dimension of 
association in the home community. Origin from the same place is not a meaningful basis of 
social organization for people while they are at home. In general, within the community itself, the 
concept of paisanaje does not imply any additional rights and responsibilities to other paisano that 
are not already included in the relationships of friend, family member or neighbor. It is not 
meaningful concept until two paisanos encounter each other outside their home community. Then 
the strength of the paisanaje tie depends on the strangeness of the environment and the nature of 
their prior relationship in the community. 

Given the cultural distance between Mexico and the United States and the large number of 
Mexican migrants living and working abroad, it is not surprising that paisanaje has become an 
important social relationship in recent years. Common origin creates a strong communal identity 
among migrants in the United States. In an unknown, alien, and often threatening milieu, migrants 
share a variety of life experiences that draw them together in the pursuit of common goals. 
Although this sense of paisanaje naturally depends on the nature of migrants' past interactions, 
they often produce new forms of association that not only promote the cohesion of migrants in 
the United States but also facilitate their reintegration into the community. 

The best example of how the paisanaje operates as integrative force is the annual fiesta 
held in honor of each town's patron saint. The patron saint, of course, is the personification of 
paisanaje, the symbolic representation of the town for all its citizens. The celebration held each 
year to commemorate the patron saint is thus more than a religious holiday. It is a reaffirmation 
of the community and its people. As such, fiestas have always represented an important 
integrative mechanism in rural Mexican society. With the advent of U.S. migration, however, the 
symbolic value of the patron saint has been shaped to the new reality of a migrant community, and 
the traditional importance of the fiesta has been greatly enhanced. 



Voluntary organizations 

Thus far we have considered various social relationships that make up the migrant 
networks, but not less important are certain institutional mechanisms that facilitate the formation 
and maintenance of social ties. A variety of voluntary associations established by migrants in the 
United States promote regular interpersonal contact, greatly facilitating the process of adaptation 
and mutual assistance. Although migrants belong to many organizations, probably the most 



important is the soccer club that has risen to support international migration in many communities 
of Western Mexico, the traditional sending region. 

Soccer games break up the routine of work and isolation and provide a forum for 
communication and interchange. Migrants share experience of the past week, discuss events of 
general interest in the town or in other places where paisanos go in the United States, and 
exchange information about job opportunities. Everyone enjoys the conviviality, and they all share 
expenses for refreshments and foods. 



Formation of Daughter Communities 

The emergence of established communities in the United States is a crucial step in the 
maturation of the migrant networks. The settlement of a few families from the same place in 
Mexico transforms the migration process by directing the streams to work sites in particular U.S. 
towns and cities. Around these families a socioeconomic organization grows, drawing subsequent 
migrants in ever increasing numbers to the specific points of destination. 

The channeling of migrants occurs as social networks focus increasingly on specific 
communities. As “daughter” settlements of Mexican out-migrants develop, the social 
infrastructure linking them to the parent communities becomes more directed and reified and the 
network becomes self-perpetuating. More migrants move to a particular place because that is 
where the networks lead, and because that is where the social structure affords them the greatest 
opportunities for success. As more migrants arrive, the range of social connections is further 
extended, making subsequent migration to that place even more likely. 

Social networks are essential elements in the integration to a new host society. However, 
Menjivar (1994: 22) has found that the particular characteristics of immigration from El Salvador 
prevented the formation of social networks that ultimately explain why Salvadorians have had 
many problems adjusting to life in San Francisco, in addition to exacerbated impoverished 
conditions. According to the author, recent immigrants from El Salvador have come to face a 
recessionary economy that offers bleak opportunities for employment for themselves as well as for 
their relatives already in the U.S. who otherwise might have supported them. In addition, the 
community is highly divided politically. This explains why compatriots and others with whom 
migrants could establish community networks are also struggling to cope with difficult aspects of 
life in the United States. Consequently, those upon whom they expected to rely for aid, are not 
always in a position to support them financially or emotionally. In many cases, once Salvadorian 
migrants join family members in the United States, the assistance they had received in the early 
stages of migration process disappear and instead, a series of hostile relations develop. 



This section has shown that networks, a form of social capital, is an essential part of the 
migration process and that the maturation of social networks leads to the creation of daughter 
communities in the United States that in turn facilitate the process of settlement, whereby 
migrants build personal, social and economic ties to the receiving community as they accumulate 
time abroad. In the next section I will argue that the settlement process is a natural consequence 
of the development of labor migration, as migrants over time, establish strong socioeconomic 
linkages in the United States. These ties prevent migrants from returning to their countries of 
origin. 



The Settlement Process 

Mexico provides the largest number of undocumented people to the United States. The 
proximity between the two countries has allowed the development of a temporary pattern of 
migration in which males, usually young, have worked for a certain period of time or seasonally 
for a few years and then they usually return to Mexico. However, several studies have suggested 
that since the 1980s, migration from Mexico has become more permanent and heterogeneous in 
terms of settlement patterns, gender, legal status and employment experience (Cornelius, 1992; 
Chavez, 1988, Alarcon, 1992). 

Between the mid 1960s, after the termination of the Bracero Program, and up to the mid 
1980s, Mexican migrants followed a pattern of migration that resembled that of the Braceros. 
Cornelius (1992; 156-157), describes this pattern as a circular flow of mostly undocumented 
young adult males who left their families behind in a rural community to work in seasonal U.S. 
agriculture for six months or less and then returned to their community of origin. Most came 
from a small subset of communities, located in seven or eight Mexican states that for many years 
had sent the bulk of Mexican migrants to the United States. Cornelius (1992:157) argues that the 
erosion of the stereotypic illegal alien population, which probably began in the late 1960s or early 
1970s has been intensified during the last ten years by four principal factors: (1) changes in the 
U.S. economy that have affected the nature and magnitude of the demand for Mexican immigrant 
labor, (2) the long-running economic crisis in Mexico, (3) the 1986 U.S. Immigration Reform and 
Control Act (ERCA), and, (4) the maturation of transnational migrant networks, whose formation 
was initiated by earlier waves of migrants to the United States. 

How can we understand the settlement process of migrants ? 

In his seminal work Birds of Passage, Piore (1979) defines settlement as the development 
of a permanent commitment to the industrial society on the part of the migrants. The migration 
stream that starts out as temporary seems to develop over time into settlement of more or less 




19 






permanent residents. For this reason, although migration has a temporary character a nucleus of 
more or less permanent migrants seems inevitably to occur. In a superficial perspective, 
settlement can be understood in terms of the success or failure of the migrants in the industrial 
society. The conventional view tends to see settlement as success, people who do well stay. 
However settlement can also be the product of failure since migrants stay when they can not 
accumulate enough funds for whatever project at home. 

In this process, the individual migrant evolves from being homo economicus to a stage in 
which a permanent community of immigrant families establishes stable linkages with the labor 
market in their demand for permanent jobs. In the first stage, immigrants view work as purely 
instrumental; a means to gather income that can be taken to the home community, however as 
time passes the need for community grows among immigrants and begin to anticipate their 
inability to maintain the ascetic existence they had originally planned and they begin to bring their 
wives and children from home. 

Massey (1986; 671-683) believes that data collected from migrants in four Mexican 
communities confirms the model postulated by Piore. Mexican immigrants become progressively 
enmeshed in a web of social connections in the United States as they build up time in this country 
and, in this process, they eventually settle in the United States. While migrants form friendship 
outside the group and family members begin traveling with them, they become more involved with 
public institutions and informal organizations. At the same time, migrants acquire more stable 
urban jobs and the share of earnings sent home falls as they shift their focus from Mexico to the 
United States. 

In addition to this, Chavez (1988) argues that even for undocumented workers, the 
formation of a family begins a process that leads to eventual settlement. These families become 
binational with the arrival of children who are American citizens and therefore have the right to 
obtain social services and education that reinforce the links to the United States. Taking this 
further, Hondagneu (1990) has found that within the household, men and women express different 
preferences with respect to settlement. Men generally indicate a desire to return to Mexico while 
women express their intention of staying in the United States. This author believes that men 
dream of the ultimate return to Mexico because through the process of migration and 
resettlement, they lose control over family resources, decisions, and privileges. 

Massey and his associates (Massey et al. 1987) found that ethnographic data and 
regression analysis show that time spent in the United States is the single most important variable 
that explains settlement and that this process is strongly affected by urban origin, non-farm 
employment in the United States and legal status. In this study, a "settler" is defined as a migrant 
who has been in the United States for three continuous years. 



2 



L 




20 




As migrants make additional trips and stay longer in the United States, they accumulate 
experience in the United States which increase the likelihood of permanent settlement. As 
migration continues, a growing number of families settle down forming "daughter communities" 
These communities in turn greatly facilitate migration by providing a stable anchor in the receiving 
community. After ten years of migrant experience, 42 percent of rural migrants and 53 percent of 
urban migrants from the sample of four Mexi' an communities have settled, with the figures rising 
to 79 percent and 76 percent after twenty years 

Determinants of the settlement process were studi ;d by a logistic regression analysis of 
men's migrant experience. The results show that factors .elated to the household economic 
position are not very important. Among personal characteristics, settlement is considerably 
enhanced by a lack of children as well as age. Settlement is then most likely to occur at early 
stages of the life cycle, just before or just after marriage. The most striking finding was that 
migrant experience ultimately overcomes the effect of other variables to render settlement 
virtually inevitable in the long run. As indicated before, possession of legal documents but no 
children and the status of being a nonfarmworker from an urban background all substantially 
increase the probability of settlement early in the migrant career, as experience progresses, 
however, these variables matter less and less. In sum, the people most likely to settle are young 
childless men from urban areas who posses legal documents and have accumulated extensive 
experience in the United States. 

This overview of some of the studies that have focused on the settlement process shows 
very interesting and useful insights as well as limitations. First, as observed in the work of Piore 
(1979) and Massey (1986) and Massey et al. (1987), time spent in the United States seems to be 
the key factor that determines settlement: the more time a migrant spends in the United States the 
more likely she will become a “settler”. However, it is very limiting to define a “settler” as 
someone who has been in the United States for three continuous years (Massey et al. 1987). 
Although this definition is useful for a statistical analysis it lacks sociological meaning, for this 
reason it seems strange that, according to the authors oi Return to Aztlan, the people most likely 
to settle are young urban men without children who posses legal documents and have 
accumulated extensive experience in the United States. This image contradicts the prevalent 
assumption in the literature that states that family formation leads to settlement. In this sense, it is 
useful to incorporate in the analysis the sociological/anthropological approach (Chavez, 1988, 
Hondagneu, 1990; Massey et al. 1987; and. Rouse, 1992) that states that family formation, the 
participation of women, and the maturation of social networks play fundamental roles in 
encouraging settlement in the United States. However, most of these studies, based only on 
ethnographic data, focus on the demographic characteristics, attitudes, opinions and practices of 
migrants; assuming ultimately that settlement is only the result of the decision of migrants. This 

22 be:, ST COPY available" 



o 



view seems to suggest that settlement takes place in a vacuum. It is crucial to analyze the 
political and economic context of reception of immigration as suggested by Fortes and Borocs 
(1989). 



Transformation of Labor Markets in California: A New Demand for Immigrant Labor 

Settlement has been encouraged by the transformation of labor markets in the United 
States. Global restructuring has led to the consolidation of two-tier labor markets. Sassen (1991) 
argues that in "global cities" like New York and London, immigrants provide low-wage labor to 
declining backward sectors of capital but also to jobs that support the highly specialized service 
sector and the high-income lifestyles of those employed in this sector. From a similar perspective, 
Castells (1989) has found that economic restructuring has caused the differentiation of labor in 
two equally dynamic sectors: the information-based formal economy and the downgraded labor- 
based informal economy that employs ethnic minority workers and immigrants. 

As a result of this, recent immigrants to the United States are mostly locating in only a few 
metropolitan cities, especially New York and Los Angeles. For this reason these metropolises are 
becoming fractured cities that are inhabited by a two-tier society. New York has been referred to 
as a "dual city" (Mollenkopf and Castells, 1991) and Los Angeles has been named the primary 
homeland of a largely Third World labor force (Soja, 1991). 

According to Cornelius (1991:167-168) California's attractiveness to the most recent 
wave of Mexican migrants reflects a more robust, more diversified employment growth in that 
state, relative to other potential destinations. Following the 1980-82 recession, a boom occurred 
in most sectors of the highly diversifi d California economy. Since 1 986, this boom has coincided 
with a sharp contraction in employment opportunities in "oil bust" Texas, whose economy only 
recently has begun to revive. In the last two decades, employment growth in California has been 
far more robust than in the United States as a whole. During the 1970s, for example, blue collar 
jobs increased in California at twice the national rate, and manufacturing employment expanded at 
nearly four times the national rate. In addition to its overall dynamism and diversity, there are 
certain structural features of the contemporary California economy that increase the demand for 
immigrant labor. For example, the system of contracting out labor-intensive tasks to small, 
largely nonunion, immigrant dominated firms in such industries as apparel, electronics, and 
construction appears to be advancing more rapidly in California than in other parts of the nation. 
And while the demand for entry-level workers is likely to rei ;ain strong, the largest numbers of 
new jobs to be created in California during the next twenty years will be relatively low-paying, 
low skill, low status jobs in restaurants, hotels, and other parts of the urban service sectors - 




22 



O 



precisely the kinds of jobs that are increasingly shunned by young, better educated, native-born 
Californians. The need for personal services among the rapidly expanding business-financial- 
professional elite has been a significant source of jobs for female immigrants in Los Angeles in 
recent years. Similarly, Roger Rouse has described the most recent emigrants from Aguililla, 
Michoacan to Redwood City, California (a bedroom suburb of northern California's high-tech 
"Silicon Valley" as that community’s janitors, dishwashers, gardeners, hotel workers, and house 
cleaners- "proletarian servants in the paragon of post-industrial society". 

On the debate over the effects of immigration on the U.S. labor markets, there are three 
theories ‘hat seek to explain this process: displacement, segmentation, and "queuing" theories 
(Valenzuela, 1993). The neoclassical displacement theory argues that immigrants arrive to the 
U.S. in the face of declining wages. As a result, an increased supply of foreign workers further 
pushes domestic wages down by expanding the aggregate labor supply despite a stable demand 
for labor. Immigrants displace native-born workers because the former are assumed to be perfect 
substitutes for the latter and skill-differences are ignored. According to segmentation theory , the 
U.S. labor market is sufficiently divided between immigrant and non-immigrant jobs so that 
domestic workers are insulated from direct displacement effects of employing migrants. Although 
native workers may be employed in unskilled jobs, they are nevertheless protected from 
competition because their jobs may be covered by union contracts. The queuing theory , that is 
related to the segmentation theory, argues that immigrants take jobs that native workers no longer 
want; that is, a job ladder, or queue, for immigrant workers exists. Over time, U.S. -bom labor 
moves onto better occupations, vacating "lower-mng" and less desirable jobs that various groups 
of newcomers then take. To the extent that such a queue is developing in secondary occupations 
or peripheral industries where immigrants and other disadvantaged groups are concentrated, 
immigrant labor may work at the expense of Black and other U.S. -bom labor. 

In relation with the "queue" theory of labor markets, Scott (1988; 226) argues that labor 
markets in American metropolises requ’re the continual recreation of pools of cheap and malleable 
labor suitable for employment in the disintegrated complexes of labor-intensive manufacturing and 
service industries. Similarly, Zabin et al. (1993) argue that California’s agricultural industry has 
historically experienced an ethnic replacement process. This concept is used to describe how 
agricultural employers in California have relied on the sequential entry of groups of foreign 
workers for most of the last hundred years. In general, a more settled group of farm workers is 
replaced by a new group who is willing to accept worse working conditions. California 
farmworkers have been successively Chinese, Japanese, Filipinos, and mestizo Mexicans. Only 
during the Great Depression, white workers "Okies" and "Arkies" formed the major pait of the 
harvest labor force. Interestingly enough, beginning in the 1980s, this replacement process is 



24 



23 






occurring within the Mexican migrant group since Mixtecos, indigenous people from Oaxaca, are 
replacing mestizo farmworkers in many rural areas of California. 



2. Labor Migration and Economic Crisis in Mexico 



This section focuses on Mexico ar.\d seeks to relate migration patterns that developed in 
the 1980s with the emergence of the economic crisis. The main contention is that the denial of 
social services will not force the return of many undocumented persons because the hard 
economic conditions in Mexico prevent the return of already settled immigrants in California. 



Impact of the Economic Crisis on Employment and Wages 

Cordera (1991) has found that between 1982 and 1988, domestic production was 
practically stagnant in Mexico and that the concomitant per capita decline in production caused 
that Mexican's standard of living was 15 percent lower in 1989 than at the beginning of the 
decade. The impact of the economic crisis within the labor market had three distinct aspects: the 
loss of employment-generation dynamism, particularly in the more modem industrial sectors (the 
manufacturing sector traditionally accounting for almost 20 percent of total employment, was 
stagnant tlirough the decade); the lower quality of the jobs that were created; and the decline in 
real wages. According to Lustig (1990) between 1982 and 1984 employment contracted sharply 
in manufacturing and constmction, which together comprise about 20 percent of total 
employment and 27 percent of nonagricultural employment. The largest drop occurred in 
constmction. In 1984 the wage bill was 45 percent below its 1981 level. However, between 
1982 and 1985, in the midst of overall economic decline, the agricultural sector faired relatively 
well in terms of output performance. The average growth rate of total GDP in the period from 
1982 to 1985 was close to zero, while for agriculture was over 2 percent. In this sector, while 
large-scale producers using hired labor probably benefited from the combination of rising crop 
prices and decreasing real wages, smallholder peasants who produce an agricultural surplus may 
have been able to protect their real income and food consumption. However, mral families who 
depend on wage income must have experienced significant deterioration in their purchasing 
power. 

Cordera (1991) argues that individual responses to the practical impossibility of obtaining 
formal emj .oyment led to an increase in legal and illegal migration to the United States, a 

25 



o 



considerable increase in criminal activity, the entrance of more family members into the labor 
market; and an increase in marginal employment, particularly self-employment-in part motivated 
by government’s "empleate a ti mismo" (be your own employer) ad campaign. In this sense, the 
informal sector to some extent offset the negative job-creation and employment-rate tendencies of 
the Mexican economy in the 1980s. According to the National Urban Employment Survey 
(Encuesta Nacional de Empleo Urbano, ENEU), between 1982 and 1987 the proportion of self- 
employed workers and family members worldng without remuneration increased from 1 6 to 2 1 
percent of the entire economically active population; the proportion of workers earning a wage, 
salary, or commissions dropped from 81 to 74 percent over the same period. 

Cornelius (1991) found that in the 1980s, migration to the United States from Mexican 
cities grew substantially. This phenomenon is consistent with the widely held notion that, in 
relative terms, the economic crisis has affected urban dwellers (especially residents of the largest 
cities) even more severely than the rural population. Prior to the economic crisis and the 
government austerity measures that it provoked, Mexico City and other large urban centers were 
heavily subsidized as places to live and work. Moreover, they were major centers of government 
employment, and the wages of government workers filtered back into the general urban economy. 
Therefore, crisis-induced austerity has disproportionately impacted Mexico's large cities. 



Economic Crisis and the Standard of Living of Mexicans 

According to Tello (1991 : 58) the crisis initiated in the early 1980s has not only affected 
negatively the living standards of people but has also widened inequality. In his view, although 
Mexico in the early 1980s was a primary example of sustained economic growth in Latin America, 
the country's low marks in social well-being and pervasive economic inequality fell far short of 
what this "economic miracle" would suggest. 

While the poorest 10 percent of Mexican families earned 2.4 percent of national income in 
1958 they only earned 1.1 percent in 1977. At the other extreme, the richest 20 percent of 
families received 50 percent of the country's available income in 1977, just as they had thirty years 
earlier. In 1985, the poorest 40 percent of the Mexican population received 9.9 percent of GDP. 
Economic inequality continues to be more marked in Mexico than in countries with comparable, 
or even lower, levels of per capita income. 

Mexico's crisis years (1982-89) further impoverished the population. During this period 
of time, the country's poor grew in both absolute and relative terms. Per capita GDP fell 14 
percent, and the decline in earnings was very unevenly distributed. While the country's population 
expanded from 71 .4 million in 1981 to 81 .2 million in 1987, the country's poor grew from 32. 1 to 



O 

ERIC 



2b 



25 




41 .3 million. In this six year period, nine of every ten Mexicans added to the national population 
were to be found in the ranks of the poor. Today forty-one million Mexicans are unable to satisfy 
their basic needs, and seventeen million live in extreme poverty. 

The portion of GDP which corresponds to wage earnings, which had always been low 
in Mexico compared to more advanced countries, dropf ed from 36 percent in 1980 to 28.6 
percent in 1986. This decline reflects the behavior of real minimum wage; from an index of 100 in 
1970, the real minimum wage rose to 109 in 1980 and then dropped precipitously to 56.6 percent 
in 1988. Over the same period, unemployment rose from 6 to 12.1 percent of the economically 
active population. 

In the same vein, Cordera (1991 ; 30) has found that while in 1980 wages and salaries 
accounted for 36 percent of national income by 1986 that figure had dropped to 28 percent. 

Several factors interacted to place the brunt of the economic adjustment on wage earners: a 
stagnant job market; uncontrolled inflation that outpaced all attempts at wage and salary 
adjustment, so that by 1988 the legal minimum wage was worth only half its 1981 value; and the 
combined effect of flexible exchange rates and repressive wage policies, designed to transfer much 
of the burden of inflation control and international price competitiveness to wage earners. 

The economic crisis and the adjustment policies to control it have affected the quality of 
education, nutrition and health among the Mexican population. As a result of reduced 
government spending on education there were fewer jobs and lower wages for educators, leading 
to stagnation and deterioration in both the quality and availability of public education. Spending 
on education declined in real terms from 1981 to 1987 and, as a percentage of GDP, was lower in 
1987 than it had been in eleven years. A corollary effect of the crisis, with serious implications for 
education, is that household strategies for confronting economic hardship included the integration 
of children and adolescents into the labor market. 

The declining investment in education halted construction of educational infrastructure. 
Budget constraints also reduced the availability of free text books and increased the student- 
teacher ratio, even as overall enrollment levels fell. This last consideration is reflected in the 
graduation rates at the different educational levels. For example, only ten of every hundred 
students en.ering university receive degrees. Moreover, there have been sharp declines in high 
school and junior college graduation rates. In 1987, fully 10 percent of the population over age 
15 (approximately five million people) was illiterate, and the remaining 90 percent had, on 
average, only at six. grade education. 

The decline in nutritional levels has multiple roots: a contracting job market and reduced 
household incomes; regressive tendencies in social spending; a fiscal policy, characterized since 
1982 by shrinking subsidies and increased prices for public goods and services; and lagging 
minimum-wage rates relative to prices for basic goods. For example, the average cost of a basket 




2V 



26 



of basic goods was almost 50 percent of the legal minimum wage in 1987, compared to about 30 
percent in 1981 . Similarly, according to Cordera, government spending on health and social 
security in 1987 was lower than in 1970, whether measured as per capita expenditures, percent of 
GDP, or percent of total public expenditures. 

Economic Crisis and Migration to the United States 

Cornelius (1991) in his article LosMigrantes de la Crisis argues that the economic crisis 
in Mexico of the 1980's propelled into the migratory flow people from families, communities, and 
states without a long history of U.S. bound migration. Similarly, the extensive publicity 
surrounding IRCA's legalization and Replenishment Agricultural Worker (RAW) programs seems 
to have attracted into the migratory flow persons from communities and states that had not 
participated significantly. In general, the 1980s saw the rapid growth in the migration of people 
from new regions, including urban areas, and more women. 

Mexican migrants to the United States in the 1980's included skilled, urban-bom Mexican 
workers from Mexico's principal cities as well as destitute campesinos from some of Mexico's 
most underdeveloped states, such as Guerrero, Oaxaca, Hidalgo, and Puebla. These states all 
have large indigenous populations. It is significant that several of the nontraditional areas now 
sending migrants to the United States are among the Mexican states most adversely impacted by 
the t conomic crisis of the 1980's (The Federal District, Morelos, and Hidalgo, all of whose 
economies contracted by more than 2 percent during the 1980-85 period; and Guerrero and 
Puebla, whose economies contracted by 0. 1-2.0 percent in the same years). 

The shift from a migrant population consisting mainly of highly mobile, seasonally employed "lone 
males" (unmarried or unaccompanied by dependents) toward a more socially heterogeneous, year- 
round, de facto permanent Mexican immigrant population in the United States accelerated in the 
1980s. To be sure, the absolute number of young, temporary Mexican male farmworkers in the 
United State did not decline during the 1970s and 1980s, but it grew slowly in absolute terms and, 
in relative terms, this fraction of the Mexican immigrants population was overtaken and 
overwhelmed by migrants who remained in the United States for long periods, accompanied by 
their dependents. Ethnographic and survey studies of both sending and receiving communities, 
interviews with would-be illegal migrants at the border, and INS apprehension statistics all show 
that there is now considerably more migration by whole family units (moving together), more 
family-reunification migration (women and children joining heads already established in the United 
States), and more migration by single women than there was a decade ago. 

Increased female migration to the United States reflects, in part, generational changes in 
the attitudes and expectations of Mexican women. Gonzalez de la Rocha (1989) has summarized 

27 

2b 



her findings from a high-migration town in Jalisco as follows: “During the last three years more 
women have left the town to be reunited with their husbands in the United States... Upon getting 
married, the woman no longer stays in the town. . . . The young women do not want to repeat the 
loneliness that their mothers experienced nor the hardships that they had to endure (while their 
husband worked in the United States”. (Cornelius, 1991 : 171). 

The higher propensity of females to migrate to the United States in recent years is also a 
consequence of Mexico's economic crisis, which has driven more wives, single women, and 
children into the work force. Especially among Mexico's urban poor, the male family head's 
income is not nearly sufficient now to meet the family's needs. 

Female emigration to the United States has also been increasing because of the abundance 
of new employment opportunities for which women are the preferred labor source. For example, 
there is a booming market in California's largest urban areas for undocumented female Mexican 
labor to provide child care, clean houses and offices, and iron clothes. In the San Diego area, 
recently arrived female Mexican migrants now find housecleaning work by going door to door, as 
males have done (for gardening work) for many years. 



3. Mixed-Status Families vs. “Undocumented Families” 



Supporters of Proposition 187 assume that the undocumented population of California is 
composed of families in which all of their members lack legal documents. In their view they can 
be found when they apply for public education or any other social service. Research has found 
that this is not true because there is a large number of mixed-status families which include US 
citizens, legal residents and undocumented people. This trend has been expanded by the ample 
legalization brought about by IRCA. 

More than 3 million people applied for the two legalization programs (1.8 million for the 
"general amnesty" and 1.3 million for the SAW program) contained in IRCA. The approval rate 
for decided cases was 94 percent and 93 percent respectively. As a result of the implementation 
of the "general amnesty" more than 1.6 million people (the majority from Mexico) were granted 
legalization. This legalized population included immigrants from 179 countries. Table 2 shows 
that as of February 1991, the vast majority came from Mexico (nearly 70 percent) and Central 
America (13 percent). The four nations that provided the most applicants were Mexico (1,162, 
461), El Salvador (136,073), Guatemala (49,942) and Colombia (24,596) (INS, 1992: 8). 



Table 2. 

Region of Origin for the Legalized 
Population under the "General Amnesty" 
Program of IRCA, 1991. 



Region 


Number 


Percentage 


Europe 


33,359 


2.01 


Asia 


75,529 


4.54 


North America 






Mexico 


1,162,461 


69.88 


Canada 


10,422 


0.63 


Other 


1 


0.00 


Caribbean 


55,279 


3.32 


Central America 


224,089 


13.47 


South America 


69,447 


4.17 


Africa 


28,880 


1.74 


Oceania 


3,880 


0.23 


Unknown 


248 


0.01 


Total 


1,663,595 


100.00 



Source: Table Adapted from Table 3 (Ib/S. 1992: 8) 



The legalized population was highly concentrated in several regions and major urban 
centers. Overall, 86 percent resided in four states: California, Texas, Illinois and New York. 
California was the place of origin of the majority of applicants since more than half of the 
legalized immigrants (54.7 percent) filed their application in this state. While one US resident in 
81 applied for legalization, one Californian in 17 did so. Similarly, while 910,235 people applied 
for legalization in California - the largest number - only 14 did so in North Dakota. (INS, 1992; 
18). 

As a result of the legalization of more than 3 million people, a large number of families in 
California have US citizens, legal residents and undocumented persons among their members. 
This has been revealed in three studies conducted in Los Angeles, San Diego and Madera County 



The Los Angeles Countv Study (ISD. 1992 ) 

The Los Angeles County Study provides valuable data to estimate the importance of the 
mixed-status families in California’s population. The r,tudy found that recent immigrants, legal 
immigrants, amnesty persons, undocumented persons and the citizen children of undocumented 



persons accounted for about 25 percent of total population in Los Angeles County as of January 
1992. In this estimate, the U.S. citizen children bom to undocumented persons accounted for 
250,000 or 2.7 percent of total population in the county. 

Since the study defines the citizen children of the undocumented as “children under the 
age of 18 bora in the United States whose mothers are undocumented persons” (ISD, 19y2;15), 
this implies that a large number of the 700,000 estimated undocumented persons living in the Los 
Angeles County are the parents or sibling of these U.S. citizens. Therefore, there is a large 
number of mixed-status families in Los Angeles County that will be difficult to deport. It is also 
unlikely that these families will leave the United States voluntarily as a result of the denial of 
education and other social services because some of their members are U.S. citizens. 

The authors of this study state that based on the Westat survey^ they derived that the 
average number of children bom in the United States per female amnesty person who had entered 
after 1978 was .90. Then, this ratio was used with their estimate of undocumented females to 
estimate the number of citizen children of the undocumented. The authors caution “that in 
evaluating this estimate, it needs to be remembered that the proportion of undocumented 
immigrants who are married or cohabiting is lower than average and that at this time most of them 
have been in the United States less than 10 years. The ratio would be expected to go up over 
time as the proportion in family unions increases and the average number of years in the United 
States increases. The women in this subsample of the Westat survey had been in the United 
States 8 to 10 years at the time of the survey. Ten years had also elapsed from the pre-1982 entry 
cut-off date of our January 1, 1992 estimate. Some of the undocumented women, however, have 
been in the United States much less than 10 years, while others entered prior to 1982 and did not 
apply for amnesty. Nationwide, the number of pre-1982 amnesty applicants was 15 % lower than 
the number of undocumented persons estimated to have been counted in the 1980 Census. We 
do not know the degree of bias caused by differences between the Westat subsample and the 
current population of undocumented women.” (ISD, 1992:22) 



San Diego: Settlers and Sojourners 

Leo Chavez (1988) in his article Settlers and Sojourners: Tlw Case of Mexicans in the 
United States based on his study in San Diego, argues that migrants tvith families were much 
more likely to reside more permanently in the United States than those who migrated alone 

* The Westat survey was a sample survey of the amnesty population commissioned by the Immigration and 

Naturalization Service and conducted by Westat, Inc. in 1989. The number of cases for Los Angeles County was 
2,129). 



(63.8% to 39.5% respectively) because migrating with a fantily appears to influence continued 
residence rather than returning to Mexico. 

In this context, Chavez contends that popular terms such as "undocumented family" and 
"illegal family" are generalities which disregard the fact that many of these families have at least 
one child bom in the U.S. and is therefore a citizen. Out of 603 households headed by 
undocumented immigrants in the San Diego sample, 42. 1% contained at least one member who 
was a citizen by birth in the United States. This proportion compares favorably with similar data 
collected in Texas. 

An analysis of the ages of undocumented interviewees provides further evidence that 
undocumented settlers are in the early childbearing years: 46% of the children were five years old 
or younger. Consequently, the chances that a family headed by an undocumented immigrant will 
have a child bom in the U.S. increase the longer that family resides in the United States. 

The evidence also indicates another pattern that is important for considering the future of 
long-term undocumented residents: many eventually become legal residents. Of the 151 legal 
interviewees who had a previous history of migration to the U.S., 59.4% were at one time 
undocumented migrants. 

In sum, many of the undocumented who are long-term residents of the U.S. must be 
considered "immigrants" rather than "migrants". This is especially true for those who have taken 
the cmcial step of forming a family in the U.S. , either by marrying here or by bringing their family 
from Mexico. Such families will not necessarily follow previous migration patterns based upon 
the mobility of a single individual. There is scant evidence that most of such families would 
willingly return to Mexico after a brief "season" in the United States. Many will remain in the 
U.S. unless they are apprehended and returned to Mexico by INS authorities. Even then, these 
families will have incentives to return to the home community and equity (both economic and 
social) they have built up, sometimes over several years, in the United States. 



Madera County: Transnational or Immigrant Workers ? 

Similarly, in my study in California’s San Joaquin Valley (Alarcon, 1994b), I found that as 
a result of the ample legalization brought about by IRC A the legal status of migrant families 
became very complicated with the predominance of mbced-status families. This study that 
examined the integration of Mexican immigrants into rural California focused on the migration 
experience of a group of families who are originally from a town in Michoacan (Mexico) and live 
in Madera County. As part of the research project, I conducted a survey of a random sample of 



3 ^ 



31 



this immigrant population living in Madera County. For this reason I selected 30 families which 
constitutes nearly 20 percent of the total number of families. 

In 80 percent of the families there were not any undocumented persons. In all of these 
families there were different combinations of US citizens, “green-card” holders, and the so-called 
“Rodinos”, that is, people who became legal residents as a result of IRCA. In 17 percent of the 
rest of families there were also combinations of US citizens, “green-card” holders, and “Rodinos 
living with undocumented persons. Finally, only 3 percent were “undocumented families” where 
all of the members were undocumented. 



CONCLUSIONS 



This study has shown that the assumptions that support Proposition i 87 contradict some 
of the most important characteristics of current immigration patterns to California. These trends 
have been uncovered by research in the different disciplines of the social sciences. Research has 
shown that labor migration is a social process and that social networks over time lead to 
permanent settlement in the receiving country. Similarly, changes in labor markets in California 
have encouraged the permanent stay of immigrants. Settlement has also been reinforced by the 
worsening economic conditions in countries like Mexico. Finally, unlike supporters of 
Proposition 187 who assume the existence of immigrant families in California, research has shown 
that the legal status of families is a complicated issue with the presence of a large number of 
mixed-status families in which there are U.S citizens, legal residents and undocumented persons. 

As a result of all these trends, it seems that Proposition 187 instead of solving the problem 
of undocumented immigration, it will create social conflicts and economic disruption in California. 
It is evident that many undocumented workers residing in California are people who are here for a 
more permanent stay because they have deepened their roots in their communities. Consequently, 
it is unlikely that these people would go back to their countries of origin even if education were 
denied in California. 

Lastly, it is crucial to emphasize that current undocumented migration to the United States 
that seems to be an unstoppable flow, is largely the result of polices implemented by the United 
States and Mexico governments. The historical review of the policies implemented by the two 
governments on labor migration reveals that the United States has always taken the initiative in 
the policy making process through a well-defined immigration legislation that is often used to 
favor particular interests. Mexico's policies have largely emerged as a response to U.S. 




33 



32 



immigration policies. In the case of Mexico, a short period of a nationalist stand that opposed 
emigration to the United States ended in the 1940s and gave way to a policy that tacitly has 
sought to maintain the migration process. Despite this long-standing laissez-faire stance that 
keeps the "back door" open to emigration, Mexican officials have recently proclaimed that 
Mexico prefers to create jobs rather than export people. This argument was used as one of the 
principal justifications for the establishment of NAFTA 

From the turn of the century to the mid-1960s, U.S. immigration policy encouraged 
temporary Mexican labor migration. This was the overall intention despite the deportations that 
took place in the 1930s and 1950s. The restrictionist push to limit immigration crystallized in 
IRC A, but this legislation still contains many concessions for employers in their search for cheap 
labor (Alarcon, 1994a). 




34 



33 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Alarcon, Rafael. "Nortenizacion. Self-Perpetuating Migration from a Mexican Town". 
Bustam^te, Jorge., Clark Reynolds and Raul Hinojosa (eds). U S.- Mexico Relations. Labor 
Market Interdependence. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1992. 

Alarcon Rafael. "Labor Migration from Mexico and Free Trade; Lessons from a Transnational 
Community" Working Paper 1 (IV Chicano/Latino Policy Project. University of California, 
Berkeley, 1994a. 

Alarcon Rafael. “Immigrants or Transnational Workers ?: The Settlement Process among 
Mexicans in Rural California.” Report for the California Institute for Rural Studies. 1994b. 

Arizpe Lourdes. Migracion. Etnicismo v Cambio Econ o mico: Un Estudio Sobre Migrantes 
Campesinos a la Ciudad de Mexico. El Colegio de Mexico. Mexico, 1978. 

Arizpe Lourdes. “The Rural Exodus in Mexico and Mexican Migration to the United States.” 
International Migration Review 15, 1981. 

Bean Frank D., Barry Edmonton, and Jeffrey S. Passel (Eds). Undocumented Migration to 
United States. IRC A and the Experience of the 1980s . Lanham and London. RAND Corporation 
and The Urban Institute, 1990. 

Boijas George. Friends or Strangers: The Impact of Immigrants on the U S. Econorny. New 
York; Basic Books, 1990. 

California Department of Finance. California's Growing Taxpayer Squeeze. Finance Report. 

1991. 

Calva Jose Luis. Probables Efectos de un Tratado de Libre Comercio en el C ampo Mexicano. 
Mexico: Distribuciones Fontamara S.A, 1991. 

Castells Manuel The Informational Citv. Information Technology, Econom ic Restructuring and 
the Urban Regional Process . Oxford; Blackwell, 1989. 

Chavez Leo. Settlers and Sojourners: The Case of Mexicans in the United States. Human 
Organization. 47 (2) 1988. 

Chiswick Barry. "The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-Bom Men." Journ al 
of Political Economy 86. 1978. 

Cordera Rolando and Ennque Gonzalez. "Crisis and Transition in the Mexican Economy.^ in 
Gonzalez de la Rocha Mercedes and Agustin Escobar (eds). Social Responses to M^co's 
Economic Crisis of the 1980s . U.S. - Mexico Contemporary Perspectives Senes 1. Center for 
U.S. - Mexican Studies. University of California, San Diego. 1991. 




3b 



34 



Cornelius, Wayne. "Impacts of the 1986 Immigration Law on Emigration from Rural Mexican 
Sending Communities" in Bean, Frank D., Barry Edmonton, and Jeffrey S. Passel (eds). 
Undocumented Migration to United States. IRC A and the Exper ience of the 1980s. Lanham and 
London. RAND Coiporation and The Urban Institute, 1990. 

Cornelius Wayne. "Los Migrantes de la Crisis. The Changing Profile of Mexican Migration to the 
United States." in Gonzalez de la Rocha Mercedes and Agustin Escobar (eds). Social Responses 
to Mexico*s Economic Crisis of the 1980s . U.S. - Mexico Contemporary Perspectives Series 1 
Center for U.S. - Mexican Studies. University of California, San Diego. 1991. 

Cornelius Wayne. "From Sojourners to Settlers: The Changing Profile of Mexican Migration to 
the United States" in Bustamante, Jorge., Raul Hinojosa and Clark Reynolds, (eds.) LL^ 
Mexico Relations: Labor Market Interdependence . Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1992. 

Cornelius Wayne and Philip Martin. The Uncertain Connecttion. Free Trade and Me>dco - U.S ^ 
Migration . Center for U.S. - Mexican Studies. San Diego; University of California, San Diego 
1993. 

De la Rocha Mercedes “El Poder de la Ausencia; Mujeres y Migracion en una Comunidad de los 
Altos de Jalisco.” Paper Presented at the XI Coloquio de Antropologia e Historia Regionales. El 
Colegio de Michoacan. Zamora: October 1989. 

Donato, Katherine, Jorge Durand, and Douglas Massey. "Stemming the Tide ?. Assessmg the 
Deterrent Effects of the Immigration Reform and Control Act . Demography 29 (2), 1992. 

Fix Michael and Jeffrey Passel. Immigrants and Welfare: New M>hhs, New Realities. Testimony 
before the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means Subcommittee on 
Human Resources. November 1993. 

Gamio Manuel. Mexican Immigration to the United States . Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1930. 

Graves Nancy and Theodore Graves. “Adaptive Strategies in Urban Migration. Annual Review 
of Anthropology 3. 1974. 

Hinojosa-Ojeda Raul and Sherman Robinson. "Labor Issues in a North American Free Trade 
Area" Assesing the Impact: North American Free Trade . Edited by Nora Lustig, Barry 
Bosworth and Robert Lawrence. Washington; The Brookings Institution, 1992. 

Hondagneu-Sotelo Pierrete. Gender and the Politics of Mexican Undocumented Imnaigrant 
Settlement. Doctoral Dissertation. Department of Sociology. University of California, Berkeley. 

1990. 

Huddle Donald. “The Net National Costs of Immigration.” Carrying Capacity Network, July 
1993a. 

Huddle Donald. “The Net Costs of Immigration to California.” Carrying Capacity Network. 
November 1993b. 

Internal Services Division (ISD). Impact of Undocumented Persons and Other I^igrant on 
Costs. Revenues and Services in Los Angeles County . Report Prepared for Los Angeles County 
Board of Supervisors. November 1992. 



35 



O 



36 



Jongkind C.F. “La Supuesta Funcionalidad de Los Clubes Regionales in Lima, Pem“ Boletin de 
Estudios Latino Americanos . 11,1971. 

Loninitz Larissa. Como Sobreviven los Marginados . Mexico: Siglo XXI Eds. 1975. 

Lustig Nora. “Economic crisis, adjustment and living standards in Mexico, 1982-85.” World 
Development 18 (10) 1990. 

MacDonald John and Leatrice D. MacDonald. “Chain Migration. Ethnic Neighbohood 
Formation, and Social Networks.” in Charles Tillv ed. An Urban World . Little Brown. 1974. 

Magnin William. “The Role of Regional Associations in the Adaption of Rural Population in 
Peru.” Sociologicus 9. 1959. 

Magnin William. Peasants in Cities . Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 1970. 

Massey Douglas. "The Settlement Process Among Mexican Immigrants to the United States." 
American Sociological Review 51, 1986. 

Massey Douglas, Rafael Alarcon, Jorge Durand and Humberto Gonzalez. Return to Aztlan. The 
Social Process of International Migration from Western Mexico. Berkeley and Los Angeles. 
University of California Press, 1987. 

Menjivar Cecilia. “Social Networks Dynamics: Implications for Salvadoreans in San Francisco.” 
Working Paper 2 (1). Chicano/Latino Policy Project. University of California, Berkeley, 1994. 

Mollenkopf John and Manuel Castells. Dual City. Restructuring New York. New York: Rusell 
Sage Foundation, 1991. 

Passel Jeffrey. “Immigrants and Taxes: A Reppraisal of Huddle’s ‘The Cost of Immigmts” How 
Much Do Immigrants Really Cost ? . The Tomas Rivera Center. February 1994. 

Piore Michael. Birds of passage. Migrant labor and industrial societies. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1979. 

Portes Alejandro and Jozsef Borocs. Contemporary Immigration. Theoretical Perspectives on Its 
Determinants and Modes of Incorporation. International Migration Review 23 (3) Fall 1989. 

Portes Alejandro and Robert Bach. Latin Journey. Cuban and Mexican Immigrants in the United 
States. Berkeley. University of California Press. 1985. 

Portes Alejandro and Ruben Rumbaut. Immigrant America. A Portrait. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1990. 

Rea Louis and Richard Parker. A Fiscal Impact i^alvsis of Undocumented Immigrants Residing 
in San Diego County. Costs and Revenues of Significant State and Local Government Programs . 
San Diego: Report by the Office of the Auditor General of California, 1992. 

Rea Louis and Richard Parker. Illegal Immigration in San Diego County: An Analysis of Costs 
and Revenues . San Diego: Report to the California State Senate Special Committee on Border 
Issues, 1993. 

Roberts Bryan. Organizing Strangers: Poor Families in Guatemala City . Austin: University of 
Texas Press, 1973. 



37 



36 



O 



Roberts Biyan. “The Interrelation of City and Provinces in Peru and Guatemala.” Latin American 
Urban Research 4, 1974. 

Roberts Bryan. Cities of Peasants: The Political Economy of Urbanization in The bird World . 
London: Edward Arnold. 1978. 

Rouse Roger. "Making Sense of Settlement: Class Transformation, Cultural Struggle, and 
Transtiondism among Mexican Migrants in the United States." Click Schiller Nina, Linda Basch, 
and Cristina Blanc-Szanton (eds) Towards a Transnational Perspective on Migration. Race, 

Class. Ethnicity, and Nationdism Reconsidered. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
Vol. 645, 1992. 

Sassen Saskia. The Global Citv. New York. London. Tokio . Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1991. 

Sassen Saskia. The Mobility of Labor and Capital. A Study in International Investment and 
Labor Flow. Cambridge. Cambridge University Press, 1988. 

Stark Oded. “Migration Decision Making: A Review Essay” Migration and Development 
Program Discussion Paper 3 Cambridge: Migration and Development Program, Harvard 
University, 1983 

Stark Oded, and D. Levhari. “On Migration and Risk in LCD’s.” Economic Development and 
Cultural Change 31, 1982. 

Scott Allen. New Industrial Spaces . London: Pion, 1988. 

Soja Edward. "Poles Apart. Urban Restructuring in New York and Los Angeles". Mollenkopf 
John and Manuel Castells (eds). Dual Citv. Restructuring New York. New York: Rusell Sage 
Foundation, 1991. 

Taylor J. Edward. “Differential Migration, Networks, Information, and Risk.” Migration and 
Development Program Discussion Paper 1 1 Cambridge: Migration and Development Program, 
Harvard University, 1984. 

Tello Carlos. "Combating Poverty in Mexico." in Gonzalez de la Rocha Mercedes and Agustin 
Escobar. Social Responses to Mexico's Economic Crisis of the 1980s . U.S. - Mexico 
Contemporary Perspectives Series 1. Center for U.S. - Mexican Studies. University of 
California, San Diego. 1991. 

Tilly Charles. “Migration in Modem European History.” in William H. McNeil and Ruth S. 
Adams (eds). Human Migration . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978. 

Tilly Charles, and C.H. Brown. ”On Uprooting, Kinship, and the Auspices of Migration.” 
International Journal of Comparative Sociology 8, 1967. 

U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service. 1991 Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration and 
Naturalization Service. Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office. 1992. 

Valenzuela Abel. “Compatriots or Competitors ? A Study of Job Competition between the 
Foreign-bom and Native in Los Angeles, 1970-1980.” Working Paper 1(2). The Chicano Latino 
Policy Project. University of California, Berkeley, 1993. 



O 

ERIC 



36 



37 



Warren Robert. “Estimates of the Unauthorized Immigrant Population Residing in the United 
States, by Country of Origin and State of Residence; October 1992.” US. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, April 1994. 

Zabin, Carol, Michael Kearny, Anna Garcia, David Runsten, and Carol Nagengast. A New Cycle 
of Poverty. Mixtec Migrants in California Agriculture. Davis. California Institute for Rural 
Studies. 1993. 

Zorbaugh Harvey. The Gold Coast and the Slu m. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1929. 



39 

38 



O 



