THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


Indigenous-Centered Pedagogies: Strategies for 
Teaching Native American Literature and Culture 

Annette Portillo 

University of Texas, San Antonio 

As a reflection on pedagogy, this essay seeks to provide strategic tools for teaching Native 
American literature and culture to non-native students. 1 My teaching philosophy is informed by 
the indigenous-centered, decolonial methodologies as defined by Devon Mihesuah who calls for 
“indigenizing” the academy by challenging the status quo and debating the controversial issues 
that adversely affect the lives and representations of Native Americans (.Indigenizing the 
Academy , 2004). I argue that an indigenous-centered pedagogy and multidisciplinary approach 
gives students the opportunity to critically examine those instances of cultural tourism and 
popular media stereotypes that continue to perpetuate gross misconceptions about American 
Indian identity and culture. In addition, I highlight the ongoing challenges that instructors face 
when teaching students to “unlearn” Eurocentric histories and dominant national narratives. I 
have taught Native American Studies courses to a wide range of students from multiple 
backgrounds and thus, this essay will be based on the various experiences I have had in the 
classroom at five different institutions in the past eight years (i.e. Ivy League, small liberal arts 
college, state college, and university). 


155 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


Interdisciplinary Approaches: English, History, American Studies 

As a scholar of Comparative American Studies who currently teaches courses within a 
traditional department of English, one of the prevalent issues I face when teaching my 
interdisciplinary courses are students’ unwillingness to move beyond their assumptions 
about specific disciplines. Thus, it is critical to challenge students’ assumptions about 
traditional disciplines, such as History and English, by providing them the tools to critically 
examine rigid boundaries. I do this in part by asking students to consider the complexities of 
indigenous identity through a native-centered perspective and consider the importance of 
self-representation as we examine historical and contemporary representations of 
Indianness. In addition, I ask them to complicate and challenge generic and confining 
disciplinary boundaries by reading primary works within their appropriate historical and 
cultural contexts. I ask them to consider several primary questions throughout the semester: 

What does it mean to tell a life story? Whose stories and histories are valued and legitimized 
and whose are forgotten? And how can we problematize the binary constructed between the 
oral and written traditions by complicating our notions of literacy? 

In my experience, one of the most useful exercises is a “freewrite” that I require during the 
first week of class. That is, I ask students to define the canon of “American” literature and then 
extend their responses to include reflections on how they have come to understand “American” 
identity and culture and the dominant national American narrative. They are then asked to define 
“Indianness,” that is, the ways in which they have come to understand and define Native 
American identity and culture. These core questions form the basis of my class and one of my 
primary objectives is to provide students historical, theoretical, and practical lenses through 


156 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 







THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


which they can critically examine their worldviews and interactions with both real/lived and 
imagined/stereotyped perceptions of and about indigenous peoples. This exercise is extremely 
useful and is followed up at the end of the semester with a reflection essay that asks students to 
critically examine their own intellectual growth and their previous assumptions of American and 
Native American identity and culture. 

The students’ comments and dialogue that are generated from this initial freewrite can be 
characterized in two ways. First, the majority of students typically respond with a dominant 
rhetoric that echoes the western-movement narrative and eastern-centered historical origins. 

They discuss their perceptions of American identity by referring to the concept of the 
“American Dream,” and using such words as “liberty” and “freedom.” Second, some students 
critique this dominant narrative by referring to the concept of “American Exceptionalism” and 
openly critique long held assumptions and myths about American identity and cultural values. 
These preliminary writing prompts lead to more complex questions about ideology and 
preconceived notions about the American national imaginary. 

It is my intention with this exercise to frame the major themes and concepts for the 
course, especially teaching students to become critical thi nk ers as they respond to each other’s 
notions of Americanness. I then facilitate this lively discussion by interjecting my own responses 
to students’ comments that usually take the form of questions and remarks about the ways in 
which dominant “official histories” are legitimized by erasing historically underrepresented 
voices and stories. Since many students enter my courses with assumptions about “oral stories” 
or “oral histories” as non-reliable sources to relate “accurate” histories, I often utilize this as a 
point of departure to further critique western-centered notions of history-telling. I underscore the 


157 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


argument in which historians themselves admit that historical research begins with assumptions. 
In addition, this “free write” exercise serves as a foundation for building a community within the 
classroom and maintaining a student-centered pedagogy. Instead of students being passive 
recipients of lectures, I provide a space where they have an increased awareness and 
responsibility for their critical comments and dialogue with one another. Although I facilitate the 
discussions and provide guidance, students are encouraged to respectfully respond to their peers 
and ask questions. As noted on my syllabus: 

It is my hope that as a collective group we can grapple and work through the 
material to develop an intellectual community that is able to skillfully and 
respectfully debate pressing issues. This class will require that you regularly 
participate in class discussions. And although some discussions might evoke strong 
emotions and debate about particular subjects, we must remember to respect 
everyone’s opinions and comments throughout the course. This course does not 
assume that you will have background in Native American Studies. (Portillo) 

Course Content: Introductory Courses in Native American Studies 

For those of us who teach Native American Studies courses, it is no surprise that the 
majority of students come to class with no background in the course content and 
unfortunately have only learned about American Indian identity and experience through 
distorted stereotypes that unfortunately still continue to plague our national collective 
consciousness. Therefore, I consistently grapple with the best methodological approaches 
and choice of texts that will give students, at the very least, an introduction to some of the 


158 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


major events and stories that have shaped Native American history within the United 
States. This is further complicated when I am assigned to teach a general survey course 
that makes it difficult to teach Native American Studies from a tribally specific lens. In 
such cases, I am challenged to choose a very small sample of “representative” works, 
which are intended to contribute to students’ knowledge about Native American history 
and culture in one semester. For this reason, my syllabus always includes secondary 
sources that are not only accessible, but also works that specifically address these issues in 
the classroom.= 

One of my main learning objectives for introductory courses is to provide students with the 
ability to enhance their knowledge of Native American literature, history, and culture. And 
problematize their understanding and experience of Indianness, that is, their thinking, speaking, 
and actions in relationship to Native American communities. I accomplish this in part by 
providing students with N. Scott Momaday’s essay, “The Man Made of Words”, and Leslie 
Silko’s collection of essays, Yellow Woman and Beauty of the Spirit. Both writers provide a 
foundation for students and introduce concepts such as storytelling and the oral tradition from a 
Laguna Pueblo and Kiowa-centered perspective. Throughout the semester, these concepts are 
applied to other autobiographical discourses. 

In anticipation of students who are entering my courses from multiple disciplinary fields, I 
provide various primary and secondary sources based on the course level and topic for the class. 
For example, in my courses on Native Women’s autobiography I teach a mix of well-recognized 
writers such as Sarah Winnemucca Hopkins, Zitkala-Sa, Linda Hogan, and Leslie Mannon Silko, 
alongside lesser-known works and authors such as Delfina Cuero, Ruby Modesto, Waheenee, 








THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


Pretty Shield, and Papago Womans In all courses, I emphasize the socio-historical context and 
do not simply assign readings for their supposed “aesthetic” value or “legitimacy” within the 
American literary canon. For example, when assigning Zitkala-Sa’s American Indian Stories, I 
also include supplemental readings that discuss the systematic genocide committed against 
Indigenous people, as it relates to the boarding schools. The following works have proved useful 
for an overview of this era: Boarding School Seasons: American Indian Families by Brenda 
Child (1998); Education for Extinction by David Wallace Adams (1995); and Conquest: Sexual 
Violence and American Indian Genocide by Andrea Smith (2005). Smith’s work provides 
students not only with the historical context of the boarding schools, but engages in discussion 
about the continuing legacies of these institutions in the 21 st century and their impact on 
contemporary indigenous communities. She begins her discussion by reviewing the state- 
sanctioned boarding schools from the 1880s to the 1980s. And makes connections between 
different forms of violence perpetrated by the state and society against Native women. She also 
includes a discussion of the “Boarding School Healing Project”, whose main goal is to provide 
healing resources for survivors of boarding schools. It is integral for students to realize that 
Native American history is not simply a story of victimization, but rather a story about survival, 
resistance, transformation, and healing. 

American Indian Identity: Countering Popular Stereotypes 

In response to questions of identity, one topic that is frequently raised in my courses is 
the pervasiveness and perpetuation of Native American stereotypes, especially in popular 
culture. I argue that it is integral to confront these issues early in the semester in order to provide 


160 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


students with the necessary tools to critically examine their own misconceptions and biases about 
“Indianness.” Devon Mihesuah states that distorted images of Native Americans can be found in 
every medium from TV shows, textbooks, movies, cartoons, commercials, logos, and insignia 
(Stereotypes and Realities 9). Thus, the dominant imagery and understanding of Native 
Americans, especially the idea of the “vanishing native” with its roots in the 19 th century, 
continues to challenge those scholars who teach American Indian literature courses. My 
experience in the classroom with such misconceptions is varied and differs depending on the 
institution and student population. Although a handful identify as indigenous, the majority of my 
students have been non-native. When they share their initial responses on how they identify 
“Indianness”, their answers echo internalized assumptions such as: they have a strong connection 
to the land; they have lost their languages; they are uncivilized; they all have casinos; they all 
attend college for free and get government handouts. These are only a few examples of actual 
responses from students that highlight the ways in which stereotypes and mythologies continue 
to dominate notions about Native American identity and culture. Since these misrepresentations 
usually surface in the first two weeks of class, I make sure to provide a space where students can 
dialogue about these misconceptions. I facilitate the discussion and periodically interject when 
necessary in order to make clear that these stereotypes are not only problematic, but also highly 
offensive. I then utilize this discussion as a point of departure to talk about “critical thinking” 
and make students more aware of their own sociopolitical and subject positions that might cause 
a disconnect between themselves and the subject matter. I then underscore one of my primary 
objectives for the course: that is, I ask students to critically examine those instances of cultural 
tourism and popular media stereotypes that continue to perpetuate gross misconceptions about 


161 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


American Indian identity by examining Native American history and literature from an 
indigenous-centered perspective. And throughout the course I explicitly reiterate the following 
student-centered approach: 

It is expected that as a class we will often disagree and rarely come to a consensus 
about the material. This should be seen as positive, rather than negative. Your 
participation is key to creating a more dynamic class; one that allows us to learn 
from each other. I expect everyone to be respectful of their fellow peers and come 
to class with open minds that will allow for constructive debate and discussions 
about the material presented in class, especially during student presentations. 
(Portillo) 

In addition, students may not be aware that even their seemingly “positive” comments 
that romanticize Indians can be offensive. I attribute some of this to “New Ageism” as well as 
the more recent depictions of indigenous people in Hollywood blockbuster films (e.g. 
Pocahontas, Avatar, and the Twighlight Saga) that continue to perpetuate indigenous peoples as 
Indian princesses, noble savages, and shapeshifters. The perpetuation of this imagery and 
students exoticized descriptions of indigenous peoples occurs more often in my Native American 
Environmentalism courses where students do not adequately complicate the ways in which the 
writers are discussing sacred sites, landscape, spirituality, religious rights, and environmental 
racism. Thus, in anticipation of such responses my syllabus for this course states: 

The purpose of this theme-based course will be to acquaint students with social, 
political, economic and ethical aspects of current Native American environmental 
issues. And contrary to stereotype, Native Americans do not have a “natural” 


162 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


affinity with environmentalism, but rather they have lands with a long history of 
being the dumping ground for toxic chemicals, nuclear waste and uranium 
tailings. Therefore, through the fields of literature, science, sociology and history, 
we will think critically about the ties of culture to place, the nature of cultural 
relationships to specific animals and environment, health concerns, cultural 
genocide and sovereignty. (Portillo) 

One book I consider essential for any introductory courses in Native American Studies is 
Mihesuah’s American Indians: Stereotypes and Realities, where she asserts, there is “no other 
ethnic group in the United States [that] has endured greater and more varied distortions of its 
cultural identity...” (1996). Her book is extremely accessible for all levels and provides readers 
with counter narratives to some of the most egregious stereotypes about American Indians. For 
my advanced level courses, I require Mihesuah’s books, Natives and Academics: Research and 
Writing about American Indians and Indigenous American Women: Decolonization, 
Empowerment, Activism (1998, 2003). In addition, I utilize the works of Paula Gunn Allen 
(Sacred Hoop, 1996; Off the Reservation, 1998) and Elizabeth Cook-Lynn (Anti Indianism, 

2001) to explore further and frame the major issues surrounding Native American Studies as a 
discipline. 

Another text that has been useful for discussions about Indigenous identity, are Joy Harjo 
and Gloria Bird’s edited anthology, Reinventing the Enemy’s Language, which not only 
introduces students to creative writers from multiple tribes, but also discusses the contentious 
issue of “blood quantum” and questions of authenticity. As we read these works, I underscore the 
importance of complicating simplistic de fin itions of Native American identity and emphasize 


163 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


that each primary text should be read from tribally specific histories and perspectives. Therefore, 
I assign secondary sources from Cook-Lynn, Mihesuah, and Allen who all complicate 
Eurocentric notions of indigenous identity. I then provide further background material to discuss 
the differences between government-imposed definitions that determine which groups are 
federally recognized. This is especially relevant when teaching in regions where local tribes 
continue to struggle for federal recognition. 

Documentaries & Storytelling: Testimonies of Survival and Healing 

In addition to written works, I utilize documentaries to supplement the primary texts. 

These visual representations provide students with another method to critically examine Native 
American literature and culture. In particular, “The Residential School Experience: A Century 
of Genocide in the Americas” produced by Rosemary Gibbons and the “The White Man’s 
Image” produced by Christine Lesiak, provide students with the ability to compare and critique 
the ways in which history is told and by whom. Both of these works give an overview of the 
“Indian Boarding Schools Era,” but relate the information through extremely different lenses. 
Thus, each documentary provides students with the ability to critically examine and question the 
ways in which Native American history is (re)presented, (re)written, and (re)righted. In fact, this 
comparative approach to reading, screening and listening to multiple stories from various points 
of view, and through different genres gives students the tools to also examine their own 
positionalities and interrogate long-held assumptions about American history and 
historiography. By including interdisciplinary materials students are provided with a tangible 
way to think about the ways in which narratives are constructed and rethink the notion of 


164 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


absolute truths. More importantly, this pedagogical approach echoes the defining characteristics 
of “communal storytelling” as defined by Silko, who states, “The ancient Pueblo people sought 
a communal truth, not an absolute truth. For them this truth lived somewhere within the web of 
differing versions...” (32). That is, . .there are no pure truths, but rather only stories, many 
stories.” (33). 

More importantly, documentaries that include testimonies are inherently significant to 
better understanding the importance of the oral tradition and storytelling as a means of survival 
and healing. For example, when teaching the history of the boarding schools, I emphasize that 
such colonialist projects of cultural and physical genocide, the very idea of “killing the Indian, 
and saving the man” as instituted by Richard Henry Pratt are not simply ideologies of the past, 
but rather legacies that persist today and are manifested in different forms of institutionalized 
racism and discrimination against contemporary native communities. In her discussion of 
boarding schools and the case for reparations, Smith argues that “[tjoday, the effects of boarding 
school abuses continue to play out throughout indigenous communities, largely because these 
abuses have not been acknowledged or addressed by the larger society. As a result, silence 
continues within Native communities preventing Native peoples from seeking support and 
healing as a result of the intergenerational trauma” (52). The documentary, “Our Spirits Don’t 
Speak English” produced by Rich-Heape Films, a Native-owned film company, is also a 
valuable tool that gives voice to the survivors and relates an indigenous-centered perspective of 
these institutions. In the classroom, the multiple testimonies included in “Our Spirits” are even 
more profound than the written works, because students have the opportunity to listen to the 
words of survivors, storytellers, poets, and community activists. In my experience, the oral and 


165 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


visual representations of “history” and “lived experience” are equally important as the written 
works and contribute to an indigenous-centered pedagogy where the oral is privileged over the 
written. 

The use of testimonies is especially pertinent to underscore the oral tradition as a legitimate 
way in which to “record history.” For example, in their creative works and essays, writers such 
as Wendy Rose, Silko, Bird, and Harjo discuss the importance of memory as it relates to 
language and history telling within their own communities, whether this is through song, ritual, 
prayer, storytelling, or writing. In the introduction to Seven Hands Seven Hearts by Elizabeth 
Woody, who is of Yakama, Warm Springs, Wasco, and Navajo descent, she discusses her own 
struggles with the loss of language. She states that it was “U.S. government policy, until just a 
few years ago, to eradicate all Indian languages. ... I am a part of the generation in which this 
language massacre reached its final stage: I learned only English” (14). But she also recognizes 
that those “older languages are active in my brain” (14). And now she is of the generation in 
which the possibility of regaining those languages has occurred. “It is through my own story and 
the stories of my family and my circle of people that I become whole... .The skill of telling and 
listening was ‘handed down’ a legacy from a very ancient art form of imparting and storing 
knowledge and wisdom. It requires patience to listen to hours of “testimony” (13-14). She 
challenges Western notions of literacy and interpretation as she articulates her understanding of 
specialized knowledge, as that which also requires one to “listen to hours of testimony.” Thus, as 
teachers of Native American history and literature, it is crucial that students not only read works 
by contemporary writers, but also listen to various forms of the oral tradition, whether this is 
through film, documentaries, or even taped recordings. 


166 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


Teaching and Practicing Storytelling in the Classroom 

In all my courses, I emphasize the importance of listening to others and especially 
“hearing” what each person says as we collectively grapple with material that at times may 
become emotionally charged. For this reason, I insist that each class counter traditional structures 
of a university-classroom environment where chairs are usually lined up in rows. Instead 
students are asked to create a “talking circle” where they can converse with one another through 
an indigenous-centered model. In addition, my courses underscore the importance of bringing in 
one’s lived experience to the discussion as a way in which to “build communities” within the 
class and provide students alternative models to engaging scholarly articles and/or creative 
works. Students’ stories and testimonies become sites of specialized knowledge that inevitably 
creates a more dynamic class and open dialogue where students can contribute more freely to the 
discussion. This pedagogical approach provides an ideal model for courses where testimonies, 
life stories and autobiographies are central to the course content. It must be noted that the 
integration of one’s own “life story” or even a student’s testimony to supplement class discussion 
will depend largely on the class dynamic as well as the instructor’s background and ability to 
facilitate this information appropriately. 

An assignment that parallels this pedagogical approach to storytelling and has worked 
successfully is one where I ask students to participate in “role-playing.” This creative 
assignment differs from a typical analytical paper and asks that students take on the personae of 
someone who has been affected by the boarding school experience. For example, they can write 
in the voice/personae of a child or an adult who attended one of these schools (this voice may be 


167 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


historical or contemporary). They may also choose to write from the perspective of someone 
who worked at the boarding schools, such as a “friend of the Indian.” These assignments can 
take the form of short stories, letters, poems or journals. I encourage students to utilize the 
multiple articles, documentaries and especially Zitkala-Sa’s American Indian Stories as models 
for their own creative works. This assignment is designed to challenge students to merge their 
critical and creative capacities. 

In my experience of teaching Native American women’s writing, I have found multi-genre 
identity-based anthologies especially useful for introductory courses. For example, Through the 
Eye of the Deer edited by Carolyn Dunn and Carolyn Comfort and a Gathering of Spirit edited 
by Beth Brant gives students access to various writers, many of whom are lesser known. I argue 
that these multi-genre collections are communal “life stories” that participate in community 
building between contributors and readers alike. Through the Eye of the Deer anthologizes 
works that retell traditional stories in a modern context. The retelling of these stories follows the 
oral tradition, which are not necessarily fixed or unchanging. The editors state that the stories 
“have been reshaped in the telling and retelling over the years; yet, the essence of the stories, the 
essence of what was true and still is true for American Indian communities remains an integral 
part of the narratives...” (xi). Another anthology, Sister Nations: Native American Women 
Writers on Community edited by Laura Tohe and Heid Erich, echoes similar themes such as 
Native American women’s roles in the community. As noted earlier, Reinventing the Enemy’s 
Language edited by Harjo and Bird is useful for discussing not only the experiences of Native 
American women, but also the inherent difficulties of publishing an anthology that purports to 


168 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


“represent” Native Americans. This anthology painstakingly chooses and includes over eighty 
writers from fifty different nations, both well-known writers as well as first time contributors. 

Decolonizing the Academy: Building Bridges with Elders and Community Activists 

In addition to assigning articles that broaden the student’s understanding of the unique 
experiences of Native Americans in relationship to the history of colonialism, genocide, and 
patriarchy, I also emphasize how these primary and secondary sources are in every way 
connected to living communities. It would be a disservice to students if these works were taught 
in isolation to their socio-historical contexts and disconnected from native voices. This 
pedagogical approach to teaching is crucial to not only building bridges within the classroom 
between students, but also building bridges with indigenous communities and the academy. 
Similar to my teaching philosophy, in Red Pedagogy (2004) Sandy Grande calls for decolonizing 
the academy, a crucial model that is needed to achieve any type of intellectual sovereignty, 
especially when teaching courses that seek to teach Native American Studies. She argues that the 
sociopolitical and material conditions of American Indian communities should not be obscured 
by questions of identity and authenticity. She states, “[a]s we raise yet another generation in a 
nation at war, it is even more imperative for schools to be reimagined as sites for social 
transformation and emancipation...” (165). I agree, that as educators of Native American studies 
during the 21 st century we must consider our classrooms as sites of consciousness raising, where 
students feel empowered to enact social change. The relationship between Native American 
communities and academia has historically been contentious and, therefore, these tensions must 
also be emphasized since classes are taught within the confines of the academy, and, therefore, 


169 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 






THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


within an institution that has historically (mis)represented or outright silenced the voices, stories 
and histories of American Indians. One approach to building bridges is to invite guest speakers 
and encourage students to become actively involved in social justice organizations within the 
community. 

This methodological approach, that is, integrating service-learning and guest speakers, is 
not difficult because regardless of region there are always active members of the community and 
multiple organizations working and advocating for social justice of indigenous people. By 
actively engaging local communities and foregrounding their voices in class, one can counter the 
tendencies to essentialize accounts of Native American history that continues to erase 
contemporary issues. For example, Grande argues for a liberatory project that destabilizes the 
isolationist narratives of nationalism and cultural chauvinism (118). She calls for an “indigenous 
theory of subjectivity” that “addresses the political quest for sovereignty, the socio-economic 
urgency to build transnational coalitions, and creates the intellectual space for social change” 
(118). Although not every institution provides support for guest speakers, I would argue that 
inviting elders and members of indigenous communities to share their knowledge with a class is 
an integral component in any course on Native American Studies. In my experience multiple 
speakers have provided invaluable infonnation to students as they discuss their personal 
experiences about contemporary issues facing Native Americans. And these “talks” provide 
students with the ability to better contextualize the course content. 

For example, while teaching at a liberal arts college in Ohio, I worked with a Native 
student organization that invited several speakers to campus. The first was Beatrice Fong Visitor 
Holy Dance, a member of‘The International Council of the 13 Indigenous Grandmothers from 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota, who spoke about the “Past, Present and Future of 
Lakota Culture.” In addition, we invited Mary Jane Buckshot from Cleveland, Ohio, who spoke 
about her own “Boarding School Experience” and relocation to Cleveland during the 1960s. Her 
discussion centered on the “Indian Relocation Act of 1956,” that was part of the U.S. 
government’s Indian termination policy which imposed assimilation and resulted in cultural 
genocide. She especially lamented the loss of language and cultural traditions that resulted from 
relocation and her boarding school experiences. In addition, my students and I also worked 
closely with the leader of the American Indian Movement of Cleveland, Ohio, Robert Roche, 
who was also the founder of the Indian Education Center located in the city. More recently, in 
my courses at the University of Texas, San Antonio, I have invited members of the Texas 
Indigenous Council to speak about the current issues facing the indigenous communities in 
southern Texas. And I have worked collaboratively with the “Women’s Studies Institute” at 
UTSA to bring in such speakers as Deborah Miranda (Chumash/Esselen), creative writer, 
scholar-activist; Margo Tamez (Lipan Apache/Jumano Apache), activist-scholar and co-founder 
of “Lipan Apache Women Defense;” Linda Sue Warner (Comanche), educational leadership; 
Rosemary Gibbons (Mimbres Apache/Chicana), activist-filmmaker, and member of the “Border 
School Healing Project (BSHP);” and Misty Thomas (Santee), director of social services at 
Santee Sioux Nation, hi preparation for these visits, students were assigned articles, creative 
works, and essays by the speakers. In addition, they screened relevant documentaries about the 
specific tribes and regions to be discussed by the visitors. The preparation of students before 
welcoming guests to speak is essential to assure that students actively engage in substantive and 
respectful dialogue with the guests. These types of interactions provide students with the 


171 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 







THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


opportunity to hear scholar-activists discuss the ways in which they are working towards social 
justice for indigenous peoples and listen to their stories about indigenous identity. 

The support and resources given to invite speakers varies depending on the institution and 
therefore, it is crucial to establish meaningful and sincere relationships with local indigenous 
communities regardless of region or school. This is especially critical for instructors teaching at 
colleges and universities that do not support Native American studies or do not have established 
NAS departments and programs. In fact, it is imperative that as scholars of Native American 
studies we continue to counter dominant paradigms that perpetuate romanticized notions of 
Indianness in and outside of the classroom. Grande aptly underscores this point and argues that 
we abandon essentialist accounts of Indian history usually framed as good vs. bad and more 
importantly, that we counter distorted myths that invisibilize American Indians in the 21 st 
century (103). As Linda Hogan states in her memoir, The Woman Who Watches Over The World, 
“Few people outside of our cultures can comprehend the depth of the pain, despair, and, for 
many of us Native peoples, anger. To other Americans, this history, if thought of at all, belongs 
to a far past, but in truth these events are recent and remembered.” (79). Thus, centering 
indigenous perspectives and voices in all aspects of the classroom provides students with the 
tools for rethinking western-centered concepts of temporality, history, storytelling, truth-telling, 
and language. 

Conclusion 

As a teacher-scholar-activist, one of my primary objectives in all courses is to value each 
student’s expressions and emphasize collective dialogue. I believe that courses are more 


172 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 






THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


productive if students feel empowered by linking their personal narratives to academic 
discussions and course content. This approach to teaching is guided by my belief that every 
student has the intellectual and creative capabilities to become potential teachers. I enter each 
course with a commitment to develop students’ reading, writing, and critical thinking skills as 
well as their appreciation for the course material. In addition, my approach follows the 
philosophy that it is possible to “build communities” within the classroom where students do not 
feel isolated and are provided the skills to engage in collaborative learning. My interactive 
classroom methods are shaped by indigenous-centered models, where extensive dialogue and 
exchange of ideas creates a dynamic learning experience. I guide students through the material 
by providing the necessary socio-historical background to primary texts and allow them to 
become active producers of knowledge. I strongly believe that it is our responsibility as 
educators to be conscious of how our teaching methods inevitably contribute to the multiple 
ways in which students will leave our classes with newly acquired knowledge about Native 
American literature and culture. 


173 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


Notes 

I am grateful for the comments and suggestions provided by Dr. Norma E. Cantu, Dr. Ben 
Olguin and the reviewers of The CEA Forum. 

1 The terms utilized to define Indigenous peoples are complex and an extensive discussion 
regarding nomenclature is beyond the scope of this essay. I will utilize tribally specific names 
whenever possible and “American Indian/Native American/Indigenous” interchangeably. Since 
self-identification and self-naming is inextricably linked to cultural sovereignty, the historical 
and contemporary debates surrounding nomenclature should always be discussed in any course 
in Native American studies. 

2 The following Native American theorists are useful for addressing these complex issues: Jack 
Forbes, Robert Warrior, Elizabeth Cook-Lynn, Philip Deloria, Shari Hundorf, Devon Mihesuah, 
and Linda Tuhiwai Smith. 

3 1 base my definition of “well-recognized” and “lesser-known” on the secondary sources 
produced about these works. Obviously, some of these works will be more familiar to others 
depending on the audience. My experience from teaching undergraduates is that most students 
are unfamiliar with any of these writers and narratives. [Zitkala-Sa. American Indian Stories. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2003; Sarah Winnemucca Hopkins and Mary Tyler 
Peabody Mann. Life among the Piutes Their Wrongs and Claims, microform : Cupples, Upham, 
G.P. Putnam, Boston, 1883; Linda Hogan. The Woman Who Watches over the World: A Native 
Memoir. 1st ed. New York: W.W. Norton, 2001; Leslie Mannon Silko, Storyteller. New York: 
Arcarde Pub., 1981.; Delfina Cuero, and Florence Connolly Shipek. Delfina Cuero: Her 






THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


Autobiography, an Account of Her Last Years, and Her Ethnobotanic Contributions. Ballena 
Press Anthropological Papers. Menlo Park, Ca: Ballena Press, 1991; Ruby Modesto and Guy 
Mount. Not for Innocent Ears: Spiritual Traditions of a Desert Cahuilla Medicine Woman. 
Angelus Oaks, CA: Sweetlight Books, 1980; Papago Woman, (1936),ed.; Ruth M, Underhill, 
Pretty-Shield Medicine Woman of the Crows, originally published as Red Mother, (1932),ed. 
Frank B. Linderman and Waheenee: An Indian Girl’s Story Told by Herself, (1921), ed. Gilbert 
L. Wilson; Truman Michelson, “The Autobiography of a Fox Indian Woman,” (40th Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology —1918-1919), 295; Truman Michelson, “Narrative 
of an Arapaho Woman,” American Anthropologist 35 (October-December 1933), 596.] 


175 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


Works Cited 

Adams, David Wallace. Education for Extinction: American Indians and the Boarding School 
Experience, 1875-1928. Lawrence, Kan.: University Press of Kansas, 1995. 

Allen, Paula Gunn. Off the Reservation : Reflections on Boundary-Busting Border-Crossing 
Loose Canons. Boston, Mass.: Beacon Press, 1998. 

—. The Sacred Hoop : Recovering the Feminine in American Indian Traditions. Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1986. 

Anzaldua, Gloria. Borderlands : The New Mestiza /La Frontera. 1st ed. San Francisco: 
Spinsters/Aunt Lute, 1987. 

Beverley, John. “The Margin at the Center On Testimonio (Testimonial Narrative).” 

De/Colonizing the Subject: The Politics of Gender in Women’s Autobiography ■ Eds. Sidonie 
Smith and Julia Watson. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1992. 91-114. 

Brant, Beth. A Gathering of Spirit: A Collection by North American Indian Women. Ithaca, N.Y.: 
Firebrand Books, 1988. 

Child, Brenda J. Boarding School Seasons: American Indian Families, 1900-1940. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1998. 

Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth. Anti-Indianism in Modern America : A Voice from Tatekeya's Earth. 
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2001. 

—. “How Scholarship Defames the Native Voice... and Why” Wicazo Sa Review 15.2 (2000): 79- 
92. 

Cuero, Delfina, and Florence Connolly Shipek. Delfina Cuero: Her Autobiography, an Account of 


176 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


Her Last Years, and Her Ethnobotanic Contributions. Ballena Press Anthropological Papers. 
Menlo Park, CA: Ballena Press, 1991. 

Dunn, Carolyn and Carol Comfort. Through the Eye of the Deer: An Anthology of Native American 
Women Writers. 1st ed. San Francisco: Aunt Lute Books, 1999. 

Erdrich, Heid E., and Laura Tohe. Sister Nations: Native American Women Writers on 
Community. St Paul, MN: Minnesota Historical Society Press, 2002. 

Grande, Sandy. Red Pedagogy: Native American Social and Political Thought. Lanham: Rowman 
& Littlefield, 2004. 

Harjo, Joy and Gloria Bird. Reinventing the Enemy's Language: Contemporary Native Women's 
Writings of North America. 1st ed. New York; London: W.W. Norton & Co., 1997. 

Hogan, Linda. The Woman Who Watches over the World: A Native Memoir. New York: 

W.W. Norton, 2001. 

Hopkins, Sarah Winnemucca, and Mary Tyler Peabody Mann. Life among the Piutes Their 

Wrongs and Claims, microform :. For sale by Cupples, Upham, G.P. Putnam,, Boston, 

1883. 

Howe, LeAnne. Evidence of Red: Poems and Prose. Earthworks Series. Great Wilbraham, 
Cambridge: Salt, 2005. 

Mihesuah, Devon A. American Indians: Stereotypes & Realities. Atlanta, GA: Clarity, 1996. 

—. Indigenous American Women: Decolonization, Empowerment, Activism. Contemporary 
Indigenous Issues. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2003. 

—. Natives and Academics: Researching and Writing About American Indians. Lincoln: 


177 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





THE CEA FORUM 


Winter/Spring 

2013 


University of Nebraska Press, 1998. 

Modesto, Ruby, and Guy Mount. Not for Innocent Ears : Spiritual Traditions of a Desert Cahuilla 
Medicine Woman. Angelus Oaks, CA: Sweetlight Books, 1980. 

Native Voices Public Television and Montana State University. The Residential School Experience 
a Century of Genocide in the Americas. Dir. Rosemary Gibbons and Dax Thomas . 

Video recording. Montana State University, Bozeman, MT, 2002. 

Public Broadcasting Service. In the White Man's Image. Dir. Christine Lesiak, et al. 

Video recording. Alexandria, VA, 1991. 

Rich-Heape Films, Inc. Our Spirits Don’t Speak English: Indian Boarding School. Dir. Dan Agent. 
Video recording. Dallas, TX, 2008. 

Rose, Wendy. Bone Dance : New and Selected Poems, 1965-1993. Sun Tracks. Tucson: University 
of Arizona Press, 1994. 

Silko, Leslie. Storyteller. New York: Arcarde Pub., 1981. 

—, Leslie. Yellow Woman and a Beauty of the Spirit: Essays on Native American Life Today. New 
York: Simon & Schuster, 1996. 

Smith, Andrea. Conquest: Sexual Violence and American Indian Genocide. Cambridge, MA: 

South End Press, 2005. 

Woody, Elizabeth. Seven Hands, Seven Hearts. 1st ed. Portland, OR: Eighth Mountain Press, 

1994. 

Zitkala, Sa, and Susan Rose Dominguez. American Indian Stories. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press, 2003. 


178 WWW.CEA-WEB.ORG 





