DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 422 133 



RC 021 314 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



McCarty, Teresa L.; Dick, Galena Sells 

Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal : The Case of 
Navajo. 

1996-07-00 

15p . ; Revised version of a paper presented at the World 
Conference on Literacy (Philadelphia, PA, March 1996) . 
Reports - Descriptive (141) -- Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Education; Bilingual Education; *Bilingual 
Education Programs; *Educational Practices; Elementary 
Education; Indigenous Personnel; *Language Maintenance; 
*Literacy; Native Language Instruction; *Navajo 
*Biliteracy; Endangered Languages; Language Shift; *Rough 
Rock Demonstration School AZ 



ABSTRACT 



This paper discusses the contribution of school -based 
mother- tongue literacy to the maintenance and renewal of endangered 
languages, with Navajo as the case in point. Although Navajo claims the most 
speakers among U.S. indigenous languages, the absolute number and relative 
proportion of Navajo speakers have declined drastically in the last 30 years. 
Language usage varies across the Navajo Reservation, depending on individual 
community histories and contact with English. English dominates the print 
environment, although other forces reinforce the primacy of oral Navajo. 
Historically, the single most harmful factor for language maintenance was 
forced English-only schooling. Following a shift in federal policies, the 
Rough Rock Demonstration School in Arizona was founded in 1966 as the first 
tribally controlled school, one that reinforced Navajo language and culture 
in the classroom. After years of fluctuating funds and services, Rough Rock’s 
bilingual program has been reinvigorated by a cadre of local bilingual 
educators. The K-6 two-way bilingual program develops children's oral and 
written Navajo and English proficiency and features high-quality exposure to 
spoken Navajo, teacher-developed Navajo texts, summer literature camps, and 
the involvement of elders as teachers and counselors. Such practices elevate 
the moral authority and practical utility of the language. Navajo literacy 
remains confined primarily to the school but supports a sociocultural 
environment in which young and old share language experiences. Rough Rock 
evaluative data demonstrate the academic success of bilingual students with a 
solid foundation in mother- tongue literacy. It remains to be seen whether 
program graduates pass Navajo to their children as their mother tongue. 
(Contains 26 references.) (SV) 



******************************************************************************** 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



******************************************************************************** 



o 

ERIC 



g Mother Tongue Literacy and Language 
Renewal: The Case of Navajo 



Teresa L. McCarty 

Department of Language, Reading and Culture 
College of Education 
University of Arizona 
Tucson, Arizona 85721 USA 
(520)621-1311 
E-mail: tlmccarty@aol.com 



Galena Sells Dick 
Rough Rock Community School 
Title VII Bilingual Program 
Box 217-RRCS 
Chinle, AZ 86503 USA 
(520)728-3311 



U S DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

H'-fhis document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



!<r£So± L- 
iQ^Ccirh/. 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

1 



Revised version of a paper presented at the World Conference on Literacy, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA. To be published in the International Literacy Institute World Wide Web site: 

http: /A li. literacy, upenn. eduA liAli. htm 



^ REVISED JULY 1996 



^ERLC 



2 



Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: 

The Case of Navajo 1 



Teresa L. McCarty 
University of Arizona 
Tucson, AZ USA 



Galena Sells Dick 
Rough Rock Community School 
Rough Rock, AZ USA 



I. An Unfolding Crisis 



Of the 175 surviving indigenous languages in the United States, 155 or nearly 90 percent 
have no child speakers (Krauss 1996). "Increasingly," one observer notes, "young Native 
Americans grow up speaking only English, learning at best a few words of their ancestral tongues" 
(Crawford 1995: 18). 

The loss of any language comes at enormous cost to its speakers. But all languages are the 
precipitates of diverse human experiences, and the loss of even one impoverishes us all. 2 The 
most serious language declines have occurred among indigenous communities in the Americas, 
Africa, Australia, and Southeast Asia. For these communities, the problem is acute. Precisely 
because they are indigenous, there are no language reinforcements available elsewhere, no other 
motherland where children can return to hear the heritage language spoken or see it written. For 
indigenous peoples, when a language is lost, it almost certainly cannot be retrieved as a mother 
tongue. 3 

In the United States, many indigenous communities are addressing this crisis through 



1 An earlier version of this paper was presented at the World Conference on Literacy in Philadelphia (March 1996). 

2 We begin with the assumption that language— in this case, Navajo— is an intellectual, cultural, scientific and 
spiritual resource to its speakers and humankind. Crawford ( 1992; 1995), Fis hma n (1991), Hale (n.d.), and Ruiz 
(1988; 1994) all present a compelling rationale for a lan guage-as -resource approach. For further discussion, readers 
are referred to this literature. Our purposes here are to show how such an approach applies to indigenous U.S. 
languages, and to illuminate the role of mother tongue literacy in implementing that approach. 

3 There are some notable counter-examples. Fishman (1991:289) cites the "miraculous" case of modem Hebrew, in 
which the process of RLS, reversing language shift, has been remarkably successful. Hinton (1993; 1995), and 
Sims (in press), also report on efforts to replenish the pool of heritage language speakers in California using a 
radical approach to language immersion in which language apprentices work with elderly speakers over a period of 
months and years. In the California cases, the ancestral language is being learned not as a mother tongue, but as a 
second language. Perhaps the most successful U.S. example of RLS involving an indigenous language as a mother 
tongue is in Hawaii, where a small group of families re-established Hawaiian as the sole language of the home, and 
where some preschools and public schools operate totally in Hawaiian (KamanS & Wilson 1996). 



Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: The Case of Navajo (McCarty & Dick, Revised July 1996) 2 

experimental language and culture renewal programs organized through or in collaboration with 
local schools. Though different in their goals and social-linguistic circumstances, most of these 
programs seek to enhance children's cultural pride and academic achievement while promoting the 
heritage language and culture. Many programs also seek to develop literacy in the native language. 

Can such programs withstand the forces driving the move toward English monolingualism? 
Fishman (1991) argues that they cannot; school-based efforts, he states, are secondary or tertiary 
to the key process of intergenerational mother tongue transmission, which must be carried out 
within the intimacy of the home-family-community domain. "One cannot jump across or dispense 
with [intergenerational language transmission]," Fishman insists; "nothing can substitute for the 
rebuilding of society at the level of . . . everyday, informal life" ( 199 1 : 95, 112). Thus, mother 
tongue literacy and in particular, school-based mother tongue literacy, are, in Fishman's 
framework, "dispensable" aspects of the process— potentially helpful but not essential in ensuring 
survival of the heritage language. 

Others argue that literacy is a necessary if not sufficient factor in maintaining indigenous 
mother tongues (see, e.g., Bernard 1995). We consider these issues for Navajo, the largest 
indigenous language group in the U.S. Specifically, we address the functions of mother tongue 
literacy and its potential for language maintenance, drawing on our experience at Rough Rock, 
Arizona, the site of the first Indian community-controlled school. Galena Sells Dick has taught at 
Rough Rock since its inception in 1966. She currently directs the school's two-way 
Navajo/English bilingual program. Teresa McCarty has worked at and with Rough Rock for 16 
years as an anthropologist and curriculum developer. We begin with some background on Navajo. 

II. The Status of Navajo Today 

The Navajo Nation stretches over much of northern Arizona and New Mexico, and part of 
southern Utah (see Figure 1). Navajo has the largest land base of any U.S. tribe— about 25,000 
square miles or an area the size of the state of West Virginia— and the largest population, about 




Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: The Case of Navajo (McCarty & Dick, Revised July 1996) 3 

250,000. Navajo country is defined by its location on the Colorado Plateau, a landscape of 
striking multihued rock formations, deep canyons and pine-studded mesas. Until recent years, this 
landscape and the tribe's geographic isolation from urban centers exerted a protective influence on 
Navajo language and culture. Aside from their interactions in federal Indian boarding schools 
(discussed below), the Navajo population as a whole did not come into regular contact with 
English until well into the second half of the twentieth century. 

Navajo is an Athabaskan language, a subset of the huge Na-Dene language group with 
speakers spread across the subarctic from Alaska to eastern Canada, southward to the Northwest 
Pacific Coast, and into the Plains and the U.S. Southwest. While Navajo claims the largest 
number of speakers of any indigenous language in the U.S.— about 160,000— the absolute number 
and relative proportion of Navajo speakers Have drastically declined in the past 30 years (Holm & 
Holm 1995). At the same time, the number of Navajos who are monolingual English speakers has 
increased, from over 7,800 in 1980, to nearly 19,000 in 1990, or 15 percent of the Navajo census 
population over age five (Crawford 1995: 21). 

This situation varies across the reservation, depending on individual community histories 
and their contact with English. In Fishman's (1991) eight-stage typology of threatened languages 
(with stage 8 representing the most disrupted), Navajo can be placed at stages 7 (a vibrant adult- 
speaking community), 6 (intergenerational transmission), 5 (literacy in the heritage language), 4 
(schools under indigenous and external control), 3 and 2 (reservation-based work, media, higher 
education, and government). But this classification masks the complexity of Navajo language use 
and change across the reservation. 4 In general, the language is strongest in reservation-interior 
communities, where some monolingual Navajo households remain. In communities on or near the 
reservation border, it is typically elderly family members who speak Navajo and know little 
English, while their children are bilingual and their grandchildren speak English and know little 
Navajo. Throughout the reservation, English dominates the print environment, though written 



4 We do not consider here language use within families living off the reservation— situations for which we know of 
little published data, but which add to the complex dynamics of the characterization offered here. 



Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: The Case of Navajo (McCarty & Dick, Revised July 1996) 4 

Navajo serves important community- wide functions in some areas (see, e.g., McLaughlin 1992). 
Other forces reinforce the primacy of oral Navajo: Kin relations are defined in Navajo; Navajo is 
the language of local and tribal government; a regional radio station carries all-Navajo broadcasts; 
and it is still inconceivable that an individual could be elected to the tribal presidency or that 
medicine men could conduct their work without a firm command of the native language (see, e.g., 
Benally & McCarty 1990). 

Nonetheless, recent reservation-wide surveys show a clear trend: "Only about half of the 
students now entering school are speakers of Navajo," Holm & Holm (1995: 62) report. The 
ultimate causes of this shift toward English must be understood within the context of U.S. 
colonialism and native language repression. The proximate causes of Navajo language shift 
include changing residence patterns and the separation of extended families associated with the 
transition to a wage economy; improvements in transportation that have facilitated access to and by 
English speakers; English telecommunications and mass media; and more generally, a gradual 
increase in the social, political, and economic integration of the Navajo Nation within the larger 
society. 

While all of these factors have had an effect, their impacts might have been less were it not 
for the overwhelming assimilative force of a single collective experience: English-only schooling. 
From the 1880s to the 1960s, the U.S. government imposed a fierce English-only policy on 

Navajo and other indigenous students in an attempt to "blot out barbarous dialects" (Atkins 

1 887). Stories abound of young children being kidnapped from their homes and taken by Indian 
agents in horse and wagon to the boarding schools. There, students faced militaristic discipline, 
manual labor, instruction in a trade, and abusive treatment for 'reverting' to the mother tongue 
(Medicine 1982: 399). Dick recalls: 

"We were punished and abused for speaking our native language If we were 

caught speaking Navajo, the dormitory matrons gave us chores like scrubbing and 
waxing the floors, or they slapped our hands with rulers. Some students had their 




6 



Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: The Case of Navajo (McCarty & Dick, Revised July 1996) 5 

tnouths 'washed' with yellow bar soap. Thankfully I never experienced this last 
punishment" (Dick and McCarty in press). 

Experiences such as these left a residue of shame and ambiguity about Navajo, inhibiting 
many parents from passing it on to their children. In combination with the sociocultural changes 
noted earlier, the net effect was to redefine language attitudes and thereby alter language choices in 
the home. One Navajo teacher explains this, citing her own internalized belief that "our language is 
second best" (Dick & McCarty in press). 

Only recently have the federal policies informing such school-based practices been replaced 
by policies intended to encourage the meaningful incorporation of indigenous languages and 
cultural knowledge into school curricula. Within the 1960s Civil Rights reforms and a new federal 
policy of tribal self-determination, Navajo community-controlled schools emerged as a primary 
demonstration of resistance to forced assimilation. Governed by locally elected, indigenous 
leaders, community-controlled schools have been at the forefront of American Indian bilingual 
education and a growing movement to stabilize and revitalize indigenous languages and cultures. 

Is this movement having an impact, and is it sufficient? To address these questions, we 
turn now to a case study of the first Indian community-controlled school: the Rough Rock 
Community School in northeastern Arizona. 

III. Language and Culture Renewal at Rough Rock 

The Navajo word for school is 6lta', meaning "a learning place associated with the white 
man's world" (Dick and McCarty in press). The school at Rough Rock is called Dini Bi'dlta'; 
Rough Rock is The People's School. An outgrowth of federal War on Povery programs, the 
Rough Rock Demonstration School was founded in 1966 through an unprecedented contract with 
the U.S. government that empowered parents and community leaders to operate their own school 
(Roessel 1977). 5 When the school began, Navajo had been written for over 100 years, but few 

5 The events leading to the founding of the school are well documented elsewhere (see, e.g., Johnson 1968; Roessel 
1977; McCarty 1989). Briefly, a three-year demonstration project began in 1965 at a nearby Bureau of Indian Affairs 



O 




7 



Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal : The Case of Navajo (McCarty & Dick, Revised July 1996) 5 

teaching materials existed in the language. Rough Rock launched the first publishing center for 
Navajo curricula and established a Navajo emphasis program that included initial literacy in 
Navajo, adult education, a medicine man training project, and numerous other community 
development initiatives. Classroom instruction explicitly emphasized Navajo language and culture. 

Since these first experimental programs, however, bilingual/bicultural education at Rough 
Rock has fluctuated in response to federal funding and language policies. This situation reflects 
the reservation economy and lack of alternative funding sources, and the historic federal-tribal 
relationship in which tribal lands were ceded for promised federal education and social support 
The reality has been that during some years, no funds were forthcoming for the provision of 
adequate bilingual services to Rough Rock's Navajo-speaking students. 

The recent reinvigoration of Rough Rock's bilingual program can be laid to the school 
board's long-term commitment to "grow their own" bilingual faculty (cf. Holm & Holm 1990; 
Watahomigie & McCarty 1994). Even during years when federal bilingual education funds were 
limited, the school board encouraged and enabled bilingual teacher assistants to work toward their 
teaching degrees. These efforts produced a cadre of local educators with a vested interest in the 
community and its children, who are prepared and committed to providing bilingual/bicultural 
instruction. Dick remembers: 

"As I worked on my degree and in my own classroom, / began to learn to read and 
write my language. / was learning along with my students. / had to pick up where 
I stopped when I entered boarding school, because my languge and culture had 
been taken ctway from me. . . . Now that there are more Navajo certified teachers at 
the school, we are better able to use Navajo as a resource for learning (Dick & 

McCarty in press). 



(BIA) school. That project proved untenable after the first year due to logistic and bureaucratic problems. To 
complete the project’s remaining two years, federal and tribal representatives identified the new and as yet unstaffed 
Rough Rock boarding school. After several community meetings at which Rough Rock residents agreed to 
undertake the demonstration project, community leaders, a tribal trustee board, the BIA, and the Office of Economic 
Opportunity entered into a contract that inaugurated the Rough Rock Demonstration School in July 1966. 



Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: The Case of Navajo (McCarty & Dick, Revised July 1996) 7 

Today, with a staff of 12 elementary bilingual teachers and a new federal bilingual 
education grant, Rough Rock is implementing a K-6, two-way bilingual program designed to 
develop children’s oral and written Navajo and English proficiency. Although 75% of these 
students still claim Navajo as a primary language, a clear shift toward English is underway. The 
bilingual program is therefore concerned with both maintaining children's Navajo abilities and 
developing their proficiency in English. This is indeed a challenging task. 

Past experience at Rough Rock has provided ample evidence that even with the presence of 
a bilingual program, English is privileged in the classroom in myriad ways. The abundance of 
English curriculum materials reflects the numerical, economic and political dominance of English 
and English speakers. To ensure that students receive sufficient high-quality exposure to Navajo, 
specific classrooms and teachers have been designated solely for Navajo content instruction. Each 
day students switch classrooms and teachers for extended blocks of time, during which they hear, 
see, speak, read and write in Navajo. The bilingual staff also has produced several children's texts 
in Navajo. For example, in Jessie Caboni's Ltfjtsooi Ayazhi Nindyiijdah (Yellowhorse Bringing 
Lambs Home (see Figure 2), children learn of the gentle, smart horse whose owner saddled him 
with gunnysacks, filled the pockets with newborn lambs from the field, and trusted the horse to 
return safely home with his newborn charges. Macintosh computers and a small printing budget 
have turned such stories into high quality literature. Texts such as these validate the local culture, 
open new possibilities for biliteracy development, and allow students to see their teachers as 
published authors— in Navajo. In addition, during summer literature camps and regular classroom 
activities, elders provide instruction in Navajo on harvesting, traditional storytelling, livestock 
management, drama and other arts. Elders also serve as school counselors, conducting counseling 
sessions in Navajo in a traditional dwelling or hooghan. 

Such activities have enabled the Navajo staff to reclaim Navajo for academic purposes, 
thereby elevating the moral authority and practical utility of the language. Preliminary program 
evaluations also demonstrate clear benefits to students, as they show consistent improvements on 



ERIC 



9 



other Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: The Case of Navajo (McCarty & Dick, Revised July 1996) 3 

ocal and national measures of achievement, and in their Navajo and English writing (Dick & 
McCarty in press). The overall impact has been to heighten community consciousness about the 
alue of Navajo language and culture. Unlike the conditions under which Rough Rock began, 
Vavajo language and culture maintenance now is far from assured. Rough Rock parents and 
Iders are keenly aware of this. "If a child learns only the bilagaana (non-Indian) way of living, 

,-ne grandmother recently remarked, "you have lost your child." Parents and grandparents now 
^ve tangible demonstrations of the ways in which their own lives can become the basis for 
chool-based language and literacy learning. This has begun to transform the negative attitudes 
■©ward literacy forged in the boarding schools, and to promote the understanding that literacy is not 
omething held by a privileged few, or, as the boarding schools taught, simply words on a page. 



t thought only the Anglos wrote books,” an elder said on being presented with Jessie Caboni's 
> ook. Texts and school-based practices such as those at Rough Rock have helped foster a 
growing consciousness that literacy is a process that is continuously renegotiated, as community 
members— the bearers of Rough Rock’s literacy history-interact, joke, tell stories and share life 



'^ssons. Galena Dick sums this up: 

"When we went to school, all we learned was English and Western culture. We 
were never told the stories that Rough Rock children now are told and write 
themselves. We're telling those stories now. We see both sides of it— and we re 
helping children make connections through literacy to their own lives. ' 



IV. Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Shift 

At Rough Rock, literacy in Navajo remains confined primarily to the school. Within this 
domain, Navajo literacy is used to inform, instruct, record traditional knowledge, transmit non- 
/ilavajo knowledge, and mediate children’s and adults’ interpersonal communications and 
i ntrapersonal reflections (cf. McLaughlin 1992). But literacy in Navajo is more than this. To 
make sense of literacy functions, McLaughlin (1989: 287) argues, "We need to see literacy in 



O 

ERIC 



mf copy MAmmm 



10 



Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: The Case of Navajo (McCarty & Dick, Revised July 1996) J Q 
can be passed on to children. Schools and their participants can support and safeguard the integrity 
of that sociocultural environment In this respect, mother tongue literacy, by fostering the sharing 
of language experiences between young and old, is indeed a powerful tool. 

Rough Rock provides one example of how these processes can be activated. Eight years 
of evaluative data at Rough Rock also tell us that bilingual students who develop a solid foundation 
of mother tongue literacy have a far better chance of succeeding in school than students in English- 
only or English-mostly tracks (McCarty 1993). In terms of the bilingual program's larger goals 
for language and culture renewal, the real test will be whether the graduates of this program, as 
adults, ensure that their own children grow up having Navajo as their mother tongue. 



Atkins, J.D.C. Report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1887. 

Benally, Ancita, and Teresa L. McCarty. "The Navajo Language Today." In Perspectives on 
Official English: the Campaign for English as the Official Language of the USA. Eds. Karen L. 
Adams and Daniel T. Brink. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin and New York, 1990, pp. 237-245. 

Bernard, H. Russell. "Publish or Perish: This Time It's For Real," General Anthropology 
Newsletter 1 (1995), 8-11. 

Caboni, Jessie, with Gilberto Jumbo, and Afton Sells. LUltsooi Aydzhl Nindyiijadh (Yellowhorse 
Bringing Lambs Home). Chinle, AZ: Rough Rock School Board, Inc., 1995. 

Crawford, James. Hold Your Tongue: Bilingualism and the Politics of "English Only. " Addison- 
Wesley, Reading, MA, 1992. 

Crawford, James. "Endangered Native American Languages: What Is To Be Done— and Why?" 
Bilingual Research Journal 19 (1995), 17-38. 

Dick, Galena S., and T. L. McCarty. "Reclaiming Navajo: Language Renewal in an American 
Indian Community School." In Language Planning from the Bottom Up: Indigenous Literacies in 
the Americas. Ed. Nancy H. Homberger. New York: Mouton, in press. 

Fishman, Joshua. Reversing Language Shift. Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters, 1991. 

Hale, Ken, "On the Human Value of Local Languages," unpublished manuscript, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, n.d. 

Hinton, Leanne. "Awakening Tongues: Elders, Youth, and Educators Embark on Language 
Renaissance." News from Native California 7 (1993), pp. 13-16. 



References Cited 



ERIC 




Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: The Case of Navajo (McCarty & Dick, Revised July 1996) ] ] 

Hinton, Leanne. "Current Problems Affecting Language Loss and Language Survival in 
California.” Paper presented at the Symposium on Language Loss and Public Policy, University 
of New Mexico Linguistic Institute, Summer 1995. 

Holm, Agnes, and Wayne Holm. "Navajo Language Education: Retrospect and Prospects." 
Bilingual Research Journal 19 (1995), 169-178. 

Johnson, Broderick. Navaho Education at Rough Rock. Rough Rock, AZ: Rough Rock 
Demonstration School and D.I.N.E, Inc., 1968. 

Kamana, Kauanoe and William H. Wilson. "Hawaian Language Programs." In Stabilizing 
Indigenous Languages. Ed. Gina Cantoni. Flagstaff: Northern Arizona University Center for 
Excellence, 1996, pp. 153-156. 

Krauss, Michael. "The World’s Languages in Crisis." Language 68 (1992), 6-10. 

Krauss, Michael. "Status of Native American Language EndangermenL" In Stabilizing 
Indigenous Languages. Ed. Gina Cantoni. Flagstaff: Northern Arizona University Center for 
Excellence, 1996, pp. 16-21. 

McCarty, Teresa L. "School as Community: The Rough Rock Demonstration." Harvard 
Educational Review 59 (1989), 484-503. 

McCarty, Teresa L. "Language, Literacy and the Image of the Child in American Indian 
Classrooms." Language Arts 70 (1993), 182-192. 

McLaughlin, Daniel. "The Sociolinguistics of Navajo Literacy," Anthropology & Educaiton 
Quarterly 20 (1989), 275-290. 

McLaughlin, Daniel. When Literacy Empowers: Navajo Language In Print. University of New 
Mexico Press, Albuquerque, 1992. 

Medicine, Bea. "Bilingual Education and Public Policy: The Cases of the American Indian." In 
Ethnoperspectives in Bilingual Education Research: Bilingual Education and Public Policy in the 
United States. Ed. Raymond V. Padilla. Ypsilanti: Eastern Michigan University, 1982, 395-407. 

Roessel, Robert A., Jr. Navajo Education in Action: The Rough Rock Demonstration School. 
Chinle, AZ: Navajo Curriculum Center Press, 1977. 

Ruiz, Richard. "Orientations in Language Planning." In Language Diversity: Problem or 
Resource? Ed. Sandra Lee McKay and Sau-ling Cynthia Wong, Heinle & Heinle Publishers, 
Boston, MA, 3-25. 

Ruiz, Richard. "Language Policy and Planning in the United States," Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics 14 (1994), 111-125. 

Sims, Christine. "Community- Based Efforts to Preserve Native Languages: A Descriptive Study 
of the Karuk Tribe of Northern California." International Journal of the Sociology of Language, in 
press. 

Watahomigie, Lucille J. and Teresa L. McCarty. "Bilingual/Bicultural Education at Peach Springs: 
A Hualapai Way of Schooling." Peabody Journal of Education 69 ( 1994), 26-42. 




12 



Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: The Case of Navajo (McCarty & Dick, Revised July 1996 ) 1 2 







CO 



Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: The Case of Navajo (McCarty & Dick, Revised July 1996) 



Figure 2. Excerpts from a Staff-Developed Navajo Storybook, 
Ltfttsoot Aydzhi Nindyiijddh (Yellowhorse Bringing Lambs Home) 

by Jessie Caboni 



tjl+tsooi Ayazhi Ninayiijaah 




Doo dah na'a^go'da jinifgo t'ii ii t’ciy£ bwob naaldloosh 
bsh. Vii akwujj dib£ bik6£’ chojoobfigo nabay^ii beh. fcjf 
bid££’ d66 tboh ay6o ycc yaa Ihily^l nft’66\ tahda 
bilas£ana ya^n6fiah Jth. £i bmahji’ t'ii bi boogbanfjj’ 
nizhdnfgo imilh£lyeedgo yflioob^'. Dib£ taah ninib d^’da, 
nidaa’ d^’da, blzh’dichi’go t'ia bf hooghamji’ nizhdnfgo 
anah£lyeed siljf. 





, J - 



Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 



© 



/» 


aA 


U.S. Department of Education 


, 1 


1 1 1 


f — J 




m 

gjzl 


Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 




1 > 1 


_U 3 > 



s£? 4TES eSj 



REPRODUCTION RELEASE 



(Specific Document) 

1. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 




Title: Mother Tongue Literacy and Language Renewal: The Case of Navajo 




Author(s): Teresa L. McCarty and Galena Sells Dick 




Corporate Source: 


Publication Date: 


N/A 


July 1996 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents 


The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2A documents 


The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2B documents 


PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

A* 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


cT 








cf 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




J 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 



Level 1 Level 2A Level 2B 



t t t 

3 EH EH 

Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 

and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 

media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 

Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



nleast 

ERIC 



/ hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy*]) formation needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 




Printed Name/Position/Title: 

Teresa L. McCarty, 


Associate Prof. 


f Orgartfzation/Address: ^ 

v _XUniversity of Arizona 

Dept, of Language, Reading & Culture 


Telephone: 

520/621 -Q2R2 


FAX: 

520/671-1857 


"Mffiaetyemail.ed. 


D t/27/9^ 


PO Box 210069 Tucson, AZ 85721-0069 


arizona.edu 


ivL v ^ i J J T 

(over) 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 

ERIC/CRESS AT AEL 
1031 QUARRIER STREET - 8TH FLOOR 
P O BOX 1348 
CHARLESTON WV 25325 

phone: 800/624-9120 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 

ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
1100 West Street, 2 nd Floor 
Laurel, Maryland 20707-3598 



Telephone: 301-497-4080 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-953-0263 



0 

ERIC 



088 (Rev. 9/97) 



e-mail: ericfac@inet.ed.gov 
WWW: http://ericfac.piccard.csc.com 



PREVIOUS VERSIONS OF THIS FORM ARE OBSOLETE. 



