DOCUMENT RESUME 



FL 027 838 

Kirkpatrick, Andy, Ed. 

Englishes in Asia: Communication, Identity, Power and 
Education . 

ISBN“l-876“768“479 

2002 - 00-00 

Slip.; Selected papers presented at the Annual South East 
Asia Conference (5th, Perth, Western Australia, Australia, 
December 6-8, 2000) . 

Language Australia Ltd., GPO Box 372F, Melbourne VIC 3001, 
Australia-. Web site: http://languageaustralia.com.au/ . 

Books (010) -- Collected Works - General (020) — 
Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC13 Plus Postage. 

Cantonese; Cultural Differences; Cultural Influences; 
Elementary Secondary Education; "^English (Second Language); 
Ethnicity; Foreign Countries ; Higher Education; Indigenous 
Populations; Language Teachers; "^Language of Instruction; 
Literature ; Official Languages ; Power Structure ; Preschool 
Children; Preservice Teacher Education; Rural Schools; Second 
Language Instruction; Second Language Learning 
Brunei; Hong Kong; Japan; Language Contact; Language Policy; 
Malaysia; Papua New Guinea; Singapore; Tok Pisin; World 
English 



This collection of papers comprises proceedings from the 5th 
English in South East Asia Conference, held in December 2000 at Curtin 
University of Technology in Perth. The 19 papers include the following: (1) 

"Global English and Local Language Policies" (Robert Phillipson) ; (2) "Hong 

Kong Parents' Preference for English-Medium Education: Passive Victims of 
Imperialism or Active Agents of Pragmatism?" (David Li); (3) "Implications of- 
the Recommendation that English Become the Second Official Language in 
Japan" (Kayako Hashimoto) ; (4) "Culture and Identity in the English 

Discourses of Mayalsians" (Azirah Mashim) ; (5) "Englishization and 

Nativization Processes in the Context of Brunei Darussalam: Evidence for and 
Against" (Hajaj Rosnah Haji Ramly, Noor Azam Haji Othman, and James 
McLellan) ; (6) "Kissing Cousins? The Relationship between English and Tok 

Pisin in Papua New Guinea" (Geoff Smith) ; (7) "Chaos in Aboriginal English 

Discourse" (Farzad Sharifian) ; (8) "Language, Literature and Culture — and 

Their Meeting Place in the Dictionary" (Susan Butler); (9) "Even Obit^'.aries 
Reflect Cultural Norms and Values" (Maya Khemlani David and Janet Y. Yong) ; 
(10) "Recent Research into the Pronunciation of Singapore English" (Low Ee 
Ling and David Deterding) ; (11) "Languages in Contact: Hong Kong English 

Phonology and the Influence of Cantonese" (Tony Hung); (12) "Canon and 
Pedagogy: The Role of American Colonial Education and Defining Standards for 
Philippine Literature" (Isabel Pefianco Martin); (13) "ASEAN and Asian 
Cultures and Models : Implications for The ELT Curriculum and for Teacher 
Education" (Andy Kirkpatrick); (14) "From TEFL to TEIL: Changes in 
Perceptions and Practices: Teaching English as an International Language in 
Chinese Universities" (Xy Zhichang) ; (15) "Reflective Discourse in Teacher 

Education in Brunei Darussalam" (David Lochmohr Prescott); (16) "Alternative 



ED 481 306 

AUTHOR 

TITLE 

ISBN 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 

ABSTRACT 



o 

ERIC 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



English: Vernacular Oral Art among Aboriginal Youth" (Ian Malcom) ; (17) "A 

Study of the Language of Pre-School Malaysian Children" (Kow Yip Cheng); (18) 
"Communication Behaviours of EFL Learners in a Native English-Speaker 
Teacher's Class: A Case in Hong Kong" (Jasmine Luk) ; and (19) "Multilingual 
Practices in Rural Malaysia and Their Impact on English Language Learning in 
Rural Education" (Hazita Azman) . (Papers contain references.) (SM) 




Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



Englishes in Asia 

COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER & EDUCATION 



ERIC 





Englishes in Asia: 
Communication, identity, 
power and education 

Editor 

Andy Kirkpatrick 



published by 
Language Australia Ltd. 




LANGUAGE 

AUSTRALIA 



Englishes in Asia: 

Communication, identity, power and education 

Andy Kirkpatrick (Editor) 

ISBN 1 876 768 47 9 



Cover designed using graphic elements provided by 
Curtin Print and Design 



©Copyright 2002 Language Australia Ltd. 

No parts may be reproduced by any process except with the 
written permission of the publisher or in accordance with 
the provisions of the Cop 3 ^ight Act. 



Published by Language Australia Ltd., The National 
Languages and Literacy Institute of Australia 



For further information contact: 

Language Australia Ltd. 

GPO Box 372F 
Melbourne VIC 3001 
Australia 

The views expressed in this publication are those of the 
contributors and do not necessarily reflect the views or 
policies of Language Australia Ltd. 



Contents 



Foreword 1 

Andy Kirkpatrick 

1. Global English and local language poUcies 7 

Robert Phillipson, Copenhagen Business School, Denmark 

2. Hong Kong parents' preference for EngUsh-medium 29 

education: passive victims of imperialism or active 

agents of pragmatism? 

David Li, City University of Hong Kong 

3. Implications of the recommendation that English 63 

become the second official language in Japan 

Kayako Hashimoto, Monash University, Australia 

4. Culture and identity in the English discourses of 75 

Malaysians 

Azirah Hashim, University of Malaya 

5. EngUshization and nativization processes in the 95 

context of Brunei Darussalam: evidence for and against 
Hajah Rosnah Haji Ramly, Noor Azam Haji Othman 

and James McLellan, 

Department of English Language and Applied Linguistics, 



Universiti Brunei Darussalam 

6. Kissing cousins? The relationship between English and 113 
Tok Pisin in Papua New Guinea 

Geoff Smith, University of Hong Kong 

7. Chaos in Aboriginal English discourse 125 

Farzad Sharifian, Edith Cowan University, Australia 

8. Language, literature and culture — and their meeting 143 
place in the dictionary 

Susan Butler, Macquarie University, Australia 

9. Even obituaries reflect cultural norms and values 169 

Maya Khemlani David & Janet Y.Yong, 

University of Malaya 

10. Recent research into the pronunciation of Singapore 179 
English 



Low Ee Ling and David Deterding, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



11. Languages in contact: Hong Kong English phonology 191 
and the influence of Cantonese 

Tony Hung, Hong Kong Baptist University 

12. Ceuion and pedagogy: the role of American colonial 201 
education in defining stcuidards for Philippine literature 
Isabel Pefianco Martin, Ateneo de Manila University 

13. ASEAN and Asian cultures and models: implications for 213 
the ELT curriculum euid for teacher selection 

Andy Kirkpatrick, Curtin University of Technology, Perth, 
Australia 

14. From TEFL to TEIL: changes in perceptions and 225 

practices: teaching English as eui International 

Language in Chinese universities 

Xu Zhichang, Beijing University of Astronautics and 

Aeronautics 



15. Reflective discourse in teacher education in Brunei 245 
Darussalam 

David Lochmohr Prescott, Universiti Brunei Darussalam 

16. Alternative English: vernacular oral art among 261 

Aboriginal youth 

Ian Malcolm, Edith Cowan University, Australia 

17. A study of the language of pre-school Malaysian 277 

children 

Kow Yip Cheng, University of Malaya 

18. Communication behaviours of EFL lecimers in a native 289 
English-speaker teacher's class: a case in Hong Kong 
Jasmine Luk, The Hong Kong Institute of Education 

19. Multilingual practices in rural Malaysia and their 303 

impact on English language learning in rural 

education 

Dr. Hazita Azman, Faculty of Language Studies, 

Universiti Kebangsaan, Malaysia. 



6 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



Foreword 



Andy Kirkpatrick 
Perth, September 2001 



This volume comprises selected proceedings from the 5th English in South East Asia 
Conference, which was held at Curtin University of Technology in Perth on 6-8 
December 2000. 

The English in South East Asia conference series was conceived as a vehicle for 
educators from the Asia Pacific region to meet euinually to discuss matters of mutual 
interest concerning the development of regional varieties English, the role of these 
varieties in conjunction with or in opposition to native speaker varieties, and the 
implications of this for English language teaching within the region. 

Previous conferences have been hosted by the University of Malaya, the 
University of Brunei, and the National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore. Future conferences in the series are scheduled for Ateneo de 
Manila University and Hong Kong Baptist University. 

The theme of the 2000 conference is reflected in the title of this volume and the 
papers address various aspects of the role of English and Englishes throughout the 
region. The volume begins with Robert Phillipson's paper on global English and local 
language policies. The paper relates conceptual haziness around 'English' and native 
speaker mythology to globalisation processes. A crucial need is to situate English in 
the wider linguistic ecology, globally and locally. Language policy, including the 
promotion of English, must be inspired by an equitable vision of how all languages 
can be permitted to flourish. Foreign experts are non-natives whose professionalism 
must build on deep knowledge of the culture in which they have chosen to work, 
which, among many other things, requires learning local languages. Phillipson's paper 
provides the framework within which many of the following papers operate. The 
authors are interested in exploring the relationship between 'Standard English', local 
varieties of English and the languages of the region. 

David CS Li discusses issues that arise from the deceptively simple question, 'Why 
is there such a strong desire among Hong Kong parents for their children to be 
educated in English?' He argues that it is a mistake to see these people who are 
positively inclined to the learning of English as victims of the hegemony of the former 
colonial language; rather, Li argues, they are pragmatically-minded people acting in 
their own best interests. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



FOREWORD 



Hashimoto extends the debate to Japan and argues that English in Japan is being 
used for Japanese purposes. In early 2000, the private advisory group for the then 
Japanese Prime-Minister recommended that English should be used as the second 
official language in order to cope with globalisation. However, at the same time, the 
Ministry of Education proposed a plan to revise the Fundamentals of Education Act in 
favour of the inclusion of nationalistic sentiment and practices. This policy re- 
positioning is also mirrored in public sentiment. Hashimoto concludes that this 
reflects continuity in Japanese attempts to preserve Japanese culture and that the 
role of English in Japan is to project 'Japcuieseness' to the world. 

Azirah Hashim also sees a role for English in preserving cultural identity. Forging 
a national identity without creating conflicts with the ethnic identities is a problem 
not only peculiar to Malaysia but also to many other countries. However, Malaysia can 
be considered to be a relatively successful multiracial society with relatively 
harmonious coexistence among ethnic groups. Language plays a complex role in 
relation to ethnic and national identity. The common experiences of the group 
influence the actual text and talk of the individuals. The examples of Malaysian 
English discourse that Hashim presents highlights the linguistic features which are 
important in establishing group identity, in this case, national identity, and yet 
preserving ethnic identities. 

Ramli, Hazam and McLellan address the questions "How do the languages of the 
region influence English, linguistically or socio-culturally? and How does English 
influence the languages of the region, linguistically or socioculturally?" By analysing 
evidence from Brunei Darussalam, they argue that nativisation (of English) and 
Englishisation of other languages are two processes that operate simultaneously in 
multilingual contexts. They conclude that Bruneians, therefore, do not believe 
themselves to be victims of the dominant discourse of English as an International 
Language. On the contrary, Bruneieuis would claim that they have some control over 
English, but that English has no control whatsoever over them. 

Similar mutual processes and complementary social roles are discussed by Smith 
in his account of the relationship between Tok Pisin and English in Papua New Guinea. 
What can be seen here appears to be an early stage of mutual influence between the 
two languages, which are still kept separate for most purposes. A situation is 
emerging in contemporary Papua New Guinea which has not been present in former 
periods of the history of Tok Pisin, namely the existence of a significant number of 
people fluent in both Tok Pisin and English. Fluency in Tok Pisin is seen both in the 
increasing numbers of first language speakers and in a native-like competence of 
many second language speakers as Tok Pisin gains a greater role in contemporary 
society, fluency in English is a product of the continuing policy to use English as the 
medium of instruction in the majority of educational establishments right from the 
beginning of primary school. 

Farzad Sharifian shows how a local variety of English can take on the cognitive 
and cultural preferences of its speakers. He first provides a brief description of 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



foreword 



Australian Aboriginal English and argues that there is an intimate relationship 
between language and other cognitive faculties and that cogrdtive characteristics and 
preferences may be shaped by cultural skills and practices. He argues that the 
resultant perceived 'chaos' in Aboriginal English makes Aboriginal English unclear to 
non-Aboriginal speakers of English. 

The links between language and culture are further explored in the next two 
papers. Susan Butler points out that the dictionary has a key role as a document of 
the language of a particuleu: language community existing in a particuleu: place at a 
particulcu: time. From this point of view the dictionary documents our culture and has 
a vital nexus with our literature. Dictionaries of varieties of English serve to record 
the differences between English-language commurdties and can be instructive on 
cultural differences. Butler, drawing on exeunples from Singaporean and Malaysian 
English, Philippine English, Hong Kong English and Australian English, shows how the 
dictionary can be a conduit to a cultural understanding in the region. 

David and Yong argue along similar lines in proposing that local varieties of 
English reflect local cultural norms. The value systems and norms of Malaysians, 
particuleurly Indians, are discussed by analysing a data beise of obitucuies which 
appeared in three English newspapers in Malaysia and obtained over a period of three 
months. The paper argues that outsiders to Malaysian cultural norms and value 
systems may not understand the significance of the discourse of these obituaries 
unless links are made between the textual discourse and local or cultural schemas. The 
data is analyzed by mciking connections between the textual discourse and local value 
systems. 

The next two papers are by Low jmd Deterding and Hung and consider cispects of 
the phonology of Singapore and Hong Kong English respectively. Low and Deterding 
show that recent research has confirmed that most of the impressionistic reports of 
the pronunciation features of SgE can be validated by instrumental mecisurements. At 
the same time, they point out that some misconceptions have been found and this 
highlights the importance of instrumental work in phonetic reseauch. 

Hung's paper is based on the author's findings from his on-going research project 
on the interlanguage phonology of Hong Kong English (HKE). With the help of 
spectrographic analysis, he found that the typical HKE speaker operates with a 
considerably smaller set of vowel and consonant phonemes than in old varieties of 
English, such as British and American English, both in production and perception. In 
particular, the HKE vowel system is very similar to that of Cantonese, both in terms 
of the number of vowel contrasts, and the phonetic quality of the vowels themselves, 
like Cantonese also, the consonant system of HKE is lacking in the voiced/voiceless 
distinction, such that the contrasts between pairs of consonants which are 
distinguished in old varieties of English by voicing eue either neutralised or replaced 
by other phonemes. 

The next series of papers consider how an imposed Standard English influences 
local educational practice. Isabel Martin provides a historical account of the way 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



FOREWORD 



English literature used to be taught in Philippine schools. In particular, she addresses 
questions such as; mat specific strategies did the American colonizers use to create 
a new type of American?' She argues that the Anglo-American canon of literature 
imposed on the Filipinos from 1901 during the American colonial period would not 
have been as potent without a powerful partner, namely, colonial pedagogy. Together, 
canon and pedagogy produced a certain type of language and literature education that 
created standeuds for Philippine literature in both English euid Tagalog. As a result of 
American colonial education, Philippine literature was relegated to the margins. 

Kirkpatrick points out that English has become the lingua franca of ASEAN and 
between other countries in East Asia. Learners of English in the region are far more 
likely to need to use English with fellow non-native speakers from the region than 
with native speakers. He proposes that a new curriculum is therefore required that 
concentrates on ASEAN rather than Anglo' cultures. This development also has direct 
implications for the variety of English that should be taught and the type of language 
teachers that should be employed. Rather than spending resources on the importing 
of native speaker teachers to provide native speaker models, Kirkpatrick puts the case 
for the treuisfer of these resources to the training of local teachers who can provide 
their students with a relevant and attainable model of English. 

Moving the discussion from ASEAN schools to Chinese universities, Xu suggests 
that the Chinese traditional attachment to Received Pronunciation (RP) or General 
American (GA) is being challenged. Changes in perceptions and practices in the 
teaching of English are therefore necessary so that students can acquire the ever- 
evolving English as an International Language (EIL), which reflects multi-cultures and 
multi-identities. For Xu, EIL is a world lingua franca and is becoming more and more 
complex and dynamic. It reflects multi- cultures and multi-identities. EIL has become 
more of a liberating concept than a mere tool for communication across national and 
cultural boundaries. It can liberate English teachers and students from their 
traditional ways of looking at English and the learning and teaching of English. 

The ability of local varieties of English to reflect local cultural practice is further 
discussed by Prescott, but in the context of teacher education. In Brunei, English is 
able to fulfil a fadlitative role, free of the sodo- cultural and ideological constraints 
that are often linked with the local and regional languages. Prescott's study suggests 
that a way forward for teacher education in Brunei is the development of the 
instrumental, fadlitative role of English as the discourse of reflective practice. Similar 
studies may help clarify the role English has to play in promoting the discourse of 
reflective practice. 

It is the place of a spedfic variety of English within the education system that 
is the focus of Malcolm's paper. Malcolm stresses that the conflict between the forces 
for globalisation and for indigenisation is reflected in education, where policies 
favouring standard-English-based literacy are countered by polides which favour the 
linguistic and cultural rights of local cultures. In U.S.A., the Ebonics debate brought 
such conflict to a head in 1996-7. In Singapore, there is ongoing controversy over the 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

10 



FOREWORD 



legitimacy of 'SingUsh' as opposed to standcird varieties based on international norms. 
In Australia, the inclusiveness of the National Policy on Lcuiguages ( 1987 ) was 
countered by subsequent moves towards prioritising Uteracy, which always means 
literacy in standard English. In this paper, Macolm provides evidence from Australian 
Aboriginal settings in support of claims that the indigenisation of English by 
Aboriginal people has resulted in the development of oral art forms which are 
sophisticated enough to claim recognition in the education system. 

The volume's final three papers also focus on educational issues. Row's study 
seeks to determine if the English used by a Seunple of Malaysian school children 
reflects local culture and what other factors may play a role in the development of the 
variety. She concludes that the language they use is indeed reflective of Malaysian 
culture and that the language of these children is used to convey, extend, create and 
recreate meaning. 

Luk's paper looks at the in-class language use of Hong Kong learners of English. 
She presents and discusses evidence that Hong Kong Chinese students' communication 
behavioiufs reflect their local cultural and linguistic identities and power. By having 
at their disposal a local language not shared by the teacher, the students, though 
having only Umited English proficiency, demonstrate a rich and dynamic variety of 
communication behaviours in making their voices heard. Luk argues that this 
demonstrates the inadequacy of a native EngUsh-speaker teacher who is culturally and 
linguistically less sophisticated than the students. 

Finally, Azman, in the tradition of viewing Uteracy from a sociocultural 
perspective, proposes an explanation for the lagging Uteracy performance among rural 
students in Malaysia, especially in English Language. She shows that changes in 
historical, socio-poUtical and socio-economic factors have impacted on multiUngual 
and multiethnic rural communities in their perceptions of Uteracy and their local 
practices in Malaysia. These changes have brought upon the communities demands of 
new skills such as Uteracy in EngUsh and computers, while at the same time revealing 
how unprepcued they are to meet these chcuiges. Schools in rural communities thus 
must play a major role in chcuiging the attitudes toweuds Uteracy among the rural 
population. The challenge Ues in making these goals relevant to the immediate needs 
of the rural population. Azman urges us to remember that the unity of a nation 
depends not upon the singleness of the tongue or homogeneity of culture, but in the 
hearts of its citizens. Therefore, a multiethnic auid multiUngual country such as 
Malaysia must first demarginaUse and then empower its citizens so that they can 
wilUngly internaUse the same goals and work towards achieving them together, while 
harmoniously maintaining their individual differences and uniqueness. 

In closing, I would Uke to acknowledge the editorial help provided by Dr Azirah 
Hashim, the University of Malaya, Dr Isabel Martin, Ateneo de Manila University, the 
PhiUppines, Dr Low Ee-Ling, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, and Dr 
Hajah Rosnah Haji Ramly of the Universiti Brunei Darussalam. To all, great thanks, 
both for your help emd for the privilege of working with you. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



1 Global English and local language policies 



Robert Phillipson 

Copenhagen Business School, Denmark 



The paper relates conceptual haziness around "English" and native 
speaker mythology to globalisation processes. It draws on eui ecology 
of language paradigm to situate English professionalism in a global 
vision of languages serving equitable purposes. There is a steady flow 
of studies from Europe, Asia and Africa documenting how current 
linguistic hierarchies serve to marginalise (speakers of ) leuiguages 
other theui English. There is also a trickle of studies showing how ELT 
professionalism can serve more appropriate local purposes. 



The twin poles of the title of my chapter, 'global English' and 'local language policies', 
suggest the tension between a globalising language and the paramount need to 
formulate and implement Uuiguage policies that meet local cultural, linguistic, 
political and economic needs. I am addressing you in English, this globalising 
leuiguage, but I would claim that I am not using global English. Global English is an 
abstraction, a language in the minds of the prophets euid cheer-leaders of 
globalisation, a hugely powerful myth that we need to locate, interpret and dissect. 
What I am using is a form of English that reflects multiple aspects of my past euid 
present identities. I hesitate to call myself a native speaker, although English was the 
language I lecimed first, in Britain, and is still my most active leuiguage, even though 
I have spent almost my entire working life in countries where English is not the 
dominant local language. My reluctance has more to do with the fact that I am well 
aweue that the mythology of the native speaker of English has been exported world- 
wide, to the point where a blind faith in the supposed attributes of the native speaker 
teacher species permeates much of the ideology of English lecuning in Asia. Many 
Asian scholars have shown how this has had pernicious effects^. The terms themselves 
— native/non-native — have been challenged by people working in theoretical 
linguistics, sociolinguistics, euid language pedagogy. In my view, this binary 
opposition is offensive because it is hierarchical and discriminatory in that the native 
is tciken as the norm, euid others are defined negatively, in terms of what they are not, 
in relation to this norm. Non-natives are abnormal, deviant in relation to certain 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

J2 



CHAPTER 1 — global ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



desired types of behaviour and knowledge — we are to the manner bom, they are 
beyond the linguistic pale, in perpetuity. This contemporary varieuit of orientalism 
thus legitimates linguistic and cultural hierarchisation and imperialism. And like 
many factors contributing to linguistic hegemony, the hierarchy is often internalised 
unquestioningly, which serves to consolidate the power of speakers of the dominant 
veiriant of the language. 

Learrung a foreign or second language to a high level is a demanding, humbling 
process which can also be exhilarating and rewarding. It is difficult to see how anyone 
who has not been through this process successfully can choose to teach any language 
that is being learned as a foreign or second language. How can one otherwise develop 
insight into the intercultural familiarisation experience that is the bedrock of foreign 
language learning? The process is captured insightfully by a key iconoclastic 
intellectual, Ivan HUch (1973: 41). 

A language of which I know only the words and not the pauses is a continuous 
offence. It is as the caricature of a photographic negative. It takes more time 
and effort and delicacy to learn the silence of a people than to learn its sounds. 

I sometimes wonder whether the politicians who regard an early start to English in 
the primary school as a peuiacea — a current fad in continental Europe — or who wish 
to accord English the status of second official language^ as is being discussed in Korea 
and JapeUi, do so because they are scarred by achieving little in their own leEurung of 
a foreign language at school, or because of embarrassment at their own lack of 
competence in the high-prestige language. In other words, I am suggesting these 
beuidwagons represent irrational solutions to a falsely diagnosed problem. like the 
xenophobic English Only movement in the Uruted States, what is proposed is fa bad 
cure for eui imaginary disease', as Gerald Nunberg (1997: 44) puts it. But that second 
or foreign language learning can be agonising is beautifully captured by Eva Hoffman, 
when she describes her traumatic experience as an immigrant to North America at the 
age of thirteen, when English was superimposed on Polish: 

The words I learn now don't stand for things in the same unquestioned way they 
did in my native tongue, 'River' in Polish was a vital sound, energised with the 
essence of riverhood, of my rivers, of my being immersed in rivers. 'River' in 
English is cold — a word without an aura. It has no accumulated associations 
for me, and it does not give off the radiating haze of connotation. It does not 
evoke.... English words don't hook up on anything... The words float in 
uncertain space. They come from a part of my brain in which labels may be 
manufactured but which has no connection to my instincts, quick reactions, 
knowledge... What has happened to me in this new world? I don't know. I don't 
see what I've seen, don't comprehend what's in front of me. I'm not filled with 
language anymore, and I have only a memory of fullness to anguish me with the 
knowledge that, in this dark and empty state, I don't really exist. (Hoffman 
1989: 106-108). 

13 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



Such are the agonies of a subtractive language learning context, an experience which 
is, I fear, widespread. The agonies are existential for eui immigrant child and for many 
children being educated in Africa through the medium of English. But those of us who 
use a second language constantly also know how demanding it is to communicate in 
less than fully fluent, idiomatic and effective ways. I live in Denmark, a country 
whose people have a high reputation as users of English as an L2. But there are 
countless anecdotes about their leaders creating unintended impressions in English. 
The Danish Prime Minister has been known to pciriy an awkward question at a press 
conference by stating that he does not have the 'ability' to answer the question, 
unintentionally making a disparaging remark about his own intellectual faculties, 
whereas he would have been home and dry if he had said he was not 'able' to answer 
the question, implying that reasons of state prevented him from doing so. The minute 
shift from the nominal form, ability, to an adjective, able, is symptomatic of how 
treacherous a language English is, like all languages. And as English is now spoken in 
so many different ways in all parts of the globe, pinning down what English is so that 
we can agree about what is under discussion, is a precondition for scholarly analysis 
of what is happening to the language, and what the language is being used for. 

What then is global English? What, following nUch euid Hoffman, are the silences 
and sounds of global English? If English is now a post-imperial, post-national 
language, as some claim, whose interests are served by its use, and what are the 
implications for learners of English ^ls a second or foreign language? To answer such 
questions, we need to listen critically to those who plead the cause of global English. 
We need to address head-on the fallacious belief in the universality of a single 
language, symbolised and mediated by its native speakers, and all that goes with them 
in terms of expertise, teaching materials, curriculum development, development 
assistance, et al. We need to work for a more democratic linguistic world order in 
which the linguistic human rights of speakers of all languages are respected. The 
native speaker fallacy^ is the linchpin connecting global English to local language 
policies. We therefore need to diagnose what types of inequality global English entails, 
and to identify local language policies at all levels, from the individual to the state 
and above, that represent a real alternative, policies for a healthy, vibrant language 
ecology. 

I shall address these issues by euialysing the following in turn: 

• English in globalisation 

• English and inequality 

• Global ELT professionalism? 

• Appropriating English locally. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 1 — global ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



English in globalisation 

English is integral to the globalisation processes that characterise the contemporary 
post-cold-war phase of aggressive casino capitalism, economic restructuring, 
McDonaldisation and militarisation on all continents. English permeates the 
globalisation of the economy, finance, and politics, in commerce (the World Trade 
Organisation, the North American Free Trade Agreement, the common market of the 
European Union and comparable regional associations), military links (NATO, United 
Nations peace-keeping operations, the arms trade), and culture (Hollywood products, 
BBC World, CNN, MTV). There is a considerable literature on globalisation, and on 
English, but there is an alarming absence of literature that brings the two together. 
A multidisciplinary approach to the analysis of language and power is needed, drawing 
on a range of disciplines. 

The huge literature on English includes excellent portrayals of the history of how 
and why the language expanded (Bailey 1991, Miihlhausler 1996), and many 
descriptions of its diversity in different parts of the world. There are also radical- 
critical analyses by scholars in the South who challenge North professional 
orthodoxies. Dasgupta (1993), for instance, convincingly demonstrates that English is 
not in an organic relationship with Indian languages or the mass of Indian people; 
Parakrama (1995) explores the distinctiveness of Sri Lankan English and its distance 
from an Anglo norm. The extensive language policy literature in South Africa 
essentially deals with how English can be 'reduced to equality'^ so that African 
languages and cultures can flourish. 

These cris de coeur from globally peripheral cultures have affinities to critiques of 
linguistics for faiUng to address the role of language in societal reproduction. 
Bourdieu (1991) shows how linguists working in a Saussurean tradition cut themselves 
off from social reaUty when focussing on a standard language but simultaneously 
ignoring the processes of state formation that have led to 'a unified linguistic market, 
dominated by the official language' (ibid.: 45). This process is now in creation at the 
global level, with English as the dominant language of the global economy, but there 
is Uttle analysis of global English in this sense^. One useful linguistic starting-point is 
the work of Mufwene, who demonstrates (1997) that the concepts and terminology 
used in relation to English outside the neo-Europes®, 'new Englishes', and creoles, 
involve biassed processes of hierarchisation of the 'legitimate and illegitimate 
offepring of English', and are fundamentally flawed and ethnocentric. When analysing 
English worldwide the bottom line is whose interests English serves, and whose 
interests scholarship on English serves^ 

Many claim that English is the world language. But to describe English in such 
terms ignores the fact that a majority of the world's citizens do not speak English, 
whether as a mother tongue or as a second or foreign language. Strong forces are at 
pains to create the impression that English serves all the world's citizens equally well, 
whereas this is manifestly not the case. Symptomatic of the wishful thinking of global 

15 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



English is the publicity marketing The International Herald Tribune (earlier New York 
Herald Tribune). It describes itself as The world's daily newspaper. Since 1887.... The 
global village has a hometown newspaper... It's the newspaper the whole world reads'. 
Evidently the global village, another metaphor much used by the cheer-leaders of 
globalisation, is monolingual. There are in fact still some 6-7000 spoken languages in 
the world, and perhaps equally many sign languages, cuid hundreds of Icuiguages are 
used across national borders. The continuing existence of most Icuiguages is, however, 
threatened by meu^ket forces cuid the ideology cuid practice of monolingual nation- 
states (Skutnabb-Kangas 2000a). 

The overall position of English in many countries has been explored in a large 
volume entitled Post-imperial English: Status change in former British and American 
colonies, 1940-1990 (FishmcUi, Conrad and Rubal-Lopez eds.1996)®. The volume begins 
and ends with Fishman's attempt to bring work on the relationship between 
language(s) cuid economic, social and political indicators up to date in the light of a 
statistically-based study of a wealth of such data by one of his collaborators, Rubal- 
Lopez, cuid input from the 29 scholeu^s from British cuid AmericcUi 'spheres of influence' 
who contribute to this volume. Fishman speculates on English being 
'reconceptuaUsed, from being an imperialist tool to being a multinational tool... 
English may need to be re-examined precisely from the point of view of being post- 
imperial (eis the title of our book implies, that is in the sense of not directly serving 
purely Anglo-American territorial, economic, or cultural expansion) without being 
post-capitalist in any wa/ (ibid.: 8). He also stresses the limitations of our 
instruments and concepts, but boldly tabulates the degree of 'angUfication' in each 
state. His cissessment that the 'socio-economic factors that we behind the spread of 
English are now indigenous in most countries of the world' cuid that the continued 
spread of English in former colonies is 'related more to their engagement in the 
modem world economy than to any efforts derived from their colonial masters' (ibid.: 
639) seems to ignore the fact that 'engagement in the modem world' means a western- 
dominated globalisation agenda set by the transnational corporations cuid the IMF, 
and the US miUteiry intervening, with or without a mandate from the United Nations, 
whenever 'vital interests' eu^e at risk. I therefore have difficulty in sharing Fishman's 
restrained optimism about linguistic power-shciring, unless there is a fundeunental 
chcuige of paradigm in language policy cuid in globalisation. 

The export of English is market driven, as it always has been. The year 2001 has 
been declared 'European Year of Languages' by the European Union and the Council of 
Europe, the primary purpose being to strengthen foreign Uuiguage learning. The 
British Council has seized on this as a means of strengthening the 'teaching cuid 
promotion of English language and British culture', with British students of foreign 
languages cis ambassadors for UK higher education in their year abroad®. In the post- 
communist world, English was one of several panaceas that were explicitly cuid 
fraudulently mcirketed as the solution to the problems of the economy and dvil 
society (explicitly by two British foreign ministers, Douglas Hurd and Malcolm 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERIC 







CHAPTER 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE EOLltiES 



Rifkind). There is a major support scheme for English teaching in post-communist 
European countries^. The then British minister for education and employment, David 
Blunkett, echoed official statements of the last fifty years when stating in November 
2000 that ... Tt makes good economic sense to use English fluency as a platform to 
underpin our economic competitiveness and to promote our culture overseas'”. The 
Koreeui government recently announced that 392 native English speakers will be 
recruited for middle and high schools next year, their purpose being to train Korean 
English teachers effectively euid give students more chances to talk with native 
speakers in class'^ Good luck to them, but that is not how foreign languages are 
learned effectively in western Europe. 

A recent example of cultural globalisation aimed at strengthening English and 
British interests is the 'Blair Initiative', euinounced on 18 June 1999. This aims at 
increasing Britain's share of the global market in foreign students. The massive 
expansion of British, American and Australian universities into distance education, 
initially in such fields eis accounting and business administration, is a related 
development. Such initiatives mean jobs for these universities and service industries, 
and are doubtless also seen as an investment in good will, in fostering favourable 
attitudes among potentially influential people. Universities must produce the post- 
colonial, post-national global citizens who will work for trcuisnational corporations, 
finance houses, and supra-national bureaucracies. This Initiative' is somewhat 
intrig uin g eUld puzzling, when, according to the British government's own figures, one 
third of all children in Britain aue growing up in poverty and derive little benefit from 
the education system. 

My examples serve to demonstrate that the English language is securely anchored 
in broader social auid economic developments. English is not a culturally neutral 
lingua franca. I am not suggesting that inter-cultural exchange of the kinds 
exemplified here is misguided auid valueless: at the individual level it may be inspiring 
and eye-opening. Likewise I would never suggest that anyone in the modem world 
should not be as optimally functional in English as possible, nor that education 
systems should not aim at this. But we need to situate English in the overall 
multilingual ecology and in global and local linguistic hierarchies. For language 
specialists, this requires critically assessing how our professionalism is constituted 
and exercised. 

In our contemporary world, 10-20% of the population are getting obscenely 
richer, the EngUsh-speciking haves that consume 80% of the available resources, 
whereas the remainder are being systematically impoverished, the non-English- 
speaking have-nots. Many decisions that affect the entire world's population are taken 
in English. Reference to English as a 'global' language has therefore much less to do 
with demography or geography than with decision-making in the contemporary global 
political and economic system. English is currently pre-eminent but may be 
challenged by Chinese, Arabic and other languages. The world system itself is fragile, 
turbulent and unsustainable. Our biodiversity and linguistic diversity are at risk. 

17 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, -IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAFTKR 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



Many of the dimensions in the contemporary tension between a globally 
expamsionist Uinguage and alternatives to it are illuminatingly brought together in 
two paradigms that were initially proposed by Yukio Tsuda, and which have been 
further elaborated in a more differentiated auialysis by Tove Skutnabb-Kcuigeis (2000a: 
657), from which the following table comes: 



Table 13 Diffusion of English and ecology of languages paradigms 



The diffusion of English paradigm 


Ecology of languages paradigm 


1. 


monolingualism and linguistic genocide 


1. 


multilingualism, and linguistic diversity 


2. 


promotion of subtractive learning of 


2. 


promotion of additive foreign/second 




dominant languages 




language learning 


3. 


linguistic, cultural and media imperialism 


3. 


equality in communication 


4. 


Americanisation and homogenisation of 
world culture 


4. 


maintenance and exchange of cultures 


5. 


ideological globalisation and 
internationalisation 


5. 


ideological localisation and exchange 


6. 


capitalism, hierarchisation 


6. 


economic democratisation 


7 . 


rationalisation based on science and 


7. 


human rights perspective, holistic 




technology 




integrative values 


8. 


modernisation and economic efficiency; 


8. 


sustainability through promotion of 




quantitative growth 




diversity; qualitative growth 


9. 


transnationalisation 


9. 


protection of local production and national 
sovereignties 


10. growing polarisation and gaps between 


10. 


redistribution of the world's material 




haves and never-to-haves 




resources 



Skutnabb-Kangeis's book is a comprehensive survey of the entire field of language 
dominance, language rights, and language ecology that synthesises work in many 
disciplines. It can serve as a springboard for action to promote more democratic 
language poUdes. The Dijfusion of English paradigm entails the promotion of one 
Uuiguage (English) and one culture (the USA's) at the expense of others, by means of 
the interlocking of linguistic imperialism with a system of production and ideologies 
that attempt to justify eui economically expansionist euid exploitative world order. The 
Ecology of Languages paradigm, by contrast, builds on our linguistic euid cultural 
diversity, attempts to ensure equality for specikers of all languages, and uses the 
human rights system as a counterweight to the 'free' market. To advance the cause of 
the Ecology of Language requires efforts at all levels from the local to the global. This 
meeuis putting leuiguage policy higher up on political agendeis. 

The globe of global English is a crystal ball, with David Crystal as one of its most 



ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNL 



N, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANUUAlit fULlClts 



articulate proponents, his book on this topic being, in my view, unscholarly, 
ethnocentric and triumphalisti^ Global English represents special interests. In 
political and scholarly discourse, it is often a subtle form of special pleading, the 
advocacy of the privileged in an imjust world. It is the relatively privileged that Henry 
Widdowson refers to when he argues that 'international English' is essentially English 
for specific professional euid academic purposes (Widdowson 1997: 143), and that this 
is what English learning should aim at, rather theui social chat with native speakers. 
I agree with him on this, eUid that the problem is not the English language but the 
purposes to which the Icuiguage is put. Where I disagree with him is in his reassuring 
belief that there is 'global approval' of the purposes to which English is put, and 
secondly that English 'no longer needs native speaker custodians' (ibid.: 144), 
meaning that for him the ownership of English has already significantly shifted away 
from the native speaker. Both these assumptions need to be challenged, not least if 
efforts to promote English as eui Asicui language are to succeed. English in this sense 
is recommended in a recent newspaper article by Andy Kirkpatrick (2000) and in this 
volume, English as a lingua franca for local Asian purposes and giving expression to 
local cultural values and needs, with the teaching of English equipping learners for 
such purposes. For this desirable goal to be achieved, much will have to change. 



English and inequality 

Like 'global English', the notion that English serves as a neutral lingua franca is a 
dangerous myth. Natives eUid non-natives do not perform on a level playing-field. The 
DcUiish Prime Minister will never be able to express himself as freely in English as 
Tony Blair. The invasion of English into local cultural space has led to governments in 
countries such as France eUid Poleuid legislating to restrict the use of English. In 
SccUidinavicUi countries there is lively debate about whether the increased use of 
English in a number of key domains, in higher education and scientific writing, in the 
media and youth culture, and as the in-company language in corporations, represents 
a serious threat to local cultural values and to the dominant local languages which 
have hitherto, at lecist for the past couple of centuries, served for all such purposes. 
It is possible that a diglossic division of linguistic labour is emerging, with English 
occupying the high prestige slots eUid connoting success eUid hedonism, and local 
languages being confined to more provincial local purposes. Symptoms of this 
inequality are legion. Five snapshot examples can trace the contours of the problem: 

• John Swales, who has spent a lifetime working on the characteristic genres of 
scientific English, describes English as Tyrannosaurus Rex, a language that gobbles 
up others eUid eliminates local cultural practices (1997). 

• David Graddol cites a native speaker editor of a scientific journal who assumes 
blithely that language errors by a non-native may well be a symptom of shoddy 
scholarship: editors are manifestly gate-keepers of both language and content 

19 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



(1997: 38), which reinforces the prevalence of scientific paradigms favoured in 
the USA (PhilUpson & Skutnabb-Kangeis 1999). 

• Ulrich Ammon (2000) has assessed the extent to which German scholars are 
disadvcintaged when obliged to write in English. He heis collected a range of types 
of evidence of inequality, such eis reports of matched guise experiments that 
indicate that, for instance in the medical world, texts in English are judged eis 
superior to texts in Dutch and Scandinavian languages. 

• The Swedish government recently commissioned a major survey of the position 
of Swedish in all key domains in Sweden, and of its use in European Union 
institutions. There is in fact clear evidence of English taking over from Swedish, 
and work is now under way to ensure that Swedish remains a 'complete' 
language^'^. Investigations of domain loss to English in all the Nordic languages 
are currently being commissioned^^ 

• My impression is that even fluent users of English as a second language are 
becoming more aware of their unequal communication rights, and resentful of 
native speaker dominance, for instance at conferences^®. 

The European Union is a test case for policies that respect linguistic diversity and for 
principles of equality both for the individual language user and for a range of 
languages”. In principle, the 11 'official' languages of the 15 member states have 
equal rights, but language policy, with the exception of certain minimal rights to 
translation (an essential service, eis documents emanating from Brussels have the force 
of law in member states, overriding national legislation) and interpretation 
(particularly for Members of the Eiuropean Parliament and senior politicians), 
unofficially accepts a hierarchy with French and English at the top (for instance, texts 
in the EU Commission in 1997 were initially drafted in English, 45.3% of input, and 
French, 40.4%, leaving very little space for other languages)^®. The logistics of 
complex multilingual institutions will become much more complicated as the EU 
enlarges and new languages are added. Pragmatic factors, such as the number of 
interpreters' booths, the availability of translations of documents, and the competence 
in foreign languages generated in education systems, strengthen the use of English at 
the expense of other languages, including French. 

Language policy is such a sensitive political issue that serious analysis of how the 
present system operates has never been undertaken, nor have efforts been made to 
work out how a reformed policy could ensure real equality of communication between 
speakers of different languages. A recent doctoral study in international law in the US 
(Feld 1998) concludes that French language protection measures (the Loi Toubon) are 
in conflict with the Maastricht treaty and the principles of a common market with the 
free movement of goods, services, labour etc. Corporate lawyers may therefore soon 
choose to challenge national language legislation on precisely these grounds. It is also 
conceivable that the EU will declare English (or perhaps a set of 'top' languages) as 
the sole supra-national language of the EU^®, but this is not imminent, and would 
flatly contradict the EU rhetoric that stresses the cultural richness and diversity of 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNIC^l^I, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

best copy available 



CHAPTER 1 - GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



Europe. The ongoing formation of the EU, its 'imagining', in Benedict Anderson's 
sense^°, is immensely complex, as it permeates all societal domains, but a novel post- 
national structure is in the making. The member states have transferred a fair measure 
of sovereignty to the supra-national level where policies are hammered out in 
partnership. All eleven languages are therefore now being used in new international 
contexts, hence are expanding their repertoires and contexts of use. But 
simultaneously there are hierarchisation processes at work that favour the dominant 
languages, both at the level of textual composition, which is strongly influenced by 
French bureaucratic rhetoric, and at the level of English in the EU consolidating the 
position it hcis acquired in many domsuns world-wide. 

I will give you one final example of linguistic inequality and injustice. Mcisaki Oda 
hcis reported in some detail on the traumatic experience of a Japanese university 
student attending a language course in London (Oda 2000). When the Japanese 
student did not conform to the stereotype of how 'the Japanese' were supposed to 
behave, and questioned it, she was victimised by the school and subjected to 
humiliating treatment. The institution insisted on control over all aspects of the 
educational discourse, which wcis structurally bicissed against the Japanese learner 
and her culture, disempowered her and invalidated her norms. Oda regards this as 
confirming a picture of mainstrecim TESOL 'imposing an ethnocentric ideology and 
inadvertently supporting the essentiaUsing discourse that represents cultural groups 
as stable or homogeneous entities' (Spack 1997: 773). This 'can be explained in terms 
of the colonial construction of the Other.... Culture hcis become a category of fixity 
rather than an engagement with difference' (Pennycook 1998: 188-89). For Oda, this 
wcis a clear Ccise of Unguicism in an educational institution, discrimination on the 
basis of language and culture, and native/non-native hierarchisation. It seems to 
confirm the diagnosis of an American political scientist, Douglcis Lummis, who went 
to work in Japan in 1961, and was appalled by the assumption of cultural superiority 
of native-speaker Americans. In an article entitled 'English conversation as ideology , 
he wrote that 'the world of English conversation is racist.... The expression 'native 
speaker' is in effect a code word for 'white'... their real role is not language teacher 
but living example of the American Way of Life'. He recommends that the Japanese 
should start thinking of English cis 

the language of Asian and Third World solidarity. When English study is 
transformed from a form of toadying into a tool of liberation, all the famous 
'special difficulties' which the Japanese are supposed to suffer from will probably 
vanish like the mist. Language schools which employ only Caucasians should be 
boycotted. Japanese who want to study English should form study groups with 
Southecist Asians, and together work out a new Asian version of English that 
reflects the style, culture, history, and politics of Asia. And then, if the 
Americans who come to Asia complain that they can't understand this new 
variety of English, they should be sent to language school. 

1 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



Global ELT professionalism? 

English still plays a dominant role in many post-colonial contexts. In Pakistan, English 
acts T)y distancing people from most indigenous cultural norms' (Rahman 1999: 293^^). 
In India, according to a large survey of the status, role euid functions in India entitled 
'Problematizing English in India', there is 'an increasing mystification and deification 
of English socially eUid pedagogically — it is essentially mecuit for a special group of 
people; it is taught (effectively) in prestigious public schools and other Indian 
languages are ignored and marginalised '(Agnihotri & Khanna 1997: 19). The study 
concludes with the words: 'What we need is a more radical paradigm shift in language 
pleuining in which English sustains rather them destroys the multilingual ethos of 
India' (ibid.: 144). The survey was funded by the British Council, reminding us that 
even if the British presence in English studies in India is small, it can none the less 
have a significant impact. 

A survey of how English has been 'brokered' in India^^ concludes that when there 
is collaboration between British and Indian experts, 'the leadership, and the greater 
initiative and influence, come from the British "expert"' (Rajan 1992b: 140). British 
influence is great, even if the impact of the United States has led to far greater 
munbers of Indians undertaking postgraduate studies in the US, and a significant 
brain drain. Rajan writes: 'The connection between higher education in India emd the 
western academy undeniably exists — it is not only historical and paradigmatic but 
is also a continuing relation of dependence and support in matters of scholarship and 
expertise, material aid, the training of personnel, the framing of syllabi, emd 
pedagogical methods.' (ibid.: 141) 

Throughout Europe there are strong local traditions of teaching English as a 
foreign language. In Denmark, where I Uve, the teaching of English has never relied on 
native speakers, though Americcinisation has been omnipresent since 1945. In some 
southern European countries, such as Greece however, English Language Teaching 
(ELT) is heavily influenced by British linguistic and pedagogical practice: 

There is a systematic construction of reality whereby , by not knowing English, 
one is excluded from emything of social importance... Greek ELT practitioners 
persistently evaluate their proficiency in English against the English of the 
native speaker... This underlying contradiction of a 'culturally neutral' language 
used in a 'culturally appropriate way'... the claim that the native speaker is the 
ideal ELT practitioner construes Greek ELT practitioners as 'knowledge deficient'. 

The monolinguaUsm legacy of ELT discourse ...positions Greek EFL teachers as 
'information receivers' involved in a process of 'ideological becoming' in 
Bakhtinicm terms and of selectively assimilating the [authoritative] word of the 
other. (Dendrinos 1999: 715-6) 

A PhD thesis by a second Greek scholar (VassiUki Mitsikopoulou, 1999) is also a 
sophisticated analysis of how the professionalism of the discourse of ELT is socially 
constructed in scholarly articles. It explores the cultural politics of the formation of 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 1 — global ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



our professional identities, the way a habitus is naturalised in discourses that project 
practical applications from scientific knowledge that in fact reflects particular 
sociocultural interests. Drawing inspiration from Bourdieu, Foucault, Fairclough and 
critical applied linguistics, it explores how discourse technologists are constructed in 
a world characterised by unequal centre-periphery relations. It subtly unravels how 
those who are at the receiving end of British professional influence ought to resist 
incorporation. 

Similar issues are also being explored in post-communist Europe, which is the 
most recent region to have been exposed to the impact of western interests and to 
resent a patronising, asymmetrical relationship with the west, not least in ELT^^: 

Until 1989 there was little serious danger of English-American cultural and 
linguistic imperialism in Hungary but today there are unmistakable signs of such 
penetration and voices of concern are heard from a growing number of 
Hungarians... Most ELT materials produced in and exported from the United 
Kingdom and the United States disregard the learners' LI, and in this respect we 
might question their professionalism... business interests override a 
fundamental professional interest, or: business shapes our profession in ways 
that we know are unprofessional. This puts us, both native and normative 
teachers of English into quite a schizophrenic position. The challenge that we 
are faced with is to keep the professionalism and get rid of the embarrassment. 
(Kontra 1997: 83, 87) 

Whether a more symmetrical relationship can be developed is considered in a recent 
discussion in ELT Journal between Rod Bolitho, a British 'expert', and Peter Medgyes, 
the eminent Hungarian teacher trainer, who expresses worry that a dependency 
culture has been allowed to develop, and that the low professional status of teachers 
undermines efforts to renew English teaching (2000: 386). The most recent number of 
TESOL Journal also explores the qualifications and training of native speaker teachers, 
on the basis of an enquiry in Hungary and China (Barratt & Kontra 2000). Not 
surprisingly what is required is culturally appropriate training. Whether there can be 
genuine partnership in an 'aid' relationship when there is an imbalance between the 
parties in economic terms is debatable, but the potential for constructive, bi- 
directional collaboration between academics is substantial. This can only occur when 
professionalism is locally determined and collaborative, rather than assumed to exist 
in what mcisquerades as being universal or globally relevant, but which in fact 
represents special interests. Hlich prophetically warned against this decades ago: 
Professional imperialism triumphs even where political and economic 
domination has been broken... The knowledge-capitalism of professional 
imperialism subjugates people more imperceptibly than and as effectively as 
international finance and weaponry... The possibility of a convivial society 
depends therefore on a new consensus about the destructiveness of imperialism 
at three levels: the pernicious spread of one nation beyond its boundaries; the 
omnipresent influence of multinational corporations; and the mushrooming of 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



professional monopolies over production. Politics for convivial reconstruction of 

society must especially face imperialism on this third level, where it takes the 

form of professionalism. (nUch 1973: 56-7) 

nUch's 'convivial society' could be advanced through an Ecology of Languages 
paradigm. The professionalism he warns against permeates much ELT. The native 
speaker ideal is implemented in teaching materials that serve to flesh out native 
speaker norms in texts that project a culture-specific worldview. Martin Baik's PhD 
study analysed the cultural content of textbooks for English in the two Koreas 
(University of Illinois at Urbana, 1994, summarised in Baik & Shim 1995). It shows 
that in the case of South Korea, the textbooks are based on stereotyping: 
'embellishment' and 'glamorisation' project western Ufe-styles as 'objects of admiration 
and envy', all of which serves to 'dissimulate the cultural dominance of foreign 
nations, especially the United States and Britain', and to belittle other cultures. The 
conclusion is that In an age where foreign language learning hais become a survival 
skill, it becomes virtually everybody's business to review the cultural message of 
language textbooks with a more critical eye' (ibid.). 

Glenn Toh's PhD study (Curtin University of Technology, 1999) does just this. It 
scrutinises cultural bias, cultural and linguistic hierarchisation in 3 generations of 
English teaching textbooks in Singapore, and shows the inappropriacy of relying on 
native speaker models when Singaporean identity is to be strengthened. Through 
meticulous critical discourse analysis he shows that the language pedagogy of the 
textbooks has its origins in a western vision of the world eind is inedeemably 
eurocentric, hence incompatible with the contemporary social realities of Singapore 
and the wider world. His study confirms the analysis in a recent survey cirticle of 
English in Singapore by Makhan Tickoo: the language in education policy ensures that 
the language of school and government displaces the language of home and 
neighbourhood (Tickoo 1996: 444), official policy resulting in what he concludes is 'a 
debilitating dependence on native speaker models, a product of not just what 
PhilUpson sees as the five fallacies in ELT, but of what Skutnabb-Kangas calls 
'colonised consciousness' (ibid.: 449)^“. He adds that this may have seriously harmful 
consequences for national identity, with excessive dependence on exonormative 
English possibly leading to constraints on the development of innovation and 
creativity (ibid.). 

James Oladejo's study at Curtin University of Technology, reported on at the First 
English in Southeast Asia conference, analysed student attitudes to native and non- 
native teachers, and clearly demonstrated that naive unfounded assumptions about 
the superiority of the native speaker teacher had strong roots in the colonial past and 
current political and commercial relationships, and were ultimately grounded in the 
'continued global technological, economic, and political dominance of English and its 
native speakers', which he regards as the contemporary form of 'linguistic imperialism 
propef (Oladejo 1997: 178). 

Similar gate-keeping applies in North America, where, for instance a PhD by a 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 1 — global ENGLISH AMD LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



woman of Pakistani origin concludes that 'only a White accent qualifies one to be a 
native speaker' in Canada (Amin 1999: 97). This is from a fascinating book, 'Non- 
native educators in English Language Teaching', which explores the diversity and 
complexity of the experience of those cleissified as non-native speakers globally 
(Braine 1999). 

There is thus plenty of empirical evidence that the British and American variants 
of TESOL have taken over where colonial education left off, and are significant agents 
in the continuing maintenance of the dominance of English. Imperialism, linguistic, 
educational, or scientific — and these often interlock, not least in applied linguistics 
and ELT — involves an asymmetrical relationship, within a hierarchical structure 
which serves the interests of one party better than the others, meaning, at a more 
general level, an exploitative structure. The English 'haves' construct English as a 
global need. This is central to the mythology of global English. 



Appropriating English locally 

It would be presumptuous and misguided for me to now come up with a quick solution 
to a range of local English problems, but it is possible to identify a number of pointers 
and writers that can be helpful. The first need is to situate English in the wider 
linguistic ecology, globally and locally, and to see in what ways the logic of 
globalisation can be challenged, which of course it is being, continuously, by masses 
of NGO movements, by internet users of languages other than English, by critical 
scholars world-wide. Language policy, including the promotion of English, must be 
inspired by an equitable vision of how all languages can be permitted to flourish 
(Skutnabb-Kangas 2000a). If English is to be a force for democracy and human rights, 
much needs to change, in North countries as much as in the South, and in North- 
South relations. Language policy could and should play an important role in such a 
transition. 

The language policy of post-apartheid South Africa is an ambitious attempt to 
valorise all local language, hence the recognition of 11 official languages in the 
Constitution, as well as a commitment to support the maintenance of many others. 
The language policy was elaborated after a long consultation process, which also 
clarified the principles that should guide language policy, namely that it is part of 
general social policy, that languages need to be seen as resources rather than a 
problem, that learning your language is a basic human right, that it is the duty of the 
state to promote all the languages within its borders, and to educate people to 
appreciate multilingualism and demonstrate tolerance and understanding of other 
cultures^^ (LANGTAG 1996). Implementing such a policy is, of course, hugely 
demanding, granted the legacy of apartheid, and not least the 'blatant hegemony' of 
English, which the policy seeks to combat. 

Thiru Kandiah sees countries in the postcolonial world as trapped in a major 
contradiction. On the one hand, they need the 'indispensable global medium' for 



O 20 

ERLC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION; IDENTITY, POWER AMD EDUCATION 

2fi 



chapter 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



pragmatic purposes, even for survival in the global economy. On the other, there is 
the fact that the medium is not culturally or ideologically neutral, far from it, so that 
its users run the 'apparently unavoidable risk of co-option, of acquiescing in the 
negation of their own understcuidings of reality and in the accompeuiying denial or 
even subversion of their own interests' (forthcoming: 21-22). These two elements form 
a dialectic, the one inevitably entailing the other. What is therefore needed in relation 
to English is 'interrogating its formulations of reality, intervening in its modes of 
understcuiding, holding off its normalising tendencies, challenging its hegemonic 
designs and divesting it of the co-optive power which would render it a reproducing 
discourse' (ibid.). Kandiah advocates authentic local projections of reality, and 
emancipatory action. 

Suresh Canagarajah is also from Sri Lanka. His book (1999) on resisting linguistic 
imperialism is a path-breaking documentation of how English learning can function 
productively in ways that meet local needs. He anchors a detailed empirical study in 
a highly articulate theoretical perspective. The rich bottom-up language policy 
description and analysis shows how the classroom can serve genuinely emancipatory 
purposes. 

Jennifer Jenkins' book on the phonology of English cis eui international language 
(2000, the title echoing Alcistair Pennycook's book on the cultural politics of English 
as an international Icuiguage, 1994) explores the notion of a common core that is 
present in many forms of spoken English, whether as an LI or L2. Her purpose is to 
elaborate more realistic pedagogic goals for L2 learners of English than the rarefied 
version of a prestige variant of LI English pronunciation. The focus is on accent 
addition rather than the elimination of foreign accent^®, a principle that has much in 
common with additive as opposed to subtractive learning of languages. It is extremely 
significant that someone working with a key constituent of a language, namely its 
phonology, relates this explicitly to ideological debates about the role of English, and 
makes an explicit effort to theorise the appropriation of various types of endo- 
normative Englishes that represent a counterweight to hegemonic Anglo-American 
dominated English (as uncritically endorsed, for instance by David Crystal, 1997, with 
his plea for a Global Steuidard Spoken English). Her book lays some of the foundations 
for a pedagogy of appropriation. 

Her book therefore links up with Canagarajah's, one of the meuiy strengths of 
which is to explore student resistance in a marginalised community, and elaborate 
critical pedagogy strategies that Ceui productively build on Keuidiah's dialectic, the 
tension between accommodation and resistance, as a way of contributing to a social 
struggle for empowerment^^. 

Appropriating English while maintaining their vernaculars makes periphery 
subjects linguistically competent for the culturally hybrid modem world they 
confront. The maintencuice of polyvocality with a clear awareness of their own 
socio-ideological location empowers them to withstemd the totalitarian 
tendencies — of local nationalist regimes and Western multinational agencies — 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



enforced through uniformity of thought and communication. The simplest 
gestures of code-switching and linguistic appropriation in the pedagogical safe 
houses suggest the strategic ways by which discourses may be negotiated, 
intimating the resilient ability of human subjects to creatively fashion a voice 
for themselves from amidst the deafening channels of domination. (Canagaiajah 
1999: 197) 

This is a far cry from the universe of development aid. The admirable collection of 
papers 'Language and development. Teachers in a changing world' (Kenny and Savage 
1997) contains a fund of reflective analysis of the factors contributing to the triumphs 
and, more frequently, the failures of development aid projects. But what to me is most 
revealing is that the title of the book itself seems to assume that English is a panacea. 
'Language' in fact refers exclusively to English. 'Teachers' are teachers of English. This 
invisibilisation of the rest of the relevant languages is a re-nm of much colonial and 
post-colonial language-in-education poUcy, which, as is well known, has served 
European languages well and other languages much less well. It reflects investment 
being put into English, an infrcistructure and ideology that discursively construct 
English as the handmaiden of globalisation, the universal medium. 

The forces behind globalisation and the diffusion of English have massive 
resources to promote their cause, and have been successful in projecting a favourable 
image of themselves. Those who believe that all languages have value, and that use of 
one's mother tongue is a human right, need to be much more active in counteracting 
linguistic imperialism and creating favourable conditions for a viable, just Ecology of 
Languages. Perhaps both paradigms could be further elaborated so as to clcirify for 
language pedagogy precisely what the subtractive spread of English^® entails, euid how 
it can be counteracted. Learners need to develop receptive competence in many 
Englishes, beginning, of course, with local variants. Foreign experts are non-natives 
whose professionalism must build on deep knowledge of the culture in which they 
have chosen to work, which, among many other things, requires learning local 
languages. There are many individuals, globally and locally, who are working to make 
English serve more equitable purposes, which means that we have cause for feeling 
confident in addressing the major challenges that we face professionally. This is 
precisely why conferences of this kind are so important. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



Reference 



Agnihotri, Rama Keint & Amrit Lai Khanna, 1997, Problematizing English in India. Delhi: Sage. 

Alexcinder, Neville, 2000. Lcinguage policy eind planning in South Africa: some insights. In 
PhilUpson (ed.) 2000a: 170-173. 

Amin, Nuzhat, 1999, Minority women teachers of ESL: Negotiating white English. In Braine 
(ed.) 1999: 95-104. 

Ammon, Ulrich, 2000, Towards more fairness in international English: linguistic rights of 
non-native speakers? In PhilUpson (ed.) 2000a: 111-116. 

Anderson, Benedict, 1983, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the origin and spmad of 
nationalism. London: Verso. 

Baik, Martin & Rosa Shim, 1995, Language, culture, eind ideology in the textbooks of two 
Koreas. In Mackan L. Tickoo (ed.) Language and Culture in Multilingual Societies: Issues 
and attitudes. Singapore: Regional Language Center. 

Bailey, Richard W., 1992, Images of English: A cultural history of the language. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Barratt, LesUe & Edit H. Kontra, 2000, Native-English speaking teachers in cultures other 
them their own. TESOL Journal 9/3: 19-23. 

BoUtho, Rod & Peter Megyes, 2000, Talking shop: from aid to partnership. ELT Journal 54/4: 
379-386. 

Bourdieu, Pierre, 1991, Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge: PoUty press. (Tremslation of 
Ce que Parier Veut Dire: L'economie des echanges linguistiques. Paris: Fayard, 1982). 

Braine, George (ed.,) 1999, Non-native Educators in English Language Teaching. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Brown, Adam (ed.) 1997. English in Southeast Asia 96. Singapore: National Institute of 
Education, Nanyemg Technological Uruversity. 

Bugarski, Rcinko, 1998, Review of Crystal 1997. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Development, 90-92. 

Cemagarajah, Suresh A.. 1999, Resisting Linguistic Imperialism in English Teaching. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Christidis, A.-F. (ed.). 1999. "Strong” and "Weak” Languages in the European Union: Aspects of 
linguistic hegemonism. Proceedings of an international conference, Thessaloniki, 26-28 
March 1997. Thessaloniki: Centre for the Greek Language, 2 volumes. 

Crystal, David. 1997, English as a global language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Dasgupta, Probal, 1993, The Otherness of English: India's auntie tongue syndrome. Delhi: Sage. 

Davidsen-Nielsen, Niels, Erik Hansen & Pia Jarvad, 1999, Engelsk eller ikke engelsk? That is the 
question. Engelsk indflydelse pa dansk. Copenhagen: Gyldendal, 1999 (Demsk Sprognaevns 
Skrifter 28). 

Dendrinos, Bessie, 1999, The confUctual subjectivity of the periphery ELT practitioner. In 
Christidis (ed.), 711-717. 

Desai, Zubeida, 2000, Mother tongue education: the key to African language development? A 
conversation with an imagined South African audience. In PhilUpson (ed.) 2000a, 174- 
178. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




O' o 



CHAPTER 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



European Cultural Foundation 1999. Which Languages for Europe? Report of the conference 
held at Oegstgeest, the Netherlands, 8-11 October 1998. Amsterdam: European Cultural 
Foundation. 

Feld, Stacy Amity, 1998, Language and the globalization of the economic market: the 

regulation of language as a barrier to free trade. Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law, 
31: 153-202. 

Fishman, Joshua A., Andrew W. Conrad & Alma Rubal-Lopez (eds.), 1996, Post-imperial 

English. Status change in former British and American colonies, 1940-1990. BerUn & New 
York: Mouton de Gru 3 rter. 

Graddol, David, 1997, The Future of English? London: The British Council. 

Heugh, Kathleen, 2000, Giving good weight to multilingualism in South Africa. In PhilUpson 
(ed.) 2000a, 234-238. 

Hoffman, Eva, 1989, Lost in Translation. A life in a new language. London: Minerva. 

HUch, Ivan, 1973, Toob for Conviviality. London: Fontana. 

Jenkins, Jennifer, 2000, The Phonology of English as an International Language. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Kachru, Braj B., 1997, World Englishes and EngUsh-using communities. Annual Review of 
Applied Linguistics, 17: 67-87. 

Kandiah, Thiru (forthcoming). Whose meanings? Probing the dialectics of English as a global 
language. In Robbie Goh et al. (eds.) Arieb — Departures and Returns: A Festschrift for 
Edwin Thumboo. 

Kenny, Brian & William Savage (eds.), 1997, Language and Development: Teachers in a changing 
world. Harlow and New York: Addison Wesley Longman. 

Kirkpatrick, Andy, 2000, English as an Asian language. The Guardian Weekly, November 16-22, 
Learning English supplement: 3. 

Kontra, Miklos, 1997, English linguistic and cultural imperialism and teacher training in 

Hungary. Report on the 2nd ELT Conference on Teacher Training in the Carpathian Euro- 
region, Debrecen, Hungary, 25-27 April 1997. Budapest: British Council, English 
Language Teaching Contacts Scheme: 83-88. 

Leger, Sylvie (ed.), 1996, Vers un Agenda Linguistique: Regard futuriste sur les nations unies. 
Towards a Language Agenda: Futurist outlook on the United Nations. Ottawa: Canadian 
Centre for Linguistic Rights, University of Ottawa: 1996. 

LANGTAG, 1996, Towards a National Language Plan for South Africa. Report of the Language 
Plan Task Group. Pretoria: Ministry of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology. 

Lummis, Douglas, no date, English conversation as ideology. In Essays on Language, 1-26. 

Melander, Bjorn (ed.), 2000, Svensk i EU (Swedish in the EU), Uppsala: Hallgren & Fallgren. 

Mitsikopoulou, Vassiliki, 1999, ELT Discourse: The professional article and the construction of ELT 
professional identities. PhD. thesis; Faculty of English Studies, University of Athens, 
Greece. 

Mufwene, Salikoko S., 1997, The legitimate and illegitimate offspring of English. In Smith & 
Forman (eds.) 1997: 182-203. 

Miihlhausler, Peter, 1996, Linguistic Ecology. Language change and linguistic imperialism in the 
Pacific region. London: Routledge. 





24 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



Ngugi wa Thiong'o, 1993, Moving the Centre: The struggle for cultural freedoms. London: James 
Currey; Nairobi: EAEP, Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Nunberg, Gerald, 1997, lingo-jingo, English only and the new nativism. The American 
Prospect, July- August 1997: 40-47. 

Oda, Masaki, 2000, Linguicism in action: language and power in academic institutions. In 
PhilUpson (ed.) 2000a: 117-121. 

Oladejo, James, 1997, The non-native teacher in the native environment: Students' attitudes 
and teachers' strategies in the ESL/EFL classroom. In Brown (ed.) 1997: 166-180. 

Parakrama, Aquna, 1995, De-hegemonizing Language Standards: Learning from (post)colonial 
Englishes about 'English'. Basingstoke and New York: Macmillan. 

Pennycook, Alastair 1994, The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language. Harlow: 
Longman. 

Pennycook, Alastair, 1998, English and the Discourses of Colonialism. London & New York: 
Routledge. 

PhilUpson, Robert, 1992, Linguistic Imperialism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

PhilUpson, Robert, 1999a, Review of Fishman, Conrad & Rubal-Lopez (eds.). 1996. Language, 
lS/2: 165-168. 

PhilUpson, Robert, 1999b, Voice in global English: Unheard chords in Crystal loud and clear. 
Review article on Crystal 1997. Applied Linguistics, 20/2: 265-276. 

PhilUpson, Robert (ed.), 2000a, Rights to Language: Equity, power, and education. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 

PhilUpson, Robert, 2000b, English in the new world order: variations on a theme of linguistic 
imperiaUsm and 'world' English. In Tom Ricento (ed.) Ideology, Politics and Language 
Policies: Focus on English. Amsterdam: John Benjcimins: 87-106. 

PhilUpson, Robert, 2001, EngUsh, or no to EngUsh in Scandinavia? English Today, \1/1. 

PhilUpson, Robert 8i Tove Skutnabb-Kangas, 1999, EngUshisation: One dimension of 

globaUsation, English in a Changing World, AILA Review, David Graddol 8i Ulrike Meinhoff 
(eds.), 13: 17-36. 

Posey, Darrell A. (ed.), 1999, Cultural and Spiritual Values of Diversity: A complementary 
contribution to the global diversity assessment. London: Intermediate Technology 
PubUcations, for the United Nations Environmental Programme. 

Pym, Anthony, 2000, The European Union and its future languages: Questions for language 
poUcies and translation theories. Across Languages and Cultures, 1/1: 1-18. 

Smith, Larry E. 8i Michael L. Forman (eds.), 1997, World Englishes 2000. Honolulu: University 
of Hawai'i Press. 

Rajan, Rajeswari Sunder (ed.), 1992a, The Lie of the Land: English literary studies in India. 
Delhi. Oxford University Press. 

Rajan, Rajeswari Sunder, 1992b, Brokering EngUsh studies: The British Council in India. In 
Rajan (ed.) 1992a: 130-155. 

Rahman, Tariq, 1999, Language, Education and Culture. Karachi; Oxford University Press. 

Skutnabb-Kangas, Tove, 2000a, Linguistic Genodde in Education — or Worldwide Diversity and 
Human Rights? Mahwah, New Jersey & London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



25 




chapter 1 — GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANUUAUt PULlCltS 



Skutnabb-Kangas, Tove, 2000b, Linguistic human rights and teachers of English. In Hall, Joan 
Kelly & Eggington, WilUam G. (eds). The Sodopolitics of English Language Teaching. 
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters: 22-44. 

Spack, Ruth, 1997, The rhetorical constructions of multilingual students. TESOL Quarterly 
31/4: 765-774. 

Swales, John M., 1997, English as Tyrannosaurus Rex'. World Englishes 16/3: 373-382. 

Tickoo, Makhan, 1996, Fifty years of English in Singapore: All gains, (a) few losses? In 
Fishman, Conrad & Rubal-Lopez (eds.) 1996: 431-455. 

Toh, Glenn Koon Peng, 1999, Primary School English Textbooks in Singapore: An examination of 
cultural and ideological content. PhD thesis. School of Education, Curtin University of 
Technology, Perth, Australia. 

Tonkin, Humphrey, 1996, Language hierarchy at the United Nations. In Leger (ed.), 

1996: 3-28. 

Tsuda, Yukio, 1994, The Diffusion of English: Its Impact on Culture and Communication. Keio 
Communication Review 16: 49-61. 

Widdowson, H.G., 1997, EIL, ESL, EFL: global issues and local interests. Wodd Englishes 16/1: 
135-146. 

Wright, Sue, 2000, Community and Communication: The role of language in nation state building 
and European integration. Qevedon: Multilingual Matters. 



Notes 

1 Questioning western dominance is a recurrent theme in Kachru's work, see, e.g., Kachru 1997. 

2 The concept of an official language in supra-statal organisations dates from the early years of the 
League of Nations, when French and English were granted equal status, and in so doing established 
The fiction — that a text written in language' can be rendered into any number of languages' and 
that the resultant renderings are entirely equal as to meaning' (Tonkin 1996: 14). The same principle 
of textual equivalence applies in the European Union, with in theory the 'same' semantic content 
being expressed in the 11 official languages. Anyone familiar with translation processes and products 
knows that squaring the circle of conceptual, cultural and linguistic difference is a utopian ideal that 
is remote from how different realities operate. For instance the legal systems in each of the 15 
member states of the European Union have evolved in uniquely distinct ways and texts can never 
mean precisely 'the same' in each language and culture. According to a EU translator, 'the "equal 
value" of all translations is a legal fiction necessary for multilingual EU legislation to work' (Pym 
2000: 7). Many constitutions specify particular languages as official, meaning their use in 
government, the courts, obligatory education etc, but this role can scarcely be what is envisaged for 
English in Japan or Korea. 

3 See Phillipson 1992, chapter 7; 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION.,; IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



chapter 1 - GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAGE POLICIES 



4 This phrase was first used in relation to Afrikaans by Neville Alexander, a key figure in South African 
language policy, 

5 On shortcomings of this kind in Crystal 1997, see Phillipson 1999b, Graddol 1997 brings many fields 
together, but is also not firmly anchored in social theory, 

6 This term relates to parts of the world occupied by Europeans, the Americas, Australasia, and South 
Africa. 

7 Ngugi wa Thiong'o, the Kenyan novelist, and a key thinker in the study of linguistic oppression, 
encapsulates the issues vividly (1993: xvi, 35): 'A new world order that is no more than a global 
dominance of neo-colonial relations policed by a handful of Western nations,, , is a disaster for the 
peoples of the world and their cultures', 

8 I have reviewed the book in the journal Language, Phillipson 1999a, 

9 Students of foreign languages in Britain spend a year abroad during their studies as language 
assistants' teaching English, for which they have minimal preparation. As part of the British Council's 
contribution to the European Year of Languages, 2200 of these assistants are being supported in a 
programme that aims to strengthen the 'teaching and promotion of English language and British 
culture' Among the strategic objectives of this scheme is to 'create positive image of the UK (and use 
assistants as ambassadors for UK higher education)'. Reported on the mailing list of the British 
Association of Applied Linguistics, 3 November 2000, 

10 Reported on the British Coundl's ELTECS electronic list and annual reports, 

11 Quoted in the Guardian Weekly, 16-22 November, Supplement on Learning English, 

12 Korea Times, 4 October 2000, 

13 The final paragraphs of Crystal 1997 (139-140) speculate on whether English will eliminate all other 
languages, which he considers would be an intellectual disaster, whereas his alternative scenario, the 
global triumph of English, is: Tn 500 years' time, will it be the case that everyone will automatically 
be introduced to English as soon as they are bom.,,?,,. It may be that English, in some shape or form, 
will find itself in the service of the world community for ever,' See my review article, Phillipson 1999b, 
and Phillipson 2000b, 

14 The Swedish language board produced an action plan to strengthen Swedish in view of the threat 
from English. Their document drew on a lengthy consultation process and the work of sub- 
commissions on Swedish in school, Swedish in higher education and research, Swedish in the media 
and publishing, Swedish in the workplace and commerce, and Swedish and information technology. 
There has also been lively debate in the press, and the Swedish government has decided to start 
implementation. The action plan makes a series of very concrete recommendations for how Swedish 
can be strengthened so that it remains fully functional in Sweden and in EU institutions. The 
proposals cover a huge range of topics, consumer information, advisory services to improve clarity of 
texts, teacher education, the training of translators and interpreters, the availability of scientific 
information in Swedish as well as English, improving the teaching of Swedish as a second language, 
etc. It is also visionary: it assumes that Swedes need real competence in both Swedish and English 
as well as having access to other languages, it specifies many research and development needs, it 
stresses how competence in the national language and in foreign languages can strengthen 
democracy, it is constructive and forward-looking rather than restrictive and defensive. It suggests 
how domestic legislation and a more proactive policy in the EU can lead to a healthy multilingual 
balance and ensure that Swedish interests are maximally promoted. It is available on the internet in 
Swedish, and also in a Danish translation in Davidsen-Nielsen, Hansen & Jarvad 1999 (reviewed at 
some length in Phillipson 2001). See also Melander 2000. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: C0MMUNIC/^(1|J, 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ?7 



CHAPTER 1 ““ GLOBAL ENGLISH AND LOCAL LANGUAOt I'ULlClt^ 



15 Funds for this were approved at a meeting in Copenhagen on 24 November 2000 of the language 
policy committee of the Nordic Ministerial Council. 

16 Ranko Bugarski, a Yugoslav/Serbian Professor of English and Linguistics, writes that 'as a non- native 
speaker who has used English almost daily for decades I tend to get inaeasingly reluctant to engage 
in protracted serious argument with native speakers over subtle non-professional — e.g. 
philosophical or political — issues ... I would not be surprised to learn that other people in my 
category have at times experienced a similar uneasiness' (1998). Bessie Dendrinos, Professor of 
English at the University of Athens, has expressed a comparable feeling, facility of communication 
in the mother tongue being of a different order (private communication). 

17 There is a substantial literature on many aspects of European Union language policy. Fbr general 
surveys see European Cultural Foundation 1999 and Wright 2000. 

18 These figures are cited in Pym 2000. 

19 Feld recommends precisely this (1998: 199): It is worthwhile to consider whether the EU should 
answer the call for uniformity on the issue of language business transactions and further protect 
itself against the potential onslaught of language regulation by each individual Member State. One 
potential action the EU might take would be to declare a common language in the EU market. 

20 See his pioneer work on the origins and nature of nationalism, 1983. 

21 Rahman's alternative is: 'The use of indigenous languages may help to bring about modernization 
it can hardly be resisted — without also bringing in Westernization' (Rahman 1999: 293). 

22 'The bo's low-key approach in cultural diplomacy, less strident than propaganda, succeeds to a great 
extent in establishing goodwill and winning acceptance among Indians... The BCs commitment to 
English language propaganda ensures its entry into mar^ spheres of Indian life, its interaction with 
government policy in language issues, as well as a modest influence on teaching in schools, colleges, 
and training institutions (Rajan 1992b: 154). Such activities are increasing, to judge by information 
on the British Council's ELTECS list. 

23 Specifically there is resentment of the unequal relationship between North American researchers and 
their Hungarian 'partners'. See the special issue of replika: Colonisation or partnership? Eastern Europe 
and western social sciences, 1996. 1 am grateful to Mikl6s Kontra for drawing my attention to this. 

24 The term derives from Franz Fanon's analysis of colonised and post-colonial societies. 

25 See the articles by Alexander, Desai, and Heugh in Phillipson 2000a. 

26 The idea of accent adding is borrowed from Olle Kjellin, Jenkins 2000: 209. 

27 For several examples of this in bilingual education in a wide range of contexts, see the contributions 
to Phillipson 2000a, in particular those by Cummins, Peura, Taylor, and Wink & Wink. 

28 Tove Skutnabb-Kangas was the first to propose changing the Diffusion of English paradigm into a 
Subtractive Spread of English paradigm. She has specific recommendations for teachers of English in 
Skutnabb-Kangas 2000b. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



Hong Kong parents' preference for English- 
medium education: passive victims of 
imperialism or active agents of 
pragmatism? 



David Li 

City University of Hong Kong 



This paper addresses the question: l/Vby is there such a strong desire 
among Hong Kong parents for their children to be educated in 
English?'. Previous accounts point to 'English linguistic imperialism' 
(PhilUpson 1992) and the hegemony of the cultural construct of 
English as a result of discourses of colonialism (Pennycook 1998). The 
paper will critically assess the extent to which these claims are 
applicable to Hong Kong, a former British colony from 1842 to 1997. 

It will do this by first examining the macro-poUtical history of Hong 
Kong to show that it has been looked upon as a refuge and haven for 
successive waves of refugee-immigrants from mainland China. While 
some official documents show that linguistic imperialism similar to 
that in other former British colonies did exist in nineteenth-century 
Hong Kong, there is Uttle evidence of the British trying to impose 
their way of Ufe on the local people. British colonial rule in the 
twentieth century was generally regarded as benevolent, and the 
colonial government was in effect as good as practicable (Tsang 1997). 
The lack of identification with the mainland Chinese government after 
1949, coupled with separate political, economic and cultural 
developments led to the emergence of 'Hong Kong identity' among the 
Hong Kong bom generations. To enhance one's competitiveness in the 
job market as well as to prepare oneself for uncertainties in the 
political future of Hong Kong, English was looked upon as an 
important asset relative to the goal of 'upward and outward mobility' 
(So 1992). It is therefore misleading and inaccurate to see those 
Hongkongers who are positively inclined toward learning English as 
victims of the hegemony of this former cotonial language; rather, they 
are pragmatically-minded people acting on their own best interests. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 - HONG KONG PARENTS’ PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Introduction 

“This is a Chinese city, a very Chinese city, with British characteristics." 

(Last Governor Chris Patten's farewell speech, June 30, 1997. Cited in Vines 
1998: 11) 

I feel greatly honored to be here, to speak to you about a topic that has direct 
relevance to one of the main themes of this conference, and at the same time, a topic 
that has been on my mind for over two years, namely, to what extent does Prof. 
Robert Phillipson's notion of English linguistic imperialism in his (1992) book apply 
to Hong Kong, and to what extent are Chinese Hongkongers victims of the hegemony 
of English — am unwanted legacy left by the British to the people of Hong Kong — 
as Alastair Pennycook argues in his (1998) book English and the Discourses of 
Colonialism. I found both monographs fascinating. But the more I think about these 
research questions, the more I feel that, while there is much truth in their claims, 
somehow, in the case of Hong Kong at least, the picture they portrayed is incomplete 
because there are a few crucial pieces missing in the puzzle. To track down the exact 
nature of this missing link was what motivated me in writing this paper. 

The paper has two main objectives. First, it is a modest attempt to address two 
complementary research questions; 

• To what extent does 'English linguistic imperialism' apply to Hong Kong? and 

• To what extent are Chinese Hongkongers victims of the hegemony of English — 
an unwanted legacy left by the British colonizers to the people of Hong Kong? 

Second, the findings to these two questions will be used to assess the degree of 
universality of the theory of English linguistic imperialism (Phillipson 1992) and the 
continued hegemony of English in postcolonial Hong Kong (Pennycook 1998). 
Implications will then be drawn regarding the theoretical adequacy of linguistic 
imperialism as a general accoimt of the spread of English worldwide. It will be argued 
that the theory is inadequate to the extent that the demand side of the story — the 
recisons and motivations for learning English — is left out of the picture. It is hoped 
that a better understanding of these reasons and motivations will shed light on the 
learners' love-hate complex', or, the concomitant psychological attachment to, as well 
as detachment from, English. 



English Linguistic ImperiaUsm and the Hegemony of 
English in the Postcolonial Era 

Recently, there have been a great deal of critical reflections and research on the 
theories and practices of ELT. Central to these reflections is the theory of linguistic 
imperialism put forward by Robert Phillipson (1992, 1994, 1997, 1998). Imperialism 
is propelled by exploitation, penetration, fragmentation, and marginalization. It takes 
different forms, for example, economic, political, military, cultural and social. 
Linguistic imperialism, which is subsumed under cultural imperialism, is the most 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 — hong KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



powerful and salient because it "permeates all other types of imperialism, since 
Icuiguage is the means used to mediate euid express them" (Phillipson 1992: 65). From 
the ideological point of view, English linguistic imperialism is one excunple of 
linguicism, a notion which is based on Skutnabb-Keuigais & Phillipson (1986) eUid 
defined as: 

ideologies, structures, and practices which are used to legitimate, effectuate, 
and reproduce an unequal division of power and resources (both material and 
immaterial) between groups which are defined on the beisis of language 
(Phillipson 1992: 47; cf. Skutnabb-Kangas 1988: 13). 

The thrust of Phillipson's (1992) argument is that in the postcolonial era — in the 
last phase of English linguistic imperialism — the ex-colonizers need not be physically 
present in the Periphery countries, for there is a group of indigenous English-educated 
elite who identify totally with the ex-colonizers' Anglocentric beliefe eUid values, 
typically through studying in a 'Centre' country, and, out of their own vested interests 
willingly serve as agents assisting in the domination of English in their home 
countries at the expense of the natural use euid development of the indigenous 
lcuiguage(s). The Centre countries, especially UK euid USA, exercise imperialist control 
and power using 'ideas' — in place of 'sticks' euid 'ceurots' as in the earlier phases of 
colonialism — by dictating the norms of 'standard' English to which all learners of 
English in Periphery countries must adhere. 

To explain why the people in former colonies do not put up a fight to stop the 
continued domination of English, Phillipson (1992) draws on the Gramscian notion of 
'hegemony', which prevails in the third and last stage of imperialism called "neo-neo- 
colonialism". In his own words: 

The sophistication of the arguments grows on a scale advancing firom the use of 
force to the use of carrots to the use of ideas. At one stage, the colonial power 
could use coercion when selling one of its products, English. When the 
counterpart became slightly more equal, and brute force could no longer be 
applied or was no longer an ethically acceptable alternative, Ceurots were more 
suitable. But the ideal way to make people do what you Wcuit is of course to 
make them want it themselves, and to make them believe that it is good for 
them. This simplifies the role of the 'seller', who then can appear as 'helping' or 
'giving aid', rather than 'forcing' or 'bargaining with' the victim. (Phillipson 
1992: 286) 

An implicit assumption of a hegemonic view and analysis of the global spread of 
English is that people in the Periphery countries have been brain-washed, to the 
extent of uncritically accepting an ideology imposed upon them. Their craving and 
demand for English is seen as an act of mindless submission to a 'false consciousness', 
rather than an autonomous, informed decision in their own best interests. Such an 
assumption has been criticized as simplistic (Bisong 1995). How valid is the Gramscian 
notion of hegemony in explaining Chinese Hongkongers' strong desire to learn English 
is a question that we will come back to later. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Another scholar, Alastair Pennycook, holds a leirgely similar view but takes a 
slightly different slant in his (1998) book on the discourses of colonialism using Hong 
Kong as one major focus of illustration. Perhaps the strongest claim he makes is that 
the hegemoruc role of English — itself a cultural construct, a tool as much as a 
product of coloruaUsm — is aUve and well today. One does not have to go very far to 
look for it; it is in ELT classrooms, manifested in the choice of medium of instruction, 
textbook and teaching material, teaching methods, preferred teacher-student 
interaction patterns, and all assumptions underlying who are the best qualified to 
teach English on the basis of the native/non-native distinction. All these ideologically 
chcirged practices, mind-sets and values, or 'cultural constructs of coloruaUsm as 
Pennycook calls them, continue to prevail today as a result of allegedly research-based 
expert opinions of appUed Unguists from Centre countries, who are virtually neo- 
coloniaUsts in disguise. like PhilUpson (1992), Pennycook (1998) maintains that the 
experts' views are in turn informed by earUer 'academic' studies of indigenous cultures 
conducted by coloniaUsts — colonial studies which did much to create and reinforce 
a 'Self vs. Othef distinction. In Pennycook's own words: 

The history of the ties between ELT and colonialism has produced images of the 
Self and Other, understandings of English and of other languages and cultures 
that still play a major role in how EngUsh language teaching is constructed and 
practised: from the native speaker/non-native speaker dichotomy to the images 
constructed around English as a global language and the assumptions about 
learners' cultures, much of ELT echoes with the cultural constructions of 
colonialism. (Pennycook 1998: 19) 

Pennycook refuses to accept any suggested benefits that colonialism might bring, on 
the grounds that such views "downplay the background of colorual exploitation, 
disdain and racism and stress instead a history of colorual benevolence, stability and 
docility" (Pennycook 1998: 103). The two historical aspects that constitute the focus 
of his "more complex treatment of coloruaUsm" (p. 102) cue: 

• the damage brought about by the opium trade was much greater than what 
British historieuis were willing to acknowledge; and 

• the poUtical stabiUty in Hong Kong and the dociUty of its colonial subjects are 
historical myths. 

His observation about the damage of opium to the Chinese nation and people is well 
t ak en. On the other hand, his analysis of social movements presented as evidence of 
the indigenous population's resistance against colonial rule is not entirely accurate 
a problem which is probably related to the selection of Uterature that informs his 
theory. Pennycook (1998) purposely excluded two types of Uterature within its 
purview. First, colonial history written by British historians which he considered 
biased auid unrepresentative of what 'really' happened to the people in the colony, 
which in his view manifests most clearly in the micro-poUtics of everyday Ufe (see 
Chapter 4, 'Opium and Riots: EngUsh and Chinese'; see also pp. 25f for examples of 
"the interaction of the personal and the colonial"); second, historical narratives and 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION', IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

37 



LHAPTKR 2 — hong KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



socio-political analyses largely occcisioned by Hong Kong's political transition in 1997. 
The main reason he gives for ignoring these two types of literature is that such 
historical narratives tend to reproduce a British view of colonial history. 

I found Pennycook's (1998) omission of the 'grand historical narratives' somewhat 
unfortunate, for in a Ccise Uke Hong Kong, a lot of valuable insights regarding the 
colonial subjects' behaviours, beliefs, attitudes and values vis-a-vis the colonial 
government would be missed if the macro -political situation is not taken into account. 
In effect, I eun arguing that Pennycook (1998) hcis not gone deep enough to achieve 
the goal of "gaining a more complex graisp of the paist" (p. 126). The complexification 
of history — in the direction of unpacking how macro-political history influences 
micro-political behaviours, beliefs, attitudes and values — is what I intend to do in 
this paper, in order to address the two main research questions stated earlier. 



British rule in Hong Kong: benevolent government 

Before going into the colonial history of Hong Kong, let us look at a few facts about 
Hong Kong at the dawn of a new millennium:^ 

• Just over 400 square miles, 'Greater Hong Kong' (Hong Kong island, Kowloon 
peninsula. New Territories, plus over 230 outlying islands) is home to over 6.7 
million people, of which over 98 percent are ethnic Chinese. Most of the daily 
necessities have to be imported. 

• "At retrocession [on July 1, 1997] Hong Kong will have a level of prosperity 
greater than that of most independent countries... Hong Kong currently stands 
as Asia's leading financial centre, and has the world's busiest container port. It is 
at present China's major gateway to the economies of the Asia-Pacific and beyond 
that to the global economy." (Brown & Foot 1997: 2-3) 

• For decades, most Hong Kong Chinese parents have preferred their children to be 
educated in English; this preference has barely changed in the postcolonial era. 

Of interest to us are two questions: Why is English so strongly embraced by Hong Kong 
Chinese parents? How do we explain their receptiveness to English and, to a large 
extent, their general preference for their children to be educated in English? I hope 
to be able to show that an important key for explaining Hongkongers' craving for 
English is to be found in the socio-political history of the colony. There is general 
consensus among historians, Hong Kong Chinese as well cis western, that there is little 
evidence of the colonial government attempting to impose the British way of life on 
Hong Kong Chinese colonial subjects. This observation is crucial in bringing home a 
second, more crucial argument, which is of immediate relevance to the main theme of 
this conference concerning the power of English, namely, that there is little evidence 
of the British colonial government attempting — in a wholesale and systematic 
manner — to impose English on Hong Kong society, or to supplant the language 
functions of Cantonese/Chinese in the domains where they prevailed. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PRHPHKENCt hUK tuuv*Aiiuw 



In what follows, where possible, I will let the voices of these authors speak for 
themselves by quoting their words verbatim. Heeding Pennycook's concern, I was 
particularly careful not to fall into the trap of reproducing views that glorify British 
colonial rule in Hong Kong gratuitously. Instead, I made a point of looking for, and 
cross-checking, every single claim made by British historians — by reading into 
colonial histories written by Hong Kong Chinese historians, both in English and in 
Chinese. 

Of course, invoking history as evidence begs a number of questions such as 'which 
history?', euid 'whose version of it'? Michel Foucault (1980), (Rabinow 1984) has 
demonstrated that the authoritativeness and orthodoxy of knowledge is far from being 
ideologically neutral. Rather, both are manifestations of power, which is created, 
instituted and transmitted largely through discourse. One revealing example is 
Tulviste & Wertsch's (1994) study of how, as a result of major upheavals in the former 
Soviet Union in the early 1990s, the historical narratives of Estonia underwent radical 
reorganization from official structural versions to unofficial (or folk), personal 
narrative versions (cf. Scollon & Scollon 1999: 58; see also Ahonen 1997, Scollon 
1999). Hence there is a good reason to believe that whoever writes history is likely to 
be defending the interests of the group the historian belongs to, and presenting and 
analyzing events from the point of view of that group. In other words, it would be 
illusory to expect historical narratives to be entirely objective and bias-free. It is not 
surprising, therefore, that an 'official history' of Hong Kong — in English or in Chinese 
— written by mainleuid scholars provides a rather different, ideologically loaded 
perspective and analysis of historical events, leading naturally to a very different set 
of observations and conclusions. The colonial history of Hong Kong written by 
mainland scholars tends to emphasize British oppression, the cruelty and inhumane 
nature of the penal code in the nineteenth century, discriminatory measures against 
Chinese inhabiteuits, trade union movement and social riots, organized trading and 
exporting of Chinese coolies, etc. (e.g. Yuan 1987, Liu 1997, Yang et al. 1997). In 
short, little or nothing positive is said about British rule (but see Yu & liu 1994). 

It is not always an easy task to decide whether a certain viewpoint is credible and 
sufficiently substantiated by evidence. One must therefore exercise maximum caution 
in the selection of viewpoints. For the purpose of this study, the viewpoints are 
essentially based on those presented in the works of Hong Kong Chinese and European 
historians and social scientists, both in English and in Chinese. This is justified by two 
main reasons: (a) unlike the mainland scholars who were either entrusted or 
personally inspired to do the task of producing a politically correct history of Hong 
Kong, the European and Hong Kong Chinese scholars dted are comparatively free from 
ideological constraints; and (b) unlike the mainland authors, most of the European 
and Hong Kong authors have lived in Hong Kong at some time, and so I believe their 
accounts and analyses are more likely to reflect the collective concerns and 
experiences of Hongkongers.^ 

A survey of the colonial history of Hong Kong from 1842 to 1997 shows that there 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

39 



CHAFTtK 2 — ttONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



is remarkable consensus, on the part of both Hong Kong Chinese and western scholars, 
that Hong Kong was untypical of other colonies. Most of them agree that Hong Kong's 
long, peutly dramatic decolonization process defies the general pattern elsewhere, of 
how colonial rule progressively yielded to indigenous, often more enlightened, 
governments. One article opens with the following remarks: 

Hong Kong confronts historians of decolonization with an embarrassing puzzle: 
the deviant that breaks all the rules; the colonial recidivist demanding more 
oppression.... Hong Kong's political history makes nonsense of the decolonising 
process as it is usually imagined. (Darwin 1997:16) 

Two pages further, the author contrasts the decolonization process of Hong Kong with 
that of other colonies in Africa and Asia as follows: 

Here indeed is a colony where colonial status still seems to be embraced with 
enthusiasm. In conventional accounts of the colonial period in Africa and Asia, 
colonial rule passes, after the initial shock of conquest, through a golden era of 
acquiescence and collaboration before entering an age of increasing turbulence 
and eventual breakdown. Hong Kong's history since 1898 almost exactly reverses 
this progression. The Sturm und Drang of its history in the first half of this 
century gave way to a high noon of colonial stability (by Hong Kong's standards) 
from 1950 until the 1990s. (Darwin 1997: 18) 

A few other titles of articles and monographs suggest that Hong Kong's decolonization 
process is indeed "sui generis", a conspicuous exception to "the colonial 
disengagement syndrome" (Darwin 1997: 17f). A short illustrated history of Hong 
Kong goes by the title 'Hong Kong: The colony that never was' (Birch 1991). Likewise, 
the Hong Kong Chinese historian Steve TscUig wrote an article that becus the title, 
'Government and politics in Hong Kong: A colonial peuadox' (Tsang, 1997a). The 
'paradox of British imperial rule', as Tsang calls it, Ues in the fact that, despite the 
Crown Colony being dominated by an autocratic government vested with necU- 
absolute power, by the early 1980s the colonial administration in Hong Kong delivered 
"as good a government as practicable" in the political tradition of China. Tsang argues 
that "the mainstay of the Chinese political tradition is Confucianism eis modified over 
the ages" (p. 63). According to The Analects, good government should be entrusted to 
gentlemen-offidals headed by a sage-king, whose mission is to uphold and promote 
the five virtues cind suppress the four evils. The five Confucian virtues were for the 
gentleman-officials: 

• to bring to the people benefits instead of drudgery; 

• to work for the people without complaint; 

• to pursue the right cause and not succumb to advancing self-interest; 

• to promote prosperity without becoming arrogant; and 

• to maintain dignity and authority without being harsh. 

(Tsang 1997a: 63) 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



Tsang goes on to point out that such an ideal government never existed in the history 
of China. In the colonial administration of Hong Kong, however, the Chinese residents 
found most of these Confucian merits, whereby colonial officials could be Ukened to 
upright Confucian gentlemen-officials, acting paternally but benevolently for the 
interests of the people. In Tsang's own words: 

The irony of British imperial rule is that, while it was originally devised with 
relatively little regard to what the local Chinese population wanted, it did in 
time come to meet all the basic requirements of 'as good a government as 
possible' in the Chinese political tradition. This was achieved not by the method 
prescribed by Confucius and his disciples over two millennia, namely the setting 
up of a government composed of Confucian gentlemen-officials. The British did 
not set out to fulfil this Chinese aspiration. Nevertheless, after a century and a 
half the administration they set up would meet the basic conditions for such a 
government, viz., efficiency, fairness, honesty, benevolent paternalism, and 
non-intrusion into the lives of ordinary people. (Tsang 1997a: 66) 

Tsang hails this eis "an achievement which heudly any Chinese government has 
achieved at leaist since the days of Confucius (c.551-479 BC)" (Tsang 1997a: 62). A 
very simileU view is expressed by a Hong Kong Chinese columnist, Tsang Ki-fan, cited 
in Stephen Vines's (1998) analysis of The imperial legac/ : 

despite the lack of democracy, Britain presided over 'the only Chinese society 
that, for a brief span of less than a hundred years, lived through an ideal never 
realised at any time in the history of Chinese societies'. (Cited in Vines 1998: 67) 

But to understand why British rule was found attractive and generally appreciated by 
most Hong Kong Chinese throughout the colonial era, one must turn to history for a 
fuller explanation. For our purposes, the following sub-themes will be discussed in 
some detail: 

• Who were/cue Chinese Hongkongers? 

• What Weis the relationship between the colonizers and the colonized? 

• How euid under what circumstances did Hongkongers develop a 'Hong Kong 
identity'? 

Let us begin with the first sub-theme: Who were the colonial subjects of Hong Kong? 
How did the 'barren rock' in 1842 with barely several thousand inhabitants emerge as 
a densely populated metropolis of over 6.5 million people at the end of the colonial 
era, and one of the most important international financial centres in the world? If 
Hongkongers did not originate from Hong Kong, where did they come from and why 
did they come to settle here? To answer these questions, we need to look at 
population movements in two periods: 1840s to 1940s, and 1950s to the present. 



41 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAFTEK 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Chinese Hongkongers (1840s — 1940s) 



When the British first arrived, the indigenous population was made up of several 
thousand, mainly fishermen, faumers, stone-cutters and some pirates as well. During 
the first hundred years of its colonial history, Hong Kong was mainly inhabited by 
ethnic Chinese who came from the Mainland for economic reasons, especially ais 
traders, while others came to try their luck at the local job market, working as coolies 
for example; still others went overseas via the port of Hong Kong, which by the end 
of the nineteenth century had already developed into one of the most important ports 
in the world (Endacott 1973: 274; Yee 1999: 15f). The vast majority of Chinese and 
foreigners there were "temporcirily resident traders and artisans euid not settlers" 
(Endacott 1973: 121). In terms of ethnic background, at no time in the recorded 
history of Hong Kong were the Chinese outnumbered. From the point of view of ethnic 
composition, therefore, Hong Kong has always been a predominantly Chinese city. 

The rapid expansion of the Hong Kong population was krgely the result of 
successive waves of refugees fleeing political instability, social unrest and natural 
disasters in the Mainland. Up until 1949, Hong Kong's colonial history coincided with 
an extended period of political turmoil in China. In addition to political upheaval 
which made life already very difficult in the Mainland, the Chinese residing in South 
China had to cope with natural disasters such as flooding. As Welsh points out, 
refugees came "from all parts of China to this British colony in search of security and 
prosperity" (Welsh 1993: 5, cf. Lam 1978, Lau & Kuan 1988). 

In contrast to seemingly endless socio-political crises up to 1949, colonial Hong 
Kong was looked upon as a haven which afforded the refugees the needed shelter and 
security, and the much hoped-for prosperity. Albert Yee (1999a) suggests that the 
mainlanders' eagerness to move to colonial Hong Kong may be accounted for by the 
'Chinese Stepping-stone Syndrome', which certainly applies to many generations of 
Chinese who went overseas — mostly to Southeast Asia and Anglophone countries 
such as Canada, USA, UK and Australia — after leading a transitory existence in Hong 
Kong (cf. Hook 1993). 

Further, at the turn of the century, colonial Hong Kong was looked upon as a 
political refuge as well as a source of inspiration by the reform-minded Chinese, 
including the founder of the First Republic, Dr. Sun Yat-sen. It was a place where much 
could be learned about a workable model of a modem, more enlightened and 
democratically based government. As John Darwin puts it, in the early 1900s, Hong 
Kong was "a saife haven where ideologies could be refined and conspiracies hatched; 
a convenient base for the real business of capturing South China [from the Qing 
dynasty] and beyond" (Darwin 1997: 24f). A very similcu view is expressed 
approvingly in the pro-PRC outline history of Hong Kong: "Hong Kong was once an 
important place for bourgeois revolutionaries to disseminate revolution" (Liu 1997: 



In sum, in the first hundred years in the colonial history of Hong Kong, life under 



85 ). 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




the protection of the British flag was seen by many Chinese in South China as an 
attractive alternative to the plight that they otherwise would have had to face in the 
Mainland. The political and socio-economic circumstances under which the refugees 
fled to Hong Kong help account for the reason why Hong Kong Chinese tended to be 
receptive to colorual rule under the British. As we will see, this historical detail is 
crucial when analyzing how English was received by the colorual subjects in Hong 
Kong, notably in the domains of business and education. 



Chinese Hongkongers (1950s — present) 

The year 1950 was important in that free traffic between Hong Kong and the Mainland 
was blocked. Until 1950, Chinese were free to enter and exit Hong Kong without any 
restriction. Border control, however, had to be introduced shortly after the founding 
of the People's Republic of China, when tens of thousands of refugees rushed to Hong 
Kong either fleeing political prosecution or having no wish to live under a communist 
regime. This was by far the most dramatic influx of refugees in the history of Hong 
Kong, which exerted tremendous pressures on public utility services such as medical 
care and housing. By 1956, within six years the total population of Hong Kong nearly 
quadrupled to about 2.5 million, thus turning the colonial enclave into "a territory 
full of anti-commurust refugees" (Darwin 1997: 29). The closure of the border was 
important in one sense: Unlike those Chinese who came and went at will, hitherto 
those who came to Hong Kong to stay were to become permanent residents — unless 
they had the means and the desire to emigrate elsewhere. As we will see, this 
development was crucial for the gradual emergence of a 'Hong Kong identity' in the 
1970s. 

From the 1950s onwards, therefore, Hong Kong and China parted ways politically 
and developed in very different routes socio-economically. Subsequent socio-economic 
developments have shown that, the initial social burden of a huge number of 
impoverished immigrants turned out to be a blessing, and the scene was set for an 
economic miracle which was to lift Hong Kong to new horizons and prosperity in the 
1970s. One major factor which made this possible was "a remarkable fusion of Chinese 
and British cultural values interacting with one another" as well as "a symbiosis of 
Western business organization and Chinese entrepreneurial spirit" (Birch 1991: 22). In 
short: 

Hong Kong was afforded an unusual opportunity to exploit the traditional 
Chinese virtues of industry, thrift and resilience during the paralysing early 
years of the People's Republic of China after 1949. (Birch 1991: 22) 

More specifically, Hong Kong's economic success is jointly attributed to the 
entrepreneurs from Shanghai, who brought with them capital and talents to Hong 
Kong, as well as a huge, hard-working labour force: 

Two essential human factors behind business success are entrepreneurial flair 



O 38 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

43 



CHAPTER 2 — hong KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



and labour. Hong Kong's industrial expansion was made possible by a pool of 
workers who put in long hours for little pay in cotton factories not unlike the 
'dark satanic mills' of the Industrial Revolution. (Birch 1991: 95) 



Relationship between the colonizers and the colonized 

There is general consensus cimong scholars that throughout the colonial history of 
Hong Kong, with the exception of those engaged in trading activities and a small 
number of bilingual brokers, the Chinese euid non-Chinese communities lived side by 
side, but neither made euiy active attempt to mix with the other socially. Endacott 
(1973), for example, observes that in the early colonial period, "there was no social 
mixing, and each community went its separate way in pursuit of the objects that had 
brought it to Hong Kong" (p. 70), eUid that "both Europecuis eUid Chinese were content 
to be governed provided there was a minimum of government consistent with security 
of life eUid property and opportunity for commercial enterprise. Benthcunite laissez- 
faire suited the Chinese eis well eis the free-trade western merchants" (p. 121). 

The Hong Kong Chinese view of their relationship with the British is nicely 
captured in a comment by Mr. Leung Chun-ying, an Executive Councillor of the SAR 
government today, who is quoted as saying that: 

The entire relationship between Hong Kong eUid Britain existed as a matter of 
expediency.... We have coexisted but we have kept each other at arm's length. 

(Cited in Vines 1998: 71; cf. Lau & Kuan 1988: 23) 

The parallel coexistence of two speech communities with minimal inter-group 
interaction between them has been described by Luke & Richards (1982) as 'enclosure', 
which continued to characterize the English- and Cantonese-speaJdng communities in 
the 1980s, eis well eis in the postcolonial era (Li 1999). 

UnUke other British colonies such eis India, therefore, there is little evidence of 
the colonial government in Hong Kong trying to impose the British way of life on the 
local population. Steve TscUig (1997a) attributes the colonial government's relative 
lack of initiative to impose British cultural values and social practices to their 
preoccupation with commerce: 

Given the commercial motives behind the British occupation of Hong Kong, the 
colonial government did not attempt to spread civilization or convert the 
Chinese to a British way of life (Tsang 1997a: 65). 

Hence, in terms of the imposition of a British way of life as part of the overall purpose, 
or agenda, of colonial rule, Hong Kong differed significeuitly from other British 
colonies such as India. From the Chinese point of view, a non-intrusive government 
was one reason why they found Hong Kong so attractive. 

Further, from the 1920s onwards until Chris Patten, most governors were 
enlightened 'old China hands' (Vines 1998: 8) who had worked in the Foreign Office 
and who had at least some knowledge of Chinese history and culture (e.g. David 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

44 



39 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Wilson, the 27th governor from 1987 to 1992, had a doctorate degree in Chinese 
history), if not in addition being Sinophiles. Quite a few governors (e.g. Cecil 
dementi, Alexander Grantham, Edward Youde, David Wilson) were students of the 
Chinese language before they took up the governorship (Shen 1994), and many of 
them were conversant in Mandarin and literate in written Chinese. It is therefore not 
surprising that many governors in colonial Hong Kong were able, cuid often willing, to 
see things from the Chinese perspective. 

There were, to be sure, recorded instances of discrimination and racism against 
the Chinese population, especially in the nineteenth century, as shown for example 
in legal discrimination cuid intimidation in early colonial rule (Munn 1999, Ngo 
1999b). In the 20th century, however, overall "most of these measures were passive 
discrimination... rather than active measures that interfered with the lives of the 
ordinauy Chinese" (Tscuig 1997a: 66), and so the pros of living under British rule far 
outweighed the cons. In sum, a benevolent, non-intrusive govermnent and a 
politically stable shelter offering security and promising prosperity were among the 
main recisons why people in South China were willing to come cuid live in the British 
colony. Lau & Kuan (1988: 20, passim) describe the colonial subjects as "a self-select 
group who voluntarily subscribe to colonial rule". Similarly, Vines (1998) points out 
that: 

What is unique about Hong Kong is that most of its population, unlike other 

people living under colonial rule, volunteered to forsake being ruled by their 

own people in favour of living under a foreign flag. (Vines 1998: 71) 

Such a trend, in fact, may be traced back to early colonial rule. In the summary of the 
socio-economic conditions between the tumultuous years 1848-1865, for example, 
Endacott (1973) observes that the colonial govermnent was surprised by "the 
phenomenal influx of the Chinese and their willingness to live under the British flag, 
for which event British administration was quite unprepared" (Endacott 1973: 121). 



1997 and Hong Kong identity 

As mentioned, 1950 was an important year, in that border controls were introduced 
by the colonial government in an attempt to steimp the tide of refugees rushing into 
Hong Kong. This policy was accompanied by another measure, namely, the issuing of 
Hong Kong identity cards, generally known as 'HKID' or 'ID cards', to legitimate 
residents as a valid proof of their right of abode in Hong Kong. Those who needed to 
travel back to the Mainlcuid were required by law to apply for a 'Certificate of Identity' , 
more popularly known as 'Cl', without which their re-entry into Hong Kong would be 
denied. Both the ID card and the Cl took on significant symbolic value, in that they 
accentuated a 'them' (mainlanders) vs. 'us' (Hongkongers) distinction, which was not 
as clearly marked prior to the closing of the borders in 1950.^ 

The transformation from a broadly defined 'Chinese national residing in Hong 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Kong' to a legally enforced 'Hong Kong resident' status, thenceforth, gave Chinese 
Hongkongers a new, regional or local identity, in addition to an ethnic identity which 
they shared with their compatriots in the Mainland. As is pointed out by Ma & Fung 
(1999: 500), ever since the social and cultural severance of the colony from the 
Mainland, the general identity of 'Hong Kong people' slowly took shape in the 1960s 
and 1970s. As Hong Kong and the PRC embarked upon very different routes politically, 
sodo-econortucally and culturally, Chinese Hongkongers found their ethnic identity 
gradually overtaken by an ever-expanding and increasingly marked and assertive 
'Hong Kong identity'. Brown & Foot (1997) attribute this awakening to the cortung of 
age of the locally educated, 'post-war baby-boom' generation: 

In the 1970s, a distinctively Hong Kong identity came into existence. Compared 
with their forbears, this generation was better educated and more 'worldly', and 
with increasing sophistication was becoming more acutely aware of the 
anachronistic aspects of Hong Kong's Crown Colony system. (Brown & Foot 1997: 

6) 

Ma & Fung (1999) rightly point out that this 'Hong Kong identity' was subconsciously 
formed and reinforced by local social practices and westernized cultural values, 
coupled with the stigmatization of mainlanders in Hong Kong popular media: 

The popular media, freed from nationalistic imperatives, served as a primary site 
of social integration and identity formation. The [Hong Kong] media absorbed 
Western values, transformed Chinese cultural particulars, articulated local 
experiences, and crystallized images of a distinct Hong Kong way of Ufe. This 
newly found identity was largely constructed by foregrounding the cultural 
differences between Hong Kongers and the mainland Chinese. Accordingly, in 
the mass media, mainlanders were stigmatized as 'uncivilized' outsiders and a 
ready-made cultural contrast against which modem, cosmopolitan Hong Kongers 
could define themselves. Since most Hong Kongers are ethnic Chinese, the Sino- 
Hong Kong cultural differentiation, or the 'othering' of mainland Chinese, was a 
significant process from which the distinctive local Hong Kong identity emerged. 

(Ma & Fung 1999: 500) 

It was therefore a quasi-systematic dichotomy of 'other' vs. 'us' cis portrayed in popular 
media which helped reinforce an opposition between mainland Chinese and Hong 
Kong Chinese, and which in turn fueled the gradual emergence of a distinct Hong 
Kong identity. Ma & Fung (1999) go on to argue that by the 1980s, an ambivalent and 
sometimes contradictory Sino-Hong Kong identity has emerged: 

Hong Kong people identify with traditional Chinese culture in an abstract and 
detached sense, but, on the other hand, they discriminate against the particular 
cultural practices which are affiliated with the Communist regime in the 
mainland. Hong Kong people's identity therefore has mainly emerged as a 
distinctive identity vis-a-vis mainland citizens, ... is affiliated with a territory, 
a way of life and a general identification of a commonly accepted set of values. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

46 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



... lacks a strong nationalistic component and does not have a clear political 
affiliation with the sovereign state. (Ma & Fung 1999: 500-01) 

Increasingly it became clear to the locally bom and bred Chinese Hongkongers that, 
while they were ethnic Chinese, they were very different from the Chinese north of Lo 
Wu who lived under a communist regime. Anna Wu, a former legislative councillor 
during the final years of British colonial rule, gives a revealing account of the nature 
and sources of this confused allegiance and identity: 

People like me had been pulled in different directions throughout our Uves. 

There had been the colonial British influence, the impact of the Cultural 
Revolution, and the repercussions of that; and then, there were our parents, who 
kept on telling us what they did in China, why they had run away and, then, 
their plans to leave once again.... (Cited in Flowerdew 1998: 78) 

According to Choi (1990), the fervour and nationaUstically-coloured sentiments 
manifested in the student movements of the 1970s may be seen as a soul-searching 
exercise on the pcirt of the better-educated post-war generations — a quest for 
cultural identity triggered by political developments in mainland China. 

One of the dictums in the study of history is: The evils that men do live after 
them'. In the colonial history of Hong Kong, the worst evil bequeathed by the 
colonizers has a name, or more precisely, the magic number and year 1997. It was an 
evil to the extent that several generations of Chinese Hongkongers lived in fear and 
anxiety from the moment that Sino-British negotiations over the political future of 
Hong Kong were made public during the early 1980s. One clear indicator of such fear 
and anxiety was that in the early 1990s, it was estimated that over half a million 
Hongkongers — about 10 percent of the total population — voted with their feet by 
emigrating overseas, notably to Anglophone countries (Flowerdew 1998: 79-80, Hook 
1993). 

Why fear and anxiety? Because, to put it in a nutshell, unlike other colonies 
which ultimately became independent at the end of the decolonization process, Hong 
Kong was to be reabsorbed into "the feared communist party-state" (Tsang 1997b: 
160). As Ma & Fung (1999) have pointed out: 

While the people of Hong Kong acknowledge the sovereignty of China over Hong 
Kong, there is strong resistance, in emotional terms, to the process of re- 
nationalization (Ma & Fung 1999: 523). 

Independence being out of the question after June 1997 (Lau & Kuan 1988: 19f), 
Chinese Hongkongers could not help worrying about the imminent loss of the Hong 
Kong way of Ufe, which is characterized above all by a laissez-faire capitalist economic 
system, freedom of speech, and the rule of law — which were made possible by a 
benevolent, non-intrusive colonial government under the British flag. It is in this 
sense that Tsang (1997a) speaks of "the ultimate irony": 

It is ironic that after the early 1980s when the British government of Hong Kong 
had lived up to the requirements of the Chinese political tradition, it took only 
a few year? to find itself at risk of falling short of local pubUc expectations.... 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 — hong KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



The people of Hong Kong increasingly wanted democracy. (Tsang 1997a: 78) 

That fecir and anxiety was mixed with anguish and despair in June, 1989. You might 
recall the shocking news that hit the world in the ecirly morning of June 6, 1989 in 
Beijing, when the People's liberation Army opened fire on student demonstrators and 
unarmed dviUans — the last, and sad, episode of the student movement which, for 
about two months, generated more than a gUmpse of hope among Chinese, both in 
the Mainland and overseas. Before this tragic incident occurred, Chinese Hongkongers 
had openly expressed soUdarity with the student movement, sending in all kinds of 
support and aid, both material and spiritual, to Beijing. 

Upon heelring and seeing news of the Tiananmen incident which led to bloodshed, 
numerous deaths and casualties, therefore, half a milUon Hongkongers took to the 
street to condemn the kilUng of innocent students and civilians and to protest against 
the use of brute force to end a surprisingly peaceful student movement. Apart from 
general sympathy with the students' demands, most Hongkongers also felt very 
insecure vis-a-vis the PRC's impending resumption of sovereignty. One of the banners 
put up in the demonstration was 'Today Beijing, Tomorrow Hong Kong', vividly 
capturing a popular apprehension that what happened in Beijing might well be 
repeated in postcolonial Hong Kong, and that ironically until then it was the British 
flag which would offer them protection against similar abuse. As Tsang puts it: 

There was widespread belief that 'as long as freedom, human rights, and 

democracy cannot be guaranteed in the PRC, they cannot be protected in Hong 

Kong after 1997'. (Tsang 1997b: 160). 

For Chinese Hongkongers, two of the direct consequences of the Tiananmen incident 
were: loss of confidence in a political future free from ideological influence from the 
north, and an identity problem. As Tsang (1997b) remcirks, "when a peaceful 
demonstration in Beijing ended in a savage tragedy, it forced the people of Hong Kong 
to confront the problem of who they really were" (p. 163). Being ethnic Chinese, 
Hongkongers felt that they shared much of the same cultural heritage and traditions 
as their mainland compatriots, but after several decades of socio-economic and 
cultural development completely independent of that in the Mainland, Chinese 
Hongkongers had "very Uttle sense of identity with the Chinese political system, nor 
with the Ufe-style of the world's Icirgest nation" (Vines 1998: x). The divide between 
ethnicity and socio-cultural identity results in what Tsang (1997b) calls "dual 
identity" which, however, was fuzzy.^ 

The 'dual self-claim identity' (Ma & Fung 1999: 604) of Hongkonger and Chinese 
was borne out by resecirch. In several survey studies before the political transition 
(e.g. Lau 1997; Wong 1996), it was found that Chinese Hongkongers tended to claim 
themselves to be both Hongkongers and Chinese, although a majority tended to prefer 
the former. These survey results suggest that, despite the resumption of Chinese 
sovereignty, memy Chinese Hongkongers have little sense of pride of their new status 
as citizens of a Special Administrative Region of China (Scollon & Scollon 1999); 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



instead, they continue to be assertive of their Hong Kong identity, which is made 
possible by the central government's pledge, and delivery of the promise, of 'one 
country, two systems'. 



The colonial history of Hong Kong: a summary 

Let us briefly summarize what we have learned from the colonial history of Hong 
Kong. As a colony, Hong Kong was not intended for British settlement; from the outset 
it was meant to be an outpost of the British Empire at the door step of China in the 
middle of the Far East, for the sole purpose of facilitating, or reinforcing, trade and 
commerce between Britain and the region. Owing to political instability, for over a 
century imtil the 1940s, colonial Hong Kong was looked upon as a haven by successive 
waves of refugees fleeing political turmoil, social unrest and natural disasters in their 
hometowns. At the same time, for better-off merchants in the Mainland, colonial Hong 
Kong was seen as a place of business opportunities, promising security, more freedom, 
even some prospect of economic prosperity. Others saw Hong Kong as a springboard 
for emigration overseas to destinations far and wide, from neighbouring countries in 
Southeaist Asia to such remote places as the Gold Mountains in North America and 
Australia. 

For those who stayed, they were reasonably pleased to be left alone politically 
and sodo-economically. Social inequalities such as racist legislation did exist, but in 
so far as the majority of the Chinese residents were allowed to go about their own lives 
and businesses while staying at arm's length from the colonizers, the shelter and 
security afforded by the British flag was an attractive alternative to a miserable 
existence in the Mainland. In a more positive light, trading and commerce generated 
business and job opporturuties, while personal rights were assured, in name if not 
always in deed, by the relatively well-enforced rule of law, in front of which all people, 
western or Chinese, appeared to be treated equally. 

From the point of view of administration, far from imposing their own culture 
and social practices on the local people, the colonial government was perceived as 
superior to the Chinese governments of Imperial, Nationalist or Communist China. 

While colonization backed by gunboats and military might is among the ugliest 
chapters in the history of humankind, it is my conviction that the research question, 
whether or not a former colony has fallen victim to English linguistic imperialism, 
cannot be adequately tackled without examining the historical circumstances under 
which colonization and decolonization took place. In this regard, I hope to have 
demonstrated that Hong Kong is an untypical case, one which does not conform to 
the usual pattern of colonization and decolonization elsewhere, especially in Africa. 



49 

O // ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

ERIC 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Parents" preference for English-medium education for 
their children: passive victims of imperialism or active 
agents of pragmatism? 

In light of the lesson learned from history, let us now consider the question, whether 
Chinese Hongkongers who openly embrace English are peissive victims of linguistic 
imperialism and the worldwide hegemony of English, or active agents of pragmatism 
in pursuit of a better life. 

It has been pointed out by many that English is very much embraced by Hong 
Kong Chinese (e.g. Pennycook 1994, 1998; lin 1996, li 1999). This is especially clearly 
reflected in the parents' choice of English-medium schools as opposed to Chinese- 
medium schools — a choice which became increasingly marked since the 1950s. 
Daniel So (1992: 76f) attributes the success of Anglo-Chinese schools in this period to 
three inter-related factors: 

• the development of Hong Kong into eui international manufacturing and financial 
centre; 

• the emergence of English as the language of wider communication for business 
and academic purposes internationally; and 

• the demand for highly educated labour following significant progress made in 
science euid technology after the Second World War. 

These are some of the forces, according to So (1992), which help explain a 
corresponding decline in popularity of Chinese Middle Schools after 1949, forces "that 
are much more powerful than government language policy" (p. 76). Other forces that 
So (1992) alludes to have their source in the outcome of the political and military 
rivalry between the Nationalists and the Communists: "the ascendancy of the anti- 
intellectual, totaUtarieUi Beijing regime created an extremely negative environment 
for the local Chinese Middle Schools" (ibid.). 

The parental preference for EngUsh-medium education for their children has 
since prevailed in Hong Kong. The socio-economic concerns and motivations behind 
Hongkongers' will and desire to be educated in English are summarized succinctly by 
So (1990) as follows: 

In short, a successful EngUsh-medium education has become the principal 
determincuit of upward eUid outward mobiUty for the people of Hong Kong. Meuiy, 
if not most, aspire to both. (So 1992: 78) 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FUK ENliLlSH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



The applicability of the Gramscian notion of hegemony to 
Hongkongers' preference for English-medium education 

Scholars who support the theory of 'English linguistic imperialism' tend to invoke the 
Gramscian notion of hegemony to account for the parents' penchant for English. Isn't 
it common sense that teaching and learning takes place most efficiently and 
effectively in one's mother tongue? Don't the Chinese parents in Hong Kong realize 
that to be educated in Cantonese, their mother tongue, is maximally beneficial to 
their children, both cognitively and humanistically? How, then, do we make sense of 
this apparently illogical yet most popular desire of Hong Kong Chinese parents for 
their children to be educated in an alien tongue, a practice which seems to act against 
their children's best interests? The explanation, they would argue, is that Hong Kong 
parents have consciously or subconsciously internalized the colonizers' preferred 
norms, values and beliefs, to the extent of willingly consenting to their imposition of 
these. Social control of this kind is consensual rather than coercive, and for that 
matter more subtle and sophisticated, as Ransome (1992) explains: 

Gramsci uses the concept 'hegemony' to describe the various modes of social 
control available to the dominant social group. He distinguishes between 
coercive control which is manifest through direct force or the threat of force, 
and consensual control which arises when individuals 'willingly' or 'voluntarily' 
assimilate the world-view or hegemony of the dominant group; an assimilation 
which allows that group to be hegemoruc. (Ransome 1992: 150) 

Consensual control, according to Antonio Grcunsd's "new orthodoxy in Meirxism" 
(Ransome 1992: 2), is achieved and perpetuated largely through non-economic 
institutions in the superstructure, such as parliamentary, legal and educational 
systems, mass media and the church. Whoever is in control of these superstructural 
institutions will be in a position to exercise hegemony over the less powerful social 
groups. 

The choice of the Gramscian notion of hegemony in the critique of English 
linguistic imperialism is in line with the general trend in contemporary critical social 
studies in the western world. Indeed, it has been pointed out that "an understcuiding 
of Gramsd's life and work has become indispensable to anyone who wishes to 
partidpate in the analysis and critique of contemporary sodety" (Ransome 1992: 5). 
In the critique of imperialism in colonial settings, adherents of English linguistic 
imperialism argue that the colonial government exerdses hegemony through "physical 
force or coercion combined with intellectual, moral and cultural persuasion or 
consent" (Ransome 1992: 135). Since English is imposed by decree in the 
superstructure, especially the public domains of government, education and law, over 
time, by virtue of its spread and use in these functional domains English takes on 
added values that it did not have prior to its imposition in the colonial society. This 
is essentially how, according to this view, the colonial subjects would voluntarily 
consent, or even choose, to be educated in English in place of their mother tongue. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



often without realizing that in so doing, they have fallen victim to English linguistic 
imperialism. This is arguably what happened in many former colonies, notably in 
Africa (Phillipson 1992). It is my contention, however, that the case of Hong Kong was 
different. 



Language-in-education policy in colonial Hong Kong: 
beyond linguistic imperialism and symbolic domination 

There has been some research into the question to what extent the notion, English 
linguistic imperialism, and a closely related concept, symbolic domination (Bourdieu 
1991), apply to colonial Hong Kong. My colleague Angel Lin (1996), for example, is 
eager to dispel what she considers to be a widely held myth that English is the most 
important factor contributing to Hong Kong's economic success story. Largely because 
of this myth, she argues, English is perversely but unjustly regarded by practically 
everyone in Hong Kong as symbolic capital, often to the lamentable extent of 
"subordinating all educational goals to the dominant goal of mastering a foreign 
language" (p. 58). One of the main reasons behind the socially constructed and 
legitimated prestige associated with English was partly the result of the colonial 
government's "social selection policies" (Lin 1996: 54f) whereby, other things being 
equal, school-leavers with a high level of English proficiency were awarded higher pay, 
while those with little or no knowledge of English would find it very difficult to stand 
out from a crowd of competitors. The access to English, however, was and continues 
to be very unevenly distributed, such that children from middle- and upper-middle 
class families have the material resources and other support (e.g. engaging a private 
tutor) needed to acquire English relatively at ease, whereas children from socio- 
economically underprivileged families who do not have such resources and support are 
bound to be disadvantaged (Lin 1996). The result is that, unlike children from better- 
off families, the children from worse-off families tend to be those who foil to acquire 
enough English to pursue higher education or a career of their own choice. One 
undesirable social consequence of such unfair competition is the self-perpetuation of 
social class boundaries, which is euguably a form of socio-economic injustice. This 
observation led Lin to criticize the government's dual-streaming medium-of- 
instruction policy, whereby about 30 percent of Primeuy Six pupils would be given the 
'right' to progress to Form One in an English-medium school, whereas the rest would 
be assigned to Chinese-medium schools (see Luke ed. 1992; Boyle 1995, 1997a; Li 
1999 and So 2000 for more details). 

I am largely in agreement with Lin regarding the sociolinguistic analysis of the 
problems in the teaching and learning of English in the classroom, as well as the 
research direction in which to explore new, pedagogically sound classroom instruction 
methods in ELT. It remains unclear to me, however, to what extent Hong Kong parents' 
preference for English-medium education for their children — as well as many of the 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

52 



47 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KOMG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEUIUM EUULAHUW 



schoolchildren's own preference as shown in TV news reports and documentaries — is 
a negative choice, that is, a decision made against their own will 

There is some indication that the desire to learn English is a positive choice. 
Boyle (1997b), for example, examines Phillipson's (1992) theoretical constructs of 
linguistic imperialism and supplements this analysis with insights drawn from 
Kachru's (1992a, 1992b) work on the autonomy and creativity of new varieties of 
English in former British colonies. Boyle's analytical instrument, or "root ideas" 
(1997b: 171), is summarized in Figure 1. 



Figure 1. Sources of Boyle's analytical instrument 



PhiUipson (1992) 


Kachru (1992a, 1992b) 


Boyle (1997b) 


early-colonial period: 
the 'Stick' stage 


language displacement 


compulsion 


neo-colonial period: 


language accommodation 


manipulation and clever 


the 'Carrot stage 




compromise 


neo-neo-colonial period: 
the 'Idea' stage 


language varieties purification 


covert control 



Boyle (1997b) then outlines the landmark events in the colonial history of Hong Kong 
before analyzing to what extent the root ideas of linguistic imperialism apply to 
colorual Hong Kong appropriately. He found no evidence of compulsion to impose 
English, for "Hong Kong Chinese have always wanted English" (p.l76), which has been 
highly valued for its 'commercial usefulness' and 'social prestige'. On the other hand, 
he found some evidence of manipulation, as shown in the Expatriate English Teachers 
Scheme and the streaming policy. As for covert control, Boyle found it difficult to 
judge. This analysis led Boyle to conclude that the notion of linguistic imperialism is 
only partially appropriate for Hong Kong. 

Boyle is critical of the fact that parents are not given any choice. He dtes 
Bisong's (1995: 125) observation of the role of English in Nigeria, where Phillipson's 
claim regarding the parents' choice of medium of instruction for their children is 
criticized as overly simplistic: 

The parent sends the child to the English-medium school precisely because she 
wants her child to grow up multilingual. She is also not unmindful of the 
advantages that might accrue from the acquisition of competence in English.... 
Arguments that carry the implication that the users of this language (English) 
do not know what is in their best interest should not be seen simply as 
patronising. They reveal a monolingual failure to grasp the complex nature of a 
multilingual and multicultural society. (Bisong 1995: 125, 131) 

Was there evidence in English linguistic imperialism in colonial Hong Kong? The 
answer is defirutely yes. There is no question about the "selfish motives of the British 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

53 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



in managing schools in Hong Kong in the 19th century" (liu 1997: 157, cf. Fu 1975, 
1979, Yu & liu 1994), and there is cleeU evidence showing that the teaching of English 
was intimately tied to the imperial interests of the British Empire, as shown in the 
Hong Kong Education Commission Report datedl902: 

In imperial interests it is desirable to offer instruction in the English language 
and Western knowledge to all young Chinese who are wilUng to study them, even 
though they are not residents of the colony, provided that the instruction can 
be furnished at a reasonable cost. 

The majority of the 900 boys at Queen's College belong to this class. After having 
studied Chinese in their own schools on the mainland, they are attracted to the 
Colony by the facilities it gives for the study of English. No distinction is made 
between them and the sons of Chinese residents of Hongkong, and it is 
recommended that this poUcy remain unaltered. The additional expense to the 
Colony is trifling, and the gain to British interests in China by the spread of 
English and of friendly sentiments towards our Empire should well repay the 
cost. (Cited in Liu 1997: 156f, emphasis added) 

An even more revealing excimple may be found in a speech given at Central School in 
1880 by the Governor John Pope Hennessy (1877-83), who, while an enlightened and 
most humanitarian official with great respect for Chinese people and culture compared 
with his predecessors (Endacott 1973, Shen 1994), was strongly pro-EngUsh in his 
educational policy. Hennessy was cited as saying: 

It has been the ambition of nearly every man who preceded me in the 
Government of this Colony, and it has been the policy of all Secretaries of State 
who have written to my predecessors and myself ... that Hong Kong should be 
made an Anglo-Chinese Colony, where her Majesty should have thousands upon 
thousands of Chinese subjects, with a thorough knowledge of the English 
language ... amenable to English law and appredating the British constitution, 
loyal to their QUEEN, and a strength to this distant part of her Majesty's Empire. 

Our educational scheme will accomplish a practical result if it assists in 
achieving that. (Cited in Fu 1979: 5) 

It can be seen that the substance of Henness/s speech extracted here is very similar 
in purpose and tenor to Lord Macaulay's 'filtration poUcy' expressed in the Minute on 
Indian Education in 1834: 

The great objective of the British government ought to be the propagation of 
European literature and sdence among the natives of India, and that all funds 
appropriated for the purpose of education would be best employed on English 
education alone. (Cited in Fu 1975: 38) 

[The purpose of teaching English to Indians was] to educate a class of Indians 
who could function as interpreters between the British colonial power and the 
millions of Indians they governed, 'a class of persons Indian in blood and colour. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




49 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EUUCATIUN 



but English in taste, in opinions, in morals, and in intellect'. (Cited in PhilUpson 
1992: 110) 

There is thus no question that English linguistic imperialism did occur in colonial 
Hong Kong, especially in the same period when it was found rampant elsewhere in 
other African and Asian colonies. Within its purview, however, English linguistic 
imperialism focuses almost exclusively on the colonizers' intentions (promoting 
imperial interests of the empire, to be sure), using primarily the discourses they 
produced as evidence, while giving little attention to the reasons behind the colonial 
subjects' demand for English, or trying to explain it away as a result of the Gramscian 
notion of hegemony (Ransome 1992) or symbolic domination (Bourdieu 1991). It is 
my contention that such an approach covers only half the story. A theory so conceived 
has validity only in so far as it bears on the supply of English, for it has left out an 
important piece in the puzzle: the demand side of the story. 

Chinese Hongkongers' attitude toward English: a love-hate 
complex 

There is some indication that English is a popular commodity which is very much in 
demand in Periphery countries. As is well-known, supply and demand are 
interdependent market mechanisms working hand in hand to determine the extent of 
success, or the lack of it, in the marketing of a commodity. That supply alone cannot 
assure market success of the language of a defunct empire, seems fairly obvious, as is 
evidenced in the fate of such colonial languages as Portuguese in Macau, Japanese in 
Korea, and Russian in many of the former republics of the Soviet Union, notably 
Estonia (Fonzari 1999). The point I want to make is that there is no way that an elite 
who have mcistered the colonial Icuiguage Ceui hope to create, euid sustain, a strong 
desire among the ex-colonial subjects to learn that language willingly, if there is no 
incentive for them to learn it. Conversely, if the language of the colonizers continues 
to be in demand in the postcolonial period, there must be some material or 
instrumental reasons why the ex- colonial subjects Weint to learn it. 

We have seen that the English language has been regarded by successive 
generations of Chinese Hongkongers as a value-adding commodity. The instrumental 
role of English is largely confirmed by a number of language attitude surveys since the 
1980s (see e.g. Pierson 1987, Pennington & Yue 1994, Hyland 1998). Independent of 
these observations, recent classroom research has also confirmed Hong Kong pupils' 
resistance to learning English and tremendous learning difficulties due largely to the 
relative insignificance of English in their life world and thus a lack of access to that 
symbolic capital called English (Lin 1996, 1997a,b, 1999a,b; Kweui 2000). How do we 
reconcile the two? Are they incompatible with each other? I think the available 
evidence points to a complex and fuzzy love-hate' psychological disposition, which 
helps explain seemingly paradoxical behaviours vis-a-vis the learning of English: 



ERIC 



50 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY POWER AND EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Everyone knows English is very useful, but since the efforts invested in learning it are 
not proportional to the gains (unlike the learning of mathematical formulas such cis 
Pythagoras Theorem), when the time comes for school work, most Hong Kong Chinese 
students tend to place English near the bottom of their priority list. There are of 
course other educational problems, ranging from the lack of support in the domains 
of home and friendship, the quality of instruction, class size (38 to 40 being the 
norm), to the teacher's heavy workload. Putting all this together, what we have is a 
vicious circle: Students' English proficiency is poor because they spend too little time 
on it, and English as a school subject is among the lowest priorities among pupils and 
students because they are not good at it, and so forth. There are English-medium 
programmes on the radio and TV, but students rarely show interest in these. 

The theory of English linguistic imperialism, while not necessarily a conspiracy 
theory (Phillipson 1992), invites us to focus on negative aspects of English and to 
impute all personal malaise arising from the learning of English cis a second or foreign 
language to the global spread of English. However valid this theory is in context- 
specific colonial or postcolonial settings, I think it is inadequate for Hong Kong 
because it leaves out one crucial element in the love-hate' complex — the desire to 
learn and master English. English may be hated by many Hongkongers who are 
powerless to succumb to the will of their parent or some significant other in the 
family to learn English — a language which plays a negligible social role in their daily 
lives (Hyland 1997). But coupled with this sense of largely other-driven compulsion 
is a self-awareness that English as a world language, if satisfactorily mastered, is a key 
that has the potential to open many doors, especially in terms of opportunities for 
higher education and career advancement: in a word, "upward and outward mobility" 
(So 1992: 78). This self-awareness is deep in the psyche of Hong Kong Chinese, a 
psyche which transcends boundaries across generations and socio-economic classes. 
This is why Hong Kong parents are so eager to see their children grow up developing 
communicative competence in (standard) English, which is also a high-priority 
objective of the Hong Kong government's educational policy, both before and after the 
political transition. The key question, which is also the source of much controversy 
and social tension in public discourse, centres around the optimal means through 
which such a high-priority educational objective can be achieved in an ecologically 
unfavorable English language learning environment like Hong Kong (Miihlhausler 
1994, 1996). 

Let me elaborate on the love-hate' complex a little more with the help of a 
couple of similes. The starting point of Hong Kong's colonial history was inalienably 
related to opium. To my mind, to characterize the role and the spread of English in 
former British colonies as linguistic imperialism, is like assigning to the language a 
number of disreputable attributes associated with the notorious opium trade. 
Accordingly, like opium, English is portrayed as: 

• externally imposed; 

• addictive, in the sense that the more you know and feel at home with using 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



English, the more you feel convinced that it is indispensable, to the point where 
you believe you should use only English "when it comes to transactions dealing 
with the more advanced aspects of life such as education, philosophy, literature, 
government, the administration of justice etc." (G. Ansre 1979: 12-13; cited in 
Phillipson 1992: 56; see also Boyle 1997b: 170); 

• coveted by 'addicts' (the English-speaking eUte) but not welcomed by the society 
at large; and 

• enfeebling: in the sense that the learning of English brings about all kinds of 
psychological problems and discomfort. 

There is arguably some truth in all of these, both in colonial and postcolonial Hong 
Kong. But the point is, these are not the only attributes, for there exist other positive 
attributes which would make English comparable to a very different Asian herb: 
ginseng. Thus, like ginseng, English: 

• comes at a certain cost, for not everyone has the material support and resources 
needed to learn it well; 

• appears in different varieties and forms; 

• can be quite 'bitter', that is, when it is learned and used; and 

• is enabling, in that it helps the learner to access (in a broad sense) more 
information, cutting-edge technology and state-of-the-art know-how, and to 
reach out to much wider audiences beyond a single country's national boundaries 
than in any other language. 

Of course, no analogy is perfect; there are clear Umits as to how far the analogies can 
be stretched. With these analogies, I simply wish to make the point that 
foregrounding only the negative attributes of the role and spread of English in former 
British and American colonies accounts for only half of the pictiue — the supply side 
of the story. To appreciate and capture the complexities involved in the spread of 
English more fully, one needs to take into account how English is used and, above all, 
how it is received by non-native speakers in context-specific settings. In the case of 
colonial Hong Kong, the picture is incomplete without looking at the demand for 
English, which can be traced all the way back to the earliest colonial period. 



Is the vitality of Cantonese threatened by the global 
spread of English? 

One of the clearest indicators of English linguistic imperialism in former British or 
American colonies is that the vitality of local languages is under threat. In Hong 
Kong, however, there is little evidence of the vitality of Cantonese — the regional 
vernacular and mother tongue of over 6 million inhabitants — being threatened by 
the presence of English. As Li (1999) remarks, for the overwhelming majority of 
Chinese Hongkongers: 

Cantonese is the dominant language of the home and informal communication 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

57 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



with friends and peers, of the market place, of electronic media and all forms of 
entertainment, including films and pop songs, the latter being more commonly 
known as 'Canto pop'. Speakers of other mutually unintelligible Chinese varieties 
such as Chiuchow, Hakka, and Szeyap belong to the minority, for whom 
Cantonese serves as a lingua franca. (Li 1999: 70) 

In Chinese-medium schools, Cantonese is used as a medium of instruction. Even 
classical Chinese texts and poetry are taught and recited in this vernacular. One 
interesting thing is that, since Cantonese is not taught as a school subject in school, 
it is widely beUeved to be just a dialect, has low prestige (compared with Mandarin), 
with no grammar, and is incapable of being written down (Li 2000b). This folk 
perception, while linguistically naive, is what informs and shapes popular views 
regarding the utilities, functions and status of Cantonese in Hong Kong. Indeed, it has 
been reported that some foreigners who are interested in learning Chinese were 
advised by Hongkongers not to learn Cantonese, because they should learn 'real' 
Chinese, meaning the national spoken language Mandarin (Putonghua) and standard 
written Chinese (Bauer 2000). 

Well before the political transition, some scholars expressed concern about the 
possible adoption of Mandarin as the medium of instruction in school. Three years 
after the handover, this possibility remains open (Bauer 2000, Whelpton 1999). To the 
extent that Cantonese is likely to be replaced by Mandarin as the language of 
instruction in the education domain, it may be argued that Cantonese is under threat 
— a threat which has its source not in English, but in Mandarin. 

As for the issue of language norms and standards, since English is rarely used as 
an exclusive means of communication among Hong Kong Chinese, it is difficult to 
persuade Chinese Hongkongers that their typical English accent (Bolton & Kwok 1990, 
Hung 2000) should be regarded as an acceptable benchmark and taught or promoted 
in ELT classes. Determining which aspects of Hong Kong accent are acceptable, 
however, is not the toughest part of the localization of norms and standards; a much 
thornier issue Ues in lexico grammar and syntax (consider, e.g., whether it is desirable 
to regard the pseudo-tough movement structure, as in 1 am difficult to learn English', 
as acceptable on the basis of its recurrence and resilience in students' homework, li 
& Chan 1999). These are some of the problems that advocates of endonormative 
standards have to come to grips with. Meanwhile, the absence of a sound sociological 
basis for using English among Hong Kong Chinese (except in Cantonese-English mixed 
code), is the main reservation against calUng into existence 'Hong Kong English' (li 
2000a,c). 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

58 



CHAPTER 2 - HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Conclusion and theoretical implications 

The macro-political history of colonial Hong Kong provides important clues to help 
interpret the nature of Chinese Hongkongers' craving and demand for English, despite 
all the cognitive difficulties and psychological discomfort engendered in the learning 
process. A theory which focuses exclusively on the hegemony and the spread of 
English in Periphery countries only accounts for half the reality at best — the supply 
side of the story. There is no doubt that English in the postcolonial era is promoted 
and seen by many as a commodity. Like other commodities, its vitality depends 
heavily on the market mechcuiism of supply and demand. To the extent that the 
demand side of the story is left out of the picture, and the complex reasons behind 
the learners' strong craving for learning English are explained away by the Gramscian 
notion of hegemony, the theory inevitably sounds monolithic and reductionist. In 
effect, accusing the Centre countries and all the ELT practitioners in their professional 
roles for assisting in the perpetuation of the hegemony of English within their 
superstructural institutions, fails to do justice to their contributions in meeting a 
global demand for English. This, I think, is the main reason why some readers of 
Phillipson (1992) feel offended. This is also why the disclaimer, that conspiracy theory 
is not what is intended (Phillipson 1992: 63), has fallen largely on deaf ears. 

One implication of this study is that two things need to be considered in the 
process of assessing the extent to which the notion of linguistic imperialism applies 
or not: diachronically, how the macro-political history of the former colony in 
question impacts on the indigenous population's attitudes toward English; and 
synchronically, how the macro-linguistic context shapes the language needs of the 
local population. In the case of postcolonial Hong Kong, the shift from a 
manufacturing-based economy to a service-industry and knowledge-based economy 
(e.g. information technology, tele-communications, transport, import/ export, hotels, 
restaurants, insurance, retail trade and real estate services) has generated a stronger 
demand for English than ever, especially in hospitality industries. Even taxi-drivers 
have been urged to develop a better knowledge of English through the government- 
funded 'English in Workplace Scheme' in order to better understand English-speaking 
tourists' needs. And, given that the pillars of Hong Kong's economy are trading, 
commerce and finance, it is the government's responsibility to ensure a continuous 
supply of competent bilinguals (ideally trilinguals) with sound communication skills 
in English needed by various business sectors. The government's efforts in promoting 
English-medium education are therefore justified, and may be accounted for by the 
society's future needs. Whether or not the dual medium-of-instruction streaming 
policy implemented as from September, 1998, is the most effective and optimum 
means towards that goal is an open question still being debated (see, e.g., li 1999, 
Poon, 2000, So 2000). To make a blanket statement, however, that the value assigned 
to English in the postcolonial era is the result of the hegemony and symbolic 
domination of this former colonial language, would be to ignore a good part of the 



O 54 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, ^O^ER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 — hong KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



sodoUnguistic complexities in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, notably 
the way English helps many to achieve upweird and outward mobility. 

From the point of view of methodology and selection of data, I think it would be 
surprising indeed if one looked into historical documents of the Empire and found no 
evidence of imperialism — the dominant ethos of the time — including linguistic 
imperialism and policies governing the use and spread of English in former colonies 
(cf. Fishman 1993, Canagarajah 1995). What is debatable is the kinds of additional 
claims that one could make based on these observations. There is some truth in the 
claim that the cultural constructs contributing to the hegemony of English continue 
to prevail in ELT materials and other teaching-related practices (Pennycook 1998). To 
redress this anomaly, it would seem a sensible line of action to draw on the insights 
of critical pedagogy (e.g. Freire 1998, Giroux, 1997, Kanpol 1999, McLaren 1995) and 
revamp the ELT teaching materials and other classroom practices with a view to 
empowering students by reflecting on and dispensing with the unwanted cultural 
baggage of English, or balancing these with local cultural values, such as including 
the LI rules of speaking in the English syllabus (Li 1998). On the other hand, the 
claim — that ELT practitioners, however well-intentioned and altruistic they may be, 
are destined to assist in the perpetuation of the hegemony of English — seems self- 
defeating, all the more so when ELT professionals implicated in the theory of English 
linguistic imperialism are not given any concrete suggestions as to how they could 
help themselves deflect from their allegedly hegemonic ELT practices and roles (Bems 
et al. 1998, 1999). 

To sum up: in response to the question, 'Why is it that Hong Kong parents tend 
to favour EngUsh-medium schools?', I hope to have shown that Hong Kong parents are 
not passive victims but pragmatically-minded active agents acting in their best 
interests. Whether or not their general preference for their children to be educated in 
English is a wise move depends in part on the amount of support for English in the 
family. In any case, that decision is a pragmatic one, driven hugely by an aspiration 
for social mobility. This is made possible by the fact that English helps one access more 
information and people — through higher education, on the job, in cyber space and 
international encounters. In writing, English has greater potential to help one reach 
out to wider audiences compared with other languages. In this light, rather than a 
tool of hegemony, English may be looked upon as a resource to enhance the learners' 
linguistic repertoire, which in turn has good potential for enriching their quality of 
life through higher education and professional development. 



Acknowledgements 

I would like to thank Prof. Robert Phillipson for his comments on an earlier draft of 
this paper presented at the conference. The research project entitled 'Linguistic 
imperialism in Hong Kong? The demand side of the story' was supported by City 
University of Hong Kong grant number 9030823. 

O 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

GO 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



References 

Ahonen, Sirkka, 1997, 'A transformation of history: The official representations of history in 
East Germany and Estonia, 1986-1991', Culture and Psychology, vol.3 no.l, pp. 41-62. 

Ansre, G, 1979, 'Four rationalisations for maintaining European languages in education in 
Africa', African Languages, vol.5 no.2, pp. 10-17. 

Bauer, Robert S, 1988, 'Written Cantonese of Hong Kong', Cahiers de Linguistique Asie 
Orientale, vol.l7 no.2, pp. 245-93. 

Bauer, Robert S, 2000, 'Hong Kong Cantonese and the road ahead'. In Li, Lin & Tsang (eds.), 
pp. 35-58. 

Bems, Margie, et al, 1998, '(Re)experiencing hegemony: the linguistic imperialism of Robert 
Phillipson', Review of ROBERT PHILLIPSON 1992, International Journal of Applied 
Linguistics, vol.8 no.2, pp. 271-282. 

Bems, Margie, et al, 1999, 'Hegemonic discourse revisited'. International Journal of Applied 
Linguistics, vol.9 no.l, pp. 138-42. 

Bickley, Gillian, 1997, The golden needle. The biography of Frederick Stewart (1836-1889), 
David C. Lam Institute for East- West Studies, Hong Kong Baptist University; Aberdeen 
and North East Scotland Family History Society, Aberdeen, Scotland. 

Birch, Alan, 1991, Hong Kong: The colony that never was, Odyssey, Hong Kong. 

Bisong, Joseph, 1995, 'Language choice and cultural imperialism: A Nigerian perspective', 
ELT-Joumal, vol.49 no.2, pp. 122-32. 

Bolton, Kingsley & Kwok, Helen, 1990, 'The dynamics of the Hong Kong accent: Social 

identity eind socioUnguistic description'. Journal of Asian Pacific Communication, vol.l 
no.l, pp. 147-172. 

Bourdieu, Piene, 1991, Language and symbolic power. Polity Press, Cambridge. 

Boyle, Joseph, 1995, 'Hong Kong's educational system: English or Chinese?' Language, Culture 
and Curriculum, vol.8 no.3, pp. 291-304. 

Boyle, Joseph, 1997a, 'The use of mixed code in Hong Kong English language teaching'. 
System, vol.25 no.l, pp. 83-89. 

Boyle, Joseph, 1997b, 'Imperialism and the English language in Hong Kong', Journal of 
Multilingual and Multicultural Development, vol.l8 no.3, pp. 169-181. 

Boyle, Joseph, 2000, International attitudes to languages and the study of global issues'. In: 
Li, Lin & Tsang (eds.), pp. 59-80. 

Brown, Judith M. & Foot, Rosemary (eds.), 1997, Hong Kong's transitions, 1842-1997, London: 
Macmillan Press, London, and St. Martin's Press, New York. 

Canagarajah, A. S. 1995, Review of ROBERT PHILLIPSON 1992, Language in Society, vol.24 
no.4, pp. 590-594. 

Canagarajah, A. S. 1999, Resisting linguistic imperialism in English teaching, Oxford 
Uruversity Press, Oxford. 

Choi, Po-king, 1990, 'A search for cultural identity: The students' movement of the early 
seventies'. In Anthony Sweeting (ed.). Differences and identities: Educational argument 
in late twentieth-century Hong Kong, Education Paper 9, University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong. 



, 9 ^- 56 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERIC 




LHAl'THK 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Conrad, Andrew W., 1996, TThe international role of English: The state of the discussion'. In 
Fishman, Conrad & Rubal-Lopez (eds.), pp. 13-36. 

Darwin, John, 1997, 'Hong Kong in British decolonisation'. In J.M. Brown & R. Foot (eds.), 
pp. 16-32. 

Davies, Alan, 1996, Ironising the myth of Unguicism', Journal of Multilingual and 
Multicultural Development, vol.l7 no.6, pp. 485-496. 

Dissanayake, Wimal, 1993, 'Symposium on linguistic imperialism: Perspective 1', World 
Englishes, vol.l2 no. 3, pp. 336-341. 

Endacott, G.B. 1973, A history of Hong Kong, Revised edition. Oxford University Press, Hong 
Kong. 

Fame, David, 1997, 'Reflections on being Chinese in Hong Kong', In J.M. Brown & R. Foot 
(eds.), pp. 103-120. 

Fishman, Joshua A, 1993, Review of ROBERT PHILLIPSON 1992, The Modem Language Journal, 
vol.77, pp. 399-400. 

Fishman, Joshua A., 1996a, Introduction: Some empirical and theoretical issues'. In Fishman, 
Conrad & Rubal-Lopez (eds.), pp. 3-12. 

Fishman, Joshua A., 1996b, 'Summary and interpretation: Post-imperial English 1940-1990', 

In Fishman, Conrad & Rubal-Lopez (eds.), pp. 623-641. 

Fishman, Joshua A., Conrad, Andrew W. & Rubal-Lopez, Alma, (eds.), 1996, Post-imperial 
English: Status change in former British and American colonies, 1940-1990, Mouton de 
Gruyter, Berlin & New York. 

Rowerdew, John, 1998, The final years of British Hong Kong: The discourse of colonial 
withdrawal, MacMillan Press, London and St. Martin's Press, New York. 

Fonzari, Lorenza, 1999, 'English in the Estonian multicultmal society'. World Englishes, vol.l8 
no.l, pp. 39-48. 

Foucault, Michel, 1980, Power/Knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings of Michel 
Foucault, 1972-1977, Edited by CoUn Gordon, Pantheon Books, New York. 

Freire, Paulo, 1998, Pedagogy of freedom: Ethics, democracy, and civic courage. Translated by 
P. Clarke, Rowman & Littlefield Publishing, Inc., New York & Oxford. 

Fu, Gail S. 1975, A Hong Kong perspective: English language learning and the Chinese student. 
University of Michigan, Michigan. 

Fu, Gail S. 1979, 'BiUngual education in Hong Kong: A historical perspective'. Working Papers 
in Language and Language Teaching, vol.l, pp. 1-10. University of Hong Kong. 

Germino, Dante, 1990, Antonio Gramsci: Architect of a new politics, Louisiana State University 
Press, Baton Rouge & London. 

Giroux, Henry A. 1997, Pedagogy and the politics of hope: Theory, culture, and schooling, 
Westview Press, Boulder, CO. 

Gramsci, Antonio, 1996, Prison letters / Antonio Gramsci, Translated and introduced by 
Hamish Henderson, Pluto Press, London and Chicago. 

Holbrow, M. 1993, Review of ROBERT PHILLIPSON 1992, ELT Journal, vol.47 no.4, pp. 358- 
360. 

Honey, John, 1997, Language is Power: The Story of Standard English and its Enemies, Faber & 
Faber. London. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 - HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Hook, Brian G. 1993, Immigration to and emigration from Hong Kong in the transition to 
Chinese sovereignt 3 i'. In Hong Kong in transition 1992, One Country Two Systems 
Economic Research Institute, Hong Kong. 

Hung, Tony T.N. 2000, "Towards a phonology of Hong Kong English', World Englishes, vol.l9 
no. 3, pp. 337-356. 

Hyland, Ken, 1997, 'Language attitudes at the handover: Communication and identity in 
1997 Hong Kong', English World-Wide, vol.18 no. 2, pp. 191-210. 

Jaeger, Gerard A. 1997, Hong Kong: Chronique d'une He sous influence. Editions du Felin, 

Paris. 

Johnson, Robert Keith, 1994, 'Language policy and planning in Hong Kong', Annual Review of 
Applied Linguistics, vol.l4, pp. 177-99. 

Kachru, Braj B. 1992a, The other tongue. University of Illinois Press, Urbana. 

Kachru, Braj B. 1992b, 'World Englishes: Approaches, issues and resources'. Language 
Teaching, vol.25 no.l, pp. 1-14. 

Kanpol, Barry, 1999, Critical pedagogy: An introduction, 2^^ edition, Bergin & Garvey, 
Westport, CT. 

Kibbee, Douglas A. 1993, 'Symposium on linguistic imperialism: Perspective 2', World 
Englishes, vol.l2 no.3, pp. 342-347. 

Kwan, Michelle, 2000, 'Reconsidering language leeimers' needs: A critical look at classroom 
verbal play of a reading lesson in Hong Kong', In Li, Lin & Tsang (eds.), pp. 297-316. 

Lam, Yau-lan, 1978, Xianggang Shihua ('Notes on the history of Hong Kong'), Hong Kong 
Shanghai Printing Press. 

Lau, Siu-kai, 1982, Society and politics in Hong Kong, Chinese University Press, Hong Kong. 

Lau, Siu-kai, 1997, 'Hongkongers or Chinese: Hong Kong Chinese identity, 1985-1995' (in 
Chinese), Twenty-first Century, vol.41, pp. 43-58. 

Lau, Siu-kai & Kuan, Hsin-chi, 1988, The ethos of the Hong Kong Chinese, Chinese University 
Press, Hong Kong. 

Li, David C.S. 1998, Incorporating LI pragmatic norms and cultural values in L2: Developing 
English language curriculum for EIL in the Asia-Pacific region', Asian Englishes, vol.l 
no.l, pp. 31-50. 

Li, David C.S. 1999, "The functions and status of English in Hong Kong: A post-1997 update', 
English World-Wide, vol.20 no.l, pp. 67-110. 

Li, David C.S. 2000a, "Hong Kong English': New variety of English or Interlanguage?' EA 
Journal, vol.18 no.l, pp. 50-59. 

Li, David C.S. 2000b, Thonetic borrowing: Key to the vitality of written Cantonese in Hong 
Kong', Written Language & Literacy, vol.3 no.2, pp. 199-233. 

Li, David C.S. 2000c, 'Cantonese-EngUsh code-switching research in Hong Kong: A Y2K 
review'. World Englishes, vol.l9 no.3, pp. 305-322. 

Li, David C.S. & Chan Alice Yin-wa. 1999, 'Helping teachers correct structural and lexical 
English errors', Hong Kong Journal of Applied Linguistics, vol.4 no.l, pp. 79-101. 

Li, David C. S., Lin, Angel & Tsang Wai King (eds.), 2000, Language and education in 
postcolonial Hong Kong, Linguistic Society of Hong Kong. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CMAFltK 2 — hong KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Lin, Angel M. Y. 1996, 'BiUngualism or linguistic segregation? Symbolic domination, 

resistance and code switching in Hong Kong schools'. Linguistics and Education, vol.8, 
pp. 49-84. 

Lin, Angel M. Y. 1997a, 'Hong Kong children's rights to a culturally compatible English 
education', Hong Kong Journal of Applied Linguistics, vol.2 no.2, pp. 23-48. 

Lin, Angel M. Y. 1997b, 'Analyzing the 'language problem' discourses in Hong Kong: How 
official, academic, and media discourses construct tind perpetuate dominant models of 
language, learning, and education'. Journal of Pragmatics, vol.28, pp. 427-440. 

Lin, A. M. Y. 1999a, 'Doing-EngUsh-lessons in the reproduction or transformation of social 
worlds?' TESOL Quarterly, vol.33 no.3, pp. 393-412. 

Lin, A. M. Y. 1999b, 'Resistance and creativity in English reading lessons in Hong Kong', 

Language, Culture and Curriculum, vol.l2 no.3, pp. 285-296. 

liu, Shuyong, 1997, An outline history of Hong Kong, Foreign Languages Press, Beijing. 

Lui, Tai-Lok & Chiu, Stephen W. K., 1999, 'Social movements and public discourse on politics'. 

In T. W. Ngo (ed.), pp. 101-118. 

Luke, K. K. & Richards, Jack C, 1982, 'English in Hong Kong: Functions and status', English 
World-Wide, vol.3 no.l, pp. 47-64. 

Ma, Eric K. W. & Fung, Anthony Y. H. 1999, 'Re-sinicization, nationalism tind the Hong Kong 
identity'. In Clement So and Joseph Chan (eds.). Press and politics in Hong Kong: Case 
studies from 1967 to 1997, pp. 497-528, Chinese University Press, Hong Kong. 

Markee, Numa, 1993, 'S 3 imposium on linguistic imperialism: Perspective 3', World Englishes, 
vol.12 no.3, pp. 347-351. 

McLaren, Peter, 1995, Critical pedagogy and predatory culture, Routledge, London and New 
York. 

Miihlhausler, Peter, 1994, 'Language teaching = linguistic imperialism?' Australian Review of 
Applied Linguistics, vol.l7 no.2, pp. 121-30. 

Miihlhausler, Peter, 1996, Linguistic Ecology: Language Change and Linguistic Imperialism in 
the Pacific Region, Routledge, London and New York. 

Munn, Christopher, 1999, 'The criminal trial under early colonial rule'. In T. W. Ngo (ed.), pp. 

46-73. 

Ngo, Tak-Wing, (ed.), 1999a, Hong Kong's history: State and society under colonial rule, 

Routledge, London and New York. 

Ngo, Tak-Wing, 1999b, 'Colonialism in Hong Kong revisited'. In T. W. Ngo (ed.), pp. 1-12. 

Nicholls, Jane, 1993, 'S 3 imposium on linguistic imperialism: Perspective 4', World Englishes, 
vol.12 no.3, pp. 351-361. 

Pennington, Martha C. & Yue Francis, 1994, 'English and Chinese in Hong Kong: Pre-1997 
language attitudes'. World Englishes, vol.l3 no.l, pp. 1-20. 

Pennycook, Alastair, 1994, The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language, 

Longman, London. 

Pennycook, Alastair, 1998, English and the Discourses of Colonialism, Routledge, London. 

PhilUpson, Robert, 1992, Linguistic Imperialism, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 

PhilUpson, Robert, 1993, 'S 3 imposium on linguistic imperialism: Reply', World Englishes, 
vol.12 no.3, pp. 365-373. 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

64 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Phillipson, Robert, 1994, 'English language spread policy'. International Journal of the 
Sociology of Language, vol.107, pp. 7-24. 

Phillipson, Robert, 1997, 'Realities and myths of linguistic imperialism'. Journal of 
Multilingual and Multicultural Development, vol.l8 no.3, pp. 238-248. 

Phillipson, Robert, 1998, 'Globalizing English: Are linguistic human rights an alternative to 
linguistic imperialism?' Language Sciences, vol.20 no.l, pp. 101-112. 

Phillipson, Robert, 1999, 'linguistic imperialism re-visited or re-invented: A rejoinder to a 
review essay'. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, vol.9 no.l, pp. 135-37, 142. 

Pierson, Herbert D, 1987, 'Language attitudes and language proficiency: A review of selected 
research'. In Robert Lord & Helen N.L. Cheng (eds.). Language Education in Hong Kong, 
pp. 51-82, Chinese University Press, Hong Kong. 

Poon, Anita Y.K., 2000, Implementing the Medium of Instruction Policy in Hong Kong 
Schools', In Li, Lin & Tsang (eds.), pp. 148-178. 

Pride, J.B. & Liu Ru-Shan, 1988, 'Some respects of the spread of English in China since 1949', 
International journal of the sociology of language, vol.74, pp. 41-70. 

Rabinow, Paul, 1984, The Foucault reader. Pantheon Books, New York. 

Ransome, Paul, 1992, Antonio Gramsci: A new introduction. Harvester Wheatsheaf, London & 
New York. 

Ricento, Thomas, 1994, Review of ROBERT PHILLIPSON 1992, TESOL Quarterly, vol.28 no.2, 
pp. 421-27. 

Scollon, Ron, 1999, 'Official and unofficial discourses of national identity: Questions raised 
by the case of contemporary Hong Kong', In Ruth Wodak & Christoph Ludwig (eds.). 
Challenges in a changing world: Issues in critical discourse analysis, pp. 21-35, Passagen 
Verlag, Vienna. 

Scollon, Ron, 2000, Review of: ALASTAIR PENNYCOOK, 1998, Language in Society, vol.29 no.l, 
pp. 138-141. 

Scollon, Ron & Wong Scollon, Suzanne. 1999, 'Political, personal, and commercial discourses 
of national sovereignty: Hong Kong becomes China', In Maiju Lauristin & Leen Rahnu 
(eds.), Intercultural communication and changing national identities. Selected papers 
presented at Nordic Network for Intercultural Communication N Annual Symposium, 6-9 
November 1997, Tartu, Estonia: Tartu University Press, pp. 49-71. 

Shen, Yongxing (ed.), 1994, Cong Buodianzha dao Peng Dingkang - Li Jie Gangdu Zhuanlue 
('From Henry Pottinger to Chris Patten - A short biography of governors of Hong Kong'), 
Sun Tin Press, Hong Kong. 

Skutnabb-Kangas, Tove, 1988, 'Multilingualism and the education of minority children'. In T. 
Skutnabb-Kangas & J. Cummins (eds.). Minority education: From shame to struggle, pp. 
9-44, Multilingual Matters, Clevedon. 

Skutnabb-Kangas, Tove & Robert PhilUpson, 1986, 'Denial of linguistic rights: The new mental 
slavery'. Paper presented at the Xlth World Congress of Sociology, New Delhi, August 
1986. 

So, Daniel, 1992, Xanguage-based bifurcation of secondary education in Hong Kong: Past, 
present and future'. In K. K. Luke (ed.). Into the twenty-first century: Issues of language 
in education in Hong Kong, pp. 69-95, Linguistic Society of Hong Kong. 



O _ 50 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IE TY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERIC 




CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



So, Daniel, 2000, 'Achieving biUteracy and triUngualism without MOI-based bifurcation of the 
schools: A plea for third-alternatives'. In Li, Lin & Tsang (eds.), pp. 9-33. 

Spolsky, Bernard, 1995, Review of ROBERT PHILLIPSON 1992, Journal of Pragmatics, vol.23 
pp. 231-34. 

Topley, Kenneth, 1999, 'British rule in Hong Kong: From 1841 to the Sino-British Joint 
Declaration of 1984', In Albert H. Yee (ed.), pp. 109-151. 

Tsang, Steve, 1997a, 'Government and politics in Hong Kong: A colorual paradox'. In J.M. 
Brown & R. Foot (eds.), pp. 62-83. 

Tsang, Steve, 1997b, Hong Kong: Appointment with China, I.B. Tauris, London & New York. 

Tulviste, Peeter & James V. Wertsch, 1994, 'Official and unofficial histories: The case of 
Estorua', Journal of Narrative and Life History, vol.4 no.4, pp. 311-329. 

Valentine, Tamara M, 1993, 'Symposium on linguistic imperialism: Perspective 5', World 
Englishes, vol.l2 no.3, pp. 361-365. 

Vines, Stephen, 1998, Hong Kong: China's new colony, Aurum Press, London. 

Welsh, Frank, 1993, A history of Hong Kong, Harper Collins Publishers, London. 

Whelpton, John, 1999, "The future of Cantonese: Current trends', Hong Kong Journal of 
Applied Linguistics, vol.4 no.l, pp. 43-60. 

Wong, Timothy, 1996, Ethnic identity and national identity of the people in Hong Kong: A 
liberal explanation, Hong Kong: Occasional Papers No. 50, Hong Kong Institute of Asia- 
Padfic Studies, Chinese University of Hong Kong. 

Yang, Yuanhua, Bao Bingzhong & Shen Jishi. 1997, Xianggang cong Gezhan dao Huigui ('Hong 
Kong: From annexation to its return to motherland'), Fujian People's Publishing Co., 
Fujian, China. 

Yee, Albert H (ed.) 1999a, Whither Hong Kong: China's shadow or visionary gleam? University 
Press of America, New York and Oxford. 

Yee, Albert H, 1999b, 'Hong Kong's education system: The universities'. In Albert H. Yee 
(ed.), pp. 219-270. 

Yu, Shengwu & Liu Cunkuan, 1994, Shijiu Shiji de Xianggang ('Nineteenth century Hong 
Kong'), Unicom Publishing Co., Hong Kong. 

Yuan, Bangjian, 1987, Xianggang Shilue ('An outline of Hong Kong history'), Chung Lau 
Publishing Co., Hong Kong. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATIO^ gENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 2 — HONG KONG PARENTS' PREFERENCE FOR ENGLISH-MEDIUM EDUCATION 



Notes 

1. See Flowerdew (1998: xiiv) for more details of Hong Kong's economic achievements. 

2. There does exist a 'counter-nanative' written mostly by Hong Kong Chinese social scientists (see, 
e.g., Ngo, ed., 1999a). The themes and critical arguments brought up in the 'revisiting' of colonialism 
by Ngo and his colleagues include: favoritism toward Chinese who collaborated with the colonial 
regime, rural politics, legal discrimination and intimidation in early colonial rule, social movements 
as a result of lack of political representation. These, however, do not amount to an effective 
refutation of the prevailing view that the colonial governance of Hong Kong was in the main 
benevolent. 

3. It should be noted that the closing of the borders did not quite stop the flow of immigrants eager to 
enter Hong Kong; it merely forced mainlanders to come illegally. To this day, illegal immigration and 
the trafficking of humans through various means continue to make news stories, so much so that 
English newspapers in Hong Kong have adopted an abbreviated term H' to stand for 'illegal 
immigrant', which is especially commonly used in news headlines. 

4. For more detailed discussion of the political and social impact of the Tiananmen incident, see 
Flowerdew (1998), Chapter 5, 'Tiananmen and After'. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



Implications of the recommendation that 
English become the second official 
language in Japan 

Kayoko Hashimoto 

Monash University, Australia 



Since Japan has never been colonised and has always possessed a 
common language (the national language), it has a unique position in 
terms of introducing foreign languages. This creates a specific local 
response to the worldwide phenomenon of English imperialism. 
However, events eeuly in 2000 created a new context that has forced 
various players to reposition themselves internally as a result of an 
increased vulnerability to external forces. In eeuly 2000, the private 
advisory group for the then Japanese prime miruster recommended 
that English should be used as the second official language in order 
to cope with globalisation. Reflecting this, the plan to introduce 
English at primary school level is now in the final stage of 
development. However, at the same time, the Ministry of Education 
has proposed a plan to revise the Fundamentals of Education Act in 
favour of the inclusion of nationalistic sentiment and practices. The 
policy repositioning is also minored in public sentiment. Recently, the 
Tokyo governor identified "foreigners" as a dangerous and unwelcome 
existence in Japanese society in his speech delivered at a ceremony to 
encourage the self-defence force. Despite this apparent increase in 
rhetorical conflict, it appears that fundamental values and beUefe 
within Japanese culture eue working to create continuity in the 
overall policy framework. This paper will document the manner in 
which these forces for continuity are still shaping even the most 
recent and extreme conflicts. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 3 — IMPUCATIOJB OF THE RECOMMENDATION THAT ENGLISH BECOME THE 2ND OFRCIAL LANGUAGE IN JAPAN 



Introduction 

The fact that Japan has never been colonised and has always possessed a common 
language has influenced the way it has introduced foreign languages to both society 
at large and to the school curriculum. Its lack of experience of being colonised has 
created a specific response to the worldwide phenomenon of English imperialism in 
the era of western globalisation. However, events in Japan in early 2000 have 
presented a new context that has provided various players with the opportunity to 
reposition themselves internally as a result of an increased sensitivity to external 
forces. One of the events is a recommendation by a private advisory group for a former 
Prime Minister that English should become the second official language in Japan. In 
this paper, I analyse the controversial recommendation and its implications, 
examining how it reflects particular elements of English language policies in Japan. 

While globalisation was a key concept of the 1990s in western societies, Japan 
was embracing a similar, but different term, internationalisation. As McCormack 
(1996) points out, Japanese internationalisation is accompanied by a continued 
Japanese insistence that its economic success demonstrates the unique qualities of 
the Japanese way, which is based on specific aspects of Japan's postwar history and 
specific views of the roles of Japanese citizens in the international community. In 
other words, the domestic motivations for the promotion of internationalisation were 
different from the goal or agenda of western globalisation. While Japanese 
internationalisation is based on the recognition of Japan and the rest of the world as 
distinct entities, globalisation is a process of producing a unified and integrated 
common culture in western society (Featherstone 1996). However, there is a different 
view whereby globalisation is seen as not a new process but rather as an extension of 
a long history of colonialism (Shohat and Stam 1996). This view indicates the 
existence of power struggles between those in the centre of the unified culture and 
those who would be marginalised by the apparently unifying force of globalisation. 

The view that globalisation is an extension of colonialism relates to arguments 
about English imperialism. Phillipson (1992) points out that the teaching of English 
cannot be politically neutral. Pennycook (1994) further argues that there has been a 
consistent but hidden cultural politics of English associated with the spread and 
maintenance of the language regardless of the various rhetorics of justification of the 
necessity of English teaching, such as colonialism, third-world development aid and 
internationalisation. The view linking globalisation, colonialism and English 
imperialism provides a perspective from which to examine Japanese policies for the 
teaching of English in order to explore whether teaching English is a product of a 
certain mechanism to maintain specific aspects of Japaneseness. 

In at least the last twenty years, the teaching of English as a foreign language 
has been seen as an essential element of Japan's internationalisation.' As I have 
argued elsewhere, in Japanese education policies, English has been identified as a 
device to develop abilities and qualities that will enable Japanese citizens to earn the 
trust of the international comm nity. However, at the same time, the respect for 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 3 — mPUCATTONS OF THE RECOMMENDATION THAT ENGLISH BECOME THE 2ND OmciAL LANGUAGE IN JAPAN 



Japanese traditions and culture is portrayed as part of the development of qualities 
that will earn such international trust. In other words, the promotion of 
internationalisation aims to re-educate Japanese citizens to re-assert to the world 
outside their collective identity as Japanese, and the teaching of English as a foreign 
language has been structured for that purpose (Hashimoto 2000). 



Snapshots of Japan in early 2000 

In July 2000, 1 visited the Tokyo and Osaka areas of Japan. The purpose of the trip 
was to collect data for research on several incidents that had occurred in early 2000. 
I wanted to examine the connections among those incidents and the implications of 
my previous findings about Japan's policies for English teaching, internationalisation 
and Japanese identity. 

In January 2000, in response to the 1999 Polls, which showed that constitutional 
reform was supported by a majority of Japanese citizens, the government set up 
constitutional research committees. In the same month, a report by The Plan for the 
21st Century Japan discussion group was released. The report proposed several 
innovative ideas, such as English becoming the second official language and changing 
the immigration law to increase the intake of migrants. Also in January, the then 
Prime Minister, Obuchi, delivered a speech on his administrative policies including 
some of the report's ideas as long-term goals, but he did not use the expression 
"English as the second official language". In February, the Education Minister 
announced that an inquiry into the post-war educational reforms would be requested, 
including a review of the Fundamentals of Education Act. One of the reasons for the 
review was that the Act did not include sufficient statements on Japanese history, 
tradition and moral education {Asahi Shinbun 2000: February 18, evening paper). In 
the same month, just before the graduation season, it was revealed that some 
prefectural boards of education had pressured schools to use the hinomaru, the 
national flag, and the kimigayo, the national anthem, at graduation ceremonies 
{Asahi Shinbun 2000: February 22, morning paper). ^ 

On April 7, Prime Minister Mori, who succeeded Obuchi after he collapsed because 
of illness, delivered his inaugural address to the Diet. It contained various 
nationalistic views but made no mention of the major role of English in Japanese 
society as had been emphasised by Obuchi. On April 9, the Tokyo Governor, Ishihara, 
gave a formal address to the Ground Self-Defence Force, stating that they would be 
requested to keep Tokyo under control if riots were initiated by sangokujin (literally 
third nationals, but extensively used to indicate foreigners) who might take advcuitage 
of any disorder resulting from an event such as an earthquake. On April 19, in 
response to a request from a non-government party for the withdrawal of his speech 
and an apology to the people concerned, the governor issued a statement to the party 
admitting that he had used an inappropriate expression {Asahi Shinbun 2000: April 
20, morning paper). 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, ID^k0TY, POWER AND EDUCATION gg 

best COPY AVAILABLE 



CHAPTER 3 — IMPLICATIONS OF THE RECOMMENDATION THAT ENGLISH BECOME THE 2ND OITICIAL LANGUAGE IN JAPAN 



In July, one of the major dairy product companies, Yidd-jirushi (Snow Brand), 
caused mass poisoning as a result of a failure in quality control in the hot and humid 
summer of Osaka, and one of the major department stores, Sogo, filed for bankruptcy 
because of a massive debt caused by the expansion of its venture business in the 
1980s. While I was in Japan, TV stations were running numerous programs about these 
incidents focusing on the inadequate systems of food safety, management style, 
quality control, and unemployment etc.. All of these programs seemed to reflect 
people's lack of confidence in society and in themselves. They seemed to indicate that 
"the systems that served as engines for Japan's prosperity are becoming obsolete" 
(Daily Yomiuri OutUne, 2000, July 29,). The snapshots as described above present a 
picture of Japanese society in confusion while trying to recover its confidence as a 
nation. I will now examine each of these snapshots in greater depth. 



Report: Plan for the 21st Century Japan 

In March 1999, the then Prime Minister Obuchi set up a private advisory body to 
discuss poUdes for the nation of abundance eind dignity, reflecting Obuchi's beUef 
that he had not had opportunities to present his own political vision after he was 
appointed as the Prime Minister in 1998 (Asahi Shinbun 2000: January 19, morning 
paper). The discussion group consisted of experts from academic and business sectors 
and altogether forty-nine people were invited to join the group. When the report Plan 
for the 21st Century Japan was released, media reports indicated that it reflected 
requests mostly from the business sector (Asahi Shinbun 2000: January 19, morning 
paper). The report listed nine key issues: education, international communication 
ability, sodal security, suffrage, finandal reconstruction, non profit sectors, the 
administration of justice, immigration policy, and foreign affairs. 

The proposal of English as the second official language is in the section entitled 
International Communication Ability: 

In both the rapid globalisation and information-orientation movements, we 
should be a pioneer at a worldwide level. For this purpose, in addition to being 
able to use information technology, it is essential to have ability in practical 
English. When we say English, we do not mean simply one foreign language but 
rather English as the international common language. It is an essential tool for 
obtaining information globally, sending messages, dealing with business and 
being involved in activities internationally. Needless to say, our mother tongue 
Japanese is the base for the inheritance of Japanese culture and tradition, but 
people should be also encouraged to learn other languages. However, to master 
English as the international common language means to acquire the most basic 
ability to access and understand the world.... In the long term, using English as 
the second official language should be considered, but it requires discussion 
among citizens. As the first step, we must make all efforts to make English a 
practical language of Japanese citizens. This is not merely an issue of foreign 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 3 — IMPUCATIONS OF THE RECOMMENDATION THAT ENGLISH BECOME THE 2ND OmCIAL LANGUAGE IN JAPAN 



language education. It should be tackled as a strategic task of Japan. {Asahi 
Shinbun 2000: February 25, morning paper) ^ 

According to the report, the idea of English as the second official language came from 
the necessity to communicate outside Japan in order to not be left out of the 
international community. Giving English the status of an official language seemed to 
be designed to increase pressure on people to master the language. Yamamoto, who is 
the Director of the Centre of Japanese International Exchanges and the secretary of 
the discussion group, thinks that the proposal reflects some urgent issues which 
Japan is facing and therefore it is inevitable that English will be used to introduce 
Japan's proud culture to the world {Asahi Shinbun 2000: February 25, morning paper). 

Another member of the discussion group, a journalist Funabashi (2000), explains 
that not only a limited number of members of the elite but also ordinary Japanese 
citizens should be able to use English if Japan wants to protect its national interests 
in the international community. He argues that national power depends on how well 
each Japanese citizen can employ English in order to access the Internet to 
communicate with the world. He considers that the current teaching of English as 
preparation for university entrance examinations is one of the obstacles to achieving 
these aims since the teaching of English lacks the perspective of English as a 
communication tool. According to Funabashi, the lack of the perspective of English as 
a communication tool comes from an understanding that Japeuiese society is a society 
which suppresses the power of language. Funabashi believes that the current language 
policy does not encourage people to maintain their facility in languages other than 
Japanese. He asserts that the change from monolingualism to multilingualism is 
crucial in order to facilitate communication with foreigners in Japan, and in order to 
provide a comfortable destination for migrants. 



English as the second official language 

Since the report Plan for the 21st Century Japan was released, the term, 'the second 
official language', has stirred reactions in Japanese society. There have been numerous 
cuguments and discussions in Veuious sectors. First of all, there is no clear definition 
of 'official language' in the report. It only mentions a requirement that biUngual 
publications should be produced by public organisations (Asahi Shinbun 2000: January 
19, morning paper). Tanaka (2000) points out the absence of a definition of die 'first 
official language', and augues that it comes from the assumption that Japanese is the 
national language, although this has never been legally defined. Usually, the need to 
define official languages occurs in a multilingual environment, and the status of 
'official language' functions to guarantee the fundamental human right of people who 
use the language as a native tongue. However, in Japan, the majority of Japanese do 
not need to use English in daily life and English is not a community language. 
Therefore, Tanaka argues that the second official language is in reality the official 
language with which to communicate with tha..intemational community. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 3 — IMPUCATIONS OF THE RECOMMENDATION THAT ENGLISH BECOME THE 2ND OFHdAL LANGUAGE IN JAPAN 



The ambiguous definition or the lack of definition of the second official language 
reflects the ambiguous purpose of leciming English. Oohara (2000) thinks that the 
Japanese economy has flourished while using a Japanese style of communication in 
the Japanese language. As a result, most Japanese do not feel the absolute necessity 
of mastering English. Comparing the situation in Japan with the case of Singlish in 
Singapore, she argues that Janglish is not the English of Japanese people because 
whenever Japanese people describe their English as Janglish it is used as an excuse 
for their incompetence in English. 

The ambiguous nature of the status of official languages in contrast to the 
dominant nature of the national language in Japan is also related to the way of seeing 
relationships between English and Japanese citizens. In other words, there is a 
tendency to expect something more than a communication tool from the use of 
English, which parallels the view of the relationships between the national language, 
Japanese, and Japanese citizens. For example, Fukuda (2000), an academic and 
commentator, thinks that even if the English of Japanese politicians is improved, the 
lack of opinions in their speech remains a problem in international arena. His view 
that what matters is not how to say but what to say is widely shared (Asahi Shinbun 
2000: February 25, morning paper).'* The emphasis on meaningfulness rather than 
superficial fluency in speaking English certainly reflects the inferiority complex in use 
of the language. However, it should be noted that in the recent social confusion, the 
Japanese way of communication has been questioned even in meaningfulness. 

A Japanese linguist, Ono (2000), who agrees that, among people whose 
professions require a high command of English, politicians are the people who most 
lack it, further argues that the recent decrease in Japanese language competency of 
Japanese citizens should be looked at within a framework of global literacy. He thinks 
that, because the ability to develop logical arguments is cultivated in the process of 
mastering the native language, global literacy can be achieved only with a strong 
command of the national language. 

The issue of national identity and English as an official language is not restricted 
to Japan. In other countries, it can also be linked to a view of internal politics. In 
Korea, Boku, who is a writer and a columnist, proposed the idea of English as an 
official language in 1998 in the middle of Korea's economic crisis (Ko 2000). According 
to Ko, Boku's original idea was to abolish the ethnic language and use English as the 
first language in order to survive in the era of globalisation, but Boku temporarily 
suggested having both the ethnic language and English as official languages of Korea. 
The idea divided the nation and the majority of people opposed the idea of English as 
the official language. The argument became active again after the appearance of the 
report Plan for the 21st Century Japan and after the issue was supported by a major 
newspaper. Ko argues that in the background there is a political attempt by people 
who are in power and fluent in English and who wish to maintain the division between 
South and North Korea. Ko suspects that, by isolating ordinary citizens who cannot 



O 68 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AMD EDUCATION 

73 



CHAPTER 3 — IMPUCATIONS OF THE RECOMMENDATION THAT ENGLISH BECOME THE 2ND OFnOAL LANGUAGE IN JAPAN 



speak English and by attempting to dominate the right to use English, those people 
are trying to enhance their power. 

In a similar vein, Inoue (2000), a socioUnguist, argues that the political 
implications of the use of English as the official language should be carefully looked 
at because there is the potential to divide Japanese citizens into two groups; those 
who are good at English and those who are not.^ Inoue thinks that the fact that the 
second official language was proposed in isolation from any discussion of Japanese 
identity indicates that the discussion group assumed the inseparable unity of 
Japanese language, nation and citizens, which would not be threatened even if 
English became the second official language. Reflecting a worldwide phenomenon 
whereby political conflicts have been triggered in the course of eliminating local 
cultures and languages, he believes that the maintenance of Japanese is important for 
political stability in Japan. 



Change in communication style 

People who welcomed the recommendation found value in its attempt to change the 
situation sunounding English teaching in Japan. Takenaka (2000), an academic 
researching economic policies, values the report for its radical ideas, which challenge 
conventional attitudes towards any type of reforms. He considers that the report 
reflects the serious problems which Japan faces. The external element is the fear of 
being left behind in international competition, and the internal element is the lack 
of faith in the current curricula for the teaching of English as a foreign language to 
youth. 

Most Japanese seem to share the view that the teaching of English, particulcirly 
the teaching of communication skills, has been a failure. The idea of English as the 
second official language is an attempt to change that situation. As Funabashi (2000) 
argues, in the background to the report there is an expectation that communication 
in English will change the ways Japanese people communicate and these changes in 
ways of communicating will make Japan more competitive in the international 
community. In other words, to give English the status of the second official fanguage 
means to create an eurifidal necessity for the use of English in Japanese society in 
order to force people to adopt new ways of communicating. On the other hand, people 
who are opposed to the idea of English as the second official language, argue that not 
all Japanese have to learn English. They think that the cunent problem will be solved 
if those in the political and business sectors work hard to achieve a high proficiency 
in the language, and that ultimately English having the status of the second official 
language in Japan will threaten Japanese identity. In their view, the current way of 
using Japanese to communicate is an essential element of Japanese identity. 

The complex ways of relating to the power of English can be observed in the 
emotional struggles with foreignness. Funabashi (2000), who criticises the lack of 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 3 — IMPLICATIONS OF THE RECOMMENDATION THAT ENGLISH BECOME THE 2ND OITICIAL LANGUAGE IN JAPAN 



discipline of communication in both the national language and foreign languages in 
Japan, points out an emotional reason for favouring "Japan that can say No". This 
phrase is the title of a 1991 book, which was written by Ishihara, who is now the 
Governor of Tokyo, urging Japanese people to say "no" to the USA because, with its 
economic power, Japan has overcome the earlier subordinate relationship with the 
USA. Funabashi argues that the desire to say "no" comes from an inferiority complex 
in relation to English competency because being able to choose to say "yes" or "no" 
according to situations is an essential element of communication. Certainly, it is not 
a coincidence that Ishihara, who urged Japan to say "no" to the USA ten years ago, 
now says "no" to foreigners living in Japan. Both statements indicate a desire to 
assert to the world the enduring distinctiveness of Japanese ways of Ufe. 



Sangokujin (third nationals) 

Immediately after Ishihara's speech was delivered on April 9th, the media reported 
numerous comments including both complaints and expressions of support from 
various sectors inside and outside Japan. The section of the speech where the 
sangokujin expression appears is as follows: 

...I cannot help but feel that Japan has been pulled apart in the last fifty years 
since we lost the war.... Probably the Whites didn't like the fact that among non- 
white races only the Japanese have managed to establish a splendid modem 
state. Therefore, America thought Japan dangerous and tried to pull Japan 
apart. Such an attempt is symbolised in the Constitution. I think nobody can 
deny that the consequences are apparent now.... In today's Tokyo, many 
sangokujin and foreigners who migrated illegally have repeatedly committed 
vicious crimes. The crime pattern in Tokyo is now different from the one in the 
past. Under such a condition, I can imagine that huge riots will happen if any 
disaster occurs. This is a reality. In order to cope with such situations, police 
forces might not be sufficient. If it is the case, I would like to request your 
service not only to rescue people in Tokyo but also to maintain order. I expect 
that you will pursue the task as your big mission.... (Asahi Shinbun 2000: April 
12, morning paper)® 

First of all, the word sangokujin, a reduced form of dai sangoku jin (literally meaning 
'the third country people'), has a historical background. Most members of Japanese 
younger generations who did not experience World War U have never heard of the 
word. Originally, it was a politically neutral word, which described people who did not 
belong to either Japan or the Allied Powers at the time of the end of World War U. 
Those people were Koreans and Taiwanese who were freed from the colonial rule of 
Japan (Satou 2000: 9). Since the late 1940s, the word has lost its neutrality and had 
been used to describe people living in Japan who are not officially recognised as 
JapcUiese citizens. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION^ IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

75 



CHAPTER 3 — IMPLICATIONS OF THE RECOMMENDATION THAT ENGLISH BECOME THE 2ND OPHCLAL LANGUAGE IN JAPAN 



The speech has been criticised in three points. One is that it was addressed to the 
defence force, which Ishihara called military. This indicates his readiness to rely on 
the defence force in order to solve political problems. Secondly, it ignores a historical 
fact, and thirdly it projects an image that all Koreans and foreigners living in Japan 
eire criminals and therefore dangerous. On April 19th, Ishihara issued a statement in 
response to the request from a non-government party for a withdrawal of his speech 
and an apology to the people concerned. His decision was reported as a political 
decision to avoid a conflict with the political party. {Asahi Shinbun 2000: April 20, 
morning paper). He said: 

I used the expression sangokujin for foreigners who have illegally migrated. 
However, this expression had been used as a discrirtiinatory word, which was 
different from the meaning I intended. Therefore, it is regrettable to 
unintentionally hurt Koreans and other foreigners living in Japan. Since I did 
not have any intension to hurt foreigners in general, I will not use such 
inappropriate expressions that will cause misunderstcmding. From now on, I 
would like to promote human rights policies in order to get rid of discriininatory 
ideas toward Koreans and other foreigners living in Japan.^ 

Ishiheura's statement was received by the party as a withdrawal of his speech and an 
apology, and no further action was taken. Ishihara's statement of apology refers only 
to the expression sangokujin but not to the content of his speech. Nevertheless, 
Ishiheura was not asked to take formal responsibility by resigning from office. This 
reflects a fact that his view is based on official reports about crimes committed by 
foreigners and the attitudes expressed are shared by the majority of Japanese citizens. 

Nakashima (2000) analyses the White Papers and reports produced by the 
Metropolitan Police Department and concludes that the Ishihara's claim that "many 
sangokujin and foreigners who migrated illegally have repeatedly committed vicious 
crimes" is not true. Nakashima argues that the nature of crimes committed by 
foreigners were not properly analysed and addressed. Therefore, he argues that 
Ishiheura's speech was not accidentally delivered by a careless politician, but instead a 
well-crafted attempt to stir up Japanese citizens emotionally in their political despair 
by leading them to exclude foreigners. This explains why a part of his speech referring 
to the purpose of the American occupation of Japan after World Weu: H has not been 
questioned. 

Most of the protests and complaints in response to Ishihara's speech a’'e about 
the references to the sangokujin and foreigners. These people include not only 
Koreans emd Chinese living in Japan but also other nationals who are working in 
Japan to overcome the shortage of memual workers in Japan. There is an interesting 
twist in the rhetoric in Ishihara's speech. He blames the USA for its racism in its 
attempt to pull apart Japan and identifies this attempt as a fundamental cause of 
problems of today's Japan, and then he bleimes minority ethnic groups and foreign 
labourers for their non-Japaneseness and identifies them as a threat to Japanese 
society. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATimtjDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 7^ 



CHAPTER 3 — IMPUCATIONS OF THE RECOMMENDATION THAT ENGLISH BECOME THE 2ND OFnCIAL LANGUAGE IN JAPAN 



Given that Ishihara has been seen as a political leader with a strong personal 
style, including the way of communicating with the public, the influence of his views 
on the public is significeuit. This kind of xenophobia, oriented both internally and 
externally, is not unusual in times of domestic crisis. If Ishihara's speech represents 
the fear of being pushed by foreign power, the recommendation for English to become 
the second official language seems to represent an attempt to survive together with 
such power, which is part of the tide of western globalisation. It is clear that 
proponents of a wider use of English in Japan see English as a device to achieve wider 
cultural change within Japanese society. Ishihara's views reflect a particular, but 
nanow euid negative way of responding to this desire for cultural reform. 



Conclusion 

Given that for at least the last twenty years the importance of oral communication 
has been emphasised in foreign language curricula in both secondary and tertiary 
education, and from 2001 English will be introduced to primary education as part of 
special activities in order to expose children to the language from eui early stage, it 
can be argued that the discussion group found the need for a radical change in 
approaches to English language education. Clearly pushed by the business sector, 
which sees the urgency of acquiring language skills as essential for national survival, 
the group attempted to change the way Japanese people communicate in English. As 
the report says, it should be discussed among citizens whether English is given a 
status of the second official language of Japan. However, the notion of the need for 
change in the ways of communicating with the world is very interesting for its 
attempt to alter an aspect of Japeuiese culture by using a foreign leuiguage as a tool. 
Even though the idea is not based on a clear understanding of the world history of 
English colonialism, it indicates a new way involving language in shaping cultural 
identity. Resistance to the idea reflects continuity in Japanese attempts to preserve 
Japanese culture and to use English to project Japaneseness to the world. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 3 — MPLICATIOMS OF THE RECOMMENDATION THAT ENGLISH BECOME THE 2ND OFROAL LANGUAGE IN JAPAN 



References 

Featherstone, M., 1996, 'Localism, Globalism, and Cultural Identity' in: R. Wilson & W. 
Dissanayake (eds.), Global/Local Duke University Press, Durham. . 

Fukuda, K. 2000, 'Obuchi "21 Seiki Nippon no Kousou" Daihihan' in Bungei Shunjuu, April, 
pp. 94-105. 

Funabashi, Y., 2000, 'Eigo Kouyougoron no Shisou' in Gengo, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 22-27. 

Hashimoto, K., 2000, '"Internationalisation" is "Japanisation": Japan's Foreign Language 
Education and National Identity' in Journal of Intercultural Studies, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 
39-51. 

Inoue, F. 2000, 'Kouyougoka no Hitsuyou Keihi' in Gengo, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 30-37. 

Ishihara, S. 1991, Japan That Can Say No., translated by F. Baldwin, Simon & Schuster, New 
York. 

Kato, S. 2000, 'Futatabi Eigo Kyouiku ni tsuite' in Asahi Shinbun, February 17, evening paper. 

Ko, Y. 2000, 'Kankoku no Eigo Kouyougokaron' in Gengo, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 38-39. 

McCormack, G. 1996, 'Kokusaika: Impediments in Japan's Deep Structure' in: D. Denoon et al. 
(eds.). Multicultural Japan: Palaeolithic to postmodern. University Press, Cambridge. 

Nakashima, S. 2000, 'Kensho Ishihara Hatsugen' in A. Utsumi et al. (eds.), 'Sangokujin' 
Hatsugen to Zainichi Gaikokujin, Asahi Shoten, Tokyo. 

Oohara, M. 2000, '"Shinglish" Haijyo Houshin no Butai Ura' in Gengo, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 28- 
29. 

Oono, S. 2000, 'Eigo Daini Kouyougoron no Kentou Hazure' in Shuukan Asahi, April 21, pp. 
129-132. 

Pennycook, A. 1994, The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language, Longman, 
London. 

Phillipson, R. 1992, Linguistic Imperialism, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 

Satou, N. 2000, 'Jyosetsu: Haiseki ka, Kyousei ka' in A. Utsumi et al 'Sangokujin' Hatsugen to 
Zainichi Gaikokujin, Akashi Shoten, Tokyo, 5-24. 

Shohat, E. & Stam, R. 1996, 'From the Imperial Family to the Transnational Imaginary: Media 
Spectatorship in the Age of Globalization', in: R. Wilson &W. Dissanayake ed, 
Global/Local, Duke University Press, Durham. 

Takenaka, H. 2000, 'Kikikan motoni "Koudou" Teishou, Kokumin ni Genjitsuteki Ronsou 
Motomeru', Asahi Shinbun, January 27, morning paper. 

Tanaka, K. 2000, 'Kouyougo towa Nanika', in Gengo, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 40-46. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 3 — IMPLICATIONS OF THE RECOMMENDATION THAT ENGLISH BECOME THE 2ND OFHCIAL LANGUAGE IN JAPAN 



Notes 

1 In the Japanese education system, English is a compulsory subject in lower secondary schools (three 
years) and a major foreign language subject in upper secondary schools (three years). At tertiary 
level, English is often a compulsory general subject for two years. From 2001, English has been 
introduced to primary education as a special activity. 

2 The bill, which declared that the hinomaru and the kimigayo were respectively Japan's national flag 
and anthem, was passed in 1999. 

3 Translated into English by the author. 

4 See a comment by the writer, Hisashi Inoue. 

5 When the first foreign minister Mori in the Meiji era attempted to introduce English as an official 
language, the proposal was not approved for the same reason. See Kato's (2000) article. 

6 Translated into English by the author. 

7 Translated into English by the author. 




O 



74 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



4 Culture and identity in the English 
discourses of Malaysians 



Azirah Hashim 

Faculty of Languages and Linguistics 
University of Malaya 



In a country where many ethnic groups, each with their own identity, 
come together to form a nation, there has to be some compromise in 
order that the needs and aspirations of the individual ethnic 
identities give way to the national identity. At the same time, it is 
important that the differences are considered a strength and that 
being a Malaysian does not make one less culturally a Malay, Chinese 
or Indieui. This paper looks at the English discourses of Malaysians to 
determine the accommodation and compromise that have taken place 
from a linguistic perspective. Examples taken from written and 
spoken discourse, such as newspaper articles, advertisements and 
conversations are used to illustrate both the culture and identity of 
Malaysians and of the different ethnic groups in the country. 



O 

ERIC 



Introduction 

There are many countries with multiracial and multicultural populations as a result of 
migration for commercial, political or other reasons. Malaysia is a multiracial country 
which has arisen from events and developments which have occurred over the last four 
or five hundred years auid accelerated in the last century. Where many ethnic groups, 
each with their own identity, come together to form a nation, there has to be some 
compromise in order that the needs and aspirations of the individual ethnic identities 
give way to the national identity in order that the greater society can exist. Conflicts 
occur when issues of identity at the ethnic level are in conflict with those at the 
national level. 

This chapter looks at the English discourses of Malaysians to determine the 
accommodation and compromise that have taken place from a linguistic perspective. 

It begins first by giving a background to the emergence of the different ethnic groups 
in Malaysia and some opinions given by various people about what it means to be a 
bangsa Malaysia (a Malaysieui race). It corihnues with an examination of the 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 71 

£ 0 best copy available 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



discourses of Malaysians, both written and spoken, and a discussion of the features 
that reveal the culture and identity of Malaysians as a whole and also of the different 
ethnic groups. 

There are many definitions of both "culture" and "identity" and a few cue given 
here. Le Vive (in Ting Toomey and Korzenny 1993:20) describes culture as an 
"inherited system of ideas that structures the subjective experience of individuals". 
Geertz (1973) (in Ting Toomey and Korzenny 1993: 20) views culture as shared ways 
of Ufe, with sharing on both the concrete level (eg cis artifacts) and the cognitive level 
(eg language, symbols). Both views emphasise that culture is a shared, consensual 
perspective within a social group, although members may not share that perspective 
equally or in every facet of experience. 

Holliday (1999:237) provides two paradigms of culture. The large culture 
paradigm refers to ethnic, national and international entities. "In contrast, a small 
culture paradigm attaches "culture" to small social groupings or activities wherever 
there is cohesive behaviour and thus avoids culturaUst ethnic, national or 
international stereotyping". 

In this paper, the focus will be on national and ethnic culture although social 
groupings may often not have any significant ethnic or national qualities. 

Identity, whether it is on an individual, social or institutional level, is something 
that is dynamic. It is something that we are constantly building and negotiating all 
our lives through our interaction with others. "Whereas some bcisic principles may 
remain more or less identical over a relatively long period of time, the more specific 
social representations, such as attitudes, may adapt strategically to social and 
political change" (Van Dijk 1998:121). Identity is also multi-faceted: we switch into 
different roles at different times in different situations and settings, and each of those 
contexts may require a shift into different identities for the people involved. This shift 
can be displayed through the language that we use. The language we use can indicate 
the variety that we speak, the accent and the grammatical variations. 

Gudykunst, Ting-Toomey and Chua (1988:93), following Tajfel, provide the 
following definitions of social identity. Social identity is "that part of an individuaVs 
self-concept that derives from his (or her) knowledge of his (or her) membership in a 
social group (or groups) together with the value and emotional significance to that 
membership" . Social identity is based on shared social beliefs (Doise and Sinclair 
1973) and social representations (Hewstone, Jeispars and Lalljee 1982). 

Identity here is restricted to "a shared core of social self-definition". By this, we 
mean "a set of social representations that members consider typical for their group". 
"The social practices, symbols, settings or forms of organisation that are typical for a 
group and with which members identify, would in that ceise be the contextually 
variable manifestations of social identity" (Van Dijk 1993:124). 

People construct their social identity by categorising themselves (or are 
categorised by others) as belonging to a social group through particular types of 
representation. This paper will look at how specikers' choice of linguistic code or 
variety plays an important role ir establishing their group identity. 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AMD IDENTITY IM THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



Background and history 

The rise of nationalism which led to the independence of Malaysia in 1957 brought 
with it the emphasis on Malay as an element of national identity. English was given 
the status of official language for ten years after independence and after that, it 
became the second language of the country. It was the language of educational 
instruction until the seventies euid is still used in many domains today. 

Malaysia is a multi-racial and multi-religious country with three dominant ethnic 
groups, Malays, Chinese eUid Indians. More than 60% aie ethnic Malays or belong to 
the indigenous races, less that 30% Chinese and about 10% Indians. Each ethnic group 
has its own culture, which includes its practices, beUefe and attitude, a set of social 
representations that the members of the group consider to be typical for their group. 
There is also the overall Malaysian identity that encompasses all ethnic groups which 
also has its own set of values, beUefe and practices. 

This chapter will attempt to determine how identity is constructed in the 
discourses of Malaysieins, observing the fact that the people involved have changing 
social practices and experiences: for example, the economic achievement of the Malays 
has increased, the educational experience has changed vastly and there has been 
cultural interchange within Malaysia and between Malaysia and other nations. 

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, Malaya was fairly homogeneous in 
terms of ethnic groups. The majority of the people were Malays Uving in small villages. 
In the interior were the aboriginal people eUid there were small Chinese communities 
in Malacca and Penang and small communities of Indians who had settled down in 
Malaysia. The Malays spoke different dialects in different geographical locations but 
they were by and large monolingual. Even the Chinese people in Malacca (the Babas) 
spoke a dialect of Malay (Ozog 1993:61). 

The second half of the nineteenth century saw a massive influx of Chinese into 
Malaysia to work mainly in the tin mines. Homogeneity gave way to heterogeneity. 
These Chinese immigrants, however, had Uttle to do with the Malays. They resided in 
urban areas and small tin mining towns. The development of rubber brought about the 
recruitment of labour from India who were mainly Tamil or Malayalan speakers. There 
were other Indians who came to work as clerks and shopkeepers and so another 
language was added to the existing ones. Interaction between the communities was 
mainly found in commerce and trade and a society with some bilingual ability arose. 

The British introduced English medium schools, attended mainly by Chinese and 
Indians due to their location in towns. Malays were largely excluded because they 
lived in villages and because they held the view that these schools were Christian 
schools which aimed to convert people to Christianity. However, the British did open 
a school in Kuala KangseU for sons of the elite Malays, many of whom formed the 
backbone of the civil service after independence. 

After the war, Malaysia, being relatively unified, was ready for independence. 
There were two difficulties — the place of the Chinese and Indians and their 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AMD EDUCATION 



77 




CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



languages and the place of English (Ozog 1993:65). The Chinese wanted citizenship 
but the rise in Chinese nationalism and the rise of communism led to an increase in 
Malay nationalism and the call by the Malay nationalists that Malay be recognised as 
the sole national language. The Razak report of 1956 promoted Malay as the national 
language and put forweud that there should be a gradual change to Malay as the 
medium of instruction in primary schools. To ensure harmony, Chinese and Tamil 
schools were also allowed and English was permitted to be used as a medium in 
secondary schools. The importance of bilingualism both as a tool for national unity 
and also as a means of ensuring national devebpment was present at the time of 
independence (Ozog 1993:65). 

The history of the nation indicates that there have been fluctuations in the 
economy and politics in the period from independence until now. There was a 
recession in the eighties and political upheaval in the late eighties. The nineties saw 
the rapid changes cissodated with the boom period followed by the regional economic 
down turn of the late nineties. Amongst the ethnic groups, the economic success of 
the seventies until the nineties coincided with the creation of a Malay business class. 
Malays became more urban and more involved in business, which had long been the 
domain of the other races. The change which took place for the Malays who moved 
from the villages to the towns and capital city was mainly government driven. 
Traditional values had to undergo change — what was normal in villages like 
cooperation and coexistence were not so conducive or relevant to the capitalist 
economy. Ability to compete with others became more important and wealth and 

/ possession came to be seen as a reflection of status. 

Places of work and living were no longer homogeneous but a mixture of different 
communities. Children of the different ethnic groups started going to the same 
schools. A Malaysian identity slowly started emerging from this convergence of the 
different ethnic groups. 

The Malaysian identity 

The national identity for all ethnic groups is Malaysian but within that are the 
different ethnic and cultural identities, Malays, Chinese, Indians and others. The 
different groups still see themselves as belonging to different groupings due to 
differences of origin, religion, culture and other factors. Although no culture is 
composed of exactly the same individuals, each culture contains similar pervading 
traits recognisable to all members. Being multi-religious, we have Islam as the religion 
of the Malays, while many of the Chinese are Buddhists, most Indians are Hindus and 
a number are of Chinese and Indians are Christians. Each ethnic group appeeus to have 
its own core values and beliefs but there are also values and beUefe which are similar 
in all the cultures, such as the ethics of family life and a respect for the hierarchical 
order of society. 

On Independence Day 2000, reporters from The New Staits Times (NST) asked a 

78 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERIC 




CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



number of Malaysieuis of different ethnic groups questions on what they thought of 
bangsa Malaysia (a Malaysian race), a term which has appecued recently. Some of the 
answers which relate to similarities and differences among the different ethnic groups 
are given here. 

About bangsa Malaysia 

"There are competing "definitions" of bangsa Malaysia among the different 
ethnic groups. A Malay may see bangsa Malaysia as Malay-based, or Malay as 
being definitive. A Chinese may see it differently, so also our compatriots in 
Sabcih and Sarawak. But I think that is to be expected; from their different 
positions they are in, they will come up with different conceptions of it. But 
bangsa Malaysia is evolving through the live-in experiences of the people, 
because various ethnic groups share common experiences and they also feel that 
their destiny is intertwined. We should allow it to evolve naturally and 
intervention from the top should not distort this natural process." 

"I do not see this need at a national level to define a bangsa. That's sociological 
suicide." 

"I define bangsa Malaysia simply as a nation whose people are multi-religious, 
multi-cultural, multi-lingual." 

How they see themselves 

"I never say I'm Indian. I mean, I don't even know what that means. I'm 
completely detribaUsed. I am actually a middle-class liberal." 

"I'm Chinese yes, but I'm Malaysian &st. China is not my home. I can't imagine 
living anywhere else." 

"My son is studying in a Chinese school. He is fluent in Chinese and Malay and 
his third language is English. Among his friends are many Chinese, Malays and 
Indians, and he sometimes speaks a different language with each of them, 
depending on the circumstances." 

"In 20 years' time, I imagine him to be a youth with cultural resources from his 
parents, his friends and the school. He has got the three languages of the people 
of Malaysia, though unfortunately not those of Sabah and Sarawak." 

"I think we will socialise him in the direction of being a new Malaysian , in the 
sense that he respects the others and integrates with them." 

About impediments to unity 

"There are deeper divisions within communities than there are between them. 
Divisions of class, wealth, opportunity, education. There's a 3 iawning chasm, for 
example, between wealthy Malays and poor Malays." 

"We are building on the integration that has already happened. A friend, who 



O 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



has just moved to Singapore to work, walked into the office in a baju kurung and 
everyone was shocked to see her. But in Malaysia, if a Chinese or an Indian were 
to wear baju kurung, it's natural. We don't even see that as a difference 
anymore." 

About 25 years in the future 

"Differences will remain. They may even increase. I'd like to explore the 
possibilities inherent in accepting our differences, and seeking common 
ground." 

"The demographics of the races will change. Will this question still be relevant 
then?" 

"While tendencies towards ethnic and religious exclusion exist, I think a feiirly 
large number of young Malaysians will embody the characteristics of Malaysians, 
and not just those of only one ethnic community. I'm quite optimistic about 
this." 

This last statement is observed in the exhortations often made to the public such as 
that found in the following article. In this newspaper article from The Sun, November 
25, 2000 with the heading 'Malaysia is my country, says 'emotional' Sam/, the 
President of the Malaysian Indian Congress, reflects the feelings of belonging and 
unification. 

The Sun, Sunday 25 November 2000 
Malaysia is my country, says 'emotional' Sarny 

Kulim, Fri.: An emotional MIC president Datuk Seri S. Sarny Vellu, campaigning 
hard among Chinese voters in Taman Selasih last night, said India has no place 
in his life. 

"I can't go back to India because it is not my country. Malaysia is. It is here I 
will serve, and one day die," said Sarny Vellu. 

He was stressing a point. For the Chinese and Indians, Malaysia is their home, 
and they have to learn to live in harmony with the Malays. 

"They must live in harmony for at least 500 years, and only the BN can 
guarantee this will happen, for the benefit of generations to come. 

"Every time I visit India, they give me a 30-day visa because I am Malaysian," 
Sarny Vellu said, as the 200 people cheered. 

"I have been to China five times at the invitation of my counterparts, but I still 
have to come back to my country," he said. 

"Although I am president of MIC, problems affecting the Chinese community are 
also close to my heart," said Samy Vellu, citing his involvement in the "pig- 
compensation" issue during the JE epidemic. 

"The government was thinking of giving only RM50 per culled pig but I asked 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



for a minimum of RM120, sa 3 iing that a big number of pig farmers have five to 
six children to feed in a family. 

"Finally, it was fixed at RM105," he explained. 

He then took a swipe at Kelantan-ruled PAS for being insensitive to the plight 
of night business operators who were forced to shut down. 

However, there are also instances that show a community resisting any changes that 
may erode their cultural identity. One such case is the recent government proposal 
that children of all ethnic groups at primary school level be placed in schools which 
are Chinese or Tamil schools. The reason for this is to promote racial integration. 
Currently, there are a number of national-type schools which use either Chinese or 
Tamil as the medium of instruction. In these proposed vision schools, the children 
could all still learn in Malay, Chinese or Tamil depending on their ethnic background 
but at the same time eat and play together. Most of the Tamil schools agreed to 
participate. However, the Chinese education movement has opted out of the plan 
fearing that their cultural identity would be eroded. 



Language, discourse and identity 

The English used in Malaysia reflects the experiences of the people Uving in the 
country and can be considered different from others in that it has emerged to suit the 
culture and the identity of the people. People live and interact across the different 
languages or across varieties of the same language. In multilingual Malaysia, where a 
considerably large portion of the people are bilingual, code-switching is a common 
feature of spoken communication. Many, especially in the urban areas, are bilingual 
in Malay and English or multilingual in Chinese/Tamil-Malay-English, the result of the 
national education policy which stipulates that the main medium of instruction of 
education is Malay with English as a compulsory taught second language. 
Codeswitching includes the insertion of words, phrases or whole sentences from one 
language into another. It enables the speakers to change footing within the same 
conversation. For example, in a conversation between two Malays who use English 
regularly, there is often a switch from one language to another, and if both are from 
the Seune state and share a common dialect, then they often resort to using this 
dialect to show solidarity or intimacy. A colleague from the state of Kedah said that 
when she converses with another Malay from Kedah, they sometimes revert to the 
regional dialect whilst joking and that there is often codeswitching between English 
and the regional dialect of Malay. 

Lexical bonowing, the use of special words which exist in Malaysian society and 
perhaps not in others, is found in Malaysian discourse. The bonowing of words from 
one's native language appears to be one of the most obvious ways in which ethnic 
identity is marked in Malaysian English. One excunple is the use of Malay words for 
food, as can be seen in the extracts from Malay students' essays written in English and 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

86 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



the newspaper articles below. These words are often untranslatable into English and 
may be from the material domain, on sodal rituals or ceremonies, religion and 
institutions, or about intangible items, values, ideals and attitudes. They are used in 
the English discourse to authenticate the item or event which is unfamiliar to the 
western world. 

Extracts from essays by Malay students 

Our favourite food is nasi dagang. The other foods are nasi minyak, nasi kerabu 
and others. 

You can see many keropok makers in my hometown. 

Keropok lekor is quite different from other keropok. 

Sometimes when public holiday comes, for example, Nuzul Quran public holiday, 
we always make foods and drinks and put it at the mosque and we eat it 
together after the prayers. 

Other words used are; wau, gasing 

Nasi dagang, nasi minyak and nasi kerabu are different types of rice dishes popular in 
certain states in Malaysia. Keropok is a commonly found fish or prawn savoury and 
keropok lekor a type of keropok available in the state of Kefantaui. Nuzul Quran is a 
Quran reading competition held once a year and is a major event for some Malays. Wau 
and gasing are traditional geunes which are played mainly in Kelantan. 

Extracts from newspaper articles 

Article, New Straits Times (NST) 

No ceramah here! 

"Stay away from our village!" 

That warning was made by Kampung Jalan Kebun villagers in Klang to the 
organiser of a proposed political ceramah this Sunday... 

Article, NST 

Johor Barn, Fri-To mark the first Festival of Lights of the new millenium, Eden 
Garden Hotel Johor Baru has for the first time come up with a “kolam". 

Measuring six metres by six meters, the kolam was placed at an open area just 
outside the hotel's Palm Bistro... 

Article, NST 

Penang, Fri-The decision on whether to allow ceramah in mosques or surau is the 
prerogative of the respective State Governments, Datuk Seri Abdullah Ahmad 
Badawi said today... 

Saturday Notes, NST 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AMD IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



...The point is, of late, dvil servants seemed to be getting a lot of flak. The 
corruption cases as highlighted under the Road Transport Department's lesen 
terbang is one... 

As has been mentioned, lexical bonowing is often used for items or events with 
religious or cultural significance. Ceramah is a religious talk to educate people about 
religion, surau is a place where Malays pray and kolam is an Indian art decoration. 
Lesen terbang directly translated is "flying licence" refers to licences which are 
obtained illegally. 

The following article refers to the Malay tradition of rumah terbuka (open house). 
This is the open hospitality found in the kampung or villages and adopted by Malays 
in the cities as well. The open house is found during Hari Raya, the Muslim festival 
after Ramadhan and it means that the house is open to all to visit and usually plenty 
of food is served. It is considered a uniquely Malaysian tradition, now found also 
amongst the Chinese and Indicin households during Chinese New Year and DeepavaU. 
It has extended to not only festivals but also to occasions such as this. Independence 
day. 

Jalur Gemilang is the official name for the Malaysian flag. It means " a glorious 
range of values" and is often found in advertisements to depict the equal status of the 
states and the federal government, the unity of the people in Malaysia, Islam as the 
official religion and the importance of the rulers. 

NST, 31 August 2000 

Today the Jalur Gemilang is hoisted with pride at home. High Commissions and 
embassies throughout the world as Malaysians, irrespective of race, colour or 
creed, celebrate the nation's 43rd Merdeka celebrations. 

At missions abroad, ambassadors and High Commissioners would play hosts to 
dignitaries and guests showering them with Malaysia's very own true rumah 
terbuka hospitality. 

Advertisements from newspapers 

The two advertisements below which appeared in the newspapers on Independence 
Day reflect and encourage the unification of the different races in Malaysia. The 
visuals contain the Kuala Lumpur tower, a prestigious landmark and one of the tallest 
buildings in the world. It indicates the achievement of the people of the country, the 
pride of the nation and also an inspiration to what can be achieved. Also, in the 
background is the Malaysian flag and people from different ethnic groups mingUng 
together reflecting the different races Uving in harmony. The overriding impression 
given is that the different races Uve in harmony, have managed to overcome their 
differences and together have built a successful country. 

After four decades and much progress, recognition and respect, we pass on our 
dreams and aspirations to our children. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



O 84 

ERIC 



At Samsung, we understand this. Our achievement is measured by how well we 
help them succeed because the future is theirs. 

Syabas on your 43rd MERDEKA. 

Keranamu Malaysia! 

PERNAS wishes all Malaysians a Happy 43rd Independence Day 

T.ilfp a flawless symphony, Malaysia's racial harmony flows uninterrupted. As old 
hurdles are cleared and new barriers confronted, Malaysians from all walks of life 
unite to face the challenges of the future. A healthy respect for each other's 
traditions, cultures and values, drives us forward, achieving international 
acclaim, conquering mountains, traversing the sea and capping the North Pole. 

Looking back at how far we have come since August 31, 1957, let us not forget 
the long journey ahead. Only unity, which is our strength, will allow us to travel 
this road unhindered. 

The word syabas is used instead of the English version "congratulations" because of 
the more intense feelings it conveys to Malaysicuis. The message "we've done it" 
appears more emphatic with the use of syabas here. 

As mentioned ecuUer, there has been movement from villages to urban areas and 
many Malays have had to adapt to the climate in the cities. 

The following advertisement illustrates the new Malay identity, that of an 
enterprising and fast moving Malay in the corporate world. It illustrates that in spite 
of changes in the way of Ufe, certain values and beliefs have remained, as can be seen 
in Hafiz's statement which attributed his success to God and family. Amongst the 
Malays is the belief that hard work and human effort are by themselves insufficient 
and that success or the reverse is determined by the will of God. It is generally 
believed by Malays that fate which is willed by God cannot be chcuiged. In the past, 
it was also believed that what is called rezeki, which refers to one's allocation of 
wealth or good fortune, is also fated by God and it was not up to people to change 
what fate had bestowed on them. Life in the villages appeared to be like that in the 
past but with the gradual change and the movement of Malays from villages, this 
belief has been replaced by another, that people using their own free will can improve 
their lives. Belief in fate is still as strong but with that is the individual's free will to 
determine what happens in his/her life and that to be worthy of success and wealth 
entails hard work and effort and to engage in complex choices about how to live and 
progress. It can be said then that the individual's free choice to show effort in life has 
become a key ingredient of modem Malay economic identity. 

"Why climb the corporate ladder," when you can take the Uft?" 

Hafiz is a young man on the move. And, these days, most of the moving is done 
in his brand new German sports car. 

At 27, Hafiz is one of the brightest stars at Prudential and in the insurance 
industry. 

89 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 4 - CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



But while it's apparent that his commitment and passion are major factors in his 
success, he attributes many of his achievements to other sources of inspiration. 

"God and family , " he explains. "Everything we have is a blessing from God. And 
nothing we do is possible without our family's support." 

A bit unusual perhaps, coming from a self-confessed big dty boy. But then Hafiz 
is anything but usual. 

When he first joined the workforce six years ago, he quickly realised that he 
wanted more than a stable, predictable job in a large corporation. 

"Within the rigid structure of a corporate hierarchy, there are fixed rules. I have 
always believed in making my own rules. Working in Prudential gave me that. 

"Here, I get tremendous support from my colleagues in the agency, but I am also 
my own boss. I determine my own hours and set my own targets." 

And Hafiz believes that as the industry moves into providing total financial 
solutions instead of merely selUng insurance policies, the prospects have never 
been brighter. 

"I'm proud to say that many of my clients have become my friends. And with 
their support, the only limit is how much you believe in yourself." 

It's clear that Hafiz Ibrahim is on the road to success. Just that in this particular 
case, it's a super-highway. 

The next example I will look at is a brochure for British Petroleum Malaysia. This 
brochure gives information about the BP card that is available for free with a 
minimum purchase of RMIO at all participating BP service stations. The cards are 
designed to give members a sense of identity by integrating elements of culture in 
them. Five were designed with the guidance of an internationally renowned /eng shui 
expert and contain the five elements of wood, fire, earth, metal and water in feng shui 
theory: The Fire Element EZ card. The Wood Element EZ card, the Metal Element EZ 
card, the Earth Element EZ card and the Water Element EZ card. The feng shui theory 
states that the universe and everything in it is influenced by the five elements of 
wood, fire, earth, metal and water and that the baUuice and harmony of these five 
elements can be enhanced and energised to bring auspicious luck. The inclusion of 
feng shui into the brochure is to cater mainly for the Chinese many of whom have 
some belief in feng shui. 

Three of the cards contain cultural elements catering mainly to the Malay 
customers. They are: The Lights EZ card (light, as a symbol of purity exudes warmth 
and kindness, symbolises good over evil, and dispels fear), the Tepak Sirih EZ card (the 
tepak sirih, a container with leaves found in Malay weddings, expresses sincerity and 
openness in fostering closer bonds and solidarity) and the Keris EZ card (the keris 
which is a weapon of Malay heritage is a symbol of the Malay world, still used for 
ceremonial purposes and is believed to have the ability to shield the owner from 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 4 - CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



physical harm and misfortune). The use of these cultural elements are used to 
persuade the customers to obtain the card. 

Extracts from short stories 

The following is an extract from a short story about two students in a university in 
Malaysia discussing how they can keep in touch during the holidays. They are of 
Indian origin and have to hide their relationship from their families who plan to 
anange their marriage to a person of the parents' choice. 

The extract reflects the traditional society where marriages are ananged and 
mixing amongst the two sexes are frowned upon. This, however, Wcis written in the 
1960s and since then, there has been a more liberal attitude towards marriage and 
mixing, and cirranged marriages, except in villages and small towns, are not the norm 
anymore. 

A number of simplification devices are observed in this extract. Wong (1983) has 
noted that there are five main processes of simplification in Malaysian English: over- 
generalisation, omission, reduction, substitution and restructuring, and that it is not 
always possible to distinguish clearly among these five types of simplication. Some 
examples of these processes are found in these excunples. 

'Everything's Ananged' by Siew Yue Killingley 

Sitting in the lounge, watching the distracting and excited girls rushing by with 
packed cases, longing to go home to some decent food, Rukumani asked 
Devanayagam, 'This time you think you can write or not? Can send to Amy's house, 
what. My mother Ukes her mother. I can easily go there to get your letters. But 
I think better you don't put my name outside. Can just put 'Miss Amy Wong'. She 
knows your writing and won't open.' 

'I think so can,' replied Devanayagam, 'but helluva dijficult man. See ah, my 
sisters brothers all, running all over the house and if I write they all ask if I'm 
learning and want to look. Also ah, if I go to post letter that clerk at the post office 
can see me. He's a joker, so sure tell my father I send love letters. But still, try 



As soon as Johnny had gone out of the front door, Rukumani's mother started. 

'Young people nowadays have no shame. My mother would have sent me out of 
the house if I had entertained a boy friend as freely as that. All that whispering. 
What will the neighbours think? A Chinese boy coming to whisper with my 
daughter. Do the Radakrishnans next door allow their daughters to run wild? Do 
you ever see a strange boy visiting the daughters of Tharmaratnam? But my 
daughter is different. She wants to be modem and be seen with all sorts of men. 
Why do you want to make me suffer in my old age? Can't you see that I'm trying 
to arrange a good respectable marriage for you? Show your gratitude. You're 
driving me to the grave!' 



lah!' 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



Question foim 

This time you think you can write or not? 

The operator 'do' is omitted in this question and it is also often omitted in wh- 
questions in colloquial Malaysieui English. Omission of 'do' does not result in 
incomprehension of the meaning of the sentence. In wh-questions which require 
subject-verb inversion, the subject-verb order is often retained. This appears to be 
overgeneralisation of word order where subject must always be followed by a verb. 

Use of "can" 

Can send to Amy's house. 

Can just put 'Miss Amy Wong'. 

I think so can. 

Here the subject pronouns are dropped and the first two sentences begin with the 
modal 'can'. De Silva (1981) found that the modal auxiliary system is reduced in 
colloquial Malaysian English and that usually only 'can' and 'must' are the ones which 
are used. These modals are used with a number of different functions which in 
standard English are served by some of the other modals. In the above examples, 'can' 
is used to indicate possibility and ability. Below are examples given by De Silva (1981) 
in Wong (1983): 

You can have this book for a week. — permission 

You can drive ah?- ability 

Can lend me your bike or not? — willingness 

Sure can./ Can also. — agreement 

How the food there? Can do. — moderate approval 

You come with me lah. Can or not? — affirmation 

How can he allow this to happen?— incredulity 

Can't be she sick all this time. — improbability 

Can't be she still not home. — improbability 

Cannot be he take your money. — impossibility 

Cannot be he do all this. — impossibility 

Omission of connector 

But I think better you don't put my name outside. 

Tt is' is omitted in the above sentence. 'There' and 'it' together with the verb are often 
omitted in colloquial Malaysian English. 

Omission of object pronoun 

She knows your writing and won't open. 

There is often omission of the object pronoun in colloquial Malaysian English 

Particles 'ah' and lah' 

See ah, my sisters brothers all, running all over the house and if I write they all ask if 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

92 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AMD IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



I'm learning and want to look. Also ah, if I go to post letter that clerk at the post office 
can see me. 

But still try lah! 

In the above examples, the fillers 'ah' and 'lah' are used to convey emotive or 
affective attitudes of the speaker. By adding 'lah' the speaker in this instance is 
placing emphasis on his statement that he would try to get in touch with his friend. 
A number of people have looked at the particle 'lah'. Asmah (1986) in Mohammad 
Fadzeli (1999) believes that the function of 'lah' is to serve as a softener and that it 
can change a command to a request. Jaafar (1999) states that 'lah' is used in 
expressions which a Malaysian finds rather uncomfortable to use with a fellow 
Malaysian. He gives the example, that if someone says to a friend: "You look beautiful 
in your new dress", the reply could be "No-lah, you look much prettier". He explains 
that in general, it is considered immodest for a Malaysian to accept a compliment with 
just a thank you and that 'no-lah' would reflect the speaker's humility. The particle 
'ah' appears to be used to place a stress on what is said and to make the speaker 
appear more convincing. 

The next two extracts contain native forms of address in the Chinese and Malay 
communities. In the Chinese community, the older Grand Aunt is referred to as the 
first Grand Aunt, the second oldest Grand Aunt as the second Grand Aunt and so on. 
This way of addressing family members is also used for uncles, aunts, cousins, brothers 
and sisters and the writer of the story has just translated the forms of address into 
English, creating lexical items which may be unfamiliar to others from different 
cultures. The Malay forms of address in a family are used in the second extract. These 
forms are abbreviated to make them sound more colloquial. Kak is an abbreviation for 
Mkak (sister), bang for abang (brother) and mak for emak (mother). The forms of 
addresses for brother and sister in Malay are also used for non-family members for a 
person who is older than the speaker. The native terms are used to show respect and 
ethnic belonging. The other words which are bonowed from Malay are those for 
clothes — sampin (a cloth that is worn over a pair of trousers for men), baju Melayu 
(Malay dress) and worn for the Malay festival after Ramadhan Hari Raya. 

Reference to 'money in green packets' can only be understood in the cultural 
context of Malaysia. This is a practice of giving money to children during Hari Raya 
whereby the money is placed in little green envelopes. This practice was adopted from 
the Chinese tradition of giving red packets containing money during Chinese Mew Year. 
While red is the favoured colour of many Chinese, green is the Islamic colour and is 
favoured by the Malays. The Malay word salam which means clasping of hands, a Malay 
form of greeting, is used with the English progressive aspect in the second extract. 

'Return to Malaya' by Lee Kok liang 

Uy first grand-aunty sat on a low mahogany bench. She was a shapeless bundle 

in the dark. She turned round and saw me. Then her greeting reached me like 

an echo, distant and reverberating. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



My second grand-aunty had walked in swiftly from the back of the house, 
hurrying along a small child with shrill commands. She had grown very thin; the 
bones stuck out in her face, her small grey bun was held by a large hair-pin. She 
wore a sombre-coloured sarong and her thin arms were covered by a long-sleeved 
blouse. 

'Khairunnisa: A good woman' by Ellina Abdul Majid 

Sam and Kak Ida and Bang La, too only spoke with them in a very general way 
and it was obvious they were worried that Danny might try to touch one of them 
for a loan or some form of financial assistance, not that such an idea occurred 
to him at all. 

Meanwhile Mak couldn't help observing (from a safe distance) that the twins had 
evidently outgrown the outfits she'd given them and she didn't like the present 
ones they were wearing at all. 

There had been quite a lot of money in green packets at Hari Raya, though for 
Adam and Rafiq, who had endeared themselves to the relatives by looking 
adorable in their baju Melayu with miniature matching sampin and 
enthusiastically salam-ing everyone in sight. 

And Hari Raya itself had been very enjoyable with plenty of feasting and 
goodwill; except that Caroline regarded herself as participating in the 
celebrations under false pretences because she was still feeding the twins herself 
and hadn't been able to fast. 

The following two examples are advertisements from the radio of conversations 
between Malaysians in English. The first one is between a travel agent and a customer 
and the second involves a husband and wife and the wife's mother. In terms of 
grammar and choice of lexical items, they are typical of other conversations between 
Malaysians. They, like many other advertisements on television and radio, use English 
which is famiUar and relevant to the people in Malaysia. Since the advertisements aim 
to persuade people to buy a product or service, they would have to be in the language 
that the locals would be able to identify with. 

For this reason, MTV Asia which uses mainly American English has launched a 
show called MTV Syok! on a Malaysian terrestrial TV station which means "Great! 
Fantastic!" This is a colloquialism which is very effective in Malaysia and can be 
identified especially amongst the youth in Malaysia (Flack 1999:9). Language thus 
plays a key role in MTV's strategy to get a bigger audience in Asia. In an interview 
about 'English mound the world', the Senior Creative Director of MTV Asia said: 

I've made a personal rule not to commission anything outside of a country for 
that country, so if we're doing a show for Indonesia the title sequence and all 
the rest has to be made by a production company in that country. It keeps the 
programming relevant and the style local. And also it stops us — the great big 
ugly outsiders — doing the picture-postcard scenes. There's a danger of using 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICA , IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



'tourist material', travel-ad stuff which is not relevant for people Uving in 
Asia.. .(Flack 1999:10). 

Advertisements on radio 

Soft Lens Comfort Contact Lenses 

Travel agent: Good morning, Maam, how may I help you? 

Customer: I want to go on a hoUday. You know, shopping only, like the 

people in Paris or New York. Basically I want fun and I want 
to shop, shop, shop. 

Travel agent: Maam, is Milan okay? 

Customer: Ya, ya, ya, just tell me how much. 

Travel agent: That'll be ten thousand five hundred. 

Customer: Hah? Ringgit ah? Aiyo, can get diskaun ah? 

FORD Hits Traffic Report: 

Sound of horns 



O 90 

ERIC 



Wife: Ei, why can't get to mummy's house? Can you drive faster or not? 

You're driving Uke my aunty, you know. You want to go to my 
mother's birthday or not? 

Husband: Yalcih, sayang, if we can find the road, if not tak sampai. 

Wife: Hah, I've got mummy's phone. Hello, mummy. 

Mother: Ei, are you coming? Everybody's here, you know. Where are you 

and that husband of yours? 

Wife: Not my fault. Rezalah, dahlah balik lambat Now we're stuck in 

the traffic jam because he didn't switch on the radio. Then ada 
accident pulak. 

Mother: Where's Reza, let me speak to him. 

Wife: Cakaplah mummy, oiu car got hands free set. 

Husband: Hello aunty er mummy, happy birthday. 

Mother: What happy birthday. Since she marry you, I can't even see my 

daughter on my birthday. Hah? What are you trying to do? 
Everyday work late Uke some big shot. Tapi habuk pun takdak. 
Why did she marry you. 

Husband: Aunty, it's time for Hits Traffic report. Bye. 

Mother: Ei, I haven't finished. 

Husband: We'll get there soon, don't worry. 

In the first advertisement, there are the occurrences of particle 'ah', the first one used 
to indicate surprise or disbeUef, and the second one to soften the request. There is 
also the exclamation aiyo commonly found amongst Malaysians of all ethnic groups. 
There is considerable code-switching in the second advertisement between 

95 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION;, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



English and Malay, usual amongst Malay speakers of English. 

Yalah sayang, if we can find the road, if not tak sampai. 

Then ada accident pulak. 

Cakaplah Mummy, our hands got hands free set. 

Every day work late like some big shot. Tapi habuk pun takdak. 

Lexical borrowing is found in Yalah, sayang. Sayang is an endearment which is 
normally retained even in spoken English when the speakers cu:e both Malay. It is a 
term of endearment like 'darUng' or love'. The operator 'do' is omitted in the question 
"You want to go to my mother's birthday or not?" as in one of the other examples 
above. There is also object pronoun omission as in "Ei, why can't get to mummy's 
house?". 

Tense and aspect are often not found in colloquial Malaysian English and the 
simple uninflected form is frequently used for the present perfect. 'Since she marry 
you,...' is an example. Again, there is omission of the subject pronoun in 'Everyday 
work late like some big shot'. 

The switch to Malay when the speaker says Tapi habuk pun takdak identifies the 
speaker as a Malay and the pronunciation of the last word taddak (of the standeurd 
tiada or takda) in the northern dialect of Kedah reveals her origin. 

Morais (2000) gives examples of new meanings and new forms found in Malaysian 
English in her study of verbal interactions in a Ceu:-assembly plant. Words like 'call' 
eind 'hammer' cu:e used to convey meanings not found in the conventional use. 

They call us to save costs. 

That's all I've been talking all day. You start arguing with Eddie youll never end 
anything. I tell him off as I tell you because why he will come up.. .that sort of 
thing he wants to hammer people. 

Call here is used to mean tell or instruct. Morais gives the explanation for this use, 
that the Malay word panggil, the word for call may also mean to tell or instruct and 
that in Cantonese the word kiew which means call also conveys the meaning of tell or 
instruct. 

The word hammer is used to mean to 'verbally bash someone' and it may be a 
transfer from Malay into English. The Malay word hantam or pukul has the meaning 
of hit, both literally and figuratively. 

Examples of new forms in Morais data include okay used as a verb and because 

why. 

...because on the side there we can okay the car... 

...Because sometimes difficult car, two days also cannot okay. 

...That's all I've been talking all day. You start arguing with E youll never end 
anything. I tell him off as I tell you because why he will come up... that sort of 
thing. 

No, it's not practised because why that day... 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICA^Cg, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



91 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



According to Morais, because why "serves as an effective reinforcement of the central 
idea of giving a reason" (Morais 2000:98) and that the Malay equivalent being sebab 
mengapa may be translated into English as "the reeison why". 



Conclusion 

Forging a national identity without creating conflicts with the ethnic identities is a 
problem not only peculiar to Malaysia but also to many other countries and this is 
something that we are still grappling with. However, Malaysia can be considered to be 
a relatively successful multiracial society with a relatively harmonious coexistence 
among ethnic groups. Language plays a complex role in relation to ethnic and 
national identity. The common experiences of the group influence the actual text and 
talk of the individuals. It is hoped that the examples of Malaysian English discourse 
presented here have highlighted the linguistic features which are important in 
establishing group identity, in this Ccise, national identity, and yet preserving ethnic 
identities. 





92 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 4 — CULTURE AND IDENTITY IN THE ENGLISH DISCOURSES OF MALAYSIANS 



References 

Clark, R, and Ivanic, R,, 1997, The Politics of Writing, London, Routledge, 

Fernando, L„ (ed,), 1998, 22 Malaysian Stories, Heinemenn, Petaling Jaya, 

Graddol, D, and Meinhof, U,H„ 1999, 'English in a changing world' in AILA Review 13, 

Graddol, D„ McArthur, T, and Flack, D„ 1999, 'English around the world' in Graddol, D, and 
Meinhof, U.H., AILA Review 13, pp, 3-18. 

Gudykunst. W. B., Ting-Toomey, S, & Chua, E,, 1988, Culture and Interpersonal 
Communication, Sage, California. 

Hashim, A., 1999, The changing role of English in Malaysia' in HKBU Papers in Applied 
Language Studies, Vol. 4, ppl29-141, 

Holliday. A., 1999, 'Small cultures' in Applied Linguistics, Vol, 20, no, 2, pp, 237-264, 

Le page, R.B. and Tabouret-Keller, 1985, Acts of Identity, Cambridge University Press, London, 

Jaafar, M. F., 1999, 'Emblematic codeswitching represented in fiction: the case of the Malay 
discourse markers lah, what, ah' in Jumal Bahasa Moden, vol. 12, pp, 41-58, 

Killingley, S.Y., 1980, 'Everything's ananged' in Fernando, L„ 22 Malaysian stories, 
Heinemann, Petaling Jaya. 

BCramsch, C., 2000, Language and Culture, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 

Lee, K. L., 1980, 'Return to Malaysia' in Fernando, L„ 22 Malaysian Stories, Heinemann, 
Petaling Jaya. 

Majid, E.A., 1998, Khairunnisa: A good woman. The Written Word, Kuala Lumpxir, 

Mohd. Said, H. and Ng, K.S., 2000, English is an Asian language: The Malaysian context, 
Persatuan Bahasa Moden Malaysia and Macquarie Library Pty, Ltd, Macquarie, 

Morais, E., 2000, Talking in English but thinking Uke a Malaysian: insights from a car 
assembly plant' in Mohd. Said, H. and Ng, K. S., English is an Asian Language: The 
Malaysian context, Persatuan Bahasa Moden Malaysia and Macquarie Library Pty, Ltd, 
Macquarie. 

Noss, R.B., 1983, Varieties of English in Southeast Asia, Singapore University Press, Singapore, 

Omar, A„ 1993, Language and Society in Malaysia, Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, Kuala Lumpur. 

Ozog, A. C. K., 1993, 'Bilingualism and national development in Malaysia' in Multilingual and 
Multicultural Matters, Vol. 14 no. 1&2, pp. 59-71. 

Sloane, P., 1999, Islam, Modernity and Entrepreneurship Among the Malays, MacMillan, 
London. 

Ting-Tomey, S. and Korzenny, F., 1993, Language, Communication and Culture, Sage, London, 

Wierzbicka, A., 1997, Understanding Cultures through their Key Words, Oxford University 
Press, New York. 

Wong, I. F. H., 1983, 'Simplification features in the structure of colloquial Malaysian English' 
in Noss, R.B., Varieties of English in Southeast Asia, Singapore University Press, 
Singapore. 

Van Djik, T. A., 1998, Ideology, Sage, London. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



5 Englishization and nativization processes 
in the context of Brunei Darussalam: 
evidence for and against 



Hajah Rosnah Haji Ramly, Noor Azam Haji Othman and 

James McLellan 

Universiti Brunei Darussalam 



This paper addresses the questions "How do the languages of the 
region influence English, linguistically or socio-culturally?" and "How 
does English influence the languages of the region, linguistically or 
socioculturally?", through analysis of evidence from Brunei 
Darussalam. Nativization (of English) and Englishization of other 
Icinguages are two processes that operate simultaneously in 
multilingual contexts. The paper presents examples of nativized 
English eind engUshized Malay from a Brunei corpus of spoken and 
written Uinguage 



Introduction 

Without in any way wishing to question the relevance euid appropriateness of this 
series of English in Southecist Asia Conferences, we would like to begin this chapter 
by maintaining the inelevance and sheer impossibility of analysing the roles and 
functions of any one language in isolation in a complex multilingual context such as 
that of the Southeast Asian region. Helpfully, however, the flyer for the conference 
posed a set of questions outlining its theme, two of which were. How do the 
Icinguages of the region influence English?', and How does English influence the 
Icinguages of the region?', both linguistically and socioculturally. These questions have 
led us to consider the processes of Englishization and nativization as they relate to 
the multilingual context of Negara Brunei Darussalam. 

Essentially we are not talking of anything new here. Studies of languages in 
contact form part of a tradition going back at least as far as Weinreich (1953), with 
many earlier antecedents. Our concept of Englishization and nativization, drawing on 
Kachru (1994), can be schematized in this model, which represents them as two 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATIOJvIdENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



ongoing, recurring and interrelated processes that are likely to be found in any 
multilingual context. 



Figure 1. 



Englishization 




English 



As noted by Kachru (1994:135), and as demonstrated in the collection of papers in 
'World Englishes' where Kachru's paper appears, the Englishization aspect has received 
considerable attention from researchers studying contact linguistics. Our chapter aims 
to give equal attention to both of these "Janus-hke faces of language contact 
situations" (z&id.:135). 

For Kachru it appears that the term 'Englishization' has both linguistic and 
hegemonic connotations. Other contributors to the World Englishes special issue 
mostly discuss linguistic aspects of Englishization. More recent studies such as that of 
Phillipson and Skutnabb-Kangas (1999), develop the hegemonic meaning, using the 
term to refer to the global spread and dominance of English over other languages, i.e. 
as one dimension of globalization. We seek in this paper to investigate the claim made 
by Phillipson and Skutnabb-Kangas that "the micro-level examples have strong 
connections to macro-level structures and processes" (ibid: 22), first by citing some 
examples of various Englishization and nativization processes, then by relating these 
to broader issues of multilingualism and language contact. 

With regard to the Malay language, Malaysian linguists have noted examples of 
creeping Englishization: 

The academic style of writing in Malay shows a certain degree of westernization 
or, to be specific, angUcization. This means that sentences in the academic 
writing in Malay reflect traces of the construction of English sentences. (Asmah 
Haji Omar 1982:142) 

Asmah (1983) also notes comparable changes in Malay phonology, namely additions 
to patterns of syllable structure necessitated by the introduction of scientific and 
technical loanwords from English. 

Mashudi Kader's (1994) study, entitled 'Anglicized Malay', presents this as an 
alternative "social dialect" of (Malaysian) Malay, which he contrasts with "native" 
standard Malay, showing morphophonemic and some syntactic features of this elite 
variety. Our paper is an attempt to apply aspects of Mashudi's study in the context of 
Brunei Darussalam's very different linguistic ecosystem. 

Nativization of English has also been thoroughly researched with reference to the 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITrii, S[giv@R AND EDUCATION 



o 96 

ERIC 



CHAPTER 5 — EMGLISHIZATIOM AMD MATIVIZATIOM PROCESSES IM THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



indigenized varieties of English, aUas "New Englishes" (Platt et al. 1984, Foley 1988) 
that have developed in Outer Circle nations. The Brunei variety of English has received 
less attention from researchers than its geographical neighbours, SingUsh (Singapore), 
MangUsh (Malaysia) and TagUsh (Philippines), because of the small size of the 
country, the paucity of resemch prior to the founding of the University in 1985, but 
also because it has been regarded as sharing many of the features of these better- 
known Englishes. 



Evidence for 

The evidence for EngUshization of Malay in the context of Brunei Dcirussalam consists 
of examples of Malay texts that show evidence of the 'bau Bahasa Inggeris' [the smell 
of English]. Such evidence can be found at every level of linguistic analysis — 
phonological, syntactic, lexical and discoursal. 

Evidence for nativization of English can be adduced from the studies, likewise 
covering every branch of linguistics, that consider 'Brunei English' to be a distinct 
variety, notably those of Cane (1993, 1994), Mossop (1996) and other chapters in the 
English section of Martin et al. (1996). 

Among a number of possible categorizations of nativization and EngUshization 
features we have chosen to follow that of Lowenberg (1984), as this fits best with the 
data sets we have collected. His study investigates the processes, chmacteristics and 
effects of nativization on the varieties of English spoken in Singapore, Malaysia and 
Indonesia, and is therefore relevant to our study of Brunei. Lowenberg (1984:3) 
suggests that nativization should be analyzed on an intianational rather than 
international level. On the latter level, of course, the nativized Veuieties would be 
deviant from the native variety, but it would make perfect sense if we look at its 
functions on the intranational level at which it is normally used. Lowenberg further 
argues that since nativized varieties are not intended for international intelUgibiUty, 
but for domestic purposes only, nativization features should be seen as linguistic 
deviations / 'variation' rather than deficiencies. 



Characteristics of nativization of English 

Semantic shifts / new collocations 

English words or phrases and expressions used by Bruneians can have their own 
meaning distinct from normal English usage. 

[1] She's my spare part. 

While it is easy to guess what 'spare part' suggests, in Brunei it means 'the other 
girlfriend beside the special one'. It works the other way round as well when 
women talk about their extra boyfriends. Clearly the notion of 'an additional 
item' has been shifted here nd used in reference to humans. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AMD EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



o 98 

ERIC 



[2] Keep up the handsome face 

To 'keep something up' means to maintain a certain standard; thus to ask 



looks' This is an example of a new collocation in English used by Bruneians. 

[3] Happy Smashing Birthday 

This is another example of a new collocation. 'Happ/ and 'smashing' are used 
together probably to emphasize the greeting. This is acceptable among 
Bruneians although in Standard English, such combinations would be deemed 
redundant. 

Transferred syntactic structures often found in student writing 

The following examples illustrate typical English constructions in students' essays 
influenced by Malay syntax. 

[4] Although these factors suggest the breakdown of the extended family 
system, but they are not necessarily true. [Walaupun..., tetapi...] 

Walaupun [although] and tetapi [but] are allowed to be used together in Malay 
sentences. This construction is commonly transferred into English constructions 
produced by Bruneian students. 

[5] By this way, it can solve the problem 

[Dengan cara ini, ia akan menyelesaikan masalah tersebut] 

[6] Regarding (the matter)... [Mengenai (perkara ini)...] 

‘Mengenai perkara ini' is a common endophoric reference device used in Malay 
writing. It is also commonly translated into 'regarding ...' in English texts 
produced by Bruneians, indicating a transfer from the Malay language. In this 
Ccise, the expression is by no means a deviation from standard English usage. 
However, it has become so over-used by Bruneians that it has become cliched. 

Transcreation of similes, metaphors, proverbs from other 
languages 

In the case of Brunei, Malay proverbs are often transliterated into English but only in 
informal situations, e.g. 

[7] You drop my waterface ~ [You dropped me in it] 



[*Kura-kura dalam perahu] 

* The full saying is 'Kura-kura dalam perahu, pura-pura tidak tahu', but often 
only the first part is quoted as any Bruneian would share a common 
knowledge of the full saying and its meaning [Tortoise in the boat, 
pretending to know not] . Hence, only the first part is translated, but even 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



someone to keep up his handsome face is really to tell him to 'maintain his good 



[Kau naikkan darahku] 
[9] Turtle-turtle in the boat 



[Kau jatuhkan air muka ku] 

[8] You make my blood go upstairs ~ 



[You humiliated me] 

[You make my blood boil] 
[You make me angry] 
[Pretending not to know] 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



here 'tortoise' is replaced with 'turtle-turtle' mocking the Malay double form 
of kura-kura. 

Hybrid lexical constractions/combinations of concepts from two 
or more cultures 

Some words or expressions are retained in their Malay forms as there are no English 
equivalents for them. These are common in English newspapers, television as well as 
radio reports, e.g. 

[10] The tahlil ceremony was held in conjunction with... [special prayers 

for the departed] 

[11] In his titah His Majesty said [statement] 

[12] Prince Mohamad said in his sabda that... [speech] 

[13] The chief guest then proceeded to do the tepung tawar on the new 

vehicles [ceremonial /traditional blessing] 

[14] Nightly berdikir ceremonies are held to commemorate Prophet 

Muhammad (s.a.w.) [p.b.u.h.] [prayers] 

Other examples: 

besuruh, mengantar berian, akad nikah, berbedak, berpacar, bersanding, 

berambil-ambilan, memapat jambul 



Characteristics of Englishization of Malay 

Semantic shifts/ innovations 

New collocations in Malay can be due to new concepts brought about by new 
developments particularly in the field of science and technology. 

[15] Thank you eh emel mu kemarin atu [Thank you for your email yesterday] 
'Email/ e-mail' is spelt 'emel/ e-mel' in formal Malay. It is also becoming 
commoner that the English spelling is retained even in Malay texts. 

[16] Saya forwardkan email yang soya terima dari... [I'm forwarding this email I 
received from...] 

'Forward' and 'email' are borrowed from English, mainly because there are no 
cunent equivalents in Malay that quite express the precise idea. 



103 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Assimilated loanwords 

Malay-icized English words Eire accepted in formal use even when there are pure Malay 
equivalents. However, in ccises where the Malay word is available but does not express 
the exact meaning, the cissimilated loanword is used instead: 



[17] organization 




organisasi 


/ 


pertubuhan 


activity 




aktiviti 


/ 


kegiatan 


promotion 




promosi 


/ 




exploitation 




eksploitasi 


/ 


penyalahgunaan 


discrimination 




diskriminasi 


/ 


pilih kasih 


globalization 




globalisasi 


/ 


kesejagatan 



Transferred syntactic structures found in writing 

These include the relative pronouns 'yang mana' (which/ who) and ‘di mana' (where). 
Malay language purists oppose such constructions, although their use seems to be 
widespread among educated Malay speakers eis well eis in the media. 

[18] Ang. Malay <- 



Dia menjelaskan kandungan buku tersebutyang 
mana dijual di kedai-kedai. 

[He described the contents of the book which is 
in the shops] 

Dia menjelaskan kandungan buku tersebut yang 
dijual di kedai-kedai. 

Ali menunjukkan kami afis di mana dia berkerja. 
[AU showed us the office where he works] 

Ali menunjukkan kami afis tempat dia berkerja. 

Asmah Haji Omar (1982:152) highlights a number of other examples of 
discourse markers not found in 'classical' Malay texts, only in modem 
academic writing: 

[20] Merujuk kepada [with reference to] 

Menurut [according to] 

Pada pendapat say a [in my opinion] 

Berhubung dengan [in connection with, in relation] 

Berkenaan dengan [concerning] 



Translation 

sold 

Std. Malay 

[19] Ang. Malay 
Translation 
Std. Malay 



Mixed morphological affixation (c.f. Mashudi Kader 1994) 

English root words that are Malay-icized by adding affixes (and vice-versa) imply 
creativity among Bruneian users of such constructions. They are not usually found in 
formal settings, nonetheless they are pervasive in colloquial usage. Some of them 
essentially break the rules of Malay spelling and phonology (e.g. no consonant 
clusters: dipredict) but they are used just the same. 



104 



O 100 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Some English root words used with Malay affixes. 

[21] Payah kan dipredict bolanya [It's hard to predict his ball] 

Borang untuk merepair barang [Form for repairs] 

Kedia terstuck di traffic [He's stuck in traffic] 

Saya forwardkan beberapa hadith [I've forwarded some hadith] 

Likewise there cire Malay root words that are affixed with English prefixes or suffixes: 



[22] Mengurating 
Cuci-ing 
Makaning 
Tiduring 
Unsangkarah\e 
Unpercayardbile 



[flirting] 

[washing] 

[eating] 

[sleeping] 

[unexpected] 

[unbelievable] 



Functions and effects of nativization and Englishization 

Lowenberg (1984) suggests that the functions of nativization and Englishization can 

be analyzed in terms of Kachru's theory of Foregrounding (to attract attention) and 

Neutralizing (to seek no attention) (1982:25-30). 

Functions of nativization 

The functions of nativization, in the Brunei context, can be summarised as 

• To express local or native concepts for which no English words exist, or no 
English words that can convey the precise emphasis and nuances of the Malay 
word 

• To foreground a Bruneian identity, to avoid disloyalty chcurges, not despite but 
because they speak English, particularly in the use of Brunei royal court and 
protocol terms in formal documents, where the English equivalents cire felt to 
lack the same degree of respect and hiercurchy as the Malay originals. Bruneians 
are thus meddng English their own. 

Functions of Englishization 

The functions of Englishization, in the Brunei context, can be summarised as 

• To express new concepts for which no Malay words exist, or no Malay words that 
can convey the precise emphasis and nuances of the English word. This function 
is therefore to address a linguistic, in particular a lexical deficit, leading to lexical 
creativity. 

• To foreground a modem, non-traditional identity through use of English 
loanwords (i.e. a modem Malay identity). 

• To neutralize situations which would otherwise be rigidly hierarchical in terms of 
Malay traditional protocol, e.g. to avoid the extremely complicated Bahasa 
Dalam, the language of the Bmnei royal court. 

105 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^01 




CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Effects of nativization 

The effects of nativization, in the Bmnei context, can be summarised as 

• The creation of a distinct variety of English from the standard native variety, 
often showing characteristics of nativized varieties mentioned earlier. 

• A bidialectal situation in which formal speeches and documents in English may 
conform more to the native English forms, while colloquial communication would 
be characterized more by bonowings and pidginized forms of English. There is, 
however, some seepage: formal documents within the Uruversity where we work 
cire increasingly characterised by nativised forms of English (some of the data 
samples in the previous section are taken from such sources). 

Effects of Englishization 

The effects of Englishization, in the Brunei context, can be summarised as 

• The expansion and enrichment of the Malay vocabulary through English 
loanwords and loan expressions. 

• The creation of a corpus of uniform registers of Malay ternunology for numerous 
modem disciplines (e.g. international banking and ICT) for acadenuc and 
administrative convenience. 

• A more versatile language that is able to express new cuid modem ideas 
comfortably. 

• Greater familiarity with English among Bmneians, so that when they encounter 
the original English words, they already have some understanding of the meaning 
through their use of the derived words in their Malay repertoire. 

Code-mixing and code-switching 

The strongest evidence for these parallel processes can be derived from samples of 
code-mixed and code-switched discourse. These are so common in the Brunei context 
that they can be considered as the unmarked variety in many domains, e.g. informal 
interaction among terticuy-level students cind service encounters in banks and Icuge 
department stores (Ozog 1996: 183). McLellan (1997) offers evidence that Malay- 
EngUsh codeswitching in Bmnei is not restricted to informal conversational 
interaction, but is also found in more formal domains such as the school classroom, 
broadcast cind print media texts and academic writing. 

Study of engUshized Malay and nativized English in the context of Brunei 
provides support for the position taken by Blommaert (1999: 192) with reference to 
comparable multilingual contexts in Africa. He notes that 'pure' (i.e. monolingual) 
Swahili, French or lingala texts are highly marked and likely to be found only in 
restricted contexts. The same can be said for texts in Malay, English and other 
languages in the Bmnei context. 





102 ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Evidence against nativization and Englishization 

Counter-evidence against the existence of these two processes consists mainly of 
statements about language use by various stakeholders. There are those who maintain 
the need for "Standard British English" as a model to be aimed at by all Bruneian 
learners, and who resist any notions of nativization of English, thereby showing their 
adherence to the position taken by Prator (1968) against 'the British Heresy in TESL'. 
Such views should not be dismissed out of hand, since they are held not only by 
expatriate language teachers, but also by influential political figures in the Southeast 
Asian region, such as Lee Kuan Yew (e.g. Straits Times, 15/8/1999) and Brunei's 
Minister of Education (McLellan 1996:161-162). 

Likewise there are those who wish to preserve the purity of the Malay language 
by arguing that any Englishization constitutes 'pencemaran bahasa' [pollution of 
language] {New Straits Times, 17/7/1996, Abdullah Hassan 1997) and that the "bau 
Bahasa Inggeris' {New Straits Times, 15/8/2000) in all marufestations must be 
eradicated from Malay texts. 

One is unUkely to find strong expressions of resistance to English eunong Asian 
writers and academic researchers who habitually express themselves through the 
English language, except for Parakrama (1995), who uses non-standard 'broken' 
English as a way of "talking back" and "writing back" to the 'Centre' from the 
'Periphery'. An isolated instance of resistance to Englishization from the Brunei 
context occurs in the Letter to the Editor (see Appendix 1). 

Among those writing in Malay, where one might expect to find more expressions 
of resistance, this appears not to be the case. McLellan (1996: 157-8) notes that while 
many Malay writers and academics are decidedly pro-Malay, very few are anti-English, 
and that criticism tends to be directed not at the English language and those who 
teach it, but at those elite groups whose commitment to championing the Malay 
language is less than wholehearted. There is, however, a noticeable desire, among 
Bruneian and other Southeast Asian educationalists and socioUnguists, to 
'compartmentalise' English and to limit its functional role to areas of science and 
technology and the acquisition of 'modem' knowledge (e.g. Jeunil Al-Sufri 1991, Lim 
1991, Abdullah Hassan 1996). The feeling seems to be that while Bruneians may need 
English, they do not have to love it, or even like it. 



Discussion and conclusions 

Although some who oppose the Englishization of Malay may say that there has been 
indiscriminate borrowing of both words and structures from English, there is a general 
acceptance that borrowing and lending are common phenomena in the development 
of any language, and are therefore perfectly acceptable — particularly of terms that 
are able to describe "the most specific of conditions, the most improbable of 
contingencies and the most arcane of distinctions" (Bryson 1990:61) — as long as the 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATI^N^^NTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



I Al 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



phonological elements are modified to suit the Malay sound and syntactic systems. 

One of the primary reasons, therefore, for the lack of any kind of resistance or 
movement against EngUshization of Malay in Brunei can be attributed to the fact that 
the process is regarded as providing a means for strengthening the Malay fanguage in 
order to facilitate its use as a medium for the dissemination of knowledge in all 
disciplines. Essentially, there is a realization that Malay (as one of the most-widely 
spoken languages in Southeast Asia) has to grow and develop, and be guided towards 
progress in tandem with its spezikers and with the latest developments in knowledge, 
economy and modern technology, and that should it fail to do so, then it would surely 
die. Thus, in this respect, EngUshization serves as a process for the modernization of 
the Malay language in Brunei. 

Another reason for the lack of resistcuice against EngUshization in Brunei is that 
the Brunei variety of Malay is very well established eis the domineUit language in 
Brunei, and there is no rivalry between Malay and the other local languages. 
Furthermore, unUke most other Southeast Asian states, Brunei has never had to deal 
with EngUsh as the language of the coloiusers, since it was never a colony. 

Chew (1999:40), in a case study of EngUshization in the context of Singapore, 
makes the claim that the dominance of EngUsh came about through a conscious 
decision on the part of its leaders and populace. She correctly notes that in Singapore, 
as elsewhere in Southeast Asia, hi- and multiUngualism are viewed as assets, not as 
problems or as properties of disadvantaged minorities, and in so doing highUghts a 
major difference in the methodological approaches of scholars based in 'centre' and 
'periphery' countries (see also Skutnabb-Kangas 2000:42 on monoUngual 
reductionism). 

MultiUngual Southeast Asia, in a similar way to multilingual Africa (Blommaert 
1999), challenges traditional ('western', 'academic', 'Unguistic') perceptions of 
languages as separate autonomous systems or entities, emd studies of mixed language 
use provide evidence of the need for redefinition of these perceptions. An ecological 
approach, such as that used by Miihlhausler (1996), has greater currency and 
relevance to the description of socioUnguistic patterns in the region. 

If we may suggest a way forwaurd, a revival of the notion of EngUsh as an 
International AuxiUary Language, EIAL, proposed by Smith (1983:1-5) might be in 
order. Pennycook (1994:281-219) takes a critical stance against EIL, defining it as a 
"dominant discourse", but crucially misses out the A (for AuxiUary), which points to 
the role of EngUsh in South-East Asia as an additional language that is acquired or 
learnt without concomitant loss of abiUty or inclination to use other languages. In 
this multiUngual region, EngUsh is additional to whatever languages have been 
acquired first, second or third, prior to EngUsh and continue to be used in importeuit 
domains such as home, friendship and service encounters. 

There is an inevitabiUty of the processes of EngUshization and nativization 
persisting in a society where decisions are made by those with multiUngual 
capabiUties, even though some of these eUte group members may themselves speak 

104 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERIC 




CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



up in favour of language purism in Malay and maintenance of British English as a 
target model. 

Those having the political power to determine matters of educational and 
language policy are those who possess the necessary multilingual capabilities and 
skills to be able to operate as public figures. These capabilities and skills have in large 
measure been acquired through the medium of English. Even those whose political 
and educational agenda includes commitment to the promotion of Malay as official 
language and as a medium of education are not averse to the incorporation of 
EngUshizations in their Malay texts. Hence the situation in Southeast Asia is in some 
respects the reverse of that in the USA and the UK: power resides in the hands of 
multiUnguals, and monoUnguals constitute disadvantaged minorities. 

Bruneians, therefore, do not believe themselves to be victims of the "dominant 
discourse of EIL"; they would like to echo the claim that they have some control over 
English, but that English has no control whatsoever over them. 



109 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



References 

Abdullah Hassan, 1996, 'Pendidikan dan Patriotisme Malaysia.' Jumal Dewan Bahasa 40 (8), 
pp.676-693. 

Abdullah Hassan, 1997, Pengunaan Bahasa Melayu Standard yang baik dan betul. Bengkel 
Bahasa Melayu, Universiti Brunei Darussalam, 26-27 Mei 1997. 

Asmah Haji 0mar,1982, Language and Society in Malaysia. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan 
Pustaka. 

Asmah Haji Omar, 1983, The Malay Peoples of Malaysia and their Languages. Kuala Lumpur: 
Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. 

Blommaert, J, 1999 'Reconstructing the sociolinguistic image of Africa: grassroots writing in 
Shaba (Congo).' Text 19-2, pp. 175-200. 

Bryson, W., 1990, Mother Tongue: the English Language. London: Penguin Books. 

Cane, G., 1993, 'A linguistic description of spoken Brunei English in the 1990's.' Unpublished 
PhD thesis. University of Strathclyde. 

Cane, G., 1994, 'The English Language in Brunei Darussalam.' World Englishes 13.3, pp. 351- 
360. 

Chew, P. G-L., 1999, 'Linguistic Imperialism, Globalism and the English Language.' AILA 
Review 13, pp. 37-47. 

Foley, J. (ed.), 1988, New Englishes: The case of Singapore. Singapore: Singapore University 
Press 

Jaludin Haji Chuchu, Haji, 1994, 'English Loanwords in a Brunei Malay Dialect. A case study: 
the Kampong Ayer Dialect.' Janang 3, pp.124-135. 

(Pehin Orang Kaya Amar Diraja Dato Seri Utama Dr. Haji Awang Mohammad) Jamil Al-Sufri, 
1991, 'Dwibahasa dan Pembangunan Negara.' Paper presented at International 
Conference on Bilingualism and National Development (BAND'91), Universiti Brunei 
Darussalam, December 1991. 

Kachru, B.B., 1982, 'The Bilingual's linguistic repertoire'. In Hartford, B., Valdman, A, and 
Foster, C. (eds.) Issues in International Bilingual Education: The Role of the Vernacular. 
New York and London: Plenum Press, pp. 25-52. 

Kachru, B.B., 1991, (ed.). The Other Tongue: English across Cultures. Urbana, HI., University of 
HUnois Press. 

Kachru, B.B., 1994, 'Englishization and Contact Linguistics.' World Englishes 13:2, pp. 135- 
154. 

Lim, C., 1991, 'English for Technology — yes! English for culture — no! A writer's view on a 
continuing Southeast Asian dilemma'. In Thao Le and McCausland, M. (eds.) Language 
Education: Interaction and development. Hobart: University of Tasmania Press. 

Lowenberg, P., 1984, 'English in the Malay Archipelago: Nativization and its functions in a 
sociolinguistic area.' Unpublished PhD thesis. University of HUnois. 

Martin, P., Ozog, C. & Poedjosoedarmo, G. (eds.), 1996, Language Use and Language Change 
in Brunei Darussalam. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Center for International Studies. 

Mashudi Kader, 1994, 'AngUcized Malay: a morpho-syntactic analysis of the Malay dialect of 
the intellectual middle-class speakers' Paper presented at 7th International Conference 
on Austronesian Linguistics, Leyden, Netherlands, August 1994. ms. 




106 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERIC 



CHAPTER 5 — EMGLISHIZATIOM AMD MATIVIZATIOM PROCESSES IM THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Maxwell, A., (forthcoming), 'English locin-words in Brunei Malay.' To appear in Sercombe, P. 
(ed.). Proceedings of the 4th Biennial Conference of the Borneo Research Council, 
Universiti Brunei Darussalam. Williamsburg, Va., Borneo Research Council. 

McLellan, J., 1996, 'Linguistic imperialism and the cultural politics of EH in the context of 
Southeast Asia: outsiders' and insiders perspectives on the roles of English.' In Brown, 

A. (ed.) English in Southeast Asia '96. Singapore, Division of English Language and 
Applied Linguistics, National Institute of Education, Nanyang University of Technology. 

McLellan, J., 1997, 'English -Malay codeswitching in Brunei: a domain-based analysis.' In 
HaUmah Mohd. Said and Ng Keat Siew (eds.) English is an Asian Language: The 
Malaysian Context. Kuala Lumpur: Persatuan Bahasa Moden Malaysia/The Macquarie 
Library, pp. 164-174. 

McLellan, J. & Noor Azam Haji Othman, 1998, 'The Myth of Widespread English in Brunei 
Darussalam: a socioUnguistic investigation.' Paper presented at 3rd English in Southeast 
Asia Conference, Universiti Brunei Darussalam. 

MiihUiausler, P., 1996, Linguistic Ecology: Language change and linguistic imperialism in the 
Pacific region. London, Routledge. 

Mossop, J. 1996, 'Some phonological features of Brunei English.' In Martin, P, Ozog, C. and 
Poedjosoedarmo, G. (eds.) Language Use and Language Change in Brunei Darussalam. 
Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Center for International Studies, pp. 189-208. 

New Straits Times, 1996, 17th July, 'Painful pollution of Bahasa Melayu.' Feature article by 
JoceUne Tan, p.8. 

New Straits Times, 2000, 15th August, 'Teaching on one's own terms', by S. S. Gopal. life 
and Times section, p.7. 

Ozog, A.C.K., 1996, 'Codeswitching in Peninsular Malaysia and Brunei Darussalam: a study in 
contrasting linguistic strategies'. In Martin, P., Ozog, C. and Poedjosoedarmo, G. (eds.) 
Language Use and Language Change in Brunei Darussalam. Athens, Ohio: Ohio 
University Center for International Studies, pp. 173-188. 

Parakrama, A., 1995, Dehegemonizing Language Standards: Learning from (post) colonial 
Englishes about English. London: MacMillan. 

Pennycook, A., 1994, The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language. London, 
Longman. 

PhilUpson, R., 1992, Linguistic Imperialism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Phillipson, R. & Skutnabb-Kcingas, T. 1999, 'Englishisation: one dimension of globalisation.' 
AILA Review 13, pp.19-36. 

Platt, J., Weber, H. & Ho, M-L., 1984, The New Englishes. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 

Prator, C., 1968, 'The British Heresy in TESL.' In Fishman, J. et al. (eds.) Language Problems 
of Developing Nations. New York: John Wiley. 

Skutnabb-Kangas, T., 2000, 'Linguistic Human Rights and Teachers of English.' In Kelly Hall, 
J. and Eggington. W. (eds.) The Sociopolitics of English Language Teaching. Clevedon: 
Multilingual Matters. Pp. 22-44. 

Smith, L.E., 1983, Readings in English as an International Language. Oxford, Pergamon. 

Straits Times, Singapore, 1999, 15th August, 'Singlish 'a handicap we do not wish on 
Singaporeans". Report of speech by Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew. p.26. 

Tongue, R., 1979, The English of Singapore and Malaysia. Singapore: Eastern Universities 
Press. 

Weinreich, U., 1953, Languages in Contact: Findings and problems. The Hague: Mouton. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AMD EDUCATION ^07 



ERIC 




CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Appendix 1 

Extract from Letter to the Editor, Borneo Bulletin, 29/7/2000 

You may have noticed that there are many "borrowed" English words used in 
the RTB^ Malay news or the local Malay media. Is there any reason for this? In 
other words, they are not using 100% pure Malay language/words. 

It is no problem for those who have a good knowledge of English but how 
about our older people? If we read or listen to other non-Malay words, they do 
not use many Malay words. 

I agree that some of the English words are difficult to translate exactly into 
Malay but at lecist try to give the nearest meaning so it would be easy to 
understand. 

I suggest to the authority concerned to please use our Malay language/words 
as purely as possible so that Malay words will last forever and ever. 

We have noticed that there are a lot of signboards saying "Gunakanlah Bahasa 
Melayu"^ so please "Mind Our Language" — "jangan sampai orang Mela 3 m 
cakap English and orang English cakap Mela3iu”^ 

Melayu Jah'* 



Notes 

1. RTB: Radio Televisyen Brunei, the national broadcasting authority 

2. Translation: ''Use the Malay Language" 

3. Translation: "Don't come to a point where Malay people speak English and English people speak 
Malay" 

4. Translation: "Indigenous Malay" 



O 108 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



112 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Appendix 2 

DATA [from DELAL, UBD 'Brunei English' corpus] 

1. NATIVIZATION 



Semantic shifts 

(criterion: terms are 
she is my spare part 
sleeping pill 
lecture 



vacuum 

aircon 

servicing 

action 

skap (: scarf) 

dry season 

timing 

project 

twin-cam 

twin carb(urettor) 

double-barrelled 

kettle 

speaking 

sober 

frus[t] 

escape 

extravaganza 



E -> Brunei Malay 

used 'creatively', i.e. not as in 'Stcindard'/NS Englishes) 

['the other girlfriend beside the special one'] 

[boring teacher/lecturer] 

[harangue from parents to children returning home late at 
night] 

[greedy person] 

[body odour] 

[visit to massage parlour/house of ill-repute] 

[show-off, sham, pretending] 

[mini-veil worn by Muslim women] 

[from mid-month to pay-day when funds are short] 

[slow, fussy, particular] 

[target of romantic interest] 

] 

] [man with two wives] 

] 

[tea or coffee-pot] 

[refers to fluency in English only] 

[ashamed] 

[heartbroken] 

[play truant, be absent from classes] 

[extraordinary] 



New Collocations (see Cane 1993 , 1994 ) 

Happy smashing birthday 
Happy Merry Christmas 
Keep up the hcindsome face 
Any good luck with.... ? 

Stay cute and gorgeous 

Controlz your brutalz [meaninglll ] 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^09 

113 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



o 110 

ERIC 



Transferred syntactic structures, most often found in student writing 
and official documents 



Although..., but... 

By this way, it can solve the problem (etc.) 



In Table 1 it shows that 

Please be informed that... 

To further a project proposal 
Please take note... 

Regarding the matter, .... 



[Walaupun..., tetapi...] 

[Dengan cara ini, ia akan 
menyelesaikan masalah tersebut] 
[Di peta 1 ia menunjuk bahawa...] 
[Harap maklum...] 

[Memanjangkan cadangan kajian] 
[Sila ambil perhatian...] 

[Mengenai perkara ini,...] 



Transcreation of similes/metaphors/proverbs/'pnbahasa 

[cf. 'Franglais' — for purposes of showing erudition, command of 2 or more 
languages?] 



He has a backbone 
Crab stone 

You drop my water face 
Silent silent tapioca 
Shy shy cat 
Stone fire 

Turtle-turtle in the boat 

You make my blood go 
upstairs 

2-3 cats running running 
Ball-carrier 



(: friends in high places) 
(miser) 

(: humiliate me in public) 
(still waters run deep) 
(pretending to be shy) 

(pouring oil on troubled 
waters?) 

(pretending not to know) 
(: ....blood boil) 

(...) 

(loyal unquestioning 
follower) 



[ada tulang] 

[ketam batu] 

[kau jatuhkan air muka ku] 
[diam diam ubi] 

[main -malu kuching] 

[batu api] 

[kura-kura dalam perahu...] 
[darah naik] 

[2-3 hieing berlari] 
[pengangkat bola] 



Modified idioms in Brunei / SE Asian Englishes 

(see Tongue 1979: 88-89) 

Count noses [c.f. count heads] 

Donkey's work [c.f. donkey work] 

Neck-to-neck [c.f. neck-and-neck] 

Up to my head in work [c.f. up to my neck] 



114 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Lexemes from Brunei Malay in English text 

The tahlil ceremony was held in conjunction with... 

In his Utah His Majesty said that .... 

The Foreign Minister in a sabda said that .... 

The chief guest then proceeded to do the tepung tawar on the new vehicles 
Nightly berdikir ceremonies are held 

Also: 

Besuruh / mengantar berian / akad nikah / berbedak / berpacar / bersanding / 
berambil-ambilan / memapat jambul / menjunjung ziarah / menjunjung ciri / do'a 
selamat / etc. 



2. ENGLISHIZATION OF MALAY 



Assimilated loanwords/phrases 



Emel / e-mel 

Bahagian Rotex 

Mobail 

Organisasi 

Aktiviti 

Promosi 

Eksploitasi 

Diskriminasi 

Globalisasi 

Fmstrasi 

Paragraf 



(...) 

(c.f. cukai jalan) 

(c.f. telefbn bimbit) 
(c.f. pertubuhan) 

(c.f. kegiatan) 

(...) 

(c.f. penyalahgunaan) 
(c.f. pilih kasih) 

(c.f. kesejagatan) 

(c.f. kekecewaan) 

(c.f. perenggan) 



[e-mail] 

[Road Tax Department] 
[Mobile phone] 
[organization] 
[activity] 

[sales promotion] 

[exploitation] 

[discrimination] 

[globalization] 

[frustration] 

[paragraph] 



Transferred (Englishized) syntactic structures 

(Found in formal/written Malay) 



yang mana 
di mana 
merujuk kepada 
menurut 

pada pendapat soya 
berhubung dengan 
berkenaan dengan 



[which] 

[where] 

[with reference to] 

[according to] 

[in my opinion] 

[in connection with / in relation to] 
[concerning] 

(Asmah Haji Omar 1982: 152) 



115 

^ ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

ERIC 



CHAPTER 5 — ENGLISHIZATION AND NATIVIZATION PROCESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



o 112 

ERIC 



Mixed morphological affixation 

(see also Mashudi Kader 1994) 

Malay affixes on English roots: 

Verbal affixes: 

df-disqualified 

payah kan dfpredict bolanya 

me/nblame 

/ne/nimplemem 

me/nonitor 

teacher akan mengexpXaia cakap Melayu 

mentidy-up 

menstart 

borang untuk merepair barang 

tertake 

terstuck 

foiwardkan 

Adjectival: 

Teriatest 



[It's hard to predict his ball] 



[teacher will explain in Malay] 

[form for repairs] 

["...soya foTwardkan beberapa hadith..."]. 

[Very latest: context: written — on UBD 
students' notice board] 



English ciffixes on Malay roots: 

Nominals: 

Kampong ketuas 
Pengiran-pengirans 

Verbals: 

curiing 

makaned 

makaninq 

menguratinq 

tidurinq 

Adjectivals: 

Unsesak 

Unsangkerable 

Unpercayarable 



[village headmen] 
[hereditary titled nobles] 

[washing] 

[ate] 

[eating] 

[flirting] 

[sleeping] 

[not busy] 

[unexpected] 

[unbelievable] 



116 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



6 Kissing cousins? The relationship between 
English and Tok Pisin in Papua New Guinea 



Geoff Smith 

University of Hong Kong 



Introduction 

Papua New Guinea's most widely spoken language has been variously called Pidgin 
English, Meleuiesian Pidgin or Neo-MeUnesicUi, but it is best known by the name given 
by its speakers themselves — Tok Pisin. Put simply, a pidgin Icuiguage emerges in the 
context of trade or other temporary contact situations, where groups with no 
Icuiguage in common use words from a locally domincuit language to create a medium 
of communication. If suitable conditions persist, the pidgin stabilises, cuid if it 
continues to be used and developed by a new generation as a native language, it then 
becomes a creole. Tok Pisin arose from a 19th century Pacific Pidgin English in the 
context of maritime trade and plantation labour, euid is currently used widely as a 
second language (a pidgin) but also as a first Icuiguage (a creole) by cui increasing 
number of people. 

Early interest in Tok Pisin was often to lampoon it as a quaint and rather silly 
deviation from the normal patterns of English. As theoretical interest in the nature of 
pidgin eUid creole languages grew, however, it was taken more seriously, although even 
today it is sometimes treated by non-speakers in eui uninformed eUid patronising way. 
The AmericcUi linguist Robert A. Hall, Jr. was the first to campaign for a more serious 
approach to the language in his seminal Hands off Pidgin English! (1955). Since then, 
a substcuitial body of descriptive work has emerged, including Dutton (1973), Laycock 
(1970), Mihalic (1971), Muhlhausler (1979), Romaine (1992), Sankoff (1986) and 
Verhaar (1996). A detailed compendium of linguistic eUid socioUnguistic data Ceui be 
found in Wurm & Miihlhiuslei^s Handbook of Tok Pisin (1985). Somewhat more recently, 
work on sister dialects of Tok Pisin in the south-west Pacific — Bislama in Vanuatu 
and Pijin in the Solomon Islands — has also been carried out. However, in spite of 
the considerable body of research work on Melanesian Pidgin, there are still of 
necessity many details of the formation of the pidgin which will never be known, due 
to the fact that accurate recording of the speech used in earlier periods was not 
possible. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATlJ)N| I*MNTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 6 — KISSING COUSINS? THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENGLISH & TOK PISIN IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA 



Tok Pisin is like English in that most of the vocabulary is derived from it, but 
unlike English iri that there are many exotic grammatical and semantic features and 
it is not comprehensible to English speakers without considerable learning. 
Complicating this picture is the fact that English and Tok Pisin now co-occur in Papua 
New Guinea. The purpose of this paper is to look at the present relationship between 
the two languages in the country. As English occupies a prominent role in 
government, business and education, and Tok Pisin continues to increase its 
geographical range and spread into more domains of contemporcuy Ufe, the two 
languages are likely to come into increasing contact. Some of the consequences of this 
contact are illustrated here using examples from a corpus of the speech of young first 
language Tok Pisin speakers recorded in the late 1980s and early 1990s. 

The formation and development of Tok Pisin 

Although the words of Tok Pisin are mainly derived from English, there have been 
influences on the developing language from a number of sources. Maritime voyaging 
in the early part of the 19th century saw features of the languages of the central 
Pacific entering the language (Keesing 1988), while large concentrations of labourers 
from the south-west Pacific on plantations in areas such as Queensland and Scunoa led 
to influence from a Melanesian substrate. Tok Pisin is thought to have developed its 
own unique characteristics after labourers returned from Pacific plantations to New 
Britain in the 1880s (Miihlhausler 1978). This involved the incorporation of a 
considerable body of lexis from the languages of New Britain and New Ireland as well 
as grammatical and semantic features. 

Many of the English words adopted into the language were radically changed in 
meaning or function, for example, the lexical items "him" "he" and "bye and bye" 
were re-interpreted with a purely grammatical role as transitive suffix, predicate 
marker and future marker respectively. A great many other words adopted the 
semantic range of indigenous equivalents, leading to considerable confusion of 
meaning by those who assumed that words that sounded like English words had the 
same mecuiing as their English equivalent. A well known example is the Tok Pisin word 
dai, which does indeed mean "die" like its English equivalent, but also means "cease, 
be unconscious" in line with the semantic range of the equivalent item in many 
languages of the area. Thus the Tok Pisin expression kilok i dai means "the clock has 
stopped." It does not indicate, as some expatriates were keen to attest, that Tok Pisin 
speakers believed the clock to be a living thing. 

Grammatical features, too, are in many Ccises more akin to Austronesian languages 
of the south-west or central Pacific, for example, the existence of predicate marking, 
dual pronoun forms and an inclusive/exclusive distinction on first person plural 
pronouns. Moreover, re-interpretation of lexis has continued to a certain extent since 
stabilisation, as most speakers have a first language on which to model structures. 

A short example will illustrate the extent of the functional changes which have 

114 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERIC 




CHAPTER 6 - KISSING COUSINS? THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENGLISH & TOK PISIN IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA 



taken place in words of English origin adopted into Tok Pisin. The following was the 
beginning of a long story told to me by a young man from Madang on the north coast 
of mainland New Guinea: 

bai mi givim liklik toktok tasol long man men long displa peles 

I will give a short talk about the people in this village 

All the words used in this extract have English origins: bye and bye, me, give, him, 
little, talk, that's all, along, man, Mary, this, fellow, place. However, some of the Tok 
Pisin words now have functions far removed from their English homologues. The word 
bai acts as a future marker, while givim, derived from "give him" incorporates the 
suffix -7/77, showing the verb to be transitive. The English "along" has become long, the 
basis of most prepositional constructions. Liklik and toktok are representative of the 
type of reduplicated forms common in pidgin languages, while the proper noun 
"Mary" is generalised to include all women or female organisms. The term peles {pies) 
has also changed meeuiing to "village" while the English noun "fellow" has been 
transformed into an adjectival suffix. "That's all" became "only" and the meeUiing was 
extended to include the conjunction "but." Thus this short example illustrates the 
extreme restructuring which has taken place in the formation of Tok Pisin. This 
transformation is generally thought to be according to patterns familiar from other 
languages spoken (Siegel 1999), although a central role for universals in pidgin 
development has also been touted (Bickerton 1981). 

Contemporary language ecology in Papua New Guinea 

As is well known, multilingualism is extreme in Papua New Guinea. In a nation of only 
some four million people, the number of separate languages currently spoken is 
approximately 860 according to a recent survey (Grimes 1992). The situation is similar 
in other Melanesian countries, and Vanuatu appears to have greater linguistic 
diversity than any other country in terms of languages per unit of population. Exact 
numbers of speakers of different languages are difficult to establish, however, as many 
are still poorly researched. The reason for such diversity is not exactly known. 
Although it may popularly be thought that the rugged terrain is responsible for 
isolating small cultural groups, this cannot be the whole explanation, as the largest 
indigenous language community in Papua New Guinea, Enga, with approximately 
160,000 speakers, occupies some of the most rugged terrain on earth. Geographical 
isolation may, however, be a contributing factor, together with other fectors such as 
word taboos and a pride in eind emphasis of cultural and linguistic differences, which 
may have led to the speciation of a large number of languages over the 30,000 or so 
years that man has been in Melanesia (Foley 1986). In addition to the factors 
mentioned above, some conditions favouring the formation of large linguistic units, 
such as writing systems and centralised political control were not present in Melanesia 
(Laycock 1982). 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICAT 




NTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 6 — KISSING COUSINS? THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENGUSH & TOK PISIN IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA 



Whatever the reasons for the linguistic diversity in the country, the existence of 
some kind of lingua franca has been and continues to be essential for inter-group 
communication and indeed for national development. Tok Pisin is the language which 
is becoming the most widely used in an increasing range of domains, both formal and 
informal. At independence, three national languages, English, Tok Pisin and Hiri Motu, 
were established, although none was designated as the sole official language. English 
is the language of most formal education, and is widely respected as both a key to 
employment opportunities and a means of communicating with the outside world. Hiri 
Motu is a pidginised form of Motu, an Austronesian language spoken in a dozen 
coastal villages necu the capital Port Moresby. Hiri Motu was used by the Australian 
administration, especially the police, as a lingua franca in Papua, and, although the 
number of speakers was considerably less than Tok Pisin, it was retained as a national 
language after independence largely for political reasons. At the time of 
independence, there was considerable suspicion of "New Guineans" by coastal 
Papuans, and the secession movement Papua Besena had widespread support. Today, 
the momentum of the movement for independence in Papua is greatly reduced, and 
Tok Pisin appears to be gaining ground in the southern provinces. 

In spite of the dramatic growth of the role of Tok Pisin, the position of English 
in government-sponsored education has remained firmly entrenched (Johnson 1977). 
Many arguments have been given for retaining English — its status as a world 
language, its role as a language of intra-national and international communication, 
the availability of teaching materials and so on. Mission education has been more 
flexible, and many “tok pies" (i.e. vernacular) primary schools were set up in various 
parts of the country. However, these were often perceived by communities as offering 
poorer economic opportunities than English-based schooling. The significance of 
language choice, of course, has implications for social and political relationships as 
well as education (Cheshire 1991, Sankoff 1976; see also Pennycook 1994 on the 
political implications of the use of English). The first voices raised in favour of a 
greater role for Tok Pisin in education were ironically from expatriate academics (for 
example Dutton 1976, Kale 1990, Litteral 1975, Lynch 1990, Miihlhausler, Wurm & 
Dutton 1979), while many English-educated national administrators continued to 
favour English. However, some national academics have also added their support 
(Nekitel 1984). 

Not surprisingly, the educational and cultural costs of teaching initial literacy in 
a foreign language have come to be felt more and more. In the 1980's, many provincial 
governments began to establish vernacular pre-school literacy programmes, usually for 
two or three years before the beginning of primary education at the age of eight. The 
ideology was primarily cultural rather than educational: children were seen to be 
losing their community traditions and values in a foreign education system. The 
success of many of these programmes and the enthusiasm they generated soon made 
the educational benefits apparent also. In a major policy initiative, elder statesman 
Sir Paulius Matane issued the Matane Report on the Philosophy of Education, (1987), 



O 116 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



120 



CHAPTER 6 — KISSING COUSINS? THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENGLISH & TOK PISIN IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA 



which restored a greater role for cultural identity in education, including vernacular 
literacy programmes. 

This theme was taken up to a certain extent in the Papua New Guinea 
government's Education Sector Review (1991), stressing the need for irutial literacy in 
a language the child understands. However, this was to be confined to a pre-primary 
elementary period, in which time it was hoped that the child would make the 
transition to English-medium education in grade 1, an assumption which Oladejo 
(1992:8) points out is "over-ambitious and unrealistic". The expansion of vernacular 
literacy does, however, continue, with recent emphasis on training local literacy 
workers recruited from within the communities they serve (Faraclas 1989). A number 
of Tok Pisin-medium schools are in operation, especially in the East Sepik Province, 
and institutions run by the Lutheran Church, and these appear to be showing promise 
with regard to early literacy (Siegel 1992, 1993). In the government primary schools, 
the English-only policy is still officially in operation, although in practice, it appears 
that more and more Tok Pisin is being used in the earlier grades. Calls have also been 
made for an expanded role for Tok Pisin in tertiary education (Bickerton 1975a, Swan 
& Lewis 1990). 




The current relationship between English and Tok Pisin 

In this section, some data examples will be presented to illustrate the effects of 
contact between the two languges. These are from a corpus of approximately 350,000 
words of transcribed speech of adolescent first language Tok Pisin speakers recorded 
and transcribed by the author (Smith 1999). Although small by the standards of some 
present-day corpora of other languages, this is nevertheless a significant resource for 
contemporary spoken Tok Pisin. Most of the 500 or so informants were in educational 
institutions where English was the medium of instruction, in provinces in the areas of 
the country where Tok Pisin has been widely spoken over the past few decades, i.e. 
excluding the Papuan provinces. The genre is mainly unscripted monologue; 
informants were simply asked to recount a story into the tape recorder. Stories 
included traditional legends, descriptions of contemporary events and some jokes. 

The fact that informants were largely in English-medium educational 
establishments and had native proficiency in Tok Pisin indicates a situation where a 
good deal of mutual influence between the two languages would be expected. Parallel 
situations in other countries have produced descriptions of the process of contact 
between pidgins or creoles and their lexifier languages, and what has typically been 
described is a post-creole continuum. In this situation, the creole (the "basilect") and 
its standard lexifier (the "acrolect") form two extremes on a gradually varying 
spectrum of linguistic forms. In between are various degrees of "mesolect." Individuals 
are generally expected to have a range of competence on this continuum, the exact 
form used being determined by social or cultural factors. 

Since continua of this kind have been described in places such as Jamaica 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 6 — KISSING COUSINS? THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENGLISH & TOK PISIN IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA 



O 118 

ERIC 



(Decamp 1971), Belize (Escure 1993) and Guyana (Bickerton 1975b), such a situation 
is clearly a possibility in Papua New Guinea where the lexifier is in intimate and 
sustained contact with a pidgin derived from it. Indeed there have been claims that 
such a continuum is already in place (O'Donnell & Todd 1980, Romaine 1992). Others 
are somewhat more cautious: Siegel (1997a) for example, considers that 
chcuacterisations of continua are premature in the whole of Melanesia. 

The data from the corpus support Siegel's view. The overwhelming majority of 
utterances are presented in a grammatical frame that is unequivocally Tok Pisin. This 
is not to deny the possibility of more mixed varieties being used in other situations 
or genres, but the process can be chcuacterised more as borrowing than mixing or 
intertwining at this stage. Since English is a very useful source of ready-made lexical 
items, it is frequently called upon to plug gaps in the referential resources of Tok Pisin 
or simply to provide stylistic alternatives. Some examples will show some typical 
processes of incorporating English items. 

An earlier paper (Smith 1998) showed that a massive influx of new English lexis 
is being incorporated in the Tok Pisin spoken on Manus. Some examples are shown 
below: 

em fest taim bio mipla ba go lo ai bio planti man na introdiusim mipla na i 
bin gutpla hontest wantem ol narapla stiudents 

it was the first time for us to go in front of a lot of people and introduce 
ourselves and it was a good contest with the other students. 

The words introdiusim 'introduce' and kontest 'contest' are clearly borrowings from 
English, but in the first case, morphological integration is seen in the adoption of - 
im, the transitive suffix. There are morphological implications of borrowing as well, as 
seen in the -s plural marker, which is increasingly used in some varieties of Tok Pisin 
in spite of the presence of the pluraUsing particle ol, which makes -s redundant. 

It cannot be seen from the above examples whether phonological adaptation is 
taking place, as the phonemes involved are common to both languages. When English 
terms with phonemes outside the Tok Pisin inventory are borrowed, in some cases 
adaptation is made, while in others, the borrowed phoneme is retained intact: 
long Tesdei olfemili blong em ol bin kam wantaim bodi blong em 
on Thursday, his family came with his body 

Here, the word "Thursday" is borrowed from English in place of the standeud 
alternative fonde but the interdental fricative (th) is modified as a stop (t). In the 
following, however, an unvoiced interdental fricative (th) and a voiced sibilant (z) cire 
retained in the borrowed item, although not normally distinguished in Tok Pisin 
phonology: 

husat i bin othoraizim? 

Who authorised it? 

Morphological integration suggests that these can be thought of as borrowings rather 
than code switches. Code-switches between English and Tok Pisin did occur in samples 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

122 



CHAPTER 6 — KISSING COUSINS? THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENGLISH & TOK PISIN IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA 



from the corpus from all areas, but very infrequently, and it was usually with a small 
number of set phreises. These often referred to time or were translations of unfamilieu: 
items, and usually constituted an obvious discontinuity set off by pauses or breaks in 
the discourse: 

Okei lo Mande moning the following day mipela i go lo gaden. 

OK, on Monday morning, the following day we went to the garden. 

ol bin faiarim kar bio ol pipisi — Provincial Police Commander. 

They set fire to the car belonging to the PPG — Provincial Police Commander. 

A whole cUne of examples from extensive code-switching to the bordeUne of what can 
be considered borrowed or established forms is described in more detail in Smith 
(2000). What can be seen here, eis in other places in the corpus, appeans to be an 
early stage of mutual influence between the two languages, which are still kept 
sepcirate for most purposes. A situation is emerging in contemporary Papua New 
Guinea which has not been present in former periods of the history of Tok Pisin, 
namely the existence of a significant number of people fluent in both Tok Pisin and 
English. Fluency in Tok Pisin is seen both in the increasing numbers of first language 
speakers and in a native-like competence of many second language speakers eis Tok 
Pisin gains a greater role in contemporary society. Fluency in English is a product of 
the continuing policy to use English eis the medium of instruction in the majority of 
educational establishments right from the beginning of primeiry school. 

A post-creole continuum is often cissociated with urban development, but on the 
beisis of the findings in this corpus, it is suggested that the pre-conditions for such a 
change may not necessarily be in urban contexts. Some urban settlements may be 
quite mixed linguistically, but in other Ceises, ethnic enclaves obviate the need for 
total Tok Pisin immersion. In provinces such as Manus and New Ireland, however, there 
now appears to be the combination of almost universal knowledge of both English and 
Tok Pisin, together with a situation where no vernacular is dominant. It is in this 
situation that the seeds of a post-creole continuum may be sprouting. 



Future directions 

The scenario outlined above involves a number of variables, none of whose direction 
is totally predictable in the future. Tok Pisin itself is continually changing, and 
competing forces for divergence and convergence within the country appear to be 
operating (Smith 1990). Calls have been made for vemaculcu: languages or Tok Pisin 
to have a greater role in education (Siegel 1997b), and if the dominant position of 
English in the education system is challenged, this could obviously ciffect the 
linguistic ecology. An alternative situation, where universal English education 
effectively made the whole population English-speaking, would fulfil the dream of Sir 
Hubert Murray, a former governor of Papua, but remains only a remote possibility at 
present. The expansion of Tok Pisin is no doubt at the expense of vernacular 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 11Q 

123 



CHAPTER 6 — KISSING COUSINS? THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENGLISH & TOK PISIN IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA 



languages, many of which must now be considered endangered. A brake on the 
expansion of Tok Hsin through a resurgence of vernaculars or regional standards 
seems unUkely at present, but is nevertheless another possible fector influencing 
developments. 



124 

O 120 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

ERIC 



CHAPTER 6 — KISSING COUSINS? THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENGLISH & TOK PISIN IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA 



References 

Bickerton, Derek, 1975a, 'University level course in pidgin and creole,' in McElhanon (ed.), 
pp. 127-133. 

Bickerton, Derek, 1975b, Dynamics of a Creole System, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 

Bickerton, Derek, 1981, Roots of Language, Ann Arbor, Karoma. 

Cheshire, Jenny (ed.), 1991, English Around the World: Sociolinguistic perspectives, Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press. 

DeCamp, David, 1971, Towards a generative analysis of a post-creole continuum, in Hymes 
(ed.), Pidginization and Creolisation of Languages, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 
pp. 349-70. 

Dutton, Thomas Edward, 1973, Conversational New Guinea Pidgin: Pacific linguistics, D12. 
Canberra, Australian National University. 

Dutton, Thomas Edward, 1976, 'Language and national development — long wanem rot?'. 
Inaugural Lecture, Port Moresby, UPNG. 

Escure, Genevieve, 1993, 'Focus, topic particles and discourse markers in the Belizean creole 
continuum', in Byrne & Winford (eds.). Focus and Grammatical Relations in Creole 
Languages. Amsterdam, Benjamins, pp. 233-247. 

Faraclas, N, 1989, 'New directions for literacy in the 1990's: Hope for the survival of Tokples 
in Papua New Guinea,' Paper to Linguistic Society of PNG Conference, Port Moresby. 

Foley, William A, 1986, The Papuan Languages of New Guinea, Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press. 

Grimes, B, 1992, Ethnologue: Languages of the world, 12th edition. Dallas, Texas: Summer 
Institute of Linguistics. 

Hall, R. A. Jr, 1955, Hands off Pidgin English! Sydney, Pacific Publications. 

Johnson, R. K, 1977, 'Administration and Language Policy in Papua New Guinea', in Wurm, S. 
A. (ed.) New Guinea Area Languages and Language Study, vol. 3: Language, culture, society 
and the modem world. Pacific Linguistics C-40, Canberra, Australian National University, 
pp. 429-68. 

Kale, Joan, 1990, 'Language planning and the language of education in Papua New Guinea', 
in Baldauf & Luke (eds.), pp. 182-196. 

Keesing, Roger M, 1988, Melanesian Pidgin and the Oceanic Substrate. Stanford, University 
Press. 

Laycock, Donald C, 1970, Materials in New Guinea Pidgin (Coastal and Lowlands), Pacific 
Linguistics, D5. Canberra, Australian National University. 

Laycock, Donald C, 1982, 'Linguistic diversity in Melanesia: A tentative explanation,' In Carle 
et al (Eds.), Gava': Studies in Austronesian languages and cultures, Berlin, Reimer. pp. 31- 
37). 

Litteral, Robert, 1975, 'A proposal for the use of Pidgin in Papua New Guinea's education 
system', in McElhanon (ed.), pp. 155-65. 

Lynch, John, 1990, 'The future of Tok Pisin: social, political and educational dimensions,' in 
Verhaar (ed.), Melanesian Pidgin and Tok Pisin, Studies in Language Companion Series vol. 
20, Amsterdam: Benjamins, pp. 387-397. 

Matane, PauUas, 1987, Matane Report on the Philosophy of Education, Waigani, PNG Govt. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 221 

125 



CHAPTER 6 — KISSING COUSINS? THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENGLISH & TOK PISIN IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA 



McElhanon, K. A. (ed.) 1975, Tok Pisin i go we? Kivung special Pub. no 1, Port Moresby, 
Linguistic Society of PNG. 

Mihalic, Frank, 1971, The Jacaranda Dictionary and Grammar of Melanesian Pidgin, Milton, 
Queensland, Jacaranda. 

Miihlhausler, Peter, 1978, 'Samoan Plantation Pidgin and the Origin of New Guinea Pidgin', 
Papers in Pidgin and Creole Linguistics no 1, Pacific Linguistics, A54, pp 7-119. 

Miihlhausler, Peter, 1979, Growth and Structure of the Lexicon of New Guinea Pidgin. Pacific 
Linguistics, C52, Canbena, Australian National University. 

Miihlhausler, Peter, Wurm S. A. & Dutton, T. E., 1979, language Planning and New Guinea 
Pidgin', in Wurm (ed.), pp. 263-276. 

Nekitel, 0. M., 1984, 'Language planning in Papua New Guinea: A nationalist viewpoint', Yagl- 
ambu Vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1-24. 

O'Donnell, W. R. & Todd, Loreto, 1980, Variety in Contemporary English, London, Allen & 

Unwin. 

Oladejo, James, 1992, 'A critical appraisal of the Education Sector Review and its implications 
for language education in Papua New Guinea,' Paper of Seminar on Applied Educational 
Research, Goroka. 

Papua New Guinea Department of Education, 1991, Education Sector Review: Deliberations and 
findings. Port Moresby. 

Pennycook, Alastair, 1994, The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language, 

London, Longman. 

Romaine, Suzanne, 1992, Language, Education and Development: Urban and rural Tok Pisin in 
Papua New Guinea, Oxford, Oxford University Press. 

Sankoff, Gillian, 1976, 'Political power and linguistic inequality in PNG', in O'Barr & O'Barr 
(eds.) Language and Politics, The Hague, Mouton, pp. 283-310. 

Sankoff, Gillian (ed.), 1986, The Social Life of Language, Pittsburgh, University of 
Pennsylvania Press. 

Siegel, Jeff, 1992, Pidgins, Creoles and Nonstandard Dialects in Education, Occasional Paper no. 
12, Melbourne, Applied Linguistics Association of Australia. 

Siegel, Jeff, 1993, 'Pidgins and creoles in education in Australia and the Southwest Pacific', 
in Byrne & Holm (eds.) Atlantic Meets Pacific: A global view of pidginization and 
creolization, Amsterdam, Benjamins, pp. 299-308. 

Siegel, Jeff, 1997a, 'Pidgin and English in Melanesia: Is there a continuum?' World Englishes, 
16(2):185-204. 

Siegel, Jeff, 1997b, 'Using a pidgin language in formal education: Help or hindrance?' Applied 
Linguistics, Vol 18, no, 1, pp. 86-100. 

Siegel, Jeff, 1999, 'Transfer constraints and substrate influence in Melanesian Pidgin,' Journal 
of Pidgin and Creole Languages, Vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1-44. 

Smith, Geoff P, 1990, 'CreoUzed Tok Pisin: Uniformity and variation', in R. Baldauf & A. Luke 
(eds.). Language Planning and Education in Australasia and the South Pacific. Clevedon: 
Multilingual Matters, pp. 197-209. 

Smith, Geoff P, 1998, 'English and Melanesian Pidgin in the Admiralty Islands,' Links and 
Letters, Vol 5, pp. 107-123. 




O 122 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 6 — KISSING COUSINS? THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENGLISH & TOK PISIN IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA 



Smith, Geoff P, 1999, 'Some recent developments in the lexical, morpho-syntactic and 

discourse features of the spoken language of young first language Tok Pisin speakers in 
three regions of Papua New Guinea,' PhD Thesis, Lae, Papua New Guinea University of 
Technology. 

Smith, Geoff P, 2000, T’ok Pisin and English: The cunent relationship', in Siegel, 3 (ed.). The 
Processes of Language Contact: Case studies from Australia and the Pacific, Montreal, 
Editions Fides. 

Swan, J & D. J. Lewis, 1990, T’ok Pisin at university: An educational and language planning 
dilemma in Papua New Guinea' in R. Baldauf & A. Luke (eds.). Language Planning and 
Education in Australasia and the South Pacific. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, pp. 210- 
233. 

Verhaar, John W. M., 1996, Towards a Reference Grammar of Tok Pisin: An experiment in corpus 
linguistics. Oceanic Linguistics Special Publications, VoL 26, Honolulu, University of Hawaii 
Press. 

Wurm, Stephen A. & Miihlhausler, P. (eds.), 1985, Handbook of Tok Pisin (New Guinea Pidgin, 
Pacific Linguistics, C70, Canberra, Australian National University. 




ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION J23 



7 Chaos in Aboriginal English discourse 



Farzad Sharifian 

Edith Cowan University, Western Australia 



This paper explores several aspects of chaos perceived in Aboriginal 
English (AE) discourse. This chaos, which partly stems from non- 
reUance on temporality, diminishes the transpauency of AE discourse 
to non-Aboriginal speakers of English. Certain cognitive and 
perceptual preferences, reflected in recall criteria, perceptual style, 
and perceptual saUency, seem to underlie this perceived chaos. These 
cognitive characteristics may be determined by cultural skills, beliefs, 
emd practices. 



Several studies have reported that Australian Aboriginal students do not often benefit 
ideally from the education they are provided with (e.g., Christie & Harris 1985, 
Keeuins 1985, Lowell & Devlin 1998, Malcolm 1982). Factors such as hearing loss, 
cultural discontinuity between home and school, linguistic and socioUnguistic 
interference, and linguistic incompatibility have been proposed to be responsible for 
this failure of the educational system, in a Western schooling context, to cater for the 
needs of Aboriginal students. 

One of the linguistic barriers to the success of Aboriginal students is the partial 
obscurity of their discourse to non-Aboriginal teachers, which has been attributed 
(e.g., Christie & Harris, 1985) to the discrepancies between the language variety 
spoken by Aboriginal students (i.e.. Aboriginal English) and the one spoken by their 
non-Aboriginal teachers (i.e., Australian English). Differences have been observed at 
all levels between these two dialects, from phonology to semantics and discourse 
(Heukins 1994, Malcolm et al. 1999). 

This paper is an attempt to look for peuallels between distinctive discoursal 
features in Aboriginal English (AE) and perceptual-cognitive principles of 
organization. The basic assumptions in this endeavour eue: a) there is an intimate 
interrelationship between language and other cognitive faculties, and b) cognitive 
cheuacteristics and preferences may be shaped by cultural skills and practices. These 
assumptions in fact summarize the author's position concerning the relationship 
between culture, cognition, and language. Assumption "a" refers to the general tenet 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^25 



128 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



O 126 

ERIC 



advocated by cognitive linguists that formal features of language are pointers to 
deeper cognitive representations and processes (e.g., Langacker 1987, 1991, Chafe 
1994). A corollary of this proposition would be that formal differences could stem 
from either representational differences or alternative processing tactics. Assumption 
"b" denotes the idea favored by cognitive anthropologists (e.g.. Shore 1996, Strauss 
& Quinn 1997) and ethno-psychologists (e.g., Davidson & Kishor 1984, Kearins 1985) 
that cultural practices and skills may have a bearing on the development of certain 
cognitive preferences or advantages. 

The rest of this paper is composed of several sections. The first section will 
present a brief description of AE. The second section will review research on cognitive 
aspects of AE. The third section will present and develop the major theme of the 
present paper. 



Aboriginal English 

"Aboriginal English" is a cover term referring to dialects of English, except Standard 
Australian English, spoken by Aboriginal Australians. For many speakers of AE, this 
dialect is a successor of Aboriginal languages that are largely extinct now (Malcolm 
2000a). This is due to the fact that AE includes features from these Aboriginal 
languages, as well as from English. Of course, AE includes features that belong neither 
to the former nor to the latter. Malcolm (1995) defines AE as: 

A range of varieties of English spoken by many Aboriginal people and some 
others in close contact with them which differ in systematic ways from standard 
Australian English at all levels of linguistic structure (sounds; word forms; 
syntax; vocabulary; meanings) and which are used for distinctive speech events, 
acts and genres, (p. 19) 

Although AE is not a pidgin or creole now, there is evidence that it has gone through 
the processes of pidginization, creoUzation and decreoUzation, and is now mainly 
used for intra-communication purposes (Malcolm 2000a, also see Malcolm & 
Kosdeledd 1997 for a diachronic study of AE). 

AE is different from Australian English both at the surface level of formal features 
and also at the deeper level of semcuitic content (Arthur 1996, Harkins 1994, Malcolm 
et al. 1999). AE employs distinctive mecuis to represent reality (Malcolm 1994a, 
1994b). Among these are: 

• AE achieves economy of expression 

• AE is highly context dependent 

• AE foregrounds aspect, duration, dual number, participant relations, emd oral art 
cuid backgrounds gender, existence, cuid plurality 

• AE discourse reveals unique rhetorical structures. 

AE achieves certain unique functions for its speakers, such as a) creating a convivial 
atmosphere among Aboriginal speakers, b) reinforcing common Aboriginal identity, c) 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, P 




EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



providing for certain Aboriginal genres, and d) achieving ironic humor (Malcolm 
1995). 

Resecirch has shown that "even where Aboriginal English seems to employ the 
same vocabulary as Australian English, it is informed by a semantics deeply rooted in 
Aboriginal culture" (Malcolm & Rochecouste 2000, P. 98). This has often resulted in 
miscommurdcation between Aboriginal children and non-Aboriginal teachers (Malcolm 
1977, 1982). As Malcolm et al. (1999) put it: 

We have seen that the same English words and expressions can accommodate 
contrasting cultural schemas, so that speakers of standard English may think 
(on the basis of surface linguistic form) they are being understood by Aboriginal 
English speakers (and vice versa) but may be drawing on completely different 
inferences from the communication from those which were intended, (p. 74) 

Cognitive aspects of A£ 

Research on cognitive aspects of AE is quite recent (Malcolm 1998, Malcolm & 
Rochecouste 2000, Sharifian 2000). As part of a project on two-way education, 
Malcolm and Rochecouste employed schema theory to identify some cultural schemas 
which underlie the production of distinctive discourse patterns in AE oral discourse 
produced by Yamaijis, an Aboriginal cultural group in Western Australia (Malcolm & 
Rochecouste 2000). By comparing 40 passages and determirung their genre-specific 
recurring content features and discourse patterns, they have been able to identify 
eight schemas, which have been labeled Travel, Hunting, Observing, Encountering the 
Unknown, Gathering, Isolation from the Group, Problem-Solving, and 
Borrowed/Hybrid. Certain discourse meukers and discoiuse strategies have also 
appeared to be associated with these schemas in AE discourse. These schemas mainly 
reflect Aboriginal cultural activities, beliefs and practices. Malcolm and Rochecouste 
observe that the first four cue the most frequently occurring in the data that they 
have analyzed. 

In a recent study on the processing of schemas by Aboriginal children, certain 
distinctive patterns emerged that could be attributed to the distinctive roles played 
by schemas in linguistic processing (Sharifian 2000). For example, referential devices, 
such as demonstratives euid pronouns, employed in AE discourse sometimes appeared 
to retrieve their antecedent from the speaker's activated schema rather than the 
device's linguistic context or the physical context where the discourse is produced. 
This was inferred on the basis of the observation that some referential devices were 
found with no previous mentiorung of their antecedents or even semantically related 
lexical items. In the following oral text, for example, the demonstrative "dat" (that) 
is used with "snake" without any previous mentiorung of the "snake" or without any 
snakes being in the immediate environment where this talk was recorded. It is also to 
be noted that K is a researcher who had not been present in the scene being described. 
Thus, it is hypothesized that the speaker is making a reference to a snake in her 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 7 - CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 

activated schema rather than any words in her current discourse or even her 
immediate environment. 

Koongamia Snake Text 

J: My sister she went to., she went to put er rubbish away.. 

K: Yeah 

J: cui she was messin roun playin like dat an., she was gunna git cut 

K: mmm 

J: she came out like dat dere... she nearly killed dat snake 

A: she stepped on the snake like dat 

J: Yeah. 

Chaos in AE discourse 

In this section we turn to the exploration of chaos perceived by non-Aboriginal 
speakers of English in AE discourse. This chaos is perceived in the way utterances are 
put together to form larger strings and stretches of discourse. It is this chaos that 
somehow disrupts the flow of communication between Aboriginal students and non- 
Aboriginal teachers. The purpose of the present analysis is to detect the factors that 
may be responsible for this discoursal phenomenon. 

The present analysis draws on more than 100 texts, mainly oral nanatives from 
Aboriginal child speakers of AE in Western Australia and a number of written texts in 
AE from Aboriginal child speakers living in the Northern Territory in Australia. 

The term "chaos", as it is used here, is bonowed from chaos theory, which aims 
at describing and explaining dynamic complex systems (Hilbom 1994). Research on 
chaotic systems has revealed patterns of order within disorder, made possible through 
the use of computer progrcuns modeling sizable amounts of data. Along the Scune line, 
the present study is an attempt to detect possible order in "chaotic" discourse in AE. 

Part of the chaos perceived in AE discourse, particularly nanative discourse, 
arises from its frequent non-reliance on, but not necessarily absence of, temporal 
ordering. This feature of AE is in parallel with the non-linearity observed in chaotic 
systems. Consider the following text written by an Aboriginal student (Source: 
Gillespie 1991): 

Green Birds Text 

On the weekend we went to look for Green birds 

and we came to camp 

and we went to watch videos 

and we went to sleep 

and eat meat 

and we were plaing marbles 

and we went to the lard to Look the big bulloc. 




ERIC 



128 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



An Aboriginal research assistant was asked to number the clauses in the above 
text according to their most probable original order of occunence of the represented 
events. In other words, the aim was to construct the order of events in fabula (i.e., 
what actually happened) from the order of presentation in sjuzhet (i.e., what is 
presented). The ordering given Weis as follows: 

line 2>Unel>Une 7> line 6>Une 5> line 3> line 4 

This means that the above text could be temporally rewritten as: 
and we came to camp 

On the weekend we went to look for Green birds 
and we went to the lard to Look the big bulloc 
and we were plaing marbles 
and eat meat 

and we went to watch videos 
and we went to sleep 

The lack of preference for temporal ordering in AE discourse is also reflected in the 
relatively high frequency of the occurrence of the connective "and" instead of 
temporal connectives such as "first", "second", "next", etc. The following text shows 
how an AE speeiker may connect the utterances by means of "and": 

The Bloke with the Shotgun Text 

(The speaker is an Aboriginal boy aged 9, in a group of 5 boys and 4 girls 5 Aboriginal 
and 4 non-Aboriginal. R is an Aboriginal boy aged 11) 

L: And last time when we were livin over the (street address) 

well we went over dis bloke's house 
and e's had dis dog 
and e ad a double barrel shotgim 
R: that's goin 

L: and.. 

I: it's going 

L: we went through de timnel 



and a dog., de dog came., 
and., we took off 

and., we went to the caravans park 

an this other bloke he ad., he ad dis urn gun 

and e's two dogs.. 

and., we um tried to jump the fence of the caravan park 
but it was too high for me 
so my hu- cousin Henry well he chucked me over 
and and I landed on my head. 

I jarred him! 

(others laughing) 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



id 130 

ERIC 



Temporal ordering has been believed by some to lie at the very heart of narrative 
(e.g., Labov 1972). For these scholars, "temporally ordered clauses (and only these) 
are labeled 'narrative clauses'" (Reinhart 1984, p. 779). For them, in narratives, the 
order of presentation (i.e., sjuzhet) is the Scime cis the original order of occunence of 
the events (i.e., fabula). Narratives should have a temporal axis called 'skeleton' of the 
text, around which the non-ncurative flesh is organized (Labov 1972). 

A writer may of course, according to this interpretation of narrative, choose to 
avoid any overlap between the order of events and the order of presentation (Reinhart 
1984). This may for example be achieved by the use of certain lexical and syntactic 
devices, such as embedding and subordination. The following sentence from Reinhart 
shows how syntactic embedding may be used to distort the original temporal order of 
events: 

• A friend of mine came in just in time to stop this person who had a little too 
much to drink from attacking me. 

This temporal ordering avoidance strategy may be employed where story telling is not 
the appropriate genre or where the writer wants to create a special effect. A good 
example would be a news report, where the report may include temporal materials but 
the news report genre does not allow 'narrativity'. In these cases, the writer makes 
every attempt to avoid the overlap of the two orders (see Reinhart 1984). It is to be 
noted here that the avoidance of temporal ordering in AE discourse may not be 
attributed to the requirements of school genres or stylistic appropriateness. Thus, we 
should move beyond the level of text to search for answers. 

Thus far, we have mentioned two different levels of temporal ordering: order of 
events in fabula, and order of presentation in sjuzhet. There is however a third level, 
which is representation of temporality in the mind of an author. This is perhaps what 
Onega and Landa (1996) call "story", the level of representation between fabula and 
text. "A text is a linguistic construct, while a story is a cogrutive scheme of events" 
(p. 8). It is at this cogrutive level that this paper is seeking explanations for non- 
linearity. It is the contention of this paper that certain perceptual and cognitive 
principles of orgardzation should be at work in determining the order of presentation 
in AE discourse. 

Non-linearity in discourse may be attributed to the modes of information 
processing. (TenHouten 1997, 1996, 1999). Having observed a non-linearity in 
Aboriginal discourse, TenHouten maintains, "[t]oday's Australian Aborigines are the 
bearers of the world's most ancient civilization. Their thinking patterns do not feature 
logical-analytic, linear information processing, but rather a gestalt-synthetic mode of 
information processing" (TenHouten 1999, p. 127). 

Based on his observation of differential patterns of time-consciousness, 
TenHouten (1999) constructs a conceptual model, in which he introduces patterned- 
cyclical cis opposed to ordinary -linear form of time-consciousness. He characterizes 
pattern-cyclical time-consciousness cis having the following features: 

133 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



• It is dualistic, which means it is based on two levels of reality: "the sacred inner 
reality and the profane outer reality" (TenHouten 1999, p. 128) 

• There is fusion of the past and the present. 

• It is irregular, discontinuous, and heterogeneous. 

• It is event-oriented. 

• It is (yclical and based on overlapping and interdependent patterns and 
oscillations. 

• It is qualitative, which refers to non-numerical assessment and "now" being the 
anchor point. 

• It is based on the experience of long duration, which refers to subjectivity of time 
passage. 

TenHouten (1999) contrasts these characteristics with the linear form of time- 
consciousness, which is one dimensional, continuous, quantitative, and which can be 
partitioned into past, present, and future. Employing a Neurocognitive Hiereuchical 
Categorization Analysis (NHCA), which is a lexical categorization method using Roget's 
International Thesaurus, TenHouten analyzes 168 life-historical interviews with 
Aboriginal and Euro-Australian people and concludes that time-consciousness in 
Aboriginal people is predominantly pattern-cyclical while it is primarily ordinary- 
linear in Euro-Australians. TenHouten (1999) relates these two patterns of time- 
consciousness to cerebral hemisphericity as follows: 

Linear time-consciousness, it is proposed here, is an aspect of the logical- 
analytic mode of informational processing of the left cerebral hemisphere (of the 
adult right-handed person); and patterned-cyclic time-consciousness is proposed 
to be an aspect of the gestalt-synthetic information processing that is 
characteristic of the right hemisphere, (p. 133) 

TenHouten (1985, 1986) had previously used several other cognitive tests and tasks 
and the results he had found all gave evidence of right hemisphericity in Aboriginal 
children. For example, TenHouten (1985) found that Aboriginal children outperformed 
non-Ab original children on Closure 79 (a right-hemisphere dependent visual closure 
test), in spite of their lower performance on WISC-R (a left hemisphere dependent 
word-pairs test). He also found higher percentages of leftweud conjugate lateral eye 
movements in Aboriginal children than non-Aboriginal children, which reflects right- 
hemisphericity on the level of hemispheric activation. Hemisphericity is in fact a 
tendency to rely more on the resources of one hemisphere than the othe' and is 
hypothesized to be pairtly determined by socio-cultural factors (see TenHouten 1999). 

A point that may be worth raising here concerns the association of linearity with 
"logic", as reflected in TenHouten's use of "logical-analytic" in the above quotation. 
"Logic" is used here as though logic is a single objectively-definable reality either 
perceived or conceived by the human mind. We should keep in mind, however, that 
studies in logic during the past century have shown us alternative ways of defining, 
modeling and applying logic. One of these alternative non-linear "logics" is what came 




134 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



to be known as fuzzy logic, which extends the concept of logic to encompass much 
more than a binary possibility of formal logic, and which can handle non-Unear, time- 
variable systems as well (Zadeh 1996). It may well be that non-linearity in Aboriginal 
cognition is a reflection of some alternative "logic" of representation and processing 
of information. 

Gell (1996) uses syllogistic logic and shows that, "there is no reason to suppose 
that 'temporal logic' is part of the foundations on which all intelligible thought must 
rest ... Ordinary logic is time-indifferent" (p. 243). In the hypothetico-deductive 
method of logical reasoning (e.g., Sharifian 1999), for instance, the major premise is 
a strict universal statement not bound by place or time. 

TenHouten does not provide any textual examples for the features that he 
identifies with the pattem-cycUcal time-consciousness; nor does he mention the 
language or the dialect of the speakers in his study. However, based on his definitions 
and descriptions, it appears that some of these featiues are in consonance, more or 
less, with the features observed to be prevalent in AE. The following texts from the 
data analyzed for this study will illustrate some of these characteristics: 

Text 3 (Devil's Visit) 

(IM is a non-Aboriginal researcher and the others are primary-school Aboriginal 
students) 



1 


Gavin: 


One devil came to me 


2 


IM: 


A devil came to you? 


3 


Gavin: 


Yeah., (at Onslow 


4 


IM: 


(well tell me all about it Gavin 


5 


Gavin: 


Out the window. 


6 


IM: 


Out the window... (What do you mean? 


7 


Gavin: 


(Yeah... I was 'wake for a looong time.. 


8 




Dat's out xxxx (an I was 


9 


IM: 


(Yes., you were in the house were you? 


10 


Raymond: 


(xxxxxx dere? 


11 


Gavin: 


(Yeah., an I looked.. 


12 




An I was.. 


13 




Wiped the window.. 


14 




Then I seen sumpin come aroun the corner dere. 



Text 5 (Featherfoot Stories) 



1 Like dese blackfellas we saw dey was featherfoot 

2 ey was singing a s song in the bush dere.. 

3 Yamatji song 





132 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



< 



I 

I 




Text 7 (Singing Story) 

1 R: urn the last urn., last um.... well next year.. 

2 IM: [yes 

3 R: [Well 

4 we- we um we was eatin these eatin our tea.. 

5 well um.. we had the lights on 

6 and dis um sing., an dis man., he come.. 

7 it was a umm blackfella.. 

8 an e come 

9 an e.. e sing.. 

10 he was sing... 

11 I don't know what he was doing.. 

12 And sing.. 

13 Then all of the uh lights switched off.. 

14 An we didn't switch them off. 

Text 13 (Hunting) 

1 T: At the station 

2 Me euid my dad euid my mother and my brother 

3 We went we went Ceunping out 

Text 18 (Sporting Exploits) 

1 First off I started off in the back line standin up you know.. 

2 then footy come towards me boy ... 

Text 20 (Little Man Story) 

1 Um.. when I 'as asleep at 'ome 

2 When I 'as asleep at 'ome .. 

3 One., one little meui was dere. 

4 I was.. I was I went under the rug 

5 An it it come right up to me ... 

Text 27 (Granddad and the Bobtail) 

1 When we was at.. Mavis's house.. 

2 well.. 

3 we make our shed... 

4 there was a little tire there ... 

In texts 3, 5, 7, and 20 the Aboriginal speakers talk about experiences belonging to 
a world, called The Dreaming, that transcends the world boundaries experienced by 
many non-Aboriginal people. Maddock (1982) maintains that, "Aboriginal cosmology 
supposes that nature and culture were formed at the same time, and it attributes both 

136 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^^33 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



to powers who lived in the world during The Dreaming and are present in it still, 
though no longer generally visible, for they have withdrawn from view" (p. 105). 
Durkheim (1912/1965) believed that Aboriginal people conceive of "two 
heterogeneous and mutually incompcuable worlds" (p. 250). This, according to 
TenHouten (1999, p. 128), accounts for the "inegularity, discontinuity, and 
heterogeneity" in time-consciousness. It should however be noted here that 
Aboriginal people may not necessarily tend to draw a separating line between these 
"two worlds" and may even find the label of Dreaming inappropriate, as it may suggest 
"an unreal experience". 

Text 13 shows a frequent feature of Aboriginal English discourse: mentioning the 
name of a place (i.e. "At the station") rather than a specific point in time, as the 
starting point of the recount. Marking the timing of a recount in AE discourse is often 
in the form of "When + an event and/or a place". In Texts 20 and 27, for example, the 
opening lines of the story clearly show this pattern of "place/ event-orientedness". 
Note that a non-Aboriginal speaker of English may tend to meuk the specific point in 
time when something happened and thus say, "When I was asleep at home last night" 
or "We were at Mavis's house last week/the other day" as the description of the setting 
in a story. 

Event-orientedness is also reflected in Text 3 where the speaker starts off the 
recount without marking the time of the event. Note how the first line of Text 7 
reveals an attempt made by the Aboriginal child speaker to accommodate to non- 
Aboriginal ways of talking by trying to build a time frame. The "synchronic ordering 
of events" in AE discourse may be equated with a non-reliance on temporal ordering 
exemplified eculier by the Green Birds Text (p. 4) in this paper. 

The "Fusion of past and present" may be reflected in using the present and the 
past form of a verb in describing a single event. This pattern can be observed in Texts 
7 (lines 7-8), Text 18, Text 20 (lines 4-5), Text 27 (lines 3-4). It should be admitted 
here that the fusion of past and present as mcuked in a verb is related to the structure 
of "tense" and may or may not be a reflection of "time-consciousness" as a cognitive 
notion. 

Overall, the above features of AE discourse point to a non-reliance on temporality 
on the part of AE speakers in structuring their discourse. This is in parallel with the 
findings of resecuch conducted on cognitive skills of Australian Aboriginal people. 
Davidson and KUch (1980) observed a preference for spatial ordering and a lack of 
preference for temporal ordering in Aboriginal children in two free-recall tasks with 
pictures and objects. They attributed this preference for spatial ordering to cultural 
and environmental influences. Davidson (1979) also refers to evidence suggesting 
that, in traditional tasks such as card playing and orienting. Aboriginal people seem 
to store and retrieve spatially information that was sampled temporally. 

Since temporal ordering is closely associated with the notion of "time", a brief 
discussion of how time is viewed in relation to cognition may prove of some insight 
here. The notion of "time", as we apply it to the 'temporalization' of experience, is 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDEN . POWER AND EDUCATION 




^ 6 \ 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



mainly a cognitive construction (see Bender & Wellbery 1991). Construction of linear 
time and setting it out as a framework within which life forms are embedded appears 
to be a preference and a demand in certain societal systems, such as the clock-and 
calendar oriented ones. Leach (1961) believes that "the idea of Time ... is one of those 
categories we find necessary because we are social animals rather than because of 
anything empirical in our objective experience of the world" (p. 125). 

Cognitive research on temporal memory (e.g., Friedman 1993, Larsen, Thompson 
& Hansen 1996) also reveals that people do not store and retrieve temporal 
information directly. Rather, they reconstruct the temporal location of past events on 
the basis of fragments of information remembered about the content of the event (i.e., 
temporal cues) and general knowledge about time patterns (i.e., temporal schemas). 

The concept of time is not a single, unique notion in human life. At least two 
different conceptions of time have been identified across cultures by social 
anthropologists. Several dichotomies have been developed to label these two 
conceptualizations of time: cyclical/Unear, sacred/secular, repetitive/non-repetitive, 
etc (Gell 1996). It has been suggested, for example, that time in The Dreaming is 
sacred and eternal, whereas time in the non-Dreeuning is secular and chronological. 
(Bemdt 1974, Bain 1992). It seems possible that the conception of The Dreaming by 
Aboriginal people has diminished their need to rely heavily on chronology. In 
cognitive terminology. Aboriginal speakers may not find it so necessary to either 
represent temporal cues or to construct temporal schemas. Instead, other cues or 
criteria may be used for the retrieval and recall of information from memory. For 
example, certain recurrent features in AE discourse suggest that the order of recall of 
the events may be determined by consideration of "place" and "event", realized in a 
sequence like WHERE>WHAT>WHY. That is, a recount may start with the description 
of a place and/ or an event, then moves to what happened and finally the reasons why 
it happened. The following passage would exemplify this pattern of recall: 

Text 97 (Tormenting Story) 

1 FT: Thas what happened to me once.. 

2 I was out bush.. 

3 I went to this hill.. 

4 and this ole fella said 'Oh don't go near that ill'.. 

5 but me nah.. 

6 I went up the 'ill.. 

7 when I was mustering sheep.. 

8 and I went in 

9 lookin in aroun.. 

10 FT: An these little fellas Uved.. 

11 an that rught they come out an 

12 tormented me.. 

13 got me an chucked me outa my bed.. 

13S 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^35 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



O 136 

ERIC 



14 chucked the bed on me an all.. 

15 I had to go back to that hill 

16 because I took somethin from the hill 

17 what I shouldn'ta taken 

18 an I took it back 

19 EH: Put it back 

20 FT: An those little xx didn't come no more 

21 JR: So they knew 

22 FT: Oh yeah I took a little a grinding rock 

23 FT; I'll take it back 

24 I-ni take that thing back.. 

25 but they jumped all over me.. 

26 chucked me out o my bed didn't e.. 

27 this was out Wiluna.. 

As it can be seen in the above text, lines 2 and 3 describe where the incident 
happened, then up to line 15 is a description of what happened and finally lines 16 
and 17 explain the reason why "little fellas" tormented the narrator. Therefore, the 
order of recall here can be said to have been contingent upon where/what/why 
consideration in that order. 

Part of the chaos perceived in AE discourse seems to come from a recurrent 
feature that is called "surveying" (Malcolm et al. 1999). Malcolm et al. observe that 
Aboriginal child speakers make a picture, in their discourse, of the whole event 
surveyed. "Surveying is a discourse strategy (perhaps a sub-genre) exhibited in the 
oral narrative of Aboriginal child speakers whereby they depict an event in the 
context of the whole communicative setting in which it takes place" (Malcolm et al. 
1999, p. 50). The italicized section in the following text, transcribed from an oral 
report of a football game by a six-year-old girl, exemplifies this feature of AE. 

Koongamia Football Text 

1 K: What about football? 

2 Did you go an watch your brother play football? 

3 A: Yeah na.. I play- 1 watch myself play football 

(laughter) 

4 K: Watch yourself play 

5 A: Yeah 

6 K: Did you go an see.. Christopher play., er 

7 A: at the WACA 

8 K: at the WACA? 

9 A: Nuh 

10 K: You didn't.. 

11 A: Nuh.. cause we [h]as ten games to play 

12 Many Ohhh no 

139 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



13 K: E's brother was in the.. Little league in Essendon on Sa- um Sunday 

14 A: an Eagles 

15 L: Hey don't., did he win.. .when. .what day., you didn't get.... 

16 ohh don't that would've been solid ay.... 

(laugh) 

17 oh boy I would've been.. I'd've been there standing at the fence.. 

18 tryin to look through the fence 

19 S: Dey got little cousin 

20 crawled in the way 

21 and.. .Uncle Simon.. .he- 

22 0 he got hit... 

23 an there.. 

24 annnd like we watched Fiona Buckley play 

25 thas her name... 

26 an er baby was like.. 

27 she's a nice girl wid about ten names.. 

28 an I was only watchin Uncle Simon watchin football 

29 L: mmm 

30 S: An Jade man he's Uke my brother 

31 A: My brother e lives at Cue 

32 S: about four five years older then me... e's five 

33 L: mm 

34 K: yeah. 

As lines 19 to 26 suggest, the speaker seems to have sampled several aspects of her 
immediate environment, which are not scenes of the football game, and in reporting 
the game gives equal prominence to all of the sampled aspects. It is as if the speaker 
has taken shots from different things happening around her. This recurrent feature of 
AE seems to reflect certain patterns of selective attention (Neisser 1980) in Aboriginal 
speakers. That is, the scope of vision adopted and attended to by Aboriginal speakers, 
as reflected in the coverage of events in AE discourse, appears to be much wider than 
that of at least urban non- Aboriginal speakers. This is endorsed by the visual spatial 
superiority observed in Aboriginal children by cognitive psychologists. Research has 
constantly shown an advantage for Aboriginal children in tasks requiring spatio-visual 
processing and memory (e.g. Kearins 1976, 1981, 1986, KUch & Davidson 1983). 

Aboriginal speakers' vision seems to capture a broader perspective, often with 
equal prominence given to several aspects of the environment being observed. When 
observing, a variety of aspects of the environment would be selected for attention by 
an Aboriginal speaker and these are represented internally to build a gestalt. These 
fragments of perceptual information may also be represented as spatial cues. It was 
mentioned earlier in this paper that research suggests that people represent temporal 
cues and the chronology observed in their retrieval is created by the help of these 
temporal cues. It may well be that Aboriginal speakers sample and store information 

140 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



o 138 

ERIC 



about different, apparently unrelated, aspects of the environment as spatial cues, 
instead of temporal cues, for later recall. The same spatial cues may also be imparted 
to the interlocutors involved in communication in order for them to construct 
gestalts, required to develop a global image of the event being described. 

Aspects of the environment which are selected for attention are usually somehow 
perceptually salient to the viewer. This perceptual saliency could be determined by 
cultiual and ecological systems. Aboriginal people attend to features of land and 
environment that may not be salient to non- Aboriginal people. This could be 
attributed to survival skills and also to the fact that physical environment, 
particularly Aboriginal land, has a symbolic significance for Aboriginal people. 

Cultural practices such as child-rearing practices may also play a role in 
determining what is salient to the observer. Kearins (1986) observes that Aboriginal 
mothers draw their children's close attention to different aspects of the environment 
from infancy. In fact, she attributes the visual superiority that she observes in 
Aboriginal children to such cultural practices. Cultiual euid environmental factors may 
also have had a bearing in developing a preference in some Aboriginal groups for a 
certain type of spatial conception called the absolute system (Levinson 1997, 1998). 
The absolute system of spatial conception, as opposed to the relative system, employs 
linguistic distinctions encoding fixed directions, such as uphill/ downhill, 
upstrecun/downstream, windwcud/leewcud. The relative system, on the other heuid, 
would employ terms such as right, left, back, and front, which encode angles on the 
horizontal relative to eui individual's point of view. 



Conclusion 

It seems that the chaos observed in AE discourse is rooted in certain cogrutive and 
perceptual preferences which could, at least partly, be determined by cultural 
practices eUid environmental factors. If so, then the educational system to which 
Aboriginal children are exposed should be informed by these cognitive characteristics. 
An effective curriculum would after all be one that takes into consideration and is 
based on cogrutive skills brought to school by the learner. That is in fact what 
underlies the concept of user-friendly education. 



Acknowledgement 

The author wishes to thank Professor Ian Malcolm, Dr Jean Harkins, Ms Hill Alison, 
the anonymous reviewers, as well as both the Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal resecuch 
team members of the Center for Applied Language and Literacy Research, Edith CoweUi 
Uruversity, for their constructive comments on the earlier drafts of this paper. 



141 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



References: 

Arthur, Jay, 1996, Aboriginal English: A cultural study, Melbourne: Oxford University Press. 

Bain, Margaret S., 1992, The Aboriginal-White Encounter: Towards better communication, 
Darwin, Australia, Summer Institute of Linguistics. 

Bender, John. 8e Wellbery, David E., 1991, Chronotypes: The construction of time, 
Stanford,Stanford University Press. 

Bemdt, Ronald M., 1974, Australian Aboriginal Religion. Fascile one. Introduction; The South 
Eastern Region, Leiden, Netherlands, E. J. Brill. 

Chafe, Wallace, 1994, Discourse, Consciousness and Time, Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 

Christie, Michael. 8e Harris, Stephan, 1985, 'Communication breaikdown in the Aboriginal 
classroom' in John B. Pride, (Ed.) Cross-cultural Encounters: Communication and 
miscommunication, Melbourne, River Seine. 

Davidson, Graham. R., 1979, An ethnographic psychology of Aboriginal cognition' in 
Oceania, Vol.49, pp. 270-294. 

Davidson, Graham R. & Klich, Leon Z., 1980, 'Cultural factors in the development of temporal 
and spatial ordering' in Child Development, Vol.51, pp. 569-571. 

Davidson, Graham R., & Kishor, Nand, 1984, Indigenous games and the development of 

memory strategies in children' in John Kirby (Ed.), Cognitive Strategies and Educational 
Performance. New York, Academic Press. 

Durkheim, Emile. 1912, The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, translated by Joseph Ward 
Swain, 1965. New York: The Free Press. 

Friedman, Wilma J., 1993, 'Memory for the time of past events' in Psychological Bulletin 
Vol.113, pp. 44-66. 

Gell, Alfred, 1996, The Anthropology of Time: Cultural constructions of temporal maps and 
Images, Oxford, Berg. 

Gillespie, Karen, 1991, McLaren Creek: The children and their English. Hons unpublished 
thesis, Australian National University, Canbena. 

Harkins, Jean, 1994, Bridging Two Worlds: Aboriginal English and cross-cultural understanding. 
St Lucia, Old, University of Queensland Press. 

Hilborn, Robert C., 1994, Chaos and Nonlinear Dynamics: An introduction for scientists and 
engineers. New York, Oxford University Press. 

Kearins, Judith, 1976, 'Skills of desert Aboriginal children' in G. E. Kearney & D. W. McElwain, 
(Eds.), Aboriginal Cognition, Canbena, Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies. 

Kearins, Judith, 1981, 'Visual spatial memory in Australian Aboriginal children of desert 
region' in Cognitive Psychology, Vol.l3, pp. 434-460. 

Kearins, Judith, 1985, 'Cross-cultural misunderstandings in education: Communication and 
miscommunication' in John B. Pride, (Ed.), Cross-cultural Encounters, Melbourne, River 
Seine. 

Kearins, Judith., 1986, 'Visual spatial memory in Aboriginal and white Australian children' in 
Australian Journal of Psychology, Vol.38, pp. 203-214. 

KUch, Leon Z., & Davidson, Graham R., 1983, 'A cultural difference in visual memory: On le 
voit, on ne le voit plus' in International Journal of Psychology, Vol.18, 189-201. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



Labov, William, 1972, Language in the Inner City, Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania 
Press. 

Langacker, Ronald W., 1987, Foundations of Cognitive Grammar, Vol. 1: Theoretical 
Prerequisites, Stanford, Stanford University Press. 

Langacker, Ronald. W., 1991, Foundations of Cognitive Grammar, Vol. 2: Descriptive 
Application, Stanford, Stanford University Press. 

Larsen, Steen F., Thompson, Charles. P., & Hansen Tia, 1996, Time in autobiographical 
memory, in David. C. Rubin, (Ed.) Remembering our Past: Studies in autobiographical 
memory. New York, Cambridge University Press. 

Leach, Edmund, 1961, Rethinking Anthropology, London, Athlone Press. 

Levinson, Stephen. C., 1997, language and cognition: The cognitive consequences of spatial 
description in Guugu Yimithirr', in Journal of Linguistic Anthropology , Vol.7 no.l, pp. 
98-131. 

Levinson, Stephen. C., 1998, 'Studying spatial conceptualization across cultures: 
Anthropology and cognitive science'. Ethos, Vol.26 nol, pp. 7-24. 

Lowell, Anne. & Devlin, Brian, 1998, 'Miscommunication between Aboriginal students and 
their non-Aboriginal teachers in a bilingual school'. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 
Vol.113, pp. 367-389. 

Maddock, Kenneth. 1982, "The Australian Aborigines: A portrait of their society' Melbourne, 
Penguin. 

Malcolm, Ian G., 1977, 'Aboriginal primary school children and classroom speech: Some 

preliminary observations', in Ed Brumby & Eric Vaszolyi (Eds.), Language Problems and 
Aboriginal Education, Western Australia, Mt Lawley College of Advanced Education. 

Malcolm, Ian, G., 1982,' Communicative dysfunction in Aboriginal classrooms', in John 

Sherwood (Ed.), Aboriginal Education Issues and Innovations, Perth, Creative Research. 

Malcolm, Ian G., 1994a, 'Aboriginal English inside and outside the classroom' in Australian 
Review of Applied Linguistics, Vol.l7 no.2, pp. 147-180. 

Malcolm, Ian G., 1994b, 'Discourse and discourse strategies in Australian Aboriginal English' 
in World Englishes, Vol.l3 no. 3, pp. 289-306. 

Malcolm, Ian G., 1995, Language and Communication Enhancement for Two-Way Education. 
Report to the Department of Employment, Education and Training, Perth, Centre for 
Applied Language Research, Edith Cowan University. 

Malcolm, Ian G., 1998, 'Aboriginal English: some perspectives from cognitive linguistics'. 

Paper presented at the Australian Linguistic Society Conference, University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, July 1998. 

Malcolm, Ian G., 2000a, 'Aboriginal English: evolving forms and functions'. Paper presented at 
the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Tones Strait Islander Studies seminar series 
on Australian Indigenous Languages: Survival in the 21st Century, Canbena, May 2000. 

Malcolm, Ian G., 2000b, The place of genres in two-way bidialectal education'. Paper 

presented to the 5th annual Round Table, Centre for Applied Language and Literacy 
Research, Edith Cowan University, WA., 30th June-lst July. 

Malcolm, Ian G., & Koscielecki, Marek M., 1997, Aboriginality and English: Report to the 
Australian Research Council, Mt Lawley, WA, Centre for Applied Language Research, 

Edith Cowan University. 




140 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERIC 



CHAPTER 7 — CHAOS IN ABORIGINAL ENGLISH DISCOURSE 



i 

j 




Malcolm, Ian G., Haig, Yvonne, Konisgberg, Patricia, Rochecouste, Judith, Collard, Glenys, 
Hill, Allison, & Cahill, Rosemary, 1999, Towards more User-friendly Education for 
Speakers of Aboriginal English. Mount Lawley, Centre for Applied Language cind Literacy 
Research, Edith Cowan University. 

Malcolm, Ian G. & Rochecouste, Judith, 2000, Event and Story Schemas in Australian 
Aboriginal English, in English World-wide, Vol.22, pp. 95-123. 

Neisser, Ulric, 1980, Towards a Realistic Cognitive Psychology [Cassette Recording], 
Washington, DC, American Psychological Association. 

Onega, Jean, S. & Garcia Landa, Jose Angel, 1996, Narratology, New York, Longman. 

Reinhart, Tanya, 1984, Principles of gestalt perception in the temporal organization 
ofnarrative texts' in Linguistics, Vol.22, pp. 779-809. 

Sharifian, Farzad, 1999, Xinguistic theory and the logic of research in empirical sciences'. 
Paper presented at the 1999 Annual Conference of Australian Linguistics Society 
(ALS99), University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Sep. 2000. 

Sharifian, Farzad, 2000, 'Schematic processing in Indigenous speakers of Aboriginal English'. 
Paper presented at the annual Round Table of the Center for Applied Language and 
Literacy Research, Edith Cowan University, Claremont, Western Australia, July 2000. 

Shore, Brad, 1996, Culture in Mind: Cognition, culture, and the problem of meaning. New York, 
Oxford University Press. 

Strauss, Claudia & Quinn, Noami, 1997, A Cognitive Theory of Cultural Meaning, New 
York,Cambridge University Press. 

TenHouten, Warren D., 1985, 'Right hemisphericity of Australian Aboriginal children: 

Effectsof culture, sex, and age on performances of Closure and Similarities tests' in 
International Journal of Neuroscience, Vol.28, pp. 125-146. 

TenHouten, Warren D., 1986, 'Right hemisphericity of Australian Aboriginal children U: 
Conjugate lateral eye movements' in International Journal of Neuroscience, Vol.30, pp. 



TenHouten, Warren D., 1995, Inferring cognitive structure from text' in Journal of 
Contemporary Legal Issues Vol.6, pp. 97-114. 

TenHouten, Warren D., 1997, 'Primordial temporality, the self, and the brain' in Journal of 

Social and Evolutionary Systems, Vol.20, pp. 253-279. 

TenHouten, W. D., 1999, Text and temporality: Pattern- cyclical and ordinary linear forms of 
time-consciousness, inferred from a corpus of Australian Aboriginal cind Euro-AustraUan 
life-historical interviews' in Symbolic Interaction. VoL22 no. 2, pp. 121-137. 

Zadeh, Lotfi. A., 1996, 'Fuzzy logic and the calculi of fuzzy rules and fuzzy graphs' in 
International Journal of Multiple-Valued Logic, Vol.l, pp. 1-39. 



255-260. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



8 Language, literature, culture — and their 
meeting place in the dictionary 



Susan Butler 

Publisher, Macquarie Dictionary, Australia 

We are all famiUar with the role of the dictionary as a reference on 
language. The dictionary has a larger role as a document of the 
language of a particular language community existing in a particular 
place at a particular time. From this point of view the dictionary 
documents our culture and has a vital nexus with our literature. 
Dictionaries of varieties of English serve to record the differences 
between English-language communities and can be instructive on 
cultural differences. In this paper, I will show how the dictionary can 
be a conduit to a cultural imderstanding in the region, drawing on 
examples from Singaporean and Malaysian English, Philippine English, 
Hong Kong English and Australian English. 



In 1985, Macquarie conducted a survey of users of the dictionary through the 
newsletter of the Macquarie Dictionary Society. Of course, the people surveyed were 
hardcore users of the dictionary but even so the results were interesting and indicative 
of the general attitude. 

The most common reason for looking up a dictionary is to find out the meaning 
of a word. The next most common reason is to establish the spelling. After that comes 
etymology, pronunciation and grammar in declining order of importance. 

1985, Arthur Delbridge, Extract from 'The Macquarie Questionnaire' in the 
newsletter of the Macquarie Dictionary Society, Volume 2 Issue 4, February, 
North Ryde, Sydney: The Macquarie Dictionary Society. 

Scale of Frequency: 1 Never, 2 Occasionally, 3 Regularly, 4 Often, 5 
Constantly 



Mean Frequency 



Meaning 

Spelling 



3.48 

2.94 




EMGLISHES IM ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION J43 



ERIC 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AMD THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



O 144 

ERIC 



Etymology 


2.46 


Pronunciation 


2.27 


Grammar 


1.85 


Culture-specific words, e.g. floater, 
churinga, tagliatelle 


2.65 


Encyclopedic words, e.g. animal names 
chemical compounds, etc. 


2.63 


Slang words, e.g. blabbermouth 


2.61 


Phrases, e.g. come the raw prawn 


2.44 


Grammatical words, e.g. always, of 


1.92 


Rude' words, e.g. shit 


1.87 


Common words, e.g. home, put 


1.65 



The fact that some of these reasons have low scores is not indicative of their 
importance or unimportance. 

You might consult the dictionary but once a year about an etymology but you 
are grateful for that information when you need it. 

At this basic level of providing information about language, the aim of a 
dictionary is to meet the needs of the user, which is why there are so many different 
kinds of diction«uies — specialist dictionaries, learners diction«uies, children's 
diction«uies. 

It is interesting that despite the many shapes and forms of the realised dictionary 
we still look things up in the dictionary', as if intuitively we feel that each one of 
these dictionaries is an access to the complete document of our language. 

At this basic level of use, the dictionary is consulted as a book that tells the 
writer what to do, although these days all dictionaries aim to tell the users what is, 
rather than overtly to instruct them on what is best. 

However, if the information in the dictionary is detailed and accurate, if the 
dictionary gets it right, then it is a small but significant step for the dictionary to 
function as an authority. Unless you are a rugged individualist, you are likely to fall 
in Une with what your language community deems to be acceptable. 

The dictionary's more sophisticated aim however is to be the record of the 
language of a particular community. It paints a picture of who we are, what our values 
are, what our history has been. If the dictionary is authentic in all its detail, then the 
picture is true. The authenticity of the dictionary relies on all that soul-searching over 
every detail, so the two functions go hand in hand. 

Sometimes this aspect of the dictionary as a cultural record is easier to see with 
other dictionaries from other times and places than it is to see with a contemporary 
dictionary. 



146 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION.ViDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



Take any page of Nathan Bailey's dictionary and you learn tiisdnating snippets of 
information about the world of the early 1700s in England. 

1727, Nathan Bailey, The Universal Etymological English Dictionary. Being 
also an Interpreter of hard Words. London: T Cox. 

BORDELLO, on the South Bank of the River of Thames, Westwcuds of the 
Bridge, and next to the Bear-garden, was sometimes the Bordello or Stews, 
a Place so called of certain Stews or Houses privileg'd there for incontinent 
Men to repair to incontinent Women, for which Privilege there was an Act of 
Parliament made in the Reign of King Henry H. in which there were some of 
the Orders: That no Stew-holder or his Wife should hinder any single Woman 
from going and coming freely at all times when they liked; Nor to keep any 
Woman at Board; but that she should Board abroad at her Pleasure: That 
they should take no more for the Woman's Chamber than 14 Pence a Week. 

That they should not keep open their Doors on holy Days. That no single 
Woman should be kept against her Will. That they should not receive any 
Woman of Religion, nor any Man's Wife. That no single Woman take Money 
to lie with any, but she may lie with him all Night till the Morrow. That no 
Stew-holder keep any Woman that hath the perilous Infirmity of burning; 
nor sell Bread, Ale, Flesh, Fish, Wood, Coal, or any Victuals, etc. These Stew- 
houses were permitted in the Time of King Henry VI. but were inhibited in 
the Reign of King Henry VO. and the Doors shut up; but set open again; but 
were put down in the Time of King Henry Vm. in the Year 1546. 

By chance, I stumbled on the entry for bordello — an entry remarkable for its length. 
Nathan begins by giving the old address — 'on the South Bank of the River of Thames, 
Westwards of the Bridge and next to the Bear-gcuden' — and then gives the rules laid 
down by an act of Pculiament in the region of Henry H for the owner of the bordello. 
They seem designed to protect the women — 'That no single Woman should be kept 
against her Will. That no single women take money to lie with any, but she may lie 
with him till the morrow' — and to protect decency — 'That they should not receive 
any Woman of Religion, nor any Man's Wife'. They also protect the health of the 
customer. 

Take Bailey's view of politics in his dictionary. The words democracy and republic 
are lacking, king is minimally defined, parliament a little more Weumly described, but 
the astonishing entries are those for knight and gentleman, which cue both very 
lengthy and list the rights of those who had achieved such status. 

1727, Nathan Bailey, The Universal Etymological English Dictionary. Being 
also an Interpreter of hard Words. London: T Cox. 

GENTLEMAN is properly, according to the ancient Notion, one of perfect 
blood, who had 4 Descents of Gentility both by his Father and Mother, viz. 
whose Father's Grandfather, his great Grandfather, his Grandfather and his 
Father on both Sides were all Gentlemen. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNIcijI^NJ IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^45 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



Gentlemen have their beginning either from Blood, as before, as they are 
bom of Parents of Worth; or for having done something in Peace or War, for 
which they are worthy to bear Arms, and be accounted Gentlemen. 

Formerly such Gentlemen had many Privileges, as first, that if one 
Gentleman detracted from another. Combat was allowed; but if a peasant or 
mean Person did so, he had a Remedy in Law. 2. In Crimes of an equal Nature 
a Gentleman was punished more favourably than a Peasant, etc. 3. 

Gentlemen might expect a peculiar Honour, and respect to be paid them by 
mean persons. 4. The Evidence of a Gentleman was accounted more 
authenthick than that of a Peasant. 5. In chusing of Magistrates, etc. the 
Vote of a Gentleman was preferr'd before that of eui ignoble Person. 6. A 
Gentleman was to be excused from Services, Impositions and Duties. 7. A 
Gentleman condemned to Death, was not to be hanged but beheaded; nor 
was his Excunination to be taken with Torture. 8. It was a punishable Crime 
to take down the Coat Armour of a Gentleman, to deface his Monument, or 
to offer Violence to the Ensign of any noble Person deceased. 9. A Gentleman 
vras not to accept a Challenge from a Peasant; because there was not a Parity 
in their Conditions. 

The ancient Saxons admitted none to the Degree of Gentlemen that liv'd by 
Trades or Buying and selling; except Merchants and those that follow'd 
Husbandry; which was always esteem'd a creditable Way of Livelihood, and 
preferable to trading to Sea. 

The Reason why those, that are students in the Inns of Court are esteem'd 
Gentlemen is; because anciently none but the Sons of Gentlemen were 
admitted into them. 

But the Students of Law, Grooms of his Majesty's Palace, Sons of Peasants 
made Priests or Canons; or those that have receiv'd Dignity in the Schools 
or bom Offices in the City, tho' they are stiled [styled] Gentlemen, yet they 
have no Right to Coat Armour. 

If a Man be a Gentleman by Office only and loses that Office, then he also 
loses his Gentility. 

In our Days all are accounted Gentlemen, that have Mony, and if he has no 
Coats of Arms, the King of Arms can sell him one. 

For example, 'The Evidence of a gentleman was accounted more authentic than that 
of a Peasant' and 'A gentleman condemned to Death was not to be hanged but 
beheaded; nor was his Exeimination to be taken with Torture'. Nathan ends with the 
sad comment 'In our days all are accounted Gentlemen, that have Money, and if he 
has no Coat of Arms, the King of Arms can sell him one.' 

1727, Nathan Bailey, The Universal Etymological English Dictionary. Being 
also an Interpreter of hard Words. London: T Cox. 





145 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AMD THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



KNIGHT a Person whom the King has singled out from the common Class of 
Gentlemen, and dignified with the honour of Knighthood. In ancient Times 
there were 6 Pcirticulars required in him that was to be made a Knight. I. 

That he was no Trader. 2. That besides other Things, he were of servile 
Condition. 3. That he should take an Oath that he would not refuse to die 
for the Sake of the Gospel and his Country. 4. His Sword was to be girt on 
by some Nobleman. 5. That he should have the Badge of Knighthood put 
upon him. And 6. That he should be enrolled in the King's Books. It was also 
required, that Knights should be brave, daring, undaunted, expert, 
provident and well behaved. Christian Kings appointed many religious 
Ceremonies to be observed at the Creation of Knights, and none were 
admitted to the Order of Knights, but such as had merited the Honour by 
some commendable and extraordinary Exploits. They were anciently 
distinguished by a Belt, a Target, a Sword, or some martial Token. But now 
the Honour being grown cheap, these Ceremonies have been laid aside, and 
there goes nothing now to the making a Knight in England, but the King's 
touching him with a Sword as he kneels, saying. Rise up Sir R.N. [Right 
Ncune] 

His disillusionment is also evident at the entry for knight in which he observes that 
knights were supposed to be good and brave and daring and undaunted and the 
Ceremony at which a Knight was created was a serious affair, 'but now the Honour 
being grown cheap, these Ceremonies have been laid aside, and there goes nothing 
now to the making of a Knight in England but the King's touching with a Sword as he 
kneels and saying Rise up Sir R.N. [Right Name]' 

Dictionaries reveal the enthusiasms of their authors, in this case towards classical 
leeiming. Nathan justifies this in his preface by pointing out that 'it is so common 
among our modem Poets to intersperse the Grecian and Roman Theology, Mythology, 
etc. in their Works, an Unacquaintance with which renders their Writings either 
obscure or at least less intelligible to the Readers', that he has felt compelled to bung 
them all in. 

An example of this sort of thing is the long entry at sacrifice which reads like a 
cross between a recipe book and a book of etiquette. 

1727, Nathan Bailey, The Universal Etymological English Dictionary. Being also an 
Interpreter of hard Words. London: T Cox. 

SACRIFICES Writers say that the Devils being Enemies to God and his Glory, 
from the Malignity of their Natures, were not content with the Offerings of 
the Fruits of the Earth, and of all manner of Creatures that were usually 
sacrific'd to them, but were so barbarous as to require human Victims, viz. 

Men and Women, to be butcher'd and burnt aUve upon their Altars. 

The Romans did sometimes dedicate their young infants to the Household 
Gods, the Gods of the Family. The Scythians, that inhabited about that Part 

149 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^47 




CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



call'd Taurica, were wont to sacrifice to their Diana all Strangers that came 
into their Hands. 

Many Damsels were beaten to death with Bundles of Rods on an Altar of 
Bacchus in Arcadia. The Germans eind Cimbri were wont cruelly to torment 
Men, and afterwards to sacrifice them. The Inhabiteuits of the most Northern 
CUmates were wont to make a Feeist for their Aged, euid crown them with 
Garlands, eUid aftervrards Ceist them down from an high Rock into the Sea; 
and others threw them off from Bridges into Rivers; whence they were called 
Senes Depontani. And Caesar, in his Commentaries, relates, that the ancient 
Gauls used to dress up a huge Statue made of BreUiches of Ozier, eUid having 
filled it with Uving Persons, to bum it to their Idols. The Egyptians and 
Inhabitants of Palestine offered their own Children to their Gods, eUid the 
Israelites themselves so far imitated their Barbarities, as to cause their 
Children to peiss between two Fires till they were miserably scorched; eUid 
they also shut them up in a hollow Idol of Brass, call'd Moloch, made red hot, 
eUid while... 

After this long introduction, Nathan provides the detail of how to do your own 
sacrifice. First take your sacrificial beast. Then mix a small quantity of salt and meal. 
Then teiste the wine. Pour the rest between the horns of the beeist euid pulUng a few 
hairs from the place, throw them into the fire. Then slay the beeist by knocking him 
down or cutting his throat. Then with a long knife, turn the bowels up and down. 
Under no circumstances touch with the hands. I won't go on but Nathan did. Burning 
the dead is a good entry too. 

And, finally. Science. Nathan is into chemistry, physics and medicine and the 
discoveries of his age. He gives humores as three general humours of the body, general 
because they Weish the whole body, viz. the Blood, the Lympha, eind the Nervous Juice. 
He discusses at length the various kinds of cautery — actual such as fire, potential 
such as caustick stone, and silver cautery, so called because it is made of silver 
dissolved in 3 Times the weight of Spirit of Nitre, and prepared according to Art. This 
will bum for ever, if not exposed to air, eUid is called the infernal Stone. 

1727, Nathan Bailey, The Universal Etymological English Dictionary. Being 
also an Interpreter of hard Words. London: T Cox. 

RAIN a Vapour drawn by the Sun, and falling to the Earth in Drops. 

Rain is formed of the Particles of Vapours, joining together, and being joined, 
fall down to the Eeirth. The Difference between Dew eind Rain, seems chiefly 
to be this. That Dew falls at some particular Times, and in very small Drops, 
so eis to be seen, when it is down; but is scarce perceivable while falling, 
whereas Rain is grosser, and falls at einy Time. 

There are several Causes, that may singly, or jointly produce Rain. I. The 
Coldness of the Air may make the Particles of the Clouds to lose their Motion, 
and become less able to resist the Gravity of the Incumbent Air, and of 



ERIC 



148 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY 






AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



consequence to yield to its Pressure, and fall to the Ground. 2. The Vapours 
may be gathered by the Wind in such Abundance, as first to form very thick 
Clouds, and then fqeeze [freeze] those Clouds together, till the watery 
Particles make Drops too big to hang any longer in the Air. 3. When Vapours 
arise in so great Abundance, as to reach and mingle with the Clouds above 
them, then they cause Rain in very large Drops, and this may happen in still 
sultry Weather; because, then the Clouds having no sensible Motion, and in 
the mean Time the Heat filling the Air with Vapours, they joining with the 
Clouds, and being stopp'd in their Progress, do open a Passage for the Stores 
of the Clouds to descend upon the Earth. 4. Sometimes the warm Wind thaws 
the frozen Clouds into Drops, cis we see Snow dissolved by Heat. Now the 
thicker and sooner any such Cloud was gathered, the larger the Drops will 
be because there was greater Store of Vapours condensed there. And hence 
it is, that in Summer Time, we have sudden Showers of Rain in exceeding 
great Drops. 

Rain is particles of vapours joined together and then squeezes them so hard 
that the particles merge to form drops too big to stay up in the air. 

A third is that a warm wind blows up and melts a frozen cloud, 'as we see 
Snow dissolved by Heat'. A thick cloud dissolved suddenly produces big rain 
drops. 'And hence it is that in Summer time, we have sudden Showers of 
Rain in exceeding great Drops'. 

The entry for rain is an opportunity for Bailey to display his knowledge of the cutting- 
edge science of his day. He provides all the current theories about the causes of rain. 

Bailey's definition of hail is 'a meteor formed of flocks of Snow, which is melted 
and then refrozen into smaller stones'. And snow is a thick cloud reduced into the form 
of carded Wooll. 'The white colour of Snow proceeds from the Conjunction of Humidity 
with Cold which naturally engineers Whiteness'. 

The language captured in the dictionary reflects the culture. 

In the same way, the various dictionaries today paint pictures of different 
communities within the umbrella of a shared English. And so, broadly speaking, the 
Oxford English Dictionary tells us about British English. Random House and Webster tell 
us about American English. Macquarie tells us about Australieui English. 

Compare the treatment of bush, a significant word in AustralieUi English, given in 
an Australian, an English and an American dictioneuy. 





1 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION |4g 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



Macquarie Dictionary 


New Oxford 


Random 


3rd Ed. 1997 


Dictionary 


House 


1997 


of English 


Dictionary 




1st Ed. 1998 


2nd Ed. 1987 


- 


Bush 




bush^ 


bush^ 


bush^ 


bush^ 


bush^ 


bush^ 


bush. 


- 


bush. 


Bush 


- 


Bush 


bushbaby 


bushbaby 


bush baby 


- 


bush basil 


bush basil 


bush ballad 


- 


- 


bush band 


- 


- 


bush Baptist 


- 


- 


bush-bash 


- 


- 


bush bashing 


- 


- 


- 


- 


bush bean 


bush beat 


- 


bush-beater 


bush boss 


- 


- 


bush breakfast 


- 


- 


- 


- 


bushbroom 


bush brother 


- 


- 


Bush Brotherhood 


- 


- 


- 


bushbuck 


bushbuck 


bush-bum 


- 


- 


bush canary 


- 


- 


Bush Capital 


- 


- 


bush carpenter 


- 


- 


bush champagne 


- 


- 


Bush Church Aid 


bushchat 


- 


Society 


- 


- 


- 


- 


bush clover 


- 


- 


bush coat 


bush country 


- 


- 


bushcraft 


bushcraft 


- 


- 


bush cricket 


- 


bush cure 


- 


- 


bush dance 


- 


- 


- 


bush dog 


- 


bushed 


bushed 


bushed 


bushel 


bushel 


busheU 




150 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY 



AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



- 


- 


bushel^ 


- 


- 


bushelbasket 


- 


- 


busheled iron 


- 


- 


bushelful 


- 


- 


bushelman 


busher 


- 


busher 


bush-faller 


- 


- 


- 


bush fallow 


- 


bush farm 


- 


- 


bushfire 


bush fire 


bushfire 


bushfire blonde 


- 


- 


bush fire brigade 


- 


- 


bush fly 


- 


- 


- 


- 


bushhammer 


bush hay 


- 


- 


bush hen 


bush-hen 


- 


- 


- 


bush-hog 


- 


- 


bush honeysuckle 


- 


- 


bushhook 


bushhouse 


- 


- 


- 


- 


bush huckleberry 


bush hut 


- 


- 


bushido 


bushido 


Bushido 


bushie 


- 


- 


bushiness 


- 


bushiness 


bushingl 


bushing 


bushing 


bushing2 


- 


- 


Bush Inn 


- 


- 


- 


- 


Bushire 


- 


bush jacket 


bush jacket 


bushland 


- 


bushland 


bushlark 


- 


- 


bush lawyer 


bush lawyer 


- 


- 


bush league 


bush-league 


- 


- 


bush-leaguer 


bush lemon 


- 


- 


bush line 


- 


bushUne 


- 


- 


bushlot 


bushman 


Bushman 


bushman 


- 


- 


Bushman 


bushman's breakfast 


- 


- 


bushman's clock 


- 





^ ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

ERIC 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



bushmanship 


- 


bushman's saw 


- 


bushmaster 


bushmaster 


- 


bush medicine 


bush nurse 


- 


Bush Nursing 


Association 


- 


Bushongo 


- 


bushoo 




bush orchid 


- 


bush oyster 


- 


bush pea 


- 


bush pig 


bush pig 


bush pilot 


- 


bush plum cake 


- 


bushranger 


bushranger 


bush rat 


- 


bush refrigerator 


- 


bush regeneration 


- 


bush robin 


- 


bush rock 


- 


bush saw 


- 


bush shower 


- 


bush-sick 


- 


bush sickness 


bush sickness 


bush stone 


- 


bush stone curlew 


- 


bush tea 


bush tea 


bush telegram 


- 


bush telegraph 


bush telegraph 


bushtit 


bushtit 


bush track 


- 


bush tucker 


- 


- 


bushveld 


- 


bushwa 


bushwalk 


- 





bushmaster 

Bushnell 



bush parole 

bush pig 
bush pilot 

bush poppy 
bushranger 

bush road 

bush shirt 



bush telegraph 
bushtit 

bushwa 

AND EDUCATION 



152 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTI 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



bushwalking 


bushwalking 


- 


bush week 


- 


- 


bushwhack 


bushwhack 


bushwhack 


bushwhacked 


bushwhacked 


- 


bushwhacker 


bushwhacker 


bushwhacker 


bush wire 


- 


- 


bushwomcui 


- 


- 


bush work 


- 


- 


bush wren 


- 


- 


bushy 


bushy' 


bushy 


- 


bushy^ 


- 


bushytailed 


- 


bushytailed 



You can see at a glance the way in which bush thrives in Australian English. It may 
not have been our own — in the sense that it is from South African English via 
American English — but we have done a lot with it, and that is what counts. 

It is perhaps easier to see this difference in the dictionaries of -isms — that is, 
words which are unique to a particular variety, or which have peculiar significance in 
that variety. In such dictionaries the cultural content is concentrated, but it is 
nonetheless discernible even in general dictionaries of each variety. 

We have yet to see dictionaries of other varieties of English such as Singaporean 
and Malaysicui English, or Philippine English, or Indian English, but they will come, 
and they will reflect different cultural concerns. 

Their dictionaries will have productive items (Uke bush in Australian English) 
which will produce sets of words not to be found in dictionaries of other varieties of 
English. 

Comparison of headwords 



Macquarie Concise 


Regional 


Grolier 


Dictionary 


(Macquarie 


International 


1998 


Project) 


Dictionary 

2000 


dragon 


dragon 


dragon 


dragon boat 


dragon boat 
dragon boat race 
dragon cup 






dragon dance 
dragon dcuicer 


dragon dance 


dragonfly 


dragonfly 

dragon form naga 






dragon gate 
dragon king 


dragon gate 



155 

^ ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^53 

ERIC 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



o 154 

ERIC 



dragon lady 


- 


dragon lady 


dragon lines 


dragon lines 
dragon mask 






dragon pot 


dragon pot 




dragon shrimp 

fire dragon 
flood dragon 


dragon shrimp 
Dragon Throne 


komodo dragon 


komodo dragon 
rain dragon 


komodo dragon 


Comparison of headwords 




Macquarie Concise 


Regional 


GroUer 


Dictionary 


(Macquarie 


International 


1998 


Project) 


Dictionary 

2000 


temple' 


temple' 


temple' 


temple^ 


temple^ 


temple^ 


temple^ 


temple^ 
temple altar 
temple bell 
temple cell 
temple ceremony 






temple compound 
temple deity 
temple elder 
temple festival 


temple compour 




temple god 
temple goddess 


temple god 




temple medium 
temple oracle 
temple priest 

Buddhist temple 
Chinese temple 
go to temple 
Taoist temple 


temple medium 



Authenticity in a variety of English is assessed on accent, lexicon and usage. We aue 
finely attuned in both listening and reading to all the minutiae of these features and 
we know, even without being able to analyse in detail why we know, when our own 
variety is captured accurately and when it is not. 

In this process, the dictionary that records a particular variety acts as the writer's 

. 156 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



i 

« 



friend. It gives writers the freedom to choose the words that are right for them and 
true to their place and time. The writer can set high store on authenticity without 
being afraid of losing intelligibility. 

To show you how this works I thought I would look at a few examples — one 
from a writer in Singaporean English who is not supported by a dictioneuy, euid one 
from a writer in American English who is. 

Simon Tay is a Singaporean writer who has struggled with the need to break from 
the British English tradition in which he was taught in order to express himself 
authentically as a Singaporean. He rinds that he is up against anxious editors who 
argue that in doing so he loses international intelligibility. To quote Simon: 

1992, Simon Tay, 'A Dictionary of English for Singapore and Its Practical 
Implications' in Words in a Cultural Context, Anne Pakir (ed.), 216-237, 
Singapore: Unipress. 

But the writer's purpose is different. First and foremost we are trying to 
capture the way we speak, to make concrete with words our minds and souls, 
and those words [Received Pronunciation or 'proper English'] just do not do 
so unless they bend, reshape or brecik. This dictioneuy will help writers 
legitimise, and will help them stop regarding their fellow English-speakers 
in Singapore like exotics. 

...For example 'horn' is a verb in Singapore as well as a noun. In one of my 
stories written in the third person and in what is generally standard English, 

I use 'horn' as a verb rather than 'he blared his horn'. Many people may not 
be alive to this 'deviation' from proper English and those who cue may think 
it was simply a mistcike; a Singaporean dictioneuy can help provide the 
explanation and justirication. It is still an editorial question in publishing 
whether there should be a glossary, whether words which are not 'standard' 
should be italicised. In my books we tried to get away from the glossaries 
and italicise as little as possible. Sometimes a glosseuy is needed for obscure 
words which have no real currency, but words like 'alameik' cue generally 
used in SE. Still, there is a temptation to treat many terms as 'deviant' and 
explain them to a hypothetical non-Singaporean, English-speaking reader. 

This dictionary will help the writer with these problems at a practical level. 

This use of horn is but one item in a wide range that gives Singaporean English its 
distinctive flavour. 

Examples of Asian English from Macquarie Dictionary 3rd Ed 1997 

ABC2^ noun a sweet dish commonly served in Malaysia, containing shaved 
ice, red beans, and other ingredients; ice kacang. [Malay a{ir) b{atu) 
c{ampur) mixed ice] 

ang pow noun (in Malaysia and Singapore) a red envelope containing 
money, given to children and unmarried adults at Chinese New Year, and also 
given on other festive occasions. Cf. lai see. [Hokkien: lit., red packet] 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNI 



IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



155 



CHAPTER 8 - LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



coffee money noun Singaporean and Malaysian English Colloquial a small 
bribe. Cf. tea money. 

durian noun 1. the edible fruit, with a hard, prickly rind and a distinctive 
flavour and smell, of a tree, Durio zibethinus, of south-eastern Asia. 2. the 
tree itself. Also, durion. [Malay, from duri thorn] 

jaga kereta boy noun Malaysian English an unlicensed male attendant who 
guards and sometimes cleans parked cars in return for tips. [Malay jaga to 
watch + kereta car] 

keretek noun a type of cigarette of Indonesian origin, flavoured with cloves. 
[Malay, imitative of the crackling sound they make when smoked] 

matsalleh noun Singaporean and Malaysian English a white person. 

nasi campur noun an assortment of Malay dishes served with rice. [Malay 
nasi cooked rice + campur mixture] 

pantun noun a Malay riddling verse form, usually of four lines, the third 
rhyming with the first, and the fourth with the second, and explaining their 
hidden meaning. [Malay] 

Tunku noun a Malayan title of respect before family names as an indication 
of nobility or rank. Also, Tuanku. [Malay: ruler] -Tengku, Tenku, fern. n. 

yellow culture noun Singaporean and Malaysian English pornography. 

If we take one page of Tay's writing we will find a number of terms that need 
explanation but which are the chosen form of expression for this writer who wants to 
find authenticity within his culture. 

1991, Simon Tay, 'My Cousin Tim' in Stand Alone, 16-17. Singapore: 
Landmark Books Pty Ltd. 

I can hardly believe the nightwatch is planned for three more days. I'm 
getting quite tired and have had my fill of kua-chi, ground nuts and packet 
drinks, of the routine of counting up the number of people still around at 
midnight and going out to buy teih-pau. Even the town's poh-pieih has lost 
its magic for me. Ek Lam usually goes with me on the midnight run but we 
aren't much company for each other. I hardly know him and have seen him 
on perhaps three occasions in the last ten years. I know he is 29 now and 
has basically taken over the responsibility for the family business since his 
father went into semi-retirement. I know he's trying to turn it around, but 
I can't think of him as anything but Tim's pesky younger brother, 12, still 
playing with marbles when we were 16 and trying to meet girls at the club. 

Even with my interest in these Englishes, I find that I do not have the resources to 
explain what kua-chi and tah-pau and poh-piah are. 

Compare Simon with all his difficulties with Annie Proulx writing The Shipping 



O 

ERIC 



155 ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTli 



Ier and education 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



News. This book is full of the dialect of Newfoundland — words like crenshaw, watch 
cap, reel footing, sunkers and tickle. 

1993, E Annie Proulx, The Shipping News, London: Fourth Estate Ltd. 

p.2 

A great dcunp loaf of a body. At six he weighed eighty pounds. At sixteen he 
was buried under a casement of flesh. Head shaped Uke a crenshaw, no neck, 
reddish hair niched back. 

p.32 

She spoke of the weather with a man in a watch cap. They talked awhile. 
Someone else reel footing along, said. Rough today, eh? 

p.32 

This place, she thought, this rock, six thousand miles of coast blind-wrapped 
in fog. Sunkers under wrinkled water, boats threading tickles between ice- 
scabbed cliffs. Tundra and beirrens, a land of stunted spruce men cut and 
drew away. 

Does Annie Proulx have amy problem with international intelligibility? Not in the leaist. 

Her writing is grounded in American English which is well supported by 
dictionaries. For the rest, the unique items of the English of Newfoundland, she relies 
on the fact that the flow of the writing carries the readers along. But if her readers 
did want to stop and take the trouble to find out exactly what a crenshaw is, for 
example, they could. 

The American regionalisms are just as obscure to the international market as the 
Singaporeauusms but the existence of the dictionary on the one haind resolves the 
problem whereas the absence of the dictionary on the other exacerbates it. 

I have taken some examples from the Shipping News because it was such a 
popular novel worldwide. The first set of words are documented in a general dictionary 
of American English. For the second set you would have to have more resources at 
your disposal and be able to consult the Oxford English Dictionary, the Second Edition 
of twenty volumes, and the English Dialect Dictionary. And yet, because it can ride on 
the back of the American English dialect, legitimised by its countless speakers, its 
international power, and its wide range of dictioneuies, this dialect does not have to 
leap the hurdles that are put in front of varieties of English in Asia. 

1987, Random House Dictionary of the English Language, 2nd Edition, Stuart 
Berg Flexner (Editor-in-Chief), New York: Random House. 

Crenshaw melon a variety of melon resembling the casaba, having pinkish 
flesh. 

watch cap 1. U.S. Navy, a dark-blue, knitted woolen cap with a tumed-up 
cuff worn by enlisted personnel on duty in cold weather. 2. any wool or 
woolUke cap resembling this and sold commercially in various colors. 
[1885—90] 




159 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^5 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



o 158 

ERIC 



1898, English Dialect Dictionary, Joseph Wright (ed.), London: Henry Frowde. 
reel-footed, adj. Sc. Irel. Also in form reel-fitted Sc. N.I.L Having the feet 
turned inwards so that the legs are crossed in walking; club-footed. 

1989, Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd Edition, Prepared by JA Simpson and 
ESC Weiner, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

reel foot Sc. [? f. REEL SB.^] a club-foot. So reel-footed a. 

sunker. Newfoundland [f. SUNK ppl. a. + -ERL] A submerged rock. Ahofig. 

tickle, sb.L [Generally held to be derived from TICKLE sb.^ (see quot. 1908); 
but some would identify it with Eng. dial, stickle a rapid shallow place in 
a river. In Nova Scotia also tittle.] A name given on the coasts of 
Newfoundland and Labrador to a narrow difficult strait or passage. 

The authors of a Singaporean, Malaysian or Philippine novel have a much tougher 
battle with their editors, with their publishers, with the arbiters of standards in their 
own countries, and with their confidence in themselves. 

The fault lies not in the regional variety but in the dictionaries whose function 
in life is to record vcuieties of English — so that we Ccui understand the subtleties of 
each other's language, the inevitable subtleties that arise from a particular community 
living in a particular place and having a shared culture and history as a common 
reference. For functional communication we can retreat to common ground but for an 
expression of what is most dyneunic, most central and most local in a particulcu 
culture we must use the full resources of each variety. 

Libby Gleeson, an Australian children's writer, has spoken about the difficulties 
she faced writing for international publishers. She said - 
'Language is my tool of trade. 

And because I write fiction I am fascinated by the way that you talk is a 
statement of who you are.' 

'Lots of people fear new technology. Some fear the fact that they can't 
control its use... I fear a different thing. 

I fear the danger of the bland, the boring sameness. 

Our publishing industry is dominated by overseas interests and the 
temptation is always to pubUsh for the international market — and that 
means cautious publishing with an international English tone — no 
colloquial Australian expression.' 

Her problem is one routinely faced by Australian publishers who seek to escape our 
pitifully small market into the larger markets, particularly for us the dream market of 
America, and who have therefore become experts at translating Australian English 
into American English or British English. 

I remember being told the cautionary tale of the publisher who sent off a 
children's book to an American editor without doing this kind of translation. The book 



160 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND 



EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AMD THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



was about a car and used the Australian word duco for the paint on the car. The 
American editor — with countless people beseeching her to publish their book — 
took one look at this incomprehensible word duco and dismissed the book to the reject 
pile. The moral of this story is that translation from one variety of English to another 
is a must for publishing survival. But what is lost in the translation? 

One of the problems is that the translation can be of two different kinds. It can 
be from one variety to another in which the new translation attempts to achieve the 
same kind of stylistic effect as the original. So vegemite goes to marmite in British 
English and pharmacy goes to drugstore in American English. 

Or the translation can move to something generalised and neutral, something 
that the publisher can get away with in anyone's English even if the work is made 
more boring as a result. In this kind of translation vegemite goes to paste or spread 
and pharmacy goes to shop. 

libby Gleeson certainly maintains that she loses her edge when she has to suffer 
this kind of translation — and children's writers must feel this even more keenly 
because children's language is full of the sublimely local. 

This extract from the Alice Springs Dictionary is an example of the extreme 
localism in children's language. 

Alice Springs Dictionary prepared by Class 421, Alice Springs High School, 
1972. 

biggest mobs a lot 

Charlie Queenie-Queenie a small bug, lives in soft sands {ant-lion) 

Comical Railways Commonwealth Railways 

donkey beetles hard-shelled beetles common in Alice Springs district 
galah session a radio talkback session 
ju-ju Ups lips that are protruding 

muchanic a person who is a bush mechanic who knows a lot about nothing 
and a little bit about something of engines 

snotty gobbles red, white and black fruit of some acacia bushes 

twin-stickin' her when the truckies let go of the steering wheel and grab 
for both gear sticks 

Some writers use localism very sparingly — perhaps confining it to dialogue. Others 
wallow in it. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 15< 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



A writer like Les Murray need never fear that Fredy Neptune will not be 
understood while the Macquarie has in it entries for the following: 



1998, Les Murray, Fredy Neptune, Potts Point, Sydney: Duffy & Snellgrove. 



shirty 

busting to know something 
youse 

to twig something 

veges 

touched 

bust out 

dead scared 

drogher 

sheet iron 

hessian bag 

antbed 

sugarbag 

puntman 

clueless 
a pasting 
chooks 



cross 

very anxious to learn something 
plural form of you 

to gain a sudden understanding of something 

vegetables 

imbeciUc 

laughing, crying, whatever 
extremely scared 
river barge 

galvanised iron in sheets 

bag made from hessian, reused eis furnishings 

a nest of ants, usually a sUghtly elevated and 

gravelly patch of bare earth 

honey from a native bee 

the man who operates the machinery which 

takes a punt back and forth across a river 

at a loss 

a beating 

chickens 



A stanza from Fredy Neptune reveals the immersion in locaUsm. 

1998, Les Murray, 'Book IV The Police Revolution' in Fredy Neptune, 217, 

Potts Point, Sydney: Duffy & Snellgrove. 

Well, he says. — How did you know I was back? I eisk. 

Merry Christmas, I add, and he says. Yes, a lot of that, to youse. 

We get him sitting down, because he's shy of Laura, euid all elbows and he 
admits he 'just had this feeUng' I'd be home. 

About Hans, he says Well yes, if he’s short in his brains 

he deserves all the more to keep everything that does worki 

Only fair. He gets outside of a junk of Christmas cake 

and I twig he's lonely, with nowhere much to go, and old suddenly. 

Sometimes the dictionary has to scramble to keep up — I was astonished to find we 
didn't have 'to look sideways at someone' — a very difficult phrase to define — which 
also appecued in Fredy Neptune. 

But a writer like Shahnon Ahmad in No Harvest But A Thom has obviously gone 
beyond the bounds that a nervous editor will tolerate. The publisher's solution here is 
the footnote at the bottom of the page. Menerong (menderong) is pulled out as 



O 160 

ERIC 



162 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



i 

I 

opposed to parang, rice bam and areca nut because it is not in any dictionciry. The 
solution in the case of fish-traps is translation — a fish-trap would more commonly 
j be called a kedai in Malaysian English. 

1991, Shahnon Ahmad, 'In the hcinds of God' in No harvest but a thorn, 7, 
Petaling Jaya: Penerbit Fajar Bakti Sdn. Bhd. 

Lahuma stood up. He stepped on to the ground and took the parang and the 
whetstone from Sanah. With his spit, he wet the whetstone. And he began 
j to sharpen his weapon. 

! Indeed, it was not good to think of the future. Let the fate of his 

I descendants remain in the hands of God. 

I He went on sharpening his parang. Since the Uist time the harvested rice 

I was carried up into the rice bam, that parang had not tasted the wood of a 

tree-stem. Lahuma had not done a stroke of proper work since the last 
harvest. At first he did try to do some other work. He had a go at cutting 
I down areca nut palms to sell the stems to the Chinese who took them down 

i to the sea to be made into stakes for seine-nets. But cutting down areca nut 

palms was not like cutting down menerong^ in wet rice land. The areca nut 
stems were as hard as brass. And to haul the stems to the main road was no 
j easy task. It was as strenuous as anything could be. So Lahuma just made 

fish-traps to catch river-fish once in a while. Rice they had. Their rice bam 
was full. Other food to go with the rice could be found. Appetizing shoots 
I could be got just behind the house. And Lahuma felt there was no need to 

do any other work. After the job of rice-growing was over, there was nothing 
: to do but just stay at home. Eat and sleep, sleep and eat. And only when the 

time caune to grow rice again would he need to begin to look for his parang. 

' menerong (menderong) — a kind of sedge 

Rice barn is not in other dictionaries either but compounds in English don't raise the 
hackles of editors nearly as much as borrowed words do. 

The assumption is that English is always intelligible by virtue of being English. 
But of course many new words are created in English whose mecuiing is not 
transparent — compounds such as love letter or packet drink in Singaporean English 
I and Malaysian English, bedspacer or dirty kitchen in Philippine English, black hand or 

iron rice bowl in Hong Kong English. 

Jessica Hagedom, a Philippine writer, has written confidently in Philippine 
English and seems to have got away with it. Although again there is no dictionary yet 
j that will back her up with definitions for merienda (a snack — morning tea or 

i afternoon tea) and bibingka (a savoury rice cake). 

i 

I 1990, Jessica Hagedom, Dogeaters, 4-5, New York: Penguin Books. 

It is merienda time at the popular Cede Espana, and the tiny restaurant is 
quickly filling up with more customers flocking out of the Avenue Theater 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICAT Jjl^I^NTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^61 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



across the street. I am acutely aware of the table of teenage boys next to us, 
craning their necks and staring lewdly at my cousin Pucha. Pucha plays with 
her hair, affecting a coy pose as she, too, suddenly becomes aware of the 
boys' attention. 'Psst ... pssst,' the loudest and largest of the boys hisses 
lazily at my cousin, who makes a big show of pretending not to hear. I glare 
at him angrily. I want Lorenza to save us, pay our bill, escort us out of the 
crowded restaurant, and take us home in a taxi. 

Lorenza catches my eye. 'Senorita Pucha,' she murmurs to my cousin, who 
refuses to acknowledge her. Pucha is flattered by the hissing boy's grossness 
and has other plans. She orders another round of TruCola, including one for 
the frowning Lorenza, who pointedly does not drink it. In her loud voice, 
Pucha professes to still be hungry and orders a second slice of bibingka, 
which she eats very slowly. She is a changed person, smiling and chattering 
about Rock Hudson, Ava Gardner, and her latest favorite, Debbie Reynolds. 

She is suddenly solicitous, oozing sweetness and consideration, 'Don't you 
wanna eat something, primaT She asks me. A sandwich, maybe? Some cake? 

Is okay-I got my allowance.' 

An excellent account of Hong Kong English has been written by Dr Kingsley Bolton in 
his thesis. Towards a new sociolinguistics in Hong Kong, published in March this year. 
It has an index of special words of Hong Kong English but, as I have remarked before, 
writers can swiftly move beyond the efforts of lexicographers to pin them down. In 
this next extract there is an entirely idiomatic use of ga je, wah kiu and dongxi. These 
items, although bonowings, are used with assurance as if the writer is conscious that 
in using them she is nevertheless not breaking the skin of the English medium in 
which she is writing. 

1996, Xu Xi (Sussy Chako) 'Valediction' in Daughters ofHui, 130, Hong Kong: 

Asia 2000 Ltd. 

Dear ga je — Just what is family anyway? Bloodlines tie us. For me, marriage 
and relationships created even more 'families' which I couldn't avoid or 
disavow, unless, like Mission Impossible, a disintegrating tape could disavow 
all knowledge once each episodic week — how I used to love that show; how 
you used to tease me about it. 

Family aside, it's also this 'overseas Chinese' wah kiu business that gets in 
the way. Grandpop never fails to remind us of our heritage as he updates the 
genealogical cheut each year for the family cuid all its branches. (His latest 
thing, you know, is proving the purity of our Chinese blood, despite the 
Indonesian, Caucasian and even Latino bloods that have seeped their 
infectious way into the generations). 

What kind of dongxi are we? How English fails me, despite all my English 
language novels! And ga je, how the Western world fails us for our most 
intimate expressions, our sense of family, our understanding of love. 





162 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



Yet c'est la vie, isn't it, for this daughter of Hui. 
ga je elder sister 



wah kiu overseas Chinese 

dongxi Ut. east-west 

The problem for all these writers is the one described by Chris Wallace-Crabbe in 
relation to Australian English — the legitimacy of that variety of English does not 
come easily when we are escaping a colorual past. 

1974, Chris Wallace-Crabbe, 'The Solitary Shapers' in Melbourne or the bush. 
Essays on Australian literature and society. 8-9. Sydney: Angus and 
Robertson. 

One way to escape from European ghosts that lean over one's shoulder and 
jog one's pen is by paying careful attention to the facts of immediate 
environment: the artist can forget mistletoe and oak in his observation of 
paperbark and pepperina. There is an achievement in seeing one's 
environment and getting its names and relationships into verse, or getting 
its forms down on canvas. One of Adcun's prime tasks in the new Eden has 
been to ncune the animals, as it were, to get their names assimilated in art, 
to give them currency and expressive possibility... 

What we have lacked, at least since Furphy, is an Adamic ncuner with a really 
large appetite for absorbing local experience and with the energy to sing it 
out loud and cleau; above all, we have lacked a man who would go beyond 
the animals and the wildflowers to name and hymn the daily tasks of Eden. 

The accuracy with which our language reflects our culture is the achievement of the 
writers within the language community. In creating texts they are, as Simon Tay said, 
bending and reshaping the language so that it is capable of authentic expression of 
our culture. This is not the work of just one writer, although individuals can have 
more or less influence on the process, but it is the collective triumph of all those who 
give voice to the perceptions and imaginings within which we all share and shape our 
Uves. 

In her article. The Lexicon of Philippine English, Dr Bautista outlines the ways in 
which Philippine English has developed as a national variety. In summary they are: 

Maria Lourdes S Bautista 'The Lexicon of Philippine English' in English Is An 
Asian Language: The Philippine Context, Maria Lourdes S Bautista (ed.), i9- 
72. Sydney (North Ryde): The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 8 - LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



The development of a lexicon 

Extensions or adaptations of meaning 
Shift in part of speech 

Preservation of items which have become lost or infrequent in other 
varieties 

Coinage - Analogical constructions 



It would be possible to illustrate this freunework with any of the varieties of English 
in the world. The processes aue the saune — the results vary. 

Nor is there anything untowaird or foreign or un-English about the way this 
development takes places in Asia. The products in Asia aire as legitimate as they are 
anywhere else. 

This expression of our culture in our kind of English is one part of our national 
inheritance. It is ours to take and adapt to the new set of circumstances in which we 
find ourselves and to hand on to the next generation as a serviceable tool, capable of 
expressing all that is dear to our hearts. Writers are of course focused on their own 
individual expression to the point where — depending on the mindset of the writer 
— they don't recognise that they are operating within a community language. They 
are Uke people who come in and hang up their pictures on the walls of a house that 
is already constructed. 

And then there are various authorities who want to tell us — the language 
community — what is good and what is bad about our language house. Not that I am 
opposed to this — every house needs an architect just as every writer needs an editor. 
But the worst kind of architect is the one who wants to turn the house into something 
it isn't, who wants to turn the Singaporean bungalow into a Tudor mansion, who 
wants to take down the Singaporean pictures and hang Turners and Constables. There 
is a Singaporean website — Speak well. Be understood.' — that is attempting to do 
exactly that. SingUsh is contrasted with Good English. Instead of saying that you are 
blur, you say that you are confused. Instead of saying that so-emd-so is a buaya you 



154 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNiqATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



Clippings 
Abbreviations 
Total innovations 

English compounds (one of the biggest categories) 
Combinations of one English element with one 
borrowed element 



Borrowing - Flora and fauna 



Food 

Culture 

Politics 

Life in general 
Expressions 




ERIC 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



say that he is a flirt. At the international level this is a step in translation that the 
Singaporean speaker would be required to take. You lose in subtlety what you gain in 
broader intelligibility. But your own language commuruty wants the authentic flavour 
of localism. Singaporeans want blur and buaya. The totality of Singaporean English in 
its formal and informal registers is needed to express fully the Singaporean 
experience. 

Each variety of English will in the future need to maintain a baUuice between 
localism and internationalism. And exactly how the variety is to be attuned and what 
the range is from localism to internationalism is something that will be judged by the 
speakers of the variety. 

This is as true of Australian English as it is of Singaporean English, as true of 
British English as it is of Malaysian English, as true of American English as it is of 
Philippine English. 

In communities where there is no direct government regulation of language 
standards, there is a tension between the language conservators and the language 
innovators. Usually what happens is that standards are set and maintained by 
individuals with a sense of community responsibility — editors, teachers, journalists, 
etc., who are looking for what is best but not blindly imposing their own will. These 
people are often in situations that give them a sense of responsibility to the 
commuruty and an awareness of what is practical. The sub-editor in a newspaper must 
know when to hold the line and when to allow individual difference or language 
change. The self-indulgent individual who wants to promote their preferences over 
everyone else's is quickly labelled a pedant and ignored. 

But in countries where the government gets involved in language standards, the 
policy that is promoted can be so fer out of step with reality as to be damaging to the 
commuruty. If it is ruthlessly maintained, there is the risk that children educated 
under its shadow will suffer the kind of language dislocation that Wallace-Crabbe has 
written about, so that eventually the adult has to unlearn their education and 
painfully learn to be themselves. They eue beyond an intuitive national identity and 
have to acquire it the hard way. 

If the variety of English is truly nativised, it will escape such strictures and 
develop anyway but it suffers for lack of sympathetic tending. Malaysian English, 
neglected by government, thrived as 'Malaysian Colloquial English' or 'Manglish', as it 
is called, but it is viewed by the educated English speakers in Malaysia as lacking a 
high form. The kind of attention that the Malaysian Government gives it now, if it 
follows the same line as the Singaporean Government, will run the risk of being so 
remote from the object of its concern as to be merely an irritation and an irrelevancy. 

The only way forward in these situations is to find a sympathetic ear in 
government, someone who understands how Uuiguage works, who finds a source of 
pride in the local variety of English and has no reason to assume that the caring 
encouragement of localism cannot accompany the efficient mastery of 
internationalism. It is possible to speak Singlish in the domestic scene, and Standard 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: C0MMUNICATI0n|. ^5^ITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^55 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



Singaporean English in professional life, and to temper one's Singaporeanness so as to 
be understood at an international level. 

We need the sense that we belong somewhere as well as the freedom to venture 
everywhere else. English is developing with a flexibility and versatility that makes it 
unique. There are other languages with as many speakers or more, but none that offers 
the Scime dual passport, legitimaqi at the local level as well as at the international 
level. And that increasingly is what each of us will need. 

The dictionary is like the snapshot of the house that we all live in. We know this 
house intimately — we know how the taps work in the bathroom and where the 
biscuits are kept in the kitchen — but we never actually look at it — until someone 
takes a picture. Better still we can compare our snapshot with the pictures of other 
houses built by other communities with a different kind of English. The snapshot is 
framed and hung up for all to see and becomes a source of pride. This is 'our house' 
we say to the people who walk into it, and we show them the picture. And all of us 
treat the house with new respect. 

The snapshots we have of English in Asia are at the moment Box Browme affairs, 
somewhat small and quickly fading. But conferences such as this show that there are 
keen photographers out there and that we can look forward to better pictures to come, 
pictures that each language community will look at and recognise as faithful to their 
kind of English in every detail. And that legitimacy and respect will follow the 
authentic record. 





166 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 8 — LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, CULTURE - AND THEIR MEETING PLACE IN THE DICTIONARY 



References 

Ahmad, Shahnon, 1991, 'In the hands of God' in No Harvest but a Thom, Penerbit Fajar Bakti 
Sdn. Bhd, Petaling Jaya. 

Alice Springs High School, Class 421 (unpub.), 1972, An Alice Springs Dictionary. 

Bailey, Nathan, 1727, The Universal Etymological English Dictionary being abo an Interpreter 
of Hard Words, T Cox, London. 

Bautista, Maria Lourdes S, 1997, 'The lexicon of Philippine English, in English is an Asian 
Language: The Philippine context, Maria Lourdes S Bautista (ed.). The Macquarie Library 
Pty Ltd, North Ryde. 

Delbridge, Arthur et al (eds), 1981, The Macquarie Dictionary, First Edition, The Macquarie 
Library Pty Ltd, St Leonards. 

Delbridge, Arthur, 1985, 'The Macquarie Questionnaire', in The Macquarie Dictionary Society, 



Vol.2 Issue 4, pp.1-3. 

Delbridge, Arthur et al (eds), 1997, The Macquarie Dictionary, Third Edition, The Macquarie 
Library Pty Ltd, North Ryde. 

Delbridge, Arthur & Bernard, John (eds), 1998, Macquarie Concise Dictionary Third Edition, 
The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, North Ryde. 

Flexner, Stuart Berg (ed.), 1987, Random House Dictionary of the English Language, Second 
Edition, Random House, Inc., New York. 

Gleeson, Libby, 1995, Launch of KiD (Macquarie Kids Internet Dictionary), Wiley Parks Girls 
High School, The Boulevarde, Punchbowl. 

Grolier International Dictionary, 2000, First Edition, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, North 
Ryde. 

Hagedorn, Jessica, 1990, Dogeaters, Penguin Books, New York. 

Murray, Les, 1998, Fredy Neptune, Duffy & Snellgrove, Sydney. 

Pearsall, Judy (ed.). New Oxford Dictionary of English, First Edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 

Proulx, E Annie, 1993, The Shipping News, Foiuth Estate Ltd, London. 

Simpson, J.A. & E.S.C. Weiner (eds), 1989, Ox/brd English Dictionary, Second Edition, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford. 

Tay, Simon, 1991, 'My cousin Tim' in Stand Alone, Landmark Books Pte Ltd, Singapore. 

Tay, Simon, 1992, 'A dictionary of English for Singapore and its practical implications' in 
Words in a Cultural Context, Pakir, Anne (ed.). Unipress, Singapore. 

Wallace-Crabbe, Chris, 1974, 'The Solitary Shapers' in Melbourne or the Bush. Essays on 
Australian literature and society. Angus and Robertson, Sydney. 

Wright, Joseph (ed.), 1898, English Dialect Dictionary, Henry Frowde, London. 

Xu Xi (Sussy Chako), 1996, 'Valediction' in Daughters ofHui, Asia 2000 Ltd, Hong Kong. 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^57 




ERIC 



9 Even obituaries reflect cultural norms and 
values 



Maya Khemlani David and Janet Y. Yong 
University of Malaya 



This paper argues that local value systems and cultural norms are 
represented in the new "Englishes" used by non-native speakers of 
English. The value systems and norms of Malaysians, particularly 
Indians, are discussed by analyzing a data base of obituaries obtained 
over a period of three months which appeaued in three English 
newspapers in Malaysia. The paper argues that outsiders to Malaysian 
cultural norms and value systems may not understand the significance 
of the discourse of these obituaries unless links are made between the 
textual discourse and local or cultural schemas. The data is analyzed 
by mcddng connections between the textual discourse and local value 
systems. The analysis reveals that social identities are made and local 
value systems reflected through the discourse. 



O 

ERIC 



Introduction 



This paper reports the findings of a study conducted on obituaries or death 
announcements obtained in three English daily newspapers in Malaysia. The discourse 
of the obituaries is produced and interpreted from the cultural context of shared 
meanings and worldviews of the writers of these obituaries. 

Schema theory is used to explain schemata underlying obituaries written by 
individuals from different ethnic and socio-cultural backgrounds in Malaysia. By 
comparing 211 obituaries, we identified some underlying schemata. Schema theory 
argues that, to understand a text, one has to be able to make links between what is 
said/written and what is in the schema/mind of the reader. It argues that a top- 
down bottom-up view of reading results in a more comprehensive understanding of 
the text. Schemata provide a framework for readers to check their understanding of 
the text, fill in information gap within the text, and clarify cunbiguities (Steffenson 
& Joag-Dev 1984). Efficient readers use prior knowledge of content and textual 
features stored in the schemata to make meaning out of the text (Rumelhart 1977, 
Goodman, 1984). 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICA 




ENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^69 



CHAPTER 9 — EVEN OBITUARIES REFLECT CULTURAL NORMS AND VALUES 



o 170 

ERIC 



Two types of schemata most often discussed in reading research are formal 
schemata and content schemata. Formal schemata are higher order structures which 
contain knowledge of the general properties of text types and differences in genre 
(Carrell & Hsterhold 1988). The other type of schema, which a reader brings to a text, 
is content schema, the knowledge relative to the content domain of the text. There 
are different types of content schemata and one, which has attracted interest, is the 
culture-specific content schema (Carrell 1988, Carrell & Eisterhold 1988). Several 
studies of reading comprehension indicate that prior knowledge and cultural 
background greatly influence the comprehension process (Johnson 1982, Steffenson 
& Joag-Dev 1984). 

In 1984, Steffenson and Joag-Dev conducted a study in which subjects from an 
Indian and American backgrounds were asked to read and recall two texts describing 
an Indian and American wedding respectively. The findings show that subjects 
recalled more of the native text than the foreign text, produced more expansions as 
a result of "remembering" items which were not mentioned in the text but were 
culturally appropriate and consistent with it, and made more distortions of the foreign 
text. From the findings, the writers concluded that an important part of reading 
comprehension is cultural knowledge — readers will understand a text better if they 
share the content schema of the writer but will distort the text if there is no shared 
schema. Similarly, a real understanding of obituaries in Malaysian newspapers by an 
outsider necessitates an understanding of local Malaysian culture and its norms and 
value systems. 

Further, the obituaries also convey and contain important messages, which 
reflect the intentionaUty of the writer. The writer's intended meaning then receives 
an interpretation because the reader recognizes the intention. Therefore, the 
communication between the writer and the reader is done within a shared domain of 
value systems. Goffman (1959) recognizes the distinction between what he calls 
information given and information given-off. For instance, one obituary of a demised 
male mentioned his mother first before his wife in the list of survivors which gives off 
the meaning that his mother is more important than his wife is. The information 
given is the information which the outsider receives, while the information given off 
reflects local values. The latter are not assigned that significance by an outsider who 
is not able to make the links between what is said and the underlying value systems 
and worldview. 



Background 

Malaysia is a multiracial country comprising Bumiputras (literally sons/princes of the 
soil/earth referring to Malays and other indigenous races such as Kadazan, Ibans etc.). 
Chinese, Indians and other minority races. The Malays form about 50% of the 
Malaysian population, the Chinese about 30% and the Indians about 9%. Malaysia is 
almost synonymous with the Muslim religion, as all Malays are Muslims by birth. In 

1 i 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION^ IDENTJlrY^ pi.WER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 9 — EVEN OBITUARIES REFLECT CULTURAL NORMS AND VALUES 



fact, the constitutional definition of Malay is one who is a Muslim, uses the Malay 
language and has a Malay life style. The Chinese are multi-religious and this includes 
Buddhism, Taoism, Confucianism and Christianity. Hinduism is the religion of the 
majority of Malaysian Indians although a sizable number are Christians. 

The cultural values of Malaysians have not been much researched. Although 
Malaysia is a multiracial country with a diversified set of values based on ethnicity, 
this too has been ignored by researchers who generally assume or imply cultural 
homogeneity (Newman and Nollen 1996). Some recent research now has begun 
examining such differences. Research by Jariah and David (1996) argue that the 
speech act of disagreeing by the Malay undergraduates of the University of Malaya in 
the English class reflect Malay cultural norms and value systems. David (1999) 
discusses how the different ethnic groups i.e. Malays, Chinese and Indians respond to 
another speech act, that of giving compliments. Loo (2001) discusses the varying 
negotiation styles of Malays, Chinese and Indieuis. 



The data consist of obitueuies announced in three English language daily newspapers 
in Malaysia, which were collected between August and October 2000. Obituaries 
collected were mainly of two ethnic groups — Indians and Chinese. Malaysian Indians 
are generally Hindus and Christians while the Chinese are generally either Christians 
or Buddhists. Obituaries of Malaysian Punjabi Sikhs were also collected. None were 
obtained for Muslim MalaysieUis. The total number of obituaries collected totaled 211 
and the breakdown for each ethnic group is as follows; 



Table 1: Breakdown of sample by ethnicity and religion 



Male. Indian. Hindu 


58 


Female Indian Hindu 


21 


Male Indian Christian 


31 


Female Indian Christian 


11 


Punjabi Male 


39 


Punjabi Female 


11 


Male Chinese Christian 


15 


Female Chinese Christian 


6 


Male Chinese Buddhist 


12 


Female Chinese Buddhist 


7 



Total 211 



Data 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA; , COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERIC 



CHAPTER 9 — EVEN OBITUARIES REFLECT CULTURAL NORMS AND VALUES 



Analysis of data 

The number of obituaries of the Indians including the Punjabi subgroup is higher than 
that of the Chinese community (81% against 18.95%). The number of Indian death 
obituaries exceeds that of the Chinese group despite the fact that the ratio of Indians 
to the Chinese population in Malaysia is roughly 1:3. This is because the Chinese 
prefer to inform relatives and friends about a death in the family by word of mouth 
or telephone (personal communication). Malay Muslims too do not announce deaths 
in local classified columns. 

It is apparent that the number of obituaries of men (73.5%), regardless of ethnic 
group, exceed that of women (26.5%). Even if men have a comparatively higher 
mortality rate, this does signify the importance assigned to the male figure in 
Malaysian society. 

Much information, not only of the deceased but also of his/her family is included 
in the obituaries. The information provided indicates and signifies the importance 
placed on certain values and norms. These are now discussed. 

Time and venue 

The exact hour and minute not only of the death but also of the ceremonial rituals 
and prayers which take place following the death is mentioned (see Example 1). Time 
of the deaths and ceremonial events following deaths are particularly significant for 
both the Chinese Buddhists and Indian Hindus as it is believed that one's death is 
predestined as is one's birth. Some Chinese even follow the Chinese calendar and 
announce the day according to the Chinese calendar. (See Example 1). 

In addition, special prayers are conducted for the soul of the deceased some days 
after the death. The exact time, for instance six or sixteen days, (see Example 1) will 
depend on the community and religious group norms. 

Example 1 

9th Moon 24th Day (female Chinese Buddhist) 

The 6th day prayers will be held at Wada Gurdwara Sahib on 2nd September 2000 
between 3pm and 5pm ( male Punjabi Sikh) 

the 16th day (Karmati) prayer will be held on Friday, October 6th 2000 starting 
at 2.30pm at the residence (male Indian Hindu) 

Besides the importance of time, the venue for some ceremonies and prayers are also 
mentioned. Again, without a knowledge of the Hindu faith, it would be difficult to 
make links between the information 'The final rites will be performed at the Batu Caves 
river side’ and the fact that cremation rather than burial takes place and the ashes of 
the deceased are released, in Ueu of the River Ganges, into any river in Malaysia. 




O 172 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 9 — EVEN OBITUARIES REFLECT CULTURAL NORMS AND VALUES 




Personal invitations 

Outsiders may be puzzled by the fact that people are risked to accept an invitation to 
lunch soon after the death of a loved one. Close friends and relatives are told to accept 
this (i.e. invitation to lunch which is incorporated with the announcement for the 
ceremonial and religious rites) eis a "personal invitation" (See Exeimple 2). This can be 
best understood with the knowledge that in some cultures it is considered 
disrespectful to peiss on an invitation through a third party, by post or via the meiss 
media. Since oral invitations are generally impossible at a time of mourning, the 
discourse is worded in such a way eis to give the impression that the invitation is 
personalized. In this way the norm or value system is maintained. 

Example 2 

The final rites will be performed at the Batu Caves riverside on day, date, time and 
thence to a lunch at 1.00pm at our residence. Kindly accept this as a personal 
invitation. 

The importance of men in Malaysian society 

We have seen that more deaths of men are announced in the various newspapers 
compared to obituaries for women. This indicates the role and status of men in 
Malaysian society. 

The importance of the male is also reflected in the discourse of the obituary. 
When a woman dies, even deceased male members are mentioned eis survivors. 
Although it is not logical for a dececised to be survived by one who heis pre-deceeised 
her, this information regarding her male relatives is provided in the obituary (Example 
3). Such information reflects the high value placed on men and the low status of 
women in Malaysian society. 

Example 3 

Survived by husband ABC (deceased) 

Deeply in Mourning: Husband XYZ (deceased) 

Deeply missed but remembered by husband, son (deceased), daughters and 
relatives 

The male bieis and the subordinate role of women (especially Indian) in society is also 
shown in the Ccise where the deceeised female (single or married) is immediately 
identified eis an adjunct or dependent of her next-of-kin male — father, husband or 
brother (Example 4). 

Example 4 

Miss XYZ, daughter of Mr. &Mrs. VN (ex-Guthries) 

Mrs. ABC, daughter of late Mr. NS ( LLN Malacca) 

Madam EFG, wife of late Mr. JP (Ex-Treasury Kuantan) 

Dr. HIJ, sister of Mr. PT (West Port Klang) 

•f n A 

X / 4 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 9 — EVEN OBITUARIES REFLECT CULTURAL NORMS AND VALUES 



O 174 

ERIC 



The importeince of the male is also shown in the sequencing of family members of the 
deceased. Incidentally, the importance of the extended family is indicated by the fact 
that it is not only the members of the nuclear family but all members including sister- 
in-law, brother-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law etc. who are mentioned in the 
obituary. However, always, the father is mentioned before the mother, the son before 
the daughter, the brother before the sister, the grandfather before the grandmother 
and the uncle before the aunt. 

Social status 

Hofetede (1991) showed that Malaysians scored high on power disteuice and placed 
great preituum on status. This emphasis on status in Malaysian society is reflected in 
the obituaries. Any marker or indicator, which implies status, is mentioned. These 
markers of status relate not only to the deceased but even family members of the 
deceased. 

One measure of social status in Malaysia is occupation, which is mentioned in the 
case of the deceased, even if he has long retired from the post (see Example 5). Not 
only is the occupation euid post of the deceased mentioned, but at times the positions 
and posts of the surviving members is also mentioned. 

Example 5 

TIZ (ex-pensioner) 

Daughter: Mrs. Z (Qualitas Specialist Center, Ex-Staff Nurse Ward 13, KLGH) 

Brother: Mr. Y (Ex-KTM, Sentul) 

Son: Dr. DE (UH, KL) 

Head of Engineering, Air Asia (Ex-MAS, Airod Ground Engineer) 

Retired Director of Telekom 

Retired Assistant Superintendent of Polis 

Status is also reflected by specifying not only the compeuiy the deceased worked with, 
but also the cunent employers of relatives of the deceased. (Example 6) 

Example 6 

Husband: Mr. X (Ex-Postal Services) 

Husband: Mr. Y (Formerly of Dunlop's) 

Acadeituc qualifications are also held in high esteem as they indicate not only a high 
level of education but also the ability to hold a good well-paying job. Status is implied 
by these academic titles: — 

ILB. Hons. (London) 

Ph.D. (USA) 

Confened titles are also seen as indicators of status and appear in the data (Example 
7). Loo (2001) states that dignitary conferment such as Datuk, Datuk Seri, Tan Sri 
and Tun, (quite similar to the British conferment of Lordships), imply not only strong 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTitv/ ^WER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 9 — EVEN OBITUARIES REFLECT CULTURAL NORMS AND VALUES 



financial standing, but also favorable links with government and royalty. 

Example 7 

Dato/Datin 

AMN, PJK, KMN,AMP 

The family of one deceased Indian Christian male proudly displayed his myriad 
accomplishments and degrees in the New Straits Times 'DDG (Cambridge), LFIEE (UK), 

LFIEM (Mai), FSE ( London), LFIB A (Cambridge), LFAB (USA), LMOIF (Cambridge) 
obviously in appreciation of their father's great achievements in Ufe. The obituary 
significantly announced the social standing of the dececised and members of his 
family. 

Social status is also indicated by the country of residence of members of the 
deceased's family. Not only are we informed of the full names of all the children of 
the dececised, but at times within parenthesis after the name is mentioned the 
country where they are currently living (Example 8). 

Example 8 

Malaysian Airlines, Zagreb, Croatia 
Son: Mr. AB (Liverpool) 

University of Jaffna 

Mark of identity 

Since Punjabi Sikh males use the generic last name Singh (meaning lion) and Punjabi 
Sikh females the title Kaur (mecining Princess) it is important to distinguish members 
of this community. Mentiorung the place of origin in India and/or Malaysia is one way 
they can be identified (See Example 9). 

Example 9 

(from the village Kampung Kepayang, Rasa) 

Village: Sangatpura (India) District: Faridkot 

Another mark of identity and social status for the Punjabis is occupation. Many 
Punjabis when they first came to Malaysia held low-paying jobs. However, with 
education, they advanced to civil service posts and professional occupations which 
raised their social status. This achievement is publicly advertised in the obituaries. 

Example 10 

Director, Co-operative Department Selangor 

For the outsider he may not understand why it is important to mention that a 
deceased had been a toddy contractor (see Example 11), but it is a marker of identity 
for a community like the Tamils who have no family or last name. Each generation of 
offspring inherit not a family name but the first name of their father This first name 
is lost with time eis each generation only uses the first name of their father. 

Identity for some Malaysians in certain social clcisses is indicated by their 

176 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^75 




CHAPTER 9 — EVEN OBITUARIES REFLECT CULTURAL NORMS AND VALUES 



profession/jobs or the positions they have or had held and the town where they 
worked (Example 11). 

Example 11 

(Ex-Choir Master) 

(Taiping Velio Tailor) 

(Ex-Toddy Contractor, Tapah Road) 

Code switching 

In addition to its specific content and context, the language in obituaries is recipient- 
designed. Consequently, lexical items which represent cultural and religious referents 
for which there is no equivalent English lexical item are refened to in their native 
languages (see David, 2001). These code switched terms are understood and shared by 
members of a speech community. Of the subgroups sampled, the Punjabi Sikh and 
Indian Hindu communities appealed to their group membership the most through 
code switching (Example 12). The data shows that a number of lexical items especially 
for Punjabi are used in the matrix or dominant Icuiguage, English. 

Example 12 

Ik Onkar (One God) 

Arkand/Path Da Bhog (Special Prayers) 

Called to the House o/Waheguru (the Lord's house) 

Similarly, Tamil words are also used extensively by Indian Hindus for terms that 
cannot be directly or efficiently translated into English and which express common 
values and beliefs (Example 13). 

Example 13 

Karumaigirigai Prayers ( 30th day after death special prayers ) 

Atma Shanti Prayers (Peace of the Soul) 

Apart from code switching, the terminology used to refer to death reflects how 
Malaysicuis generally view death. These topics are seldom discussed openly cuid may 
be taboo in some circles ais is evident from the lexical items or vocabulary used to 
describe them. Example 14 provides some examples. The deep level meaning is 
provided in pcurenthesis. 

Example 14 

passed away peacefully (after an illness, sometimes long and painful) 

Passed away suddenly (accident, injury, unnatural causes) 

Bloomed in 1990, Faded in 2000 (death of a young boy) 



17 







176 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 9 — EVEN OBITUARIES REFLECT CULTURAL NORMS AND VALUES 



Conclusion 

The paper argues that local cultural norms and value system are reflected in the 
English used by non-native speakers of English. An understcuiding of the language i.e. 
English in itself without a knowledge of the local cultural schema will not bring 
complete and comprehensive meaning to an outsider. For outsiders to decode such a 
text they must have the schema of local cultural attributes, norms and value systems. 
Only then can they fully understand the message. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 9 — EVEN OBITUARIES REFLECT CULTURAL NORMS AND VALUES 



References 

Carrell , P. L. & Eisterhold, J. C, 1988, Schema theory and ESL reading pedagogy, in Carrell, 
P.L., Devine, J. & Eskey, D. (eds.). Interactive Approaches to Second Language Reading, 
CUP, Cambridge. 

Carrell, P. L., 1988, 'Content and formal schema in ESL reading' in Tesol Quarterly, Vol. 21, 
pp. 461-481. 

David, K. M., 1999, Interethnic variations in response patterns to compliments in Malaysia. 
Paper presented at International Conference of Applied Linguistics 17/9/99, Perth. 

David, K. M.,. 2001, The Sindhis of Malaysia: A sodolinguistic study, Asean, London. 

David, K. M. & Norazit, L, 2000, 'Selection of reading texts: moving beyond content schema', 
in Literacy across Cultures, Vol. 4 no. 1, pp. 11-17. 

Goffman, E., 1959, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, Doubleday, New York. 

Goodman, K., 1984, Reading as a psycholinguistic guessing game, in H. Singer & R. B. 

Ruddell (eds.) Theoretical Models and Processes of Reading, N. J.: International Reading 
Association, Newark. 

Hofstede, G, 1991, 'Management in a multicultural society', in Malaysian Management Review, 
Vol. 26 no.l, pp. 3-12. 

Jariah, M. J. and David, K. M., 1996, 'Oral skills : a need for acceptance of LI cultural 
norms,' in Pertanika Journal of Social Science and Humanities, Vol. 4, pp. 11-19. 

Johnson, P., 1982, 'Effects of reading comprehension of building background knowledge,' in 
TESOL Quarterly, Vol.l5 no. 2, pp. 503-516. 

Loo, M. 2001, A contrastive style of negotiation styles among Malaysian Malays, Chinese and 
Indians: a practical guide to doing business with Malaysians (draft), 13 pp. 6/2/2001 
[Loo M's website] . 

Newman, K L & Nollen, S. D., 1996,. 'Culture and congruence: The fit between management 
practices and national culture', in Journal of International Business Studies, Vol. 27 no. 
4 pp. 753-779. 

Rumelhart, D. E, 1977, "Towards an interactive model of reading,' in S. Domic (ed.) Attention 
and performance, Erbaum, Hillsdale. 

Steffenson, J. & Joag-Dev, C. 1984, Cultural knowledge and reading, in J. C. Alderson & A. 

H. Urquhart (eds.) Reading in a Foreign Language (pp.48-61), Longman, London. 




178 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, 



179 



IDENTITY, POWER AND 



EDUCATION 



10 Recent research on the pronunciation of 
Singapore English 

Low Ee Ling and David Deterding 

National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University 



After a consideration of some criteria which can help determine which 
features of pronunciation are important for teachers to concentrate 
on, this paper reviews recent research on the pronunciation of 
Singapore English (SgE) and evaluates the degree to which previous 
impressiorustic descriptions of SgE are substantiated by instrumental 
measurements. 



Introduction 

Early research on the pronunciation of English in Singapore (SgE) (e.g. Tongue 1979, 
Platt & Weber 1980, Tay 1982, Brown 1988a) was based on the auditory impressions 
and expertise of linguists. It was not easy at that time to support the research with 
instrumental measurements, but much valuable descriptive work Wcis done and it has 
provided a solid foundation for all subsequent work on SgE. 

More recently, extensive research on SgE based on detailed analysis of data with 
the help of instrumental techniques has been conducted (e.g. Deterding 1994, Lim 
1996, Low & Grabe 1999, Low et. al. 2000). This paper will provide eui overview of 
some recent instrumental research on SgE, much of it published in Brown et al. 
( 2000 ). 

In this paper, we will first consider some criteria to help determine which 
features of speech are most important for teachers to concentrate on. Then, after 
giving a brief overview of the pronunciation of SgE, we wnll discuss some of the recent 
research into the vowels, the consonants, the stress patterns, and the rhythm of SgE. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICAHON, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 10 — RECENT RESEARCH ON THE PRONUNCIATION OF SINGAPORE ENGLISH 



Which pronunciation features are important? 

As most Singaporeans Eire happy to sound like Singaporeans, there is no need for them 
to adopt a totally British accent. However, as Singapore is heavily dependent on 
foreign trade, it is also important for Singaporeans to be understood easily by people 
from outside Singapore. 

Some local pronunciation features interfere with comprehensibility, while others 
serve to mark the speaker as Singaporean without interfering with comprehensibility 
(Brown 1991). So how can teachers determine which features merely contribute to 
this local flavour without causing a problem, and which features do result in greater 
difficulties for understanding? 

Three criteria will be discussed: occurrence elsewhere, functional load, and 
shibboleths. 




Occurrence elsewhere 

Some features of SgE involve simplification of the speech. When this simplification 
involves a process that is common in other vairieties of English, it is unlikely to result 
in problems for comprehension. However, if the process is not found elsewhere, non- 
Singaporean listeners may find it hard to understand what is said. 

Let us look at two exEunples of simplification that might occur in SgE and try to 
determine which one is more serious. Consider sentences [1] and [2]. 

[1] He backed that team. 

[2] He backs that team. 

Many Singaporeans simplify final consonant clusters (Deterding & Poedjosoedarmo 
1998), so in the first example, the past tense -ed suffix may be dropped from backed, 
while in the second example, the present tense -s suffix may be dropped from Tiacks'. 
Which of these is more serious? 

The omission of the -ed suffix (which here would be pronounced as /t/) is 
actually very common in conversational English around the world, including in 
standard British English, as it is quite normal for a final /t/ to be deleted when it 
occurs in final position, between two consonants the first of which is voiceless (Wells 
& Colson 1971:68). Pinker (1999:19) observes that ice cream really ought to be iced 
cream, but the frequent deletion of the final consoneuit in the first word has become 
standard. 

Pinker (1999) further argues that one of the reasons why so many common verbs 
in English have an irregular past form is in order to maintain an important semantic 
distinction which would otherwise be lost as a result of the deletion of the final 
consonant. In contrast, there are extremely few irregular present tense -s forms, 
because there is no need for them, as deletion of a final alveolar fricative is rare in 
most varieties of English. (The only irregular present tense -s forms are: is, does, and 
has. Additionally says is /sez/ rather than /seiz/ for most speakers.) 

So clearly the omission of an -ed suffix is far less important than the omission 




180 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 10 — RECENT RESEARCH ON THE PRONUNCIATION OF SINGAPORE ENGLISH 



of an -s suffix, because the former is quite a common process in many varieties of 
English while the latter is less common. Unfortunately, many pronunciation teachers 
do not know this, and they wciste huge amounts of time getting their students to 
pronounce -ed in every situation. 

Functional load 

The second criterion considers the functional load bom by a linguistic feature: how 
many words does it help to differentiate. This is the distinction discussed in detail by 
Brown (1988b). Let us again consider some examples illustrating features of SgE and 
see if we can determine which is more important. 

In SgE, the distinction between long and short vowels is sometimes lost 
(Deterding & Poedjosoedcirmo 1998). As a result, sport and spot may sound exactly the 
same, cind similarly fool and full may become exact homophones. Which of these is 
more important? Should teachers spend more time on the distinction between /o:/ 
and /d/? Or should they devote more of their time to the distinction between /u:/ 



The decision here is actually quite straightforward: There are many minimal pairs 
for the first contrcist, but only a few for the second, so clearly the contreist between 
/o:/ and /o/ is far more important than that between /u:/ and /u/. 

This can be confirmed quite easily. In his webpage devoted to minimal pairs, John 
Higgins of Stirling University lists 157 minimal pairs for the first distinction, but just 
18 for the latter one (including such things as bull vs buhl — whatever that means!). 

Shibboleths 

The Bible tells us that forty-two Ephraimites were slaughtered when they were 
identified by their inability to pronounce the word shibboleth {Judges Ch.l2). 
Nowadays, we do not usually kill those who make mistakes in their pronunciation, but 
it can happen that people fail to get a job or something like that because of a feature 
of their speech. 

The term shibboleth is now used to refer to a feature of speech which is heavily 
stigmatised: it is a something which people are acutely aware of, and its use can cause 
alarm bells to start ringing. Therefore, a shibboleth may take on a greater importance 
than one would expect from its functional load. 

In Singapore, the absence of dental fricatives constitutes a kind of shibboleth, so 
the distinction between three and tree might be a bit more important than one would 
expect. 

Jenkins (2000) has suggested that dental fricatives are not important in 
International English, firstly because they are rather difficult to learn, and secondly 
because substituting them with other sounds is unlikely to cause misunderstandings. 
However, this may overlook their importance as shibboleths. 



and /u/? 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, ID'ENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION Jg] 



CHAPTER 10 — RECENT RESEARCH ON THE PRONUNCIATION OF SINGAPORE ENGLISH 



Features of SgE pronunciation 

A summary of the features that tend to characterise SgE can be found in Deterding 
and Poedjosoedarmo (1998:chapter 19). A very brief overview is presented here. It 
should be stressed that not all Singaporeans exhibit all these features, because there 
is a great deal of variation in the speech found in Singapore (Pakir 1995). However, 
most of the features discussed here are found quite widely in SgE. 

Monophthongs 

There is neutralisation between the two non-close front monophthongs / e/ and / ae/ , 
so that for many Singaporeans bet and bat may sound alike. 

In addition, there is often no length distinction in vowels, so that two vowels in 
a long/short pair sound the same. As a result, the distinctions between the following 
pairs of vowels may be lost: /i:/ and /i/; /o:/ and /n/; and /u:/ and /u/ . 

On the basis of functional load, the last of these distinctions is not very 
important, and the one between /a:/ and /a/ is also less important than the others. 

Diphthongs 

The two diphthongs /ei/ and /ou/ tend to be pronounced as monophthongs. This 
rarely causes misunderstanding, partly because these two diphthongs are still distinct 
from all other vowels, and also because a monophthongal pronunciation of these 
sounds is quite common elsewhere, such as in Scotland (Wells 1982:407), so for 
teachers to try to get students to pronounce these sounds as diphthongs is quite 
frankly unnecessary. 

Finally, the diphthong /eo/ is also pronounced as a monophthong. Of course, this 
is also true in Standard British English, so it is rather absurd if teachers in Singapore 
insist that this is a diphthong. 

Consonants 

The dental fricatives /0/ and /6/ are quite often replaced by the corresponding 
alveolar plosives /t/ and /d/. As we have seen, this is something of a shibboleth in 
Singapore, but it is not clear if it really results in much confusion. In his website, 
Higgins lists 117 minimal pairs for the voiceless consonants /0/ and /t/, and 58 for 
the voiced ones /6/ and /d/, so we can conclude that they are a little more important 
than the distinction between /u:/ and /u/. 

As already mentioned, final consonant cluster simplification is quite common, so 
that six might sometimes be pronounced as / sik/ cind orange eis / orin/ (though this 
is perhaps only found in basilectal speech). Notice that deletion of a final strong 
fricative sound is almost never found in standard English, so this feature does cause 
some problems for communication with non-Singaporeans. 

The glottal stop is quite common in place of a final plosive, especially /k/ and 



O 182 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: 




COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND 



EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 10 — RECENT RESEARCH ON THE PRONUNCIATION OF SINGAPORE ENGLISH 



/t/, SO that spot might be /spo?/. Of course, this feature is not uniquely Singaporean, 
and is quite widespread in Britain. 

Finally, vocalisation of dark /!/ is very widespread, so that little might be /lits/ 
cuid milk may be /misk/. Once again, this is quite common in British English (Wells 
1982:295), cuid is just continuing a historical trend, whereby the original /!/ in words 
like walk cuid folk hcis already completely disappeared. 

Stress placement 

SgE hcis been observed to have different patterns of stress placement thcui standeud 
English and Singaporeans seem to have a preference for place stress on a later syllable 
in a word, usually on the final syllable. For example, words like carefully and 
hopelessly are stressed on the final syllable instead of the first. 

In standard English, compound nouns generally have their main stress on the 
first item, but this often does not occur in SgE. If SingaporecUi students are presented 
with the following two phrcises: 

ENGUsh teacher 

English TEACHer 

and cisked which one of the people referred to teaches English cuid which one comes 
from Englcuid, they generally Ccuinot identify the first one eis the teacher of English. 
In other words. Singaporeans do not appear to be able to distinguish between 
compound and phrasal stress. 

Intonation and rhythm 

The intonation of SgE hcis many features that set it apart from stcindard English. For 
example: the concept of tonic syllable (nucleus) may not apply to SgE; SgE utterances 
are often characterised by a falling tone on the final word, even when that word is a 
pronoun or a preposition; and a distinct rise-fall tone is commonly used for extra 
emphasis. 

The rhythm of SgE is often described cis having syllable-timed rhythm, in contreist 
with the stress-timing of stcindard English. Brown (1988a) describes this cis the 
staccato effect. 



Recent research 

In the previous section, some features of SgE have been described. But the question 
remains: how do we know that these features really exist in SgE? Is there any firm 
evidence? Or are we just relying on the intuitions of various linguists? 

Recently, there has been substcintial research on SgE, including measurements of 
many features of SgE. In this section, some of this recent research will be discussed. 



184 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION ^8 



CHAPTER 10 — RECENT RESEARCH ON THE PRONUNCIATION OF SINGAPORE ENGLISH 



Q 184 

ERIC 



Open front monophthongs 

Suzanna and Brown (2000) meeisured the formants of /e/ and /se/ under various 
speaking conditions, and they report that the distinction between these two vowels 
tends to be neutralised in conversational speech, but the distinction may be 
maintained in careful speech. In other words, many Singaporeans are able to make 
this distinction, but choose not to in less formal situations. 

Long-short vowel neutralisation 

In a third-year elective course on Experimental Phonetics run at the National Institute 
of Education in Singapore, students cire asked to meeisure the formants of all their 
monophthong vowels under two circumstances: reading a list of words; and in 
conversation with their tutor (the second author of this paper). These meeisurements 
generally suggest that there is neutralisation of the distinction between long and 
short vowels, particularly in the conversational situation. 

However, we need to be aware of one caveat to this conclusion: formants reflect 
vowel quality, not duration, so it is possible that speakers may produce two vowels 
with the same quality but still maintain a difference in duration. We should note, for 
example, that many British speakers actually produce /a:/ and /a/ with much the 
same quality, and differentiate these vowels mostly by length. 

Although it would be possible to measure duration cis well, the duration of vowels 
is highly dependent on phonetic environment. For excunple, /i:/ in beat may well be 
shorter than /i/ in bid, because of the influence of the final voiceless plosive /t/. 
Although this effect can be factored out in the word list, it is not so easy to deal with 
it in the conversational data. Furthermore, speaking rate heis a substeintial influence 
on the duration of vowels, and it is hard to take this into account. 

So although the formant meeisurements confirm the neutralisation of the long- 
short vowel distinctions for many SgE speakers, there are some limitations in these 
measurements. 

Closing diphthongs /ei/ and /3U/ 

Deterding (2000) and Lee and Urn (2000) both seek to determine the degree of 
diphthongisation of /ei/ and /su/ in SgE by measuring the rate of change of the 
first formant. Although it is acknowledged that this meeisurement does not give a 
complete representation of the phonetic realisation of these vowels, it does provide a 
fairly reliable indication of how diphthongal the vowel is. 

These papers report that the dipthongal movement in these two vowels is 
significantly smaller in SgE than in British English, and also that there little 
difference between the different ethnic groups in Singapore. 

We can conclude that monophthongal / ei/ and /su/ is distinctive of Singapore 
speech, but as discussed above, it does not interfere with intelligibility. Furthermore, 
the use of a diphthongal /su/ makes the speaker sound awfully British, and this is 
something most Singaporeans may want to avoid. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 10 — RECENT RESEARCH ON THE PRONUNCIATION OF SINGAPORE ENGLISH 



Dental fricatives 

Moorthy and Deterding (2000) investigated the use of dental fricatives in SgE, eind 
they report that it is extremely hard to determine the acoustic correlates of the 
distinction between /0/ emd /t/. Even after studying the spectrograms for memy 
weeks, the researchers could not determine for sure what it was that made some 
instemces sound like /0/ emd others Uke /t/. 

They then presented the data to four trained phoneticians, who were asked to 
give their judgements on which were tokens were tokens of /0/ and which of /t/, but 
these phoneticieuis also could not agree. The conclusion was that memy tokens 
represented something between /0/ emd /t/, maybe a dental plosive, and listeners 
could rarely be confident about classifying what they hear. Furthermore, it is likely 
that different listeners are sensitive to different acoustic features. 

The research concluded that most specikers may sometimes use one, sometimes 
another, and often something in between. In fact, very few speakers always use /0/ 
or always use /t/, so maybe what is important is the proportion of instances where 
/0/ is found. This, of course, is similar to the findings of Labov (1971) in his research 
on the occurrence of phonological variables such as /r/ in New York — there are no 
absolutes, just tendencies. 

Lexical stress placement 

Low (2000) set out to test the claim made by previous researchers that lexical stress 
placement in SgE differs from British English (BrE) for polysyllabic words (Tongue 
1979, Platt emd Weber 1980, Tay 1982, Deterding 1994). Words Uke hopelessly are 
claimed to be stressed on the first syllable in BrE but on the final syllable in SgE. 
Furthermore, as discussed earUer, SgE seems not to distinguish between compound 
and phrasal stress. 

The problem with these observations is that they are based on the production of 
test words in citation forms. In this position, test items are in nuclear, intonational 
phrase-final position and we can expect to find phrase-final lengthening in BrE as 
described by Cooper emd Paccia-Cooper (1980). If SgE merely lengthens phrase-final 
syllables more than their BrE, then this may account for the so-called differences in 
stress placement patterns observed. 

Low (2000) hypothesised that the observed stress difference between SgE cuid BrE 
is the result of greater phrase-final lengthening in SgE than in BrE, and she designed 
an experiment where test words were embedded in carrier phrases in both phrase-final 
and phrase-medial position. Both duration and Fundamental Frequency (FO) 
measurements were tciken. 

Results for duration showed that there was significantly more phrase-final 
lengthening in SgE theui BrE for the words in final position but this effect disappeared 
in medial position. In other words, the lengthening of words Uke manfully in final 
position reflects a difference in degree of phrase-final lengthening between the two 
varieties of EngUsh and not a difference in lexical stress placement. Results for FO 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 10 — RECENT RESEARCH ON THE PRONUNCIATION OF SINGAPORE ENGLISH 



showed that in BrE, there is a substantial drop in FO between the initial stressed 
syllable and the subsequent two unstressed syllables in final position compared to 
SgE. However, in medial position, this difference was not found. Thus, results explain 
that it is the significantly greater phrase-final lengthening and the less substantial 
drop in FO between initial and final syllables that accounts for the observed difference 
in lexical stress placement. In other words, SgE speakers mark phrase boundaries more 
prominently than their BrE counterpcuts. 

In another experiment. Low (2000) tested whether SgE speakers actually 
distinguish between compound and phrasal stress. Unlike the results in the earlier 
experiment just reported where the observed difference in lexical stress placement is 
a result of a difference in boundary marking and not a difference in stress placement, 
it was found that BrE speakers assigned different FO patterns to compounds and 
phrases, but SgE speakers do not. 

Thus, the results from Low (2000) show that impressionistic claims about 
differences in lexical stress placement between SgE and BrE need to be verified by 
instrumental measurements. Acoustic evidence could be found to validate the 
observation that Singaporeans do not distinguish between compound and phrasal 
stress. However, the differences in stress placement for polysyllabic words was found 
to be an artifact of boundary marking instead. 

Rhythm 

SgE speakers are claimed to exhibit syllable-timed rhythm (Brown 1988a, Deterding 
1994). Low et. al. (2000) set out to investigate why SgE rhythm is perceived as 
syllable-timed. They hypothesised that the effect of syllable-timing is achieved 
through the virtual absence of reduced vowels in SgE. To test this hypothesis, two 
sentence sets were designed. One set contained only full vowels and the other had 
vowels that could potentially be reduced in fast speech in British English. Vowel 
duration measurements and first and second formant frequency measurements (FI and 
F2) were taken. 

Results confirmed the hypothesis. It was found that for BrE speakers, there was 
a significant difference in successive vowel durations between the full and the reduced 
vowel sets, showing that BrE speakers do distinguish between full and reduced vowels. 
In terms of spectral patterns, there was also a clear distinction between the F1-F2 plot 
(which is considered a rough approximation of a speakers' vowel quadrilateral space) 
for full in contrast to the reduced vowels in BrE. In SgE however, no significant 
difference was found between successive vowel durations for the two sentence sets, 
and the F1-F2 plot for full and reduced vowels were difficult to tease apart. Moreover, 
when the F1-F2 plot for the potentially reduced vowels in BrE were contrasted with 
those in SgE, it was clear that SgE speakers had significantly more peripheral 'reduced' 
vowels than their BrE counterparts. 

Their experimental findings provide a plausible acoustic explanation for the 
perception of syllable-timed rhythm in SgE by showing that SgE speakers do not 

187 

136 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 10 — RECENT RESEARCH ON THE PRONUNCIATION OF SINGAPORE ENGLISH 



maintain a clear distinction between full and reduced vowels. 



Conclusion 

Recent research has confirmed that most of the impressionistic reports of features of 
SgE can be validated by instrumental measurements. At the same time, some 
misconceptions have also been found and this highlights the importance of 
instrumental work in phonetic research. 

Of course, this research into the features of Singaporean English is still in its 
infancy — much more reseeuch is needed before we can be certain of the true 
position. 



188 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 10 — RECENT RESEARCH ON THE PRONUNCIATION OF SINGAPORE ENGLISH 



References 

Brown, Adam, 1988a, The staccato effect in the pronunciation of English in Malaysia and 
Singapore'. In Foley, J (ed.) New Englishes: The case of Singapore, Singapore University 
Press, Singapore, pp. 115-128. 

Brown, Adam, 1988b, 'Vowel differences between Received Pronunciation and the English of 
Malaysia and Singapore: which ones really matter?'. In Foley, J (ed.) New Englishes: The 
case of Singapore, Singapore University Press, Singapore, pp. 129-147. 

Brown, Adam, 1991. Pronunciation Models, Singapore University Press, Singapore. 

Brown, Adam, Deterding, David & Low, Ee Ling, 2000, The English Language in Singapore: 
Research on pronunciation, Singapore Association of Applied Linguistics, Singapore. 

Cooper, W E & Paccia-Cooper, J. 1980. Syntax and Speech, MIT Press, Cambridge MA. 

Deterding, David 1994. The intonation of Singapore English', Journal of the International 
Phonetic Association, Vol.26 no.2, pp. 61-72. 

Deterding, David, 2000, 'Measurements of the /ei/ and /3U/ vowels of young English 
speakers in Singapore'. In Brown et al. (2000) pp.93-99. 

Deterding, David & Poedjosoedarmo, Gloria, 1998, The Sounds of English: Phonetics and 
phonology for English teachers in Southeast Asia, Prentice Hall, Singapore. 

Higgins, John. 

http://www.stir.ac.uk/departments/humansciences/celt/staff/higdox/wordlist/ 

Jenkins, Jennifer, 2000, The Phonology of English as an International Language, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. 

Labov, William, 1972, Language in the Inner City, Blackwell, Oxford. 

Lee, Ee May & Lim, Lisa, 2000, 'Diphthongs in Singaporean English: their realisations across 
different formality levels, cuid some attitudes of listeners towards them'. In Brown et al. 

(2000) pp.100-111. 

Lim, Lisa, 1996, 'Prosodic patterns characterising Chinese, Indian and Malay Singapore 
English' PhD thesis. University of Reading. 

Low, Ee Ling, 2000a, 'Is lexical stress placement different in Singapore English and British 
English?'. In Brown et al. (2000) pp. 22-34. 

Low, Ee Ling & Grabe, Esther, 1999, 'A contrastive study of prosody and lexical stress in 
Singapore English and British English', Language and Speech, Vol.42 no.l, pp. 39-56. 

Low, Ee Ling, Grabe, Esther, and Nolan, Francis, 2000, 'Quantitative characterisations of 

speech rhythm: syllable-timing in Singapore English', Language and Speech, Vol. 43, no. 
4 (in press). 

Moorthy, Shanti Marion & Deterding, David, 2000, 'Three or Tree: Dental fricatives in the 
speech of educated Singaporeans'. In Brown et al. (2000) pp. 76-83. 

Fakir, Anne, 1995, 'Expanding triangles of English expression in Singapore: implications for 
teaching'. In Teng S.C. and Ho M.L. (eds.) The English Language in Singapore: 
Implications for teaching, Singapore Association for Applied Linguistics, Singapore. 

Pinker, Steven, 1999, Words and Rules: The ingredients of languages, Weidenfield & Nicholson, 
London. 

Platt, John & Weber, Heidi, 1980, English in Singapore and Malaysia: Status, features, 
functions. Oxford University Press, Kuala Lumpur. 





188 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 10 — RECENT RESEARCH ON THE PRONUNCIATION OF SINGAPORE ENGLISH 



Suzanna binte Hashim & Brown, Adam, 2000, The [e] and [ae] vowels in Singapore English'. 
In Brown et al. (2000) pp.84-92. 

Tay, Wan Joo Mary, 1982, The phonology of educated Singapore English', English Worldwide, 
Vol.3, pp.135-145. 

Tongue, Ray K., 1979, The English of Singapore and Malaysia (2nd edition). Eastern 
Universities Press, Singapore. 

Wells, John C., 1982, The Accents of English, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Wells, J.C. & Colson, Greta, 1971, Practical Phonetics, Pitman, London. 




ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AMD EDUCATION 285 



11 Languages in contact: Hong Kong English 
phonology and the influence of Cantonese 

Tony T.N. Hung 

Language Centre, Hong Kong Baptist University 



The present paper is based on the author's findings from his on-going 
research project on the interlanguage phonology of Hong Kong 
English (HIX). The subjects comprised 15 undergraduates at the Hong 
Kong Baptist University. With the help of spectrographic cuialysis, it 
was found that the typical HKE speaker operates with a considerably 
smaller set of vowel and consonant phonemes thcui in old varieties of 
English (or OVE's, such as British cuid American English), both in 
production and perception. In particular, the HKE vowel system is 
very similar to that of Cantonese, both in terms of the number of 
vowel contrasts, euid the phonetic quality of the vowels themselves. 
Like Cantonese also, the consonant system of HKE is lacking in the 
voiced/voiceless distinction, such that the contrasts between pairs of 
consoncuits which are distinguished in OVE's by voicing are either 
neutralised or phonetically realised by other mecuis. 

There are a number of interesting phonological rules in HKE which are 
found in few other varieties of English, including: [l]/[n] alternation 
(as in let [let]~[net]), [ai]/[Ai] alternation as in tries-twice), 
monophthongisation of diphthongs in certain phonological contexts 
(as in rain and phone), and phonetic realisations of /v/. 



Introduction 

The phonology of Hong Kong English (HJCE) heis been described, sometimes 
incidentally, in a small number of previous publications, including Luke & Richards 
1982, Bolton & Kwok 1990, Pennington 1995, and Peng & Setter 1999. The present 
paper is a by-product of my on-going research on the phonology of HKE (cf. Hung 
2000). The focus of my research thus far has been on the phonology of HKE as a 
system in its own right, on a par with other "New Varieties" of English, such as 
SingaporecUi and Malaysian English. In the present paper, 1 shall approach HKE 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATIglQlj^ENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 11 — LANGUAGES IN CONTACT: HONG KONG ENGLISH PHONOLOGY AND THE INFLUENCE OF CANTONESE 



phonology from a different perspective, i.e. as an interlanguage which is partly the 
product of interaction between two languages, English and Cantonese (the HKE 
learners' mother tongue). I shall demonstrate that many of the distinctive features of 
HKE clearly show the influence of Cantonese phonology, both at the segmental and 
syllabic levels, though there are also innovative features unique to HKE. 

The object of my study is the English spoken by educated young people who were 
bom and raised in Hong Kong. For this purpose, I made recordings of 15 subjects from 
the first-year undergraduates of the Hong Kong Baptist University, of whom 8 were 
females and 7 males, and 6 were from the Arts and 9 from the Science Faculty. In three 
separate recording sessions, they were asked to read three different word lists, 
totalling 281 words in all. Each list was read twice by each speaker. The words were 
intended to capture all the vowel and consonant contrasts that potentially existed in 
English. As far as possible, minimal pairs were used: for example, heed, hid, heat, hit, 
head, had, bet, bat, etc., and wherever possible, common everyday words were chosen 
to minimise the effect of unfamiliarity. The words were jumbled up to ensure that 
similar-sounding pairs such as heat and hit or seal and zeal did not occur in 
juxtaposition, to minimise any preconceived notion that they were supposed to 
contrast. The lists also contained words which contrasted all the consonants of English 
in various positions and various combinations. The data were transcribed by ear, as 
well as analysed acoustically by the Computerised Speech Lab (Model 4300B) software 
where necessary to confirm my subjective perceptions or reveal acoustic properties 
which were hard to hear. 



Vowels 

i) Monophthongs 

Spectrographic analyses of the vowels produced by my subjects confirmed my 
perception that certain vowels which are distinct in most Old Varieties of English 
(OVE's), such as the vowels in words like heat and hit, are virtually indistinguishable 
in HKE, both perceptually and acoustically. The acoustic data were given in Hung 
(2000), so I shall not reproduce them here, but merely summarise the results. On the 
basis of these data, one can conclude that HKE speakers in general operate with no 
more than 7 simple vowel contrasts (not counting the neutral vowel [a]), in 
comparison with 11 for British RP specikers. The inventory of simple vowels in HKE is 
given in Figure 1 below: 



1S2 




192 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POV/ER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 11 — LANGUAGES IN CONTACT; HONG KONG ENGLISH PHONOLOGY AND THE INFLUENCE OF CANTONESE 



Figurel. Inventory of HKE vowels. 



Vowel 


Examples 


[i] 


heat, hit 


[e] 


bet, bat 


[u] 


hoot, hood 


[3] 


cot, caught 


[a] 


heart 


[A] 


hut 


[3] 


hurt 



One important systematic feature of the HKE vowel system is the lack of the 
tense/non-tense or long/short distinction, which more than anything else accounts 
for the smaller number of vowel contrasts. Here the influence of the learners' mother 
tongue, Cantonese, is evident. Cantonese has a much simpler vowel system than any 
OVE's, as given in Figure 2 below: 

Figure 2. Cantonese vowel chart 





Front 


Central 


Back 


HIGH 


Ly 


- 


u 


MID 


e, 0 




0 


LOW 




A 


a 




Notice that this is virtually identical to the HKE vowel system (reproduced in Figure 
3 below), except for the two front rounded vowels in Cantonese, [y] and [ 0 ] which do 
not exist (at the phonemic level) in HKE. 

Figure 3. Hong Kong English vowel chart 

Front Central Back 

HIGH i _ u 

MID e 3 3 

LOW _ A a 



Notice also that the HKE vowel system, though similar to those of other Asian 
varieties of English spoken in Singapore, Malaysia, China and Japan (cf. Hung 1995, 

1997), differs from them in that HKE makes a distinction between the vowels [a] and 
[a] (as in hut vs. heart). The most probable explanation for this relatively unusual 
feature is again Cantonese, which — unusually for languages of this region — has this 

193 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION jg3 



CHAPTER 11 — LANGUAGES IN CONTACT: HONG KONG ENGLISH PHONOLOGY AND THE INFLUENCE OF CANTONESE 



particular vowel contrast, as in [SAin] "heart" vs. [sam] "three" (NB. both syllables 
have identical tones). 

A perception test was also administered to a different group of first-year students 
from the ones who made the recordings. Recordings of minimal pairs, for example 
heat/hit, as spoken by (i) a HKE speaker and (ii) an RP speaker, were played to the 
group, and they were asked to circle the word which they thought they heard. The 
results are shown in Figure 4. 



Figure 4. Perception test results 





HKE 

Speaker 


Native RP 
Speaker 




HKE 

Speaker 


Native RP 
Speaker 


heat 


60% 


53% 


hit 


60% 


67% 


bet 


40% 


47% 


bat 


67% 


60% 


hoot 


87% 


73% 


hood 


93% 


33% 


cot 


67% 


80% 


caught 


73% 


87% 


heart 


93% 


87% 


hut 


87% 


67% 


hurt 


100% 


100% 









[The figures above show the percentages of correct identifications, by the subjects, of 
these words as spoken by a HK speaker and a native RP speaker respectively.] 

Though sketchy, the above results show that, by and large, the typical HKE 
speciker cannot discriminate between pairs of vowels like [i:] and [i] and [e] and [as], 
even when they are clearly distinguished in the pronunciation of an RP speciker. 

ii) Diphthongs 

On the whole, the 15 subjects produced the same 8 diphthongal contrasts as are found 
in RP and some other OVE's. These are given in Figure 5: 

Figure 5. Inventory of HKE diphthongs. 



[ei] 


hate 


[au] house 


[lO] 


here 


[ai] 


height 


[ou] coat 


[eo] 


hair 


[01] 


toyed 




[uo] 


poor 



O 194 

ERIC 



As given in Hung (2000), acoustic analyses of these diphthongs show the transitions 
in vowel quality which make them true diphthongs rather than monophthongs. In this 
respect, HKE differs from many NVE's, such as Singaporean or Indian English, which 
have a simpler inventory of true diphthongs. This may be attributed to the fact that 
Cantonese has an unusually rich diphthong system, including [ei] and [ou], which are 
not found in the mother tongues of most speakers of Singaporean, Indian, Malaysian 
or Japanese English. 

134 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 11 — LANGUAGES IN CONTACT: HONG KONG ENGLISH PHONOLOGY AND THE INFLUENCE OF CANTONESE 



But the most interesting features of HKE diphthongs lie in their alternations in 
different syllabic structures. These phonological phenomena, some of which are 
possibly unique to HKE, are apparently related to syllable structure in Cantonese. 
Though a syllable in Cantonese can end with a stop or nasal, the vowels in such 
syllables must be simple vowels. Thus, syllables in Cantonese with diphthongs as their 
nuclei must be open and cannot end with a consonant. Hence, [meik] (as in the 
English word make) or [mem] {main) or [foun] (phone) would not be well-formed 
syllables in Cantonese, whereas [mik], [mig] and [fun] would be. This probably 
explains why, in HKE, diphthongs in syllables ending with a stop or nasal are 
shortened to simple vowels. In the case of syllables with diphthongs ending with 
fricatives (as in face), though these too are not attested in Cantonese, they are not 
shortened in HKE, as they are not subject to interference from syllables ending with 
stops and nasals in Cantonese, which always have only simple vowels as their nuclei. 

The most puzzling feature of HKE diphthongs is the status of [ai] vs. [ai] in the 
following excunples: 

tries [tj’wais] twice [tj’wAis] 

Are these two diphthongs contrastive, or are they predictable allophones of the same 
phoneme? The words tries and twice seem to suggest that they are contrastive, and in 
a totally innovative way for English. Wherecis these words are contrasted in OVE's by 
the voicing of the {s} suffix as well as by the [tr] vs. [tw] contrcist, such contrasts do 
not exist in HKE, which appears to utilise a contrcist in the diphthong instead, one 
which does not exist at the phonemic level in OVE's. To solve this puzzle, it is cmcial 
to compare the broader distribution of [ai] and [ai] in HKE. From my limited data, 
the following picture emerges: 

[ai]: lie, lies, lice, try, tries, eye, eyes, wise, rise, rice, ice, size, tide, side, ride 

[ai]: tight, site, rite, light, mice, twice 

One can draw a number of observations, but few conclusions, from the above data. In 
open syllables, only [ai] can be found. The contrast between tide, side, ride (all with 
[ai]) and tight, site, rite (all with [ai]) suggests that the voicing of the following 
consonant heis something to do with the distribution of these two diphthongs. A 
similar phenomenon can be found in Canadieui English, where the diphthong /ai/ is 
systematically "raised" to [ai] when followed by a voiceless consonant, as in right 
[jAit] and rice [jais]. However, the rest of the HKE data is not consistent with such 
a hypothesis, as both diphthongs can be found in similar phonological environments, 
as in mice [mAis] and rice [jais] where they are followed by the same voiceless 
consonant [s]. 

It is relevant to note here that Cantonese has the [ai] (as in [mAi]"rice") vs. [ai] 
(as in [mai] "buy") distinction at the phonemic level. The learner thus comes 
equipped with these two sounds in their internalised phonology, and apparently 
assigns them to words in English in a partially systematic manner (as in tight vs. tide), 
and partially in an arbitrary manner (as in mice vs. rice). 





ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



195 



CHAPTER 11 — LANGUAGES IN CONTACT: HONG KONG ENGLISH PHONOLOGY AND THE INFLUENCE OF CANTONESE 



Consonants 

i) Stops 

My analysis of the data shows that there are 6 distinctive stops and 2 distinctive 
affricates in HKE (same as in OVE's), neimely: /p/ pea, fhf bee, /t/ tie, /A/ die, /k/ 
cold, /q/ gold, /tj/ cheap, /ds/ jeep. Phonetically, the "voiced" stops and affricates 
in HKE are not really voiced but are voiceless and unaspirated, distinguished from the 
"voiceless" stops and affricates by the aspiration and greater delay in voice onset time 
of the latter. In this sense, they are comparable to, and apparently influenced by, the 
4 pairs of voiceless aspirated/unaspirated stops and affricates in Cantonese. 

ii) Fricatives 

The most significeuit feature of fricatives in HKE is that, for the great majority of 
speakers, there is no evidence of a voiced/voiceless contrast. All fricatives are 
voiceless, which means that instead of 8 fricatives (/f/, /v/, /0/, /6/, /s/, /z/, /J/, 
/ 3 /), there are only 4. This shows the influence of Cantonese, which has only 
voiceless but no voiced fricatives. 

In particular, there exists only one alveolar fricative, /s/, in HKE. There are no 
tokens of the voiced alveolar fricative [z] in any position — initial, medial or final — 
as shown in the examples below. 

seal [sil] zeal [sil] 

race [jeis] raze [jeis] 

racing [jeisig] razing [jeisig] 

There are thus no grounds for postulating an underlyingly voiced alveolar fricative 
I'Ll in the phonemic system of HKE. It would be reasonable to assume that the 
underlying representations for words like zerd, raze, and razing in HKE are /sil/, 
/reis/ and /reisg/ respectively. 

Likewise, there is no evidence for an underlyingly voiced palato-alveolar fricative 
/ 3 /, as all tokens of a palato-alveolar fricative are voiceless ([J]), as in: 
pressure [pjejo] pleasure [plejo] 

Contrary to popular perception, at least half of my HKE subjects did have an 
interdental fricative /0/ in their inventory of consonants, cis in: 
thin [0in] clothing [klou0ig] 

The rest produced [f] in place of [0]. For those speakers, the voiceless interdental 
fricative is apparently not in their consonant inventory, and the above words would 
have the underlying representations /fin/ and /kloufig/ respectively. 

For virtually all HKE speakers, however, there is no evidence of a voiced 
interdental fricative /6/. Words with this particular phoneme (where it exists) in 




196 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 11 — LANGUAGES IN CONTACT: HONG KONG ENGLISH PHONOLOGY AND THE INFLUENCE OF CANTONESE 



OVE's are realised in HJCE as follows, with a [d] if it is in word-initial or intervocalic 
positions: 

this [dis] brother [bjAds] clothe [klou0] 

Finally, there is no evidence for the existence of a voiced labio-dental fricative /v/ in 
HJCE. Words that contain the /v/ phoneme in other varieties of English have a /w/ 
or / f/ instead in HKE: 



vine 


[wain] 


leave 


[lif] 


advice 


[ed'wais] 


even 


[’ifon] 


event 


[i'went] 


leaving 


[■lifig] 


revoke 


[ri'wuk] 


rover 


['joufs] 



As the [v] consonant never surfaces in emy environment in HKE, it would be 
reasonable to conclude that the above words have either a /w/ or /f/ (as the case 
may be) in their underlying representations, and that the phoneme /v/ does not form 
a part of the phonological system of most HJCE specikers. 

iii) Other consonants 

There are three nasal consonemts, /m/, /n/ emd /g/, in HJCE, and three approximants 
/w/, /}/ and /h/, all of which also exist in Cantonese. By far the most interesting 
consonant in HJ[E is /!/, in particular its apparent interchangeability with /n/ in the 
syllable onset position. In the syllable coda, the two consonemts are contrastive, as in 
pill [pil] vs. pin [pin], and therefore they have to be postulated as separate phonemes 
in HKE. But in the onset, they are often interchanged. The data in Figure 6 below 
show the frequency (in %) with which irutial T' (by spelling) is pronounced as [n], 
and initial "n" as [1]. 

[l]~[n] alternation 

Figure 6: Frequency of [l]~[n] alternations among 15 HKE speakers: 



"1" ^ [n] 


"n" ^ [1] 




line 


37% 


night 


33% 


lame 


27% 


no 


23% 


lead 


17% 


nciked 


20% 


loose 


17% 


number 


20% 


loud 


17% 


need 


13% 


lot 


13% 


not 


10% 


Icike 


13% 


net 


10% 


leafing 


10% 


now 


10% 


low 


10% 


noose 


7% 


let 


7% 


nine 


7% 


leaving 


7% 


name 


3% 


light 


7 






leave 


3% 






lumber 


3% 







[Words with initial "I" or "n" showing no alternation: 0%] 

197 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION JQy 



CHAPTER 11 — LANGUAGES IN CONTACT: HONG KONG ENGLISH PHONOLOGY AND THE INFLUENCE OF CANTONESE 



It is hard to see any phonological patterns behind these alternations. The only thing 
approaching a "pattern" is the fact that line and lame, the two words in the list which 
are most frequently pronounced with initial [n], are exactly reversed in the other list 
by nine and name, which are the two words least frequently pronounced with initial 
[1]. This suggests that the presence of a nasal in the same syllable (as in line euid 
lame) increases the likelihood of an initial "1" being pronounced as a nasal, just as it 
decreases the likelihood of an initial "n" being pronounced as a non-nasal {nine, 
name) - some sort of "nasal harmony" or "nasal spreading" so to speak. Apart from 
that, it is hard to draw euiy other conclusions from the above data. 

The most revealing data turned out to be instcuices where the same speaker 
alternated between [1] and [n] in the same word in two separate readings. This 
happened with significeuit frequency, in the following cases: 

Speaker 8: 12x (let, leaf, longing, lot, lake, lead, leafing, leaving, loose, not, 

light, night) 

Speaker 14: 6x (lot, light, long, loose, naked, need) 

Speaker 1: 3x (loose, loud, number) 

Speaker 3: 2x (line, longing) 

Speaker 7: lx (number) 

The fact that the very same speaker pronouncing the same word may alternate 
between [1] eUid [n], together with the lack of any clear phonological pattern in their 
alternation, suggests that [1] and [n] are probably in free variation in HKE in the 
onset position of a syllable. This phenomenon apparently stems from Cantonese, 
where /!/ and /n/ are interchangeable in a Icirge number of words. For example, the 
words [nei] ("you") and [nou] ("brain") are just as frequently pronounced as [lei] 
and [lou] 

A summary of the HBIE consonant system is given in Figiue 7 below: 

Figure 7: The consonant system of HKE 



/p/ 


pea 


/tf/ 


cheap 


/f/ 


fee, even 


/!/ 


lice, pill 


/V 


bee 


/d3/ 


jeep 


/s/ 


seal, zeal 


/n/ 


nice, pin 


/t/ 


tie 






/0/ 


thin, clothing 


/m/ 


mice 


/d/ 


die, this 






/J/ 


she, pleasure 


/g/ 


sing 


A/ 


cot 










/r/ 


rice 


/g/ 


got 










/w/ 


wise, van 














/}/ 


yes 














N 


hit 



ERIC 



198 

193 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 11 - LANGUAGES IN CONTACT; HONG KONG ENGLISH PHONOLOGY AND THE INFLUENCE OF CANTONESE 



Distribution 

My data on the distribution of segments in HKE are so far inadequate for purposes of 
drawing a comprehensive picture of these phenomena in HKE. However, the influence 
of Cantonese is also apparent here. For example, the cluster [kw], involving a velar 
stop followed by a labial glide, does not occur before rounded vowels in HKE, but only 
before non-rounded vowels, as illustrated by the following: 
quote [kout] quit [kwit] 

quarter [koto] quite [kwAit] 

The above distribution has an interesting counterpart in modem Cantonese, where, 
among the younger generation of speakers at least, the cluster [kw] has been 
simplified to [k] before rounded vowels, but is maintained before non-rounded vowels, 
as in: 

[kwog] [kog]"broad" vs. [kwAi] "expensive" 

[kwok] [kok]"nation" vs. [kwai] "strange" 



Conclusion 

The phonological features of HKE are an interesting exemplification of the interaction 
between English cuid Cantonese, without being a direct "cloning" of Ccuitonese 
phonology. This is apparent not only at the segmental level, but equally at the syllabic 
level, where certain combinations of sounds are possible but not others. 





ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 11 — LANGUAGES IN CONTACT: HONG KONG ENGLISH PHONOLOGY AND THE INFLUENCE OF CANTONESE 



References 

Bolton, K. & Kowk, H., 1990, The dynamics of the Hong Kong accent: social identity and 
socioUnguistic description.' Journal of Asian Pacific Communication, Vol.1 no.l, pp. 47- 
72. 

Hung, Tony T.N., 1995, Some aspects of the segmental phonology of Singapore English. In 
S.C. Teng & M.L. Ho (eds.). The English Language in Singapore: Implications for teaching, 
Singapore Association for Applied Linguistics, pp. 29-41. 

Hung, Tony T.N., 1997, The phonemic system of some Asian varieties of English. Paper 

presented at the Fourth International Conference on World Englishes, Singapore, 19-21 
December, 1997. 

Hung, Tony T.N., 2000, Towards a phonology of Hong Kong English.' in World Englishes, 

Vol.l9 no.3, pp. 337-356. 

Luke, K.K., & Richards, J.C., 1982, 'English in Hong Kong: functions and status.' English 
Worldwide, Vol.3, pp. 47-63. 

Peng, L. & Setter, J., 1999, 'The emergence of systematicity in the English pronunciation of 
two Cantonese-speaking adults.' English Worldwide, Vol.21 no.2, pp. 81-108. 

Pennington, M.C., 1995, 'Language diversity in bilingualism: Preliminary speculations on 
varieties of Hong Kong English.' Language in Education Journal, Hong Kong Institute of 
Education, Vol.l, pp. 1-19. 





200 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



12 Canon and pedagogy: the role of American 
colonial education in defining standards 
for Philippine literature 

Isabel Pefianco Martin 
Ateneo de Manila University 



Filipino historian and essayist Renato Constantino wrote: "With 
American education, the Filipinos were not only learning a new 
language; they were not only forgetting their own language; they 
were starting to become a new type of American." What specific 
strategies did the American colonizers use to create this new type of 
American? How did they use the public schools to produce their 
cultural clones? The answer may be found in the language and 
literature education that the Americans introduced in 1901. 

This paper argues that the Anglo-American canon of literature 
imposed on the FiUpinos during the American colonial period would 
not have been as potent without a powerful partner: colonial 
pedagogy. Together, canon and pedagogy produced a certain type of 
language and literature education that created standards for 
Philippine literature in both English and Tagalog. The paper attempts 
to show that Philippine literature was relegated to the margins as a 
result of American colonial education. 



Introduction 

On 13 August 1898, a few months before American forces officially occupied Mauiila, 
American soldiers had already begun to teach in Corregidor (Esioko 1994). It is 
assumed that their first lesson was English. Less than a month later, on 1 September 
1898, Fr. William D. McKinnon, the chaplain of American military forces, opened seven 
schools in Manila (Martin 1980). 

It was no accident that the first teachers of English in the Philippines were 
American soldiers. Public education Weis introduced by the Americans eis an essential 
component of military strategy. General Arthur MacArthur himself declared the 
following about public education: 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 201 




ERIC 



CHAPTER 12 — CANON AND PEDAGOGY 



The matter [public education] is so closely allied to the exercise of military force 
in these islands that in my annual report I treated the matter as a military 
subject and suggested a rapid extension of educational facilities as an 
exclusively military measure (Unesco 1953:74). 

Throughout the American colonial period, English was systematically promoted cis the 
language that would "civilize" the Filipinos. It was the language that the colonizer 
introduced to the colonized so that the latter would be able to participate in a society 
detemuned by colonialism. 

It was educational policy to systematically confine the native Icuiguages outside 
the territories of formal schooling. Such policy was institutionalized through the 
heavy use of instructional materials of Anglo-American origin for language 
instruction. Throughout four decades of American public education, Filipino students 
were exposed to a canon of literature which included works of Henry Wadsworth 
Longfellow, Washington Irving, Ralph Waldo Emerson, as well as those of Shakespeare, 
George Elliott, Matthew Arnold, and the romantic poets. Meanwhile, Filipinos were 
using their own language outside the schools. 



A flourishing literary life 

When the Americans curived in the Philippines, the Filipinos already had a flourishing 
literature. In the first decade of American colonialism, with memories of the 
revolution against Spain still fresh, seculcu values spread rapidly cis a rejection of 300 
yeeus of religious domination. Spanish declined but English had not yet gained a 
foothold. Thus, the floodgates of literature in the native languages were flung wide 
open. With a newfound freedom of expression under the American colonizers, 
Philippine poetry, fiction, and journalism flourished. 

However, in spite of the existence of a wealth of writing by Filipinos, Philippine 
literature was never recognized inside the colonial classroom. It Wcis only during the 
latter half of AmericeUi colonialism, perhaps with the introduction of the readers of 
Camilo Osias and the textbook of Francisco Benitez and Pciz Marquez Benitez, that the 
canon in the classroom opened up to Filipino writers. It should be noted, however, 
that these textbooks were written in English. 

It is easy to understand why Philippine literature was not recognized in the 
colonial classroom. 

First of all, the Philippine literature that flourished at the beginning of the 
American colonial period was not in English. As it had been the policy from the start 
that native languages were not to be used in schools,^ Philippine literature certainly 
had no place in the colonial classroom. 

In 1925, a comprehensive study of the educational system of the Philippines (also 
known as the 1925 Monroe Report) reported that Filipino students had no opportunity 
to study in their native language. The report recommended that the native language 



ERIC 



2C2 

202 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 12 — CAMOM AMD PEDAGOGY 



be used as an auxiliary medium of instruction in courses such as character education, 
and good manners and right conduct (Board of Educational Survey, 1925). In spite of 



schools until 1940. Such a poUcy propelled the English language towards becoming a 
wedge that separated the Filipinos from their past (Constantino 1982). 

Colonial canon 

other than language, a more compelling reason for barring Philippine literature from 
inclusion in the canon of the classroom was that Anglo-American literature best 
served the interests of the colonizers. In this canon, the following titles were 
included: 



Titles 


Authors 


The Song of Hiawatha, Evangeline, and 
The Courtship of Miles Standish 


Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 


The Alhambra 


Washington Irving 


"Gettysburg Address" 


Abraham Lincoln 


"Self-Reliance" 


Ralph Waldo Emerson 


Robinson Crusoe 


Daniel Defoe 


The Merchant of Venice, As You Like It, 
Macbeth, and Julius Caesar 


William Shakespeare 


Lady of the Lake 


Walter Scott 


Sohrab and Rustum 


Matthew Arnold 


The Life of Samuel Johnson 


Thomas Babington Macaulay 


Silas Mamer 


George Eliot 



A detailed analysis of these texts, as well as the way they were taught to Filipino 
children, reveals the combined power of curriculum, canon, and pedagogy in 
promoting myths about colonial realities. These texts made natural and legitimate the 
illusion that colonialism existed for the sake of the colonials and not the colonizers. 

One would wonder, for example, why the works of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 
were included in this canon when in the United States during the early part of the 
1900s, Longfellow was regarded by critics as one whose poetry was shallow and too 
didactic (Snyder & Snyder 1953). But from 1904, Evangeline was read by all Filipino 
high school students. In 1911, The Song of Hiawatha was read by all Filipinos in all 
public elementary schools in the country. 



this, American education officials insisted on the exclusive use of English in the public 




ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AMD EDUCATION 203 



CHAPTER 12 — CANON AND PEDAGOGY 



Also in 1904, Filipino elementary school students began to read Washington 
Irving's The Alheunbra, a collection of stories set in a historical palace in Spain. The 
Alhambra was built and inhabited by Moslem kings during the 13th century. One 
would wonder why, among all the works of Irving, was this particular one included in 
the colonial canon. 

A closer inspection of Evangeline, The Song of Hiawatha, and The Alhambra, 
reveals themes that directly promote American colonialism. In these texts one can 
almost find prescriptions for good behavior in a colonized society. Evangeline, for 
example, is the story of how Evangeline and Gabriel were separated during the time 
when the Acadians were ejected from their home by the English colonizers. However, 
the story tends to attract more attention to the romantic and sentimental portrayal 
of Evangeline's ill-fated love, rather than to the anger of the Acadians at the English. 
In The Song of Hiawatha, the protagonist Hiawatha regards the English colonizers as 
messengers of God. In the end, Hiawatha accepts his fate, leaves his home, and 
entrusts to the English his fellow native Americans. Irving's The Alhambra depicts 
colonizers as savages who destroy lives and cultures. However, it is interesting to note 
that these colonizers are the very same Spanish colonizers who subjected the Filipinos 
to 300 years of suffering. It is, thus, ecisy to see why the text is an invaluable tool of 
American colonialism in the Philippines. 

Politics of reading 

This Anglo-American literary canon, powerful as it might be, would not have been as 
potent on its own. Direct exposure to such a canon did not automatically ensure the 
creation of the so-called "brown Americans". Such view presupposes that literature has 
a direct effect on readers, that the language of literature is transparent, thus making 
its meaning immediately accessible to the reader. 

However, the act of reading cannot be reduced to the simple act of recovering 
meaning from a text. The act of reading is not the simple process of decoding some 
embedded message from a text. Rather, it involves what Paulo Freire describes as 
reading the word- world (Freire & Macedo 1987) where text and reader converge to 
produce meaning. Such view of reading shatters the notion of the literary text as the 
sole source of meaming. The reader is thus empowered; she is made co-creator. 

However, as the act of reading liberates, so too does it subjugate. In the context 
of the colonial classroom, there is another force that intervenes in the production of 
meaning — the human agent, the teacher. 





204 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 12 — CANON AND PEDAGOGY 



Colonial pedagogy 

In 1904, Washington Irving's The Alhambra and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's 
Evangeline were first taught to 1st year high school Filipino students. The Merchant of 
Venice and other plays by Shakespecue were introduced to 3rd yecu high school 
Filipino students. One wonders how, after only a few yecus of exposure to the alien 
English language, could these students access literary texts of such complex language 
and strange culture. The key, of course, is the teacher. 

In 1901, the first big group of American teachers arrived in the Philippines 
aboard the U.S.S. Thomas. These "Thomasites", as they were nicknamed, were assigned 
to various parts of the country to teach both Filipino students and teachers. By 1940, 
only about 97 American teachers were found to be on active duty in the Philippines 
(Unesco 1953). However, throughout four decades of American colonialism, not much 
had changed in the curriculum, Ccuion, and pedagogy of Icuiguage cuid literature 
education in Philippine public schools. 

During the early years of public education in the Philippines, memory work 
became a popular method of teaching. This was described by one school principal, as 
the only way by which Filipino students could learn English. In 1911, she wrote the 
following: 

We must insist that every day in his first three years of school life, the Filipino 
child has a dialogue lesson, and we must make him commit that lesson 
absolutely to memory. For instance suppose his first lesson is as brief as this: 

Good morning, Pedro. 

Good morning, Jose. 

How cue you this morning, Pedro? 

Thank you, I am very well. 

It would not be cruelty to animals to insist on any second grade pupil's 
conunitting that lesson to memory (Fee 1911:113) 

Fee believed that, like AmericcUi students, Filipinos would best learn the Icuiguage, not 
by reading, but by memorizing dialogues, the same dialogues AmericcUi children 
memorized in American schools. This, of course, was symptomatic of the practice by 
AmericcUi teachers in the Philippines of importing teaching methods from the U.S. 
And why not? After all, the Philippines was a colony of the United States. 

This cuid other mechanical methods of teaching the English language manifested 
itself in different forms in the public schools: eye movements in reading, reading 
aloud, performing grammar drills, cuid reciting memorized passages. The practice 
became so widespread that in 1913, Dr. Paul Monroe, later appointed head of the 
Board of Educational Survey, wrote the following about Uuiguage education in the 
Philippines: 



205 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 12 — CANON AND PEDAGOGY 



o 206 

ERIC 



Grammar seems to be too much separated from language work... The method 
employed seems to be largely a questions and answer method — often combined 
with mere memorized work (Monroe 1913:150) 

In 1925, the Boeird of Educational Survey, which conducted a comprehensive study of 
the Philippine public school system, reported similar findings: 

Children in upper grades seem to have a "reciting" knowledge of more techrucal 
English grammar than most children in conesponding grades in the American 
schools. To what degree this helps them in speaking and writing English no one 
really knows (Board of Educational Survey 1925:239) 

This mechcinical method of teaching language also foimd its way in the teaching of 
literature. In the same report of the Board of Educational Survey, this method of 
teaching was criticized: 

Practically an entire semester of the freshman year is given to an intensive study 
of Evangeline, a selection that can be read by an ordinary reader in two or three 
hours. Obviously this poem is read intensively. It is analyzed, taken to pieces, 
put back together, looked at from every angle, and considered in all of its 
relations. Such a course in literature is really a course in intellectual analysis of 
the most improfitable kind. This analytic method of teaching literature is 
Scinctified by a long academic tradition and should provide a splendid training 
for the literary critic, but, as a means for developing taste for literature and an 
interest in reading, little can be said in its defense (Board of Educational Survey 
1925:378) 

In 1929, one unnamed American school teacher reported the following practice in 
Uteratme classes in the Philippines: 

The course in literature was a misnomer. It should have been called "The 
Comparative Anatomy of our Best Works." We skinned participles and hung the 
pelts on the blackboard to dry. We split infinitives, in much the same manner as 
a husky midwestem youth splits a stick of wood. We hammered the stuffing out 
of the compound and complex sentences, leaving the mere shells of their selves. 

We took our probes and dug into the vitals of literary masterpieces, bringing 
their very souls to the light of day... We analyzed sentences and defined words — 
in short, we completed the course, as outlined, including the most important 
thing: the conect manner of passing the final examinations (Graphic 1928:17). 

The literary texts which mcike up the canon in the colorual classroom were presented 
by the teachers not just as examples of good English, but also as great literature. 
Exposure to such a canon and pedagogy would certainly exact a toll on Philippine 
writing, as well on standards for Philippine literature. 

From the compositions of Filipino students alone, one can already see the effects 
of American colonial education on writing. In 1928, one English teacher observed that 
in writing compositions, students tended to mimic the Anglo-American writers they 
read in class. An example of such follows: 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 12 — CANON AND PEDAGOGY 



Amongst my female sectionmates there is one who will make my heart stop 
throbbing whenever I will gaze upon her. She is not pure Filipina but are what 
we call in the Philippines Mestiza. She have a golden Idnky hair and a oblong 
face on which was a rare and sporadic pimples. She is not so white as plate nor 
so black as Negro, but between the two, so that when the sun will shine on her 
face a blood running thru the arteries can be plainly seen (Graphic 1928:17) 

According to the student- writer's English teacher, the student directly lifted the words 
"throbbing" and "oblong" from Edgar Allan Poe, although Poe did not use the term 
"oblong" to refer to the face of a person, but to a box. The term "sporadic", which the 
student used to describe pimples, might have been taken from a biology text, or could 
have been a confusion with the word "dangling." If it was an error, then the source 
of the word was most likely Washington Irving. The lofty tone of the paragraph, 
furthermore, might be traced to Matthew Arnold. The teacher added: 

A vast army of literary knights— Chaucer, Poe, Irving, Kipling, Arnold, 
Stevenson, Tennyson, Longfellow, Johnson, Noah Webster, Shakespeare and 
countless others crop up continually in the written work, perhaps somewhat 
mangled, but recognizable nevertheless (Graphic 1928:17) 

This observation was confirmed by the General Office Supervisors of the Bureau of 
Education. In March 1928, they published the following statement: 

The topics chosen for composition should encourage originality in thought and 
expression rather than reproduction of literary works. There should, of course, 
be nice correlations of work in literature and composition. But such a large 
majority of the composition topics should not be drawn from the course on 
literature and when the composition topic is correlated with literature, it should 
be so worded as to call for original thought rather than reproduction. 

Writing in Philippine schools tended to imitate the language of the texts taught to 
students. Such an observation is not very different from those made about Philippine 
literature in English produced during the second decade of the American colonial 
period. 



Local color in Philippine literature in English 



In 1928, Dr. George Pope Shannon, head of the English Depcirtment of the University 
of the Philippines and adviser of the UP Writer's Club, warned writers about four 
tendencies of Philippine literature in English: (1) slavish imitation, or the tendency 
of Philippine literature to imitate Anglo-American texts; (2) provincialism, or the 
tendency of Philippine literature to be confined to narrow issues such as patriotism; 
(3) self-complacency, or the tendency of Philippine writing in English to reject issues 
that interest the general reader; and (4) discouragement, or the tendency of Filipino 
writers to lose confidence in their own writing because of the low quality of their work 
(Shannon 1928:6) 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 207 



CHAPTER 12 — CANON AND PEDAGOGY 



These observations from an American educator who had a wide influence on 
Filipino writers might have defined standards of excellence for Philippine literature in 
English. It is clear from Shannon's statements that originality was demanded. But 
what exactly did it mean to be original? 

In 1928, in the essay "On Story Settings," Filipino writer and critic Casiano 
Calalang offered the following advice to fellow writers: 

...it will profit us to pay particular attention to our surroundings, to the 
peculiarities that make them different from others, to the atmosphere of our 
villages which can not be confounded with the metropoUtanism of the city. And 
when in our mind the differences are clear, let us start with enthusiasm and 
vigor to write stories that will breathe the heat and passion of the tropics, and 
bear the distinctive stamp FILIPINO (Calalang 1928). 

With this statement, Calalang laid bare the contradictions Filipino writers of English 
were facing during the period of American colonialism. On the one hand, Filipinos 
were expected to produce writings that were acceptable to the general reader, that is, 
the American reader, or more precisely, the Filipino reader with the literary taste of 
an American. Such taste, of course, was developed in the colonial classroom with the 
Filipinos' exposure to Anglo-American texts. On the other hand, it was also demanded 
that Philippine writing in English be original. And to be original meant to infuse 
Philippine literature with local color, a quality certainly not consistent with the 
nature of Anglo-American texts Filipinos were expected to read and imitate. 

Ten years after the success of the first Philippine short story in English ("Dead 
Stcus" by Paz Marquez Benitez), another Filipino writer and critic, Arturo Rotor 
lamented the fact that Philippine writing in English was still in the experimental 
stage. He noted the abuse of local color in most short stories (Rotor 1937). Many yeeus 
later, Casiano Calalang decided to write in Tagalog, explaining that "...it was better in 
Tagalog. English was very simple, very direct" (Alegre & Fernandez 1984:22). 

The demand for local color was a compromise that American colonialism 
promoted so that Philippine literature in English would become acceptable by its 
standards. It was a concept that allowed Philippine literature in English an opening 
into the mainstream of literary life in the Philippines. 

It was also a symptom of the contradictions in Philippine literary life as a result 
of American colonial education. On the one hand, Filipino writers were expected to be 
original in their writing, that is, to avoid mimicking Anglo-American literature. And 
yet, the only literary texts they were exposed to in the colonial clcissroom were Anglo- 
American. 

With the promotion of local color as a standard of excellence, Americein 
colonialism, through education as a potent instrument, successfully delimited the 
sphere of Philippine literature in English to that space where great literature does not 
belong. With the demand for local color, Philippine literature in English was 
effectively pushed to the margins of the mainstream, thus relegating it to the position 
of other. 




208 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 12 — CAMOM AND PEDAGOGY 




Romantic features of Philippine literature 

In contrast, local color was not an issue in Tagalog literature, precisely because 
Tagalog literature already lay at the margins of American colonial society. Filipinos 
schooled in the Anglo-American canon saw in Tagalog literature the so-called flaws of 
romantic form and content. 

In 1935, Genaro Virtusio wrote the following about the Tagalista, or Filipino 
writer of Tagalog: 

The trouble with our Tagalistas, is that they are content to cater to the great 
bulk that is the unsuspecting ignorant mass yearning to be emotionally tickled 
and sentimentally pleased, disregcuding all that is good and beautiful, and 
worth-having in literature (Virtusio, 1935:2). 

The "great bulk" that Virtusio was referring to were the thousands of readers ("the 
unsuspecting ignorcuit mass") of the Tagalog magazine Liwayway. The wide readership 
of this magazine during the colonial period suggests that emotional, sentimental, and 
moralistic literature was very popular. Virtusio's statement also reveals that at that 
time, emotionalism and sentimentalism were considered qualities of poor writing, as 
well as of poor taste in literature. Such qualities belonged to the opposite side of what 
were considered "good" and "beautiful." 

It should be noted that this penchcuit for romcuitic writing was also evident in 
Philippine literature in English. In 1928, Jose Garcia Villa wrote: 

Love has been the major ingredient all these yecus and because of its overuse, 
has spoiled the story.. .While this passion for the love story may seem only the 
writer's fault, it is equally the reading public's... Also, it must be known that the 
Filipino public has a weakness for flowery Icuiguage. A writer who does not use 
florid words is not appreciated (Villa 1928:2). 

Like Virtusio, Villa was referring to the popularity of romantic literature that was 
made available to the public through weekly magazines. 

In 1929, Thomas IngUs Moore, professor of English at the University of the 
Philippines, wrote: 

...sentimentalism is the worst weakness of all Filipino literature. It is caused by 
the emotional and idealistic nature of the people and by the fact that their 
literature is doubly adolescent-written with an adolescent knowledge of the 
English language and by adolescent minds. Turn to the pages of the Collegian or 
the Sunday Tribune or the Herald. Read the works of Mr. Galang — if you Ccui do 
so. Take the St. Claire translation of the FLORANTE AND LAURA. Here, in general, 
we have a welter of emotion which has little relation to the facts of Ufe, 
especially the hcud ones. Everything is ideal, especially in the emotional sense 
of the terms. It is depressingly subjective. There is no substance of objective 
reality. It is sloppy, molluscan; it has no vertebrate of fact (Moore 1936: 1). 

At a literary conference at the University of Sto. Tomas in 1932, Eufronio AHp 
made the following distinction between the Philippine short story in English and its 

209 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 209 



CHAPTER 12 — CANON AND PEDAGOGY 



counterpart in the native Icinguage: 

... whereas the latter is sickeningly sentimental, the former is real; one is grossly 
romantic, the other is realistic (Alip 1932:18). 

A few years later, in 1936, Jose M. Hernandez, head of the Department of English of 
the University of Sto. Tomas, attempted to rationalize and naturalize romanticism in 
Philippine literature. He wrote that: 

...in writing there are certain qualities of the English language which are 
difficult of assimilation in an Oriental country like ours; for, whereas the best 
English writing demands the crispness, sharpness, severity and economy of 
expression, the Oriental manner of speaking and writing calls always for 
wordiness, ornate language, a "fine writing" — all these being very suggestive of 
pleonasm and surplusage (Hernandez 1936: 1-16). 

It is clear from the statements above that what was considered as a weakness of 
Philippine writing was also perceived as a weakness of the Filipino race. These 
observations from Filipino critics and educators, as well as from influential American 
educators, only perpetuated the dichotorrues between Occidental and Oriental 
languages, realistic and romcintic literatures, high literature and low literature, good 
taste cind poor taste, maturity and adolescence, intelligence and ignorance. Thus, in a 
hierarchy of Utereiry stamdards imposed through education by American colonialism, 
Philippine romantic literature in English or Tagalog was consigned to the very bottom 
of the heap. Of course, on top of that heap was Philippine literature in English that 
was infused with realism and local color. At the highest point were Anglo-American 
literary texts, romantic or realistic. It did not matter which, because these were not 
Filipino. 

Conclusion 

As material manifestation and ideological apparatus of American colonialism, public 
education in the Philippines under the Americans only perpetuated the interests of 
American colonial ideology. At the same time that American colonialism promoted the 
Anglo-American Utereiry canon, it also propagated approaches to teaching that would 
have direct benefits for the existing order. The partnership of canon and pedagogy 
sealed the fate of FiUpino readers and writers. 

Thus, the beUef that pubUc education was introducted in the PhiUppines for the 
FiUpinos is in fact false. The reaUty is that pubUc education, specifically language and 
Uterature education during the American colonial period, was designed to directly 
support American coloniaUsm. The combined power of the canon, curriculum, and 
pedagogy constituted the ideological strategies resulting in rationaUzing, 
naturaUzing, and legitimizing myths about colonial relationships and reaUties. The 
FiUpino experience of American colonial education must constantly remind us that 
language and Uterature education is never neutral. Education is power — the power 
to forge reaUties, the power to propel cultures, the power to interrupt Ufe. 



ERIC 



210 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, I 



V^h'Q, 



POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 12 — CANON AND PEDAGOGY 



References 

Alegre, Edilberto N. and Fernandez, Doreen G., 1984, The Writer and His Milieu: An oral 



history of the first generation of writers in English. Manila: De La Salle University Press. 

Alip, Eufronio M., 1932, 'Present-Day Tendencies in Philippine Literature.' The Philippines 
Herald Magazine, 2 March. 

Board of Educational Survey, 1925, A Survey of the Educational System of the Philippine 
Islands. Manila: Bureau of Printing. 

Calalang, Casiano, 1928, 'Story Settings.' The Philippines Herald. 29 January. 

Constantino, Renat, 1928, The Miseducation of the Filipino. Quezon City: Foundation for 
Nationalist Studies. 

Estioko, Leonardo, 1994, History of Education: A Filipino perspective. Philippines Society of 
Divine Word. 

Fee, Mary Helen, 1911, 'Learning English — A Plea for New Methods.' The Teachers' Assembly 
Herald. 9 May. 

Freire, Paulo and Macedo, Donaldo, 1987, Literacy: Reading the word & the world. 
Massachusetts: Bergin and Garvey Publishers, Inc. 

Graphic,1929, 'Experiences of a Maestro: An American School Teacher Looks Back at Two 
Years Spent in the Bureau of Education', Graphic. 23 March. 

Hernandez, Jose M, 1936, 'Is a Filipino Classic in English Impossible?' 1936 Yearbook of the 
Philippine Council on Education. Manila: PCE, 

Martin, Dalmacio, 1980, A Century of Education in the Philippines: 1861-1961. Manila: 
Philippine Historical Association 

Monroe, Paul, 1913, 'A Survey of Philippine PubUc Schools.' The Teachers' Assembly Herald, 11 
May. 

Moore, Inglis T, Is a FiUpino Classic in English Impossible?', in Hernandez, 1936, 1936 
Yearbook of the Philippine Council on Education. Mcirula: PCE, 1936. 

Rotor, Arturo,1937, 'The Filipino Short Story-Ten Years of Experiment.' Philippine Magazine 
January 

Philippine Public Schools, 1928, 'Observations and Suggestions by General Office Supervisors: 
Topics for Composition.' Philippine Public Schools, Vol. I no 3. 

Shannon, George Pope, 1928, 'Four Dangers Confronting Philippine Literature.' Graphic, 6 
October. 

Snyder, Franklyn B. and Snyder, Edward D, 1953, Henry Wadworth Longfellow. A book of 
American Literature. Revised Edition. New York: Macmillan. 

UNESCO-Philippine Education Foundation, 1953, Fifty Years of Education for Freedom, 1901- 
1951. Manila: National Printing Company. 

Villa, Jose Garcia, 1928, 'The Best Filipino Short Stories of 1927.' Philippines Herald, 22 
January. 

Virtusio, Genaro,1935, 'Vernacular Literature and Literary Quacks', The Herald Midweek 
Magazine, 2 August. 



Notes 

1 The native language (Pilipino) was not allowed to be taught in the public schools until 1940. 




POWER AND EDUCATION 



13 ASEAN and Asian cultures and models: 

implications for the ELT curriculum and for 
teacher selection 



Andy Kirkpatrick 

Curtin University of Technology, Perth, Western Australia 



The teaching of English in schools in Indonesia and in many other 
countries of ASEAN has not been successful. Graduates of secondary 
schools, despite many hours of leciming English over several years, 
often have little English proficiency. However, English has become the 
lingua franca of ASEAN and between other countries in East Asia. 

Thus a new curriculum is required that concentrates on ASEAN rather 
than Anglo' cultures and on local rather than imported native speaker 
teachers. 




Introduction 



It is impossible to identify and isolate an 'English' culture that is common to all 
speakers of English. For example, the cultures represented by Nigerian, Singaporean, 
Indian, Scottish, Philippino or Australian Aboriginal English are all very different. So, 
while a variety of English must be linked to a culture, it is not inextricably tied to an 
'Anglo' culture. A variety of cultural identities can be represented by new varieties of 
English. 

In the context of the East and South East Asian region, a major role that English 
plays in the region is that of a lingua franca. English is the lingua franca of the 
political elite and ASEAN (Krasnick 1995). It is also a common lingua franca between 
professionals and the business community of the East Asian region. 

In contrast to many parts of the world where the use of English has caused much 
debate (see Phillipson 2000), the use of English as a lingua franca appears to have 
been accepted. In a study of the use of English as an 'official' language of ASEAN, 
Okudaira (1999) has shown that language was not even mentioned in the Bangkok 
Declaration of 1967 in which ASEAN was officially established. In responses to 
questions about the role of English, Okudaira (1999, pp. 95-96) quotes ASEAN officials 
as saying "The idea of English as the common language came out automatically", "We 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICAT 




'NTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 21 



CHAPTER 13 — ASEAN AND ASIAN CULTURES AND MODELS 



took it for granted", "There hcis been no regulation for the use of English but it hcis 
been used in all the actual situations", "No one hcis been conscious about it". 

In any event, it must be understood that the vast majority of people in the region 
who are leciming English cue doing so with the express purpose of being able to 
communicate with fellow non-native speakers. Gordon Wu of Hong Kong's Hopewell 
Holdings captured this emerging role of English in the Far Ecistern Economic Review 
of 21 March 1996 saying: 

"English is no longer some colonial language. It is the meeuis we in Asia 
communicate with the world and one another." 

To take a specific example, Indonesian learners of English are, in the main, 
learning English in order to speak to Thais, or Koreans, or Vietnamese or Japanese. 
They do not need a curriculum concerned with an understanding of 'Anglo' cultures. 
What is needed is a curriculum concerned with an understanding of regional cultures. 
It is cugued here that the cultures and pragmatic norms of the people in the region 
are more relevant to these speakers than the cultures and pragmatic norms associated 
with so-called native speaikers. This has clear implications for English language 
teaching in the region's schools, both for the curriculum and for the types of English 
teachers, and these implications are considered below, with a pcirticular focus on 
Indonesia. 



Implications for the curriculum 

The English language teaching world is awash with commercially produced language 
teaching materials. While some international publishers do publish materials for local 
markets, the majority of materials cue aimed at the lucrative global mcuket. These 
global materials are, for the most part, published in inner circle countries. For 
example, a book on ELT materials and methods (McDonough and Shaw 1993) provides 
a list of fifty two published ELT course books, fifty one of which were published in the 
UK. The remaining one Wcis published in the United States. The majority of these 
contemporary ELT materials cue only really appropriate for people who are learning 
English cis a second language in countries like the UK or the United States. Given their 
'Anglo' focus, the content of these course books and the teaching methodologies they 
cissume cue hugely inappropriate for English language teaching in ASEAN contexts, 
where the great majority of English language teachers are tocal non-native speaker 
teachers, and the great majority of English language learners are local school children 
learning English primarily because it is part of the national curriculum. 

It is important to underline that the proposed curriculum is not intended for 
students whose aim it is to travel and study in the traditional centres of 'Anglo' 
culture, such cis Australia, the United States or Great Britain. Nor is this curriculum 
intended for those students who expect to work with native speakers of English. 
Rather, the curriculum being proposed is for the overwhelming majority of learners of 
English who are learning English simply because it is on the curriculum. Currently, 




214 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 13 — ASEAN AND ASIAN CULTURES AND MODELS 



they are not successful learners. 

In the context of Indonesia, Soenjono points out the sad feet. "With few 
exceptions, generally a high school graduate is not able to communicate intelligibly 
in English" (Soenjono 2000, p.27). However, eis English is the regional lingua franca, 
a new curriculum based on ASEAN cultures can provide a real practical reason for 
learning English and thus students will develop a motivation for learning it. They will 
want to learn English to communicate with fellow so-called non-native speakers of 
English throughout the region. 

In arguing that the pragmatic norms of the speakers of the ASEAN region are 
more relevant than Anglo' pragmatic norms for ASEAN learners of English, we assume 
that the pragmatic norms of the speakers' first language will be transferred to their 
variety of English. There is plenty of well-established evidence to show that pragmatic 
norms are transferred across languages in this way (Gumperz 1982, OdUn 1989). 
Malcolm (this volume) shows how the pragmatic or cultural norms of Australian 
Aboriginals cue transferred from Aboriginal languages to Australian Aboriginal 
English. There is also some evidence that the pragmatic norms of speakers of certain 
Asian languages are similcu and that they differ from the pragmatic norms of native 
speaker English. Kirkpatrick (1991) has shown that the preferred request pattern in 
Modem Standard Chinese follows the schema of fecework — reasons for request — 
request, and that this differs from the pattern in English which prefers to place the 
request before the reasons or justifications for it. Scollon and Scollon (1991) have 
shown that speakers from different Asian languages delay the introduction of the 
topic of conversation until after a substantial amount of fecework, while English 
speakers often dispense with fecework and broach the topic more immediately. 

David Li of Hong Kong's City University is therefore right to cugue (1998) that 
the curriculum of a new variety of English should reflect the pragmatic and cultural 
norms and values of the learners, especially if they are primarily using their variety 
of English to communicate with fellow non-native speakers from the region. If the 
pragmatic norms of their variety of English derive from the pragmatic norms of their 
first languages, their variety of English will be more successful medium of intra- 
regional communication than a variety that reflected 'Anglo' norms. In addition, 
speakers of a new variety of English will want to preserve their identity, and the 
reflection of their pragmatic and cultural norms in the local variety of English is an 
important way of doing this (Kirkpatrick 2000). 

English language teaching materials are therefore needed that promote the local 
or regional variety of English and that represent the cultural and pragmatic norms of 
the speakers of these newly developing varieties. These materials also need to 
contrast regional cultures. The major focus of the curriculum becomes Asian cultures. 
The English standard becomes an Asian standard. 

This alters the criteria against which the authenticity and relevance of an 
authentic text is judged, both in terms of content and language. First, the content of 
a conversation between native speakers about the fickle weather in Scotland is 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 215 




CHAPTER 13 — ASEAN AND ASIAN CULTURES AND MODELS 



immediately seen as inappropriate and irrelevant. On the other hand, a conversation 
in English between an Indonesian and a Thai about the role of Islam in Indonesia 
becomes an authentic and relevant text. English becomes a vehicle for intercultural 
communication and intercultural language teaching (Crozet and Liddicoat 2000) 
within ASEAN and the East Asian region. 

There is no shortage of potential material for such a curriculum. A glance 
through the papers given at Borneo Research Council conference in Kuching in 2000 
(Li 2000) suggests a whole range of possible topics for the Indonesian English 
language classroom. They deal with real issues that could both increase knowledge 
and develop critical skills in the students. Here are some examples. 

A study on fire safety of longhouses in the Seblak' 

'Tropical storm Greg 1996 and its aftermath in Sabah' 

'Changing perspectives of a former hunter' 

'Traditional communities in forestry policy' 

Impact of tourism on longhouse communities' 

Indonesian workers in Sarawak: the direction of the daily commuting workers' 
'ClecUising and blessing plants for wedding couples' 

Materials such as these can provide secondary school students with authentic teaching 
materials that address issues that are real to the students and with which they can 
identify. Please note that materials that deal in a superficial way with 'Asian' themes 
or sights are not being proposed. For example, a unit in an English language 
curriculum that simply describes an important temple in Thailand or mosque in 
Indonesia is unlikely to stimulate students. Material, however, that forces students to 
consider fundamental differences between Buddhism and Islam is much more likely to 
be stimulating. 

The second criterion against which the teaching materials should be judged is 
language. Materials that have a language focus need to comprise a major part of the 
curriculum. However, instead of the focus being on a native speaking model, the focus 
needs to shift to a local standard. In the context of Indonesia, it would seem to make 
sense to adopt the Malaysian variety for several reasons: it is an established standard; 
linguistically Malay and Bahasa Indonesia are almost identical; and there are close 
cultural and religious links between Indonesia and Malaysia. There is the added 
advantage of Malaysia being able to provide appropriate English language teachers. 

Below is a translation into English of a Minang dialogue. The example was 
provided by Rusdi Thaib who is himself a Minang, eui Indonesian ethnic group centred 
around Padang in Sumatra. 

A female (A, age 40) wants to invite a friend (B, age 41) to a wedding party. A 
goes to B's house. 

A: (knocks at the door). Assalamu'alaikum 

B: Wa'alaikum salaam. Please come in. 

A: Are you alone? 

B: Yes. I am always alone during the day. 




216 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: 



COMMUNICATION 




POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 13 — ASEAN AND ASIAN CULTURES AND MODELS 



er|c 



A; Where are your children? 

B: My son is helping his father in the rice field and my daughter is studying at 

school. 

A: What are you growing at the moment? 

B: Rice. EarUer we grew chilU. What about your children? 

A; Oh, he is still in Jakarta. I haven't heard from him for months now. But I beUeve 
the saying 'no news is good news'. 

B: What is he doing in Jakarta? 

A; He is a tailor in Tanggerang. He works for his uncle. 

B: Has he married? 

A; Yes. He married a Javanese girl. 

B: That's good. 

A; Oh, what I would like to tell you is this.. .do you know Hassan's daughter? 

B: I vaguely know her. 

A: She is going to marry Chairil's son. The wedding party will be next Friday. We 

hope you can come. 

B: Insyaallah I will come. 

A: I think I should be off now. Asscunalu'alaikum. 

B: Wa'alaikum salam. 

It must seem odd to be suggesting that a translation of a Minang dialogue could be 
used for English language teaching. The point is that the schema of this dialogue 
represents a cultural norm in many parts of Asia. The cultural conventions and 
pragmatic norms of Minang require that A first talks about B's family and so forth 
before actually broaching the main point of the conversation. In this it follows what 
Scollon and Scollon (1991) have called a common pattern of Asian conversations in 
that, what to English speakers appears to be the topic (inviting), is preceded by a 
great deal of facework. While the sequence and pattern of this dialogue might 
transgress Anglo pragmatic norms, the students are likely to use English with people 
from the region for whom the sequence and pattern of this dialogue with its extended 
facework is culturally appropriate. In other words, the trcuisfer of these pragmatic 
norms into English will result in a more appropriate variety of English for regional use. 
Kirkpatrick (2000) provides further examples. What Ammon (2000) has called the 
non-native speakers' rights to linguistic peculiarities become the non-native speakers' 
rights to culturally appropriate varieties of English, fashioned by the speakers 
themselves. 

A third area that must be reflected in the curriculum and materials is what we 
will call voice. That is to say, the people portrayed in the materials should be ones 
with whom the learners can identify. In a fascinating longitudinal survey of primary 
school English textbooks used in Singapore, Toh (1999) found that the Oxford 
University Press materials used in the 50s and 60s presented the English speaking 
world as modem and associated with advancements in technology, while Singapore 
and Malaysia were presented as lands of villages and bullock carts. The message was 

216 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION £17 



CHAPTER 13 — ASEAN AND ASIAN CULTURES AND MODELS 



clear — English is for progress and you learners need English to help your countries 
progress. If local people were given a voice it was either as servants, peasants, or as 
pastiches of English children. One took afternoon tea with Aunt Joan. Then in the 
1980s, the primary series called Pep was produced by the Curriculum Development 
Institute of Singapore. This series foregrounded the Chinese and gave them voice. 
Other races fared less well. Singapore beccune the centre of the world and a beacon 
of progress. People who fell sick in Malaysia were rushed to Singapore for medical 
treatment. The third series that Toh examined was the more recent Pets series, which 
was also produced by the Curriculum Development Institute. To quote Toh, "Pets 
reverts to both Inner Circle type material and ideologies" (p254). Local people are 
given no voice at all. Only Western stories are told and the characters in them are all 
from the western canon. Toh asks "What meanings would a textbook with many pieces 
adapted from native (speaker) centre (NC) works be transmitting? That English is to 
be associated with works from the centre? That only NC stories are worth being told?" 
(p.257) 

Given the historical contexts in which these sets of materials were produced, it 
is not surprising that the Oxford series presented the ideology it did. Nor is it 
surprising that the second series, produced as it was by the Curriculum Development 
Institute of Singapore, presented Singapore as the centre of the world and gave voice 
to the majority ethnic group, the Chinese. What is surprising is that the recent series. 
Pets, has reverted so completely to native speaker material and ideologies. No local 
people are given a voice at all. It is as if the Curriculum Development Institute are 
denying that Singaporeans speak English themselves and denying them cuiy sense of 
ownership of the language. 

It is proposed here that any new English language curriculum for the region must 
give voice to local people. The curriculum must portray local people using English with 
fellow non-native speakers in real settings. This is not to deny a voice to people from 
outside the region. But the focus must be on showing how English is used among 
people of the region. 

To conclude this section, we argue that, given the role of English in the ASEAN 
region, the aims of a new curriculum and materials should be to motivate the learning 
of English by including Asian/ASEAN cultural content euid promoting an AsieUi/ ASEAN 
standard variety of English. This is not to say that the curriculum should be 
exclusively devoted to Asian/ASEAN cultures and varieties, but that its focus should 
be on these. There is no reason why students can not be introduced to external 
cultures and varieties of English, but these should not be presented as models. In the 
process of teaching English, the curriculum needs to establish three important 
principles in the minds of the learners. These are: 

(i) English is used as a lingua franca throughout the South-East and East Asian 
region and that English is a language that is used by people in the region to 
discuss regional affairs. The use of English between non-native speakers is much 
greater than the use of English between native speakers. 

217 

218 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 13 — ASEAN AND ASIAN CULTURES AND MODELS 



(ii) different cultures exist among the region euid the use of a local variety of English 
as a Ungua freuica allows people to learn about and discuss these cultures in a 
culturally appropriate form of English 

(iii) there are many varieties of English and that these differ phonologically, lexically, 
syntactically, at the levels of discourse eUid text, eUid in their use of cultural 
conventions and pragmatic norms. These differences Ceui not be treated as errors 
or deviant from some 'Anglo' norm. 



Implications for the selection of teachers 

There is a belief that the native speaker of English is eui intrinsically better English 
teacher theui a local non-native speaker. "The notion that the ideal teacher is a native 
speaker is a cornerstone of monolingual pedagogy" (PhilUpson 1992, p.l3). In this 
section of the paper, we shall argue that, in the context of ASEAN, trained non-native 
speaking teachers of English (NNST) are likely to be more suitable as English Uuiguage 
teachers theUi monolingual native speakers, provided of course that their own level of 
English is of sufficient standard. First, however, we can take issue with the very term 
'native speakef. Several scholars have provided persuasive arguments for abeuidoning 
the term native speaker (Ramptonl990, Canagarajah 1999). The Indonesicui context 
provides a further argument. 

Bloomfield defined a native language as one learned on one's mother's knee eUid 
that no one is perfectly sure in a Icuiguage that is acquired later. This definition 
equates a native speaker with a mother tongue speaker eUid is based on the 
assumption that the IcUiguage a child learns first is the language spoken to it by the 
mother. Bloomfield's definition also assumes that age is the critical factor in IcUiguage 
learning although he does say that, in rare instances, it is possible for a foreigner to 
speak as well as a native (Hockett 1970). 

There are some problems with this definition of native speaker, however. It seems 
to be useful in societies that are monolingual where both parents speak the same 
IcUiguage eUid where that language is the IcUiguage of the local speech community. 
Meuiy societies are, however, multilingual. One only has to consider the languages 
spoken in the countries of ASEAN to realise that multilingual societies are the 
regional norm. For example, the majority of people in Indonesia will have a local 
language as a mother tongue eUid, by Bloomfield's definition, be native speakers of 
that mother tongue, whether it be Bugis or MineUig or Javanese or whatever. Yet most 
Indonesians will also learn the national language, Bahasa Indonesia, once they go to 
primary school eUid will use this as the IcUiguage of education, as a lingua freUica 
between fellow Indonesians and as the official IcUiguage for the rest of their lives. Yet, 
by Bloomfield's definition, these people are not native speakers of Bahasa Indonesia 
as they have learned it as a second language. But it seems in some way odd to suggest 
that they do not possess a native-Uke fluency in the language. It would appear, then, 

218 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 219 



CHAPTER 13 — ASEAN AND ASIAN CULTURES AND MODELS 



that the very notion of the native speaker is a construct of monolingual societies and 
is not relevant in the context of multicultural societies such as Indonesia where 
multilingual people cue the norm. While we might expect the notion of the innate 
superiority of a native speaker to be deep-seated in relatively homogenous and 
monolingual cultures such as Japan and Korea, it is also still strongly held in 
Indonesia. 

How deep-seated this belief is can be seen by putting two Idealised' curriculum 
vitae alongside each other and considering which of the two applicants employers 
would select to teach English in a secondary school in a country in the region. 

CV A 

An inexperienced monolingual native English speaker with little knowledge of the 
local education system, with little knowledge of the local political system, with little 
or no knowledge of the cultures and religions of the country, with little or no 
knowledge of local teaching and learning styles, and with little or no knowledge of 
the roles and status of English vis a vis other languages. 

CV B 

A trained multilingual non-native speaker of English (but with a high level of 
proficiency in English), who is familiar with the local educational and political 
systems, who understands local cultures and local teaching and learning styles, and 
who has a good understanding of the comparative roles the languages of the 
community play. 

It seems surprising, even depressing, but many governments still consistently 
prefer and thus advertise for teachers whose CVs more closely approximate CV A than 
CV B. A recent example of this is provided by the South Korean government's decision 
to employ one thousand native English speakers to teach in Korean schools. The 
advert placed in the Korean Herald asked for native English teachers of two types, 
neither of which requires TESOL training or a knowledge of Korean language or 
culture. 

"Type 1 teachers require a Certificate in TESOL or 3 years full-time teaching 
experience with a graduate degree in TESOL or experience and interest in Korean 
culture and language. 

Type 2 teachers only have to be native speakers of English with a bachelor's 
degree in any field." 

Two reasons why 'CVA may get the job can be determined by reference to the first two 
ELT tenets identified by Phillipson (1992). These are that English is best taught 
monoUngually (that is to say, the only classroom language should be English), and 
that the ideal teacher is the monolingual native speaker. These tenets need to be 
discarded. 

First, insisting on a monolingual classroom when the teacher and students both 
share an LI and/or national language, as is the case in the vast majority of language 





220 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 13 — ASEAN AND ASIAN CULTURES AND MODELS 



teaching situations in the region, is to deny the language classroom a rich linguistic 



resource. The uses of LI and or national languages can be contrasted with the target 
language in ways that will help the learners make sense of the target language and 
give them a greater understanding of their own. 

Second, insisting on native speaker teachers of the target language, even though 
they are monolingual, is to deny the importance and value of multilingual non-native 
speaker teachers. Teachers who share the same LI or national languages of their 
students have already been through the experience of learning the language that their 
students are now trying to learn. This experience will sensitise them to the particular 
difficulties the learners will have, will allow them to empathise with the learners and 
introduce to the learners effective strategies that they themselves adopted when 
learning the language. Medgyes(1994) has argued that empathy is the most important 
quality a teacher can possess. Monolingual teachers with no experience of learning 
another language or no great proficiency in a foreign language do not have the 
insights into the language learning process that are possessed by the multilingual 
non-native speakers and nor can they readily empathise with their students. 

The advantages of local multilingual teachers can be placed alongside some of the 
disadvantages of importing monolingual native speaker teachers into the local 
classroom. The first disadvantage is that the imported teachers will not speak the 
language of the students or the staff. Not speaking the language of the students, the 
teachers will not be able to use the linguistic resources available in the classroom. 
They will not be able to draw any linguistic or cultural contrasts in the use of the local 
language and English. Skutnabb-Kangas puts it strongly 'A monolingual teacher 
teaching students who are to become bilingual or multilingual is by definition an 
incompetent teacher for those students' (2000:632). In the context of ASEAN, the 
native speaker will provide a model of English that is both inappropriate for local 
students for reasons outlined above. Their native speaker status is likely to place their 
model of English higher than the local teachers' in the minds of both local students 
and teachers. This can be devastatingly demotivating for both parties. The local 
teachers will constantly feel that their model is somehow inferior to the native 
speaker model. This leads to an overall sense of insecurity on their paut. The students 
will quickly deduce that the local model is undervalued and inferior and that therefore 
the English that they will speak will be inferior. This feeling of inferiority on the paut 
of both teachers and students will not create am atmosphere conducive to efficient amd 
confident language learning. 

Other disadvantages of monolingual native speakers are firstly that as they are 
not able to speak the local language they will not be able to contribute to the life of 
the school in any way. They will also be unhmiiUar with the cultural and educational 
roles expected of the teacher and the student in the local context. Finally, after a 
relatively short period of time, many will leave. This has to be a poor investment. 

In the context of the ASEAN, therefore it is argued that ideal English language 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 221 



CHAPTER 13 — ASEAN AND ASIAN CULTURES AND MODELS 



teachers are trained, multilingual local non-native speakers with high proficiency in 
English for several reeisons: 

• they provide an appropriate and attainable model of the language 

• they provide a motivating example for their students 

• they have empathy for their students 

• they are linguistically sophisticated 

• they understand local cultural and educational traditions 

• they represent an excellent educational investment. 

The status of well-trained local teachers of English therefore needs to be promoted and 
the value they have for the English language teaching classroom must be realised. 
They provide appropriate models of language and act eis role models of leuiguage 
learners for their language learning students. Their value lies in their linguistic 
resources and their socio-cultural understanding. As Wolfram (1995) heis argued in the 
context of ESL in the United States, teachers must display, among other qualities, an 
appreciation of the social and contextual roles of vernaculars and standards and have 
background knowledge of the vernacular. What we argue for here is that the regional 
vernacular or variety should become the taught variety and that this variety should 
provide the models and the materials. 

This is not to say, of course, that there is no room for suitably qualified 
multilingual native speaker teachers. Many are excellent teachers. But it must also be 
understood that the great majority of language learners will be learning English to 
converse with other non-native speakers of English. They are learning English for 
instrumental reasons and so that they can use it as a lingua franca among themselves. 
Only a relatively small number are learrung English in order to develop an 
understanding of any 'Anglo' culture. Thus, a curriculiun that places a primary focus 
on Asian cultures, and that uses an Asian standard of English eis a model gives an 
authentic voice to local people and uses local teachers or teachers from ASEAN is more 
likely to be successful for the great majority of learners of English in ASEAN. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 13 — ASEAN AND ASIAN CULTURES AND MODELS 



References 



Ammon, U, 2000, Towards more fairness in international English: linguistic rights of non- 
native speakers? In Robert Phillipson (ed,) Rights to Language, Equity, power and 
education, London, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp, 111-116, 

Canagarajah, S, 1999, Tntenogating the "native-speaker fallacy": non-linguistic roots, non- 
pedagogical results'. In Braine, G (ed,) Non-native Educators in English Language 
Teaching, Mahwah, New Jersey, Lawrence Erlbaum, 

Crozet, C & Liddicoat, A, 2000, "Teaching culture as an integrated part of language: 

implications for the aims, approaches and pedagogies of language teaching" in Liddicoat 
& Crozet (eds,) Teaching Languages, Teaching Cultures, Melbourne: Language Australia, 

pp, 1-18 

Gumperz, J, 1982, Discourse Strategies, Cambridge, Cambridge University press 

Hockett, C, 1970, A Leonard Bloomfield Anthology, Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 

Kachru, Braj, 1995, "The speaking tree: a medium of plural canons', in Tickoo (ed,), pp, 1-20 

Kirkpatrick, A, 2000, English as an Asian Language: implications for the English language 
curriculum, in Brown, A,(ed,), English in South East Asia, Singapore, National Institute 
of Education, Singapore, pp, 58-70, 

Kirkpatrick, Andy, 1991, Information sequencing in Mandarin letters of request'. 
Anthropological Linguistics Vol 33 no, 2, pp, 183-203 

Krasnick, H, 1995, "The role of linguaculture and intercultural communication in ASEAN in 
the year 2020' in Tickoo (ed,), pp, 81-94 

Li, David, C,S, 1998, Incorporating LI pragmatic norms and cultural values in L2: developing 
English language curriculum for EIL in the Asia-Pacific region', Asian Englishes Vol, 1 
no,l, pp, 31-50, 

Li, Michael (ed,), 2000, Borneo 2000, Proceedings of the 6th Biennial Borneo Research 
Conference, Kuching, University of Malaya Sarawak, 

McDonough, S 8e Shaw, C,, 1993, Materiab and Methods in ELT, Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 

Medgyes, P, 1994, The Non-native Teacher, London, Macmillan 

Odlin, T, 1989, Language Transfer, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press 

Okudaira, A, 1999, 'A study of international communication in regional organisations: the 
use of English as the official language of ASEAN', Asian Englishes Vol, 2 no,l, pp, 91- 
107, 

Phillipson, R, 1992, Linguistic Imperialism, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 

Phillipson, R, (ed,), 2000, Rights to Language, Equity, power and education, London, 

Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 

Rampton, M,B,H, 1990, 'Displacing the "native speaker": expertise, affiliation and 
inheritance, English Language Teaching Journal, Vol 45 no, 2 

Scollon, R & Scollon, S, 1991, "Topic confusion in English-Asian discourse' World Englishes Vol 
10 no,2, pp,113-125 

Skutnabb-Kangas, T, 2000, Linguistic Genocide in Education or Worldwide Diversity and 
Human Rights? New Jersey, Lawrence Erlbaum 

Smith, L, 1991, 'Standards in World Englishes' in Tickoo, M, (ed) Languages & Standards: 
Issues, attitudes, case studies, SEAMEO Regional Language Centre, Singapore pp,33-41 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 223 



ERIC 



CHAPTER 13 — ASEAN AND ASIAN CULTURES AND MODELS 



Soenjono Dardjowidjojo, 2000, 'English teaching in Indonesia', English Australia Journal , Vol 
18 no.l, pp. 21-30 

Tickoo, ML (ed.), 1995, Language and Culture in Multilingual Societies, Singapore, SEAMEO 
RELC Anthology Series 36. 

Toh, G, 1999, Primary School English Textbooks in Singapore: An examination of cultural and 
ideological content, Unpublished PhD thesis, Curtin University of Technology 

Wolfram, W, 1995, 'Re-examining dialect in TESOL', TESOL Matters Vol.5 no.2, p.22 
Wu, Gordon, 1996, As quoted in the Far Eastern Economic Review of March 21. 





224 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



14 From TEFL to TEIL: Changes in Perceptions 
and Practices: Teaching English as an 
International Language (EIL) in Chinese 
Universities in P.R.China 



Zhichang Xu 

Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



This paper addresses English as cin International Language (EIL) by 
discussing English teaching and learning in Chinese universities. With 
the shift from English as a foreign language to EIL, the Chinese 
traditional attachment to Received Pronunciation (RP) or General 
American (GA) standards has been challenged. Therefore, chcuiges in 
perceptions and practices in the teaching of English should be made 
so that students can acquire the ever-evolving EIL, which reflects 
multi-cultures and multi-identities. 



Introduction 

English was traditionally viewed as either a mother tongue, or a second or foreign 
language by both native speakers and non-native speakers. In the past two decades, 
more and more people have begun to view English as an International Language. On 
the one hand, "the predomincuit position cunently enjoyed by English is a historical 
contingency arising from the mercantile and colorual expansion of the British Empire, 
which was followed by American economic and technological hegemony." On the other 
hand, " the technological developments, economic globalization and improved 
commurucations have all played a role in the new global flows of English. And with 
these new flows have emerged a changing pattern of identities and social relations — 
on both an individual level and on a global scale" (Eco 1995, pp. 181-2). In addition, 
an increasing number of linguists, language researchers and teachers from various 
national and cultural backgrounds, both native and non-native, have been actively 
involved in the study and teaching of English. As a result, general English proficiency 
at a global level is rising, and the number of English learners all over the world is 
rising dramatically, especially in countries such as China, Japan, and Korea etc., all of 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUMICAT^Ny i4eMTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 225 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



which are in the "expanding drcle" (Kachru 1992, p.356). According to Kachru, "the 
'expanding circle' includes the regions where the performance varieties of the language 
are used essentially in EFL contexts." With regard to the expanding circle, Crystal 
(1997, p.61) stated that: 

Estimates for the total number of these speakers vary enormously: they have 
been as low as 100 milUon and as high as 1,000 million. ... One thing is plain: 

... their role in any accoimt of the global English pictiue is likely to increase 
dramatically in the twenty-first century, eventually exceeding the significance 
currently attached to the outer-circle coimtries. Numerically, much will depend 
on what happens in the countries with the largest populations, notably China, 
Japan, Russia, Indonesia and Brazil. 

English has been "the most-studied foreign language in China" (Cheng 1992, p.l62) 
ever since China's opening to the outside world in the late 1970s. The number of 
English learners in China has been increasing at overwhelming speed. Some children 
in major cities start to learn their ABC at kindergartens, but most students learn 
English in their primary schools, or in some rural areas, in secondary schools. Although 
there is no English-speaking Chinese community on China's mainland, and English has 
no official status, the learning of English has been booming since the 1980s along with 
rapid economic development. Since Chinese Putonghua (Mandarin) does not feel 
linguistically inseciue in the face of the global spread of English, the government is 
generously supporting the teaching and learning of English in China. English is used 
in some of China's radio and TV programs and in newspapers as a means of letting the 
world know about the changes in China. People, especially educated adults and young 
people, are strongly motivated to learn English, because it may enable them to have 
access to better jobs, more opportunities, and a wider world. All this has great 
implications for ELT in China. What does EE, mean to English lecimers and teachers in 
China? What models of English should we (as non-native English teachers) adopt in 
teaching? Should we incorporate Chinese cultiual norms into the teaching of English? 
What changes, if any, should accompany the shift from EFL to EIL? 



English as an International Language 

In the 13th EA Educational Conference English in Australia, one of the keynote 
speakers, Scott Thombury commented that "We don't possess a language, but we learn 
it and live in it". In the case of English, this is true. 

The English language ceased to be the sole possession of the English some time 
ago. Indeed, when even the largest English speaking nation, the U.S.A. turns 
out to have only about 20 per cent of the world's English speakers, it is plain 
that no one can now claim sole ownership. This is probably the best way of 
defining a genuinely global language, ... . (Crystal 1997, p.l30) 

As a global language, it is not surprising that, "while English is used by more 



O 226 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, I 




FOWER AND 



EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



people than any other language on Earth, its mother-tongue speeikers make up 
only a quarter or a fifth of the total." (Strevens 1992, p.28) 

It might be uncomfortable for native specikers of English to lose the ownership of 
English. However, in the foreseeable future, the rapid spread of English is unstoppable. 
Five years ago, the British Council predicted that. 

By the year 2000 it is estimated that over one billion people will be learning 
English. English is the main language of books, newspapers, airports and air- 
traffic control, international business and academic conferences, science, 
technology, diplomacy, sport, international competitions, pop music and 
advertising. (Graddol 1996, p.l81). 

Now, five yecus later, at the end of 2000, we see that those predictions have all been 
realised. In the meantime, with the Internet sweeping almost every comer of the 
world, people are more and more aware of the speed at which changes in, around and 
about English are taking place. In Robert Phillipson's words, (Graddol 1999, p.20) 
"English is deeply involved in ongoing processes of globalization and localization." 
Hence, "using terms like second or foreign language no longer adequately describes 
the cunent situation with regcud to EL use" (Kirkpatrick 2000). As a result such terms 
as Englishes, Englishisaton, English hybridization, English globalization, English 
nativization and English as an International Language have become common in 
linguistic circles. Larry Smith (Kachm 1992, p.41) says "it is the widespread use of 
English which makes it an international language." He has proposed EIL as "a blanket 
term to cover all the functions of English as it is actually used in different parts of 
the world" (Bickley 1982, p.86). 

The importance of ... the recent development of English has been not just the 
vast numbers of people who now need or want English ..., but the fact that using 
English suddenly hcis nothing to do with one's nationality or with the historical 
facts of the spread of English-speaking colonies. (Strevens 1992, p.31) 

"In sum, English as an International Language situations are frequent and can be 
classified in terms of the interactors engaged in those situations" (Bickley 1982, 
pp.86-7) Such situations include those where a Chinese speaks in English to a 
Japanese in Beijing; where a Singaporean speciks in English to an Australian in Perth; 
and where a Scot speaks in English to an American in Hong Kong, etc. In general, 
when speakers coming from differing national and cultural backgrounds are present, 
EIL is more likely than any other languages to be the lingua franca. 

Chew (Graddol 1999, p.38) stated that "By the 1980s, more concerns began to 
surface regarding the theoretical, methodological, ethical, and professional issues 
related to the global spread and use of English." Presently, the concept of EIL relates 
extensively to the issues of standards and norms of English; to the issues of English 
varieties and their respective cultures; and more practically, to the issues of teaching 
and learning of English. 



226 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 227 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



EIL and standards/norms 

It is difficult to define the standards and norms of English in an EIL context. However, 
some linguists have attempted to give definitions of Standard English. 

Standard English is that variety of English which is usually used in print, and 
which is normally taught in schools and to non-native speakers learning the 
language. It is also the variety which is normally spoken by educated people and 
used in news broadcasts and other similar situations. (Trudgill 1983, p.l7) 

With the spread of English, many different varieties have developed. ..., but 
there is a variety called Standard English which is a target of use for almost all 
educated users of the language. The printed form of this variety, at the sentence 
level, is very similar no matter who the users are or what the geographical 
location (is). (Smith 1991, p.33) 

While talking about Standard English, we do not imply that non-standard varieties are 
ungrammatical forms. 

The study of language use has shown not only that non-standard varieties 
exhibit grammatical regularity and consistent pronunciation patterns in the 
same way that standard varieties do, but also that a vast majority of people will 
use non-standard features at least some of the time in their speech. Socio- 
linguistic research has demonstrated that the speech of most people is, at least 
in some respects, variable, combining, for example, both standard and non- 
standard sounds, words or grammatical structures. (Radford et al 1999, p.l7) 

One interesting aspect of Standard English is that in every English-using 
community those who habitually use only standard English are in a minority. 
(Strevens 1992, pp.51-2) 

Therefore, in the EIL context. Standard English is not necessarily associated only with 
the standards and norms of the U.K. or the U.S., or any other Inner-Circle nations. In 
fact, Tom McArthur (the editor of English Today) holds that "... one has to conceive of 
'Standard English' as a complex, not ais a monolith. We all use it in different ways; we 
all approximate to something which isn't there, but which we idealise about, 
negotiate and compromise." (Graddol & Meinhof 1999, p.4) 

The standards and norms of English are not only complex, but should also be 
dynamic and evolving. On the one hand, the co-existence of many varieties of English 
has enriched and will continue to enrich the so-called Standard English; it becomes 
more and more multi-cultured, which in turn enhances communication among 
speakers of English, and secures the position of EIL. As John Honey (Tickoo 1991, 
p.30) says, "many of the differences between local forms of English and international 
standard English constitute a potential enrichment of the speaker's expressiveness 
and it will be important to recognize opportunities of genre, style and register which 
make such uses appropriate." On the other hand, "Standard English is hybridizing 
with other kinds of English and also with other languages and producing dynamic and 
systemic, stable hybrid forms." (Graddol & Meinhof 1999, p.5) We know that, "English 





228 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 




is inherently a borrowing and an Anglicizing language. Ever since its earliest 
beginnings it has been part of the nature of the English language to incorporate ideas, 
concepts, and expressions from other societies and to make them part of English." 
(Strevens 1992, p.31) 

The dynaituc and evolving features of the standards and norms of EH. may, on the 
one hand albw both native and non-native varieties of English to continue developing 
and flourishing; on the other hand, they may also restrict those varieties from 
deviating so as to be mutually unintelligible. 

EIL and varieties/cultures 

English, eis its neune suggests, started as a native-speaker Veiriety in England. Strevens 
(1992, p.32) pointed out that, 

English existed until the early eighteenth century only as a native-speaker 
variety, and only in the form used in England — then later in Britain as a whole. 

But already by the time of the American War of Independence a form of English 
was current in America that was identifiably, almost proudly, American and not 
British. This was the beginning of the process by which types of English have 
proliferated. The British-American differentiation is of particular consequence, 
since every subsequent form of English has affinities with one of the main 
breuiches, BE or AE, rather than the other. 

Apart from native varieties of English, non-native Vcirieties of English have gradually 
emerged in areas and nations illustrated by Kachru eis the Outer amd Expanding circles. 
"The recognition of the functional diversity of English is so important that some have 
begun to use the term Englishes to reflect the functional and formal vairiations in the 
language" (Smith 1991, p.33). 

These vairieties, such as Indian English, Nigerian English and Singaporean English 
are different from native speaker varieties. But, of course, native varieties differ 
among themselves. Quirk (Brumfit 1982, p.l5) says, "the divergence between one 
man's English and another's is great enough to be striking within each of the English- 
speaking countries." So, these non-native Veirieties are simply different from native 
Vcirieties, not deficient in the context of EIL. In fact, these Vcirieties are "flourishing, 
effective, functional, sometimes elegant and literary" (Strevens 1992, p.37). 

Embedded in these varieties are their respective identities and cultures. 
Therefore, EDL is not inextricably tied to Anglo-culture(s). "The use of English is 
always culture-bound, but the English language is not bound to any specific culture 
or political system" (Bickley 1982, pp.86-7). In fact, "any culture can use English as 
its vehicle" (Smith 1991, p.36). Kachru (1992, p.359) says "It is evident that English 
does not represent one or two ways of life; therein lies its strength." "The spread of 
English is not a homogenizing factor which causes cultural differences to disappear, 
but the use of English offers a medium to express and explain these differences" 
(Smith 1992, p.41). 

The concept of EDL raises our awareness that it not only enables non-native 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 229 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



O 230 

ERIC 



speakers to understand the cultures of the native speakers, and those of other non- 
native speakers as well, but also provides a great channel for native speakers to 
understand the cultures of non-native speakers. 

EIL and English teaching/learning 

Before we beccune fully aware of the changing socioUnguistic profile of English, e.g. 
the shift from ESL/EH, to EIL, the paradigm in the teaching and learrung of English 
was based on what Kachru (1992, pp. 357-8) listed as the six fallacies: 

1. That in the Outer and Expanding Circles, English is essentially learned to 
interact with native speakers of the language. 2. That English is necessarily 
learned as a tool to understand and teach American or British cultvual values, or 
what is generally termed the Judeo-Christian traditions. 3. That the goal of 
learning and teaching English is to adopt the native models of English (e.g., RP 
or GA). 4. That the international non-native varieties of English are essentially 
"interlanguages" striving to achieve "native-Uke" character. 5. That the native 
speakers of English as teachers, academic adnunistrators, and material 
developers provide a serious input in the global teaching of English, in policy 
formation, and in determining the channels for the spread of the language. 6. 

That the diversity and variation in English is necessarily an indicator of 
linguistic decay; that restricting the decay is the responsibility of the native 
scholars of English and ESL programs. 

The awareness of the six fallacies and the introduction of EEL have great implications 
in the teaching and learning of English. In recent years, English teachers and learners 
have gradually freed themselves from native variety-oriented teaching and learning 
methodologies. They have come to realize the diversity and functional validity of non- 
native varieties of English. 

As far as teaching English as an International Language is concerned, the 
decisive difference in outlook is the recognition that in the great NNS 
populations English will be taught mostly by non-native speakers of the 
language, to non-native speakers, in order to communicate mainly with non- 
native specikers. (Strevens 1992, pp.40-1) 

EIL, as a tool, should not be taught and learned only for the purpose of understanding 
the Anglo-culture(s). It is used by non-native speakers "to communicate to the rest 
of the world their identity, culture, politics, religion, and 'way of Ufe'". (Snuth 1991, 
p.36) In this sense, "native speakers need as much help as non-natives when using 
English to interact internationally" (Smith 1992, p.41). 

If the goal of English learning and teaching is for near-native proficiency, then 
the battle is lost before it has begun. In the context of EIL, such a goal is neither 
desirable nor practical. More emphasis in EIL teaching should be placed on treating 
learners as potential EIL users, rather than near-native speakers. In fact, as Smith 
(1991, p.36) says, "no one needs to become more like native English speakers in order 
to use English well." 

229 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



James Baxter (Bnimfit 1982, p. 86) notes that when a person has the ability to 
speak (or write) English internationally, there is no preconceived idea as to who the 
potential interactor(s) in a communicative exchange will be, whether in terms of 
nationality, linguistic background or cultural background. In a teaching situation he 
believes that whereas in EFL and ESL specific varieties of English and specific cultures 
can be dealt with, the goal in the teaching of EE, cannot be knowledge of the details 
of a given variety of culture, or even numbers of these. Students must somehow be 
prepared to operate with English in unknown situations which are characterized by 
variation in linguistic and cultiual behavioiu. Central, therefore, to the EIL approach 
are the realities of diversity and adaptation. 

Current Situations in Teaching English to Chinese 
University Students 

"English (in China) began to be taught extensively in universities from the mid 1960's, 
especially in large cities." (Gao 2000) Since the late 1970s, English has become "the 
most-studied foreign language in China" (Cheng 1992, p.l62). In the 1950s, however, 
Russian had been the donunant foreign language. As a result, some of the Chinese 
English teachers in the 70s and 80s were originally Chinese Russian learners and 
teachers. However, "virtually no Russian was taught from the 70's" (Gao 2000), so 
these Russian teachers converted to learning and teaching English as the need for 
English in China increased. Meuiy of the present-day young or middle-aged Chinese 
English teachers cue those who learned English in secondary schools from Chinese 
English teachers through traditional grcunmar-translation and audioUngual methods. 
These practitioners were later trained as language teachers by both Chinese and native 
English teachers in colleges through a variety of communicative approaches. 
Therefore, in most ELT classrooms today in China, especially at the tertiary level, there 
are reflections of these wide-ranging influences from elderly Russian-trained Chinese 
English teachers through a traditional focus on form (still very common), to native 
speaker teachers euid a 'communicative' approach. 

Another featiue of ELT in Chinese universities is that there is a great need for 
both qualified non-native and native English teachers. The reasons behind this are 
partly historical and partly economic. On the one hand, the Cultural Revolution (1966- 
1976) brought about a fault zone of intellectuals in many acadenuc fields in China; on 
the other hand, a considerable number of those who were trained as English teachers 
in the late 70s and eeuly 80s have either gone abroad or plunged into the sea 
(engaging themselves in business, trade, administration or management) — two so- 
called booms that have arisen since China's opening to the outside world. 

This loss of trained English teachers has occiured at precisely the time that the 
number of English learners in China has increased quickly. Over 90 percent of all 
college and university students take English as a compulsory course. All students have 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATIO . TY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



to meet the minimum requirement of the nation-wide College English Test, Band 4. 
Many need to pass Band 6. They may need to consult the literature and the latest 
developments in their academic fields; some intend to further their studies in an 
English-speaking country, or to find a job in a foreign-funded international company 
or joint-venture. In a way, knowledge of English gives people a sense of status 
(Kirkpatrick 1999) and most of the time it means a brighter future for young Chinese. 
However, even though the enthusiasm for the Chinese to learn English is high, the 
fact is, within an expanding-circle nation like China, the actual daily need for genuine 
communicative use of English is still relatively low. An average monolingual Chinese 
can survive quite well without knowledge of English. Linguistically, English does not 
constitute a threat to the Chinese Putonghua, at leeist not yet. 

Under such circumstances, ELT in Chinese universities still, to a certain extent, 
emphasizes "gaining knowledge about the English language rather than using the 
language for genuinely communicative purposes"(Shih 1999, p.20). Li Xiaoju (1990, 
p.65) stated that: 

Traditionally, a language lesson in China consists of a focus text and a list of 
language points drawn from the text. The language points are about grammar or 
vocabulary: They concern only the form of the language, since the sole objective 
of the course is to teach language form. 

Shih (1999) further commented that traditional approaches blend elements of 
grammcir translation and audioUngual methods and tend to be teacher-centered. In a 
typical Chinese English classroom, "the teacher does most of the work of providing 
background information ... and explicating grammar and vocabulary ... " (Shih 1999, 
p.21). As Cem and Margaret (1990, p.23) put it, "in China ..., the pedagogical focus 
seems to be on the grammatical features of English without regard for its 
communicative and/or cultural functions." John Gray (2000, p.280) stated that, "In 
much ELT material, it has been argued, the student is positioned at the receiving end 
of a virtually one-way flow of information. Although students complete 
comprehension tasks on reading and listening texts, there is often Uttle opportunity 
for them to respond to or challenge the information they receive from the perspective 
of their own culture." Learners who are taught English in this way tend to develop a 
passive attitude, and in the meantime, a sense of correctness rather than effective 
ways of accessing information and communicating with other speakers of English. 

The Chinese English learners' sense of correctness is also reflected in their strong 
preference of standard English no matter what standard it is. 

Chinese Ministries of Education and Chinese professionals still argue strenuously 
for a native speaker variety. ... The Chinese Government and many Chinese 
consider that, whatever is taught, it must represent the standard. For the 
government, British English represents the standard, although younger people 
are leaning towards an American standard (Kirkpatrick 1999). 







31 



232 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



The strong sense of native variety standard has a great influence on most of the major 
college ELT textbooks. The textbooks commonly used across China in the past two 
decades generally contain texts by British or American authors, lists of new words and 
useful phrases, and a large number of exercises which include Reading Aloud and 
Memorizing, Comprehension of the Text, Vocabulary, Word Building, Structure, Cloze, 
Translation, Reading Activity and Guided Writing. College English: Intensive Reading 
(Dong 1997) is a prime example. Moreover, "most textbooks project an Anglo-centric, 
male-dominated, middle-class utopia of one kind or another." (Prodromou 1990, p.35) 
According to the present author's recent survey into the texts of College English: 
Intensive Reading, of the 40 texts in Books I — IV, 32 texts (80%) were by American 
authors or taiken from American sources (magazines, newspapers, or book series), and 
7 texts (17.5%) were by British authors or from British sources. Only one text, which 
was about the British sailor Francis Chichester, was source-unknown, but the source 
was most probably British (See Appendix I). As far as College English: Intensive 
Reading is concerned, only U.S. or U.K. authors are included. There is no space for 
authors from the outer or expanding circles. 

Figure 1. Standards of English in the 40 focus texts of College English: 

Intensive Reading 



From TEFL to TEIL: Changes in Perceptions and Practices 



The shift from TEFL to TEIL seems to be inevitable in the Expanding Circle in the 
foreseeable future due to the changing profile of English. To cope with this, changes 
in perceptions and practices in the learning and teaching of English need to be made. 
EFL learners want to acquire an international variety of English, independent of the 
cultural norms and values of native English speakers" (Cem & Margaret 1990, p.23). 




American English 



British English 



Source unknown 



232 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, FOWER AND EDUCATION 233 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



Change 1 

EIL is not only closely associated with the cultures of the U.K., the U.S. and other Inner- 
Circle nations, it is also equally closely associated with the cultures of all speakers of 
English in both Outer-Circle and Expanding-Circle nations. 

In the past, English native speaker teachers were greatly preferred in Chinese 
universities, no matter what educational backgrounds they had. 

These teachers, most of whom come from Britain or the United States, bring with 
them the notion that a language and its culture are two inextricably related 
entities, and as such should be taught together, ... and ... that no real 
acquisition of the target language can take place without the learner's 
internalization of target language speakers' patterns and values. ... Thus, foreign 
language teaching is seen cis a pedagogical process aimed at changing the 
learner's behaviour by injecting new norms and values into it. ... The foreign 
language teacher is often advised to persuade the learners that success in 
language learning depends upon the degree to which they integrate themselves 
with the native environment of the language, whether they are learning it in the 
country in which it is spoken or not. (Cem & Margaret 1990, pp.21-2) 

Now, with the shift from TEFL to TEIL, when recruiting English teachers, Chinese 
universities should pay more attention to the educational backgrounds and English 
proficiency of the candidates than to whether they are native speakers or not. In 
language classrooms, teachers as language models have both tangible and intangible 
influences on the students. In this sense, qualified non-native English teachers, if 
recruited together with qualified native English teachers, can properly demonstrate 
for Chinese learners the ever-changing sociolinguistic profile of EIL. They help the 
students raise their awareness that EIL reflects multi-cultures euid multi-identities. 

In addition to recruiting qualified English teachers (both non-native and native), 
more attention should be paid to developing multi-cultural and student-oriented EIL 
teaching programs, taking the non-native teacher as their focus. 

Change 2 

EIL encourages students to incorporate their Ll norms and values, and to use EIL for 
local as well as international circumstances. It rejects the unrealistic goal that students 
should struggle for native-speaker-like proficiencies. 

With the shift from TEFL to TEIL, "there is no reason to see systematic deviations 
from Anglo-American norms at the pragmatic and discourse levels as enors. Rather, 
there is room to analyze these as non-native speakers' attempts to use L2 in such a 
way as to conform to their Ll pragmatic norms and cultural values" (li 1998, p.39). 
Instead, it is highly desirable for Chinese students to use EIL to cater for their own 
needs, cuid in the meantime to incorporate some Chinese norms and values into EIL, 
the process of which is now commonly described as indigenization or nativization. 
Prodromou (1990, p.39) has argued that "the use of local varieties of English" is a way 





234 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



for the teachers to "be sensitive to the status of English as an international language 
on the one hand and the learners' cultural background on the other." Whereas for the 
students, the success of learning "depends on ... integrating the language with their 
own ideological and social needs" (Brumfit 1982, p.6). 

Therefore teaching materials in English reflecting Chinese local cultures should 
also be extensively used. Culturally localised materials can have positive effect on 
learners' target language use. 

Teachers and students should now be liberated from the idea that teaching and 
leciming English is for the students to achieve near-native proficiency. "Kramsch sums 
up ... 'Traditional methodologies based on the native speaker usually define language 
learners in terms of what they are not, or at least not yet. Or, one might add, not ever"' 
(Cook 1999, p.l89). Now, we should look at the students as genuine (or potential) 
EIL users, not as deficient interlanguage speakers. If we as English teachers can raise 
the students' awareness that through leauning EIL, they can communicate with 
English native speakers as well as the rest of the world without losing their own 
identity or being treated as deficient learners, they are more likely to achieve a higher 
level of EIL use. 

Change 3 

EIL doesn't repel the students' knowledge and use of their mother tongues. Instead, 
together with these other tongues, EIL produces multi-competent users of English. 

Traditionally while learrung English, "students are always translating into and 
out of their own languages — and teachers are always telling them not to" (Swan 
1990, p.96). However, EIL values the students' knowledge and use of their mother 
tongues. As Swan points out foreigners have mother tongues: they know as much as 
we do about how human beings communicate. What the English-leaming students 
have to do is to communicate in English. Their mother tongue experience remains 
relevant although there exist a lot of culturally different, even conflicting attitudes, 
values and norms. 

In teaching practice, teachers should view the use of students' mother tongues 
positively, and introduce activities that deliberately involve both languages (Cook 
1999, p.202). Teachers should take advantage of the students' knowledge and use of 
their mother tongues and encourage the students to translate and interpret between 
EIL and their mother tongues. Only by doing so, can English become a real-sense EIL. 

The students' mother tongues together with EIL constitute the multicompetence 
in them, a term that refers to "the compound state of a mind with two languages" 
(Cook 1999, p.l90). The concept of multicompetence is in itself liberating in that it 
views EIL learning students as multicompetent English speakers rather than 
incompetent imitation native speakers. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 235 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



Change 4 

EIL helps both teachers and students raise their awareness of the large number of 
English varieties, and therefore it stimulates and facilitates extensive exposure of 
students to these varieties in English classrooms. 

The widely used college English textbooks across China have long focused on 
British and American cultural norms and values. As we have seen, textbooks go so far 
as to exclude all other varieties of English. As a result, both students and teachers in 
China lack awareness of the large number of English varieties, such as Australian 
English, Indian English, Nigerian English, Singaporean English, and are unaware that 
new varieties may be developing, possibly even Japanese English and Chinese English. 
Therefore, when exposed to the outside world in contexts where EIL is appropriate, 
students and teachers of English find it hard adjusting to the different varieties of 
English, as they have had no exposure to them while learning English. 

It is the large number of English varieties that truly makes English an 
international language. In teaching practice, teachers should explore all possible 
avenues to obtain materials of different varieties of English along with their 
distinctive cultures. Such materials are readily available from the media. For example, 
when the present author keyed in "Indian English Newspaper" in the Yahoo search 
box, 8 matches popped up instantly on the screen; and with "Chinese English 
Newspaper" came 9 matches. In the English version of the People's Daily (China's 
largest official newspaper), anybody who knows English and who has access to the 
Web can read headline stories as the following: 

• IBA Seeks More Chinese Lawyers 

• Li Peng Stresses Importance of Amending Laws 

• Past Decade Sees Fastest Residential Construction in Shanghai 

• Premier Zhu Stresses Agriculture 

• Most Populous Province Trying to Have Everyone Registered for Census 

• Seventy Percent of Officials in Tibet Are Tibetans: Survey 

• Nearly 1.9 Million Beijing Residents Aged Over Sixty 

• Chinese Lawyers Conference 2000 Opens 

• Fake Medicine Destroyed in Shanghai 

• Chongqing to Become Major Railway Hub in SW China 

Source: http://engUsh.peopledaily.com.cn/China.html, [20 November, 2000] 

Therefore, EIL, to English teachers who have access to the Web, is only a mouse-cUck 
away. What these EngUsh teachers really need is awareness of the existence of these 
materials and the confidence to use them. Otherwise, the younger generation 
students, who are brought up in front of the computer, will leave their teachers 
behind in terms of exposures to EIL. The old-fashioned concern about students' 
indigestion is, in fact, imwananted. "Actually what teachers of EngUsh in China ought 
to be worrying about is not giving the students too much, but giving them too 
Uttle"(Li Xiaoju 1990, p.65). 




236 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, ID 




POWER AND 



EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



Change 5 

EIL brings language classrooms closer to the real-world. However, it also distinguishes 
classrooms from the real-world. 

Traditional EFL teaching in China is very much tied to British and American 
literature. However, when students have authentic contacts outside their classrooms, 
they find that very few people want to talk about British and AmericeUi Uteratiue with 
them. What makes them feel even worse is that they find most of the people they 
have contacts in English do not speak standard British or American EngUshi The real 
English speaking world is full of different varieties of English — Englishes. 

"The aims of language teaching can be divided into internal classroom goals that 
relate to the students' life within the classroom, ... and external goals that relate to 
the students' use of English outside the classroom" (Cook 1999, p.l97). However, the 
two types of goals should be integrated by bringing EIL into classrooms. Authentic EIL 
material gives students a taste of 'real' language in use, and provides them with valid 
linguistic data for their unconscious acquisition processes to work on (Swan 1990). 
Even though EIL plays eui importeuit role in bringing classrooms closer to the real- 
world, we can not turn our classrooms into a United Nations assembly room. Learning 
English is, nonetheless not the same as using English. Effective learning can involve 
various kinds of disteuicing from the real-Ufe behavior that is its goal. In a developing 
country such as China, well-designed euid properly used textbooks focusing on the 
cultures of the Inner-Circle nations Ceui still be useful. However, the point is, English 
teachers in China should make selective use of existing textbooks eUid, at the same 
time, adopt authentic language materials from various sources that suit the students' 
level of English eUid expose them to the world of EIL. 

Change 6 

EIL sets higher demands on both non-native and native English teachers. 

ELT has always been a challenging profession. It has been a profession of 
continual change in response to new situations and to new leuiguage learning eUid 
teaching theories. Now with the shift from EFL to EIL, especially in the Expanding 
Circle, both non-native and native English teachers are experiencing new challenges. 
They have no other choice but to adapt to the evolving socioUnguistic profile of EIL. 
They need to consider theoretical issues such as norms, standards and cultures of 
English; they also need to consider practical issues such as teaching methodologies, 
the selection of teaching materials and the attitudes towards the students' language 
errors. More importantly, they need to "update" themselves in terms of EIL, which 
involves raising their awareness of EIL eUid exposing themselves extensively to it. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



Conclusion 

EIL has become an issue within the past two decades. In the new millennium, EIL is 
likely to spread even faster and wider. EIL as a world lingua franca is becortung more 
and more complex, dynamic and evolving. It reflects multi-cultures and multi- 
identities. EIL has become more of a liberating concept than a mere tool for 
commimication across national and cultural boundaries. It can liberate English 
teachers and students from their traditional ways of looking at English and the 
learning and teaching of English. 

With regards to the teaching and learning of EIL in Chinese colleges and 
universities, changes in both perceptions and practices are suggested: EIL is not 
exclusive to the U.K. and U.S varieties; EIL is inclusive of the norms and values of the 
other tongues; EIL produces multi-competent users of English; EIL raises people's 
awareness of the changing sodoUnguistic profile of English; EIL brings real-Ufe to 
language classrooms; and EIL challenges all who are not aware of its existence. 
However, EIL is not a panacea. To conclude in Bickley's words. 

It places in the forefront the reality that from a sharing of commonalities such 
as grammar, lexis and phonology, communication does not automatically flow. 

EIL provides the means of perceiving that enhanced world communication is 
possible only through recognizing all those areas of behavior which are not 
shared across national or cultural Unes." (Bickley 1982, p.86) 





238 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



References 

Bickley, V. 1982, The international uses of English: Research in Progress', in Brumit, C. (ed.) 
English for International Communication, Pergamon Press, Oxford pp.81-91. 

Brumfit, C. (ed.), 1982, English for International Communication, Pergamon Press, Oxford 

Cem, A. & Margaret, A., 1990, The question of culture: EFL teaching in non-EngUsh-speaking 
countries', in Rossner, R. & BoUtho, R. (eds) Currents of Change in English Language 
Teaching, Oxford University Press, pp.21-27. 

Cheng, C. 1992, 'Chinese Varieties of English' in Kachru, B. B. (ed) The Other Tongue: English 
across Cultures, University of Illinois Press, Urbana and Chicago, pp. 162-177. 

Crystal, D., 1997, English as a Global Language, Cambridge University Press 

Eco, U., 1995, The Search for the Perfect Language, Oxford, Blackwell 

Gao, Y., 2000, Email to Z. Xu, [Online], 17 Nov., Available: Email: 
xuz@spectrum.curtin.edu.au [17 November 2000] 

Goodman, S. & Graddol, D., 1996, Redesigning English: new texts, new identities. The Open 
University, Routledge, London and New York 

Graddol, D. 1996, 'Global English, Global Culture?' in Goodman, S. & Graddol, D. (eds) 

Redesigning English: new texts, new identities. The Open University, Routledge, London 
and New York p.l81. 

Graddol, D. & Meinhof, U.H., 1999, English in a Changing World, Biddles Ltd., Guildford, U.K. 

Gray, J., 2000, The ELT Coursebook as Cultural Artefact: how Teachers Censor and Adapt' in 
ELT Journal, Vol.54 no.3 

Kachru, B., (ed.) 1992, The Other Tongue: English across Cultures, University of Illinois Press, 
Urbana and Chicago 

Kirkpatrick, A., 1999, 'English as an Asian Language: Implications for the English Language 
Curriculum' in 4SEA Conference, Singapore [22-24 November] 

Kirkpatrick, A., 2000, Email to Z. Xu, [Online], 18 Oct., Available: Email: 
xuz@spectrum.curtin.edu.au [18 October 2000] 

Li, D., 1998, 'Incorporating LI Pragmatic Norms and Cultmal Values in L2' in Asian Englishes, 
Vol.l no.l 

Li, X., 1990, 'In defence of the communicative approach' in Rossner & BoUtho (ed.) Currents 
of Change in English Language Teaching, Oxford University Press, pp. 62-65. 

Prodromou, L., 1990, 'English as cultural action', in Rossner & BoUtho (ed.) Currents of 
Change in English Language Teaching, Oxford University Press, pp.35-39. 

Radford, A. et al., 1999, Linguistics: An Introduction, Cambridge University Press, U.K. 

Rossner, R. & BoUtho, R. (eds.), 1990, Currents of Change in English Language Teaching, 
Oxford University Press 

Shih, M., 1999, 'More Than Practicing Language: Communicative Reading and Writing for 
Asian Settings' in TESOL Journal Vol.8 no .4 

Smith, L., 1991, 'Standards in World EngUshes' in Tickoo, M. (ed) Languages & Standards: 
Issues, Attitudes, Case Studies, SEAMEO Regional Language Centre, Singapore pp.33-41 

Smith, L., 1992, 'Spread of EngUsh and Issues of IntelUgibiUty' in Kachru, B. B. (ed) The 
Other Tongue: English across Cultures, University of UUnois Press, Urbana and Chicago, 
pp. 75-90 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



Strevens, P. 1992, 'English as an International Language: Directions in the 1990s' in Kachm, 
B. B. (ed) The Other Tongue: English aaoss Cultures, University of lUinois Press, Urbana 
and Chicago, pp. 27-47 

Swan, M., 1990, 'A critical look at the communicative approach' in Rossner, R. & BoUtho (ed.) 
Currents of Change in English Language Teaching, Oxford University Press, pp.77-96. 

Tickoo, M. (ed.), 1991, Languages & Standards: Issues, Attitudes, Case Studies, SEAMEO 
Regional Language Centre, Singapore 

Trudgill, P., 1983, Sociolinguistics: An Introduction to Language and Society, Penguin Books, 
Harmondsworth, England 

Cook, V., 1999, 'Going Beyond the Native Speaker in Language Teaching' in TESOL Quarterly, 
Vol.33 no. 2 



240 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 





CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



Appendix I "Titles, sources and Standards" of English in 
the 40 focus texts of College English: Intensive Reading 



Book Unit 


Text 


Source 


Standard 


One 1 


How to Improve Your 
Study Habits 


Lado (American Linguist) English Series 
Book 6 


American, 


2 


Sailing Round the World 


Unknown 


Unknown 


3 


The Present 


New Horizons in English 6 


British 


4 


Turning Off TV: A Quiet 
Hour 


Perspectives — An Intermediate Reader 


American 


5 


A Miserable, Meny 
Christmas 


Lincoln Steffens' (a well-known 
journalist, editor, and lecturer) 
Autobiography 


American 


6 


Sam Adams, Industrial 
English 


It's All In A Day's Work by George 
Draper and Edgar Sather 


American 


7 


The Sampler 


The Sampler by the American author 
I.V.Morris 


American 


8 


You Go Your Way, I'll Go 
Mine 


The Human Comedy by William Saroyan 


American 


9 


The Brain 


BBC Modern English by Hugh Corrigan 


British 


10 


Going Home 


New York Post (1971) New Advanced 
Reading Skill Builder 1, by Pete Hamill 


American 



240 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 241 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



Book Unit 


Text 


Source 


Standard 


Two 1 


Is There Life on Earth? 


By Art Buchwald (a well-known humor 
columnist for the Washington Post) 


American 


2 


The Dinner Party 


Reading Skill Builder 2 (1973) by 
Reader's Digest Services, Inc. 


American 


3 


Lessons from Jefferson 


Progressive Reading Series Book 8 by 
Dr. Virginia French Allen 


American 


4 


My First Job 


Pick and Choose (1971) by Longman 
Group Limited 


British 


5 


The Professor and the 
Yo-Yo 


Challenges by California State 
Department of Education 


American 


6 


The Making of a Surgeon 


By Dr. William Anthony Nolen 
( American surgeon and author 
From Reading Skills Handbook 


American 


7 


There's Only Luck 


New West (Feb. 1981): a magazine 
published in California 


American 


8 


Honesty: Is It Going Out 
of Style? 


Senior Scholastic Oct, 31, 1980 


American 


9 


What Is Intelligence, 
Anyway? 


By Isaac Asimov ( Rusian-born American 
author. From Insight 


American 


10 


Profits of Praise 


By Janet Graham, From Encounter 


American 



241 




242 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



Book Unit 


Text 


Source 


Standard 


Three 1 


A Brush with the Law 


Penguin Advanced Writing Skills compiled 
by James O’Driscoll 


British 


2 


The Woman Who Would 
Not Tell 


By Janice Keyser Lester 
New Reading Skill Builder 3 


American 


3 


Why I Teach 


By Peter G. Beidler, From Alumni 
Magazine Consortium (Nov. 1984) 


American 


4 


Lady Hermits Who Are 
Down But Not Out 


The Observer (April, 9, 1978): 
a newspaper published in Britain 


British 


5 


The Day Mother Cried 


By Gerald Moore 


American 


6 


A Day’s Wait 


By Ernest Hemingway, 

From Winner Take Nothing (1933) 


American 


7 


The Shelter 


By Rod Selling, From a TV play on 
CBS (1961) 


American 


8 


Daydream a Little 


By Eugene Raudsepp (President of 
Princeton Creative Research Inc.) From 
Reading Laboratory Power Builder, 2b-10 


American 


9 


The Death of Hitler 


By William L. Shirer (a well-known 
American journalist, war correspondent, 
and historian. From The Rise and Fall of 
the Third Reich (1960) 


American 


10 


The Fantastic Spurt in 
Technology 


By Alvin Toffler (a well-known American 
futurologist. From Future Shock (1970) 


American 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 14 — FROM TEFL TO TEIL 



o 244 

ERIC 



Book Unit 


Text 


Source 


standard 


Four 1 


Big Bucks the Easy Way 


By John G. Hubbell, From Reader's 
Digest, June 1982 


American 


2 


Deer and the Energy Cycle 


By Aaron N. Moen, From The 
Conservationist Sept.-Oct. 1980 


American 


3 


Why Do We Believe That 
the Earth Is Round? 


George Orwell (pen name of Eric Blair- 
Born of English parents in India) From 
The Collected Essays, Journalism and 
Letters of George Wrwell, VoL 4 


British 


4 


Jim Thorpe 


By Steve Gelman (American reporter for 
Sport magazine) From Great American 
Athletes of the 20th Century 


American 


5 


To Lie or Not to Lie - 
The Doctor's Dilemma 


By Sissela Bok (American author) 
From The New York Times (1978) 


American 


6 


How to Mark a Book 


By Mortimer J. Adler (American educator 
and writer) From The Essayist (1985) 


American 


7 


The Luncheon 


By W. Somerset Maugham (English writer) 
From Flere and There (1948) 


British 


8 


The New Caves 


By Isaac Asimov, From The Norton 
Sampler compiled by Thomas Cooley 


American 


9 


Journey West 


By Jim Doherty (American naturalist and 
journalist) From National Wildlife magazine 


American 


10 


Why People Work 


By Leonard R. Sayles (Professor of 
Columbia University; Consultant to the 
NASA) From Reading Selections 


American 



243 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION,' IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



o 

ERIC 



15 Reflective discourse in teacher education 
in Brunei Darussalam 

David Lochmohr Prescott 
Universiti Brunei Darussalam 



Reflective practice and action research have recently been introduced 
into the teacher education programme at Universiti Brunei 
Darussalam. This has been done in order to try and improve teacher 
effectiveness and develop a sense of professionalism among pre- 
service teachers. Minnis (1999) heis argued that the socio-cultural 
distinctiveness of Brunei presents a number of obstacles to the 
implementation of reflective strategies in teacher education. This 
paper further argues that such innovative concepts, conditioned by 
socio-cultural factors, may be affected by certain socio-cultural 
features. Reflective, evaluative work with student teachers studying in 
the BA Education programme (TESL Major) is described and analysed 
to determine to what extent the student teachers' discourse is 
characteristic of the reflective genre. The role of English in facilitating 
this aspect of teacher education in Brunei is discussed at the 
conclusion of the paper 



Introduction 

The purpose of this paper is to build on work conducted by Minnis (1999) which 
critically examined the compatibility of Brunei cultural values and the assumptions of 
reflective practice. In his paper Minnis (p. 173) concluded "that reflection as 
conceived and implemented in the west has a limited yet potentially positive role to 
play in teacher education in Brunei". In the context of this "limited yet potentially 
positive role" samples of student-teacher reflective discourse are discussed to 
ascertain if they exhibit any distinctive linguistic features in response to certain local 
sodo-cultural factors. The emerging discourse can be seen as indicative of the 
developing role of English in facilitating this aspect of teacher education in Brunei 
Firstly, some background on Brunei will be presented, examining in peuticular the 
ideology and values that infuse both society and its institutions. Then, there will be 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 245 




CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



a brief discussion of assumptions concerning reflective practice and how these are at 
variance with the socio-cultural distinctiveness of the Malay-Islamic Sultanate. 
Reflective, evaluative work developed with student-teachers studying in the BA 
Education course will be described. Finally, the student-teachers' discourse will be 
examined to see what reflective characteristics are evident and whether there is any 
influence from Bruneian socio-cultural factors 

Background on Brunei 

Brunei Darussalam is a small affluent Malay-Islamic Sultanate on the northwest coast 
of Borneo. The Sultan and the government of Brunei have established a national 
ideology, Melayu Islam Beraja, known locally as MIB (Malay Islamic Monarchy). The 
ideology justifies preserving the absolute monarchy and invokes Brunei's history and 
Islamic values in so doing. MIB, the dominant ideology, pervades Brunei society "and 
governs its institutional norms and behaviour" (Minnis 1999: p. 172). In practice this 
means that education policy and practice are strongly influenced by cultural and 
religious ideologies determined by the state. As recently as Teachers' Day, 2000 
(September 23rd) His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan of Brunei Darussalam, 
in his Titah to inaugurate the Teachers' Day celebrations, remarked that: 

a national education philosophy... (should)... focus on the nation's efforts to 
produce excellent individuals who are not only knowledgeable but are also 
faithful and pious (Hassanal Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah 2000: p. 1). 

Brunei has been described as a rentier capitalist state (Gunn 1993). Revenues in such 
economies accumulate directly to the state from oil and gas receipts, which are then 
distributed to the population in the form of subsidised imports and housing, secure 
government jobs, free medical services and free education. Thus economic growth in 
Brunei has not been directly related to development of human resources nor have 
education and training, in the past, been integral to this growth. However, the state 
has recently indicated that the Brunei economy needs diversification in order to 
ensure long-term survival and prosperity. The tone of official media declarations 
indicate that all members of society are obligated to assist the state in implementing 
this policy, including sacrificing personal interests for the collective good of society 
In education the policy has found expression in efforts to expand the technical- 
vocational sector showing the government's intention of trying to achieve a greater 
accord between the workplace and education and training (Government of Brunei 
1996) in similar ways to that achieved in South Korea and Singapore. Again His 
Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan of Brunei Darussalam has clearly expressed 
this intention: 

The goal of our teaching and education missions is to produce high quality 
human resources that can meet the needs of the socio-economics and politics of 
the country We need to achieve this goal in tandem with the cunent borderless 
globalisation trend (Hassanal Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah 2000: p. 1). 






246 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, ID^'{|r^ POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



To reinforce this technical-rationalist view of human resource development 
Brunei has a school system driven by exciminations with attainment markers at 
various stages. Participation rates in this system are high and have contributed to 
increasing literacy levels. Increased access to higher education with increasing tertiary 
numbers has also been a recent trend. Minnis (1999) pointed out that the 
combination of a technical-rationalist view of human resource development and 
education together with increasing participation rates has led to a tendency for 
Bruneians to view education as a commodity which can be exchanged for jobs and 
social status. A resultant problem is that credentials become more important than 
leauniing and this inevitably affects educational quality. Minnis (1999) further 
contended that the pursuit of educational credentials triviaUses teaching and 
promotes school and teacher "effectiveness". 

In such circumstances students (and teachers) are likely to resist innovation. This 
means, according to Minnis (1999), that teachers are liable to find difficulty in 
reconciling the rationale underlying reflective practice with the more pressing need to 
conform to the curriculum and prepare students for examinations. Ultimately this 
kind of state-led, social reproduction model of education, which Singapore has 
endeavored to move away from in recent years (Davie 2000), leads to emphcisis on 
form rather than content and on rote learning over understanding. 

Bruneian values 

Brunei shares a number of values with other Southeast Asian countries though it also 
embodies particular cultural values and behavioural patterns that mark it out as 
distinctive in the region. 

Shared values include stress on a balance between rights and duties with perhaps 
the balance being tipped towards duties (Vatikiotis 1996). This is an emphasis that 
most likely stems from the traditional importance attached to one's duties and 
responsibilities within the family and the larger community in Southeast Asia. Allied 
to this is the notion that family and community rights teike precedence over the rights 
of individuals. Consultation and consensus in preference to contention and debate as 
well as deference to authority are further values Brunei shares with other Southeast 
Asian countries. 

Cultural values and behaviours peculiar to Brunei are the result of the ethnic 
composition of the country. Malays are the predominant group in Brunei. As well there 
are between 60,000 and 70,000 Chinese, a group with significant economic influence 
and expertise but who play little part in government. Indigenous groups are usually 
peripheral to Brunei society unless individuals convert to Islam and/or intermarry 
with Malays. As a result the vast majority of students in the university are Malay as 
are the vast majority of pre-service and active teachers. 

Malay culture has been depicted by various writers (Blunt 1988, Maxwell 1996) 
as collectivist in orientation, hierarchical with a strong family orientation. Blunt, in 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



particular, found Brunei Malays exhibited high power distance, that is they were 
willing to accept unequal distribution of power unquestioningly and to regard it as 
normal. He found also that they were nervous about situations perceived as 
unstructured or unpredictable and that they exhibited emotional resistance to 
change, dislike of risk-taking and conflict with a preference for clear organisational 
structures with explicit rules and regulations that should be adhered to. However, it 
should also be pointed out that despite the strong influence of Islamic values in 
Brunei Malay culture, Bruneian women have considerable freedom to pursue 
education, careers and social mobility. 

The work of Benedict (1967) and Lowenthal (1987), cited by Minnis (1999), 
focuses on the singular traits of small states and societies in Southeast Asia which 
contribute to the social order. For instance, Benedict points out that in such societies 
the emphasis is on who people are, rather than what they do and how well they do 
it. Lowenthal refers to a "managed intimacy" in which getting along with one another 
is a significant societal fector and personal ambition is subordinated to group 
solidarity, cohesion, balance and harmony. 



Assumptions concerning reflective practice 



O 248 

ERLC 



Reflective practice is an educational paradigm that has developed in socio-cultural 
contexts informed by value systems quite different from those that pertain in Brunei. 
Wainryb (1992) has identified four key features of reflective practice. Firstly, there is 
the concept of engagement by which teachers are active agents in their development 
rather than recipients of training. Secondly, reflective practice is strongly influenced 
by constructivist learning theory. According to this view of learning teachers actively 
assess new ideas and information in the light of past experience in order to construct 
personal meaning. Thus learning is a creative, dynamic and personal experience, 
different for each learner. Thirdly, teachers themselves are the primary initiators of 
their own development. The spirit of enquiry comes from within the practitioner 
rather than being imposed from outside. Finally, the broad goals of reflective practice 
are teacher autonomy rather than teacher dependence. Involvement in this process 
develops the ability to contemplate problems and develop and apply solutions 

This is an epistemology considerably at odds with the ethos of Bruneian society. 
The assumptions underlying reflective practice take for granted "that teachers either 
posses a high degree of autonomy and professional freedom or that they should work 
towards achieving this end" (Minnis 1999: p. 175). Acceptance of the importance of 
the individual as a social unit is fundamental to reflective practice. Teachers in the 
west are relatively free to criticise their societies and institutions and can openly 
discuss and critically evaluate educational issues and developments should they wish 
to do so. Teachers in other parts of the world cannot be said to have this sort of 
freedom, Brunei being a case in point. In Brunei the family and the group are 
important social units rather than the individual. There is also a hierarchical structure 

, 247 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATIONi IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



of inferiority and superiority, of power distance or inequality in the social 
stratification system. Power distance tends to preclude the confronting of issues 
openly; in Brunei it means that authority is seldom criticised. Instead the moral and 
ethical nexus of Malay-Islcunic values emphasises notions such as group solidarity, 
cohesion, balance and harmony. 



The development of reflective, evaluative work: the socio- 
cultural context 

In his paper Minnis (p. 181) gave the following question and answer, "Is there any 
role for reflective practice in the teacher education curriculum? The answer is a 
cautionary yes". He proposed two steps. The first was to legitimise reflection within 
schools with the approval of education authorities. The second was to decide at what 
stages of training, development or experience the process of reflection might be best 
introduced to teachers, and then emphasised and reinforced. With due respect to 
Minnis, whose article is thorough and thought provoking, these cautious steps are 
unlikely to result in any real progress towards a more thoughtful and engaged 
teaching profession. The nature of Bruneian society, particularly at institutional 
middle management levels, tends to preclude the promotion of this kind of change. In 
any case what Minnis finally proposes is not very much like the reflective 
epistemology he discusses at length in his article even allowing for local sodo-cultural 
practices. 

So the question arises as to how one might encourage the development of 
reflective capacity in Bruneian teachers in a way which is compatible with the socio- 
cultural ethos of the country but which retains something of the key elements of 
critical introspection. The work that is about to be described evolved out of personal 
"evaluative dialogue" (Butler 1992: p. 279) constructed while monitoring the 
implementation of components of the BA Education major course EL2210 Electronic 
Resources for English Language Teachers. 

This course focuses on three main components. The first of these is concerned 
with theories of leauning based on work by Levy (1997) and Jones 8e Mercer (1993). 
This results in the student-teachers beginning their considerations of all material 
within the frameworks of relevant theories of learning; behaviourism, constructivism 
and socio-cultural theory derived from the work of Vygotsky (1978). Henry 
Widdowson (1994: p. 20) has argued that in order to develop teachers need "the 
disciplinary authority of theory (and) to know how to use it as a condition for 
enquiry". Knowledge and application of this authority is essential to make one's way 
meaningfully and constructively with respect to electronic ESL resources. The second 
component is concerned with exploration, assessment and evaluation of English 
lemguage software. The student-teachers work in groups to construct instruments to 
evaluate CALL software; they then evaluate the application and utility of the 
instruments. The third component is concerned with assessment and evaluation of 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNIC DENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



English language websites as resources for teachers and students. In this case the 
student-teachers work individually to construct evaluation instruments and assess ESL 
websites. Again they evaluate the application and utility of the instruments. The 



context of the theories of learning with which the course commences and the software 
and website tasks are structured in order to reflect features of these learning theories. 

A feature of the course is the input of a remote lecturer using the synchronous 
text chat application in WebCT, an integrated course management/ delivery tool which 
works like a Webserver with a number of special features. This aspect of the course 
comes near the end and encourages application of the knowledge and skills 
development that the student-teachers have undergone throughout the course. The 
epithet "chat" is misleading, as the student-teachers consider the pedagogic 
implications of ICT issues during the synchronous exchange and review key issues of 
the course. In terms of ICT delivery the pedagogic paradigm operating here is that of 
remote expert, resident tutorial group, resident backup facilitator . 

The development of reflective, evaluative work: nurturing 
critical introspection 

Evaluation of teaching programmes, if it is conducted at all, commonly tends to be in 
the form of a survey or an open-ended response given at the end of a course. Whether 
such evaluation has any significant impact on the programme it addresses is debatable 
for a number of reasons. Amongst these is the fact that end of course evaluation may 
be conducted simply because it is an administrative requirement rather thcui an 
exercise motivated by genuine concern for programme review. In such circumstances 
it is unlikely that the "real" voices of the student-teachers will be obtained or 
attended to. A key concern in the instance described here was how the student- 
teachers in EL2210 could be provided with opportunities to present their real 
thoughts. 

Retrospective evaluation of courses by peuticipant insiders is rare. Arguments 
against retrospective evaluation cite the changing perspectives that develop as the 
time interval between course completion and evaluation increases (Nunan, 1992; 
Allison, 2000). The concern is that the recall of what actually happened may not be 
accurate. However such a concern applies to any evaluation no matter when it is 
conducted; individual perspectives are not uniform and each individual constructs the 
reality that is meaningful for him/her. Moreover, retrospective evaluation has the 
considerable merit of allowing appraisal of the usefulness and effectiveness of course 
qualities that prove to have lasting value in the world outside the classroom. 



assessment and evaluation of the software and the websites is conducted in the 





250 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Seminar presentation 

In the academic year 1999-2000, rather than follow the common course evaluation 
practice, a group of five student-teachers were invited to participate in a public 
seminar in which they would present their evaluations of three key aspects of the 
course. The student-teachers were selected using a purposive strategy (Cohen and 
Meuiion 1989) in which demonstrated insight and discernment were important 
selection factors. All five accepted the invitation. 

In the public seminar the lecturer outlined the three components, learning 
theories, ESL software evaluation and ESL website evaluation, in terms of the course 
objectives. The student-teachers then presented their evaluations of these 
components within a framework collectively developed for the seminar (see Appendix 
One). Emphasis was given to elements such as task definition, task preparation 
(background reading, discussion, in-class preparation), lecturer input, available 
resources (samples, on-line examples, articles), as well as task development and in- 
task guidance. There was also focus on group input, feedback, knowledge development 
and further applications as appropriate to each component. The seminar was attended 
by approximately forty people, some of whom were academic staff of the Universiti 
Brunei Darussalam, but most of whom were Bruneian teachers from government 
schools, with some expatriate teachers from the two international schools in Brunei. 
Following the presentations there were questions from the audience and explanatory 
discussion. 

Post-seminar questionnaire 

After the seminar the student-teachers were given a questionnaire that asked them 
to reflect on the seminar experience. The three questions asked were: 

What academic benefits do you consider you gained from this evaluation? 

What personal benefits do you consider you gained from this evaluation? 

What do you consider to be the positive and negative points with respect to the 

seminar participation? 

The purpose here was to move beyond simply evaluating course EL2210. By seeking to 
engage the student-teachers in a reflective process the intention was to build on their 
ability to contemplate problems and think about solutions. This kind of cognitive 
challenge was embedded in the software and website evaluation tasks described earlier 
and underpinned our concern to provide the student-teachers with the "necessary 
enabling conditions" (Widdowson: 1994: p. 20) to help them think critically about ICT. 
Wainryb (1992) has written about the broad goals of a reflective approach to teacher 
education as teacher autonomy rather than teacher dependence. In the volatile world 
of ICT, dependent modes of thought would hardly equip student-teachers to face and 
deal with the unexpected and unpredictable issues and circumsteuices that they would 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 251 




CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



i 



t 



1 

I 

i 



i 



I 



i 



I 



I 



most likely encounter. The ability to embrace learning as a creative, dynamic and 
personal experience seems appropriate in the ICT context. We considered that the 
student-teachers' responses would also reveal evidence about the effectiveness of the 
course and the pedagogic paradigm. 

The student-teachers' reflective discourse 

In this paper it has been argued that there is a clear divergence between the western 
epistemic ethos of reflective practice and the moral and ethical nexus of Malay-Islamic 
values cis evident in Bruneian society and institutions. This and the caution urged by 
Minnis with respect to reflective practice would suggest that the discourse produced 
by the student-teachers might lack the qualities of critical introspection that are 
characteristic of this genre. Swales (1990) has pointed out that expert members of a 
discourse community recognise the communicative purposes and therefore the 
rationale for the "genre". This rationale thus "shapes" the pattern of structure of the 
discourse and has influences on content and style. According to Zeichner and Liston 
(1987) "reflection seeks to help student-teachers become more aware of themselves 
and their environment in a way that changes their perception of what is possible" (p. 
25). Butler's (1996) reflective model stresses the development of self-competence and 
awareness with the aim of attaining more sophisticated levels of personal and 
professional awareness. Considered in the light of these comments do the student- 
teachers' responses to the post seminar questionnaire qualify as reflective discourse? 

The student-teachers' responses to the first question are shown in Figure 1. In 
Butler's (1996) terms there is initiatory "professional awareness". What is perhaps 
most heartening is the fact that the comments do not all merely reflect on the 
immediate event (the public seminar) and the course directly in question. Though 
limited, this extension beyond the established situation seems to accommodate 
elements of reflection. 

Figure 1: Student-teacher reflective discourse: academic benefits 

What academic benefits do you consider you gained from this evaluation? 

« I became aware of the good and bad points of the course (EL2210) 

• It gave me experience in evaluating a course in other areas 

• Could use the experience gained from this course and the seminar to evaluate other courses 

• It will help me in future courses and as a teacher in evaluating either for my school work or for 
exerdses to be given to my students 



The student-teachers' responses to the second question, shown in Figure 2, illustrate 
three issues. Firstly, there are gains identified that had to do with the context of the 
public seminar (items 1-4). Considerable time is devoted in the BA Education TESL 
course to developing presentation skills, but almost entirely in the safety of the 





252 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



classroom. Medgyes (1999) and Nunan (1987), amongst others, have both discussed 
the contrivance of classroom activities designed to simulate real life. In the public 
seminar the student-teachers experienced a real-life situation. Their comments here 
reflect this. Then there are those comments (items 6 & 7) that have a personal, 
introspective aspect to them. It would be easy to pass off these remarks as inexpert, 
but it is importeint to remember these were produced by pre-service student-teachers 
aged 20 to 21 years. Perhaps a more realistic interpretation of the discourse would be 
to acknowledge them as fledgling evidence of the student-teachers concerned 
becoming more aware of themselves and starting the process of cheinging their 
perceptions. Finally, there is a pragmatic comment (item 5) that echoes something of 
the view of education as a commodity. 

Figure 2: Student-teacher reflective discourse: personal benefits 

What personal benefits do you consider you gained from this evaluation? 

• Gained experience talking in public 

• Helped gain confidence in public speaking 

• Helped develop my ability to speak in public and gave me experience in writing and editing for 
a public seminar 

• Gave me the experience to speak in public and what it was like to address a public audience 

• Acknowledgement for participating in the seminar would be useful in my later career 

• Learnt the hard way to pay attention to the questions before answering and making a fool of 
myself 

• It helped me to realise that it is always nerve-wracking before a presentation, but it gets better 
once you start speaking in front of everyone Thus it gives me some kind of practice in public 
speaking 



The third question sought positive euid negative responses. The positive items, shown 
in Figure 3, reiterate some issues already identified (the experience of the public 
seminar) but also reveal some genuinely reflective comment. Item 3 is ein example of 
Zeichnefs eind Liston's (1987) observations about reflection helping student-teachers 
chcinge their perception of what is possible, while item 4 recalls Butler's (1996) 
suggestions about reflection promoting the development of self-competence and self- 
awareness. Then, there are items that show the student-teachers' reflection on the 
question of developing more sophisticated levels of personal eind professional 
awareness. Butler (1996) has written quite extensively about the role of reflective 
practice as an agent of self-improvement and personal awareness of professional 
advancement. Items 1 & 2 and items 5 & 6 in Figure 3 reveal first glimpses of this 



process. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 253 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Figure 3: Student-teacher reflective discourse: positive points of seminar 
participation 

What do you consider to be the positive and negative points with respect to the seminar 
participation? 

Positive 

• Learning how to speak and act appropriately in a public seminar 

• Learnt how to use Power Point and became aware of how useful it could be 

• The possibility that the students could change the structure of the course 

• The audience would gain insight into the course (EL2210) from the evaluation that I presented 

• Gained first hand experience of public speaking and became aware of my weak points 

• Became aware of the hard work required to make a successful seminar Gained a feeling of 

satisfaction when all the hard work paid off 



The negative items resulting from the student-teachers' responses to the third 
question cue shown in Figure 4. There cue a number of personal, introspective items 
(items 1-4) reflecting individual misgivings and uncertainties about quality of 
contribution. Given the age and experience of the participants these doubts could be 
considered natural and healthy. In fact, the all round semineu performance was 
considerably better than these comments would suggest euid these individually critical 
responses reveal a lack of genuine benchmeuks for self evaluation on the part of the 
student-teachers. Here again the concerns of Nunan (1987), Medgyes (1999) and 
others about contrived classroom activities designed to simulate, real life cue 
pertinent. 

At the time the seminar was conducted computers were not widely used in 
teaching in Brunei government schools eUid the student-teachers' comments responded 
to this reality. However, since the semincu the Brunei Government has announced a 
substantial ICT project that will provide computers for government schools. The 
student-teachers' reflections were apposite at the time; subsequent events have 
chcuiged the situation. One of the premises of the EL2210 course was that ICT would 
eventually find its way into Bruneian schools. The Brunei Government's initiative has 
justified this belief. 

A comment on the item 5 in Figure 4 is wananted. As discussed ecuUer in this 
article Brunei sheues a number of cultural values with other Southeast Asieui 
countries. It will be recalled that among these is a preference for consultation and 
consensus as opposed to contention eUid debate Lowenthal's (1987) comments, in 
writing about Brunei, concerning a "managed intimacy" are implicit in this item. 
Getting along with one another is a significant societal factor eUid personal ambition 
is subordinated to group soUdeirity, cohesion, balcuice and harmony. 




er|c 



254 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Figure 4: Student-teacher reflective discourse: negative points of seminar 
participation 

What do you consider to be the positive and negative points with respect to the seminar 

partidpation? 

Negative 

• My answers to the audiences' questions might not have been relevant 

• What I said in the seminar might not have been useful/relevant to the audience 

• My contributions might not have been as useful and relevant to the audience as I thought them 
(they seemed to bore the audience) 

• Not experienced in public speaking and so made a fool of myself during the seminar 

• What I personally thought might not always have been a collective opinion 

• Not able to think from a teacher's point of view For example, in real life, the English teachers 
do not really use software/websites to teach and they do not necessarily evaluate the 
software/websites 

• Not really relevant for some teachers because they do not use computers The most hi-tech they 
get is using the OHP Not many computers available in schools and if they're available they're 
mostly used by computer students only 



The role of English in reflective discourse 

The discourse produced by the student-teachers in this small study does exhibit some 
of the qualities of critical introspection that are characteristic of this genre. This is 
despite the doubts about the appropriateness of reflective practice for Bnmeian 
teachers expressed by Minnis (1999) and the obvious divergence between western 
reflective epistemologies and the nexus of Malay-Islamic values as evident in Bruneian 
society. In this concluding section two possible reasons to account for the student- 
teachers' discourse are put forweud. 

The first has to do with the roles of English in the ASEAN region. In 1974, Lee 
Sow Ling, writing about English as the non-ideological language of development, 
commented on the role of English in education in Singapore. At the time she pointed 
to a redefinition, "a sharpening of focus on its instrumental-tool function as distinct 
from its social euid cultural roles" (Lee, 1974, p. 32). Since then English has become 
the de facto lingua fieuica of ASEAN (Krasnik 1995) and, as Chew 1996 has pointed 
out, the globalisation of English has resulted in it becoming less European eUid more 
determined and shaped by users who are not necessarily native speakers. In citing 
Singapore as eui example of such developments Chew has described English in 
Singapore as a working language. Xu Darning and Tan Pack Ling, in their 1996 study 
Trends of English Use among Chinese Singaporeans, showed that despite a dramatic 
language shift from Chinese to English evident in the two youngest generations of 
contemporary Chinese Singaporeans, as a whole the Chinese population in Singapore 



ERIC 



£,5A 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNI 



IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 255 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



o 256 

ERIC 



is still predominantly Chinese-speaking. English is important to this population 
because it is the language of dealing with the authorities while Mandcirin is the 
language of the community. 

In Brunei the situation is different from Singapore though the role of English as 
a non-ideological language is still apparent. In 1985 Brunei introduced a bilingual 
education system (known locally as the "dwibcihasa" system). Jones (2000) has 
described the system eis "heavily weighted in favour of Malay at the lower primary 
level, by secondary the majority of subjects are taught in English". (YM Dr Haji) 
Ahmad (1991), quoted in ZuUcamain Edham (1997: pp. 15-16), reported that 
principals and teachers believed the bilingual system exposed students to an 
international language while preserving the sovereignty of the Malay language thus 
promoting national unity. Junaidi (1992), also quoted in ZuUcamain Edheun (1997: p. 
19), found teachers confident of the position of the Malay language in Bnmei society 
and saw EngUsh as the language of development and technology. A comprehensive 
national attitude survey, conducted in 1993 showed that the great majority of 
respondents across age, gender and ethnic differences felt that their cultural values, 
reUgion, identity and national language (Malay) would remain intact despite the 
impact of exposure to the English language. Writing about these results Jones (1997: 
p. 27) concluded, "This suggests confidence in the Bruneians' own sense of national 
identity" and (that) Bmneians have not adopted "English as a replacement for Malay". 
EngUsh, it seems, is able to fulfil a faciUtative role, free of the socio-cultural and 
ideological constraints that are often Unked with the local and regional languages. 

The second reeison has to do with the context in which the discourse was 
generated. Minnis, in his article, Weis particularly concerned to point out that those 
eispects of reflective practice that promoted critical evaluation and open discussion of 
educational issues and developments were inappropriate in the Bruneian context. The 
student-teachers involved in this small study were, of course, operating in a special 
socio-cultural context which embodied a number of neutral factors. The faciUtative 
influences of youthful enthusiasm, expatriate lectruer and university academic 
procedures (course evaluation, semincu presentation and post-seminar reflection) 
cannot be discounted. Perhaps a more important contextual issue weis embodied in the 
fact that the student-teachers were an integral part of the practice on which they 
reflected. To a certain extent they were participatory stake-holders examining 
procedures which they had helped shape. This was certainly tme of the pubUc 
semineu. It was the event in the evaluation, presentation, reflection sequence that 
was the catalyst for the reflective discourse. Recent work by Desmond AlUson (2000) 
argues for involvement of participants in (amongst other things) reflective discussions 
that help make meanings in educational development and inquiry rather than seeking 
opinions by the more disteuicing procedures of survey euid interview. 

This small study suggests that a way forward for teacher education in Brunei 
Darussalam is, firstly, the development of the instrumental, faciUtative role of EngUsh 
as the discourse of reflective practice. Secondly, the use of integrative approaches that 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION', IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



value student-teachers as participatory stake-holders could huild on the societal 
factors of solidarity, cohesion, balance and harmony in seeking to build a more 
purposive understanding of the teacher education process. An obvious deficiency in 
this study was the size of the student sample. Similar work with larger student 
groupings is planned for the future. Results from these studies may help to confirm 
whether there is a place for reflective practice in teacher education in Brunei and also 
clarify what role English has to play in promoting the discourse of this educational 
paradigm. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



References 



Allison, D. M., 2000, Meaning in the Mind? Making sense of comments in questionnaires and 
interviews. Paper presented at Language in the Mind conference. National University of 
Singapore, Singapore, September 2000. 

Benedict, B., (Ed.). 1967, Problems of Smaller Territories. London, University of London, 

Blunt, P., 1988, Cultural consequences for organisational change in a southeast Asian state: 
Brunei. Academy of Management Executive, 1, (3), 235-240. 

Butler, J., 1992, Teacher professional development: An Australian case study. Journal of 
Education for Teaching, 18, (3), 221-238. 

Butler, J., 1996, Professional development: Practice as text, reflection as process and self as 
locus. Australian Journal of Education, 40, (3), 265-283. 

Chew, G-L. C., 1996, Cultural Diversity: Global Implications for Language Learning and 
Teaching. Paper presented at the ACTA-ATESOL (NT) INC National Conference and the 
7th TESOL in Teacher Education Conference, Danwin, Australia 

Davie, S., 2000, October 4, The Straits Time, Singapore, Singapore Press Holdings. 

Government of Brunei, Ministry of Law, 1996, Seventh National Development Plan 1996-2000. 
Brunei Darussalam, Government Printing Office. 

Gunn, G. C., 1993, Rentier Capitalism in Negara Brunei Darussalam. In K Hewison, R 

Robison & G Rodan (Eds.). Southeast Asia in the 1990s: Authoritarianism, democracy 
and capitalism. London, Allen and Unwin. 

(Kebawah DuU Yang Maha MuUa Paduka Seri Baginda Sultan Haji) Hassanal BoUdah 

Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah, 2000, September 24, Borneo Bulletin. Brunei, Brunei Press Sdn. 
Bhd. 

Jones, A. & Mercer, N., 1993, Theories of learning and information technology. In Scrimshaw, 
P. (Ed.). Language Classrooms and Computers. London, Routledge. 

Jones, G. M., 1997, The changing role of English in Brunei Darussalam. In Brown, A. (Ed.). 
English in Southeast Asia 96. Singapore, National Institute of Education. 

Jones, G. M., 2000, Insights for Young Learners from Bilingual Education. Paper presented at 
ELTeCs Conference, Taipei, Taiwan. 

Krasnik, H., 1995, The Role of Linguaculture and Intercultural Communication in ASEAN in 
the year 2020. In Tickoo, M. L. (Ed.). Language and Culture in Multilingual Societies. 
Anthology Series 36, 81-94, Singapore, SEAMED Regional Language Centre. 

Lee, Sow ling, 1974, A Survey of the English Language Teaching Situation in the SEAMED 
Countries. Phase 1, Country Profiles. Singapore, RELC. 

Levy, M., 1997, Computer-assisted Language Learning: Context and conceptualization. Dxford, 
Clarendon Press. 

Lowenthal, D., 1987, Social features. In Clarke, C. & Payne, T. (Eds.). Politics, Security and 
Development in Small States. London, Allen and Unwin. 

Maxwell, A. R., 1996, The place of the Kadayan in traditional Brunei society. South East Asia 
Research, 4, (2), 157-196. 

Medgyes, P., 1999. Epilogue: The Fifth Paradox: What's the English lesson all about? In 
Kennedy, C. (Ed.). Innovation and Best Practice. Harlow, Longman. 



258 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERIC 




CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Minnis, J. R., 1999, Is reflective practice compatible with Malay-Islamic values? Some 
thoughts on teacher education in Brunei Darussalam. In Australian Journal of 
Education, 43, (2), 172-185. 

Nunan, D., 1987, Communicative language teaching: making it work. English Language 
Teaching Journal 41, (2), 136-145. 

Swales, J. M., 1990, Genre Analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, 
Cambridge Uruversity Press. 

Vatikiotis, M. R. J., 1996, Political Change in Southeast Asia: Trimming the banyan tree. 
London, Routledge. 

Vygotsky, L. S., 1978, Mind in Society: The development of higher psychological processes. 
Cambridge, Harvard University Press. 

Wainryb, R., 1992, Qassroom Observation Tasks. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press 

Widdowson, H., 1994, Some Observations on Teacher Development. In Richards, K & Roe, P 
(Eds.). Distance Learning in ELT. London, MacMillan. 

Xu, Darning & Tan, Pack ling, 1996, Trends of English Use among Chinese Singaporeans In 
Brown, A. (Ed.). English in Southeast Asia 96. Singapore, National Institute of 
Education. 

Zeichner, K. M. & Liston, D. P., 1987, Teaching teachers to reflect. Harvard Educational 
Review, 57, (1), 23-48. 

(Ak) Zulkarnain Edham, 1997, Teachers' Attitudes Towards The English Language and The 
Dwibahasa Education System: The Views of a New Generation. Unpublished BA (TESL) 
dissertation paper, Universiti Brunei Darussalam. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 259 



CHAPTER 15 — REFLECTIVE DISCOURSE IN TEACHER EDUCATION IN BRUNEI DARUSSALAM 



Appendix One 

Evaluation Framework 



Lecturer Input 


student-teacher input 


Course Component Purpose(s) 


Realisation of purpose(s) 




[Elements selected as appropriate] 


1. To understand and to recognise the 




varying degrees to which learning 


• Task definition 


theories inform electronic English 




language resources 


• Task preparation 


2. To develop, implement and evaluate 


• Lecturer input 


appraisal frameworks for English 


• Resource availability 


language software 






• Task development 


3. To develop students' familiarity with 




English language websites and search. 


• In-task guidance 


navigation and link functions germane 


• Group input 


to these websites 






• Feedback 


4. To develop, implement and evaluate 




appraisal frameworks for English language 


• Knowledge development 


websites 


• Further applications 


5. To introduce students to Information and 




Communications Technologies (ICT) as 




resources for English language teaching 







260 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



16 



Alternative English: vernacular oral art 
among Aboriginal youth 



Ian Malcolm 

Edith Cowan University, Western Australia 



While the present century has seen unprecedented growth in the use 
of English internationally to serve economic and political ends (i.e., 
the globalization of English), it has also seen a process of reverse 
colonization of English, as it has been increasingly used to serve the 
local purposes of cultures for which it is the adopted tongue (i.e., the 
indigenization of English). 

The conflict between the forces for globalization and for 
indigenization is reflected in education, where policies favouring 
standcud-EngUsh-based literacy are countered by policies which favour 
the linguistic and cultural rights of local cultures. In U.S.A. the 
Ebonics debate brought such conflict to a head in 1996-7. In 
Singapore there is ongoing controversy over the legitimacy of 
"SingUsh" as opposed to standcud varieties based on international 
norms. In Australia the inclusiveness of the National Policy on 
Languages (1987) was countered by subsequent moves towards 
prioritising literacy, which always means literacy in standcud English. 
Evidence will be provided here from Australian Aboriginal settings in 
support of claims that the indigenization of English by Aboriginal 
people has resulted in the development of oral art forms which cue 
sophisticated enough to claim recognition in the education system 
which has hitherto refused to recognize more than one English. 

Four oral narratives by southwest Aboriginal youth will be used to 
illustrate a range of schemas, genres and expressive devices, some of 
which cue unique, and some of which have counterparts in other oral- 
based cultures. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



261 



CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



i 



Background 

Teacher Alan, what d' you do with your spare time? 

Alan Walkin 

Teacher Mm 

Alan Walkin round 

Teacher Walkin round, yeah. 

What else? 

What do you find when you're walking round? 
Alan Cattle 

Teacher Cattle. You'd walk a long way to find cattle. 
Wouldn't it be better to be on a horse? 

What d'you walk around on a horse? 

Alan ifes 

Teacher Right. Ride a horse around slowly. 

(DTI, 1973) 



This is am extract from a conversation of a non-Aboriginal teacher with some of the 
Aboriginal individuals in his claiss in a secondauy school in the Kimberley. The 
conversation did not exactly flow smoothly. The teacher wais kindly seeking to provide 
the researcher with samiples of speech by the Aboriginal students, but he was doing 
this in a typically non-Aboriginal way, singling out the students one by one and 
trying to engage in conversation with each of them in the hearing of the others by 
asking them questions. Some Aboriginal students would have responded to the 
questions with silence, since singling individuals out from the group and tisking them 
direct questions is a form of behaviour which Aboriginal people naturally retreat from, 
but these students were doing their best to read the intentions of the teacher and give 
him what they wanted. And for his part, the teacher was trying to read the intentions 
of the students and to help them to express what he saw as their meanings. On both 
sides, however, the meanings were missed. To the non-Aboriginal teacher, walking, 
especially in the Vcist expanses of the Kimberley, was a pointless and inefficient way 
of spending one's time. To the Aboriginal student there were few pleaisures to compare 
with walking around and observing features of the environment, just ais his amcestors 
had done over countless ages, and just as the creative beings had done in the 
dreaming. Just to mention "waUdn'" should, he thought, have conveyed something of 
that magic to the teacher, but the teacher seemed, as always, by his mode of 
questioning, to have an agenda of his own. 

In another school in the same town, a remedial teacher had finished her class but 
one of her students was ignoring the lunch bell because she wamted to talk. A portion 
of what she wanted to say was: 

When we went for a walk, 

when we was at er [place name] ^ 

^61 




262 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



we went for a walk 

an Robert, 'e was crawlin in the sand 

'n 'e saw this snake, 

an' 'e ran back an toV Mum 

'n we killed it, 

an' 'e picked it up 'n ran around, 

'n when the 'orse came 

'n m' dad 'n Uncle Roy, Peter, 

well I said "Daddy, can I 'ave a ride on the 'orse?" 

'Esaid "Yeah." 

An' Daddy jumped off, 

I got on the horse... 

(TMlO/1, 1975). 

This student, left to herself to choose her topic, eind being able to initiate the 
interaction in her preferred dialect. Aboriginal English, talked about what happened 
when she went walking, cuid her discourse left the teacher in no doubt ais to why 
walking was, for her, eui ideal way to spend her time. 

This paper derives from the assumption that, in situations where more theui one 
variety of English is being used, teachers euid students often miss one euiother's 
meanings, because they enter the communicative experience from different starting 
points. The problem is not only that they have different dialects of English, but that 
these different dialects evoke quite different worlds of meaning, to the point where 
some meanings which are readily accessible in one dialect may be virtually 
inaccessible in the other. The mismatch is not occaisioned by the use of specialized 
vocabulcuy. It revolves around the most basic of concepts, Uke "walking". The student's 
chance to make and access meamings may depend on whose dialect prevails in the 
interaction, eUid we know that in Australieui classrooms the dialect which prevails is 
overwhelmingly that of the teacher. Standard English. 

The cleissroom presents us, in microcosm, with a conflict between systems of 
communication cmd culture which has global dimensions, eUid therefore, ais I would 
see it, the Aboriginal cleissroom is a verbally contested site which hais its counterpeirts 
in many peirts of the world. 

Globalizaton and vernacularization 

The tension in the cleissroom between two Englishes is matched at the global level by 
a tension between two conflicting trends among the users of English. On the one heind 
is the trend towards the use of English to serve the pragmatic ends of wider 
communication, maximised access to the most lucrative trading markets, speedy eind 
efficient exchange of information across diverse cultural groups; the trend we call 
globalization. But there is an equally pervasive trend which I shall call 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 263 




CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



vemacularization, whereby speakers of English are increasingly using it to express 
localized identity, to make it a vehicle of alternative forms of creative expression, to 
maintain, through its distinctive usage, cultures or sub-cultures which have 
traditionally been overlooked or undervalued by speakers of the dominant native 
speaker varieties of the language. 

Many authors have observed these tensions and referred to them in different 
ways. They may be comprehended within the division pointed out by Lo Bianco (1999) 
between a "human capital ideology" and a "human rights ideology." Global English 
serves the needs of expemding human capital, whereas localized Englishes embody 
their speakers' identity and are associated with their claims for equitable treatment. 
They may be seen to represent ; "cultural homogenization" as opposed to cultural 
diversity (Hall 1999, citing Aikman). They may be related to the discourse on 
linguistic imperialism, as opposed to linguistic ecology. Miihlhausler, for example, has 
characterized linguistic imperialism as "a promoter of one-way learning, the flow of 
knowledge cuid information from the powerful to the powerless" (1994:122) and has 
contrasted it vtnth linguistic ecology, which concentrates on "the well being of the 
inhabitants of a language ecology" and "the long term sustainability of the system" 
(1994:129). It has been pointed out by Toolan (cited by McArthur 1999) that English 
has shown development on the one hand into a global language "used by globe 
trotting professionals" and on the other into "new" languages used by speakers where 
it has become a major native language of adoption. While it is subject to globalizing 
and centricizing influences, it is experiencing equally pervasive decentricizing 
influences, as observable in the grovtnng number of dictionaries of localized Englishes, 
not least the recently published Australian Oxford Dictionary (Moore 1999) and the 
Aboriginal English dictionary of Jay Arthur (1996). 

In the contest between global and localized Englishes, educational systems, and 
the governments which fund them, consistently support the global varieties or those 
standardized national veirieties which approximate most closely to them. Varieties 
such as Aboriginal English, SingUsh, Ebonics and the Uke tend to be outlawed, or 
deemphasized in the educational systems which serve their specikers. In Australia the 
principles of inclusivity espoused in the epoch making National Policy on Languages 
(Lo BicUico 1987) were subsequently watered down in the paper which was produced 
by Government to supersede it, entitled Austialia's Language, which clearly 
emphasized literacy rather than language, and as such, literacy in standard English. 
For purposes of official policy we have one language and one variety, although the 
reality we know is different. 

There seems to be an implicit assumption that only standard varieties of the 
language are fit to have a place in the education system, and that only such varieties 
are bearers of cultural values worth maintaining. This assumption is easy to sustain 
while little is generally known about the non-standard varieties and while it seems 
that the artistic use of language is the preserve of the standard varieties. But, 
whatever might be prescribed by politiciems and educators, a large number of the 

264 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERIC 




CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



world's English speakers are aware that much of the experience that is closest and 
most valued to them goes on in an alternative English, and, because these people are 
intelligent euid creative, their alternative English reflects that, at least for them. In 
this chapter I would Uke to take a small step towards supporting the recognition of 
alternative Englishes in education by looking at one of them- Aboriginal English- in 
terms of the oral art of its teenage speakers. 

Data source 

The samples of discourse which I shall focus on are drawn from a corpus of 75 
transcribed texts of oral narratives by Aboriginal students attending schools in the 
Perth Metropolitan Area. The oral narratives were recorded between 1976 and 2000 
eUid are being analysed by a bicultural research team eis part of a one-year project 
funded by the Australian Research Council. Although, through other projects, many 
narratives have been obtained from Aboriginal students living in more remote areas, 
I am focusing only on metropolitan students to show the continuity of cultural 
expression which ceui be found in monolingual, city-dwelling Aboriginal students. We 
shall look briefly at four oral narratives, all recorded in 1996 by students of a 
metropolitan senior high school talking with their teacher who, though not 
Aboriginal, was closely associated with the students as a specialist in Aboriginal 
education. 

Analysis 

The passages are self-contained segments of more extended discourse, and have been 
reproduced, for purposes of analysis in clausally related units. The euialysis being 
made here will focus on four aspects of vernacular cirt which they exhibit: schematic 
associations, narrative structure, discourse marking and expressive discourse 
strategies. 

P29 Song in My Dream 

This text consists of a narrative by "L", accompanied by two girlfriends, "P" and "A", 
as she talks with "J", the teacher. L's utterances have been put in bold in the 
transcript: 

1 L: Oh when was it 

2 I went when I was um little 

3 'bout yeah it was ten years ago 

4 I was about five 

5 and um we was livin' up north in Broome. 

6 No not Broome, Roeboume. 

7 And um I remember having this funny dream 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 265 




CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



8 that I was in the lounge room in the um the house 

9 and then this book shelf fell on me, 

10 an' then this song come on you know what it weis? 

11 J What Weis it? 

12 L: 'I just called to say I love you'. Xxxx oohh 

13 P; [And the book shelf fell on you 

14 and they were sing'n oh ho] 

15 L: (Laughs) An' no 'I just called to say I love you' that song came 

16 I still have that dream you know 

17 cause it's 

18 J: Oh it's Uke a recurring dream 

19 L: Yeah I just like I think it's a message or something 

20 J: Yeah 

21 L: it's like xx that song came into my dream 

22 I just loved it ay 

23 I'm like Mmmm 

24 J: What the message is in that? 

25 when you fall in love 

26 you gonna fall in love 

27 Uke it's gonna be Uke a tonne of bricks 
(096 Girrawheen, Unes 140-154.) 

Schematic associations 

This narrative, Uke many which we have recorded by Aboriginal students, hcis an 
overall preoccupation with the interrelationship of physical and spiritual experience. 
The framework of a "dream" story provides a ready structure in which such subject 
matter can be communicated, especially when one is speaking to a non-Aboriginal 
person. As Arthur (1996:10) has correctly observed. Aboriginal English maintains the 
Aboriginal understanding that the "spiritual world is everywhere mcuiifested in the 
physical." But there is a further level of spiritual cissociation in this story. It is 
concerned with a message being sung. Singing, in traditional Aboriginal society, was 
a powerful way of accessing spiritual forces. Gill (1998:169), referring to the work of 
Strehlow, notes: "Songs are often sung to prevent or to inflict injury or 
sickness... Some songs have the power of charms, to bring about changs in the 
weather, for example, or to attract a person of the opposite sex. Songs certainly are 
considered powerful and efficacious." South-west Aboriginal people are well aware of 
the spiritual power of singing. One of the ways in which this awareness is maintained 
is through oral art. Here, whether consciously or not, L has drawn on this cultural 
schema and given expression to the power of song to bring a spiritual message. In 
lines 24-27 the teacher attempts to read a meaning into what L has said, but her 
meaning is not taken up by L. 

One other schematic association is worthy of comment, and that is contained in 




266 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



the first six lines. At the outset, L puts her nanative within the framework of 
travelling around the country. In many of our nanatives especially from rural dwelling 
Aboriginal people, the travel schema is fundamental to the structure of the story. Here 
it does not form the main framework but it is implied. 

Narrative structure 

We can observe, with respect to the narrative structure of L's story (as we will with all 
the narratives we look at) that it is in two parts. The first part extends from lines 1 
to 15 and is concerned with the past experience of the narrator; the second part 
extends from lines 16 to 23 and is concerned with the present relevance of that past 
experience. At a more fine-grained level we can see that L is communicating her 
narrative in a patterning of units which I call narrative idea units and interactive idea 
units. The former are embedded within the world of the narrative cuid carry the story 
forward. The latter are less frequent, but move into the here-and-now world of the 
interaction and are concerned with the understanding and empathy of the hearer. 
Interactive idea units are in lines 10 ('you know what it was?'), 16 (T still have that 
dream you knov/), 19 (T think it's a message or something') and 22 ('I just loved it. 



Discourse markers 

L makes use of three discourse markers which are commonly found in Aboriginal 
English narratives. In line 16 she uses the tag 'you know'. This has the purpose of 
marking an interactive idea unit. It shows that the listener's awareness is important 
to the speaker. In line 17 she uses what I call 'explanatory 'cause'. This should not be 
confused with the conjunction "because" which signals the reason for something. 
Rather, it is used to signal something that the listener needs to know to understcuid 
or interpret what has gone before. The third discourse marker is the tag 'ay, which, 
like 'you know' marks an interactive idea unit, but has the additional sense of 
soliciting confirmation, whether verbal or non-verbal. 

Expressive discourse strategies 

A common device in oral narrative in many parts of the world is parallelism, or the 
restatement of something often with some modification. This is also common in 
Aboriginal English oral narrative. We see it in lines 12 and 15, lines 15 and 21 and 
lines 19 and 22 (though in this latter case it is probably simply the retrieval of a 
previously interrupted utterance). L also uses non-verbal expressions as expressive 
devices, in lines 12 ('oohh') and 23 ('Mmmm'). A third device, also typical of 
Aboriginal English discourse is the use of the demonstrative 'this' to bring certain 
elements from the background of her story into profile, as in the case of 'this funny 
dream' (line 7), 'this book shelf' (line 9) and 'this song' (line 10), clearly the most 
salient elements in the story. 



a/). 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 26 




CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



o 268 

ERIC 



P35 Noise in a Duplex 

1 A: I used to live in duplex 

2 an' I jus' rny- my window was right near um 

3 L: xxxx 

4 A: yeah em' um I used to have - 

5 I used to hear xxx all shake 

6 eui' like 'cause we saw 

7 'cause we used live next to all the criminals em' everythink you know 

8 an' um they used to jump our fence 

9 the police used to always run in our back you know 

10 you jus' like- you didn't know what was goin' on 

11 so you always like jus' layin' there 

12 If you got up 

13 my bed weis real squeaky 

14 if you got up 

15 it like squeak 

16 an' then like if you walk aroun' the thing 

17 you XX you know 

18 it always used to mcike a noise 

19 an' used to be scared to get up 

20 an' jus' layin' there 

21 or like when you hear it stop 

22 you say da a d 

23 J: [(laughing)] 

24 L: [xxxx] 

25 P: [xxxxx] 

26 A: pus' like like the um] other week um 

27 I heard someone 

28 I thought someone knockin' on my window 

29 an' I go like this 

30 when we wcis just goin' to sleep 

31 someone knocking on the window 

32 I go 'Da-a-d' 

33 He Ceui hear me 

34 I kept sayin' 

35 I said 'D-a-d! Over there!' 

36 I said 'Ohh did you jus' 

37 did you hear someone knock on my window?' 

38 'e said 'No that was only me' 

39 'oh-h you idiot' (Tape 096 Girrawheen, p. 11-12, Lines 332-347). 

Text P35 is a further extract from the Seune conversation, this time with "A" doing the 
narration. 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

267 



CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



Schematic associations 

A, like L, is concerned with the intenelation of physical and spiritual experience. 
Aboriginal English nanatives are typically about known and named persons, but there 
is one exception. There is a narrative tradition derived from a schema I have elsewhere 
described in the words of one of our Aboriginal research assistants as "scary things" 
(Malcolm 2000) in which the words "someone" or "something" are used to refer to 
visitants who are unknown and only vaguely, if at all, perceived. A in this story is 
invoking this tradition. Her story, however, perhaps because of the presence of the 
non-Aboriginal teacher, does not claim to present an actual visitation, but rather a 
hoax. It is noteworthy that, as in the story by L, the schema of travelling around is 
present in the background, in that A locates her experience in one of the stopping 
places of her past experience. 

Narrative structure 

The narrative structure of A's story, like that of L, is in two parts. The first part takes 
up lines 1-22 and is concerned with generalization about experience; the second part 
takes up lines 26 to 39 and provides an exemplification to support the generalization. 
The distinctness of the two structures is clearly seen if we excunine the verbs emd 
discourse markers involved. The first part employs the imperfect tense consistently. 
Used to', sometimes reduced to 'used', occurs 8 times. It also repeatedly marks idea 
units as interactive, using 'you know' four times. By contrast, the second half has no 
verbs in the imperfect and no interactive idea units, but is fully oriented to the 
nanative. 

Discourse markers 

We have noted the use of the discourse marker 'you know' (Unes 7, 9 and 17). Two 
other discourse markers are used. In Unes 6 and 7 we see the use of explanatory 
'cause, in the same way in which L used it, to introduce a sequence which provides 
detail for the explanation of what has gone before. The other prominent discourse 
marker is 'Jus Uke', in Une 26, which marks the introduction of the second section of 
the text (the exempUfication). 

Expressive discourse strategies 

Two expressive discourse strategies are worthy of mention in this text. The first is the 
paralleUsm which we find in Unes 27-33. We observed paralleUsm in L's text but the 
process is a Uttle more complex here. Three cases of paralleUsm appear to be 
embedded, wholly or partly, in one another. At the widest level, Une 27 1 heard 
someone' has its echo in Une 33, 'He can hear me.' The anxiety of contact with the 
unknown in Une 27 is balanced with the reUef of contact with the known in Une 33. 
Then the significant words 'someone knockin' on my window' in Une 28 have their 
exact echo in Une 31. Meanwhile the response of the narrator is incompletely 
expressed in Une 29 and completed in Une 32. Clearly the movement of the narrative 
is complexly patterned, not following the Unear progression which standard EngUsh 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 269 

268 



CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



requires. Yet the story does follow a non-Aboriginal pattern in the way in which it 
employs another expressive device, a punch line (Unes 38-39) to provide an impactful 
conclusion. 

P39 Cricket 



1 


J: 


So you not gonna play Cricket or anything? 


2 


D: 


's boring 


3 


J: 


No, bit of a girl's game, is it? 


4 


D: 


You sit there an' hit 'n' bat ball 


5 




then your like 


6 




an' you miss it 


7 




and you get jarred up by your coach an' that. 


8 




Vfe used to play Cricket when we's in North 


9 




but we kept on losing. 


10 


J: 


Did you? Yeah. Not a good team? 


11 


D: 


Naa 


12 




well we only won our last match 


13 




when they like when we played the top team 


14 




and they had to play to git in the grand final to win. 


15 




but we beat 'em by two points. 


16 


J: 


Yeah, well that might 


17 


D: 


My um friend arr- 


18 




wha's 'is name? 


19 




I think 'is name is Peter. 


20 




He hit- 


21 




'cause we needed a six to beat 'em 


22 


J: 


Yeah 


23 


D: 


He hit a four 


24 


J: 


Yeah 


25 


D: 


An' they- an' they 'ad one more bowl left 


26 


J: 


Yeah 


27 


D: 


An' then he hit it 


28 




an' it went past the fulla who touched the ball 


29 


J: 


Really, god 


30 


D: 


Jus', jus' near the fence 


31 




and it jus'- just rolled 


32 




an' touched the fence 


33 




and got a four 


34 


J: 


[Oh, oh oh,] 


35 




It must have been an exciting game though 


36 




[Everyone must a been cheering] 


37 


D: 


[Yeah ^ 


38 




an' after that ^ S 9 




270 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



39 we had a big- we had a big feed 

40 J: Did you? Yeah 

41 D: Pizza, cool drink, everything. 

(Tape 096 Girrawheen, lines 473-495). 

Schematic associations 

This is an example of a sporting story which is schematically organized according to 
the hunting schema. Hunting stories are a popular traditional genre among Aboriginal 
people, especially males, in more remote and rural areas, but the hunting schema is 
still accessed by metropolitan Aborigines and may be used as a framework for the 
representation of sporting events. The hunting schema (see Malcolm and Rochecouste 
2000) typically has four main elements: the observation, the chase, the kill and the 
feed. Stories following this schema commonly employ various suspensory devices, 
stressing the need for persistence on the part of the hunter. D is a boy about 13 years 
of age, speaking with "J", the same teacher who was addressed in the other extracts. 

As is common in a hunting story (since it is important that nobody gets lost) he 
identifies the participants by name (lines 17-19). He shows the need for persistence 
on the part of the tecim (since their win nearly got away from them) (lines 20-33) and 
he rounds the match off, in the same way as a hunting trip is rounded off, with a feed 
(lines 38-41). It is also important to note that, as in the case of the previous 
narratives, the event is put in the context of travel around the state (line 8). 

Narrative structure 

like the two previous narratives, this one has a two-part structure. It is similar to As 
narrative in that it begins with a generalization about experience (in lines 1-11) and 
then gives an exemplification (lines 12-41) but in this case the exemplification is 
presented as a special case which contradicts the experience which has been 
generalized about. 

Discourse markers 

D uses three discourse markers. In lines 5 and 13 Tike' (which corresponds to 'Jus Uke' 
which was used by A) performs the function of leading in to an exemplification. In 
line 21, in common with the two previous narrators, D uses explanatory 'cause to 
provide the background to what he has already spoken about. The other discourse 
marker is one not encountered before. It is the use of 'well' to introduce a 
contradictory extension, in line 12. 

Expressive discourse strategies 

A common strategy used in hunting stories is to introduce a subject, then use a 
succession of verbs relating to it without repeating the subject. D uses this strategy 
in a limited way in lines 31-33. The effect is one of heightened anticipation of the kill 
(or in this case, the win). It is noteworthy that, in describing what we might perceive 
as a single action, the hitting of a four, D uses 6 verbs, showing observation of all the 
details of the ball's course (lines 27-33). 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 271 



270 



CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



P44 Staying Awake 

1 D: I was the first one to go to sleep. 

2 'Cause um cause if I 

3 like if you was the last kid to go to sleep 

4 you git more fun 

5 like I was tryin' to stay awake like this 'ere 

6 an' all them other kids there (puffing) 

7 'Well I'm gonna stay. 

8 What about you?' 

9 an' I'm like 

10 'yeah, yeah my eyes are jus' sore.' 

11 I'm sittin' there still 

12 an' I woke up 

13 like when they go an' chuck all them kids in the red car 

14 so they- they got- 

15 I got up 

16 an' I jumped straight in 

17 an' um the youngest- the oldest one- like no- the youngest one Shane 

18 like 'e jumped out of the car 

19 and went to like- 

20 we's all ready to go 

21 'e jumped put of the red ca- 

22 jumped out of the blue car 

23 to git in the red car 

24 and 'is mum was lucky us kids seen on the spotty 

25 or we- 'e would a been there stuck 

26 J: (laughing) Poor Shane 

27 D: An' we climbed 

28 wait wait wait for me 
(Tape 096 Girrawheen, lines 580-589). 

This is a later extract from the interaction between D and his teacher. D is describing 
what went on on a 'spotting' expedition, where a group of people went out in the 
dark, driving around with a spotlight looking for kangaroos. 

Schematic associations 

There is one fundamental underlying schema in this narrative. It is a schema in which 
the group of people involved in the event share a reciprocal awareness and 
responsibility for one another. This is expressed in D's desire not to go to sleep first, 
which would isolate him from the group and what they are doing, and it is also 
expressed in the concern for Shane, who nearly gets left behind. Aboriginal English 



271 



ERIC 



272 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



discourse abounds in stories which underline the importcuice of doing things together 
and stress the foolishness or peril of going it alone. 

Narrative structure 

Again, as in the three previous narratives, we find that this one is structured in two 
parts. The first part, lines 1-12 is concerned with the narrator's leaving the group by 
falling asleep, cuid the second part, lines 13-28 is concerned with Shane's leaving the 
group by jumping out of the car. The two halves are clearly distinguished in the 
grammatical selections they entail. In the &st half there is greater employment of 
existential verbs, imperfect tense and the progressive aspect, showing that, as in the 
case of text P35, the narration commences in a generalized way. The second half, 
which is strongly narrative, predomincuitly employs verbs in the simple past tense. 

Discourse markers 

For the fourth time in four texts, we find the explanatory 'cause being used. It occurs 
in line 2, leading in to an explanation of why it was not a good thing for D to go to 
sleep first. The other marker employed in this text is 'like' with the sense of 
exemplification, as used in texts P35 and P39. We find it in lines 3, 5 cuid 9. In the 
latter instance, Uke functions in the phrase Tm Uke' as a direct speech introducer. 

Expressive discourse strategies 

In lines 7 cuid 8 we see direct speech interpolated into the narrative with no phrase 
identifying the speaker. This is not uncommon in Aboriginal English cuid is also found 
in some Aboriginal Uuiguages and in oral narrative in other parts of the world. Line 
28 appears to represent another example of this strategy, cuid it also illustrates 
another common Aboriginal stylistic device: lexical repetition. The other strategy 
which marks this text is the use of flashback in lines 2 — 11. D tells of his going to 
sleep in the first line, but from lines 2-10 he is detailing the struggle he had made to 
prevent this happening. It is not until line 12 that the story resumes with his waking 
up. Again, we see that the narrative is not constrained by the kind of linear 
progression that would be expected in a story in stcuidard English. 



Implications 

The oral narratives we have considered here cue not exceptional. They are part of a 
continuing tradition which we have found being maintained by Aboriginal people in 
j all parts of Western Australia. What they demonstrate, I hope, is that ordinary 

I speakers of Aboriginal English have access to a significcuit repertoire of expressive 

resources when they are given the opportunity to express themselves on subjects of 
their own choosing, using their alternative form of English. The fact that the speakers 
' illustrated here come from city-dwelling Aborigines shows that the cultural 

inheritcuice of Aboriginal English is being strongly maintained even where it might be 
most at risk of being drowned out by the non-Aboriginal language and culture. 

^ ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 27 

ERIC 

d t ? 



I ti 



CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



Aboriginal people have a long tradition of what Peters-Little (2000:6) has called 
" 'resistance' to whiteness," and two centuries of a monodialectal standard English 
education system have not displaced this. There is no future in an education for 
Aboriginal people which will ignore their existing knowledge and achievements. One- 
way education ignores the fact that, as Peters-little, herself an Aboriginal writer, puts 
it, "Aboriginal people actively participate in the construction of their own 
AboriginaUty" (2000:6). 

Aboriginal people and the many people who, like them, have invested much of 
their culture and identity in an alternative English, will be best served by a two-way 
bidialectal education in which due regard is given to what Corson (1998:9), following 
Bourdieu, has called their cultural capital as well as to their aspirations to acquire 
standard English as a link to the global culture. 



Acknowledgements 

The research reported on here has been carried out with the help of a Small Grant of 
the Australian Research Council for the year 2000. The team whose combined efforts 
have helped to lead to the findings reported here includes Glenys Collard, Louella 
Eggington, Ellen Grote, Alison Hill, Angela Kickett, Judith Rochecouste, Glenys Hayes, 
Victor Patrick, Patricia Konigsberg and Farzad Sharifian, although the responsibility 
for any misinterpretation which this paper may contain is mine alone. 

I would like to pay tribute to another member of our research team who sadly 
passed away recently and whose ncune it is not appropriate to mention. 



n n o 

^ /■ o 



O 274 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 16 — ALTERNATIVE ENGLISH 



References 

Arthur, J.M.,1996, Aboriginal English: A cultural study, Oxford University Press, Melbourne. 

Chew, Phyllis,1999, 'Linguistic imperialism, globalism, and the English language' in David 
Graddol and Ulrike H. Meinhof (eds.), English in a Changing World — L'anglais dans un 
Monde Changeant, AILA and The English Book Centre, Oxford, pp. 37-47. 

Corson, David,1998, Changing Education far Diversity, Open University Press, Buckingham. 

Gill, Sam D.,1998, Storytracking: Texts, stories and histories in Central Australia, Oxford 
University Press, New York. 

Hall, Bev,1999 'Globalisation of English- Global feudalism or global knowledge.' Paper 
presented to the 24th Armual Congress of the Applied Linguistics Association of 
Australia, University of Western Australia, Nedlands, September. 

Lo Bianco, Joseph, 1999, Globalisation: Frame word far education and training, human capital 
and human development/rights. Language Australia, Melbourne. 

Malcolm, Ian, 2000, 'The Place of Genres in Two-Way Bidialectal Education.'Paper presented to 
the fifth annual Round Table of the Centre for Applied Language and Literacy Research, 
Edith Cowan University, Claremont Conference Centre, 30th June — 1st July. 

Moore, Bruce (ed.), 2000, The Oxford Australian Dictionary, Oxford University Press, 

Melbourne 

Malcolm, Ian and Rochecouste, Judith, 2000, 'Event and story schemas in Australian 
Aboriginal English.' English World-Wide, Vol.21 no.2, pp. 95-123. 

McArthur, Tom,1999, 'World English(es), world dictionaries' Paper presented to the 'Who's 
Centric Now?' Conference, The Dictionary Research Centre, Australian National 
University, Canberra, October. 

Miihlhausler, Peter, 1994, 'Language teaching = linguistic imperialism?' Australian Review of 
Applied Linguistics Vol.l7 no.2, pp.121-130. 

Peters-little, Frances, 2000, The Community Game: Aboriginal self-definition at the local level, 
AIATSIS Research Discussion Paper No. 10, Aboriginal Studies Press, Canbena. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



17 



A study of the language of pre-school Malaysian 
children 



Kow Yip Cheng 
University of Malaya, Malaysia 

This study looks at the English language used by sixty Malaysian 
children. Children do not merely recreate what they hear in their 
surrounding environment; rather they play an active role in 
constructing and reconstructing language they hear making it 
appropriate to their needs. The study aims to: - 

• Examine the language used by the respondents to communicate 

• Determine if this variety of English reflects the local culture 

• Determine if other factors play a role in the development of this 
variety. 



An overview of the language in education in Malaysia 

The national language of the country is Malay, and English is an important second 
Icuiguage. There are two types of schools in the country, namely national schools and 
national type schools, the latter comprising Chinese-medium schools and Tamil- 
medium schools. In national schools the medium of instruction is Malay, with English 
taught as a second language. Further, pupils can attend POL (Pupil's Own Language) 
classes, be it Tamil or Mandarin. In Chinese-medium schools, where the medium of 
instruction is Mandarin, Malay is taught as a second language and English as a third 
language. Likewise, in Tamil-medium schools, Tamil is the medium of instruction, 
while Malay is taught as the second language and English the third. 

In order to have a headstart in school, children are sent to kindergartens as early 
as three years of age. In kindergarten the children are exposed to English and Malay. 
Some kindergartens also offer a third language, namely Mandarin, to prepare children 
who will be entering the national-type schools. Thus one finds that the majority of 
Malaysian children are bilingual and some non-Malay children are even trilingual and 
have in their linguistic repertoire languages such as Malay, English, Mandarin or Tamil. 



275 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 277 




CHAPTER 17 — A STUDY OF THE LANGUAGE OF PRE-SCHOOL MALAYSIAN CHILDREN 



Area of research 

This study looks at the language, in particular the English Language, used by sixty 
Malaysian children. Children do not merely recreate what they hear in their 
surrounding environment; rather they play an active role in constructing and 
reconstructing language they hear thereby making it appropriate to their needs. 
Hence the aims of this paper cue to: 

• Examine the language (with emphasis on the English Lcuiguage) used by the 
respondents to communicate 

• Determine if this variety of English reflects the local culture 

• Determine if other factors play a role in the development of the variety of English 
spoken 



Methodology 

In order to study the variety of English used by Malaysian children to convey meaning, 
a total of three tasks were devised. The first task was one in which the respondents 
were required to listen to a reading of the nursery rhyme "Humpty Dumpty". Next 
they were required to recite the rhyme to the resecircher. 

The second task required the respondents to listen to a story entitled "The Greedy 
Dog". Next the respondents were required to retell the story. 

The last task was one in which the respondents were given the opportunity to 
tell their favourite story. There were no restrictions as to the respondent's choice of 
story or the style in which they chose to tell their story. This task was designed to 
study the respondent's ability to tell a story without any aid. This last task was unlike 
the first two where the respondents had the opportunity of first listening to the 
nursery rhyme (Task 1) and the story (Task 2), and then retelling them. This would 
mean that the respondents had free reign to utilise their creativity and language in 
telling the story. 

A total of sixty respondents were selected for this study. All the respondents 
were from middle income families and were enrolled in various kindergartens in an 
urban area. Factors such as mother tongue and age were taken into consideration. 
Respondents ranging from four to six years of age were selected from Malay and 
Chinese families to determine the influence of culture cuid the mother tongue on the 
language they use to communicate in. 

Of the sixty respondents twenty-eight were Chinese and thirty-two were Malay. 
The break down in terms of sex was twenty-five females and thirty-five males, 
distributed in the following manner according to age, fourteen aged four, twenty-four 
aged five and twenty-two aged six. 

Table 1 shows the profile of the respondents while table 2 shows the breakdown 
according to gender and ethnic groups. 




278 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: 



COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, F 



(hlni. Qid 



EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 17 — A STUDY OF THE LANGUAGE OF PRE-SCHOOL MALAYSIAN CHILDREN 



Table 1. Profile of Respondents 



Age 


Sex 


Race 


No. of Respondents 


4 


M 


C 


2 


4 


F 


C 


4 


4 


M 


ML 


3 


4 


F 


ML 


5 


5 


M 


C 


8 


5 


C 


C 


4 


5 


M 


ML 


8 


5 


F 


ML 


4 


6 


M 


C 


9 


6 


F 


C 


1 


6 


M 


ML 


5 


6 


F 


ML 


7 


Table 2. Breakdown According to Gender and Ethnic 
Groups 





Age 


Sex 


Race 




M 


F 


C 


ML 


No. of Respondents 


4 


5 


9 


6 


8 




5 


16 


8 


12 


12 




6 


14 


8 


10 


12 


Total 




35 


25 


28 


32 



Key: M — male F — female C — Chinese ML — Malay 



Rich interpretation 

In this study a rich interpretation method was employed. A rich interpretation 
requires the researcher to infer what the child may be trjring to say euid the emphcisis 
is on using contextual information to infer the child's intention when speaking. 

Prior to the 1970s', studies on child language had concentrated on syntactic 
structure to the omission of meaning. Studies in the 1970s tried to remedy this 
omission by going beyond the form of children's speech to include an interpretation 
of what the child intended to say or what became known as 'rich interpretations'. The 
first of these studies was carried out by Bloom in 1970. In her study Bloom suggested 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION £79 

277 



CHAPTER 17 — A STUDY OF THE LANGUAGE OF PRE-SCHOOL MALAYSIAN CHILDREN 



that different semantic relations can be expressed by identical utterances. She found 
that children used the word 'no' in three different ways in two-word utterances. The 
first was to express rejection as in 'No dirty soap', the second to describe non- 
existence as in 'No pocket', and the third meaning was of one of denial as in 'No truck'. 

One of the shortcomings of the rich interpretation technique is that it relies 
heavily on adult interpretations of the mecining the child intends to express. Thus 
there may arise the danger of endowing the child with intentions that were simply 
not present. Nevertheless, steps were taken in this study to overcome this problem. 
For example, greater structural content to the utterance would ensure a more accurate 
interpretation. Thus, one-word utterances that can mean more or less anything were 
avoided and instead there was a conscious effort to elicit longer structures. Further 
there was no effort to fit all the children's utterances into a pre-specified relation; 
rather the sample was studied in detail to examine the children's attempts to 
communicate. 



The functions of language 

In order to study the functions fulfilled by the respondent's language, HalUday's 
1 (1975) six functional concepts were utilized. He defines them as: 

' 1. Instrumental function: used to satisfy the child's needs to obtain goods or 

services, the T want' function. 

i 2. Regulatory function: used to control the behaviour of others; the 'do as I tell you' 

I 

function. 

3. Interactional function: used to interact with those around child; the 'me and you' 
function. 

4. Personal function: used to express the child's own uniqueness; the 'here I am' 
function. 

5. Heuristic function: used to explore the environment; the 'tell me why' function. 

6. Imaginative function: used by child to create its own environment; the 'let's 
pretend function. 

HalUday differentiates between the six functions that language is used to serve in a 
very young child's language and the three macro-functions that an adult's language is 
used to serve. This occurs as a result of functional reduction whereby the original six- 
proto functions are replaced by three highly coded and abstract but simpler functions, 
namely the ideational, the interpersonal and the textual functions. 

The ideational function is concerned with the content of language. It functions 
as a means and expression of our experience both of the external world and of the 
inner world of our own consciousness together with what is perhaps a separate sub- 
I component expressing certain basic logical relations. It is basically the use of language 

to learn. 

The interpersonal function is language as a mediator of role including all that 
may be understood by the expression of one's ovm personalities and personal feelings 

er|c 



280 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



rj f M 



78 



CHAPTER 17 — A STUDY OF THE LANGUAGE OF PRE-SCHOOL MALAYSIAN CHILDREN 



on the one hand, and forms of interaction and social interplay with other participants 
in the communication situations on the other hand. While the ideational component 
sees the use of language for learning, the interpersonal component sees the use of 
language to act. 

The textual function is an enabling function, that of creating text which is 
language in operation as distinct from a string of words or isolated sentences and 
clauses. It is the component that enables the speaker to organise what he is saying, 
in such a way that it makes sense in the context and fulfils its function as a message. 

Culture and bilingualism 

In this study the bilingual status of the respondents who are from the Malay and 
Chinese ethnic groups is taken into consideration. 

Retcher and MacWhinney (1995) point out that differences between whole 
cultures and the values people place on different types of languages used in 
interaction with young children constitute an important factor which has yet to be 
investigated. 

Communication strategies 

In this study it was found that in their attempt to communicate, the respondents used 
Veuious communication strategies. 

Communication strategies are defined as strategies that are employed when 
things go wrong, in other words, is an aid in times of trouble. They are thus not 
linked to problem-free communication. Bialystok (1990:35) defines commurucation 
strategies as strategies that "overcome obstacles to communication by providing the 
speaker with an alternative form of expression for the intended meaning." 

A look at the innovative strategies 

Bloomfield in his book "Language" (1933:Chapter 2) looked at acquisition from a 
behaviourist point of view in which one determines the set of environmental 
conditions that lead the child to identify and associate events with internal states. He 
proposed a five-step process that accounts for the child's acquisition of word meaning. 
In step two of his five step-process the child imitates with his closest speech what his 
mother produces, for example, (da) for 'doll'. Does a child merely imitate what he 
hears in his environment or is he able to go beyond the boundaries of his 
environment? In this study, the language employed by the respondents is examined 
to determine if factors other than culture plays a role in the make-up of the vcuiety 
of language they speak. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 17 — A STUDY OF THE LANGUAGE OF PRE-SCHOOL MALAYSIAN CHILDREN 



Innovative strategy 1: word coining 

One of the strategies utilised by the respondents in this study is the innovative 
strategy of word coining. Under Tarone's (1977) paraphrase strategy, word coinage is 
defined as making up a word, for example, 'airbalV for balloon. This strategy is 
employed by respondents to fulfil a function, that is, new words are created to fill 
gaps in their lexicon; or to stand in for a word that is difficult to recall. Thus, word 
coining enables them to convey meanings for which they have no ready-made words. 

A highly innovative strategy employed by the respondents to convey meaning 
involves the use of words taken from the LI. For example, a respondent used the 
phrase 'nen-nen pot' to mean Tireast' as in: 

"...take one girl and suck his 'nen-nen pot..." 

When asked what 'nen-nen pot’ was, the respondent pointed at his breast. The 
coining of this phrase shows the creativity of the respondent. 'Nen-nen' in a dialect 
of Chinese means milk cind a pot is a vessel used to contain fluid. As the breast of a 
breaist-feeding mother contains milk, thus it is a 'nen-nen pot’. 

While adults rely on their rich vocabulary to communicate ideas and express their 
wants and needs, young children who are still acquiring language are to a large extent 
limited by their incomplete vocabulary. However, this does not mean that they stcind 
back eind wait while their incomplete vocabuUuy becomes complete. Rather they 
resort to creative strategies to compensate for their limited vocabulary. As a result, 
the language produced by the respondents in this study is not a mere reflection of the 
local culture. It can be seen that language is manipulated to fulfill a required 
function. 

Innovative Strategy 2: using elements from the LI 

Innovative strategy 2 is akin to but unlike code -switching. The code-switching 
strategy involves the use of two or more linguistic varieties at ciny point in a sentence 
be it within a sentence or between sentences. However, the strategy used by the 
respondents here involves the appending of a sentence in English with a particle from 
their LI, for example: 

He lost his bone, loh. 

They want to run away, lah. 

In the first example, the initial sentence in English is appended by a particle from the 
LI, that is, the Chinese Icinguage. In the second example, the sentence is appended 
by a particle from the Malay language. 

The use of the particle at the end of a sentence appears to be a common habit 
not only among the respondents in this study, but generally among Malaysians. In 
fact the appending of a particle to the end of a sentence, phrase or word is definitive 
of Malaysian English. Hence the variety of English used by Malaysian pre-school 
children is influenced by the variety spoken by the adults around them. In other 
words, the variety is reflective of the culture of the country. Nevertheless, the 




282 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, PC ID EDUCATION 




CHAPTER 17 — A STUDY OF THE LANGUAGE OF PRE-SCHOOL MALAYSIAN CHILDREN 



examples seen here serve special functions which are discussed below. 

'Loh' Wcis most commonly used in the word final position. As this particle is of 
Chinese origin, it is used by the Chinese respondents. Examples of the use of this 
particle can be seen below: 

1. He lost his bone loh. 

2. ...the bones fall down loh. 

3. ... eh no more witch loh. ..no more already loh. 

This strategy of appending a sentence in the L2 with a pcu±icle from the LI is also 
functional. The use of this particle in the word final position appears to fulfil vairious 
functions, such as: 

• creating a sense of comradeship with the listener 

• softening the effect of the sentence, that is, appealing to the listener through a 
soft tonal ending 

• introducing a pause to a phraise thus creating parcels of meaning 

It can be seen from the examples above that the particle introduces a pause at the 
end of a phrase, thus creating parcels of meaning. This is by virtue of the fact that 
the pcu±icle is followed by a pause. By introducing a pause, the particle breaks a long 
sentence up into smaller parcels of meaning, thus making a long sentence more 
comprehensive and meaningful. Further the particle also appears to add colour and 
emphcisis to a sentence, thereby enhancing its mecuiing making properties. 

The particle loh' is used here by the respondents in an innovative manner to 
extend the meaning of a message. Thus the use of an LI pcu±icle appended to the 
word final position of an L2 sentence is to be viewed as evidence of creativity of the 
respondents. 

The particle lah' which has its origins in the Malay language, is used by both 
Malay and Chinese respondents, probably because Chinese children have great 
exposure to Malay and because this use of lah' is common in colloquial Malaysian 
English. 

1. What... bones lah. 

2. Tell lah. 

Just as the pcu±icle loh' hcis extended functions, likewise the pcu±icle lah' fulfils the 
following functions: 

• adding emphasis to a message 

• creating a sense of comradeship with the listener 

• softening the effect of the sentence, that is, appealing to the listener through a 
soft tonal ending 

• acting as a period to a phrase thus creating parcels of meaning 

The use of the particle lah' by the respondents in this study is not merely evidence 
that they speak Malaysian English. Beyond that, it is proof of their creativity. Just 
one particle appended to the end of a sentence extends the meaning of the message 
they are communicating. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 17 — A STUDY OF THE LANGUAGE OF PRE-SCHOOL MALAYSIAN CHILDREN 



Q 284 

ERIC 



Innovative Strategy 3: using elements from the L2 

In this creative strategy, the respondent ends a sentence in the L2 with a new use of 
a word from the L2, for example: 

He can fly one. 

The sentence is in English. However, the word 'one' that is appended to the sentence 
is not used in its original meaning in English where it functions as a numeral as in: 
'One is enough.' 

It can also be used as an indefinite pronoun as in: 

'Mr. Smith is not one of my customers.' 

It can be used as a personal pronoun, for example: 

The Holy one...' 

Data from this study showed that 'one' was used as a numeral, that is single and 
integral in number, for example: 

1. ...ah tiger want to eat one duck... 

There were also instances where the lexical item 'one' was used in word final position 
as in the examples below: 

2. A horse is go like this one. (gallops) 

3. Like thief Uke that one. 

Just as in the case of innovative strategy 2, the use of the particle 'one' here is 
another feature of Malaysian English. However, it is obvious from the examples above 
that 'one' was used with a different meaning from that of its conventional meaning. 

In example 2 'one' is used to replace the word 'gallops'. Likewise in example 3, 
'one' replaces the characteristics of a thief. In this capacity the particle 'one' appears 
to be a 'dumm/ word, that is, in itself it holds no meaning; but taken in the context 
in which it appears, 'one' replaces words or phrases which the respondent is unable to 
articulate in words. 

Appending particles and words to sentences extends the functions of the 
message; in other words meaning is extended through the innovative use of lexicon. 
The case of 'one' is a clear illustration of this point. The rule is simple; 'one' can be 
used to replace a multitude of words based on its context. Thus the strategy of 
overextension has been put into play. 

When faced with the need to express new meaning, the respondent stretches his 
limited vocabulary through overextension. Overextension, which is refened to by 
Vygotsky (1962) as 'associative complexes' or 'chain-complexes', result from the way 
children tend to focus on only one aspect of a situation at a time and to generalise 
that alone. 

Lack of knowledge, mental fog and wrong analysis can all lead to overextension. 
Lack of knowledge suggests that a child overextends the use of a word because of his 
incomplete and Umited vocabulary. In the second instance the child views the world 
through a mental fog. However, meanings become more precise as the child learns to 

2S2 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICAflONl IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 17 — A STUDY OF THE LANGUAGE OF PRE-SCHOOL MALAYSIAN CHILDREN 



discriminate more finely. Finally, wrong analysis applies to the state where the child 
uses a prototype that he then matches to other possible examples of a category using 
the characteristics of the prototype. If there is sufficient agreement he assigns the 
new object to the same category. In other words, discrepancies between child and 
adult language occur because children analyse the prototype differently from adults. 

As they grow older they gradually alter their analyses to fit those of the other people 
around them. 

The data here points to the fact that overextension occurs probably as a result of 
the child's limited vocabulary. Nevertheless in the name of communication, the child 
tries hard to get his meaning across while talking about concepts they have as yet no 
words for. In other words, the child is expressing meaning within the limits of his 
competence in the target lamguage. In this case, the respondents combined word 
stems with ciffixes to express new and richer meaning. This points to their creativity 
in utilising a limited repertoire of words to convey a multitude of mecuungs. 

Innovative Strategy 4: using loan words from the LI 

An innovative strategy employed by the respondents involving LI is the use of loan 
word from their LI. This strategy points to the ability of the child to handle the 
problem of meaning making. Malaysian children are bilingual and this ability is 
exploited by them. Hence it can be said that the language employed by the children 
here is reflective of the culture of Malaysia and the variety spoken, that is, Malaysian 
English. If there is no known word in the L2 to convey the message, then the 
respondent reverts to the known LI lexicon, for .example: 

‘tien tong’ for heaven 

{'tien tong' is from the Cantonese language) 

Data collected from this study revealed that in most instances the Chinese 
respondents borrowed from their mother tongue Chinese but there were also instances 
in which they borrowed from Malay as in the example below. 

Re 17 : In the 'pasar malam'. 

{'pasar malam' in the Malay language means night market.) 

In this example, the respondent uses the strategy of stretching her limited vocabulary 
by employing vocabulary that is common to Malaysians. The respondent uses the 
phrase 'pasar malam' probably because there is no equivalent of the concept of 'pasar 
malam' in the English language and it has become common in Malaysian English. It 
can be translated and called a night market but unlike a market it does not only have 
fresh food on offer. At the Malaysian night market one can purchase anything from 
baby wear to traditional medicines and even have a game of cards. 

Another such instance is found in the example below where a respondent who is 
proficient in English reverts to his mother tongue. In this example, he points out that 
Robin's costume is colourful. This is probably dictated by the fact that Robin does not 
wear shirt and trousers but rather an unusual costume. In Malay the term Tiaju' may 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATI^.SdSnTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 285 




CHAPTER 17 — A STUDY OF THE LANGUAGE OF PRE-SCHOOL MALAYSIAN CHILDREN 



be used as a general term to refer to clothing. Hence, in this case, the respondent 
not only employs a word that is common to Malaysians, he does so for a reason. The 
respondent openly made a choice when he used the term loaju' because it was a word 
that best conveyed the meaning he wanted to communicate. 

Re 41 : 'Baju' got. 

Re : Robin is... 

Re 41 : Colourful 'baju'. 

Re : Colourful 'baju'? 

Re 41 : Yah 'baju' is colourful.. .got 'baju'. ..black, red, ...pink... 

The conclusion may be drawn that innovative strategy 2 of borrowing from the LI and 
the common vocabulary of Malaysians is used for the following functions: 

• to compensate for a limited vocabulary 

• to express a concept that is uniquely Malaysian 

• to overcome the problem of explaining the meaning of a term using the second 



• to add colour and emphasis to the meaning of what they are trying to 
communicate. 

It may be said the use of the loan word where one switches from the L2 to LI is not 
unique to the respondents here. The use of loan words is common among Malaysian 
speakers. Once again it can be said that the language employed by the pre-school 
Malaysian children is reflective of the culture of Malaysia. However, beyond that the 
language that is used is functional. Further, what makes this strategy innovative is 
the fact that the respondents have used it to fulfil extended functions as seen in the 
examples above. They have exploited their bilingual status in the name of 
communication. 

Conclusion 

The child who embcirks on a journey as an explorer of unknown territory, therefore 
exploits his innate creativity. He is not merely an imitator of the leuiguage he is 
exposed to in his environment rather he makes language work for him. The language 
that he employs is reflective of Malaysian culture but beyond that his language is 
functional. Language is used to convey, extend, create and recreate meaning. 



language 





286 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 17 — A STUDY OF THE LANGUAGE OF PRE-SCHOOL MALAYSIAN CHILDREN 



References 

Bialystok, E., 1990, Communication Strategies: A Psychological Analysis of Second Language. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell Ltd. 

Bloom, L., 1970, Language Development: Form and function in emerging grammars. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 

Bloomfield, L., 1933, Language. London: George, Allen and Unwin. 

Carson, A.S. and Rabin, A.I. 1960. Verbal Comprehension and Communication in Negro and 
White Children in Journal of Educational Psychology vol. 51 pp. 47-51. 

Fletcher, P. and Mac Whinney, B. (ed.), 1995, The Handbook of Child Language. USA: 
Blackwell Publishers. 

HalUday,. M.A.K., 1985, An Introduction to Functional Grammar. Edward Arnold: U.S.A. 



London: Edward Arnold. 

Locke, J., 1956, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Chicago: Gateway Editions. 

Me. Neil, D., 1970, The Acquisition of Language: The study of developmental 
psycholinguistics. New York: Harper Row. 

Menyuk, P., 1971, The Acquisition and Development of Language. Englewood Cliffs, New 
Jersey: Prenctice Hall. 

Potts, M., Carlson, P., Cocking, R. and Copple, C., 1979, Structure and Development in Child 
Language: The preschool years. U.S.A. : Cornell Uni. Press. 

Tarone, E., 1977, Conscious Communication Strategies in Interlanguage: A Progress Report. 
In H.D. Brown, C.A. Yario, and R.H. Crymes (eds.). On TESOL. Washington D.C.: TESOL. 

Vygotsky, L.S., 1962, Thought and Language. Cambridge: MET Press. 



. 1975. Learning How to Mean: Explorations in the development of language. 




ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 287 



18 Communication behaviours of EFL learners in a 
native English-speaker teacher's class: a case in 
Hong Kong 

Jasmine C. M. Luk 

The Hong Kong Institute of Education 

This paper attempts to present and discuss evidence of Hong Kong 
Chinese students' communication behaviours reflecting their localized 
cultural and linguistic identities and power in English lessons taught 
by a native English-speaking teacher. By having at their disposal a 
local language not shared by the teacher, the students, though having 
only limited English proficiency, have demonstrated a rich and 
dynamic variety of communication behavioius in making their voices 
heard. Findings from these behaviours revealed the inadequacy of a 
native English-speaker teacher who is cultiually and linguistically 
incongruent with those of the local students. 

Introduction 

The purpose of this paper is to present EFL classroom data in the context of Hong 
Kong with a focus on the students' communication behavioius. Most previous research 
on classroom interaction up to the recent decade set the major focus on teacher talk 
with the general belief that the speech behavioius of the students will somehow be 
shaped by those of the teachers. However, with a changing attitude to authority and 
a rising awareness of human rights, students' speech behaviours in the class have been 
shown to be more dynamic, unpredictable and creative, very often beyond the 
initiation power and control of the teachers (Candela 1999). In L2 classroom 
situations, the scenario could be more complex. A myriad of communication 
behavioiufs may emerge because the students and very often, the teachers, have not 
only a range of speech acts to manipulate, but also two, or sometimes more, linguistic 
codes to select from. 

Hancock (1997) reported how a group of L2 learners who share an LI oscillate 
between two frames of classroom discourse symbolized by a choice of language codes 
during group work. The off-record discourse frame, characterised by the use of Ll, is 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 289 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGLISH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



o 290 

ERIC 



concerned with "negotiation between the learners" (Hancock 1997, abstract). The on- 
record frame is used in the presence of a potential L2 audience (e.g. the teacher), and 
thus, is mainly conducted in L2. In Hancock's data, the latter type of talk may also 
involve the use of some single-word or short LI insertions. 

Using a simileU perspective, Pennington (1999a, 1999b) found that in a bilingual 
classroom in Hong Kong, students and teachers also often switch between Cantonese 
and English in the three intertwining discourse frames, namely the lesson-support 
frame, the institutional-support frame, and commentary frame. In general, the lesson- 
support frame is most closely related to the lesson content and therefore, done mostly 
in L2 (English); while the institutional support frame is concerned mainly with the 
conveying of implicit and explicit institutional messages and LI (Cantonese) is more 
often used. In these two frames, the teacher is usually the leading participant even 
though students may sometimes be given the "centre stage" in the lesson-support 
frame (as in doing a role-play) and therefore are expected to use English (L2) only. 
The commentary frame is the only frame that usually excludes the participation of the 
teacher. This is the outermost frame in the classroom discourse in which students 
make on-lesson or off-lesson comments between themselves with or without the 
permission or elicitation from the teachers. This is similar to the underUfe talk 
mentioned in Canagarajah (1999). This frame is therefore done almost one hundred 
percent in LI euid most frequently in a mocking and joking way. While the 
commentary talk of the students is found to be highly lively and creative, their talk 
is very often not related to the lesson content and may be "tangential to the purpose 
of the lesson or even disruptive of it" (Pennington 1999b, p.60). 

Set also in the context of Hong Kong, lin (2000) found that students' use of LI 
does not necessaudly appear only in the outermost lesson commentary frame. Her data 
of classroom interaction between a bilingual Cantonese-EngUsh teacher and a class of 
young secondary L2 learners showed that students may choose to use their LI, or LI 
spoken with eui Anglicized tone (probably mocking the funny tone used by many 
foreigners when speaking Ccuitonese) to respond to the teacher's formal initiation in 
public even though Cantonese is traditionally taboo in the L2 clcissrooms in Hong 
Kong. The students in Lin's (2000) analysis manipulated their verbal play in LI in a 
very creative and meaningful way. Their responses fit in most relevantly in the IRF 
(initiation-response-feedback) pattern. However, the students' behaviours reflect a 
“local Cantonese-based Chinese cultural identity" (Lin 2000, p. 76, italics in original). 
Similar to Pennington who expressed concern over the potential tangential effects of 
too much Ll-commentary talk on the students' L2 development, Lin wondered if the 
students' language experience in the so-called L2 classroom would ever enable them 
to access other socioeconomically valued linguistic resources and cultural capital. She 
called for the promotion of multilingualism among school children so as to enable 
them to grow out of the encapsulation in a largely Cantonese-speaking sociocultural 
world and gain access to other socioeconomically valued linguistic resources and 
identities. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGLISH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



If the bilingual teachers in Pennington's (1999) and Lin's (2000) papers 
experienced difficulties in motivating students to move towards this goal, will a group 
of so-called "native" English-speaking teachers be in a better position to do so? Will 
this group of teachers, by coming mainly from what Holliday (1994) refers to as the 
BANA group (British, Australasia and North American models), be more able to 
establish a favourable language environment to motivate students to use more L2 for 
meaningful communication, and transcend their ethnic border and enter into a 
community of practices more highly valued than their vernacular one? 

The idea that the native English-speaking teachers may be better able to provide 
a more favourable and authentic classroom environment for second language 
acquisition heis been empirically supported by two studies in Hong Kong, one by Tsui 
(1985) and one by Tsang (1994). While Tsui's study mainly focussed on the teachers, 
Tsang looked at the students as well. Both studies compcued the teacher-student 
interaction patterns in a native English (NT) and a local bilingual teacher's classroom 
and found that the NTs were more able to provide interactional modifications (Long, 
1983) which engage the students in longer interaction. In Tsang's study, the students 
took more responsibilities for participating in and initiating during classroom 
interaction in the native teacher's class. However, both Tsang (1994) and Tsui (1985) 
did not explore whether the results were due to the nativeness, or the pedagogical 
skills of the teachers concerned. 

Nevertheless, the idea to import native English-speaking teachers to teach in 
local schools was introduced in Hong Kong as eeuly as 1986 to raise the quality of 
English language teaching eind learning by engineering a chcuige in the school 
environment from an ethnocentric and monolingual one to a bilingual and bicultural 
one (Johnson & Tang 1993). It is hoped that the availability of English teachers who 
do not speak the students' LI will increase the opportunities of the students to use 
the target language for meaningful communication in a more authentic environment. 

The present study 

The present paper attempts to present and analyse data collected from such a 
classroom ecology, with the major focus set on the students' communication 
behaviour. The key focus is on whether students will demonstrate more sanctioned 
communication behaviours (e.g. using more L2) in a native English-speaker teacher's 
class. 

The native English-speaking teacher in this study is from Britain and employed 
under the Expatriate English Teacher Scheme in Hong Kong, which is the predecessor 
of the Native English-speaking Teacher (NET) Scheme. The majority of the students 
admitted to the school were of middle ability. According to the teacher, however, the 
English ability of the class was rather limited even though most students should have 
studied English for six years. During lessons, however, they were responsive and 
talkative in Cantonese. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGLBH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



o 292 

ERIC 



Findings 

A textbook-based general English lesson forms the major data base for this paper. 
Transcripts of the lesson show a lot of similar students' linguistic and interaction 
behaviours that have been reported and discussed in Pennington's (1999b) and Lin's 
(2000) papers. Despite the fact that the teacher is a 'native' English speaker who does 
not understand Cantonese, the students provided LI responses to the teacher's L2 
initiation. The students also answered the teacher with Anglicized Cantonese and used 
LI during underlife commentary peer talk. All such behaviours do not seem to index 
the presence of a non-Cantonese speaking English teacher. On the surface, the 
students' communication behaviours seemed to have reflected no difference from 
those in an EFL classroom inhabited by a bilingual teacher. However, a closer 
examination of the sequential development of the turns taken by the students and 
their utterances has enabled me to discover some participant-oriented communication 
behaviours of the students which might not have appeared in a bilingual teacher's 
classroom. I would Uke to present and discuss such data through two representative 
excerpts. 

I will show in Excerpt 1 below how a boy student (B2) employs a hierarchy of 
linguistic strategies to communicate his meaning to the teacher. 



A four-level speech adjustment mechanism 

Excerpt 1 

(Excerpt 1 happens at the beginning of the lesson in which the teacher initiates a 
question with a view to establishing the students' schemata of fast food restaurants in 
Hong Kong. This forms part of the preparation for a textbook-based reading 
comprehension task.) 

Transcription notations: 



T 


Native English teacher 


B 


Boy student 


Ss 


Students 


Bold type 


Cantonese transcriptions 


< > 


Free English translation of the Cantonese 


A 


Anglicized Cantonese (high pitch) 


t 


Rising intonation 


[ ] 


Overlapping speech 


( ) 


Observer's comments 


;; 


Lengthened syllables, the more the longer 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGUSH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 




1 


T: 


2 


3 


Bl: 


4 


Ss: 


5 


6 


T: 


7 


8 


B2: 


9 


10 


B2: 


11 


12 


B3: 


13 


14 


B2: 


15 


B4: 


16 


T: 


17 


18 


B2: 


19 


Gs: 


20 


T: 


21 


22 


B5: 


23 


B7: 


24 


B6: 


25 


(lau 

(Tn 


26 


T: 


27 


Ss: 


28 


B3: 


29 


Ss: 


30 


T: 


31 


B3: 


32 


T: 


33 


Ss: 


34 


B6: 


35 


36 


T: 


37 


B3: 


38 


B6: 


39 


40 


T: 



Right, (clearing her throat) Fast food restaurant. 

What is a fast food restaurant? 
mak dong [nou <McDonald> 

(several students together) [faai caan dim 
[faai caan dim <fast food restaurant> 

[McDonald's for example 

(other Ss are making suggestions) 

daai faai wud <Fairwood (name of a fast food shop) 

(in Anglicized tone) daai^ faai'' wnid'' 
daai'' — big faai'' vrad'' <Fairwood>. 

Big happy (meuiy Ss laugh) 

(anglicized) taai'' gaa'' lok'' <Cade' de Cairo (name of a fast food shop) 
(many Ss talking at the same time) 
big happ::y (chuckling at the end) 

(rather softly) Pizza Hut 

okay okay. Shh shh shh, it's easier t 

[. shhhhh 

(chuckling) [big happy 

[Wendy, Wendy 

shhhhh it's easier I think, if you put your hand up and I can hear one (?) 
instead of forty. 

Okay? So we've got McDonald, Wendy's, thank you'' 



(loudly) haa dik see <Hardee's> 

(anglicised) hung dak gei gaa heung gaai 



eKentucky Fried Chicken> 



What is it about big firework? 

(laugh) big firework 

daai kaa lok <Ccde' de Carol> (angUcized) daai gaa lok, big happy 
daai faai wud 

Tell me what it is in Chinese, and I'll find out 
(loudly) daai gaa lok aa 

How about t shh, a place where you can get chicken? 
chicken aa (Cantonese peuticle) 
gaai <chicken> 

(Anglicized) haang dak gei <Kentucky> 
hand-hand-hand 

(very softly) m zi dim gong <Don't know how to say it> 

(playful pronunciation and Anglicized) haang'' dak'' gei'', haang'' dak'' 
gei'' <Kentucky> 

Put up your hand. Raise it. Put your hand up. 

230 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 293 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATIOM BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGLISH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



41 Don't shout out. Put your hand up . 

42 A place where you can get chicken. 

43 B3: I don't know English 

44 T: Beginning with a K 

My focus of analysis is B2's utterances from lines 8-11. The four levels of linguistic 
realizations are: 

Level 1 - LI only ( daai faai wud) 

This candidate response appeared after another two LI responses (mak dong non in 
line 3; faai caan dim in line 4-5). The fact that the teacher acknowledged the 
appropriate answer status of "mak dong non" by saying "McDonald's for example" 
might have prompted B2 as well as other students to go on proffering other responses 
in LI. Even though the students know that the teacher is a non-Cantonese speaker, 
they seem to have this instinctive habit of providing an LI response to an L2 
initiation in the English classrooms. This may be because they are more used to 
relying on their LI for cognitive processing. Therefore, even though the incoming 
stimuU is in L2 and the students know that the teacher is not a Cantonese speaker, 
they just could not hold the Cantonese back because it comes readily and is closely 
linked with their cognitive thinking. Their use of LI to an apparently non-Ll speaker 
on the one hand represents a lack of abiUty to gloss the LI term in L2, and on the 
other hand also reflects their instinctive and habitual use of LI in learning. 

Level 2 - Anglicized LI ( daai^ faai^ wud^ <Fairwood> name of a fast food 
shop) 

This type of linguistic behaviour in the English classroom was first reported in lin 
(1996) even though experienced local English teachers would not find it unfamiliar. 
Throughout the lesson, there were many more instances of Anglicized LI utterances 
from the students. The appearance of such a response reflects a complex psychological 
perception of what English is like by the students as has been reported in lin (2000). 
The lack of the L2 term is of course the major reason. The deliberate mocking and 
joking attitude of the students towards the way foreigners speak Cantonese as a 
symbol of resistance cannot be overlooked too. Canagarajah (1999, quoting Scott, 
1985) mentions how humour, sarcasm, and parody have been used by people as modes 
of resisting power in subtle and non-direct ways. The students of course were well- 
aware that the teacher would not be able to understand their Anglicized LI. A 
manipulation of this unique linguistic feature reflects the students' intention to make 
fun rather than to communicate. However, it is also possible to perceive the students' 
behaviour as a kind of L2-appropriation. Even though it is not the proper L2 version, 
an Anglicized LI at least makes it sound like L2. Compared with the pure LI, an 
Anglicized LI is at least one small step forward to the L2. 




O 294 

ERIC 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, FOWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFt LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGUSH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



Level 3 - Literal L2 translation-cum- Anglicized LI (big faai^ wiid^ 
<Fairwood>) 

Apart from further fun-making, by translating part of the Cantonese word into 
English, we cannot deny that B2 is trying to get the meaning across to the teacher. 
The student seems to be hoping that the hint given by the word "big" would arouse 
the NTs memory of the fast food restaurant which all local people must know. 

Level 4 - Literal translation (big happy) 

Even though this utterance from B2 caused quite a bit of laughter from other 
students, by treuislating the whole name Uterally into English, B2 has actually fulfilled 
his institutional role of answering in English. However, due to the linguistic and 
cultural incompatibility of the teacher and the students, the teacher still could not 
make out what the fast food restaurant is despite B2's effort. 

This speech adjustment mechanism has striking similarities to the Ll-based 
achievement strategies demonstrated by NNS learners during communication 
disruptions when interacting with native speeiker reported in Haastrup and PhilUpson 
(1983). Also similar to the findings in Haastrup and PhilUpson's study, the Ll-based 
communication strategies used by B2 in the class have not led to successful 
communication of messages, as evident in the teacher's query in Une 26 when she 
misheard students' Anglicized Cantonese (faai'^ wud'') as referring to the English 
word "firework". 



Students' awareness of two languages at work 

Though students in the class relied mainly on their Ll in cognitive processing and 
communicating among themselves and even with the teacher, there is a lot of 
evidence showing code-switching or code-mixing behaviour of the students. Code- 
alternation or code-mixing is frequent behaviour of teachers and students in ESL 
classrooms. The juxtaposition of the two codes usually takes place between sentences. 
Canagarajah (1999) argued that students' ability to switch codes display their 
"development of meta linguistic and meta-cognitive competence" (p.l40). They need 
to be aware of the boundaries of two distinct grammatical systems when putting them 
in juxtaposition. Code-switching behaviours very often serve rhetorical purposes. This 
observation is in fact quite true. In Excerpt 1, apart from demonstrating the more 
common intersentential code-switch for L1-L2 annotation, the students have also 
displayed a distinct type of code-alternation behaviour which I will call intra-phrasal 
code alternation (big faai'' wud'' ). In Une 10, when B2 offered "big faai'' wud''" as 
an improved cuiswer of the AngUcized one "daai'' faai'^ wud''", he has demonstrated 
his knowledge of some Unguistic properties of Chinese and EngUsh. He understands 
that the name "daai'' faai'^ wud''" consists of three syllables and therefore three 
stand-alone characters of Chinese. However, faai'^ wud'' in Chinese constitute a 
phrase with one meaning. This kind of intra-phrase code-alternation reflects creative 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 295 

292 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGLISH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



manipulation of the languages by the students. In the later part of the lesson, cuiother 
student has also employed a similar strategy and put forward "potato jung^ <a 
smashed mass>" to refer to "smashed potatoes". 

Another piece of evidence showing students' awareness of languages at work can 
be seen in their attempt to use hybridized speech forms to appropriate a common 
translation approach. While it is right for lin (2000) to say that Hong Kong students 
in her study used Anglicized Cantonese to mock the funny way of speaking Cantonese 
of the foreigner, we should not overlook the possibility of an unconscious 
internalization of Romanization as a common cross-linguistic translation process for 
Chinese terms of address by the students. Most Chinese people's names are romanized 
into English sounds with English alphabet letters, and some unique food items in 
Chinese have become codified, for example, tou fu and dim sum (li 1996). A similar 
observation has been reported by Lin (2000) when she refened to the official ncuning 
of an ancient Chinese Goddess as "Tin Hau" (literally "the Queen of Heaven"). Besides, 
two other popular fast food restaurants in Hong Kong, McDonald's and Hardee's, have 
their Hong Kong Chinese versions based on their pronunciation which make them 
seem like reverse transliterations from L2 to LI. The students' further offering of 
"daai'^ faai^ wud'^, daai^ gaa'^ lok'^" and in the later section, "haang'^ dak'^ gei'^" 
(for 'Kentucky') in Anglicized tone may have reflected the students' own language 
rules and reasoning patterns. 

A consecutive L1-L2 annotation 

Consecutive L1-L2 annotation appears in B3's utterances from lines 37 to 43. The 
teacher wanted to elicit the English name of a fried chicken fast food restaurant. Some 
students, eis usual, provided the Anglicized version of the Chinese transliteration. B3 
seemed to have understood the problem of the teacher. He first of all murmured softly 
in Cantonese that he did not know how to say it in English. The teacher of course 
missed that. After a few turns taken up by the teacher and other students, he finally 
succeeded in formulating the English expression to tell the teacher that he did not 
know the term in English (line 43). This use of an L2 -based communication strategy 
worked and the teacher followed up and provided hints to the students. Though 
limited, it is a laudable phenomenon which shows that the students and the teacher 
were commmiicating. 

Let's now look at Excerpt 2. With Excerpt 2, 1 would like to show how students' 
language awareness and practice are closely related to the local popular culture. 





296 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGUSH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



LI- or local culture-based verbal play 

Excerpt 2 

(After eliciting names of the local fast food restaurants, die teacher elicits students' 
knowledge of food items available in some popular fast food restaurants.) 

1 T: Chips I think came from England, not from France. 

2 But they call them French fries. 

3 Okay, what can you get at Wendy's? 

4 (Lots of suggestions from students, difficult to differentiate on the tape.) 

5 T: Okay, ice-cream sundae 

6 B8: (near the recorder) Sunday, ((seung ?)) <??> ('Sunday' is a local mobile 

7 telephone network company.) 

8 B9: sun dei? <sundae> 

9 BIO: (not near the recorder) Sunday, din waa lei go woo <it's a telephone> 

10 (Some students are laughing and spelling 's-u-n-d-a-y'.) 

11 B8: baai go din waa lok hui <put a telephone into it> 

12 T: That's day's Sunday. How about the ice-cream sundae? 

13 B9: y, y, d-e-y 

14 BIO: lok gei aa <Mokia> (a mobile phone brand name) 

15 (exaggerated and playful pronunciation) Noki::a:: (many students laugh) 

16 T: yeah'', it's not a day, it's a food, and the food doesn't have a It has 'e', 

17 ice-cream sundae, okay? 

18 What else can you get at Wendy's? 

The homophones "sundae" and "Sunday" have given the students an opportunity to 
manipulate language for fun. While the students are thinking of the mobile phone 
company on hearing "sundae", the teacher has clearly mistaken the students' 
confusion as related to the seventh day of the week. This instance shows that the 
teacher, by being foreign to the students' culture, is not accessing the students' 
mainstream thinking, which is largely Ll-based. A local teacher familiar with local 
culture would see the point immediately. BlO's mentioning of "Nokia" (line 14) was 
of course meant to be fun-making but it might also have served as a hint for the 
teacher to make an association between Sunday and the mobile phone company. 
However, the teacher failed to take the clue. This instance shows that 
miscommunication may appear due to cultural incongruity, even though both 
interactants are using the same language. 



: 294 

^ ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 297 

ERIC 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGLISH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



Implications 

The limitations of Ll-based communication strategies 

It has been shown in Excerpt 1 that even though some students have employed a 
Vcuiety of creative commurucation strategies different from those reported in 
Pennington's (1999a, 1999b) and Lin's (2000) studies, a common understanding 
between the teacher and the students still failed to be established in most of the cases 
mainly because the strategies used by the students are basically Ll-based. This shows 
that Ll-based strategies have great linutations in cross-cultural international 
commurucation with non-Cantonese speakers. 

Influences of mass media culture on language practice 

The students' abilities to offer "Wendy (sic)" and "Pizza Hut" as candidate responses 
and their marupulation of the homophoruc nature of "Sunday" and "sundae" to make 
fun reflect the great impact of popular mass media culture on students' language 
practices. We cannot say that students are not motivated to use English. However, it 
seems that only English conveyed through popular culture in the mass media could 
draw students' attention and have a higher possibility of being retained by the 
students. A potential danger of this phenomenon could be related to the quality and 
quantity of the English appecuing in the popular media. If the English picked up by 
the students from popular culture is too localized, it may not be able to help students 
to commurucate with people from outside this culture. 

The non-native "native" speaker 

The concept of the native speaker is a matter of relativeness. As English users, the 
students are non-native. However, in terms of the vernacular language in Hong Kong, 
Cantonese, and the local sociocultural context, they are native. The reverse is true for 
the teacher, who is native as an English speaker, but foreign in the sense that she did 
not possess the insider's knowledge of the "complexities of the meanings students are 
trying to produce with linuted language skills" (Pennycook, 1994, p.245). In other 
words, she lacked the local knowledge of the students she was teaching. 

A readiness to cross the border? 

Education policy makers in Hong Kong place high expectations on the native English- 
speaking teachers to produce "immediate" effects (Chief Executive, 1997) on raising 
students' English standards through more authentic use of the language. The data 
presented in this paper, however, may disappoint them. While a few students did 
attempt to orientate their commurucation behaviours towards a teacher who did not 
share their LI, most others were still very much attached to their vernacular discourse 
identities. However, the "blame" should not all go to the students. I have shown that 
these students have some sort of metalinguistic awareness of how their LI emd L2 are 



ERIC 




298 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGLISH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



working. Attempts to respond to the teacher's initiation and collaborate with the 
teacher in completing the IRF sequences could be seen everywhere. When the English 
they need is easy, handy and represents popular culture, they will not resist using it. 
For example, "coffee, coca-cola, Wendy (sic). Pizza Hut and Hardee's" appeared in 
students' responses. The problem for these students seems to be a lack of sensitivity 
to the real meaning of being biUngual, or learning English in addition to knowing 
Chinese. The inability of the students to tell the NT the English versions of daai faai 
wud and daai gaa lok reflects the stark reality that the culture of the students is 
CcUitonese or Chinese-based. Knowing daai faai wud and daai gaa lok is already 
sufficient for them to function well in society. Therefore, even though the English 
versions of daai faai wud and daai gaa lok always appecu side by side the Chinese 
ones, students seldom notice. The English versions of these two restaurants have never 
entered into the students' cultural worlds. The need to provide the English names of 
these two restaurants never occuned to them until this lesson. In other words, the 
students in this paper have not crossed the cultural and linguistic border which has 
sepcuated their vernacular language and English as their L2. 

It seems that an effective EFL teacher for this type of student does not depend 
on whether he/she is a "native" speaker. As Pennycook (1994) has rightly pointed 
out, the major task for EFL teachers "is not, as some teachers beUeve, to find ever 
better ways of making students talk, but to understand in ever more sensitive ways 
why they talk the way they do, and why they remain silent" (p. 245). By being a non- 
Cantonese speaker, the teacher has good potential in motivating some students to 
make effort to communicate with her in the target language. However, due to her lack 
of students' local knowledge, on several occasions she failed to understand the 
students' messages, euid so could not take them across the cultural and linguistic 
border. Canagarajah (1999) maintained that EFL teachers in periphery and post- 
colonial ethnic contexts should be "border-crossers and practice a pedagogy that 
negotiates competing discourses and cultures" (p. 194) generated by the differences 
between the vernacular and standard English-based identities and ideologies. If the 
teacher had done some research on the popular local fast food restaurants and learnt 
their Cantonese names, or had been more alert to the popular culture of the students, 
she should have been able to act as a bridge for students to cross over from the LI to 
the L2. 

Conclusion 

By showing two excerpts of EFL classroom interaction between a group of Hong Kong 
students and their native English-speaking teacher, I have shown how the students 
have demonstrated their creative interplay of LI and L2 (though of limited quantity) 
in the front stage of the classroom despite the fact that the teacher is a non-Ll 
speaker. However, due to the largely Ll-based communication strategies of the 
students and the Ll-linguistic and cultural deficiency of the native English teacher. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 299 



CHAPTER 18 - COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGLISH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



communication has not always been successful. These findings show that a native 
English speaker teacher with little or no knowledge of the students' vernacular 
language and local culture does not necessarily facilitate target language acquisition 
of the students. A certain degree of sensitivity to students' LI linguistic and cultural 
practices might be necessary. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGUSH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



References 

Canagaiajah, A. S., 1999, Resisting Linguistic Imperialism in English Teaching; Oxford 
University Press. 

Candela, A., 1999, 'Students' power in classroom discourse'. Linguistics and Education, 10(2), 
pp.139-163. 

Chief Executive, the Honourable Tung Chee Hwa, 1997, Building Hong Kong for a New Era. 
Address at the Provisional Legislative Council meeting on 8 October 1997. The Hong 
Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China. 

Hacistrup, K. & PhilUpson, R., 1983, Achievement strategies in leamer/native speaker 

interaction. In C. Faerch & G. Kasper (eds.). Strategies in Interlanguage Communication, 
Longman: London and New York. 

Hancock, M., 1997, 'Behind classroom code swiching: layering and language choice in L2 
learner interaction'. TESOL Quarterly, 31(2), pp. 217-235. 

Holliday, A., 1994, Appropriate Methodology and Social Context. Cambridge University Press. 

Johnson, K., & Tang, G. 1993, 'Engineering a shift to English in Hong Kong schools' in T. 
Boswood, R. Hoffman, & P. Tung (eds.). Perspectives on English for Professional 
Communication; City Pol 3 rtechnic of Hong Kong. 

Li, David.C.S., 1996, Issues in Bilingualism and Biculturalism. Peter Lang Publishing, Inc. New 
York. 

Lin, Angel M.Y., 1996a, Doing-English-Lessons in Secondary Schools in Hong Kong: A 
sociocultural and discourse analystic study. Unpublished PhD thesis. University of 
Toronto. 

Lin, Angel M. Y., 2000, lively children trapped in an island of disadvantage: verbal play of 
Cantonese working-class schoolboys in Hong Kong'. International Journal of Sociology 
and Language{lA3), pp.63-83. 

Long, Michael H., 1983, 'Native speaker/non-native speaker conversation and the negotiation 
of comprehensible input'. Applied Linguistics, 4(2), pp. 126-141. 

Mehan, H. 1979, Learning Lessons. Harvard University Press. 

Pennington, Martha C., 1999a, 'Bringing off-stage 'noise' to centre stage: a lesson in 

developing bilingual classroom discourse data'. Language Teaching Research, 3(2), pp.85- 
116. 

Pennington, Martha C., 1999b, Traming bilingual classroom discourse: Lessons from Hong 
Kong secondary school English classes'. International Journal of Bilingual Education and 
Bilingualism, 2(1), pp.53-73. 

Pennycook, A., 1994, The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language. Longman: 
London and New York. 

Scott, J. C., 1985, Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance. New York 
Times, 2 September: Part A, 10. 

Tsang, S. K. Y., 1994, An Analysis of Teacher-Pupil Interaction in ESL Classroom with Reference 
to Native Speaking and Nonnative Speaking Teachers. Unpublished MA, Hong Kong 
Baptist University. 

Tsui, B. M. A., 1985, 'Analysing input and interaction in second language classroom'. RELC 
Journal, 16(1), pp.8-31. 




ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, FOWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 18 — COMMUNICATION BEHAVIOURS OF EFL LEARNERS IN A NATIVE ENGLISH-SPEAKER TEACHER'S CLASS 



Van Lier, L., 2000, From input to affordance: Social-interactive learning from an ecological 
perspective. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.) SociocultuTal Theory and Second Language Learning. 
Oxford University Press. 




O 



302 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



1 



I 

I 

! 

I 19 Multilingual practices in rural Malaysia and 
their impact on English language learning 
in rural education 

i 

I Dr. Hazita Azman 

I Faculty of Language Studies 

I Universiti Kebangsaan, Malaysia 

i 

I 

This article compares home and school literacy practices of rural 
I communities in multicultural Malaysia. It discusses how these 

schooled practices were constructed within a framework in which 
literacy is viewed as autonomous and independent of context and 
j which marginalizes non-school literacy practices. It reveals the 

paradoxical situation that these relationships have created in rural 
Malaysia: schooled literacy is necessary for the attainment of 
I national goals but the marginalization of non-school literacy practices 

inhibits successful attainment of those envisioned goals. 

Background 

Malaysia, with a population of approximately 23 million, is a multilingual cuid 
multicultural country, intent on creating a national identity through one language 
and a globally knowledgeable population through the mastery of literate skills 
i especially in the English language. 

During the past four decades new nations like Malaysia have made massive efforts 
^ to reduce illiteracy as the ability to read and write is seen as the basic building block 

for further education cuid development. Such aims reflect these new nations' need to 
modernise in order to participate creatively and competitively in scientific, economic 
, and technological progress brought on by the developed countries. Sustained in this 

, development is the accepted view that literacy in English is a valuable source for 

individual dignity, a prerequisite for further learning in many areas of knowledge, and 
a key skill needed for mcuiy occupations, 
j 





ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 3Q3 



CHAPTER 19 — MULTILINGUAL PRACTICES IN RURAL MALAYSIA AND THEIR IMPACT ON ENGLISH LEARNING IN RURAL EDUCATION 



Literacy education in Malaysia 

literacy education in Malaysia centres on the importance of mastering content and 
skills through Bahasa Melayu for national identity and unity, and acquiring the 
English Language for nation building and modernization 

Essentially, a child in Malaysia receives six years of primary education and seven 
years of secondary education, the first five years of which is compulsory. At the 
primary level, education is received in the national language at the national schools 
or mainstream government schools and in Mcuidarin and Tamil at vernacular "national- 
type" schools. The national-type schools cater for the Chinese and Indian students 
respectively but are known to have received students of other ethnic backgrounds as 
well. For example there has recently been an increase in the number of Malay students 
enrolled in Chinese national type schools. This is due to the reported excellent 
performance by Chinese students from these schools, in Mathematics especially. 

Students in the national type schools begin their education in their vernacular 
languages, as well as Malay, while English is only introduced in their third year at 
school. 

Thus students in Malaysian schools are all bilingual and many are trilingual. That 
is, they are able to speak, and in most insteuices read and write to Vcuious degrees of 
proficiency, the national language Bahasa Melayu, their own vernacular, if it is not 
Malay, eutid the English Language, which is taught as a compulsory second language in 
all schools. 

Currently, special emphasis is being given to the student's ability to attain 
English language literacy skills, especially in the rural areas and particularly at the 
primary level. This is because the government deems as very important mastering the 
Icuiguage as a means of equalising opportunities for the rural people. 

In the advent of the computer age, mastery of English language literacy skills is 
particularly crucial for Malaysians not only to bridge the urban-rural gap on the micro 
level but also to bridge the digital gap between developed eUtid developing countries 
on the macro level. 

English language literacy at rural schools 

The concern about English language literacy problems cunong rural students has 
become significeutitly more important with the advent of the electronic and 
technological world bringing with it a globalized era which is set to seep through the 
developing countries including Malaysia. 

Low English literacy performance has been a perennial problem since Bahasa 
Melayu was made the main language of instruction and knowledge in 1976. 

Despite efforts to upgrade the teaching and learning of English, especially in the 
rural areas, English literacy skills among the rural children at school remains very low 
compared with their counterparts in the urban areas. 

In the English Language excutiination results for the primary euid secondary 




304 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



ERLC 



CHAPTER 19 — MULTILINGUAL PRACTICES IN RURAL MALAYSIA AND THEIR IMPACT ON ENGLISH LEARNING IN RURAL EDUCATION 



national exams, recently the rural schools showed a 6.4 percent drop across the board 
in the success rate with only 44.3% obtaining passes at the primary level and 40.55 
% passes at the secondary level (MOE 2000). 

At the same time as attempts to improve outcomes in English literacy skills are 
being made, emphasis is also being placed on the use and mastery of Bahasa Melayu, 
the national language, especially among the non-Malays. 

Integral to the identity of non-Malay students, however, eue also the literacy 
practices in their home languages, which shape their &st experiences with literacy. 
Such children are therefore faced with the challenge of maintaining their native 
languages while trying to assimilate two other languages into their repertoire. 

As the national language is vital to promoting unity and national identity and 
the English language is necessary to promote nation-building and globalization 
processes in industry and communication technology, it is essential to have an 
accurate picture of the languages in use, in terms of the full range of literacy practices 
in the rural community and how the perceived values related to them impact on the 
practices of each other. 

Thus literacy circumstances in rural Malaysia are unique given the diversities in 
ethnic culture and language, as well as environmental backgrounds. 

This chapter highlights the need to have a comprehensive understanding of the 
rural child's environmental background and opportunities for literacy input, which 
extend from the historical, political, socioeconomic profile of the community he or 
she lives in to the ethnic and home language he or she belongs to, before language 
euid literacy problems can be unravelled. 



I 




Rural Malaysia 

Seventy-five percent of Malaysia is still rural. A community is designated as rural on 
the basis of its distance from a large town (more than 80km), population size (under 
2,000) and its overall socioeconomic status (average of <RM1000 per month) in 
relation to the rest of the country (Department of Rural Development Malaysia 1999). 

Historically, Malays populated Peninsula Malaysia. It was not until the 
nineteenth century during the British colonial rule that Chinese and Indian 
immigrants were brought to the country for economic purposes. The British brought 
Chinese indentured labourers into then Malaya in the 1850s to work in the tin mines 
and Indian indentured labourers in the 1870s to work in the rubber plantations. 

Traditionally, rural communities in Malaysia are characterised by the pattern of 
separate ethnic enclaves laid down by the British colonials when they resettled 
different groups of people consistent with their desire to "divide eind rule" in their 
effort to stay in power (Rosnani 1996; Ee, 1984). 

In general, an examination of the demographic features of most rural 
communities in Malaysia reveals that the population is heterogeneous, distinctively 
identified by ethnicity and also by the historical circumstances of their settlement 

302 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 3Q5 



CHAPTER 19 — MULTILINGUAL PRACTICES IN RURAL MALAYSIA AND THE® IMPACT ON ENGLISH LEARNING IN RURAL EDUCATION 



into the areas. While the local population is still mainly traditionally segregated into 
their residential cireas, the impending influx of new settlers to the area, with the 
opening of new roads and highways connecting one region to another throughout the 
country, have in*turn encouraged the opening of new housing developments and 
commercial centres to border the rural communities. 

The impending integrative forces of these inevitable changes seem likely to effect 
change in the attitudes and values of the rural communities as envisaged by the local 
rural development department. Rural development programmes in Malaysia are 
designed to extend the benefits of development to those who live in the rural areas. 

By yecu 2020, the rural development department (2000) hopes to upgrade the 
rural areas in the country into attractive settlements, equipped with well-planned and 
facilitated infrastructure including the widespread use of ICT. Meanwhile, the rural 
society would be educated and trained for life long skills that would empower them 
with a "modem" mind that is open and flexible and is able to compete well in the 
competitive knowledge based economy. 

Rural education in Malaysia 

In Malaysia, 83% of primary schools and 58% at the secondary level are categorised 
as rural schools (Azizah & Sharifah 1992). Schools are designated as rural based on 
their locality and the surrounding socio-economic conditions of the community. 

Through its mral development programmes, the government has taken several 
measures to upgrade learning facilities at the rural schools while awarding 
scholeirships to deserving students to encourage them to pursue education at a higher 
level. Students at these rural schools also receive free school textbooks and food 
coupons to ensure that they receive a nutritionally balanced diet at school. 

Rural education plays a significant role in accomplishing national strategies for 
rural development in that it develops the capacity to read and write and encourages 
attitudes and communication skills that are conducive to encouraging rural people to 
participate in development processes and to motivate others to do likewise. 

The national education curriculum thus constmcts literacy practices such as 
reading and writing for information on the basis of values related to the national goals 
and strategies. Therefore the constmctions of literacy practices are mainly socially and 
politically determined in Malaysia. 



Literacy Practices 

street (1994) and Barton (1994) define literacy practices as socially accepted ways of 
doing things, which involve not only acquiring technical skills but also taking on 
particular identities associated with them. 

Caimey and Ruge (1997, pp. 5) further explain that literacy practices are 
"situationally defined in and through" literacy events, where the interactions and 
practices of people are socially constmcted by "the general cultural ways of using 

303 

O 306 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 

ERIC 



CHAPTER 19 — MULTUINGUAL PRACTICES IN RURAL MALAYSIA AND THEIR IMPACT ON HJGLISH LEARNING IN RURAL EDUCATION 



literacy". 

As the value a society places on literacy and exactly what it means by literacy 
may change over time, McKay (1996, pp. 426) points out that "what it means to be 
literate is therefore dependent on the literacy values and standards of the period". 

Thus this implies that the acquisition of a particular set of literacy practices is 
also associated with different contexts and different cultural identities (Street 1994). 

In this view, the skills, concepts, and ways of thinking that an individual develops, 
referred to as "literate behaviour or practices" by Heath (1991), reflect the uses and 
approaches to literacy that permeate the society in which the individual is a 
participant. 

Ferdman (1990) and Gee (1990) observe that, as it is a social and cultural 
practice, members of different cultures may differ in what they see as literate 
behaviours and therefore engage in different literacy practices. We must therefore talk 
of literacies or multiple literacies as identified by Gee. This view of literacy 
encompasses multiple discourses, which may include those other than print: visual 
literacy, computer literacy and literary literacy. 

Literacy practices in rural Malaysia 

The fact that literacy definitions change according to social and cultural priorities is 
evident in the development pattern of literacy education in Malaysia. 

In the 1970 s there was a call for literate and aural skills in Bahasa Melayu to be 
emphasised, especially among the non-Malays, as an integrative force and for the 
development of a national identity among the multiethnic society in Malaysia. 

Then in the 1980's there was an overwhelming concern for literate knowledge in 
mathematics and science. Campaigns to make the two subjects more 'student friendly' 
and applicable to the students resulted in revisions to the math and science syllabi as 
well as the teaching methods to be used. 

In the 1990 s and at the dawn of the new millennium, literacy and computer 
literacy have taken on importance as the governing group is compelled to 
acknowledge the need to create a knowledge based society who are multi-skilled, 
resourceful, creative and innovative, while at the same time possessing strong moral 
and ethical values. Along with these two discourses, English literacy came back into 
importance as the language for global commurucation. However, the preferred 
discourse now is English for science and technology rather than English for 
communicative purposes only. 

The schools are responsible for realising these national goals through their 
curriculum and practices. 

This responsibility is even more significant in rural communities where the 
majority of the parents do not possess adequate an educational background or 
financial capacity to provide their children with the necessary tools and skills. These 
parents rely solely on the schools to provide their children with these opportunities 
and skills. 

301 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 3Qy 



CHAPTER 19 — MUmUNGUAL PRACTICES IN RURAL MALAYSIA AND THEIR IMPACT ON ENGLISH LEARNING IN RURAL EDUCATION 



Generally, the rural population has submitted to the fact that mastery of the 
literacy skills in English and computers is the key to economic gains and elevated 
positions on the socioeconomic ladder for their children. Unfortunately this is not 
reflected in the population's literacy practices and behaviours. 

In a nationwide survey carried out by the National Library of Malaysia in 1998, 
it was found that although 91% of the rural population claimed to be literate as 
defined by "can read", less than 30% "practice reading" and "can read proficiently" in 
either Malay or English (Frank Small et al. 1998). Even less than 10% are computer 
literate and only 5% has a computer in the home. Most of the computer training and 
experiences occur at work and school. 

A more in-depth investigation by Hazita (1999) of two rural communities 
revealed that literacy behaviours evolved around school related practices (84% of the 
time), such as completion of homework and studying for tests and quizzes. These 
activities occuned mainly in Malay, Memdarin, Tamil. 

English Language was seldom given as homework, as the English teachers usually 
ensure work is done in the classroom with their guidance. 

In terms of non-school related literacy acts, reading of magazines and newspapers 
was ranked the most frequent activity at home among most fathers and some mothers 
(80%), followed by reading of religious books, mostly with mothers guiding their 
children (65%). Writing short notes or letters and cards occur occasionally, usually 
nearing festive seasons (5%). These literacy acts are carried out in Malay (55%), 
Mandarin (30%) or Tamil (13.5%) and very rarely in English (1.5%). Table 1 below lists 
the most common literacy acts that occur at home. 



Table 1. Non-school Uteracy practices 



Materials 


Fathers 


Mothers 


Family 


Children 


Schoolbooks (84%) 


9% 


10% 


1% 


80% 


Newspapers & Magazines (80%) 


50% 


30% 


20% 


5% 


Religious Books (65%) 


15% 


65% 


5% 


15% 


Writing letters/ notes & cards (5%) 


20% 


30% 


15% 


35% 



n= 339 



Other home literate acts demonstrated and reported by the participants in the study 
are reading comics in Malay, reading education magazines such as National 
Geographic, browsing through coitdcs in English and reading novels or storybooks in 
any language, singing the lyrics of a song from print while listening to the song in 
English. 

The same study revealed patterns in publication purchases in the two 
communities. It found that most parents spent a significant amount of their small 
earnings on school-related materials such as workbooks for Math, Bahasa Melayu, 
Science emd English Language. 





308 ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 19 — MULTILINGUAL PRACTICES IN RURAL MALAYSIA AND THEIR IMPACT ON ENGLISH LEARNING IN RURAL EDUCATION 



other non-school related materials bought most frequently are entertainment 
magazines, newspapers and religious books in Malay, Mandarin and Tamil. See Table 2 
below. 

Table 2. Non-school Reading Materials Purchased 



Materials 


Malay 


Mandarin 


Tamil 


English 


Magazines 


60% 


18% 


21% 


1% 


Newspapers 


35% 


27% 


28% 


10% 


Religious books 


55% 


23% 


21% 


1% 



Outside of the schools and homes these commuruties offer Uttle opportunities for 
schooled literacy skills to be appUed, especially where English literacy is concerned. 

Therefore, the social realities of these nual communities render the imposition of 
literacy practices for English especially irrelevant, as the immediate environment does 
not currently reflect their needs. This is because business transactions cue conducted 
in either non-standard Malay or a Chinese dialect; conversations at coffee shops are 
carried out in mainly Malay, Chinese and Tamil; and printed matter can be found in 
the different ethnic languages. Even movies and television shows are subtitled in 
Malay and Chinese. Thus there is very little need for the use of English in the 
immediate social environment. This fact poses some pedagogical challenges to the 
rural schools in relation to the teaching of ESL in rural areas. 

Several patterns depicting rural perceptions of literacy euid literacy practices also 
emerged from the study (Hazita 1999): 

The first is the notion of literacy equated with school literacy and this has had 
an overreaching influence on home literacy practices. All rural ethnic groups viewed 
literacy skills as being associated primarily with school success and future career 
opportunities. In this construction, literacy was seen in terms of school practices and 
less in terms of practices that occur every day in the community. This view of literacy 
has led to a marginalization of non-school literacy practices in the schools and homes 
where pcirents encourage their children to study instead of reading storybooks and 
where schools regard other literacy practices at home which cue limited to functional 
tasks such as writing notes and reading for general information and entertainment as 
not valuable. 

Secondly, the study has found a general pattern that indicates a lack of 
integration amongst the ethnic groups in public life in rural communities. The use of 
specific languages is determined by the place of use and purpose. In essence, because 
the communities are heterogeneous and socially diverse, their home language literacy 
practices are confined mostly to their own ethnic groups. 

Multilingual literacy practices most commonly occur in venues such as schools 
because the curriculum dictates it to be so, or if in public, at specified venues where 
ethnic groups gather, such as at the various work places. 

306 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA; COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 19 — MULTILINGUAL PRACTICES IN RURAL MALAYSIA AND THEIR IMPACT ON ENGLISH LEARNING IN RURAL EDUCATION 



o 310 

ERIC 



And thirdly the summary of findings presented in the study consistently 
highlights a pciradox between the perception of school literacy goals as the 
embodiment of national goals and the interpretation and implementation of these 
goals by the teachers (and the parents who emulate the teachers) in classroom 
constructions of literacy. 

These patterns of contrast are mainly due to the different attitudes and 
philosophies held by school personnel in relation to the views of how literacy can be 
constructed. The teachers construct literacy in the classroom as skills to be utilised by 
the students to demonstrate comprehension of an isolated text so that their 
proficiency can be evaluated. The literacy events constructed in the classroom do not 
usually expand the relevance of the literacy act beyond the text. What is being taught 
is not always related to the students' social realities nor do teachers draw upon the 
student's own literacy backgrounds. 

By doing this, the teachers, consciously or unconsciously, effectively marginalize 
the existence of other languages and literate behaviours associated with them. Thus, 
in marginalizing these other literacies in the classroom, the teachers segregate rather 
than integrate these main languages in multilingual and multiethnic Malaysia. 

In failing to recognise the salient differences in the language literacy practices 
of the multiethnic communities and the way these practices fit into the social network 
the student operates within, the teachers may ignite a sense of insecurity among the 
members of the community that their multiethnidty and multilingualism may be 
threatened. These patterns point to the vital fact that schools may find it helpful to 
draw more often on the cheuacteiistics of multilingual home literacy practices. These 
focus mainly on getting information and meaning for current knowledge and 
entertainment. Such a function is very valuable in the modem context and may help 
create an interface between schools and homes if more frequently acknowledged. 

This interface would thus allow teachers to draw on home literacy practices at 
school and parents might be encouraged to see all forms of literacy as helping to build 
competence in school related literacies, especially for English language. 

In summeiry, the patterns that could be discerned emerging from the study are 
delineated below: 

1 Literacy practices can be categorised into two major types of behaviours: school- 
related practices and non-school related practices. 

2 Literacy practices occur in multilanguages: Malay, Memdarin, Tamil and to a 
limited extent English. 

3 English literacy occurs mainly in schools only. 

4 Home literacy practices are largely dictated by school practices. 

5 Perceptions of literacy among the rural population which, although 
heterogeneous in ethnicity and home languages, is nevertheless homogeneous in 
its valuing of literacy and its role in achieving the nation's aspirations for a 
knowledge-based society. 



307 

ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 



CHAPTER 19 MULTILINGUAL PRACTICES IN RURAL MALAYSIA AND THEIR IMPACT ON ENGLISH LEARNING IN RURAL EDUCATION 



6 However, social realities in the rural communities demonstrate that post-literacy 
activities are not immediately available, rendering the 'new literates' limited 
avenues for upgrading and using their skills as well as applying their literacy 
knowledge. 



Conclusion 

In the tradition of viewing literacy from a socdocultiual perspective this paper 
examined and attempted to extend a probable explanation for the lagging literacy 
performance among rural students in Malaysia especially in the English Language. 

Changes in historical, socio-political and socioeconomic factors have impacted on 
multilingual and multiethnic rural communities in their perceptions of literacy and 
their local practices in Malaysia. These changes have brought upon the communities 
demands for new skills such as literacy in English and computers, while at the same 
time revealing how unprepared they are in meeting these inevitable changes. 

Schools in rural communities thus play a major role in changing the perceptions 
of literacy among the rural population. And the onus lies in the school personnel who 
need to ensure that the national goals and the means to achieve them are 
accomplished. However, the challenge for them is making these goals relevant to the 
immediate needs of the rural population and their social realities. 

While vision 2020 hopes for the achievement of the cultural unity and an 
independent and progressive nation for Malaysia, it is valuable to remember that the 
unity of a nation depends not upon the singleness of the tongue or homogeneity of 
culture, but in the hearts of its citizens. Therefore, for a multiethnic and multilingual 
country such as Malaysia to forge ahead in its nationalistic goals, it must first 
demarginalize and then empower its citizens so that they can willingly internalise the 
same goals and work towards achieving them together, while harmoniously 
maintaining their individual differences and uniqueness. 



308 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 3^1 



CHAPTER 19 - MULTILINGUAL PRACTICES IN RURAL MAUYSIA AND THEIR IMPACT ON ENGLISH LEARNING IN RURAL EDUCATION 



References 

Azizah Abdul Rahman & Sharifah Md. Nor, 1992, 'Rural education in Malaysia', in Victor King 
and Nazaruddin Mohd. Ali (eds.). Issues in Rural Development in Malaysia, Dewan 
Bahasa & Pustaka, Kuala Lumpur, pp. 313-329. 

Barton, D., 1994, 'Preface: literacy events and literacy practices', in M. Hamilton, D. Barton, 

R. Ivanic, (eds.). Worlds of Literacy, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, Toronto, 
pp. vii-x. 

Cairney, T. H. & Ruge, J., 1997, Community Literacy Practices and Schooling: Towards effective 
support for students. Executive summary. Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra. 

Department of Rural Development Malaysia, 1999, Perancangan pembangunan luar bandar, 
Kementerian Pembangunan Luar Bauidar, Kuala lumpur. 

Ee, Tiang Hong, 1984, Education in Malaysia and Singapore: A comparative study of racial and 
cultural factors as determinants of education policy, 1945-1970, Unpublished Phd Thesis, 
Graduate school of education. University of Western Australia. 

Ferdman, B., 1990, 'Literacy and cultural identity', in Harvard Educational Review, vol.60, pp. 
181-204. 

Frank Small & Associates, 1998, Reading Profile of Malaysians 1996: A national survey. 
National Library of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 

Gee, J, 1990, Social Linguistics and Literacies: Ideology in discourses. The Falmer Press, 
London. 

Hazita Azman, 1999, Multilingual Literacies in Rural Malaysia: National goals and local 

practices. Unpublished PhD thesis. Graduate School of Education, University of Western 
Australia. 

Heath, S. B, 1991, 'The sense of being literate: historical and cross-cultural features', in R. 
Barr, M. L. Kamil, P. Mosenthal, and p. Pearson (eds.). Handbook of Reading Research, 
Longman, New York, vol.ll, pp. 3-24. 

McKay, S. L, 1996, 'Literacy and literacies', in S. L. McKay and N. H. Homberger (eds.). 

Sociolinguistics and Language Teaching. Cambridge university press, Cambridge, pp. 421- 
445. 

Ministry of Education Malaysia, 2000, Analisis keputusan peperiksaan 1999, Kuala Lumpur. 

Rosnani Hashim, 1996, Education Dualism in Malaysia: Implications for theory and practice, 
Oxford University Press, Kuala Lumpur. 

Street, B, 1994, 'Cross-cultural perspectives on Literacy', in L. Verhoeven (ed.). Functional 
Literacy: Theoretical issues and educational implications, John Benjamin Publishing 
Company, pp. 95-111. 





312 



ENGLISHES IN ASIA: COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER AND EDUCATION 




COMMUNICATION, IDENTITY, POWER & EDUCATION 

Edited by 

Andy Kirkpatrick, Curtin University of Technology, Perth, Australia 



The papers in this volume represent a selection of the papers given at 
the 5*^ English in South East Asia conference, held at Curtin University 
of Technology, Perth 6-8 December 2000. 

This collection of 19 papers by key researchers in the field explore 
various aspects of the development of regional varieties of English 
including the roles that they play in local and regional communities 
and how they co-exist with other varieties of English and other 
languages. 

Specific questions addressed by the papers here include: 

• Is English developing at the expense of regional languages? 

• How do regional varieties of English reflect regional cultures? 

• How do the languages of the region and the various Englishes 
influence each other? 

• What are the classroom implications of regional varieties of 
English? 



Curtin 




Centre for Literacy, Culture , 
and Language Pedagogy 



School of Languages 
and Intercultural Education 




Published by 





U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 



Reproduction Basis 



X 



This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release (Blanket) 
form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all or classes of 
documents from its source organization and, therefore, does not require a 
"Specific Document" Release form. 



This document is Federally- funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may be 
reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form (either 
"Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 




EFF-089 (1/2003) 



