DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 305 S04 EC 212 754 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Hoernicke, Placido A.; And Others 

Perceptions of Etnnic and Multicultural Content in 

Two Ka:]or Journals Related to Exceptional Children. A 

Report to the Minorities Committee of the Council for 

Exceptional Children, Fall 1988. 

88 

14p. 

Reports - Research/Technical (143) 
KFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

Alaska Natives; American Indians; Asian Americans; 
Blacks; ^Content Analysis; Cultural Pluralism; 
^Disabilities; Elementary Secondary Education; 

Ethnic Groups r Hispanic Americans; ^Minority Group 
Children; Pacific Americans; ^Periodicals; Scholarly 
Journals; ^Special Education; Teacher Attitudes; 
Teaching Methods 

Exceptional Children (Journal) ; Teaching Exceptional 
Children (Journal) 



ABSTRACT 

This study examined literature coverage of issues 
related to ethnic and cultural minorities in two publications in the 
field of special education: "Exceptional Children" and "Teaching 
Exceptional Children." Leadership personnel within the Council for 
Exceptional Children (n=76) were surveyed concerning their opinions 
of multicultural content in the two journals. Results indicated that 
the 40 respondents felt the amount of minority coverage in both 
journals was inadequate. The respondents also perceived that the 
amount of coverage varied by group (Black, Hispanic, American Indian, 
Asian, Pacific Islander, or Alaskan Native/Native Canadian). An 
analysis of the content of the publications from 1985-1987 was a-so 
undertaken, which involved counting each occurrence of terms related 
to ethnic and multicultural concerns. Findings suggested that there 
were relatively few occurrences of the terms. "Teaching Exceptional 
Children" hcd very limited coverage of the topic. In "Exceptional 
Children," approximately 68 percent of the occurrences were related 
to Blacks and 24.5 percent were related to Hispanics. The remaining 
7.5 percent of the occurrences were distributed among Asians (4%), 
American Indians (2.5%), and Pacific Islanders (1%). Terms related to 
Alaskan Natives/Native Canadians did not occur. (JDD) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



oo 

Perceptions of ethnic and Multicultural Content in Two 
Major Journals Related to Exceptional Children 



U S DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

OH»ce d EducattOnai Reseaech amj Imofowement 

FDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATjON 
CENTER (ERIC* 

_^?'^fS document has Oeer reproduced as 
'eceived f'om me pe'son c o'9anija»»on 
originating it 
r Mrr^or cnangei have been made to if«prowe 
reproduction quality 

• Points 0' View o? opinions staieo m this doco 
m«nr rtA no» necessarily represent official 
OERl position or OOliCy 



UJ 



A Report to the Minorities Committee 
of the Council for Exceptional Children 
Fall 1988 



Authors : 



Placido A. Hoernicke, Associate Professor of Special 
of Special Education, Fort Hays State University 
Hays, KS 

Michael Kallam, Assistant Professor of Special 

Education, Fort Hays State University, Hays, KS 

^ Tulio Tablada, Director of Special Services, Garden 

>s City, KS 

^ "PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 

X MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



lEF 

^ BFST mPY ftVAII ftBLE 



/ 



.ERIC 

- ^ ^ TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 

I HFOnMAT IQ M C 6»T6n <Cf>lO>.' 



Perceptions of Ethnic and Multicultural Content in Two 
Major Journals Related to Exceptional Children 



The culturally, linguistically and ethnically 
diverse population of the United States is increasing at a 
very rapid rate. Baca (1984) reports projection figures 
for the non-English-speaking population in the United 
States growing from 28 million in 1976 to nearly 40 
million by the year 2000. The increase in this population 
will be reflected in larger numbers of students with 
culturally diverse backgrounds in all areas of education, 
including special education. 

Providing appropriate services to the culturally 
diverse students currently enrolled in special education 
is a tremendous challenge to special educators. This 
challenge will intensify as the population continues to 
increase. Questions on providing appropriate services to 
culturally diverse students, that are currently being 
asked, are increasing at what appears to be a faster rate 
than the answers. A typical response to educators' 
questions about "issues," such as those related to 
cultural diversity, is to refer the individual making the 
request to the "literature." In the area of providing 
appropriate services to culturally diverse special 
education students this approach may be problematic. 

The Research Problem 

In light of the typical pattern, of referring the 
educator to the "literature," a study was conducted to 
determine the actual content on minority students in two 
special education journals as well as the perceptions of 
special education leadership personnel toward the amount 
of the coverage. 

The study consisted of two parts. The first part of 
the study was designed to survey leadership personnel 
within the Council for Exceptional Children (CEC) on their 
opinions of multicultural content in Exceptional 
C hildren and in Teaching Exceptional Children . This 
part of the study included the development of a survey 
instrument and the ixiailing of the instrument to Governors 
and Executive Board members of CEC. (See Appendix A.) 

The second part of the study, which was carried out 
concurrent with che survey, was an analysis of the actual 
multicultural content in these journals. In order to 
provide objective data a list of specific terms was 
developed (i.e.. Black, Hispanic, Asian, etc.) and the 
number of times each of these terms occurred was recorded. 

The two major special education journals. 
Exceptional Children and Teaching Exceptional 
Children , were selected for study because they are 
provided to each member of the Council for Exceptional 
Children and are available in university, school and 



institutional libaries, and consequently have a large 
readership. They were also selected because they 
represent a broad array of coverage in the area of 
exceptional individuals. In the interest of recency and 
of representativeness, the issues of the journals 
published in 1985, 1986, and 1987 were included in this 
study. 



Surveys were mailed to 76 Governors and Executive 
Board members of CEC . There were 40 respondents (53 %) to 
the survey. The respondents represented a group with a 
great deal of experience in special education. The 
responses to an item on years of membership indicated that 
the respondents had been members from between 9 to 39 
years with an average of 17.5 years of membership. Since 
this group represented leadership levels at thci state and 
national level this finding was expected. 

The majority of the respondents indicated that they 
were white. Only two indicated that they had a minority 
background. One respondent indicated that he/she was 
Black and one indicated that he/she was American Indian. 
The respondents were also asked to indicate if they were 
currently working with ethnic/cultural minority students. 
The majority, 28 (70%), indicated that they were currently 
working with minority students. 

Respondents were also asked to indicate the CEC 
divisions to which he or she belonged. The majority 
indicated that they belonged to several divisions ranging 
from the Division of Learning Disabilities to the Division 
for Research. Table 1 shows the respondents membership in 
the various CEC divisions. 



The Subjects 



Table 1 

Respondents Membership in CEC Divisions 



Division 



Membership 



Administrators (CASE) 
Learning Disabilities (DLD) 
Mental Retardation (CEC^MR). 
Teacher Education (TED) 
Behavioral Disorders (CCBD) 
Early childhood (DEC) 
Career Development (DCD) 
Physically Handicapped (DPH) 
Communication Disorders (DCCD) 
Gifted (TAG) 

Technology and Media (TAM) 
Educational Diagnostic Services (CEDS) 
Researcn (CEC^DR) 



35% 

35 

28 

25 

18 

18 

12 

10 

8 

8 

8 

5 

3 



Respondents Perceptions of Publications Content 



The respondents, Governors and Executive Board 
members of CEC, were asked to indicate their perceptions 
of the amount of multicultural content in Exceptional 
Children and in Teaching Exceptional Children , The 
researchers selected the CEC leadeuhip group because it 
was felt that the years of membership and the 
responsibilities of the offices held by individuals in 
this group was an indication of serious commitment to the 
field of special education and that this group would be 
interested in and sensitive to the content of the CEC 
publications under study. The respondents were asked to 
indicate, in their opinion, whether the coverage of ethnic 
and multicultural concerns in Exceptional Children and 
in Teaching Exceptional Children for the years 1985, 
1986, and 1987 was "too little", "about right" or "too 
much" as related to Blacks, Hispanics, American Indians, 
Alaskan Natives/Native Canadians, Asians, and Pacific 
Islanders. The mean responses related to the coverage of 
minority concerns in Exceptional Children on a five 
point scale (1 = too little, 3 = about right, 5 = too 
much) ranged from a high of 2.4 for Blacks to a low of 1.6 
for Alaskan Native/Native Canadian. There were a few 
respondents who did not express an opinion or who omitted 
one or more responses on the survey. Table 2 shows the 
responses related to the amount of coverage of the 
selected groups. 

Table 2 

Respondents Opinion of Minority Coverage 
in Exceptional Children for 1985, 1986, 1987 



G^^Q^P Mean Response 



Black 2.4 

Hispanics 2 . 0 

American Indian 1.9 

Asian 1.9 

Pacific Islander 1.7 

Alaskan Native /Native Cai.^dian 1.6 



It is clear that in no case did the mean response 
indicate that the coverage was "about right" or "too 
much". It is also clear that a perception exists that the 
amount of coverage varies by groups. 

The mean responses related to Teaching Exceptional 
Children on a five point scale (1 = too little, 3 = about 
right, 5 = too much) ranged from a high of 2.4 for Blacks 
to a low of 1.8 for Pacific Islander. Table 3 shows the 
mean responses of the respondents opinions of the amount 
of coverage of the selected groups. 



4 

Table 3 

Respondents Opinion of Minority Coverag e 
in Teaching Exceptional Children for 1985, 1986, 1987 



Group Mean Response 



Black 2.4 

Hispanics 2 . 2 

American Indian 2.0 

Asian 1.9 

Pacific Islander 1 . 8 

Alaskan Native/Native Canadian 2.0 



As was the case with Exceptional Children , it is 
clear that in no case did the mean response indicate that 
the coverage was "about right" or "too much" in Teaching 
Exceptional Children . It is also clear that, in 
Teaching Exceptional Children as well as in Exceptional 
Children a perception exists that the amount of coverage 
varies by groups. 

Quantitative Analysis of Publications 

In addition to the survey of the perceptions of 
special education leadership personnel about the 
multicultural content of the publications selected for 
study an analysis of the content of those publications was 
undertaken. The researchers decided that in order to 
provide an objective view of the content a quantitative 
rather than a qualitative approach would be used. The 
researchers hypothesized that if an article contained 
content related to ethnic and multicultural concerns that 
terms such as "Black", "Hispanic", "American Indian" or 
some other equivalent term would appear in the article and 
that these terms could then be counted. The following 
terms were selected for this study: Black, Hispanic, 
American Indian, Alaskan Native/Native Canadian, Asian, 
and Pacific Islander. A recording form was developed to 
record each occurrence of the selected terms in the 
articles appearing in the 1985, 1986 and 1987 issues of 
Exceptional Children and Teaching Exceptional 
Children . (See Appendix B.) 

The occurrence of the selected terms was infrequent 
in Exceptional Children and almost nonexistent in 
Teaching Exceptional Children over the 3 year time 
period studied. There were 23 6 occurrences of the 
selected terms in Exceptional Children over the three 
year period. Table 4 shows the number of occurrences of 
the selected terms. 



ERIC 



G 



Table 4 

Occurrence of Selected Terms 
in Exceptional Children for 1985, 1986, 1987 



Term Occurrence 



Black 160 

Hispanics 58 

American Indian 6 

Asian 10 

Pacific Islander 2 

Alaskan Native/Native Canadian 0 



The occurrence of the selectee terms in Teaching 
Exceptional Children was very limited • In the three year 
time period the selected terms appeared only 10 times • 
Table 5 shows the number of occurrences of the selected 
terms. 

Table 5 

Occurrence of Selected Terms in Teaching 
Exceptional Children for 1985, 1986, 1987 



Term Occurrence 



Black 1 

Hispanics 5 

American Indian 2 

Asian 2 

Pacific Islander 0 

Alaskan Native/Native Canadian 0 



In addition to the selected terms a few related 
terms were encountered. A few references of a general 
nature such as "minority students," "ethnic groups," 
"bilingual child," etc., occurred in the publications; 
but, even these terms were infrequent. 

Conclusions 

This study was concerned with the coverage of issues 
related to ethnic and cultural minorities in two of the 
most widely read publications in the field of special 
education; Exceptional Children and Teaching 
Exceptional Children . One facet of the study included a 
survey of the perceptions of leadership personnel in the 
Council for Exceptional Children about the amount of 
multicultural coverage in these CEC publications. The 
second facet of the study involved counting the occurrence 
of selected terms related to multicultural content in 
these CEC publications. 



The findings of this study are indicative of a number of 
areas which merit further research. 

The purpose of this study was to investigate the 
perceptions of leadership personnel in the field of 
special education toward the coverage of minority issues 
in the two major special education publications and to 
analyze the amount of content related to minority issues 
in an objective manner. The findings, related to the 
survey, suggest that the respondents, in general, feel 
that the coverage of ethnic and multicultural concerns is 
not adequate. The mean responses on a five point scale 
related to the coverage in both Exceptional Children and 
Teaching Exceptional Children were below the "about 
right" (3.0) category. The mean responses ranged from a 
high of 2.4 for content related to Blacks on both 
publications to a low of 1.6 for Alaskan Native/Native 
Canadian on Exceptional Children . It should be 
emphasized that the number of respondents, although small, 
does represent about half of the governors and executive 
board members of CEC . This group has demonstrated serious 
commitment , interest , sensitivity , and leadership to the 
field of special education and the literature in the area* 

The findings related to the content analysis of the 
selected publications suggest that there are relatively 
few occurrences of the terms related to the groups 
selected for thir study. In addition to the small number 
of occurrences of the terms in Exceptional Children it 
is important to point out that approximately 68%, 160 of 
236, of the occurences were related to Blacks and that 
approximately 24.5%, 58 of 236, of the occurrences were 
related to Hispanics. The remaining 7.5% of the 
occurrences in Exceptional Children were distributed 
among Asians (4%), American Indians (2.5%), and Pacific 
Islanders (1%). Terms related to Alaskan Natives/Native 
Canadians did not occur. Another factor that should be 
considered is that the occurrences were not evenly 
distributed across the three year time period of the 
study. In some cases the majority of the occurrences were 
within a particular article. 

The coverage of multicultural content in Teaching 
Exceptional Children appears more limited than that in 
Exceptional Children . Only 10 occurrences of the 
selected terms were found in Teach^ Exceptional 
Children which is indicative of very limited coverage of 
the topic. 

A general conclusion related to the present study is 
that while the survey respondents feel that the coverage 
of ethnic and multicultural topics and concerns in the 
selected publications is slightly less than adequate, as 
indicated by their responses to the survey, an analysis of 
the content of the publications indicates that the 
coverage is exceedingly limited when analyzed by counting 
the number of occurrences of what can be described as key 



7 



indicaLors of multicultural content. The question of how 
much covera^' can be considered "adequate" must be 
considered jm a number of perspectives. in the 
publications area, the question of adequacy must be 
addressed not only from the perspective of the quantity of 
the content but also from the perspective of the quality 
of the content. in addition to the quantity and quality 
issues, questions of adequacy must be addressed from the 
perspective of the scope of the publications and the needs 
of the readers. 

The findings in the present study indicate (1) the 
respondents feel that the coverage of multicultural issues 
is less than adequate, (2) the analysis of the content 
indicates very few occurrences of key indicators of 
multicultural content, and (3) the majority of the 
respondents in this study indicated that they are 
currently serving minority group students. The position 
of the researchers, based on the findings of this study is 
that the amount of coverage of multicultural issues is not 
adequate. 

The following general recommendations are made for 
the purpose of ensuring that the content in special 
education publications with broad readership meet the 
perceived needs of special educators working with diverse 
populations: (1) a study or series of studies on the 
qualitative aspects of the coverage of ethnic and 
multicultural concerns using a broader research base 
should be undertaken to determine the quality of the 
content, (2) more content related to minority groups needs 
to be included in the publications, (3) members of 
minority groups should be encouragevi to submit articles 
for publication, and (4) content in articles of general 
interest should reflect minority, as well as majority 
concerns . 



9 



Reference 



Baca, L. M., & Cervantes, H. (1984). The bilingual 
special education interface . St. Louis: Times 
Mirror/Mosby 



10 



Appendix A 




11 



CEC ETHNIC AND MULTICULTURAL CONCERNS OMMiTTEE 
Publications Task Foxce - Survey 1988 



This survey is designed to elicit your opinion about the 
representation of ethnic and multicultural co"^cerns in 
EX CEPTIONAL CHILDRE N and TEACHING EX CEPT IONAL CHILDREN^ 
All responses to this questionaire will be kept confidential 

Please complete all of the following items> 

1. Number of years you have been a member of CEC . 

2. Male Female . 

, 2. 



3. Divisions you belong to 1 



. 3. 



4. Your background: Alaskan N a t i ve / Na t i ve Canadian, 

American Indian, Asian, Black, .iispanic, 

Pacific Islander, White. 

5. Do you currently work with e t h n i c /mu 1 1 i c u 1 1 uv a I students? 

Yes No 

6. What is your opinion about the coverage of tthn-.c and 
multicultural concerns in E xception al Chi ldr en for 1935, 1986, 
1987? (circle the number -hat best expresses your opinion) 



GROUP 



Too Little About Right Too Much 



Black 

American Indian 
Alaskan Nat i ve / 
Native Canadian 
Hispanic 
Asian 

Pacific Islander 



2 
2 

2 
2 
2 
2 



3 
3 

3 
3 
3 
3 



4 

4 
4 
4 
4 



5 
5 

5 
5 
5 
5 



7. What is your opinion about the coverage of ethnic and 
multicultural concerns in Teach ing Excep tion al Children for 
1985, 1986, 1987? (circle the number that best expresses your 
opinion) 



GROUP 



Too Little About Right Too Much 



B lack 

Ame rican Indian 
Alaskan Native/ 
Na t i ve Canadian 
Hispanic 
Asian 

Pacific Islander 



2 
2 

2 
2 

2 
2 



3 
3 

3 
3 
3 
3 



4 
4 

4 
4 
4 
4 



5 
5 

5 
5 
5 
5 



ERIC 



12 



1* 



Appendix B 



13 



CEC Ethnic and Multicultural Cormuittee 
Publications Task Force - 1988 



PUBLICATIONS ANALYSIS FORM 



Reviewer Name 



Date 



Publication Title: 
Date: Volume: 
Article Title: 



Number 



Frequency of Occurance 





Black 


Amer i can 
Tndis^n 


Ala ^ka n 
Nai" "i VP 
Nati ve 
C ana di an 


IT i ^Da nip 


Aqi a n 


Pap 1 "F 1 p 
T ^1 a ndpr 



































































































































































































































































































































































































































































ERIC 



