Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


The Constructive Marginal of Moby-Dick. 
Ishmael and the Developmental Model of 
Intercultural Sensitivity 

Jeff Morgan 

Lynn University 

Those who attach a high importance to their own opinion should stay at home 
Aldous Huxley, New York Times interview, Sept. 7,1926 

Cultural sensitivity theory is the study of how individuals relate to 
cultural difference. Using literature to help students prepare for study abroad, 
instructors could analyze character and trace behavior through a model of 
cultural sensitivity. Milton J. Bennett has developed such an instrument, The 
Developmental Model of Intercultural Sensitivity (DMIS), which measures 
behavior from ethnocentric to ethnorelative. Cultural sensitivity research has 
proven time and again that Bennett’s DMIS is a strong model after over thirty 
years. In a 2003 article in The International Journal of Intercultural Relations, R. 
Michael Paige and others analyze a new model, co-created by Bennett, called 
the Intercultural Development Inventory (IDI). It is based on Bennett’s old 
model. The IDI suggests different stages of development but is so similar to the 
DMIS that the research shows the strength of Bennett’s DMIS, which I will 
use with Herman Melville’s Moby-Dick to chart Ishmael’s cultural sensitivity. 

The simplicity of the DMIS may very well help attest for its longevity 
in the field. The DMIS can be seen as a chart, beginning with ethnocentric 
behavior. Ethnocentrism moves through three stages, starting with denial, 
in which the individual appears to even deny the existence of one who is 
culturally different. Next is the defensive stage. Here, the individual will 
characteristically denigrate those culturally different than himself. In the final 
stage of ethnocentrism, minimization, the individual, when gauging one 
culturally different than himself, will only embrace those characteristics that he 
also has. The next three stages encompass the ethnorelative phases of cultural 
sensitivity and are initially marked by the individual’s acceptance of difference, 
followed by his adaptation of certain cultural aspects not native to himself. 
The last stage is integration, which can be taken ad infinitum, producing a 
constructive marginal, one who has such a diverse ethnic makeup that he only 
fits in withother constructive marginals. In 1993, Janet M. Bennett noted 
Barack Obama, the first black elected president of the Harvard Law Review, 


l 



Jeff Morgan 


as the epitome of constructive marginalism. “In some ways, Obama presents 
us with an ideal case study of a man in the middle of many cultures. While 
various cultural groups may each seek his allegiance, he appears to claim for 
himself an identity that is beyond any single cultural perspective” (Bennett 
110). This process also describes Ishmael, the weary, wayworn wanderer who 
constructs his own identity in Herman Melville’s American classic, Moby-Dick. 

The second decade of the new millennium marks a time of great change 
and, consequently, great challenges. In the United States, one significant change 
involves immigration and the growing populations of a number of ethnicities. 
In a 1997 commencement speech at the University of California at San Diego, 
Bill Clinton spoke of the inevitability of no cultural majority existing in this 
country by 2050. “A half-century from now, when your own grandchildren 
are in college, there will be no majority race in America” (A4). More recent 
statistics from the U.S. Census Bureau seem to bear this out, this goes to 
show how so much will depend upon cultural sensitivity. Often reserved for 
students who are on the verge of studying aboard, cultural sensitivity theory 
can help so many more work toward cultural sensitivity. For those students 
who cannot study abroad, they can travel in their minds with the likes of 
Ishmael and learn from his experiences how to deal with cultural difference, 
and for those who can, reading Melville’s Moby-Dick with Bennett’s DMIS in 
mind can allow for analysis that leads to true insights into how one ought to 
interact when experiencing cultural difference. Furthermore, in a world grown 
increasingly smaller, one gets to practice ethnorelativism in his own backyard, 
and reading about Ishmael, Melville’s constructive marginal, through the gaze 
of cultural sensitivity theory can ultimately help us live our lives in our very 
neighborhoods. 

The Historical Critical Context of Ishmael and 
Cultural Sensitivity 

Others have analyzed the character of Ishmael within a context of cultural 
sensitivity. Melville clearly aligns Ishmael with Jonah, inviting criticism based 
on the allusion. In his landmark American Renaissance: Art and Expression in the 
Age of Emerson and Whitman (1941), F. O. Matthiessen discusses the runaway 
nature of Ishmael’s character. He characterizes Ishmael as, at least early on 
in the novel, an existentialist in the sense, particularly, of “an individual’s 
separation from his fellow human beings” (443). For Matthiessen, Ishmael’s 
cultural sensitivity conflict, his isolation, climaxes still early in the novel with 
Queequeg. “When Ishmael recognized that the man’s a human being just as 
I am,’ he was freed from the burden of his isolation, his heart was no longer 
turned against society” (Matthiessen 443). Analyzing Matthiessen’s reading 


2 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


of the conflict and climax within a framework of cultural sensitivity reveals 
the basic truths of Bennett’s cultural sensitivity model as Ishmael moves from 
ethnocentric to ethnorelative behavior, primarily because he shared a bed with 
a presumed savage, a strong representation of integration, the final phase in 
Bennett’s model. 

However, by the end of the novel Ishmael becomes a constructive marginal, 
and, still, this is an area Matthiessen explores. He addresses Ishmael’s multiple 
perspectives in Melville’s chapter 42 “The Whiteness of the Whale.” Ishmael’s 
willingness to accept multiple interpretations of the symbolism of the color 
white follows two chapters in which Melville suggests the need for cultural 
sensitivity. In chapter 40, Melville gives a good idea of how multi-cultural 
the Pequod is; not all the crew equally appreciates the singing and dancing, 
and there is almost a battle royale at the end. These individuals clearly need 
to be more accepting of difference, but the next chapter characterizes Ishmael 
as one who can read a symbol and abide by its hidden truth, namely here, 
the dark portents. Here, he is not unlike Hamlet, who has given himself to 
providence. Ishmael abides by the majority opinion, confessing “I gave myself 
up to the abandonment of the time and the place; but while yet all a-rush 
to encounter the whale, could see naught in that brute but the deadliest ill” 
(203). An activist would have Ishmael intervene, but Ishmael is not an activist; 
he is a constructive marginal, constantly creating his own reality (M. Bennett 
64), a reality that Janet Bennett characterizes as “commitment in relativism” 
(117) and which Matthiessen pegs decades before when he recognizes that 
“one thing that could redeem the wolfish world,’ the Ishmael of Moby-Dick 
found, was sympathy with another human being” (443). 

Other great scholars after Matthiessen also characterize Ishmael in terms 
of cultural sensitivity but without the context of cultural sensitivity theory 
woven into their analyses; however, it is there in spirit. It is there when 
Richard Chase in his significant book from 1957, The American Novel and Its 
Tradition, writes about Ishmael looking into the water. Unlike Ahab, Ishmael, 
as Chase points out, see his “own image in a context of life and reality” (108). 
In terms of cultural sensitivity theory, Chase’s contrast is clear, for Ahab is 
the exemplar for ethnocentric behavior, his condition, in fact, frequently 
referred to as monomaniacal. Ishmael, on the other hand, views himself in a 
context. Leslie Fiedler, three years later in his Love and Death in the American 
Novel, further underlines the importance of understanding Ishmael from a 
standpoint of cultural sensitivity. Fiedler focuses on Ishmael’s relationship with 
Queequeg and is quick to draw attention to Ishmael’s cultural insensitivity 
early in the novel. “Everything about Queequeg appalls him,” but in a short 
time, “he awakens in the harpooner’s embrace” (534). Queequeg’s tomahawk 


3 



Jeff Morgan 


pipe becomes a peace pipe, and Queequeg’s idol, Yojo, becomes the recipient 
of repeated ritualistic condescension from Ishmael. Fiedler marks Ishmael’s 
relapses, as with Elijah after Ishmael and Queequeg sign on with the Pequod, 
or when Ishmael “lent his voice to the pledge of the maddened crew to pursue 
the abominable quest” (550). Ultimately, Fiedler, too, recognizes Ishmael’s 
ethnorelativism, turning to “The Monkey Rope” chapter of the novel to help 
symbolize integration and the “A Squeeze of the Hand” chapter to epitomize 
integration with Ishmael asserting, “nay, let us all squeeze ourselves into each 
other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very milk and sperm of 
kindness” (456). 

Since these pioneering works on American Literature, a plethora of books 
have added to the analysis of Ishmael as a constructive marginal whose character 
goes through the process of cultural sensitivity. The same year Criterion 
brought out Fiedler’s fresh views of Ishmael and Queequeg’s relationship, 
Merlin Brown’s The Long Encounter: Self and Experience in the Writings of 
Herman Melville came out. Brown, though, writes “we must not expect an 
exact sequence of steps” charting Ishmael’s growth of cultural sensitivity (241). 
With Bennett’s DMIS, now we can. In 1973, Robert Zoellner continued 
looking for a process, a model, within which the growth of Ishmael’s character 
could be better explained, and he notes Ishmael’s view of the whale moves 
from demonic monster to fish to mammal to brother (185). In his 1991 book, 
The Machine in the Garden, Leo Marx asserts how Ishmael, after surviving 
the adventure of the Pequod, develops a narrative voice that embraces two 
distinct voices, “the claims of our collective, institutional life and the claims of 
nature” (285). In the 80s and 90s, writers such as Robert Martin and William 
V. Spanos, in other large works on Melville, analyze Ishmael in economic 
terms addressing two sides to Ishmael’s character, the individual that leads to 
imperialism and the more constructive marginal type of characterization that 
leads to a more liberating multiplicity and suggests anti-capitalistic themes. To 
be sure, Nina Baym, John Bryant, and Lawrence Buell all address “Melville’s 
complex marginalizing rhetoric” (Bryant 708). 

In the past half century, several articles have appeared addressing the issue 
of Ishmael’s character and constructive marginalism. In 1967, David Hirsch 
writes briefly in AN&Q, “Ishmael actually presents himself in two guises 
in the novel” (115). Melville, though, does not stop the multiple layers of 
Ishmael’s constructive marginal characterization at two. Three fine essays on 
the subject of multiplicity come out in the 1980s. Philip Egan’s “Time and 
Ishmael’s Character in ‘The Town-Ho’s Story’ of Mo by-Dick" focuses on the 
story within the story to assert Ishmael’s discomfort with his audience and 
pinpoint his growth toward constructive marginalism at some mid-point; 


4 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


however, Egan writes that “we cannot refer to Moby-Dick as a bildungsroman 
or ‘novel of education’ because we do not really know the stages and methods 
by which Ishmael achieves his growth” (338). This, again, is where Milton 
Bennett’s DMIS can help. Mark Patterson, in a 1984 writing, anticipates 
Ishmael’s remarkable growth and analyzes a process but doesn’t go all the way 
with Ishmael, relegating his development in a tone of loss when he writes that 
Ishmael’s “voice later seems to disappear into the narrative itself, mimicking 
a variety of other voices as the novel progresses” (297). The disappearance 
he refers to is actually Ishmael’s new character, a kind of rainbow coalition 
of cultural influences. In 1989, Susan Lyne Knutson clearly brings the 
discussion into the context of cultural sensitivity studies when she analyzes 
“Wheelbarrow,” chapter 13 in the novel, in which Queequeg turns cultural 
tables on Ishmael, pointing out the difficulties one has grasping customs when 
in a different culture and how the natives are inclined to be derisive. Knutson 
claims the passage “indicates that Melville was aware of the problems with 
ethnocentric vision, and was perhaps as conscious of them as a man of his time 
might be” (par. 27). 

More recently, the critical analysis seems to want to follow Bennett’s 
stages. Robert Martin returns to the subject in a smart 1990 essay, “Sleeping 
with a Savage: Deculturation in Moby-Dick, ” in which he asserts Ishmael’s 
ethnocentric character early in the novel is the result of cultural homophobic 
conditioning. He recognizes that Melville clearly juxtaposes Queequeg’s Yojo 
with Father Mapple’s Christ to illustrate the existence of different visions, and 
recognizes different voices in Ishmael, noting, at least three. Joseph Adriano’s 
“Brother to Dragons: Race and Evolution in Moby-Dick” from 1996, points to 
Melville’s thematic tendency to undercut traditional hierarchies, which echoes 
the work of cultural sensitivity scholars who point to the traveller abroad who 
now prefers abroad to the United States. Adriano takes Ishmael’s character 
even farther down the line of Bennett’s cultural sensitivity development, 
characterizing Ishmael as too smart to fight the Leviathan; instead, he embraces 
it, just as he embraces the harpooners who also embrace the Leviathan. This 
is the community of constructive marginalism. Recent ecocriticism, a field 
closely related to cultural sensitivity, by Elizabeth Schultz and Susan Kalter 
expands that community to include the whale. Schultz focuses on “cetacean 
and human kinship” (104) that recalls Bennett’s stage of minimization in the 
way that Ishmael admires the human qualities in the whale. Kalter writes of 
savagism, which closely resembles Bennett’s ethnocentrism. “Melville’s radical 
ecology,” to Kalter, connects “to the valuing of Native American cultures” (13). 
Still furthering the community, Thomas L. Dumm, in a 2005 essay, expands 
it to include the reader. Dumm characterizes readers of the novel as fellow 


5 



Jeff Morgan 


constructive marginals, and Ishmael asking to be named at the beginning of the 
novel can be seen as an effort toward a union of isolatoes or fellow constructive 
marginals (400). Bringing the reader into the discussion as he does suggests 
how cultural sensitivity classes using literature can have some benefit. 

Understanding Ishmael using the DMIS 

Let us now turn to the text for a close reading and analyze this process 
of Ishmael’s growth toward becoming a constructive marginal, and there is 
no better place to start than the beginning. We have already seen how Robert 
Martin suggests cultural conditioning that has gone into Ishmael’s character 
even before the curtain rises on Moby-Dick. Before the action starts at the 
Spouter Inn, Melville tells us a lot about Ishmael. He can tell a story, which 
is no small feat; however, despite this skill, Ishmael is poor, disinterested with 
society, grim, of a damp and drizzly soul, fixated on death, and ready for 
violence. He also needs to get to water to best reflect. Ishmael minimalizes 
cultural difference when he lumps everyone with himself as “tied . . . nailed 
. . . [and] clinched” (4), and he exhibits similar ethnocentric behavior when 
he heralds the universal appeal of water for purposes of reflection. Further 
minimization occurs when Ishmael places everyone on the stage, the play being 
the thing that providentially unites us. Early in the novel, Ishmael trivializes 
difference, exhibiting what Milton Bennett would characterize as transcendent 
universalism since Ishmael seems to have fallen for the single truth fallacy (41- 
44). 

Once Melville takes the action to the Spouter Inn, which represents 
worldliness due to its diverse clientele, Ishmael’s ethnocentrism takes center 
stage. A conflict arises because Ishmael must share a bed with another man, 
Queequeg, but Ishmael has not seen the harpooner. Our hero claims, “I 
would put up with the half of any decent man’s blanket” (15). The key word 
there is the adjective decent. Ishmael begins “to feel suspicious of this ‘dark 
complexioned harpooner’” whose bed he is to share. He even associates the 
harpooner with the devil and assumes a position of superiority over the man 
he is supposed to sleep with, thinking the harpooner “must undress and get 
into bed” (16) first. Ishmael would clearly be more comfortable sleeping with 
a man more like himself, like Bulkington, aloof, alone. Ishmael’s anxiety with 
strangeness is classic defense behavior in cultural sensitivity theory. He is 
experiencing a cultural conflict (Wurzel 6-7), and it is a great conflict because 
the harpooner is so different than Ishmael. As Paige points out, the greater the 
cultural difference, the greater the challenge (“On the Nature” 5). 

Ishmael appears to have skipped Bennett’s first stage of cultural sensitivity, 
denial. Bennett characterizes the first phase of this ethnocentric behavior as 


6 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


isolation, a trait seemingly not part of Ishmael’s character. A teacher who 
chooses to get away from it all by boarding a whaler that symbolically represents 
the world, Ishmael is aware of cultural difference. Boarding the Pequod 
symbolically suggests Ishmael is actually embracing the world. Ishmael does, 
though, get a little defensive about cultural difference, as we have seen above. 
Ishmael exhibits the three main characteristics about defense. He denigrates 
the harpooner when associating him with the devil. He also shows his sense of 
superiority over the harpooner with his condescending tone when describing 
Queequeg’s ritual with his idol. Not long after the episode at The Spouter 
Inn, Ishmael even begins Bennett’s final phase of defense, reversal, in which 
the ethnocentric person denies his previous superiority and acknowledges 
his own inferiority. Though Ishmael seems to skip the stage of denial, he 
definitely exhibits behavior characteristic of Bennett’s second stage, defense. 
Ishmael will proceed through the other stages of Bennett’s Developmental 
Model of Intercultural Sensitivity, and he will experience relapses along the 
way; however, within The Spouter Inn episode, Melville packs a boatload of 
details that lend themselves to looking at his novel through the lens of cultural 
sensitivity theory. 

A brief look at some other key action under the roof of the Spouter Inn 
reveals how significant the episode is in establishing Ishmael’s course through 
the stages of cultural sensitivity, starting with defense. He does accept to share 
a bed with Queequeg, but only after it appears Queequeg isn’t returning 
to the inn. He tries on Queequeg’s poncho-mat, but, seeing his reflection, 
becomes alarmed and disrobes. Certain that his roommate is an evil killer, 
Ishmael commends himself “to care of heaven” (22). Once Ishmael finally sees 
Queequeg’s face, he revolts. Ishmael seems to want to accept Queequeg, but 
his fears result in him virtually denying Queequeg’s existence by remaining 
silent and pretending not to be there. Once the two are aware of the other’s 
existence, an apparent murder ends with Ishmael admiring Queequeg’s simple 
integrity, which suggests Bennett’s idea of reversal, but he minimizes Queequeg 
when he says, “the man’s a human being just as I am” (26). This is very limited 
acceptance and primarily indicative of Bennett’s ethnocentric characterization. 
After all, as the episode comes to a close, Ishmael demands that Queequeg 
adapt to Ishmael’s ways, and Queequeg does so willingly. Still, at the very end 
of the episode, and suggestive that Ishmael will progress through further stages 
of cultural sensitivity, we have the positive sign of Ishmael sleeping his best 
sleep ever. 

Life with Queequeg after that first night at the Spouter Inn continues 
to conflict Ishmael as he struggles with his own ethnocentric side. Melville’s 
symbols, such as their embrace, the patchwork quilt, Queequeg’s tattoos, 


7 



Jeff Morgan 


and the blending of the latter two, represent cultural integration, but soon 
give way to more ethnocentric detailing. For example, Ishmael starts to see 
Queequeg as superior in a bit of reversal, but soon reverts back to a standard 
culturally defensive posture. He adopts a defensive tone during “The Street,” 
chapter six, associating Queequeg with diction such as “outlandish” and “wild” 
and “cannibals” and “savages” (36). Melville also mixes in more ethnorelative 
detailing as Ishmael accepts Queequeg’s harpoon as a razor and an eating 
utensil. There is a lot that Ishmael can learn about cultural sensitivity from 
Queequeg, especially from the way the harpooner adapts to boots, but an 
even stronger teaching moment occurs when Ishmael sees Queequeg at the 
Whaleman’s Chapel. After the Spouter Inn episode, Ishmael is on his way 
toward becoming a constructive marginal, but Queequeg seems to be already 
there. 

At the Whaleman’s Chapel, Melville provides significant detailing that 
needs to be viewed with a culturally sensitive gaze. For years, sailors from 
around the world have found themselves in New Bedford and the Whaleman’s 
Chapel, each needing to adapt to certain things in these settings, so Ishmael’s 
visit to the house of worship definitely suggests he’s integrating. Particularly, 
Father Mapple’s sermon is instructive. Stylistically, the sermon is important 
in terms of cultural sensitivity because it is the first extended speech from 
someone other than Ishmael and subsequently advances Melville’s theme 
involving multiplicity and ambiguity. Furthermore, the actual content of 
Father Mapple’s sermon also advances cultural sensitivity. The preacher asks 
his parishioners to sacrifice what they want to do in order to follow another, in 
this case, God. This is not unlike Queequeg’s sacrifice with the boots. 

After church, the chapters leading up to the disembarking of the Pequod 
further Ishmael’s education, albeit in a rather wavering way. Ishmael reverts to 
a defensive tone with diction such as “heathenish,” “savage,” and “hideously 
marred” (55), referring to Queequeg’s tattoos. But, he adds, “Through all 
his unearthly tatooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest heart” 
(55). This acceptance, which is Bennett’s fourth stage and first of three in the 
ethnorelative stages, continues for a page in the novel until a minimization 
setback occurs with some reversal, both indicative of Ishmael backsliding 
to ethnocentric stages. Ishmael minimizes Queequeg by suggesting that 
one thing he likes about the harpooner is his phrenological resemblance to 
George Washington, a comparison that also reveals Ishmael’s admiration for 
Queequeg. More of the same can be seen a bit later when Ishmael sees the 
wisdom in adopting some of Queequeg’s way of looking at the world, mainly 
indifferent that is, and in spending a second night together. Along the way, 
they share a pipe, symbolic of their integration, which Queequeg takes a step 

8 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


farther with more physical connection that represents a bosom friendship and 
even marriage. At the same time Ishmael behaves in a more ethnocentric way 
with lines such as “I’ll try a pagan friend thought I, since Christian kindness 
has proved but hollow courtesy” (57), clearly exemplifying Bennett’s reversal 
description. This jagged process leading to Ishmael’s constructive marginality 
is not unprecedented in cultural sensitivity theory. In fact, Kenneth Cushner 
describes a tension in someone who is attracted to cultural maintenance and to 
cultural pluralism (353). In Ishmael’s case, when Ishmael refers to Queequeg 
as a pagan, he would be in the maintenance side of the conflict, and the more 
open side is evident in the openness to spend a second night with Queequeg. 
A formal analysis of Ishmael’s conflict here clearly can be articulated using 
cultural sensitivity theory, which is why students could benefit from mapping 
Ishmael’s sojourn of the self. 

After a few pages dripping with ethnocentrism, Melville again brings up 
Ishmael’s conflict as described by Cushner. Ishmael’s biography of Queequeg is 
especially telling here. The diction mixes words such as “savage” and “wild” and 
all of their connotative baggage with a more regal tone. This is soon followed by 
the aforementioned wheelbarrow scene, significant for its lesson that is perhaps 
best described in Queequeg’s words: “It’s a mutual, joint-stock world, in all 
meridians” (68), which alludes to him helping the greenhorn and the captain, 
who both thought lightly of Queequeg. To be sure, the harpooner serves as a 
strong role model for Ishmael. Queequeg is eager to integrate, hoping to adapt 
certain characteristics that he can then take home for his people. However, as 
Melville’s narrative is about set to sail, Ishmael still reveals himself as culturally 
conflicted, unable, for instance, to understand Queequeg’s spirituality even 
though he certainly tries. 

The trying shows Ishmael struggling through Bennett’s stages, and in 
the chapters before embarkation, Ishmael reveals himself to still have one 
foot stepping back into ethnocentrism and the other stepping forward into 
ethnorelativism. For example, Ishmael combines acceptance with defense 
when he says at the start of chapter 17, “I cherish the greatest respect towards 
everybody’s religious obligations, never mind how comical” (90). The two sides 
to that quote help show Ishmael has a way to go. In fact, most of Melville’s 
detailing keeps his characterization of Ishmael within ethnocentric parameters. 
Unlike Ahab, whom Melville starts characterizing in chapter 16, Ishmael has 
not had the education and experience to make him a constructive marginal. 
Still, despite all of Ishmael’s ethnocentric behavior, referring to Queequeg’s 
Ramadan rituals as intolerable, despite his differences with Queequeg, they 
saunter off together to the Pequod. It is there where Ishmael will continue to 
grow, referring to life aboard the Pequod as his Yale and Harvard. 


9 



Jeff Morgan 


The whole novel takes a turn once the Pequod is off, and cultural sensitivity 
seems to take a back seat to other more pressing thematic concerns in Melville’s 
story. Ishmael, indeed, appears to disappear. Yet, the whole novel can be seen as 
maintaining a thematic focus on cultural sensitivity. Even chapters that focus 
on other mammals, such as the chapter on cetology, work, as Marx, Schultz, 
Kalter, and others have pointed out, within a context of cultural sensitivity 
theory because Melville, here, forces the reader to change his view of the whale, 
just as he forces the reader to change with further characterization of Ahab. 
The infamous captain of the Pequod has reached the end of Bennett’s process, 
but constructive marginalism can leave one a bit isolated. Milton Bennett 
characterizes the constructive marginal as one who is constantly creating 
his own reality (64). Indeed, Ahab, attaching a high importance to his own 
opinion, has constructed a reality, fed by his monomania, which perceives 
the whale, Moby-Dick, as a wall that, if torn down or, killed, will then reveal 
some hidden truth. Ahab’s common characterization as a transcendentalist 
gone mad is not all that different, in the end, than Ahab’s characterization 
as a constructive marginal gone mad. As Janet Bennett points out, to the 
constructive marginal “ambiguity seems overwhelming” (117), and ambiguity 
and hidden truth heap Ahab. 

Another theme that, at first, may seem disconnected with a discussion 
of cultural sensitivity theory is Melville’s treatment of democracy. In contrast 
to crews on merchant-marine vessels, which Ishmael has experience on, the 
Pequod is “barbaric, heathenish, and motley” (133). If the Pequod represents 
the United States and all her cultural diversity, our population, as Melville 
sees it, appears in a rather dim light. Still, Ishmael narrates of the dignity 
in free democracy, praising the common man’s potential, which is definitely 
ethnorelative. Ishmael clearly opposes a pessimistic view of folks when he says, 
“man, in the ideal, is so noble and so sparkling, such a grand and glowing 
creature, that over any ignominious blemish in him all of his fellows should 
run to throw their costliest robes.” A sentence later, he adds that the “dignity I 
treat of, is not the dignity of kings and robes, but that abounding dignity which 
has no robed investiture. Thou shalt see it shining in the arm that wields a pick 
or drives a spike; that democratic dignity” that Ishmael further characterizes 
as “centre and circumference of all democracy” (126). The sense of acceptance 
that resonates in these lines connects with cultural sensitivity theory. By openly 
embracing all the cultural difference on board the Pequod, Ishmael not only 
promotes democracy. He promotes notions that differences are necessary and 
preferable, that choices are not based on absolutes (M. Bennett 47-8). 

At sea, Melville’s’ characterization of Ishmael still remains in a kind 
of transitional phase shifting between ethnocentrism and ethnorelativism. 


to 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


Ishmael’s word choices can be denigrating, suggesting his sense of cultural 
superiority when he refers to the “diabolism” in Ahab’s special crew, defensive 
diction that compounds with his characterization of Fedallah’s “half-hissed” 
voice (236). Both examples illustrate Ishmael’s sense of evil and the devil with 
those in question. This special crew has made its first appearance from below 
upon the first lowering for whales. The response to their appearance from 
Archy, the one who heard them earlier, helps put Ishmael’s cultural sensitivity 
in perspective, for Archy seems to accept them. Stubb, too, seems to accept 
them; however, he does refer to the special crew members as “devils” (237). The 
rather existential Starbuck accepts Ahab’s special crew but refers to their being 
onboard as “a sad business” (238). Ishmael also begins to accept these men, 
but his sensitivity will go beyond that of any of these other characters. Still, he 
wavers. Ishmael demonstrates some reversal when he elevates Daggoo above 
Flask, and his tendency towards minimization reoccurs with his line, “Verily, 
there is nothing new under the sun” (228), a rather insensitive remark since 
it posits that there is no cultural difference that Ishmael has not experienced, 
which is not exactly the most sensitive line coming from one who is to be 
the heroic constructive marginal at the end of the narrative. Yet, to Ishmael’s 
credit, his weaving with Queequeg, at least symbolically, not only addresses 
time, but their collaborative effort points to integration. 

Chapter 49, called The Hyena, may serve as a turning point for Ishmael as, 
at this point, much more of Melville’s detailing going toward characterization of 
his narrator includes action that suits ethnorelativism a bit more. Here, Ishmael 
hints at traumatic experiences as a teacher of acceptance and adaptation. He 
mentions how life naturally throws these experiences into one’s path and how 
he, particularly, has come to terms with these. For Ishmael, he now realizes 
that “nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worth disputing. He bolts down 
all events, all creeds, and beliefs, and persuasions” (247). His openness, his 
willingness to accept and adapt, will become intensified on the Pequod, noting 
that there’s “nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy sort 
of genial, desperado philosophy” (247). Milton Bennett would recognize 
Ishmael’s philosophy as one leading him toward constructive marginalism. 
Ishmael is accepting the world outside himself, and Melville’s detailing begins 
to accelerate that notion at this stage in the novel. To be sure, Melville has 
picked a setting and cast of characters conducive to ethnorelative sentiments 
because sailors tend to have a range of experience that goes beyond most 
landlubbers. In chapter 53 The Gam, Melville clearly asserts this notion about 
sailors, attributed to shared profession and “common pursuit and mutually 
shared privations and perils” (261), all of which makes Ishmael becoming 
a constructive marginal aboard the Pequod rather moot unless evidence of 


u 



Jeff Morgan 


ethnocentrism is seen onboard. 

Fortunately, the very next chapter, The Town-Ho’s Story, helps keep such a 
conflict front and center in the narrative. Although, Melville takes Ishmael off 
the ship and to another time to accomplish this. In Lima, Ishmael integrates, 
but the Peruvians’ self-deprecating humor, their anti-Christian comments, and 
their tendency to minimalize with lines like “The world’s one Lima” (274), all 
help bring out the ethnocentric side of Ishmael. Upon moving his detailing 
back aboard the Pequod, Melville brings Ishmael back to more ethnocentric 
characterizations. He has Ishmael acting metaphorically defensive when he 
equates hemp rope with “a dusky, dark fellow, a sort of Indian; but Manilla 
[rope] is as a golden-haired Circassian to behold” (303). And, he shows reversal 
when he raises a famished Fejee cannibal above the “unlighted gourmand, who 
nailest geese to the ground and fastest on their bloated livers in thy pate-de- 
fois-gras” (327). And, yes, even his tone echoes reversal. 

Melville perhaps best presents insensitivity on board the Pequod when 
he turns to more commercial or capitalistic detailing. Ishmael feels for the 
whale. Whales, like buffalo, seen abstractly as humans, suggest a certain level 
of denial, the first level of ethnocentrism, through the actual hunting of them. 
Stubb evinces just such ethnocentric capitalism during the Pip episode. He 
“indirectly hinted, that though man loves his fellow, yet man is a money¬ 
making animal, which propensity too often interferes with his benevolence” 
(452). Stubb also has some strong words for the French. But, more to the 
case is the fast-fish/loose-fish analogy, which is not from Ishmael’s mind but 
something that he reports on, and it strongly suggests sexism and nationalism. 
It is safe to say that Ishmael encounters plenty of ethnocentric behavior aboard 
the Pequod. From the ethnocentricity of Peleg, whom Ishmael encounters as 
he and Queequeg sign-up for their voyage; to both Peleg and Bildad being 
insensitive to Queequeg, especially Bildad, who tries to convert Queequeg; to 
the fight aboard ship in chapter 40, a fight that starts because of the cultural 
insensitivity of a Spanish sailor who equates a recent burst of lightening with 
Daggoo’s teeth; to various crew members characterizing Ahab’s special crew in 
culturally insensitive terms; to the men who listen to Ishmael’s recounting of 
the Town-Ho’s story at the Golden Inn in Lima; to the gross and insensitive 
capitalism that runs through the narrative in the hunting of the whales, Ishmael 
encounters ethnocentric behavior. 

And, from his defensive start with Queequeg, Ishmael manages to rise 
above his ethnocentrism and grow considerably in cultural sensitivity. Early 
in their relationship, Ishmael denigrates Queequeg and feels superior to him 
most of the time, but in time he begins to see ways in which Queequeg is 
superior. Even before these feelings, Ishmael minimizes Queequeg, showing 


12 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


that Ishmael’s process closely follows Bennett’s DMIS. Before long, Ishmael is 
using Queequeg’s harpoon as a razor and accepting the harpooner’s smoking 
in bed. In addition to sleeping together in the same bed, clear integration 
occurs in the highly symbolic Monkey-rope scene, linking the two as if by 
the life force of an umbilical cord. They are that attached, integrated. So that, 
in the end, Ishmael is, indeed, a constructive marginal. One of the first signs 
that Ishmael was moving toward constructive marginalism was in chapter 
61 Biographical. Ishmael’s combination of accepting Queequeg while at the 
same time being defensive about him points to two sides at work in Ishmael, 
working simultaneously, indicative of the balance characteristic of constructive 
marginalism. In his essay on “Trainer Competencies” in Education for the 
Intercultural Student, Paige characterizes a good trainer with qualities such as 
openness, flexibility, tolerance of ambiguity, and sense of humor, to name a 
few (190-1). These are characteristics that Ishmael has. In his other essay in 
that book, Paige describes similar characteristics in the context of constructive 
marginality, calling the state an empowered one (16). As this potential trainer, 
as this constructive marginal, Ishmael is the only survivor of the Pequod. In 
the introductory essay to his book, Cushner presents cultural sensitivity theory 
that explains how Ishmael survives, for he states that those who have “a strong 
preference for interactions with similar others and an active avoidance of 
intercultural interactions will not fare well in ‘a world’ in which intercultural 
interactions are increasingly commonplace” (5). This is not to say that others 
aboard the Pequod are not culturally sensitive, for there are, namely Ahab 
and Queequeg; however, Ishmael is different in several ways, especially in his 
ability to adapt and integrate with a plurality of views. 

Cultural sensitivity theory also connects with formal analyses of Moby- 
Dick in viewing Melville’s theme of ambiguity. Ishmael realizes and accepts 
ambiguity. Wurzel writes, “Multiculturalism is the opposite of dogmatism, for 
it teaches us to accept the inevitable contradictions embedded in everything 
we learn” (5). Consider Ahab’s monomania in opposition to Ishmael’s cultural 
sensitivity. Ishmael is able to take in multiple points of view, and from the 
variety create his own reality. This is almost exactly how the Bennetts explain 
constructive marginalism. Milton Bennett, the designer of the DMIS, defines 
a constructive marginal as one who is constantly creating his own reality (64), 
and Janet Bennett adds, the “constructive marginal is a person who is able to 
construct context intentionally and consciously for the purpose of creating his 
or her own identity” (113). 


13 



Jeff Morgan 


Practical Applications of this Analysis 

Ishmael might be a natural, though, which is why reading, discussing, 
and writing about Melville’s Moby-Dick would be helpful activities for those 
about to go abroad, and for those who cannot travel to experience different 
cultures, the novel, and Ishmael’s characterization particularly, would, at least, 
expose them to the necessity of cultural sensitivity. Ashwill writes, “there are 
ways of developing intercultural competence that do not necessarily include 
language learning and education abroad” (21). Definitely, studying Melville’s 
masterpiece can be one of those ways. Ishmael would most likely appeal 
to Ashwill as a trainer, for he emphasizes that good education in cultural 
sensitivity ought to stress the importance of interpersonal and relational skills 
and ambiguity tolerance and adaptivity, going as far as adding that such traits 
may very well characterize a modern leader. Think Barack Obama, and we 
may want study of Ishmael in Political Science. For now, though, study abroad 
seems like the logical place to start. The lessons of cultural sensitivity may 
not be limited to cultures. However, for our focus, consider what some of the 
top scholars in the field say is important about cultural sensitivity training, 
keeping in mind that following Melville’s characterization of Ishmael may very 
well be revealing the ideal trainer. To be sure, intercultural sensitivity helps 
lead to intercultural competence (Hammer, Bennett, and Wiseman 422), and 
Ishmael’s competence is again best seen in his ability to combine disparate 
ways of thinking. Anderson et al. ask, “are there activities that students should 
participate in prior to participation in a study abroad program that would 
significantly enrich their overseas experience and lead to greater intercultural 
sensitivity?” (46-7). Yes, a literature class designed with an eye toward cultural 
sensitivity would be both efficient and effective. In the Realistic Era that 
Melville presages, one could consider Sarah Orne Jewett’s The Country of 
the Pointed Firs, a novel about acceptance, adaptation, and integration. In 
the present, Campbell McGrath’s “City in the Clouds” in his Florida Poems 
can help show those other ways cultural sensitivity theory and, particularly 
Milton Bennett’s DMIS, can be used in a context of environmentalism and 
ecocriticism, something that Melville address through his anti-capitalistic 
theme in connection with whale hunting. Cushner is correct when he writes, 
“only through significant and long-term experiences with people different 
from oneself can one become effective at living and working across cultures” 
(362). For those who need a crash course on the subject, I have a suggestion. 

Works Cited 

Anderson, Philip H., et al. “Short Term Study Abroad and Intercultural 

Sensitivity: A Pilot Study.” International Journal of Intercultural 


u 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


Relations. 30 (2006). 457-69. 

Ashwill, Mark A. “Developing Intercultural Competence for the Masses.” 

International Educator. 13.2 (Spring 2004). 16-25. 

Bennett, Janet M. “Cultural Marginality: Identity Issues in Intercultural 
Training.” Education for the Intercultural Experience. Ed. R. Michael 
Paige. Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural, 1993. 109-135. 

Bennett, Milton J. “Towards Ethnorelativism: A Developmental Model of 
Intercultural Sensitivity.” Education for the Intercultural Experience. Ed. 

R. Michael Paige. Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press, 1993. 21-71. 
Brown, Merlin. Ihe Long Encounter: Self and Experience in the Writings of 
Herman Melville. Chicago: U of Chicago P, I960. 

Bryant, John. “Democracy, Being, and the Art of Becoming America.” 

College English 59.6 (Oct. 1997), 705-711. 

Chase, Richard. Ihe American Novel and Its Tradition. Garden City: NY: 
Doubleday, 1957. 

Clinton, Bill. “One America in the 21 st Century.” 1997 Commencement 
Speech at the University of San Diego. In One America in the 21 st 
Century: the Report of President Bill Clinton’s Initiative on Race. Steven F. 
Lawson and John Franklin Elope. New Haven: Yale UP, 2009. A3-A7. 
Cushner, Kenneth. “Intercultural Education from an International 

Perspective: An Introduction.” International Perspectives on Intercultural 
Education. Ed. Kenneth Cushner. Mahweh, NJ: Erlbaum, 1998. 1-13. 
Cushner, Kenneth. “Intercultural Education from an International 
Perspective: Commonalities and Future Prospects.” International 
Perspectives on Intercultural Education. Ed. Kenneth 
Cushner. Mahweh, NJ: Erlbaum, 1998. 353-370. 

Dumm, Thomas L. “Who is Ishmael?” Massachusetts Review 46.3 (Sept. 
2005), 398-414. 

Egan, Philp J. “Time and Ishmael’s Character in ‘The Town-Ho’s Story’ of 
Moby-Dick.” Studies in the Novel 14.4 (Winter 82), 337-347. 

Fiedler, Leslie A. Love and Death in the American Novel. New York: Criterion, 
1960. 

Hammer, Mitchell R., Milton J. Bennett, and Richard Wiseman. “Measuring 
Intercultural Sensitivity: The Intercultural Development Inventory.” 
International Journal of International Relations. 27 (2003). 421-43. 
Hirsch, David H. “Notes: Melville’s Ishmaelite.” AN&Q 5.8 (Apr. 67), 115- 
116. 

Kalter, Susan. “A Student of Savage Thought: The Ecological Ethic in Moby- 
Dick and Its Grounding in Native American Ideologies.” ESQ: A Journal 
of the American Renaissance 48.1-2 (2002): 1-40. 


15 



Jeff Morgan 


Knutson, Susan Lyne. “Bowering and Melville on Benjamin’s Wharf” A Look 
at Indigenous-English Communication Strategies.” Essays on Canadian 
Writing 38 (Summer 89), 67-80. 

Marx, Leo. The Machine in the Garden: Technology and the Pastoral Ideal in 
America. London: Free Association, 1991. 

Matthiessen, F. O. Art and Expression in the Age of Emerson and Whitman. 

London: Oxford University Press, 1941. 

Melville, Herman. Moby-Dick, or The Whale. New York: Penguin, 2001. 

Paige, R. Michael. “On the Nature of Intercultural Experiences and 

Intercultural Education.” Education for the Intercultural Experience. Ed. 

R. Michael Paige. Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural, 1993. 1-19. 

Paige, R. Michael. “Trainer Competencies for International and Intercultural 
Programs.” Education for the Intercultural Experience. Ed. R. Michael 
Paige. Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press, 1993. 167-99. 

Paige, R. Michael, et al. “Assessing Intercultural Sensitivity: An Empirical 
Analysis of the Hammer and Bennett Intercultural Development 
Inventory.” International Journal of Intercultural Relations. 27 (2003), 
467-486. 

Paterson, Mark E. “Democratic Leadership and Narrative Authority in Moby- 
Dick! Studies in the Novel 16.3 (Fall 84), 288-303. 

Schultz, Elizabeth. “Melville’s Environmental Vision in Moby-Dick .” 

Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and Environment! .1: 2000, 97- 
113. 

Wurzel, Jaime S. “Multiculturalism and Multicultural Education.” Toward 
Multiculturalism: A Reader in Multicultural Education. Ed. Jaime S. 
Wurzel. Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press, 1988. 1-13. 

Zoellner, Robert. The Salt-Sea Mastodon: A Reading of Moby-Dick. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1973. 


16 



