DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 431 690 



SO 030 871 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

ISSN 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 

JOURNAL CIT 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Frese, Millie K. , Ed. 

Myths & Legends . 

Iowa State Historical Society, Iowa City. 

ISSN-0278-0208 

1999-00-00 

33p. 

State Historical Society of Iowa, 402 Iowa Avenue, Iowa 
City, lA 52240-1806; telephone: 319-335-3916 (subscription: 
$9.95 for 4 issues) "The Goldfinch" is also available on 
cassette tape for those with visual impairments, physical 
disabilities, and learning disabilities, contact Iowa Dept, 
for the Blind, Tel: 800-362-2587, or write the Iowa Dept, 
for the Blind Library, 524 4th St., Des Moines, lA 50309. 
Collected Works - Serials (022) -- Guides - Classroom - 
Learner (051) 

Goldfinch: Iowa History for Children; v20 n3 Spr 1999 
MF01/PC02 Plus Postage . 

American Indian Literature; Class Activities; Elementary 
Education; Folk Culture; *Legends; *Local History; 
Mythology; *Social Studies; *State History; Story Telling 
*Iowa 



ABSTRACT 



"The Goldfinch" is a periodical that introduces young 
children to various facets of Iowa history. Each issue has a different theme 
topic and a number of articles covering diverse aspects of the topic being 
addressed. This issue focuses on myths and legends. Featured articles discuss 
how stories passed from generation to generation to reveal clues about 
history. The volume includes a family legend dating from the Civil War era. 
Native American myths about the origins of man, a legend preserved by 
Czechoslovakian immigrants. Underground Railroad legends, and famous Iowan 
hoaxes. Student activities include a myths and legends crossword puzzle, a 
history hunt maze, and questions about Nathan Isbell Jr.'s diary. (MM) 



*************ir*********ir**ir*********************************-k-k********fefe-kfefe**'kfefe 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

******************************************************************************** 



o 

ERIC 



ED 431 690 







'^hink of this issue of The Goldfinch as one enormous 
kitchen table. It’s a comfortable place where people gather 
as a family and tell the stories of their lives. There’s room 
for everyone, so pull up a chair. 

Stories are plentiful in Iowa. They go back to the 
earliest inhabitants of the land. Some of the stories in this 
issue (such as the Indian myths beginning on page 10) 
have been around for thousands of years and reveal the 
heart of the people they represent. Mesquakie stories, for 
example, convey sacred beliefs and help today’s Mesquakie 
kids know who they are as part of their tribe. Their stories 
come from an oral tradition, where people told stories to 
help kids learn traditions, lessons, and history that weren’t 
written down. What stories in your family, community, or 
culture do you tell to help explain who you are or to 
preserve your beliefs and traditions? 

Also in this issue, you’ll hear stories of buried 
treasure, a Civil War soldier, an elusive sea monster, a 
brave knight, and a hero of western folklore. Along the way, 
you’ll discover the power of a good story to capture your 
imagination and not let go. You’ll see how events from 
history inspire legends and how the lives of legendary 
people can be traced to common beginnings. “I thought it 
was neat that a tail-tale character like Wyatt Earp could 
seem so ordinary,” said Ben Butler, 9, a member of our 
kid’s advisory board. Are there legends in your own family 
that you can trace back to an ordinary source such as a 
family farm or an immigrant ancestor? 

Listen to the stories in this issue with your imagi- 
nation, and pretend you’re there, in history, experiencing 
the events taking place. Then, after you’ve turned the last 
page, tell us a story of your own. Stories are part of who we 
are, and at our enormous kitchen table, there’s time for 
everyone’s story. 

2 TTie Goldfinch 





Volume 20, Number 3 • Spring 1999 



Educational Press 
Association of America 
Member 

Winner of a 1998 
Parents’ Choice 
Silver Honor Award 

EDITOR: Millie K. Frese 

PUBLICATIONS DIRECTOR: Shaner Magalhaes 

ILLUSTRATION: Mary Moye-Rowley 

CONSULTING EDITORS: Joan Diamond, professor 
emeritus, University of Northern Iowa, Cedar Falls; 
Roger Natte, Fort Dodge; and Lynn Nielsen, PhD, 
professor of education. University of Northern Iowa, 
and NE Iowa UNI student teaching coordinator. 

CONTRIBUTING WRITERS: Barbara Cairns. Jill 
Esbaum, Katherine House, Benton Sen, and Jan 
Wolbers. 

EDUCATORS’ ADVISORY BOARD: Carol Dighton, West 
Delaware Middle School, Manchester; Janice L. 
Gobble, Danville Elementary School, Danville; Valerie 
Kreutner, Black Hawk Elementary School, Burlington; 
and Clen A. Lincoln, Fair Oaks Middle School, Fort 
Dodge. 

CHILDREN’S ADVISORY BOARD: Ben Butler, Cedar 
Rapids; Sarah Frese, Danville; Emily Johnson, Fort 
Dodge; Jessica Myers, Coral vl lie; and Jeff 
Zittergruen, Van Horne. 

SPECIAL THANKS TO: Dennis Bell, Bellevue, 
Nebraska; Johnathan Buffalo, Mesquakie Tribal 
Historian: Gail Froyen, storyteller; and Patricia Hikiji, 
National Czech and Slovak Museum, Cedar Rapids. 

CREDITS: The characters Wild Rosie and Goldie 
created by SHSI exhibit designer Jerry Brown. Cover 
photo: Frank E. Foster Collection, SHSI (Iowa City). 

The GoldUnch (ISSN 0278-0208) is published quarterly by the 
State Historical Society of Iowa, 402 Iowa Avenue, Iowa City, 
Iowa 52240-1806 (319/335-3916). Second-class postage 
paid at Iowa City, Iowa, Subscriptions are $9.95 for four 
issues. 

Postmaster: Send address changes to: Carol Carey, 
subscriptions coordinator. The Goldfinch, State Historical 
Society of Iowa, 402 Iowa Avenue, Iowa City, Iowa 52240- 
1806. © State Historical Society of Iowa, 1999. No portion of 
The Goldfinch may be reproduced without prior permission 
except for classroom use. 



Go/dffnch is also available on cassette tape 
for those with visual impairments, physical 
disabilities, and learning disabilities. For more 
information contact the Iowa Department for the Blind. 
1-800-362-2587. Or write to the Iowa Department for 
the Blind Library, 524 4th St, Des Moines 50309, 







\/i w ^ 








onte 




J Dear Readers 
^ Tell Me a Story 
Buried Treasure! 

What’s in a Name? 

The Story of a Family Tree 
Sacred Stories Preserve Ancient Traditions 
Finding the Future in the Past 
Wyatt Earp and the Legend of the O.K. Corral 
Myths and Legends Crossword Puzzle 
fy The Amazing History Hunt 
fS Legends of Hidden Heroes 
20 Dear Diary... 

A Giant Hoax 




On the Trail of an Iowa Sea Monster 
How Do You Start a Modern Myth? 

i. 







p- 8 



The Goldfinch 3 




|| his issue of The Goldfinch may be treading on 
dangerous ground. Sometimes, like a detective look- 
ing for clues to solve a case, historians want “just 
the facts.” For a history magazine, an accurate por- 
trayal of the facts about people, places, dates, and 
events is crucial. But the topic of Myths and Leg- 
ends goes beyond 
“just the facts.” 

Stories reveal a 
lot about the people 
of history — what 
they believed, what 
they thought was 
important. The sto- 
ries people have told 
for generations 
teach us about the 
atmosphere in 
which the facts of 
history take place. 

You’ve probably 
heard the legends of 
PQng Arthur’s court 
and know the stories 
of Paul Bunyan and 
Johnny Appleseed, 
too. But not all 
myths and legends come from the distant past, or 
from distant places. Legends can start in your own 
family or your own hometown. Most legends start 
with some fact or event, with something that hap- 



pened or probably happened. The story excites our 
imagination, inspires our pride, or maybe makes 
us stand in awe. The story gets told and retold until 
it becomes part of who we are as individuals, fam- 
ily, or community. Legends are stories that refuse 
to go away and sometimes grow in the telling. 

Myths are dif- 
ferent from legends. 
M)dhs are stories that 
tell what we believe 
about our world or 
about something su- 
pernatural. They deal 
with the origins of re- 
ligious beliefs. How 
did the world begin? 
How did we come to 
be here? What hap- 
pens after death? 

In its own soci- 
ety, a myth is under- 
stood as a true, often 
sacred story. While 
stories from Greek 
mythology may be 
the best known, 
myths have evolved 
in many cultures to explain what people believe, to 
offer heroes, and to illustrate the differences be- 
tween good behavior and bad, and explore the con- 
sequences of choosing unwisely. Myths are stories 

5 




Telling stories is one way Mesquakie families keep their 
history alive. This photo of the Buffalo family was taken in 
1926. The baby, Mary Ann Buffalo, grew up to become 
the mother of Johnathan Buffalo, whose retelling of the 
Mesquakie creation story appears on page 10. 



4 The Goldfinch 





of heroes and events that can’t be proven histori- 
cally, but they speak truth within their society. 



9 ww mm 

“Storytelling brings people closer together,” ex- 
plained Gail Froyen, a retired University of North- 
ern Iowa librarian who now devotes her time to tell- 
ing stories to school groups and adults in Iowa and 
across the nation. “Whether it’s grandparents tell- 
ing stories to their grandchildren or kids telling 
about their day at school, we are all storytellers. 
Stories are part of who we are as human beings.” 
Stories move from culture to culture as people 
migrate from one place to another. Sometimes the 
stories change over time, but the truth they convey 
remains. 

The tapestry of Iowa stories is woven from 
threads belonging to every group of people who 



Bits of family 
history are ' 
preserved in 
photographs, 
stories, and 
records of 
dates and 
events. Can 
you identify 
any legends, 
myths, or 
other stories 
that are 
important to 
your family? 



HOTO: r*RANK 



! Gail Froyen, storyteller, at Price 
Lab School, Cedar Falls, in 1989. 

have called this place home. “People pass on their 
heritage and values through stories,” Froyen said. 
“Many Native American stories, for example, pass 
on a value that people are only a part of creation. 
When a hunter kills an animal, he must have rever- 
ence for the life he has taken because [the animal’s] 
life gave him life by providing 
food and clothing.” 

Froyen believes the grow- 
ing popularity of the ancient art 
of storytelling is in part a reac- 
tion against modern technol- 
ogy. “Storytelling offers inti- 
macy that technology doesn’t 
provide. It fulfills a need for 
human connection. In stories, 
you get a flavor for times and 
people. You get the real essence 
of what life was like. Names and 
dates alone have no life.” \ 






The Goldfinch 5 



er|c 



Photo: Courtesy Gail Froyen 



Juried Treasure! 

It was almost dark on a chilly fall evening in 1843 
when a federal paymaster and his guards stopped at 
an inn near McGregor on their way to Fort Atkinson. 
The paymaster, a tall, thin man who was about 50, was 
heavily armed. His saddle bags held $63,000 in gold 
coins to pay soldiers stationed at forts in the prairie 
territory. 

While eating at the inn, the paymaster suddenly 
lurched to his feet sputtering, “I...I think I’m going to 
die!” He clutched the money containers and bolted 
from the inn. Ten minutes later he reappeared in the 
doorway, then slumped to the floor— dead. The gold 
was gone. To this day people hunt for the treasure, 
but no trace of it has been found. /• c \ 




Fact or Fiction? 

It’s true that, after acquiring the 
' Louisiana Territory from France, 
the U.S. government built forts to protect 
settlers moving into the area. We also 
know that the government established 
military highways connecting the forts, 
and that the military road between Forts 
Atkinson and Crawford (in Prairie du 
Chien, Wisconsin) was the most 
frequently traveled. Paymasters did travel 
between forts with gold to pay soldiers. 
Where there is gold, stories about lost 
treasures are sure to follow. The 
questions we can't answer: How much (if 
any) gold was lost? Have the treasures 
ever been found? 



t ^ 



\V?) 












'^'^1 






Ao 



'’f " „ for ' 









‘ f f ^ . 






' 6 ' l^e GoidiSnch' 















Fort Atlcinson was e-stablished on the- banKs of the 
Turte'f F-iver in l84o. This is how it looted during the 
'(ears when pa'/masters transported gold over lonel'f 
militar'l roads. Fort AtKinson was the onl'( fort built b-f 
the (1.5. government to protect one tribe of Indians 
from another. TodaNf, <(00 can visit the ruins of Fort 
Atkinson in Winneshielc Oom^. 



CDir 



BESTCOPYAVAILABLE 




What'ft in a name? 

Many places in Iowa have names that come from 
Indian words. The Wapsipinicon River is one example. 
Some people believe this explanation of how the 
Wapsipinicon got its name; 

Wapsipini6on is an Indian word for white potato or 
swan apple, referring to the white artichotes 
growing along the river banics. 

But legends offer other explanations. What 
follows is a retelling of one popular legend. The 
main characters are Indians, but the story itself is 
probably not an Indian story. Why? One clue is 
found in the names of the Indian tribes represented 
in the story. “Sac” and “Fox” were names the U.S. 
government used for the Sauk and Mesquakie tribes, 
not names the Indians would have used to refer to 
themselves. 



Indian princess named Wapsi was known for 
her grace and beauty. She was the favorite daugh- 
ter of the Sac chief. Good Heart. One winter the 
Sac Indians were attacked by the Dakota . The . 
Sac sent word to their allies, the Fox, who 
immediately came to help. 

Pinicon, a handsome young brave, came 
with the Fox Indians. Pinicon and his father, the 
elderly chief, led their tribe in war against the 
Dakota. Together, the Sac and Fox warriors drove 
the Dakota out of the region. 

A feast was held to celebrate the victory. 
When the Fox returned to camp, 

Pinicon stayed behind, 
for he and Wapsi 
had fallen in love. 



They stole off by themselves to drift in their canoe 
on the river and talk of their future together. 

Suddenly an arrow pierced the peaceful night 
and struck deep into Pinicon’s heart. Pinicon fell 
from the canoe into the river. Wapsi sprang to his 
aid, and she, too, tumbled into the water. Wapsi 
and Pinicon sank to their deaths as the jealous 
brave who had wanted Wapsi for his own bride — 
and who shot Pinicon — hid in the bushes and 
watched. ^ ^ 

Several versions of this legend are told, but 
they all claim that if you stand very still 
on the banks of the Wapsipinicon, you 
can hear the whispers of the lovers in 
the river that bears their names. 

The Goldfinch 7 





o 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Ixichard Shelley worked quickly during the sum- 
mer of 1862 to harvest his crops before leaving to 
fight in the Civil War. A superstitious man, Shelley 
hung the scythe he used to cut crops in the fork of 
an oak tree on his eastern Iowa farm. He told his 
family to leave it there. His fear: if they took the 
scythe down, he would not come home. 

Shelley enlisted in the 24th Iowa Volunteer 
Infantry on August 18, 1862. Ten days later, he left 
his wife, four sons, and a daughter to support the 
Yankee cause. The oldest child was 8 years old when 
Shelley left; the youngest was 13 months. 

Shelley’s unit fought in battles throughout the 
South, including those at Vicksburg and Jackson, 
Mississippi. He was captured by the Confederates 
at the Battle of Cedar Creek, Virginia, on October 

a long-handled tool with a 

,ij. 



19, 1864, and sent to Libby Prison in Richmond. 
When he was released, he rejoined his unit. 

The scythe remained undisturbed in the tree, 
a symbol of Shelley’s absence from his family, and 
of the hope he would return home safely. Shelley 
mustered out of the Union army on July 17, 1865. 
He d been gone almost three years, and when he 
finally reached home, no one could remove the 
blade because the tree had grown around it! Over 
the next 126 years, the oak tree grew considerably 
larger — and the story became embedded in the 
Shelley family heritage just as the scythe was em- 
bedded in the tree. 

Although Shelley sold the farm in 1901, his 
descendants often repeated the story and visited 
the farm to see the scythe in the tree. 

6urvec^lade used for mowing or reaping 



8 The Goldfinch 




P-ichard Thornton ‘5hM\w 



It was during such a 
visit in August 1998 that 
some of Shelley’s relatives 
discovered the tree had 
blown down in a severe 
storm two months earlier. 

That’s when Ray Shelley, 

Richard’s great-great-grandson, 
and other members of the Shelley 
family realized they needed to act 
quickly to save this important piece of their past. 
The tree was a connection to Richard Shelley they 
did not want to lose. Ray paid the current owners of 
the farm $1,200 for a large section of the oak, in- 
cluding the embedded scythe. He donated the tree 
to the Iowa County Historical Society so it can be 
displayed in the society’s museum, along with in- 
formation about the Shelley family. For Christmas 
in 1998, he gave each of his children a small piece 
of the tree so 
they can keep 
the family leg- 
end alive. 



This 2.4th Iowa 
Volunteer 
InfantPj 6ivil 
War campaign 
medal belonged 
to Ftchard 
‘5helle'(. 



Photos: Courtesy Dennis Bell 




L)ometimes legends are as close as 
v(our own family That's what Favi 
‘Shelle'i discovered as a Kid when, in 
the late i460s, his grandparents told 
f him about the famil'j tree. The'( 

; weren't talking about a diagram of his 
ancestors. Instead, thevj described how 
his great -great -grandfather, Ftchard 
Thornton ‘5helle'(, left his marK on an 
oaK tree on the famil'j farm near Marengo. 
Now, Favi sees the sc>(the in the tree as a 
phvjsical part of his heritage, "proof of where 
we came from." He savis, "1 can reach out and 
touch something m'( [great-great-] grandfather 
put there." For him, the legend has special 
meaning. LiKe his ancestor, Favi Knows what it is 
liKe to be awavj from his famil'j to serve his 
countcj. He spent 2.2. Njears in the Iowa National 
6iuard. "1 Know the sacrifices 1 made....l Know the 
doubts 1 had about whether 1 would return....lt 
brought me closer to him because 1 Know how he 
suffered and the loneliness he felt." 

‘Shelle'i's advice for 6iol(ifinch readers: asK 
vjour parents and grandparents about life as far 
bacK as tbs'! can remember. Find out if thevi 
helped in World War 1 or World War 11, or if thevi 
served in the militacf since then. Did '(our famil'j 
immigrate to the United “States? Has Iowa alwavjs 
been '(our familfs home? "If Njou don't asK '(our 
elders, v(ou are never going to Know '(our heri- 
tage," he savis. "Write it down and preserve it. If 
viou don't asK, '(ou'll never Know what will slip 
awavi." 



The Goldfinch 9 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




^acrecC Stories (Preserve 
Ancient traditions 



i 





American Indian myths have been 
passed from one generation to the 
next for thousands of years. The sto- 
ries are considered sacred and are 
usually told, not written. 

Johnathan Buffalo grew up hearing 
the sacred stories of the Mesguakie 
Indians. Now, as tribal historian, he 
has written down many of the ancient 
stories to help students at the Sac 



and Fox Settlement School near Tama 
learn about Mesguakie culture and his- 
tory. Stories such as the one that fol- 
lows about the creation of the Red 
Earth People link the Mesguakie with 
their heritage. Sacred stories help the 
Mesguakie children know who they are. 
Knowing their history will help them 
pass on what it means to be 
Mesguakie to future generations. 






10 The Goldfinch 



Earth Feople 

A long time ago, after the Creator 
had made the land and everything 
on it, he made the People. He 
formed them from clay that was as 
rich and red as the reddest blood. 
And the People were of that color of 
red. After he made the People, he 
told them that he had made them 



out of the red earth. ..he told them 
they would be called Mesquakie, Red 
Earth People. Since that time and up 
to the present, the People the 
Creator had made are known as 
Mesquakie— Red Earth People. 

The Creator then taught the 
Mesquakie everything they needed 
to live — how to hunt, grow crops, 
gather food. He taught them how to 
make their houses, clothing and 
tools. He also taught them rules on 

li 5a6r&d—hol'(; having to do with 

r&ligious beliefs; worth'f of great resped. 



O 

ERIC 




how to live. He taught them 
how to sing and dance. Even the 
feelings the people had were 
those of the Creator. It was as if 
the People were like their 
Creator and the Creator was like 
his People. 

When all was done and every- 
thing was taught, the Creator 
told the Mesquakie that he was 
going to leave them. He told 
them that he would go up north 
where it was always winter, but 



that he would come 
down once a year to 
see how the people were and 
what the world he had made 
was like — and how to know him 
as he was coming. He would 
come as the first snows of win- 
ter. So the Creator left his 
People by the sea where the 
Mesquakie lived for many years, 
living the way of life that they 
had been taught. 

1 —Johnathan Buffalo 

iZ 



According to 3uffalo, 
Meeo\uakie legends tell of an 
early home by the great sea in 
the east. It’s believed this 
home ivas 
along the 5t. 

Lawrence River 
in Canada. After 
relocating several 
times due to 
pressures 
from enemy 
tribes, 

European- American 
traders and settlers, 
and French, British, and 
American governments, 
the Mesciuakie combined their 
money and purchased land in 
Iowa in 1350. Located near 
Tama, the Mesquakie settle- 
ment differs from a reservation 
because the Mesquakie — not 
the government — own and con- 
trol the land. 






BEST COPY AVAILABLE 







Little 3r other 
Qnaree the Sun 

In 1340. U.5. soldiers relocated the 
Winnebago to reservation land in Iowa. Six 
years iater, they were forced to move from 
Iowa to South Dakota. This example of a 
Winnebago myth explains how people, not ani- 
mals. became chiefs in the world. 



12 TTie Goldfinch 



13 



r\t the beginning when the earth was new, 
the animals were the chiefs. They were 
more powerful than humans, whom they 
hunted, killed, and ate. Finally they killed all 
the people except one girl and her little 
brother, who lived in hiding. 

“Sister, are there no other people in this 
world?” he asked one day. 

“There may be others,” she said, “but we 
don’t dare go looking for them. Terrible ani- 
mals would stalk and kill us.” 

But Little Brother was consumed with 
curiosity. So when his sister went off to gath- 
er food, he set out to look for other 
humans. He walked a long time but met 
neither people nor animals. He got so 
tired that he lay down in a spot 
where the sun had melted the 
snow away. While he was sleep- 
ing, the sun rose and shot fiery 
rays upon Little Brother. Waking 
up, the boy found that the feather 
robe he was wearing had scorched and 
tightened around him so that he couldn’t 
move. To free himself he had to tear it apart. 
It was ruined! He shook his fists and shout- 
ed, “Sun, I’ll get even! Don’t you think you’re 
so high that I can’t get at you!” 

Angry and sad. Little Brother returned 
home. He wept when he told his sister how 
the sun had spoiled his feather robe. After 
fasting for twenty days, he told his sister to 
make a snare for him to catch the sun. She 
went out and gathered many secret things 
and twisted them into a strong cord. 







Little Brother waited until the middle of 
the night, when it is darkest. He went out 
and found the hole in the sky through 
which the sun would rise, and at its 
entrance he set his snare. When the sun 
came up at the usual time, it was caught 
and held fast. There was no light or warmth 
that day. 

Even though the animals were the chiefs, 
they were afraid. They called a council of all 
their elders and talked for a long time. At 
last they decided that the biggest and most 
fearsome of all the animals should go and 
gnaw through the cord holding the sun. 
This animal was a Dormouse, who was not 
small, as she is now, but big as a mountain. 

Dormouse went to the place where the 
sun rises and found him in the snare. The 
sun had grown hotter as he struggled to free 
himself. As Dormouse approached, the hair 
on her back smoked and was singed off, but 
she crouched down and began to gnaw at 
the cord. She chewed and chewed and after 
a long time managed to bite it in two. 

Freed at last, the sun rose at once and 
made everything bright again. But the heat 
had shriveled Dormouse down to her pres- 
ent size, and the sun’s rays had half blinded 
her. Although brave Dormouse had freed 
the sun, everybody realized that Little 
Brother, who had snared the sun, was the 
wisest being in this world, and the one with 
the greatest power. Since that time the 
humans have been the chiefs over the ani- 
mals, the hunters instead of the hunted. 




Like other Indians, the Sioux believed they 
came from the soil. The first man drew himself 
up from the soil, fighting for his freedom. 
Sunshine hardened the earth and strengthened 
the man. Their nation sprang from the first 
man and claimed the great plains as their own. 

Sioux myths also explain how behavior such 

as deceit and trickery 
came about. 

According to the 
Sioux, Ictinike is the 
son of the sun god. 
When Ictinike offend- 
ed his father, he was 
banned from the 
celestial regions. 

Indians say Ictinike 
taught them all the 
evil things they know, 
and they regard him as 
a Father of lies. 

-by Benton Sen 

The Goldfinch 



\ 4 " 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 






F 



indseM, te FuH 



ure in tine Vast 



Settling near others from their own country 
was one way early immigrants found comfort 
and safety. It also kept their traditions alive. 

In the case of many Czechoslovakian im- 
migrants, that area was in and around Cedar 
Rapids. Repeating myths and legends was an 
important way of keeping in touch with their 
past, both with their own ancestors and the 
culture they left behind. 

One legend explains why the lion on the 
Czech coat of arms has two tails. A retold ver- 
sion follows. 



brave Knight named ^runcvitc set out to win for himself 
and his countpf a great priz.e, which he could bear on his 
coat of arms as an emblem. He ended up on an island filled 
with shipwrectcs and stceletons, which ^runcvit: realised too 
late meant that no one was ever allowed to leave. 

&runcvitc saw a giant bird coming to the island and 
carpjing off dead horses. Hiding himself in a horsehide, 
&runcvik was carried in the bird's huge talons to its nest, 
from which he escaped before he could be eaten. 

Traveling on, he came upon a furious battle between a 
lion and a dragon. The lion was tired and near defeat, ^runcvitc 
jumped into the fight to sla'j the dragon, after which he 
tended the lion's wounds. The lion became his faithful com- 
panion and accompanied him on his quest to fight the forces 
of evil, hate, env^, and greed. 

One da'j, ^runcvitc and the lion came upon the &lactc 
Pock of Oarkness which was, in realit'j, an evil sorcerer with 
a powerful, magic sword that could crush an-fthing it touched. 
The sorcerer challenged the brave knight to a battle. The 
lion, in an attempt to divert the sorcerer's attention from 
^runcvik, was struck b^ the sword, which split his tail in two 
parts. 6ver since, the 6z.ech Lion has had two tails. 

14 TTie Goldfinch , 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE " ' 




^runcvik used his shield as a mirror to blind the evil 
sorcerer, who dropped his magic sword, ^runcvik picked it 
up and used it to destro'j the &lack Pock of Darkness. As it 
crumbled, a spring of water burst forth. In the water, a beau- 
tiful princess began to appear. Her face was the Vitava Ptver. 
Her hair was the houses on both sides of the river. The magic 
sword became the Prague bridge, where ^runcvik and his 
lion stand guard forever. 

To this da'j, 6z.ech legend has it that one of the bridge's 
pillars contains Prince ^runcvik's 
magic sword. 



* ) 



Uons 



3. an in.po.an. 



Nationai 

brary in cedar RaP'ds f 3,^33 of a 

cultures, which are pres They 

tell. Check ihto the =“J“To,s...onceupo^^ 

meant a lot to your an ces__^ 

-by Jill Esbaum 



Might at the 01, Corral 



Th& n>\a6&: Tombston&, Ariiona. Vnt datK Octob&r Th, iggi. {\&vi. Ite 6lanton grabb&d W'jatt's arm to stop 

Two s&ts of brotb&rs, Tom and ^vK- McLaurj and Ite and him from firing. “TViis fight has comm&nce^,* W'jatt said, 

E'ill'f 6lanton, ar& in town. Tombstone Marshal Virgil 6arp pushing Canton asid&. "6»o to fighting, or g&t awa'j." 

suspscts th&m of hors& rustling. Wl&r a confrontation in a V4h&n th& gunfight &nd&d, th& McLaurj brothers and 

Tombstone saloon, Virgil calls upon his brothers, vl>(att and &ill>( ^^nton were dead. Ite 6lanton ran awa'j. Virgil, 
Morgan, and a friend Tohn H. ''Doc* Hollida'j, to defeat the 
dreaded outlaws. 

Virgil and W'jatt waliced down (remont t>treet near 
the O.ic. ^lorral. W'jatt advised Doc to hide his gun under 
his coat. Virgil, who wanted to disarm the outbws, con- 
fronted them and said, "^O'js, throw up 'jour hands, I want 
-jour guns." &ut W'jatt was overheard sa'jing, "You have 
been looicing for a fight, now 'jou can have one." 



Morgan, and Doc were wounded. W'jatt 6arp was un- 
harmed. Tie shootout 
lasted onl'j ?0 seconds. 
e>ut the Old West 
legend bom at the 
O.K ^lorral lives on. 

-by Benton Sen 



Bid you know? 

Wyatt Earp, one of the legendary heroes of the 
Gunfight at the O.K. Corral, grew up in Pella, Iowa. 

Earp. who farmed with his father, ran away 
to enlist in the army when he was 15. His father 
soon found him and sent him back to their Pella 
cornfields. A year later, the Earp family left Iowa 
for southern California because Wyatt's father 
disagreed with Iowa’s position on the slave 
issue; the elder Earp thought slaves should not 
be freed. Wyatt received his first gun prior to the 
journey and kept the wagon train of 40 families 
supplied with fresh meat. 

When Wyatt was 22, he moved to Lamar, 
Missouri, married, and became a lawman. When 
his wife died of typhoid fever, Wyatt drifted in 
and out of odd jobs in Kansas, Texas, Wyoming, 
and Arizona. He became a buffalo hunter, 
policeman, deputy sheriff, assistant marshal, 
gambler, railroad v.orker, stagecoach driver, and 
rancher. He married again at age 60 and 




Fullliaine; wyatt 

Berry Stapp 
Earp (named 
after his 
father’s com- 
manding 
officer in the 
Mexican War) 

ParGntS! Virginia Ann Cooksey 

and Nicholas Porter Earp 
Born! March 19, 1848, in Monmouth, Illinois 

Moved to Iowa: i850 



Siblings: 



James, Virgil, Martha, Morgan, 
Warren, and Anna. 



became a prospector during the Alaska Gold 
Rush. Wyatt eventually returned to California and 
worked in the motion picture industry until he 
died in 1929. Best remembered as a fearless 
frontier lawman, the Pella farm boy became a 
national legend. ' -Oy Barbara Cc»n ks 

riu* (loUirUK'll 15 



1-6 






^^OSSWO^^ 




Solitary; by itself. Richard Shelley 
left his mark on a oak tree. 

6. University of Okoboji's legendary 
football team. 

9. The Father of Lies according to 
Sioux legend. 

10. A great story may take 

your away. 

12. Record of past facts and events. 

1 7. Safe to eat. 

1 8. River that was home to 
Iowa's sea monster. 

20. Midday. 

21. Bring about or produce. She hoped 

her research would good results. 

22. An ancient art that brings people 
together. 



George Hull's stone hoax; The Cardiff _ 
Personal record of daily life. 

Legendary Czech animal with two tails. 

Site of a gunfight involving Wyatt Earp: 
The Corral. 

offers clues for solving 



5. Yesterday's 



7. 

8 . 
11 . 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16 . 

17 . 

18 . 

19. 



16 The Goldfinch 



■i.-' 






history mysteries! 

Buried wealth. It could be gold— or a great story! 

A story symbolizing basic truths in a community. 
Greeting. 

Stories set to music. 

Location of northern Iowa's mythical university. 

Event in U.S. history that inspired many legends. 

Stories that start with a fact or 
event in history— then grow! | 

Mesquakie means Red People. 

Tool for mowing. 

Goldfinch readers who love history. 

17 




YOU CAN GO PENEATH AN OVERPASS, PUT IF YOU HIT A PEAP ENP, m AGAIN/ 




■WE AMAZING 

History 

HUNT 

Rooking for clues in a 
history mystery is a lot 
like hunting for buried 
treasure. Your research 
may start with a "map" 
—a person, place, idea, 
or event you want to 
learn more about. The 
hunt for history will 
involve phone calls and 
leg work. It may lead 
you on a meandering 
course through libraries, 
archives, courthouses, or 
internet web sites. Along 
the way you'll meet 
interesting people with 
great stories to tell. 

Don't worry if you hit a 
dead end. That's the sign 
to start digging deeper. 



fen 








-4 0 . » 




'fz 


) 



Answers on pag 



18 



The Goldfinch 17 





toes 



from the outside, then went inside 
and discovered how to reach it 
through the bookcase. 

The secret room held crum- 
bling proof that the room was once 
used to hide runaway slaves. The 
Riddles discovered old clothing, 
including a shirt and shoes. They 
also found a yellowed copy of the 
Anti-Slavery Bugle newspaper from 
Salem, Ohio, dated 1851. The little 
*^f walls could talk, Gayla Young’s house in Den- room probably served as a hiding place for slaves 
mark, Iowa, would whisper stories about brave men who came north from Missouri on their way to free- 
and women who risked their lives for freedom and dom. Hiding fugitive slaves was a tremendous risk 
about the people who helped them along their way. for the homeowner, who would have been impris- 
Young’s house was built in 1838 by Deacon oned if caught. ‘Trowbridge was a married man 
Theron Trowbridge, who followed abolitionist Asa with children,” Young said. ‘To risk his family like 
Turner to Denmark. The two men left Quincy, Illi- he did showed that he had a strong religious belief 
nois, because of the townspeople’s views on slavery, that slavery was wrong.” 

Denmark, shaped by Turner’s influence, became a Gayla purchased the house from her grand- 

center for abolitionists. parents in 1987 and still lives there with her family. 



Trowbridge built a small bookcase in the up- 
stairs bedroom that hid a small opening leading to 
a crawlspace approximately 10 feet long, 4 feet wide, 
and 3 feet high. Trowbridge was a plasterer by trade. 



“There are times that I would like to sell it and move 
to a newer house,” she said, “but this house is a 
part of history.” As a third grade teacher, Gayla is 
concerned that students understand and remem- 



and he cleverly sloped the interior walls so that the her this country’s struggle to free the slaves. “Kids 
extra space was not noticeable from outside the little have a hard time understanding the need for the 

underground railroad; they only see history 
Young’s grandparents. Bob and Ethel Riddle, through the movies. But if we let people know what 
purchased the home in the 1940s after it had been happened and the risks that these people took to 
vacant for years. They discovered the secret room help others, maybe we can prevent something like 
while replacing the roof. They found the crawlspace slavery from ever happening again.” 



18 The Goldfinch 



■ o^Ijolifionisj-: person opposed fo sla\rer-y- 



I 








' '> 1 - /' . '< 0 #. - ; 

1^' Vv-Jfj I '4 . <j"i • , », ^ > '■■ 

' Vi#L\ »' ;, ' i-£,V ’>1 'V‘ •■'•■'■' ' 

■V - '"* . , ' ’ >S • 




If we let people 
know what 
happened and 
the risks that 
these people 
took to help 
others, maybe we 
can prevent 
something like 
slavery from ever 
happening again. 







siiMi 









- ... . ... .,-. ^ 




♦VSt^V: 






aj»k.a . 



-t* ,■•■■•.■■•,>■,. V.. 

,ri^fi*B- J ttiinlii aili 



.j^>. j ■■». ... , .Ui 

I«i*d. Vbcn is n#^ ^’flKiil af'AM wO in tU« ' 

; "at • ■ 

U»n «{ XoA^y trnith ^.thMin* ^ 9ln»k*> 

<t. 1<*4» CouiffCMt .tlisj; yjr- . 

, ^ ^• iU&icua 5^Afeiiibba 'tabr4ce«'«n of 
KeAiMij^ ivU tralnaei ih' t&«)01iu> tu< (iiiUw 




Iowa’s Underground Railroad 

^^^he underground railroad was a lifeline to the 
enslaved men and women of the south. It was a 
loosely organized group of abolitionists who helped 
runaway slaves escape the south to reach Canada 
(and freedom) in the 1800s. Stops on underground 
railroad lines consisted of homes, barns, shrub- 
bery — hiding places of any kind where abolition- 
ists hid the slaves along their journey northward. 
While the underground railroad didn’t actually have 
passenger cars running on tracks, it was a way to 
move people from one place to another. 

The underground railroad is a good example 
of how events from history grow into legends. Iowa 



\jLn^srjrou.n^,:r^eanj'j^h^^en or seCref~nof Ijensafi^ earfh! 



did have underground railroad activity, but the ex- 
tent of the activity may Bave become exaggerated 
over the years. There is no way to accurately count 
the number of slaves who traveled through Iowa 
on their way to freedom. Providing help to escap- 
ing slaves was illegal, so information about under- 
ground railroad stops was kept secret. Many his- 
torical accounts of Iowa in the 1800s describe the 
underground railroad as an efficient, well organized 
network that provided help to thousands of escap- 
ing slaves. Many Iowa towns claim to have been 
part of an underground railroad line. Caught up in 
the legend, many homeowners believed that root 
cellars, hidden rooms, or large cupboards in their 
homes must have hidden slaves. 

Chances are, however, that most root cellars 
stored food, not slaves, and the secret rooms and 
cupboards were probably built for reasons com- 
pletely unrelated to slavery. 

Although there is no evidence to support that 
the underground railroad in Iowa was widespread 
or organized, there certainly were some well-es- 
tablished stops in the state. Evidence such as the 
items found in Gayla Young’s house offers proof 
of the network’s activity in Iowa. The legends in- 
spired by the underground railroad help to keep 
history’s heroes alive, \ 



The Goldfinch 19 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Photos and Newspaper: Courtesy Gayu Young 





I^than Isbell, Jr., and his wife, Sophia, warned their daugh- 
ter, Sophronia, never to go into the woodshed on their prop- 
erty in Denmark, iowa. One day when Sophronia was 10 years 
oid (probabiy in 1844), she disobeyed and found two biack 
men on a straw bed in the corner. Then, for the first time, she 
understood what her father was doing. He operated a “sta- 
tion” on the underground raiiroad! Stories of his efforts to 
heip escaped sieves have been passed down iike treasures 
to generations of Nathan isbeii’s famiiy. According to famiiy 
accounts, isbeii made frequent trips into Missouri (a sieve 
state) to distribute Bibies and other reiigious iiterature. Whiie 
in Missouri, he hid one or two escaped sieves in his faise- 
bottomed wagon and took them back to iowa, where they 
hid in his woodshed untii the next connection on the escape 
route ied them further north toward freedom. 






75 













~7i) mUot, ^fS/jJUL, 

y/ ^ uM- 

u*\. a. ©«• 

yK</cf l)-%(AAt/CbJ R. 1 0 

/UUa/j O •? V 9 ^ 

fA.vuv^ 

'~i‘0 »^V-» ^ 

Chi'll ofc„ i), xpc(' tu>,7j- ^xso t, o^f'uyit. 
-^ 7 *- / 0 '^TuS/ 



yo AiAA -9'/Ui 



i •' 



Heiping escaped sieves was risky business for Isbeii, but he kept at it untii his death 
in 1856. One way to confirm Isbeii’s work as an aboiitionist is to iook through his diary, 
it’s fiiied with entries recording detaiis of his daiiy iife, from what he pianted to how much 
he paid for a pair of boots for one of his sons. A few of the entries are reprinted here. We 
haven’t changed Isbeii’s speiiing or punctuation, so you might find a few “mistakes.” See 
if you can find a ciue in isbeii’s diary about his work with the underground raiiroad. 



June 1841 

8tfi Commenced our journey from Lenox, 
Berkshire Co., Mass, for Iowa Territory. Came by 
the way of West Stockbridge, 10 miles. The 
railroad to Hudson, 38 miles, thence to Albany, 30 
miles by steamboat. Thence by the Erie Canal to 
Buffalo, 10 days, thence by the lake, on steamboat 
to Cleveland, 194 miles. 19 hours. Thence by the 
Ohio Canal to Portsmouth, 309 miles, 5 V 2 days. 
Thence down the Ohio River in Steamboat to the 
Mississippi river to Fort Madison, 409 miles. 
Where we arrived July 11th all in comfortable 
health. Thence in a wagon which Mr. George 
Dewey came in, to Fort Madison for us, to his 
house the same day 5 'A miles having travelled 



2105 miles and been on the way 33 days and 3 
hours, including eleven days which we were 
hindered from time to time in [changing] boats & 
boats waiting for freight. Fare $96.33 Food 20.75 
4250 lbs freight $117.40 

Ju[yl841 

21st Removed from Mr. Dewey’s house to Den- 
mark, 3 1/2 miles. 10 miles from Ft. Madison... 

June 1848 
6tfi A white frost 

8tfi Went to Salem to help drive off the slave 
catchers 



20 Tlie Goldfinch 



BEST COK AVAILABLE 







Isbell Diaby: SHSI (Iowa Ci ty) 

_ -\ra 






5 

*„a// 



ln5'^ // ^ 







"'vL.// /irtivi /{t-j-4/ 






//> / 






iu !X^^' natM4 



A /; >; 

./4_ 



cfi^rC\iv 9 uIf^ /t^ 



C 1^ 



y // A'^uJt 

^'A //auscr,x^^/AyatA Y 
. . -r/7 4. / A^/ .rV/a,t,f / ZeAf/y 

J/i a^iii4 C4i<' L 

/ <,71 y- 

tt^tf<y Ln /o i^l f h 

„L X 



CoC^ 



Ar. Qr«u,yyf^-y ■ cyA ^ 



iUy S 



!>'»««//// AiA 
-// 

ft 






\fri 



/i\ 



A!j ^Axifx. yt<^t/c. 



^Bc a luimi actccirvci 



9tH returned 
from Salem 

October 1848 
9tfi Mormon 
Temple burnt at 
Nauvoo 

9V[ay 1850 
13tfi Under- 
ground railroad 
got a passenger 
from Missouri 



about how he and his wife, aiong with their seven 
chiidren, traveiied to iowa. To iearn more about 
isbeii, study his diary entries again, and then 
answer the questions beiow. 

V 

O Sometimes when people talk about historical 
myths, they’re talking about things many people 
believe about historical events but that aren’t 
really true. One common myth about Iowa history 
is that all immigrants to this area came by covered 
wagons. How does Isbell’s diary challenge that 
popular belief? 



9{pvemSer 1850 

IZtH Commenced again distributing Bibles 
18tfi Bot George boots; paid $1.50 

May 1851 

Hailstorm, broke much glass 



© If it’s true that Isbell made frequent trips into 
Missouri to pick up passengers for the 
underground railroad, why do you think he didn’t 
write about it more often in his diary? 



Ju[yl85l 

i^t/t Cholera prevails, 5 died today 



Nathan Isbell, Jr., was born in Massachusetts in 
1801. For many years, he farmed and operated 
a saw miil. In 1841, when he was 40 years old, 
Isbell sold his farm and miii, pinning his hopes 
for a better life on the promise of the far west — 
Iowa Territory, isbeii wrote in his diary from 
1830 untii about 1855. His handwriting deterio- 
rates over the years, and the iast six pages of 
the diary were cut away. Most of the entries in 
Isbell’s diary are oniy one or two iines iong. in 
what is perhaps his iongest entry, isbeii writes 



© Are you surprised that Isbell mentions his 
abolitionist work at all in the diary? Why or why 
not? 



O Why do you think Isbell didn’t want his children 
to know about his work with the underground 
railroad? 



fif 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Tlie Goldfinch 21 




^^ore than 130 years ago, a 
five-ton block of gypsum left 
Fort Dodge concealed beneath a 
veil of lies. 

In 1866, George Hull, a 
tobacco farmer and cigar maker 
fi-om Connecticut, was in Ackley, 
Iowa visiting his sister. He had 
the reputation of a villain — and 
some accounts say he even 
looked the part, with a black 
moustache and beard and 

I U 



wearing black fi-om hat to boots. 
Described as an athiest, he 
reluctantly accompanied his 
sitster to the Methodist Church 
in Ackley where he listened to 
Reverend Turk preach a revival 
sermon that mentioned the 
Bible verse Genesis 6:4 — “There 
were giants on the earth in those 
days...” 

Hull and Turk later argued 
about how to interpret that 



passage. The result: Hull 
conceived a scheme to fool 
people with a giant carved of 
stone. And he hoped to make 
money on the side. 

Hull and an Iowa friend 
went to Fort Dodge in 1868 to 
obtain a block of gypsum 12 
feet long, 4 feet wide and 2 feet 
thick. People in Fort Dodge 
became suspicious of the two 
mud-splattered strangers who 



22 The Goldfinch 



23 



Photo: Courtesy of the New York State Historical Association, Cooperstown, N.Y. 







were spending so much time in 
stone quarries. Hull told curious 
onlookers that the goliath-sized 
block of gypsum was to be 
placed on exhibition in Wash- 
ington as an example of “the 
best building stone in the 
world.” But the story often 
changed. Hull also claimed the 
block was Iowa’s gift to a Lin- 
coln memorial in Washington. 
Or that it was for a monument in 
New York that would be made 
of contributions from quarries 
representing each state in the 
Union. It took several weeks of 
persuasion, grueling work, and 
a few bribes to dig Hull’s 10,000- 
pound block of gypsum out of 
the ground. 

Hull hired Edward 
Burkhardt, a stone cutter in 
Chicago, to turn the gypsum 
into a prehistoric giant. The 
problem was getting the stone 
to the artist. The immense size 
and weight of the gypsum 
exhausted teams of horses and 
broke wagons and bridges 
along the 40-mile trip to a 
railroad. The block had to be 
cut smaller along the way to 
lighten the load. 



In Chicago, Burkhardt and 
his assistants secretly carved 
the block into a figure which 
resembled Hull. The giant 
emerged from the stone looking 
as though he had died in agony. 
The artists simulated skin pores 
by pounding the stone with a 
hammer embedded with needle- 



THE GIAHT 
EMERGED 
FROM THE 
/TOHE 
LOOKING 
A/ THOUGH 
HE HAD DIED 
IN AGOHr 



like points. Blue veins in the 
stone became the petrified veins 
of an ancient man. A sulfuric acid 
bath turned the statue dingy 
brown. Hull himself spent count- 
less hours rubbing the statue 
with a sponge, water, and sand to 
remove chisel marks and create 
the illusion that the giant had 
aged for centuries in the earth. 



Some legends — like this one — are created on purpose, with 
hoaxes (practical jokes to deceive the public) at the core. Other 
legends evolve on their own over time, inspired by people or 
events from history. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



The giant was crated and 
hauled to a relative’s farm near 
Cardiff, New York. It cost Hull 
about $2,200 to create, trans- 
port, and bury his giant in the 
ground between roots of an old 
elm tree on “Stub” Newell’s 
farm so it would look like it had 
been there forever. A year later, 
Newell showed two hired men 
where to dig a well on the farm. 
In the process, they “discov- 
ered” the giant. 

Scientists pondered the 
discovery while people flocked 
to Newell’s farm for a chance to 
see the giant — for a 50-cent 
admission fee. Eating places 
and stagecoach runs sprang up 
to feed and transport tourists. 
Some thought it looked like an 
Indian. Or George Washington. 
A graduate student at Yale, 
Alexander McWhorter, claimed 
the figure was the Phoenician 
god Baal. He even found 
pictorial inscriptions on the 
statue (which no one else could 
see) and translated them. 

Hull reportedly made $3 
million before his giant was 
proven a hoax. Then, Hull 
eagerly took credit for the 
deception, gloating over his 
ability to fool so many people. 

The Goldfinch 23 




o 

ERIC 



The. StoVy 



Eventually the truth behind 
Hull’s hoax became known. But 
that didn’t kill the story. 

“The real Cardiff Giant was 
as popular after it was discovered 
to be a hoax as it was before,” 
said Dr. Gilbert T. Vincent, 
president of the Farmers’ Mu- 
seum in Cooperstown, New York, 
where the giant is on display. 

Paul D’Ambrosio, Farmers’ 

Museum chief curator, believes 
the giant has generational appeal. 

“People who saw it at the museum as kids bring 
their own kids back to see it,” he said. TTe Cardiff 
Giant, which has intrigued scholars and writers 
through the decades since the hoax, may make a 
return trip this summer to Iowa, where it would 
be on display at the Fort Museum in Fort Dodge. 

“It’s not an easy piece to transport,” said 
D’Ambrosio. “It’s made of porous stone which is 
not as sturdy as it looks.” Moving the giant— now 
considered an irreplaceable artifact— requires 
special handling. It takes a fork lift to load and 
unload the 3,000 pound figure, and the giant has 
to be packed so it won’t rattle and so the weight 
won’t shift (which could damage both the statue 
and the truck) . It’s expensive to pack, ship, and 
insure the Cardiff Giant. 

*Tlie giant broke into two pieces many years 
ago — the legs are separate, which may help in 
moving the object,” D’Ambrosio said. Tlie two 






Photo; Courtesy of the New York State Historical Association, Cooperstown, b 

pieces fit together so well that viewers don’t 
notice the damage. 

Considering what it takes to move the 
enormous Cardiff Giant today, George Hull’s 
success in transporting the block of gypsum, 
getting it carved into the likeness of a mythical 
giant, then secretly burying it on a farm amidst 
the roots of established trees is all the more 
amazing. 

Even if the real Cardiff Giant doesn’t make it 
back to Fort Dodge, visitors to the Fort Museum 
can see a replica carved by Cliff Carlson in the 
late 1960s and early 1970s th^ is part of the 
museum’s permanent 
exhibit. 



24 The Goldfinch 







BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




COVtD^fUCH^GlGAHTieHO^^IfAPPEKTODAr?— 1 



"Oh, sure!" savis Dr. 6iilb&rt T. Vint&nt, pr&sid&nt of 
the Farmers' Ntuseum in Cooperstown, NY. "Hoay.es 90 
on all the time." 

Vineent believes it would be hard to tome up with 
a m'(thieal human figure that would have the same 
attraction toda'( as the Cardiff 6iiant had l?0 viears 
ago. To be successful, Vincent ey-plained, a hoay. must 
tap into something that's happening at the time. In the 
late 1800s when 6ieorge Hull fooled the world with the 
Cardiff 6iiant: 

" Charles Darwin had just published his theopf of 
evolution. 

“ FossiliZ-ed remains had been discovered while 
digging the 6rie 6anal. 

^ It was a time of religious fervor as people 
debated the biblical record of time and scien- 
tific theories of time. “Dome religious leaders 
li\ie P-everend Turii insisted that everything in 
the ^ible, including passages about giants 
inhabiting the earth, happened ey.actl'j as it 
is described. Others, liice Hull, disagreed. 

"Ml the issues being discussed at the time 
were touched on the Cardiff 6iiant," said 
Vincent. IK successful hoay. feeds on the mo- 
ment. "It stri\ies a chord with what people are 
thiniiing about and taliiing about," Vincent said. 

People were eager to believe in Hull's creation. 

The dissenting voices of people who thought it 
was a hoay. from the start were ignored. 

It's easvy to laugh at the hoay. todavy and at 
the people who were so easilvy fooled bvy a statue 
carved out of Fort Dodge g'ypsum. "We can't 
loo\i bacii at people in the l^th century with 
disdain because the'y believed in the Cardiff 
6(iant hoay.," insists Paul D'Mnbrosio, Farmers' 



(Museum chief curator. "People todavy still have the 
same fascination with the biiarre." He agrees with 
Vincent: hoay-es happen every davy. "People have alwavys 
believed in things that aren't real," he said. That the'y 
believed in the Cardiff 6iiant is "not that farfetched." 

Toda'y, the Cardiff 6iiant is a monument to one of 
America's greatest hoay.es. It reminds us that people 
crave good stories and tall tales, and that legends 
persist because people want to believe. What iiind of 
hoay. would capture the world's attention toda'y? Looii 
at what's in the news to see what people are taliiing 
and thiniiing about. Taiie computers, for ey.ample. Is the 
Y2.K "millennium bug" real? Or could it be an elaborate 
hoay. of Cardiff 6iiant proportions? Could someone fool 
the world with images of UFOs? Could someone with 
an imagination liiie Hull's create and "discover" the 
bod'y of an alien who visited the earth centuries ago? 

Do 'you thinii it would fool people? ^ 



This photo shows 
gypsum miners 
working in a Fort 
Dodge quarry in 
1910. In 1868, 
workers hauled 
the beginnings of 
the Cardiff Giant 
hoax out a Fort 
Dodge gypsum 
bed. Where do 
think the next 
great hoax will 
start? Who do 
you think will 
start it? 



^ SHSI (low^ fn ^ 





BESTCOPYAVAILABLE 





he TraiC of an 






lonster 



by Katherine House 

You may have heard of the Loch Ness monster, a huge, dinosaur- 
like creature said to live in a murky Scottish lake. Scientists and 
ordinary citizens have been trying to track “Nessie” for years. But 
did you know Iowa had its own sea monster more than 100 years 
ago, or so a local legend claims? 



H< 



Logs were disappearing from 
James Wright’s farm near 
Oskaloosa along the south bank 
of the Skunk River. So Wright 
built a sturdy fence around the 
feed lot and posted his trusty 
bulldog there to keep watch. 
Still, within 20 days, ten of his 
largest hogs disappeared. Each 
one weighed between 250 and 
400 pounds. And each vanished 
vdthout a trace. The fence was 
not damaged, and the watchdog 
never uttered a growl. 

On December 4, 1884, Wright 
took his rifle and hid near the 
feed lot, determined to solve the 

26 The Goldfinch 



mystery of his disappear- 
ing hogs. He stayed there 



Just then a gigantic creature crept 
over the river bank. TTie monster 
stepped over the fence and 
grasped a 300-pound hog in its 
ferocious jaws. TTie hog disap- 
peared behind 17-inch teeth as 
the creature plunged back into 
the water. 

Wright told city authorities that 
the monster’s legs were three feet 
long and thick as a man’s body. 

Its tail alone was 20 feet long. 

People hurried to Wright’s farm 
as news of the monster spread. 

TTie crowd swelled to 2,000. 

People cautiously approached the 
water. Suddenly the beast lunged 
up the bank, grabbing a horse by 
the neck. The rider was rescued, 
but the monster dragged the 




It was a 

quiet night, except for the 
violent splashing he heard 
in the nearby Skunk River. 

As the sun rose, Wright 
turned toward home. He 
must have been tired, cold, 
and discouraged after spending 
the night in his feed lot without 
catching sight of the hog thief. 

Art by MaiyMoye-Rowley 





horse 
down the 

bank, into the river. Fifty men 
fired 10,000 shots at the animal, 
to no avail. Then one of the men 
ordered a cannon to be loaded 
with railroad spikes and gun- 
powder. Before the roar of the 
cannon died away, a wail, loud 
and long, came from the water. 
The monster’s head and tail 
lashed the water, staining the 
river with blood. 

Twelve oxen dragged the 
dead sea monster into town. It 
measured 81 feet from the 
end of its tail to the tip of 
its nose. Its heart 
weighed 80 pounds! 
A doctor from 
Davenport 
examined 




the beast 
and said, 

“Gentlemen, this is no Cardiff 
giant.. ..It probably belongs to a 
species of gigantic lizard sup- 
posed to have been extinct many 
thousand years.” 

he Goldfinch first discovered 
the sea monster in an Iowa histo- 
ry book published in the 1960s. 
But tracking down the original 
newspaper article that spawned 
the legend proved nearly as elu- 
sive as the monster itself. The 
brief mention in Hawkeye Lore, 
by Bernice Reida and Ann Irwin, 
noted that an Oskaloosa newspa- 
per published an account of the 
monster in the fall of 1884. With 
this clue, the chase for the story 
was on! 

A telephone call to directory 
assistance gave Goldfinch 



sleuths the phone 
number of the Oskaloosa Herald 
newspaper. We called an editor 
in the Herald newsroom. She’d 
never heard the sea monster 
story, but provided the names 
and phone numbers of some 
local historians who might be 
able to help. 

Next we checked the 
Oskaloosa library. Unfamiliar 
with the sea monster story, the 
staff offered no additional clues. 
The next contact on our list: 
Patricia Patterson, one of the 
people recommended by the 
newspaper editor. Patterson and 
her husband, Lloyd, have com- 
piled an index to Herald articles. 
The sea monster search became 
contagious. “Wild horses 
couldn’t keep us away” from 
the search, Mrs. Patterson said. 
When the Pattersons could not 



O 

ERIC 



The Goldfinch 27 






turn up any information on the 
monster, Mrs. Patterson called a 
friend who had purchased old 
copies of the Herald from the 
library when the newspapers 
were microfilmed. Her fiiend, 
too, was captivated by the leg- 
end. Puzzling over the story 
kept him awake at night reading 
copies of the 1884 Herald. He 
began with the April issues, fig- 
uring the sea monster could not 
have been spotted earlier in the 
year, when the river was most 
likely frozen. 



The hunting party 
for the sea monster 
story was getting 
larger. The sus- 
pense was grow- 
ing, too. Where 
would our search 
lead? What really 
happened? 

The next contact DoUie 
BeDillon, archivist at the Nelson 
Pioneer Farm Museum of the 
Mahaska County Historical 
Society. BeDiUon knew exactly 
what we were looking for. She pro- 
vided copies of three newspaper 
articles, all published in 1968. 

That’s when the 
mystery deepened. 
The Earlham Echo 
newspaper had pub- 
lished an article about 
the monster on 
February 8, 1968, 
after hearing a caller 





to a Des Moines radio 
program inquire about the 
Oskaloosa monster. That article, 
which originally appeared in the 
Earlham Gazette on December 5, 
1884, seemed to be just the one 
we were looking for. It described 
the monster in detail and told 
how it came out of the river and 
stole a hog that weighed at least 
300 pounds. 

But a quick check of an Iowa 
map told us Earlham is located 
west of Des Moines and is 
nowhere near the Skunk River. 
The editors of the Echo were 
puzzled, too. “There was no 
explanation why it was published 
in the Earlham Gazette. Probably 
just a good story,” they wrote. 

It turned out that we were 
not the first detectives investi- 
gating this mystery. In 1968, the 
sea monster legend intrigued 
editors of the Oskaloosa Daily 



O 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





/ 



Herald. Managing Editor 
Dave McMillen read the 
article in the Echo and 
decided to conduct his 
own research to deter- 
mine if the legend were 
based on facts. The orig- 
inal article mentioned 
that the monster was 
skinned and would be 
sent to the Academy of 
Natural Science in 
Philadelphia. McMillen 
learned that the 
Academy of Natural 
Science did in fact exist. 
Unfortunately, no one 
there had a record of the 
Oskaloosa specimen. 
Next he checked issues 
of the 1884 Herald. He 
found two references to 
the monster, but couldn’t 
find the original article 
that supposedly had 
been printed there. He 
decided to reprint the 
story anyway and 
reached this conclusion: 
“Whether there really 
was a monster, we don’t 
know. We’ll let you 
decide for yourself. But, 
we think you will agree, 
it is a good story.” 



EACT 




he Oskaloosa sea monster may have 
begun as a hoax, much like the Cardiff 
Giant. Newspaper accounts credit Al 
Swalm with the idea of loading a can- 
non with railroad spikes to slay the 
beast. Swalm, known as a practical 
joker, was editor and part owner of the 
Oskaloosa Weekly Herald in 1 884. 
Other men mentioned in news accounts 
also lived in Oskaloosa at the time. 
Were their names mentioned to make 
the story seem true? Or, were they all 
practical jokers? 

Perhaps the entire story was motivat- 
ed by politics. In 1884, Grover 
Cleveland, a Democrat, defeated James 
Blaine, a Republican, for president of 
the United States. The Oskaloosa 
Herald contained a brief reference to 
the monster in 



December 1884, saying that Cleveland, 
"like other prominent Democrats was 
bound to have the whole hog or none, 
with free trade and transportation." This 
indicated that the writer thought 
Cleveland was unwilling to compromise 
on important issues of the day. The arti- 
cle went on to say, "It might be well to 
keep that 12-pounder in readiness for 
any other of those southern fellows who 
may come this way." The '12-pounder' 
refers to the cannon used to slay the 
monster. 

The reference to southern fellows 
might have meant southern sympathizers 
who migrated into Iowa from the South 
following the Civil War. Dave McMillen 
wrote in a March 1968 /-/ero/of article 
that these men "harbored ambitions of 
recapturing the south and restoring it to 
its proper place." They kept guns in a 
cave and periodically went up and 
down the Skunk River preying on live- 
stock. Because of this, the gang 
became known as the "monster." 

How do you think the leg- 
end started? Contact The 
Goldfinch with your 
ideas! 






ANSWER PAGE 






How Do You Start a Modern Myth? 

fvs\c tiSe FTo^essoTs at 0 Oi 






by Katherine House 



hen it comes to football, lowans are divided 
about which college team to support. But many 
people in Iowa root for the University of Okoboji 
Phantoms, a team that remains undefeated through- 
out its long history. How could that be, you ask? 
You’ve never heard of the Phantoms? 

Maybe that’s because the Phantoms, as their 
name suggests, don’t really exist. In fact, neither 
does the University of Okoboji, or does it? 

Visitors to Iowa’s Great Lakes region throw 
trash in wastebaskets that say, “Help Keep your 
Campus Clean.” Cars throughout Iowa Display Uni- 
versity of Okoboji stickers. School supporters, in- 
cluding former President George Bush, wear T- 
shirts with the university logo. High school students 
visit the campus annually looking for the adminis- 
tration building. There’s even a telephone number 
for the institution listed in the phone book. 

Although there are many real aspects of this 
university, there are no classes or professors. That’s 
because the college is a modern myth, one that be- 
gan in 1973. At the time, Herman 
Richter, a Milford business owner, 
got together with friends and rela- 
tives for a weekly softball game. 

They always joked about “Camp 
Okoboji” because of the variety of 
recreational activities available in 
the Great Lakes region. 

Richter had T-shirts printed 
with an official-looking U of 0 logo 

32 



that proclaimed, “In God We Trust. Everyone Else 
Cash.” The T-shirts sold quickly, and residents and 
area visitors embraced the mythical university. 
From the joke grew the U of 0 Foundation, a real 
fund-raising group that has donated money for com- 
munity causes. The Great Lakes region also hosts 
several university sporting events, including Winter 
Games each January. 

“It gets confusing,” says Richter, who holds the 
title Director of Student Affairs. “It’s part myth. It’s 
part reality.” There’s one thing for certain, though. 
“It began as an expres- 
sion of pride in a 
beautiful area,” 

Richter explains. 

“Wherever you 
live, be proud of, 
your area and 
hometowns.” k i 



/re fhese 1^90 loKe CHoboji 
V'/Vfori Oh V(y.C(yfioi^ Or are fhey 
U of 0 ^\jibenf:s ih ^‘s^xA-ise? 




O 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



THE 



US ISSN 0278-0208 

State Historical Society of Iowa 

402 Iowa Avenue 

Iowa City, Iowa 52240-1806 




Second-class postage paid 
at Iowa City, Iowa 



GO 47408DEVCENS28010H A 

SOCIAL STUDIES DEV CENTER CIAL 

ATTN JANE E HENSON 

2805 E lOTH ST SUITE 120 

BLOOMINGTON IN 47408-2698 



33 




BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 




'6 






U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 



This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket) form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form 
(either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 



EFF-089 (9/97) 




