DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 461 451 



RC 021 525 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 

JOURNAL CIT 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Benson, Chris, Ed. 

Networking across Boundaries. 

Middlebury Coll., VT. Bread Loaf School of English 
DeWitt Wallace/Reader's Digest Fund, Pleasantville , NY. 
1997-00-00 

5 Op . ; Theme issue. Published twice a year. 

Collected Works - Serials (022) -- Reports - Descriptive 

(141) 

Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network Magazine; Fall-Win 1997 
MF01/PC02 Plus Postage.' 

American Indian Education; Class Activities; Computer 
Mediated Communication; Computer Networks; Computer Uses in 
Education; ^Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary 
Education; Higher Education; Intercultural Communication; 
Literature Appreciation; * Rural Education; Rural Schools; 
^Student Projects; ^Teacher Collaboration; *Writing 
(Composition) 

*BreadNet; Networking; Teacher Networks 



ABSTRACT 



This theme issue focuses on the challenges and opportunities 
of online technology as it is used by teachers and students in rural 
classrooms in Alaska, Arizona, Colorado, Georgia, Mississippi, New Mexico, 
South Carolina, and Vermont. "Computer Country" (Cynthia Baughman) is an 
overview of online, collaborations of teachers in the Bread Loaf Rural Teacher 
Network. "Rural Teachers and Students: Connecting and Communicating" (Rocky 
Gooch) answers teacher questions on the classroom use of BreadNet, Bread 
Loaf's telecommunications network. "Student, Teacher, and Community Growth at 
Ganado Intermediate School : An Interview with Susan Stropko" (Chris Benson) 
describes professional development, technology implementation, student 
involvement, and goals of a Navajo school in the Bread Loaf network. "Native 
American Literature and Learning: A Multicultural Sharing" (Lucy Maddox) 
reports on the networking of Native American teachers. "Walking in Two 
Worlds: Poetic Explorations across Distances and Differences" (David Koehn) 
describes how a poem by a Navajo poet galvanized Alaska students to begin an 
online inquiry into the experience of biculturalism . "Writing with 
Telecommunications: Crossing Institutional Boundaries" (Ceci Lewis) describes 
collaborative writing projects that link high school and college students. 
"Rural Challenge Network: Reaching Out" (Anthony Kennedy, Natasha O'Brien) 
relates how principals and teachers in Alaska use networking for school 
reform and a pedagogy of place. "Cross-Age Conferencing: A Literary Inquiry" 
(Michelle Wyman-Warren) describes online discussion of Joseph Conrad's "Heart 
of Darkness" by New Mexico high school students and Massachusetts college 
freshmen. "Listening to Students in the Connections Project" (Patricia 
Parrish) reports on an online writing exchange between middle- schoolers and 
preservice English teachers. Other brief articles include "Teacher Networking 
and Professional Development in Alaska: An Interview with Annie Calkins"; 
"Teacher Networks at Bread Loaf: The Endless Summer" (Diana Jaramillo) ; 
"Stepping Aside To See Ourselves" (Scott Christian) ; "Research for Action 
Submits Four-Year Report on BLRTN" ; "'Exchanging Lives: Middle School Writers 
Online' : A Review" (Chris Benson); "You Have Mail with Telecommunications" 
(Emily Quirion) ; "Between Two Schools: Poetry, Magic, Connection" (Doris A. 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



Ezell -Schmitz ) ; "Maple Syrup and Desert Sand: A Heritage Exchange" (Carol 
Zuccaro) ; "New Mexico and Alaska Border Jumpers" (Dianna Saiz) ; and "Andover 
Bread Loaf Writing Workshop Makes Annual Visit to BL" (Lou Bernieri) . 

Includes 1997-98 announcements abut members, notes from state network 
meetings, 39 book and online resources on technology and education, and lists 
of rural teacher fellows. (SAS) 







Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



• 0 2'1 S 2 5 ED 461 451 



BREAD LOAF 



Rural Teacher Network 




Magazine 



Alaska 


Arizona 


Colorado 


Georgia 


Mississippi 


New Mexico 


South Carolina 


Vermont 



Networking across ‘Boundaries 



y o 

sIRIC 









PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



_R er&fVL 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



Rural Teachers and Students: Connecting and Communicating 4 

by Rocky Gooch 

Student, Teacher, and Community Growth 

at Ganado Intermediate School 7 

An Interview with Susan Stropko 1 

m 

Native American Literature and Learning. u s department of education 

Multicultural Sharing 1U educational resources information 

by Lucy Maddox , W / TY\\s document has been reproduced as 

received from the person or organization 

Walking in Two Worlds: Poetic Explorations originating i. 

0 ^ □ Minor changes have been made to 

across Distances and Differences 12 improve reproduction quality 

by David Koehn 

Writing with Telecommunications: 

Crossing Institutional Boundaries 14 

by Ceci Lewis 

Rural Challenge Network: Reaching Out 16 

Anthony Kennedy and Natasha O'Brien 

Plus more stories about the use of technology by teachers and students in rural class- 
rooms. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



O' 



A Publication of the Bread Loaf School of English 
Middlebury College 
Middlebury, Vermont 

Faii/winter. 1997 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



From the Editor 

by Chris Benson 
Clemson University 
Clemson , SC 

B eginning in 1993, the Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network has 
grown from its original 30 Fellows, all rural teachers, to close 
to 200 teachers, principals, and associates. The growth of the Net- 
work and the professional development of its members were, and 
continue to be, made possible by generous support from the 
DeWitt Wallace-Reader’s Digest Fund. Another essential ingredi- 
ent encouraging this growth and development is the avid use of 
electronic networking by Network members. 

The advent of decentralized networks of teachers who 
use telecommunications to inform each other, to collaborate on 
curriculum, and to create professional development opportunities is 
a relatively new phenomenon. Founded in 1984, Bread Loaf’s tele- 
communications system, BreadNet, was a pioneer in this network- 
ing technology and remains one of the most actively used network 
systems for English teachers in the country. Because telecommuni- 
cations has had such a positive influence on the BLRTN, we have 
devoted this issue of BLRTN Magazine , “Networking across 
Boundaries,” to stories about online technology as it is used by 
teachers and students in our classrooms. 

Electronic networking is especially essential for rural 
teachers and students because it provides the opportunity to create 
informal, decentralized networks in which learning is connected to 
specific rural locations and cultures. For too long, rural schools and 
districts have been expected to follow the lead of urban and subur- 
ban models of learning, and the result has been greater consolida- 
tion of schools and the disappearance of small schools in rural 
communities. 

Though the BLRTN promotes technology in education, 
no one in our network believes that technology or telecommunica- 



tions can replace good teachers. Technology can be used, however, 
to increase the learning opportunities for students and teachers by 
contextualizing the learning and allowing rural teachers in remote 
locations to design their own rural curricula. For example, Navajo 
students in in the Southwest are using multimedia technology to 
incorporate the Navajo philosophy of learning into projects that 
meet the Arizona state standards. Tlingit students in Alaska and 
Navajo students in New Mexico are reading texts and writing to 
each other using telecommunications to explore the idea of living 
in two worlds, the one Native American and the other Anglo. 

Other BLRTN teachers are using telecommunications to connect 
their high school students in joint reading and writing projects with 
college students. These projects change the dynamics of schooling: 
electronic networking allows isolated teachers to find colleagues to 
work with, and teachers in remote geographical locations can col- 
laborate with the click of a button. In schools across a single dis- 
trict, students can explore cross-age projects together. Principals in 
isolated rural schools can work with their colleagues in other loca- 
tions who may face similar problems. Electronic networking re- 
moves the constraints that traditional centralized school systems 
place on teachers and students and creates opportunities to form 
new partnerships for learning. 

Though technology creates opportunities for rural 
schools, it also presents new challenges for professional develop- 
ment. Each school will have to decide which technology and facili- 
ties it needs, and teachers ought to be leading this discussion be- 
cause they will determine how and whether technology is used in 
the classroom. Through intensive summer training and extended 
investigation during the school year, BLRTN teachers have be- 
come knowledgeable advocates of instructional technology. They 
know what works and they know why it works. In this issue of 
BLRTN Magazine , “Networking across Boundaries,” these teachers 
explain how electronic networking helps to create and sustain 
teachers’ common professional interests and students’ intensive 
academic inquiries. W 



DeWitt Wallace-Reader’s Digest Fellowships for Rural Middle and High School Teachers in 
Alaska, Arizona, Colorado, Georgia, and New Mexico 



T he Bread Loaf School of English of Middlebury College 

announces the sixth year of the Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Net- 
work. The Bread Loaf School is offering full-cost fellowships for 
rural middle and high school teachers. In addition, these teachers 
will be eligible to reapply in 1999 for full-cost fellowships for a 
second summer at any one of the three Bread Loaf campuses, in 
Vermont, Lincoln College, Oxford, and New Mexico. The DeWitt 
Wallace -Reader’s Digest Fellows will spend their first summer 
session at the Bread Loaf campus in Vermont, taking two courses 
in writing, literature, or theater. Only full-time public school teach- 
ers are eligible. The DeWitt Wallace-Reader’s Digest Fellowships 
for rural teachers will cover all expenses for the summer session: 
tuition, room, board, and travel. The 1998 Bread Loaf Summer 
session in Vermont runs from June 23 through August 8. 

During the summer session, Fellows will receive training 
in Bread Loaf s telecommunications network, BreadNet, and will 
participate in national and state networked projects. Each Fellow 
will receive a $1 ,000 stipend to finance telecommunications costs, 



to make modest equipment purchases, and to finance the imple- 
mentation of a classroom-research project in his or her school. 

The mission of the DeWitt Wallace-Reader’s Digest 
Fund is to foster fundamental improvement in the quality of 
educational and career development opportunities for all 
school-age youth, and to increase access to these improved ser- 
vices for young people in low-income communities. 

Applications must be received by March 15, 1998. For 
application materials and a detailed description of the Bread Loaf 
program, write to: 

James Maddox, Director 

Bread Loaf School of English 

Middlebury College 

Middlebury, VT 05753 

PHONE: 802-443-5418 FAX: 802-443-2060 

EMAIL: BLSE@breadnet.middlebury.edu 



3 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf 
Rural Teacher 
Network 

Fall /Winter— 1997 

Editor 

Chris Benson 

chris_benson@breadnet.middlebury.edu 

Address correspondence to Chris Benson, 
Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network, Bread 
Loaf School of English, Middlebury Col- 
lege, Middlebury, VT 05753-6115. The 
Bread Loaf School of English publishes the 
Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network Maga- 
zine periodically. 

Director of the Bread Loaf 
School of English 
Director of BLRTN 

James Maddox 

Coordinator of BLRTN 

Dixie Goswami 



Table of Contents 

Computer Country 2 

by Cynthia Baughman 

In an overview of the Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network, the author explains 
how rural teachers use telecommunications to sustain the collaborative relation- 
ships established during summers of study at the Bread Loaf School of English. 

Rural Teachers and Students: Connecting and Communicating 4 

by Rocky Gooch 

How do rural teachers in BLRTN use BreadNet technology in their classrooms? 
The Network’s Director of Telecommunications answers questions commonly 
raised by rural teachers and administrators who want to include telecommunica- 
tions technology in the curriculum. 

Student, Teacher, and Community Growth at Ganado 
Intermediate School: An Interview with Susan Stropko 7 

with Chris Benson 

Technology that supports networks of teachers is a key element in school reform 
in a Native American school in the Navajo Nation. 

Native American Literature and Learning: 

A Multicultural Sharing 10 

by Lucy Maddox 

Computer conferencing on BreadNet provides a forum where teachers inform 
each other about a broad range of Native American cultures and literature. 



Bread Loaf Office Staff 

Elaine Lathrop 
Sandy LeGault 
Dianne Baroz 

Faculty Coordination 

JoBeth Allen 
Victor Luftig 
Andrea Lunsford 
Lucy Maddox 

Jacqueline Royster, Senior Consultant 

Director of Telecommunications 
BLRTN 

Rocky Gooch 

rocky_gooch@breadnet.middlebury.edu 

Director of BreadNet 

Robert Lagerman 

Technical Consultants 

Caroline Eisner 
Douglas Wood 

Teacher Research and Documentation 

Scott Christian 
Bette Ford 

Copyright 1997 
Bread Loaf School of English 

No part of this publication may be 
reproduced in any form without permis- 
sion in writing from the editor. 

o 

idlebury, Vermont 



Walking in Two Worlds: Poetic Explorations across 

Distances and Differences 12 

by David Koehn 

A poem by Luci Tapahonso galvanizes an online student inquiry into the experi- 
ence of living in and between two cultures. 

Writing with Telecommunications: 

Crossing Institutional Boundaries 14 

by Ceci Lewis 

Collaborative writing projects that link high school and college students are still 
rare but growing in frequency in the Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network. 

Rural Challenge Network: Reaching Out 16 

by Anthony Kennedy and Natasha O 'Brien 

Principals and teachers in Ketchikan, Alaska, are active in a consortium of five 
schools funded by the Rural Challenge to sponsor school reform and a pedagogy 
of place. 



Cross-Age Conferencing: A Literary Inquiry 18 

by Michelle Wyman-Warren 

High school students in Mountainair, New Mexico, connect and communicate 
with college freshmen at Brandeis University in Waltham, Massachusetts, to dis- 
cuss Joseph Conrad’s classic modem novel Heart of Darkness. 

Listening to Students in the Connections Project 22 

by Patricia Parrish 

Middle schoolers and college preservice English teachers begin an online writing 
exchange that strengthens communication skills and teacher preparedness. 

Plus more stories about technology and collaboration among teachers 
and students in rural American classrooms. 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Computer Country 



by Cynthia Baughman 
Middlebury College 
Middlebury, Vermont 



Editor's Note: A similar version of - 
this article appeared in the Fall 1997 
issue of Middlebury Magazine, the 
alumni magazine of Middlebury Col- 
lege. 



W ithout leaving their own school, 
the students in Renee Moore’s 
Mississippi 12th grade class “con- 
versed” with students in South Africa 
during that country’s first elections 
after apartheid. They also listened to 
Ladysmith Black Mambazo and com- 
pared the South African musical tradi- 
tion to the Delta blues of their home. 
With a computer pipeline between two 
English classes, students in Soweto 
and students in the rural South com- 
pared apartheid and pre-civil rights 
segregation. Then they read two nov- 
els and commented back and forth by 
computer. 

This innovative exchange, 
called the Freedom Project, is but one 
example of the creative teaching made 
possible by the Bread Loaf Rural 
Teacher Network (BLRTN). Last 
June, a hundred educators gathered at 
the Bread Loaf campus in Vermont at 
a conference on “The Teaching of En- 
glish in Rural Schools” to hear and tell 
of similar experiences. When Renee 
Moore introduced herself, she talked 
about her students, at home in a school 
still segregated by race in fact, if not 
according to the letter of the law. She 
spoke for a mostly poor, all-black 
group of senior high school students 
who, nevertheless, had “virtually” fol- 
lowed their teacher out of Mississippi 
to Soweto, South Africa. 



o 

ERIC 



The Bread Loaf Rural 
Teacher Network 

With generous funding since 
1993 from the DeWitt Wallace- 
Reader’s Digest Fund, Bread Loaf has 
been a critical force in the effort to 
improve instruction in rural class- 
rooms in Alaska, Arizona, Mississippi, 
New Mexico, South Carolina, and 
Vermont. With grants totalling $5.1 
million from the DeWitt Wallace 
Reader’s Digest Fund the program 
will carry on through August 2001, 
adding new, outstanding rural teachers 
and expanding into two new target 
states, Colorado and Georgia. The new 
grant includes a significant increase in 
the effort to involve administrators in 
the network; their support for their 
rural teachers is vital. The Annenberg 
Rural Challenge has become a partner 
in this endeavor, providing financial 
support for participating teachers. 

These teachers from rural 
America join others convening at 
Bread Loaf each summer. Approxi- 
mately 400 concentrate on literature, 
writing, and theater arts. Some earn 
graduate degrees in English; all 
deepen their knowledge of literature 
and writing. For as many as five sum- 
mers they work at Bread Loaf cam- 
puses in Ripton, Vermont; Lincoln 
College, Oxford, in England; and the 
Native American Preparatory School 
in Rowe, New Mexico. In addition, 
they learn how to use BreadNet, the 
telecommunications network that links 
the Bread Loaf community. 

This technology serves as an 
important component in the learning 
that goes on in Bread Loaf teachers’ 
classrooms. The computers are not, 
however, the center of the learning. 
Best used, they become invisible, 
merely the means to better writing and 
reading, better understanding of the 
great literature of the world and the 
thoughts that have produced it. In 
electronic sites on BreadNet, students 
engage in ongoing online dialogue 
with other Bread Loaf classrooms, 



5 



sometimes in the same state, some- 
times on another continent. Deter- 
mined, dedicated teachers are met by 
students who want to learn. Hard work 
has a lot to do with the learning. What 
happens in these classrooms is, never- 
theless, a miracle. 



A Sense of Place 

“When students in Alaska 
and Vermont compare their reactions 
to Romeo and Juliet or to The Diary of 
Anne Frank , they labor for clarity and 
specificity,” says James Maddox, di- 
rector of the Bread Loaf School of En- 
glish and director of the BLRTN. 
“They learn to see their own rural 
places with fresh eyes.” 

The places rural teachers 
work can make them feel alone, as 
well as short of the resources available 
to many, though not all, teachers. 
(Those working in poor urban areas, 
ironically, experience very similar 
challenges.) Thus, Bread Loafs mis- 
sion for rural education is twofold: to 
improve the quality of education in the 
classroom, and to make possible pro- 
fessional development for rural teach- 
ers. Teachers often operate in schools 
that are far from ideal, and technology 
can be an important part of the learn- 
ing for their students and for them- 
selves. 

These teachers walk a tight- 
rope, committed not only to their 
classrooms, but also to their communi- 
ties. In rural areas teachers sometimes 
feel themselves outsiders, sometimes 
insiders. Being members of the 
BLRTN helps them negotiate their 
feelings about those positions either 
way. Bread Loaf can revitalize their 
teaching, making the familiar for in- 
siders seem strange and exciting 
again; it can also make outsiders feel 
connected. 

Some teachers have had to 
learn to accept their differences as 
teachers in schools where no one else 
is involved in BreadNet. “Word gets 
out. Kids talk. You know if you’re not 
in Steve’s BreadNet classes, you’re 
missing out,” says an Arizona princi- 
pal about one of his teachers. “He 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



doesn’t have tardy problems. He 
doesn’t have disciplinary problems.” 
Most of rural America is not on the 
information highway, while these few 
outstanding teachers who attend Bread 
Loaf have access to resources others 
don’t have. That can be unsettling, 
even threatening to other teachers. “Is 
the person returning from Bread Loaf 
with the great ideas going to be a loner 
or a leader?” asked one conference 
participant. 

Susan Stropko, principal of 
Ganado Intermediate School on the 
Navajo reservation in Arizona, goes to 
enormous efforts to help the Bread 
Loaf teachers return to a school where 
their leadership is wanted, where pre- 
liminary teaching about technology 
has already taken place for those who 
cannot travel to Bread Loaf, where the 
returning emissaries are greeted as 
people who can help their colleagues 
and especially the students they all 
care about educating [see interview 
with Susan Stropko in this magazine, 
page 7]. Receptive groundwork is vital 
and, at least in Ganado, seems to be 
effective in spreading the techniques 
and ideas that improve learning in ru- 
ral areas. One of the most successful 
of these techniques is direct online 
discourse between students in differ- 
ent schools. 



Online Discourse 

“Online discourse that is not 
‘pen-pal-ish’ is producing a kind of 
dialogue that is not occurring in the 
classroom otherwise,” says Dixie 
Goswami, coordinator of the BLRTN. 
“It’s not business as usual.” Students 
often work harder, knowing their writ- 
ing will go on line. And, when all they 
know about one another is what they 
write, students learn words matter. 

Members of Renee Moore’s 
class have also corresponded with 
“classmates” in Vermont, whose dif- 
ferences from the Mississippi students 
were perhaps as significant as those of 
the Soweto “classmates.” The groups 
wrote what they thought the other stu- 
dents were like, never having met their 
kind. Their prejudices bared, they then 



discussed William Shakespeare’s The 
Merchant of Venice, inquiring into the 
sources of prejudice in that play — and, 
in fact, even asking whether the play 
itself was an example of prejudice. 

Anne Gardner’s high school 
English students in Georgetown, 

South Carolina, intrigued teachers 
with their online discourse. “I didn’t 
do anything. It was the kids,” says 
Anne of the attention paid to the com- 
puter dialogue that evolved between 
her class and a distant one taught by 
another Bread Loaf teacher. Anne 
started posting the transcripts of these 
computer conversations outside her 
classroom on unused bulletin boards, 
and people started reading. Teachers 
began asking what it was all about, 
and students became the teachers of 
teachers, explaining online communi- 
cation. 



Continuing Challenges 

The scale and diversity of 
challenges in rural education are stag- 
gering. Wisely, Bread Loaf has no in- 



terest in quick fixes; it cares about 
teaching and change in teaching that 
can be sustained. The urgency of a 
teacher’s desire to get on the technol- 
ogy train and get moving is met with 
measured, practical suggestions for 
how to move forward; if a school can 
afford only one computer, put it in the 
teacher’s home; if a little more money 
is available, put one or two computers 
in a classroom. Filling a laboratory 
with state-of-the-art computers is not a 
good allocation of resources without a 
budget for technology training of at 
least 30 percent (typically, 95 percent 
goes to equipment and only 5 percent 
is designated for training, resulting in 
underused resources). 

Cultures that are different and 
the same, language that is powerful in 
the hands of rural students as well as 
Shakespeare, literature that sheds light 
on others and ultimately on oneself — 
all this is within reach of these remote 
rural schools with the help of the 
Bread Loaf School of English, its 
technology, and the heroic teachers 
scattered in very distant trenches as 
they lead the charge for learning. ‘W 



>9 ^ s 

Principals and Administrators at the Conference on the 
Teaching of English in Rural Schools — Bread Loaf, June, 1997 

Lenny Allsbrooks, Rio Rico High School, Rio Rico, AZ 

Alice Angney (Superintendent), LaMoille South Supervisory Union, Morrisville, VT 

Joan Assey, Director of Development, Richland District 2, Columbia, SC 

Nicholas Cheromiah, Laguna Middle School, Laguna, NM 

Patricia Chesbro, Palmer High School, Palmer, AK 

Richard Clement, Schoenbar Middle School, Ketchikan, AK 

Ricque Finucune, Pojoaque High School, Pojoaque, NM 

Daniel Fontes, Calabasas Middle School, Rio Rico, AZ 

Mr. Gabaldon, Academy at Santa Cruz Union Valley High School, Eloy, AZ 

Alfredo Garcia, Pojoaque Middle School, Pojoaque, NM 

Renae Humburg (Superintendent), Sierra Vista Public Schools, Sierra Vista, AZ 

Anthony Kennedy, Ketchikan High School, Ketchikan, AK 

Paul Logan (Vice Principal), Waccamaw High School, Pawleys Island, SC 

Bernier Mayo, St. Johnsbury Academy, St. Johnsbury, VT 

Jane Phinney, Ripton Elementary School, Ripton, VT 

Jeffrey Place, Peoples Academy, Morrisville, VT 

Carolyn Renteria (Superintendent), Estancia, NM 

Ernest Renteria, Mountainair High School, Mountainair, NM 

Ted Riggen, Barre Town School, Barre, VT 

Susan Stropko, Ganado Intermediate School, Ganado, AZ 

David Sullivan, Ocean Springs High School, Ocean Springs, MS 

George Troxel, Palmer Middle School, Palmer, AK 

' s j ) 



& 



11 



dlebury, Vermont 



3 



Fall / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Rural Teachers and Students: 
Connecting and Communicating 



by Rocky Gooch 

BLRTN Telecommunications Director 
Middlebury College 
Middlebury, VT 

“ What the Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network is NOT is a network of a hundred 
thousand people , whose messages on line are faceless. What we ARE is a very 
small network (several hundred members) of like-minded individuals who share 
common beliefs, who read common texts, who share a love of literature and writ- 
ing. We have a unique bond. We focus not primarily on technology but on content 
and curriculum . . . on students and their learning. That’s what drives the Rural 
Network — not the technology, although we could not function as we do without 
BreadNet to keep us together and to bring our students into this learning commu- 
nity. ” 



— Doug Wood, 1997 Conference on the Teaching of English in Rural 
Schools, Vermont 



D oug Wood, who taught at a 

middle school in South Carolina 
before he began doctoral studies at 
Harvard in 1995, is a Bread Loaf 
graduate (’97) who has been a techni- 
cal consultant to the Rural Teacher 
Network since 1994. Doug is right 
when he says the focus of BLRTN is 
content and curriculum; he’s also right 
when he says that BreadNet is a neces- 
sary tool that we use to connect and 
communicate, which we do with great 
intensity and regularity. Contributors 
to this issue of the Bread Loaf Rural 
Teacher Network Magazine demon- 
strate the resourcefulness of teachers 
and students who use BreadNet — and 
its flexibility. In the context of their 
articles, I want to try to answer several 
questions frequently asked about 
BreadNet and the Rural Teacher Net- 
work. 

— What do teachers who 
integrate computer conferencing 
into their teaching require, in terms 
of training and support? 

Teachers let us know very 
quickly that integrating computer con- 
ferencing into their teaching and their 



professional and social lives is a de- 
manding and time-consuming task. 
They require a user-friendly system 
with plenty of technical support in the 
form of phone calls, troubleshooting, 
visits to their classrooms and, in some 
cases, their homes. And they ask for 
fairly intensive training in computer 
conferencing at the Bread Loaf cam- 
puses, preferably reinforced by net- 
worked Bread Loaf courses in litera- 
ture and writing. 




BLRTN technical consultant Doug Wood 



Using BreadNet as a teaching 
and learning tool has been described 
as a developmental process, which is 
not to say that every teacher follows 
the same pattern in the same sequence. 
Generally speaking, it works this way. 
Teachers who are enrolled in their first 
Bread Loaf summer session in Ver- 
mont come to the Computer Center 
regularly for six weeks for individual 
or small group sessions, depending on 
their level of expertise. Some of these 
teachers are in networked classes, 
which reinforce and deepen their un- 
derstanding of how computer confer- 
encing promotes conversations about 
literature, writing, and theater. During 
the summer, all first-year BLRTN 
teachers begin communicating, and 
teachers plan BreadNet exchanges that 
will take place during the academic 
year. Two or three teachers choose a 
topic or theme and usually limit the 
exchange to one class or group of stu- 
dents each. Teachers spend some time 
on line planning, adjusting schedules, 
talking about what’s happening among 
their students, and figuring out exactly 
what works best for them and their 
students, given constraints such as 
equipment, time, and support. Some 
teachers ask for transcripts of their 
online exchanges, and — with their stu- 
dents’ help — analyze what they find 
there as a prelude to planning the next 
exchange, which may be with a differ- 
ent set of teachers and students on a 
different topic entirely. Gradually, 
over a period of two or three years, 
teachers experiment with different ap- 
proaches and techniques in the ex- 
changes, including students in plan- 
ning and decision-making. They are 
aware of issues of privacy, censorship, 
inappropriate student access, and tech- 
nology costs: they are critical users of 
technology. 

Some rural teachers become 
recognized as experts in their schools 
and districts: they lead technology 
planning and become advocates for 
using technology in thoughtful and 
productive ways; they offer work- 
shops and invite colleagues to join in 
BreadNet exchanges. They become 
aware of culturally sensitive issues 
and of ways that pedagogies and as- 



4 



7 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter /Winter 1997 



sumptions can clash on line. BLRTN 
teachers form a group of reflective 
teachers who have much to offer 
policy-makers, planners, and practitio- 
ners: they are capable of evaluating 
software and commercial programs — 
and BLRTN exchanges. A number of 
BLRTN teachers are in the process of 
creating online literature and writing 
courses for middle and high school 
students. 



Does the reading and writ- 
ing going on in classrooms decrease 
as students participate actively in 
BreadNet exchanges? 

So far as we can determine, 
students read and write more fre- 
quently when they are part of active 
exchanges. The actual BreadNet ex- 
changes are the tip of the iceberg. 

Most of the learning activity related to 
an online exchange takes place in the 
individual classrooms: reading, dis- 
cussing, writing, interpreting, analyz- 
ing, and presenting. The distillation of 
these activities and further refinement 
of the ideas are what actually take 
place on line. Quite often the culmi- 
nating event in an online exchange is a 
hardcopy publication of student writ- 
ing that is generated and revised 
through the collaborative experience. 

Aside from BreadNet ex- 
changes and projects involving stu- 
dents, how do BLRTN teachers use 
BreadNet? 

Random checks indicate that 
at least 70% of BLRTN fellows, net- 
work leaders, and staff log-in at least 
once a week; about 25% log-in every 
day. Here’s a rough description of ma- 
jor activities on BreadNet: social inter- 
action; conversations about practice, 
theory, and research; collaborative 
inquiries; drafting, writing, and pub- 
lishing; planning exchanges; sharing 
resources; exploring ideas, texts, and 
issues. BreadNet activity is shaped by 
participation in the six-week summer 
sessions; technical training; state 
meetings; audio-conferences; phone 
calls; letters; manuscripts and student 
writing exchanges by mail; video- 

o . 



tapes; the BLRTN Magazine ; and 
classroom visits. A few of us use 
BreadNet infrequently, for one reason 
or another, but remain important 
members of the Rural Teacher Net- 
work. 

BLRTN is a flexible, genera- 
tive model for professional develop- 
ment, with older members passing 
along their expertise to fellow teachers 
and administrators, students, and col- 
lege faculty. 



repairs, special programs. At its best, 
BreadNet presents an alternative to 
commercial programs that deplete 
time and resources and ignore good 
practice. 

Every rural teacher’s situa- 
tion is different. A few teachers have 
five or six networked computers in 
their classrooms; others have limited 
access to networked equipment in 
their school libraries. Many teachers 
must use their home computers, with 




A few of the scores of BreadNet conferences as they appear in the FirstClass software 



How about equipment and 
access? Do BLRTN teachers have 
comparable equipment and Bread- 
Net access in their classrooms? 

Although the situation is 
changing slowly, many BLRTN teach- 
ers are struggling with inadequate 
equipment, technical support, and ac- 
cess to the Internet. In school after 
school, we hear about plans to change 
all this; and in school after school, we 
learn of other needs: books, teachers, 



students typing messages and down- 
loading them on disks that are taken 
home and sent out on BreadNet at 
night. We estimate that about a third 
of BLRTN teachers have Internet ac- 
cess and enough networked computers 
in their classrooms for students to par- 
ticipate actively and directly in col- 
laborative work on line. One thing is 
clear: exemplary (and busy) rural 
teachers who form the Rural Teacher 
Network will not spend time, money, 

(continued on next page) 



dlebury, Vermont 



5 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



. . . Connecting and 
Communicating 

(continued from previous page) 




Each Fellow in the BLRTN can receive mail in his or her personal mailbox 
(see upper left) and has access to numerous conferencing areas where 
collaboration can take place . 



and energy on technology that does 
not provide them with some personal 
satisfaction and their students with 
opportunities for connecting and com- 
municating that pay off in improved 
skills and understandings. 

— How is BreadNet differ- 
ent from most K-12 networks? 

BreadNet is a conferencing- 
based network. We use FirstClass 
Intranet Server (FCIS) because it sup- 
ports a great variety of online activi- 
ties. Rather than using email, Bread- 
Net teachers are able to join or open a 
conference, which they do with mini- 
mal assistance from network adminis- 
trators. 

A teacher’s personal mail is 
found in her BreadNet desktop in the 
“Mailbox” folder (see figure on right). 
Instead of logging into the network 
and using an email client like Eudora 
to open a list of mail which has to be 
sorted, saved, filed, and deleted, a 
BreadNet teacher logs-in, goes di- 
rectly to her mailbox for personal mail 
from other Bread Loafers or from 
folks on the Internet, then quickly 
goes to conferences where current 
work is taking place. All messages 
that have been sent, for example, to 
the “Culture Exchange” conference 
are there waiting: older messages 
haven’t been deleted, the new ones are 
identified with red flags; and topics of 
discussion within the conference can 
be threaded (grouped together). The 
teacher simply reads and replies to 
new messages, sends her students’ 
new work to the conference, and then 
moves on to the next conference area 
that she’s participating in. It’s very 
easy to refer back to a previous mes- 
sage — there is no search for the lost 
printed hard copy, or search for a file 
with a forgotten label — just open the 
conference area again and the message 
is there. 



Students do not have Bread- 
Net accounts: exchanges, conversa- 
tions, collaborative publishing 
projects — all go through the teacher. 
Teachers, students — and parents — are 
comfortable with this process, which 
helps us avoid inappropriate or hurtful 
exchanges. Students are working on a 
document to be entitled “Golden Rules 
for BreadNet Exchanges,” and we are 
now experimenting with a few student 
accounts. 

BLRTN teachers have the 
experience and skills to guide schools 
as they invest in technology and de- 
sign training programs for teachers 
and students: teachers should be 
brought into the decision-making pro- 
cess at all levels and provided with 
incentives to act as mentors and inno- 
vators. Technology budgets should 
reflect realities of integrating technol- 
ogy into teaching: 35% for teacher- 



centered teacher training; 65% for 
equipment and access, with the 
teacher training always taking prece- 
dence over equipment. 

BreadNet is a meeting place 
for teachers and students, dedicated to 
encouraging young people to take 
pleasure in reading and writing. One 
goal of BreadNet is to promote and 
facilitate non-racist, culturally en- 
gaged teaching for teachers and stu- 
dents of all ages and backgrounds. 

BreadNet may be accessed by 
virtually any type of computer, either 
over the Internet or via a modem. It is 
very user-friendly, and even the most 
stubborn technophobe can learn to surf 
conferences with a minimum of time, 
trouble, and anxiety. Accounts are 
given out, free of charge, to any stu- 
dent, graduate or faculty member of 
the Bread Loaf School of English who 
makes the request. ¥ 



6 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



Student, Teacher, and Community Growth at Ganado 
Intermediate School: An Interview with Susan Stropko 



Editor's Note: In October, Ganado Intermediate School in Ganado , Arizona, on 
the Navajo Reservation hosted a gathering of Arizona BLRTN teachers. Between 
meetings I spoke to Susan Stropko, principal of Ganado Intermediate — one of five 
schools in a Bread Loaf-sponsored network funded by the Rural Challenge — 
about professional development, technology, students, and the goals of this con- 
sortium of schools. 



Chris Benson: Please tell our readers 
a little bit about Ganado Intermediate 
School and the community of Ganado. 

Susan Stropko: Ganado Intermediate 
School is in the Navajo Nation, in the 
northeast comer of Arizona. It’s an 
isolated country of rugged red-rock 
canyons in the high desert at 6,500 
feet of elevation. From Ganado, the 
reservation extends in the four direc- 
tions from 35 to 120 miles. Teachers 
here live on campus in housing owned 
by the district. 515 children attend the 
Intermediate School, and about 2,200 
K-12 students attend the four Ganado 
schools. 98% of our students are Na- 
vajo. The population in the surround- 
ing area is about 5,500. Geographi- 
cally, the district is unusually large, 
including families living as far as 35 
miles away, and encompassing five 
chapters within our boundaries. 

CB: And a chapter is .. . ? 

SS: “Chapter” refers to the smallest 
branch of political subdivision in the 
Navajo tribe; it also refers to the land 
surrounding the chapter house, which 
to those unfamiliar with Navajo gov- 
ernment would be something analo- 
gous to a town hall. Our district chap- 
ters are Klagetoh, Kinlichee, Corn- 
field, Steamboat, and Ganado. Some 
children travel even farther to attend 
our schools: from Wide Ruins, 
Greasewood, and Nazlini chapters, 
and from the Hopi land, all of which 
lie outside our boundaries. 



CB: The Navajo Reservation is one of 
the most beautiful places Tve visited. 
We hear a lot these days about the 
benefits of technology to rural people, 
especially those in isolated places like 
northeast Arizona. Yet rural schools 
are struggling not only to acquire 
technology but to figure out how best 
to use it. How have you used technol- 
ogy at Ganado? 

SS: Four years ago we began to build 
a system of 100 networked Windows 
95 work stations including two labs 
and computers in all classrooms. After 
becoming familiar with the curriculum 
materials on the market, teachers be- 
gan to envision children using curricu- 
lum software, publishing their writing, 
creating multimedia projects, and 
communicating with the outside 
world. Our children are not yet as 
strong as we hope they will become in 
writing and reading. We work with 
children to build those skills by tap- 
ping into their strong visual and kines- 
thetic learning preferences. Multime- 
dia technology, I believe, promises to 
help us accomplish our literacy goals. 
We’ve been working with this tech- 
nology now for a few years. Our chil- 
dren write and publish with text and 
graphics. They have begun to use digi- 
tal camera images in their publica- 
tions. By the end of this year, after we 
have completed building our multime- 
dia production lab, the students will 
learn more about scanning, processing 
audio and video, producing CDs, and 
creating a variety of presentations of 



their learning. Teachers here imagine 
students will soon use technology as a 
routine part of school — like they now 
use texts, pencils and paper. We have 
glimpsed the power of supporting ex- 
cellent instruction with technology in 
our writing and publishing lab. For 
several years now, Jim Lujan has sup- 
ported our 23 classroom teachers by 
working with all 500 of our children in 
the computer lab. The children have 
written thousands of pages about their 
lives here in the Navajo Nation. I see 
astounding progress, from observing 
some students laboriously penciling a 
few words on their wide-lined re- 
cycled paper six years ago to publish- 
ing fluent stories on laser printers to- 
day. The final step in building our lo- 
cal and wide-area networks will be to 
complete the telecommunications 
component. Some of our children have 
never been off the reservation, and 
telecommunications technology offers 
a way to connect with other people 
and other places. 

CB: That sounds fairly sophisticated. 
What kind of staff do you need to do 
that? 

SS: In our school, we hope that all 
adults will use technology, not just 
specialized staff members. In the same 
way that use of pencil, paper, and text 
materials could not be effective if only 
a few staff members knew how to use 
them, use of technology cannot be ef- 
fective if only a few are comfortable 
with it. We are progressing. A few 
years ago, however, only a few staff 
members were comfortable with com- 
puters. Back then, the teachers who 
were most interested began to look 
more closely into technology applica- 
tions. We called them the computer 
“lead learners.” They investigated 



(continued on next page) 



idlebury, Vermont 



10 



Fall / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



. . . Susan Stropko 

(continued from previous page) 

what was possible and desirable for 
our school, ordered software, experi- 
mented with it, and then offered what 
they had learned to the rest of the fac- 
ulty. We dedicated the textbook bud- 
get one year to software acquisitions 
to support this process. The children 
began to use curriculum software. 

They continued to publish in the writ- 
ing lab. Last year, in order to prepare a 
group of instructors to teach computer 
applications to our staff and 300 other 
district personnel, I taught graduate 
courses for the lead learners. This se- 
mester, our labs are open four nights a 
week for four community college and 
university computer courses taught by 
several of our lead learners. At the 
same time, the lead learners are pre- 
paring for the second-semester ad- 
vanced courses by exploring multime- 
dia production and telecommunica- 
tions. We have created cycles of adult 
learning with the lead learners in the 
advance followed by waves of inter- 
mediate and beginning learners. This 
familiarity with technology has be- 
come evident in our classrooms, labs, 
and administrative offices. The quality 
of information processing, document 



production, and telecommunications 
has taken a quantum leap. 

CB: Speaking of telecommunications, 
Ganado Intermediate is one of the five 
public schools that make up the Bread 
Loaf Rural Challenge Network, which 
is funded by the Rural Challenge. Are 
you linked on line with these schools 
yet? 

SS: Several teachers have access to 
BreadNet including Bread Loaf Fel- 
lows Judy Tarantino, Nancy Jennings, 
Jim Lujan, and several other Ganado 
teachers involved in a research project 
funded by The Spencer Foundation. 
We have been communicating on line 
with others in the Rural Challenge 
Network, and Bread Loaf teachers are 
in the preliminary stages of online 
projects with our children and students 
in our partner Rural Challenge 
schools. 

CB: What are your goals in linking 
teachers and the Ganado curriculum 
with the other schools in the Rural 
Challenge Network? 

SS: Our goals have to do with adults’ 
and children’s learning. Our primary 
school goal is that our students will 
become literate. Toward this goal, the 




district supports teachers with the best 
professional development opportuni- 
ties. The Rural Challenge Network 
affords teachers the exceptional op- 
portunity to pursue professional de- 
velopment through teacher networks 
that Bread Loaf has established. The 
Rural Challenge Network emphasizes 
pedagogy of place and supports our 
work to integrate curriculum within 
the Navajo philosophy of education. 
We may think more deeply about our 
own culture through communicating 
across cultural contexts with the Rural 
Challenge Network partners who are 
in other interesting and unique places: 
Ketchikan, Alaska; Pojoaque, New 
Mexico; the Laguna Pueblo in New 
Mexico; and Ganado, Arizona. Each 
has a cultural background distinct 
from the others. 

CB: What are those backgrounds? 

SS: Our community here in Arizona is 
predominantly a Navajo culture with 
some Hopi influences. Laguna is a 
pueblo Indian tribe in New Mexico. 
Pojoaque combines local pueblo In- 
dian culture with Hispanic and Anglo 
culture. And in Ketchikan, Alaska, 
there is the Tlingit Indian culture and 
the Anglo. Given the rich cultural and 
human resources these places repre- 
sent, the Rural Challenge encourages 
us to strengthen our pedagogy of 
place, keeping education close to 
community wishes and needs. 

CB: Do you mean “community 
wishes” as an alternative to state- 
mandated curriculum? 

SS: In our case, we pursue integration 
of curriculum and culture within the 
framework of the state-mandated stan- 
dards. Fortunately, the standards are 
not overly specific and this works for 
us. Community wishes and needs are 
as important as state-mandated poli- 
cies — perhaps more important. The 
Annenberg Rural Challenge seems to 
encourage decentralized education. 

CB: And is that your goal , too? 



8 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



SS: As a small, rural and isolated dis- 
trict, we already are fairly decentral- 
ized. As a school we do receive law 
and policy direction from the state and 
the district. The state has mandated 
student achievement of the Arizona 
Academic Standards, but we exercise 
freedom in designing curriculum and 
in achieving the standards. Through a 
ten-year collaborative process with 
our four schools, support departments, 
parents, and community, we’ve devel- 
oped a curriculum model, the Founda- 
tions of Learning, that places learning 
in the context of Navajo culture. We 
strive to integrate learning as de- 
scribed by the model, and that integra- 
tion aligns us with local values. 

CB: What are you learning from your 
partners in the Rural Challenge Net- 
work? Are you working closely with 
the other principals? 

SS: We learn with our Rural Chal- 
lenge partners when we meet with 
them and throughout the year. A large 
part of what I see in the partner 
schools is the impact that Bread Loaf 
has made, either through BLRTN or 
the Rural Challenge Network. Bread 
Loaf recruits excellent teachers to its 
fellowship programs and provides ex- 
traordinary graduate study. That has 
made a difference at the schools where 
these teachers teach. When the net- 
work teachers meet, they share infor- 
mation about the extraordinary learn- 
ing projects they do with students. The 
stories are irresistible and generate a 
flood of connections, commitments, 
and new ideas within the group. The 
unique aspect of the Rural Challenge 
Network is that it explicitly includes 
principals in the network. The Rural 
Challenge Network principals are An- 
thony Kennedy of Ketchikan High 
School, Dick Clement of Schoenbar 
Middle School in Ketchikan, Ricque 
Finucane of Pojoaque High School, 
and Nick Cheromiah of Laguna 
Middle School. We are considering 
working together on an action research 
project. The Rural Challenge Network 
is about teachers’ professional devel- 



opment, and it’s about principals’ and 
schools’ growth too. 

CB: Tell me a little bit about decen- 
tralization. On the one hand , as a 
member of these teacher networks , 
you ’ re advocating for decentraliza- 
tion , yet at the same time you ’re unit- 
ing with other schools like those in the 
Rural Challenge Network , which is 
another kind of school “system. ” 

What is the difference between those 
two kinds of systems? 

SS: There is a critical distinction. It’s 
the difference between hierarchical 
organization and networked or 
webbed organization. In the hierarchy 
of most state or district systems, 
power and authority define relation- 
ships among participants and limit the 
extent to which individuals may par- 
ticipate in decisions and in creating 
the qualities of the learning environ- 
ment. As policy is handed down 
through the layers of authority, it be- 
comes less and less sensitive to the 
needs of the children and teachers, 
who are traditionally located at the 
bottom. Attempts are made through 
representative 
decision-making, 
committees, re- 
view processes, 
and public hear- 
ings to make 
policies sensitive 
and responsive. 

But the system, 
the hierarchical 
organizational structure, does not an- 
ticipate or allow for the fact that every 
individual, not just representatives, 
must interact mentally, dialogically, 
and emotionally with other individuals 
and with information in order to create 
change. I don’t believe hierarchy fos- 
ters the best growth in people who 
share the common purpose of educat- 
ing children. Networks seem better 
suited to that purpose. 

CB: What is a network? What do you 
mean by that ? 



SS: A network thrives on lateral con- 
nections — regardless of rank — where 
relationships are based on shared pur- 
pose and interests, reasonable tasks, 
important dreams, mutual obligations. 
A network offers opportunity for 
people to connect with each other for 
good reasons, and because those rea- 
sons are important to the individuals, 
they create the changes needed to pur- 
sue their goals. Wherever participation 
is intense there is strong growth. The 
more links there are, the stronger the 
network is. If some connections break, 
if people leave or stop participating, 
for example, the network is still strong 
through other relationships and pro- 
cesses. 

CB: So , in pursuing professional de- 
velopment, networks work more effi- 
ciently than hierarchy. To put it in 
metaphorical terms, you ’re describing 
the difference between how a chain 
works and how a net works: if a link in 
the chain breaks, the function and use 
of the chain is severely limited. That’s 
hierarchy. But if there’s a hole in the 
net, it still works more or less. That’s 
a network. 



SS: That network may work even bet- 
ter because the hole will cause new 
kinds of productive connections to 
form. There are many more opportuni- 
ties in a network to generate collabo- 
rative relationships than there are in a 
hierarchy. The Bread Loaf Rural 
Teacher Network is an example of 
how well the model works for sup- 
porting teachers and schools. 'i' 



A network thrives on lateral 
connections — regardless of rank — where 
relationships are based on shared 
purpose and interests, reasonable tasks, 
important dreams, mutual obligations. 



ddlebury, Vermont 



9 



Fall / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Native American Literature and Learning: 
A Multicultural Sharing 



by Lucy Maddox 
Georgetown University 
Washington, D.C. 

D uring the summer of 1997, a 
group of teachers who were 
spending the summer studying at the 
Bread Loaf campus in Vermont came 
together to discuss their common in- 
terest in teaching Native American 
literature to their students. The group, 
spearheaded by Cora Ducolon, 
brought a variety of needs and con- 
cerns to those initial meetings. Some 
were primarily interested in introduc- 
ing Native American materials into 
their existing courses, some were in- 
terested in creating new courses with 
Native American components, and 
some were simply concerned with do- 
ing a more effective job of teaching 
the materials that were already in their 
curricula. 

One result of those summer 
meetings was the establishment of a 
new conference on BreadNet, the tele- 
communications network of the Bread 
Loaf School of English. The Educa- 
tion NA conference, designed as an 
electronic extension of the face-to-face 
meetings in the Bam at Bread Loaf, 
has continued to reflect and build on 
the energy of the initial conversations. 
By providing a place for teachers to 
confer with each other and to solicit 
many kinds of advice, the conference 
is meeting a genuine need of teachers 
(K-12 and above) who want to bring 
more Native materials into their class- 
rooms but are unsure about the best 
way to go about it. 

Since many of us who are 
now teaching — perhaps most of us, at 
all levels — have had little or no formal 
training in Native American literature 
and history and may have gotten much 
of our information from Hollywood 
movies, we can approach the teaching 
of those materials with great insecu- 



rity, no matter how good our inten- 
tions. We don’t always know what 
texts are available and which texts are 
sufficiently “authentic”; we don’t al- 
ways know if what we have learned 
about, say, the Blackfeet, also applies 
to other groups, such as the Navajo; in 
introducing Native materials to our 
students, we can often worry that we 
might be just plain getting it wrong 
and even perpetuating damaging ste- 
reotypes. Cora Ducolon spoke for 
many of her colleagues when she 
wrote to the conference, “There is 
nothing sadder than a white girl teach- 
ing Native American literature to a 
group of white students when no one 
in the room, including the teacher, has 
any real knowledge of the culture.” 
Education NA has offered a safe place 
to raise questions, to try out teaching 
plans, to ask for advice about texts and 
approaches to them, to share both in- 
securities and areas of expertise. It has 
also been a place where everyone has 
been made aware that when we speak 
of the “culture” of Native Americans, 



we are in fact speaking of many 
widely varied practices, beliefs, and 
ways of living. 

One of the many advantages 
of Education NA is that several of the 
regular participants teach Native 
American students; to date, teachers of 
Yup’ik, Athabascan, Tlingit, Navajo, 
and Laguna Pueblo students have con- 
tributed to the conversations. Some of 
these teachers have also arranged ex- 
changes between their students and 
other students, both Indian and non- 
Indian. The conference thus expands 
that monolithically white classroom 
that Cora spoke of and allows teachers 
and students to listen to people who 
have “real knowledge” of cultural situ- 
ations other than their own. The con- 
tributions of the Native students and 
their teachers are especially useful as a 
way of reminding everyone that there 
are often fundamental differences 
among Indian tribal groups and com- 
munities; their contributions help to 
make it clear just how vast and how 
truly multicultural a place “Indian 




Lucy Maddox ; professor of Native American literature, at Bread Loaf in Vermont 



10 



13 



Middle bury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



country” really is — and always has 
been. 

One of the most energetic 
student exchanges arranged by Educa- 
tion NA teachers has been the “Walk- 
ing in Two Worlds” exchange, about 
which David Koehn writes in this is- 
sue. In reading the students’ writing 
about what it means to them to walk in 
two worlds — one Native, the other 
predominantly white — one quickly 
comes to realize that those two worlds 
multiply into many; the two worlds in 
which David Koehn’s Inupiat students 
walk, for example, are not identical 
with the two worlds in which Bruce 
Smith’s Navajo students walk, or 
Trevan Walker’s Tlingit students. The 
dividing line between Native and non- 
Native may be drawn all over the map 
of the country, but what falls on either 
side of that dividing line varies signifi- 
cantly as one moves around the map — 
even the map of a single state. 

At the same time, the contri- 
butions of the students are reminders 
that American students everywhere, 
no matter where they live or what their 
home language may be, share many of 
the same interests and concerns. It has 
been my sense, as the result of my par- 
ticipation in Education NA and other 
BreadNet conferences, that we teach- 
ers are often inclined to head as 
quickly as possible for this common 
ground, to look for the similarities 
among the differences, to encourage 
students to locate themselves in a 
larger world by finding the places 
where they can connect with others 
who are in most ways not like them- 
selves. And while I sometimes be- 
come nervous about the rush to find 
“universal, ” fearing that in our haste 
we will elide the differences that make 
us who we are, I have also come to 
recognize that if we are to talk with 
each other across our differences, it is 
important to find a ground that will 
allow us to have genuine conversation. 

This need for a common 
ground was brought home to me in an 
exchange that Lauren Sittnick and I 
arranged — through Education NA — 
between her Native students at Laguna 
Middle School in Laguna, New 
Mexico, and my graduate students 



(most of them white, and none of them 
Indian) who were taking a course in 
Native American literature at 
Georgetown University. Lauren and I 
agreed that her students would first 
write about superstitions they were 
familiar with at Laguna, and my stu- 
dents would respond; in the second 
phase of the exchange, the Laguna 
students would write imitations of the 
mixture of myth, history, and autobi- 
ography in Scott Momaday’s The Way 
to Rainy Mountain , which my students 
had also read, and my students would 
again respond. 

When I first proposed the 
exchange to my students, they were 
hesitant; they weren’t sure how they 
should respond to students who were 
so much younger, and they were espe- 
cially insecure about how they should 
correspond with “real” Indians, when 
they were still making their way tenta- 
tively through the “foreignness” of 
Native American literature. When the 
Laguna students’ superstition stories 
arrived, however, my students were 
immediately fascinated. The Laguna 
students wrote about many things: the 
prohibition against looking out the 
window after dark; the mysterious 
“pajama boy” who walks the reserva- 
tion after dark; the greedy man who 
turned into a devil figure after winning 
too much money at the casino. My 
students responded by writing about 
their own superstitions, about stories 
they had heard, about things that they 
feared. Their stories said much about 
the places they came from, their child- 
hood experiences, the folk wisdom 
they had acquired orally — sometimes 
from immigrant grandparents, some- 
times from suburban parents or older 
siblings, and in one case from a karate 
teacher. 

By exchanging stories about 
fearsome things, the Laguna students 
and my Georgetown graduate students 
were simultaneously underscoring 
their differences and locating a com- 
mon ground in their stories about the 
superstitions they were not willing to 
discard. Once this connection was 
made, my students were eager to hear 
more from the Laguna students. Be- 
ginning a correspondence about 



ddlebury, Vermont 



Momaday’s incorporation of tradi- 
tional Kiowa myths into his personal 
memoir then made more sense to my 
students, since they had, perhaps un- 
consciously, already been conversing 
with the Laguna students about the 
conflation of myth and autobiography 
in all lives. They felt connected. 

If my students became more 
comfortable writing across the age and 
culture gap by exchanging superstition 
stories, and if they learned some 
things about what it means to live in 
Laguna, Lauren Sittnick had other, 
perhaps more important, reasons for 
finding the exchange useful. As 
Lauren noted, one of her goals was to 
help her students “carry what they 
have in Laguna and in other modem 
settings without feeling one place puts 
an X through the other and vice 
versa.” Her students were able to tell 
stories to an audience that would take 
them seriously, and then to connect 
those stories to their lives, and to hear 
from others very different from them- 
-selves about the stories they carry with 
them. Her students, Lauren observed, 
“noticed patterns in superstition sto- 
ries from different regions. ... It is 
amazing how quickly they pick up on 
how language is used for various pur- 
poses. . . My own students were, I 
think, surprised to discover that they 
too could use their stories, and their 
language, to communicate with people 
they had thought they could only read 
about in books. 

The kind of exchanges that 
Education NA encourages, among 
teachers and students, can help to edu- 
cate all of us to our differences, at the 
same time that they can encourage us 
to value what we carry with us and to 
realize that we have important stories 
to share, “m 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Walking in Two Worlds: Poetic Explorations 
across Distances and Differences 



by David Koehn 
Barrow High School 
Barrow, AK 

A s my students create a six-foot 
poster of a Hills Brothers Coffee 
can, I listen to them talking about the 
different parts of the poem “Hills 
Brothers Coffee,” by Luci Tapahonso, 
a poet who is Navajo. One student ex- 
plains that the poem is about a man 
who speaks only Navajo, and he is 
visiting with his niece, the speaker in 
the poem. Other students discuss the 
setting in the poem, recalling their ex- 
periences with their own visiting rela- 
tives. In Tapahonso’ s poem, the uncle 
stops by the house of his young niece 
on his walk to the store. He stays for 
coffee with his niece, and he looks at 
the coffee can “with the man in a 
dress, / like a church man.” My stu- 
dents laugh as they draw the figure 
from the coffee can on the large 
poster. As they place the last few stan- 
zas of the poem on the poster, they 
again laugh at the uncle’s whimsy 
when he insists that “some coffee has 
no kick” but “this one does it for me.” 
Though my students appreciate the 
humor in the poem, they suspect 
something meaningful is happening as 
well. The making of coffee, for ex- 
ample, represents a natural blending of 
things: sweet white sugar with black 
bitter coffee, English and Navajo, 
white and Native American. Though 
none of my students has ever met a 
Navajo, they all understand the uncle 
is at ease with these seemingly contra- 
dictory things. The uncle walks in two 
worlds, the one Navajo, the other 
white, and he seems comfortable with 
the juxtaposition. He is finding his 
own way. 

* * * 

During my summer at Bread 
Loaf in Vermont, I found teachers in- 



terested in having their students write 
personal responses to poetry as a step- 
ping-stone to writing their own poetry. 
Discussions of this technique in read- 
ing and writing poetry helped us to 
understand the different ways that stu- 
dents’ ethnicity helps them interact 
with and appreciate poems. Each stu- 
dent brings something different to the 
reading of a poem. And quite often, 
reading and writing poetry can help 
students understand their ethnicity in 
new ways. 

In our current online ex- 
change we are exploring how aware- 
ness of ethnicity allows one to walk in 
two worlds, and this exploration has 
become the theme for many of the po- 
ems we’ve chosen to read with our 
students. Luci Tapahonso’ s poem 
“Hills Brothers Coffee,” for example, 
explores the commingling of Navajo 
culture and mainstream Western cul- 
ture. We began our online exchange 
with reader-responses to this humor- 
ous poem. 

The classrooms participating 
in this online exchange vary in their 



ethnicity. My students are a multicul- 
tural group of juniors that includes 
Inupiat Eskimo, Macedonian, Cauca- 
sian, and ethnically mixed students, all 
attending school in Barrow, Alaska, 
330 miles inside the Arctic Circle. 
Twelve hundred miles to the south of 
us in Bethel, Alaska, Hugh Dyment’s 
eighth graders at Bethel Regional 
High School are predominantly 
Yup’ik Eskimo. Bruce Smith’s Navajo 
students attend eighth grade at 
Crownpoint Junior/Senior High 
School in the Navajo Nation in New 
Mexico. Anne Gardner’s classroom in 
Georgetown High School in South 
Carolina is composed of an even mix 
of African American and white stu- 
dents. Trevan Walker’s students at 
Ketchikan High School in Alaska are 
predominantly Caucasian with some 
Tlingit students. The differences 
among the classrooms created the po- 
tential for extended exploration of our 
theme, walking in two worlds. 

Wilson Kassock of Bethel 
wrote to his peers in the other schools 
about his conceptions of the traditional 





Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



and the modem: “Everybody lives in 


? 1 


two cultures. I live in two cultures, but 




in blood I’m full Yup’ik. I don’t live 


Memory 


in an igloo. I don’t wear seal skin 




clothes to school. But I hunt and fish 


by Ernestine Chaco 


for my family.” 




Many students looked closely 


I get up in the morning 


at how the uncle in Tapahonso’s 


And get ready for school. 


poem, while humorous, maintained his 


I go to my Grandma’s house; 


cultural dignity. Dana Jackson, a 


She fixes my hair. 


Tlingit student from Ketchikan wrote: 


My Mom works hard 


. . Modem day living will always 


So there is food on the table, 


play a part in the uncle’s life. But 


And she has little time. 


people with different cultural back- 




grounds can look at their culture as a 


I ask her one day, 


personal asset ... as something that 


“Mom, why don’t you fix my hair anymore?” 


completes them.” Dana offered others 


She says to me, 


in the conference her insight about 


“It is hard in the real world, 


how culture functions within one’s life 


But you’re too little to know what I’m saying.” 


as opposed to merely ornamenting it. 




Our initial set of responses to 


I walk to my Grandma’s house. 


Tapahonso’s poem led to an exchange 


She is lonely. 


among students about culture, ethni- 


This is the first time I have seen her so lonely. 


city, and poetry. The discussion is on- 


She has three daughters and four sons, 


going. 


But one of her sons is dead. 


We anticipated the students’ 


“Where are your boys?” I ask. 


own poems would be the major high- 


“They’re at a baseball game,” she replies. 


light of the exchange. We weren’t dis- 


I pull a cushion towards where she is sitting. 


appointed. The poems students wrote 


“What kind of style do you want?” she asks. 


and posted on line varied as widely as 


“The usual.” 


the ethnic groups represented in the 




conference. Many were notable, but 


We sit quietly 


one poem surely worthy of mention 


I hardly know 


came from Ernestine Chaco, an eighth 


How to speak 


grade student in Bruce Smith’s class at 


Navajo 


Crownpoint. Ernestine studied Tapa- 


Except 


honso’s poem closely, exploring its 


For a few words. 


theme of walking in two worlds. Then 




she wrote “Memory,” which appears 


This morning my Grandpa is herding sheep. 


on this page, remarkable for its candor 


I can’t believe he can walk 


and reflective tone. 


Down the canyon 


* * * 


And back up again. 


As I download Ernestine’s 


I say good-bye to him in Navajo. 


poem from the computer, my students 


He replies, “Ha goh nee. ” 


are tapping away at keyboards all 




around me, drafting responses and in- 


Finally, 


sights to the poems of their online 


Her hands are done 


peers. They treat the poems generated 


Braiding my hair. 


by their peers with as much respect, 


I sit with her a little longer; 


depth of perception, and rigor as they 


I can hear the clock 


gave Luci Tapahonso’s poem. Their 


And the loud silence. 


exploration of culture, difference, and 


During this moment 


poetry — from Navajo to Inupiat, from 


I wish I could speak Navajo. 


African American to Yup’ik, from 




white to Tlingit — has created respect 





for the ways of each. ¥ 



C i 



iddlebury, Vermont 



16 



13 



Fall / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Writing with Telecommunications: 
Crossing Institutional Boundaries 



by Ceci Lewis 
Buena High School 
Sierra Vista , AZ 

T his past summer, while I was 
studying in the Bread Loaf pro- 
gram at the Native American Prepara- 
tory School in New Mexico, an idea 
for an online conference began to take 
shape in my mind. The Bread Loaf 
campus located in the red mesa coun- 
try of northern New Mexico lends it- 
self to the formulation of such ideas. 
The school is snuggled away from the 
hustle and bustle of the outside world, 
and Bread Loafers have ample time to 
get to know one another, exchange 
ideas, and develop collaborative ven- 
tures. The “monsoon” weather in late 
July and early August, charged with 
electrical voltage and thick with rain, 
encouraged those on campus to linger 
over meals and discuss possible online 
telecommunications exchanges. 

During one such stormy day, 
Bread Loaf faculty member John 
Wamock and I began to discuss the 
possibility of linking our classes to- 
gether. In the winter, John teaches on 
the English faculty at the University of 
Arizona, in Tucson. I teach twelfth 
grade English at Buena High School 
in Sierra Vista, which is approxi- 
mately 80 miles southeast of Tucson. 
While the rain beat on the tiled roof, 
John and I began to sketch out what an 
online exchange might be like be- 
tween his English 101 Composition 
college students and my twelfth grade 
high school students. 

As the summer session came 
rushing to an end, we left the Bread 
Loaf haven in New Mexico with only 
vague ideas of what might come of 
this exchange. I wanted my students to 
make contact with college students 
and to be made aware of the academic 
demands of college writing courses. 
John wanted his students to become 



more proficient with online communi- 
cation. We both agreed that my stu- 
dents and I should take a field trip to 
visit his class at the university. And so 
the semester began. 

After a bit of negotiation, 
John arranged to provide me with ac- 
cess to his university’s listserv, and 
through this medium our students be- 
gan posting introductions of them- 
selves to each other. Since my class 
was considerably larger than John’s — 
I had 34 students to his 26 — we de- 
cided not to set up partners for the ex- 
change. As is the case in most classes, 
the natural writers took up the slack 
and all students were able to write and 
receive responses. My students posted 
brief introductions and asked ques- 
tions about college life. Since many of 
John’s students were recent high 
school graduates and away from home 
for the first time, they were willing 
and eager to share their experiences 
about their new lives as 
high school graduates and 
college students. The ex- 
change began to flourish. 

Soon my students were 
receiving reports about 
the “do’s and don’ts” of 
life at the university. My 
students were very inter- 
ested in trying out this 
informative and social 
brand of writing because 
there were real people 
answering their questions. 

As conference 
moderators, neither John 
nor I had to prod too 
much to keep the conver- 
sation alive. At my end, 
the students kept asking 
whether they had received 
any “mail.” Advice from 
the college students 
ranged from “make sure 
you know how to write a 



research paper,” to “make sure you 
know how to read your professor.” 
Other students emphasized the need to 
adjust schedules to include time for 
studying. Many students away from 
home for the first time remarked how 
different college was because there 
was no one to make sure they went to 
class or did their homework. The ideas 
and examples that came from these 
freshman students enlightened my se- 
niors. These were things they wanted 
to know about. 

After the initial introductory 
writing between our students, John 
allowed my students to review logs his 
students kept regarding their in-class 
conferences with each other about 
their writing projects. As John’s stu- 
dents worked out problems with their 
writing, my students followed along 
by reading the logs. When the college 
students began researching topics for 
persuasive essays and rhetorical analy- 




te 



* 




^14 



17 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



ses, my students began to search for 
and develop topics for their own re- 
search papers. John’s log book, which 
stored all the discussion from the 
listserv, became a valuable resource in 
my classroom. 

As the semester whirled by, I 
found myself worrying about the field 
trip. Due to economic hardships, my 
principal could not fund the field trip. 
Where were we going to get $175 to 
pay for the bus and bus driver? A re- 
markable measure of my students’ 
commitment to this project was that 
the class voted unanimously to pay for 
the expense themselves. They never 
hesitated. With a five-dollar donation 
per student, the money was raised and 
we chartered a school bus. 

When November 6 arrived, 
only twenty-four students were able to 
make the actual trip. Assisted by a 
preservice teacher from the university 
as a chaperon, we loaded up and 
headed northwest to Tucson. 

Imagine our surprise when 
we arrived on campus to find that it 
was Homecoming Week. Our bus 
pulled up just in time to see the crowd 
dispersing from the inauguration cer- 
emony of the university’s new presi- 
dent. Wide-eyed and excited, my stu- 
dents explored the university’s mall 
and observed the exhibits set up to 
celebrate the festivities. After an hour 
set aside for lunch and recreation, we 
set out to find our “sister class.” 

Since John’s classroom was 
small, he suggested we meet for class 
outside. Fortunately, the tent which 
housed the inauguration ceremonies 
was still up and served as an open-air 
classroom. As college students and 
high school students began arriving, 
an unexpected guest appeared. Larry 
Evers, the Head of the English Depart- 
ment at the University of Arizona, in- 
troduced himself to our group and 
welcomed us to the campus. My stu- 
dents and I felt gratified that our visit 
to the campus on this busy day was 
extraordinary enough to warrant a spe- 
cial welcome. In retrospect, it does 
seem that the interaction between col- 
leges and public schools is particularly 
rare. 



As the class began, John and 
I addressed the group, and then John’s 
students individually introduced them- 
selves and mentioned the topic they 
were working on for their rhetorical 
analyses. It was fun, finally, to see the 
faces of the authors of the writing we 
had been reading all semester. My stu- 
dents followed by stating their names 
and then pairing up with the college 
students to discuss topics and thesis 
statements. 

The tent filled with conversa- 
tion as students discussed life, friends, 
fun and, believe it or not, even their 
research topics. John and I observed 
the students, making sure that every- 
one had a partner. After approximately 
40 minutes of discussion, we recon- 
vened as a large group. At this time, 
John and I asked whether or not the 
students had suggestions for future 
exchanges between the University of 
Arizona and Buena High School. Stu- 
dents were eager to make recommen- 
dations: having the students come for 
a whole day, visiting more often, hav- 
ing better computer access to make 
communicating on line easier. We pre- 
sented John Wamock with a Buena 
Senior tee-shirt, and his class pre- 
sented us with U of A football, volley- 
ball, and basketball posters. Then it 
was time to go home. 

All the way to the bus, the 
students laughed and talked about 
what a great time they had. Back on 
the bus and curious to find out 
whether this excursion meant more 
than just a day away from school, I 
asked students what they learned. To 
my elation, my question was answered 
with responses like, “I’ve narrowed 
down my topic,” “I think I have a 
handle on my research now,” and “I 
have a thesis statement!” 

The field trip served as a 
wonderful capstone to the sturdy foun- 
dation of collaboration our students 
had built through sharing ideas on 
line. By seeking out audiences and 
peers outside their respective class- 
rooms, both college and high school 
students were able to develop their 
writing to a greater extent than is usu- 
ally possible in an insulated academic 
setting. And for my students, the pos- 



sibility of going to college no longer 
seems like going into uncharted terri- 
tory; I believe more opportunities for 
cross-institutional collaboration like 
the one I’ve described would help 
smooth the transition that young stu- 
dents must make as they move from 
high school to college academics. 

* * * 

An Afterword 

by John Wamock 
University of Arizona 
Tucson, AZ 

Ceci Lewis is entirely too 
modest about her contribution to this 
exchange. It was her initiative that got 
us started and her faith in the possibil- 
ity of the exchange that got us over the 
rough spots to that warm sunny day 
when our classes finally met and 
mingled so happily under the red and 
white tent that we commandeered after 
our newly inaugurated president had 
moved on to participate in other 
Homecoming festivities. 

When Ceci proposed this ex- 
change to me last summer at the Bread 
Loaf-New Mexico campus, I was 
game. I thought it would be grand to 
be able to give my first-year composi- 
tion students the experience of being 
experts (I can still remember what 
godlike creatures college students 
seemed to me to be when I was in high 
school) for a while at a time in their 
lives when they were most of the time 
feeling anything but expert. At the 
same time, my students would be 
close enough to high school to have a 
vivid sense of what they’d have to do 
to communicate with Ceci’s students. 

I liked the idea of their having a real 
audience to whom they would write. 

I had some qualms though. I 
had done enough electronic 
conferencing in classes here to know 
that such exchanges had to be thought- 
fully structured if they were to have 
any real educational value. I wasn’t 

(continued on next page) 



iddlebury, Vermont 



15 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Rural Challenge Network: 
Reaching Out 



Afterword 

( continued from previous page) 

sure we could do that here. Ceci as- 
sured me that everything would be 
fine. I believed her. She was right. 

You never know these days 
what will be the collective expertise 
with computers in any given class. 

The range can be very wide. It turned 
out that none of the students in Sec- 
tion 90 were email adepts, and I began 
to worry. Along with everything else, 
they’d have to get accounts, find labs, 
learn how to do listservs. 

They did it, not all precisely 
on the schedule Ceci and I had 
dreamed up, but with a will. In a short 
time, my students, like Ceci’s, got to 
the point where they complained in 
injured tones if their email writing 
wasn’t promptly responded to. 

It would have been a mistake 
to expect too much from this first ex- 
change, which I believe was the first 
of its kind to happen at my university. 
If we had expected too much, we 
probably would have missed the very 
valuable things that did happen: my 
students did feel a little bit big-broth- 
erly and big-sisterly toward Ceci’s 
students (they vigorously denied this, 
of course). In their easygoing 
mentoring, my students did form a 
more secure sense of what was going 
on in class. They also had the valuable 
experience of talking about “our” is- 
sues with an “outside” audience, 
something that I’m sure helped me 
help them learn some important les- 
sons about the importance of audi- 
ence. 

My thanks again to Ceci. 
We’ve probably broken some new 
ground here. I’m ready for more. 

As far as college-school in- 
teractions go: I know that BLRTN 
teachers have been using BreadNet for 
years now with great success in school 
to school interactions. *¥ 



by Anthony Kennedy 
and Natasha O ’Brien 
Ketchikan High School 
Ketchikan , AK 

L iving in Ketchikan, an island 
community in Southeast Alaska, 
one becomes accustomed to turning 
inward, sometimes forgetting that a 
world lies beyond the watery bound- 
aries that isolate us. We have only 30 
miles of road, which go nowhere. One 
leaves the island only by boat or 
plane. The closest city of any size is 
Seattle, two hours away by plane and 
costing $385 for the cheapest ticket. 
Because of these circumstances, we 
tend to look inward and rely on our 
own resourcefulness. But we also 
know it’s important to reach outward. 

For us, reaching outward has 
recently become more feasible. 
Ketchikan High School now has over 
250 computers for a student body of 
670 students. We have Internet access, 



and soon we will have email accounts 
for all teachers and students. And now 
that Ketchikan High School is a mem- 
ber of the Bread Loaf Rural Challenge 
Network (BLRCN), the rest of the 
world has never been so close. 

The BLRCN, a consortium of 
five schools engaged in school reform, 
is funded by the Rural Challenge, a 
fund set aside by Ambassador Walter 
Annenberg for the reform of rural edu- 
cation. Participation in BLRCN, along 
with participation in the Bread Loaf 
Rural Teacher Network (several 
Ketchikan teachers are Fellows of 
BLRTN), has provided teachers and 
students of Ketchikan High School a 
link to the outside, allowing many ex- 
citing things to happen in our school. 
We have become connected with other 
students, teachers, and communities 
across the country. The five schools 
involved in this consortium are differ- 
ent in many aspects, but they share 
two important traits: they are located 
in rural places, and they have a strong 




Anthony Kennedy (left), principal of Ketchikan High School, with Richard Clement, 
principal of Schoenbar Middle School, at Bread Loaf in Vermont 





Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter /Winter 1997 



desire to improve their students’ learn- 
ing experiences through collaboration 
with other schools. These commonali- 
ties and the funds from the Rural 
Challenge have allowed us to meet, to 
begin discussions, and to initiate 
school reform. 

Teachers from the five 
schools in the consortium — Ketchikan 
High School and Schoenbar Middle 
School, Ketchikan, Alaska; Pojoaque 
High School, Pojoaque, New Mexico; 
Laguna Middle School, Laguna, New 
Mexico; and Ganado Intermediate 
School, Ganado, Arizona — have face- 
to-face meetings twice a year. These 
meetings provide an opportunity to 
learn from one another and to share 
our common experiences with learn- 
ing in rural settings. We’ve learned 
that the problems we have — e.g. too 
few good jobs in our community or 
the high dropout rate among our Na- 
tive students — are not completely 
unique to us, and we can share how 
we overcome these problems. 

We also share the assets of 
teaching in a rural community: we 
have many caring individuals who 
nurture our students’ learning in a 
very personal way; and we know 
people in the community outside our 
school (it’s not unusual to hold a par- 
ent/teacher meeting in the aisle of the 
supermarket). This intimacy that exists 
between each school in the BLRCN 
and its community bonds all the 
schools in the network: though all the 
schools are very different culturally, 
our ruralness makes us cohorts in 
school reform. 

We also work together to out- 
line our goals for the future of educa- 
tion in our communities. The opportu- 
nity to share common experiences and 
to get to know each other as people 
forms the glue that holds our group 
together. Each time we meet, the bond 
becomes a little stronger. Knowing 
and caring for colleagues in this per- 
sonal way encourage enthusiasm in 
teachers, and that transfers to their stu- 
dents when they participate in collabo- 
rative projects involving the use of 
telecommunications. 



In June, 1997, 

Ketchikan hosted a consortium 
meeting, and we took time to 
explore and explain carefully 
to each other what we mean by 
“pedagogy of place,” a com- 
mon concept of learning 
among all the schools funded 
by the Rural Challenge. In 
Ketchikan, this takes many 
different shapes, such as the 
integration of the community 
into our required freshman sci- 
ence class. The students study 
the basic concepts of biology, 
physical science, and chemis- 
try, using our rain forest as 
both a subject of study and an 
outdoor laboratory. Labs are 
held in the woods behind the 
school, and students explore 
not only the science, but the 
economics as well. Students 
gain a better understanding of 
their “place” and what it 
means to them. 

As the consortium grows and 
matures, each school is beginning to 
examine how it can become a resource 
of support for the other members in 
the Network as well as other rural 
schools. The principals in the group 
have agreed to work together on a re- 
search project that will provide us 
with the information we need to re- 
duce the dropout rate of our Native 
Alaskan students. We are now in the 
process of applying for a grant from 
The Spencer Foundation to assist us in 
this work. Without the networking 
capabilities encouraged by Bread 
Loaf, which puts teachers in touch 
with each other for collaborative pur- 
poses, this initiative could not have 
developed as quickly. 

The funds from the Rural 
Challenge have also enabled us to 
bring in skilled presenters for in-ser- 
vice opportunities. In the spring, 
BLRTN Fellow Scott Christian came 
to Ketchikan and helped our entire 
district develop ways to incorporate 
writing across the disciplines. Scott 
was very well received, and he helped 
promote quality in the writing of our 
students. Also in the spring, BLRTN 




u l 



i 



Natasha O'Brien 

consultant Jackie Royster came to 
Ketchikan to speak with middle and 
high school teachers and faculty of our 
local community college. She helped 
us understand how to develop our cur- 
rent teaching practices, and she en- 
couraged us to keep open the lines of 
communication among teachers 
throughout our district, an activity that 
is lamentably rare in many other dis- 
tricts. 

One unique aspect of the 
BLRCN is that it casts principals, 
teachers, and students in roles as true 
collaborators, and the involvement of 
the entire school is refreshing. In the 
future, we expect the Rural Challenge 
to assist us by continuing to provide 
links to other unique rural schools and 
communities as we continue to re- 
shape the way students learn in the 
place where we live. We expect stu- 
dents will accomplish more than they 
have in the past. Teachers will con- 
tinue to develop collaborative oppor- 
tunities to help each other develop 
professionally. And the schools in the 
BLRCN will become active sites 
where concerns of the community and 
the school are one and the same. « 







iddlebury ; Vermont 



20 



17 



Fall / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Cross- Age Conferencing: A Literary Inquiry 



Michelle Wyman-Warren 
Mountainair High School 
Mountainair, NM 

I knew that I was going to be called 
to the principal’s office. The stu- 
dents in my seventh-period communi- 
cation class knew it, too. A loud knock 
at the door broke the tenseness and 
quiet in the classroom, and a fellow 
teacher entered and said she was sent 
by our principal to stay with my class 
while he waited to see me in his of- 
fice. 

Also waiting for me in Mr. 
Renteria’s office was a very unhappy 
student — I’ll call her Estella — from 
my seventh-period class. Earlier she 
had stormed out of the classroom be- 
cause she was angry and frustrated 
with our new project. Mr. Renteria 
had calmed her, and now he wanted to 
understand what was going on in my 
class. 

Estella blurted out that I was 
making her read a college-level book 
about Africa and that I was expecting 
her and her classmates to communi- 
cate with college students about it. 

“It’s not fair,” she complained. “We’re 
just in tenth grade, and there’s no way 
anyone can pass the class if we have 
to work this hard!” 

Standing in the principal’s 
office, I asked Estella what she had 
learned about Africa that was impor- 
tant. Finally, the tension broke, and 
Estella replied, “Well, the Congo was 
colonized by Europeans just like New 
Mexico was.” Mr. Renteria seemed 
impressed that Estella made that con- 
nection and told her that she might be 
getting more from the class than she 
thought. 

Estella was referring to the 
first electronic telecommunications 
exchange, which I had arranged, be- 
tween my students at Mountainair 
High School in New Mexico and Pro- 
fessor Victor Luftig’s freshmen at 
Brandeis University in Massachusetts. 
Earlier in the school year, Victor had 



invited BLRTN Fellows to engage 
their students in an online study of 
Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness 
with his college freshmen. Though I 
had never met Professor Luftig, I 
knew he was a professor at Bread Loaf 
during the summer, and I was there- 
fore interested. Since Mountainair 
High School had a classroom set of 
the novel, I jumped at the opportunity 
to place my students in this collabora- 
tive venture with Victor’s. 

I believed my communication 
class, which meets during the last pe- 
riod of the school day, would be per- 
fect for this unique experience. Period 
seven had barely completed one unit 
of study, and I was worried about their 
academic progress. I knew I needed to 
do something different, perhaps even 
“revolutionary,” to hold the students’ 
attention during this difficult hour. 
Many of the Brandeis students in the 
course studying Conrad’s book were 
international students, and I hoped the 
cultural differences my students en- 
countered in Victor’s students would 
help my students view the book from 
several perspectives. 

My students began their 
study of Heart of Darkness several 
weeks earlier than the Brandeis stu- 



dents with an overview of what they 
already knew about Africa, the setting 
of the novel. Most students knew very 
little. For example, though they knew 
that lions, giraffes and elephants lived 
in Africa, they did not know the his- 
tory or the geography of the continent. 
Many students did not know whether 
Africa was nearer to Europe or the 
United States. Students made a list of 
topics about Africa about which they 
knew very little. Then we divided up 
the list so that each student could be- 
come an “expert” in a specific area for 
our study and share his or her findings 
with the class. We created an African 
collage that we taped to the classroom 
wall and which featured a large stu- 
dent-drawn map of Africa, photo- 
graphs of the Congo River, and a his- 
torical time-line that coincided with 
the action in Heart of Darkness. 

The setting of colonial Africa 
in Conrad’s novel isn’t so removed 
from my New Mexico students as one 
might initially think. With a popula- 
tion of approximately 1,000 and situ- 
ated between a mountain range, the 
Manzanos, and the prairie (locally re- 
ferred to as the Llano), Mountainair is 
also located in a strikingly beautiful 
landscape. Most students at MHS 




21 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



(there are 170 students 7-12) have 
strong ties to the community and can 
trace those ties back for several hun- 
dred years. Some trace their family 
roots to the Spanish Conquistadors 
who oversaw the building of three 
magnificent sixteenth-century Spanish 
missions located a few miles from 
Mountainair. This land is not unac- 
quainted with colonialism. 

Victor and I decided we 
would begin the online communica- 
tion by having our students read 
posted prompts related to the novel; 
the students’ responses began with 
short self-introductions followed by 
responses to those prompts. For the 
next six weeks, my students at MHS 
and Victor’s at Brandeis shared their 
interpretations of Conrad’s novel, 
which confronts readers with themes 
of racism, oppression, the exercise of 
free will, and the effects of evil on the 
individual and on society. What sur- 
prised my students, once they began 
reading the novel, was that many of 
the issues Conrad raised in his novel a 
century ago are the same issues we are 
dealing with today. Here are some stu- 
dents writing about the novel: 

Hi! My name is L.K. and I am 
from Mountainair, NM. I agree 
that Heart of Darkness is a hard 
book to get into, but once we fin- 
ished it and started talking about 
it I began to better understand it. I 
don’t think Conrad is a racist, and 
his opinions about Africa and Af- 
ricans were probably very differ- 
ent from other European people of 
his time. What do you think about 
Conrad? 

Another MHS student wrote, 

I think the author is racist and 
probably most people in those 
days were racist too, so Conrad 
probably thought it was okay to 
use racial slurs. ... I agree with 
S.S.’s [a Brandeis student’s] view 
of how the Europeans compared 
themselves to the Africans (also 
the part at the beginning about the 
Romans invading England) and I 
believe that though the Europeans 
were calling the Africans savages, 
it was the Europeans who were 
acting like savages. 



The Brandeis students an- 
swered questions that the MHS stu- 
dents posed about the novel and its 
various themes. Many times the stu- 
dents at Brandeis encouraged my class 
to be patient with their study of the 
novel as it was complicated and com- 
plex but worth the time and effort nec- 
essary for a critical study of an impor- 
tant work of literature. One MHS stu- 
dent explained to a Brandeis student 
how she and her classmates compared 
the action in Heart of Darkness to 
their own contemporary experiences: 
During today’s class a lot of stu- 
dents had a hard time understand- 
ing the story, so Ms. Warren 
asked us to think about how the 
story would have been written 
today. Most of the kids figured 
Marlow and Kurtz would be drug 
dealers and that Kurtz would 
break away from the main gang. 
Marlow would be sent after him 
to avenge the main drug syndi- 
cate. I thought it helped but it also 
got away from the main idea of 
the story about the struggle be- 
tween good and evil. 

Through our exchange with 
the Brandeis students on Heart of 
Darkness , my students from 
Mountainair High School learned that 
they could express their ideas and 
opinions in writing with the care and 
deliberation necessary to encourage 
respectful and thoughtful responses 
from college freshmen. The students’ 
correspondence, as I read it, helped 
me to identify the troublesome parts in 
the novel, and I was able to refocus 
the class’s attention on these parts. 

The most important gain for both my 
students and for myself was the affir- 
mation that people with different 
backgrounds can share a common 
ground through discussions of difficult 
issues raised by good literature. Will 
my students remember the Heart of 
Darkness exchange? I think so — be- 
cause one day in the cafeteria several 
months after the exchange had ended, 

I overheard one of my students ex- 
press his fear and loathing of that 
day’s lunch menu: “the horror, the 
horror.” 



ERLC 



iddlebury, Vermont 



22 



An Afterword 

by Victor Luftig 
Brandeis University 
Waltham, MA 

Most of the dozens of 
Brandeis freshmen who exchanged 
comments with Michelle Wyman- 
Warren’s class wrote better during that 
exchange than they did at any other 
time during their first year of college. 
They were in the course that included 
the exchange because we thought they 
weren’t yet ready for the mainstream 
first-year seminars, but the writing 
they produced during the exchange 
was better than that produced by a lot 
of the first-year students whom we 
supposed to be their writerly betters. 
Scholars like Andrea Lunsford have 
provided what seems to me the right 
explanation for their extraordinary 
writing: the students knew they were 
in “the presence of others,” that they 
were addressing people they might 
really persuade, elicit responses from, 
and exchange ideas with. But I think 
also for the duration of that exchange, 
our students from Greece, Korea, the 
former Soviet Union, East Los Ange- 
les, and Waltham got to be people in a 
place writing to other people in an- 
other place. Whether they ever got a 
clear sense of where Mountainair is, 
I’m not sure — though the great gener- 
osity of Ms. Wyman-Warren and her 
students, who sent along wonderful 
local artifacts that I could distribute to 
some of the most active correspon- 
dents, certainly helped in that re- 
gard — but they learned a lot about 
how to think and write about locales 
like Conrad’s. That learning was the 
point, of course, but it was also the 
unique outcome of the exchange. 
First-year college students don’t usu- 
ally argue about literature passion- 
ately, using vivid supporting evidence 
from the assigned texts, but the con- 
ference includes dozens of examples 
of such strong argumentation. I sent 
some of those to our Dean; she called 
them “honey for the soul ” Now I like 
to think of such honey as a local prod- 
uct that’s also an import. W 



19 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Rural School On Line: Nuke Sites 



by Janet T. Atkins 

Wade Hampton High School 

Hampton , SC 

I s the use of nuclear energy an ac- 
ceptable risk? That’s the question 
two teachers and their students posed 
for themselves in an online conference 
on BreadNet in the spring of 1997. 

The project, called Nuke Sites, will 
continue this year as new students ex- 
amine the issues of environmental rac- 
ism, community health, and nuclear 
proliferation. 

The idea for this project 
originated during a casual conversa- 
tion I had with New Mexico teacher 
Phil Sittnick about having our students 
participate in a collaborative inquiry 
on line. During the conversation, we 
realized that each of us lives near an 
industrial site related to the nuclear 
fuel chain. Phil teaches on the Laguna 
Indian Reservation, near the site of 
what was once the world’s largest 
open-pit uranium mine, which is now 
closed. I live near the Savannah River 
Site in South Carolina, a key facility 
of the U.S. Department of Energy 
dedicated to national security, envi- 
ronmental cleanup, and waste manage- 
ment. 

To enhance my understand- 
ing of the scope of the project, I trav- 
eled to New Mexico to visit Phil’s stu- 
dents and their school. The trip was 
made possible in part by a minigrant 
from Write to Change, a nonprofit or- 
ganization sponsoring writing projects 
that focus on the community. This op- 
portunity to work on line with Phil’s 
students and to visit his school, I must 
say, is probably a rare experience in a 
teacher’s tight schedule of classes and 
preparation, and I took the opportunity 
to record the event in my journal, 
which I’ve excerpted below. 

Let me begin by saying that I 
truly appreciated this opportunity to 
visit Phil’s students at Laguna Middle 
School, his wife Lauren Sittnick, then 
teaching at Los Alamitos Middle 



School in Grants, NM, and our col- 
league Susan Miera at Pojoaque High 
School in Pojoaque, NM. I had a great 
time talking to these teachers, getting 
to know their students, and seeing how 
other schools organize their curricula. 
While I love the high desert of New 
Mexico, I reaffirmed my belief that 
South Carolina is an excellent setting 
in which to teach and to pursue profes- 
sional interests. 

November 11. Today, I drove to 
Atlanta Airport. ... I made a 
point to drive through the Savan- 
nah River Site to check out any 
obvious changes. The only strik- 
ing occurrence was when the po- 
lice blocked traffic with their ve- 
hicles while an enclosed truck 
crossed the highway. I wondered 
what was in the truck. It’s hard to 
believe that plutonium was manu- 
factured for many years in this 
beautiful pine wilderness. The 
flight to Albuquerque made for a 
long day; I was really tired but 
glad to see Phil and Lauren. 

November 12. 1 slept in until 
9:00 a.m. Didn’t even hear the 
Sittnicks leave for school. I did 
some writing and reading until 
Lauren came home for lunch. 

Then we went to her school, Los 
Alamitos, [Lauren currently 
teaches at Laguna Middle School] 
where I observed two classes. 

That night Phil and I planned the 
Nuke Sites project. We watched a 
slide show on the nuclear indus- 
try, which was informative and 
mentioned both the Savannah 
River Site and the Laguna 
Jackpile/Pagaute Mines. 

November 15. Floyd Solomon, 
the cultural affairs liaison at La- 
guna Middle School, took me to 
see the mining area. He is knowl- 
edgeable on issues of mining and 
its effects on the Laguna people. 
We spent an hour together talking 



about the pros and cons of the 
mine and how the Laguna people 
benefited from both the mining 
itself and from the reclamation. I 
learned, however, that working in 
the mine conflicted with much of 
Laguna culture, their language, 
and their religion. I realized that 
as my students and I discuss the 
effects of the Savannah River Site 
on our lives, we certainly will 
need to think about our environ- 
ment and what losses we face be- 
cause a nuclear graveyard is in 
our backyard. I took a lot of pho- 
tographs, though snapshots can’t 
do justice to the vastness of the 
mines. It’s sort of like going into 
a great cathedral and seeing what 
appear to be tiny stained glass 
windows near the top of a vaulted 
ceiling and then being told the 
windows are twenty feet tall. It’s 
difficult to perceive the depth of 
those holes in the earth; it’s hard 
to imagine how the mesas on this 
site must have once looked. And 
all this for something to make 
bombs! I look forward to talking 
to my colleagues at Hampton 
about my experience here. 

Once I was back at home, we 
eagerly began the conference. Using 
curriculum materials that Phil had 
gathered as well as newspaper clip- 
pings and information gleaned from 
the World Wide Web, my students and 
I researched and discussed the nuclear 
fuel cycle. Other teachers passed by 
my classroom and did a confused 
double take when they heard words 
like “fission,” “fusion,” or “rads” 
coming from the mouth of an English 
teacher. The students talked excitedly 
and wrote passionately about their 
findings, first in a general description 
of the sites they researched and then in 
a well-documented opinion paper 
about nuclear fuel. We built on our 
understanding by viewing the slide 
show which deeply moved most of us 
with the information about the elimi- 
nation of two small towns, Ellenton 
and Dunbarton, from the Savannah 
River Site. The residents of these “dis- 
appeared” towns were compelled to 




A 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



move to “New Ellenton,” a commu- 
nity created just for them. Our stu- 
dents also looked at a reproduction of 
We're Making a New World , a paint- 
ing that depicts a barren, post-apoca- 
lyptic landscape with a weak, white 
sun rising over the naked tree tops. I 
asked the students to discuss the paint- 
ing in class and to write a response in 
poetic format. This conference has 
given our students a chance to connect 
to the past, reflect on the present, and 
speculate about the future. Writing 
about these issues in a literate and 
trusting community has given them an 
opportunity to ask genuine, hard ques- 
tions, to write about issues close to 
home, and to respond to each other’s 
writing via BreadNet. 

For instance, Wade Hampton 
student Rene Payne wrote, “Nuclear 
power, weapons, and warfare have no 
place in our world, and hopefully they 
will cease to exist one day. Still that 
won’t fix what has already occurred 
and what continues to occur. I feel as 
if we will never learn, and if we did it 
would be too late because our Mother 
is dying and we’re digging her grave.” 

Another student, Lee 
Norment, wrote, “It is difficult to bal- 
ance the economic reward with the 
nuclear hazard. It is hard to overlook 
the $85 million in goods and services 
purchased in South Carolina with 
money generated by the nuclear fuel 
industry. However, when does money 
supersede health?” 

Finally, the poem by Barrett 
Brotherson that appears on this page 
puts many students’ thoughts in per- 
spective. 

Later in the spring, Phil was 
able to come to South Carolina to visit 
Wade Hampton High School. While 
here, he was interviewed by South 
Carolina Educational Television for a 
documentary on BLRTN. I think we 
all discovered that healthy people are 
informed people, and when students 
are allowed to investigate and write 
about important issues, they grow into 
people who are better able to make 
positive changes in their world. This 
project allowed two classrooms to net- 
work across place and culture in a sig- 
nificant way. Students published a 



magazine anthologizing the writing 
that grew out of their online discus- 
sions. As a community of learners, we 
came to better develop our views 
about the nuclear fuel chain. The an- 
thologies were distributed to doctors’ 
and lawyers’ offices in the local com- 



munity as well as to students at 
school. By doing so, we have shown 
others in our community what we 
have learned about the social and 
emotional impact of living near 
nuclear sites. ¥ 



The forest stands naked in icy sunlight, 

The trees — stripped of their protection 
by death and time — stand exposed, 
stretching sun-bleached arms 
toward the sky in a silent plea for mercy 
to One who either cannot hear 
or will not help. 

The little stream that once laughed, 

splashing and leaping 

over rocks as it wound 

its way through the trees, 

lies stagnating, its waters 

putrid and choked with decayed fragments 

of a forest it once fed. 

All is silence now. 

No stirring of life in the underbrush; 
no rustle of leaves in the wind. 

No song of birds in the treetops 

no chatter of squirrels in their canopy homes. 

All gone — 

burned in one brief, blinding flash 
of progress. 

— Barrett Brotherson 
Wade Hampton High School 



iddlebury , Vermont 



24 



21 



Fall / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Listening to Students 
in the Connections Project 



by Patricia Parrish 
Sumrall Attendance Center 
Sumrall, MS 



Editor’s Note : The author would like 
to thank Dr . Susan Malone of the Uni- 
versity of Southern Mississippi for her 
essential collaboration in the Connec- 
tions Project and for her assistance in 
writing this article. 



M y students astound me, not just 
sometimes, but generally every 
day. Eighth graders are a rare breed: 
perceptive and naive, serious and 
funny, but always interesting. Since 
attending Bread Loaf, I’ve become 
fascinated with looking closely at my 
students to observe how they think 
and learn. To do this, I’ve also become 
a master “eavesdropper.” For three 
years, I’ve been monitoring my stu- 
dents’ writing, and each week I learn 
something new about learning, about 
my students, and about myself. 

My chance to really get in- 
side the hearts and minds of my stu- 
dents began in the fall of 1995, when 
Dr. Susan Malone, Director of English 
Education at the University of South- 
ern Mississippi, approached me about 
a project to link her preservice English 
teachers and my eighth grade English 
students in a collaboration. We called 
our collaboration the Connections 
Project because it helped us cross 
boundaries that isolate students and 
teachers in their classrooms. 

The goals for the project 
were to develop a collaborative uni- 
versity-school model for an alternative 
preservice field experience; to im- 
prove preservice teacher preparation 
by providing preservice teachers with 
experiences working one-on-one with 
students in real classrooms; and to im- 
prove eighth grade students’ reading 



and writing skills by providing mean- 
ingful contexts for these activities. 

The personal connections 
forged between the college and junior 
high students were a significant by- 
product of the project. One eighth 
grader, Jamie, expressed what most of 
the students felt when she said, “The 
idea of doing this project was a good 
one. Whoever thought junior high stu- 
dents could help college students! And 
vice versa. I think that since we 
learned so much through English, we 
should use this technique in our other 
classes, too. I’ll bet it would pull up 
both of our grades. Plus, we would get 
to make new friends.” 

The technique Jamie referred 
to involved pairing college students in 
Susan’s “Adolescent Literature” class 
with my eighth grade students as writ- 
ing partners to exchange structured 
weekly correspondence about young 
adult novels. The preservice teachers 
purchased novels for their partners and 
developed response 
guides for the books. 

Then in the spring of 
1996 we extended the 
project to include 
preservice teachers in 
the “Composition 
Theory” class. During 
this phase of the 
project the students 
shared drafts of their 
writing with one an- 
other and met to- 
gether at the end of 
the semester with par- 
ents and friends to 
read their favorite 
pieces and celebrate 
their work. Through 
these activities I be- 
gan my own great 
learning experience 
about writing, stu- 
dents, and human na- 
ture. 



During the first year of this 
continuing project, I hand-delivered 
the letters back and forth between my 
school in Sumrall, a small rural Mis- 
sissippi town, and Hattiesburg, fifteen 
miles away, where the university is 
located. Delivering the letters was an 
inconvenience, but I was learning so 
much about my students. In one letter, 
Luther, an inveterate eighth grade 
prankster, responded to his college 
partner. Hank, very seriously: “I found 
your story to be very interesting, and I 
have only one complaint: you try too 
hard to write a good story. Loosen up 
and just write. Other than that, it was 
good. I like the beginning where you 
said, ‘I just sit in my recliner and write 
or think.’ I liked that it was long. I like 
fairly long stories — well that’s all!” 
Here, I’ve eavesdropped on an edito- 
rial suggestion that is good advice for 
any student writing in an academic 
setting — “Loosen up and just write.” 
And to think it came from Luther, the 
prankster! I’m learning that my as- 
sumptions about the reading and writ- 
ing abilities of students can be wrong. 

Chayeisha, an outspoken and 
athletic girl, chose to respond to a 




Patricia Parrish of Sumrall Attendance Center, 
Sumrall, Mississippi 



>2 



25 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



criticism her USM partner Jessica had 
given her in their previous exchange 
of letters: “What’s up? Nothing here, 
just writing you saying thank you for 
the advice. It was helpful. Do you re- 
member when you wrote me saying 
don’t be using slang words? I don’t 
use slang words — that’s just the way I 
talk. I’m not trying to catch no attitude 
with you. I read about your writing 
process and it was neat. I got to go. 
P.S. Keep ya head up!!!!” In this in- 
stance, Chayeisha is firmly declaring 
ownership of her writing and letting 
her writing partner know it. After 
eavesdropping on this exchange, I 
now think more carefully about how 
language forms and informs each 
student’s writing and her sense of self. 

My eavesdropping on these 
“conversations” between college stu- 
dents and my students has made me 
rethink the impact that writing assign- 
ments make on my students. I found a 
letter from Aja, a lovely, serious girl, 
who writes to her older partner Lisa: 
“That is so weird that you have to 
write an essay on how you usually 
write an essay . ...” Here, Aja’s mak- 
ing a wonderful observation, question- 
ing the purpose of academic writing 



assignments, in particular one that is a 
“meta-writing” assignment. Is “weird” 
defined as good or bad in an eighth 
grader’s lexicon? I don’t know; I’ll 
have to eavesdrop further. 

Through this project I’ve be- 
gun to understand that eighth graders 
view writing differently, especially 
from the way I view it. For example, 
Nikki, after discussing the upcoming 
Homecoming Dance at length and de- 
voting a whole page to how she is going 
to wear her hair for the big function, 
confides in Shelli: “For my story, I am 
still working on it. But I really cannot 
write long stories. I guess that is not 
one of my talents. Could you give me a 
few tips on how to make a story 
longer?” I find Nikki’s request puzzling 
because it comes at the end of a long, 
newsy narrative letter, one of the long- 
est pieces of writing I’ve seen from 
Nikki yet. Obviously, this girl can de- 
velop a piece of writing, so why does 
she think she can’t? Why does she 
view academic writing and this narra- 
tive to Shelli as completely different 
species? How can I make the academic 
writing Nikki does in my classroom as 
meaningful as her narrative letters to 
Shelli? To answer these questions, I’ll 



have to keep listening to my students. 

After delivering my students’ 
writing for a year, Susan and I wrote a 
grant proposal to obtain computers for 
my students so they could conduct the 
writing exchanges on line with the USM 
students, who already had access to a 
computer lab. We applied for a Goals 
2000 subgrant and, in the fall of 1996, 
received $47,000 for equipment and 
supplies for my classroom: fourteen 
new computers, four printers, lots of 
books on writing and reading theory, 
and many other supplies. Though tech- 
nology amplified the enthusiasm for the 
project, it made it more complicated too. 
The world of email and the Internet is 
now open to my students, and we are 
just beginning to explore it, sending let- 
ters and drafts on line. Our project now 
has a Web site that explains the history 
of the project and publishes book re- 
views and pieces of writing from the 
eighth graders and the USM students. 
We’ve reached beyond our classroom 
walls to the world. 

Just last week one of my favor- 
ite students, Eli, an active boy with big 
blue eyes who has trouble staying in his 
seat long enough to write anything, re- 
minded me why I am devoted to this 
cross-age, cross-institutional project. At 
the end of his letter to his USM partner 
Kim, Eli tells her: “I gotta say the topic 
of the story you wrote was, at first, bor- 
ing, but the way you put it made it inter- 
esting. My mom read it too, and she 
liked it. See ya later. Friends, Eli P.S. 

‘Be like a postage stamp — stick to one 
thing until you get there.’” 

Once again, one of the 
unlikeliest students has surprised me. 
Who would have believed that students 
and parents are actually discussing writ- 
ing and the writing process at home 
without being coerced? Though I know 
it wasn’t meant for me, Eli’s 
postscripted advice found a place in my 
heart, and I’ve decided to follow it: I’ll 
“stick to” teaching these kids, stick to 
listening closely to them and learning 
from their insights. And even though I 
sometimes don’t know where we are 
headed, I know we’ll “get there.” m 




An interactive literature and writing project for junior high students and preservice English teachers 




Student Texts 



Young Adult Novel Reviews 



Welcome to the CONNECTIONS Project! This project, vas created by Dr. Susan Malone of the 
University of Southern Mississippi English Department and Ms. Patricia Parrish . English teacher at 
Sumrail Attendance Center. The project brings together eighth grade students and. English majors 
seeking secondary education certification. They share both young adult novels and original writing 
experiences. This page shove ases a sample of things created during the past few years under this 
project. Feel free to browse all of the original work at the site and e-mail'us your reactions! For a 
more detailed history- of the project, click here. 



Other Web sites for parents and students: 

[ ^Children's Literature Web Guide 
Bl lnternet School Library Media Center 
BBThe Mighty Pen 



Web site of middle school students at Sumrail Attendance Center 
and students at Southern Mississippi University 
( www-dept. usm. edy/~conn ect/conn ec. html ) 

o 

diddlebury, Vermont ^ " r . 



23 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Teacher Networking and Professional Development in Alaska: 
An Interview with Annie Calkins 



Editor's Note: The following questions 
and answers are from transcripts of 
interviews conducted by South Caro- 
lina Educational TV for the forthcom- 
ing documentary on the Bread Loaf 
Rural Teacher Network (BLRTN), in 
which Doug Keel , Education Associ- 
ate with the South Carolina Depart- 
ment of Education, intennewed Annie 
Calkins , the Assistant Superintendent 
for the Juneau School District. 



Doug Keel: What are the characteris- 
tics of Juneau as a school district that 
make it a good collaborative partner 
of the Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Net- 
work? 

Annie Calkins: The BLRTN is impor- 
tant not just to the Juneau school dis- 
trict and community but to all teachers 
and administrators in Alaska. Alaska 
is a very big state with a small popula- 
tion of about 500,000 people who are 
geographically very spread out. I think 
the BLRTN has helped us communi- 
cate innovative ideas and practices to 
each other across the state. BLRTN 
has also helped many isolated rural 
teachers stay connected with impor- 
tant developments occurring in our 
state and the rest of the country. For 
teachers in Juneau, connection and 
communication are important. We 
value our affiliations with BLRTN 
teachers who live in smaller commu- 
nities across the state, where people 
have different languages and cultures. 
Juneau is Alaska’s capital, and so it’s 
important for us to know and appreci- 
ate all the diverse communities across 
Alaska, their differing languages and 
literacies. 

DK: Is there a new wave of profes- 
sional development moving through 



Alaska? And what has the BLRTN 
done to help redirect staff develop- 
ment? 

AC: For many of us in this state, the 
BLRTN has encouraged a paradigm 
shift in the way we think about profes- 
sional development. Teachers are be- 
ginning to seek professional develop- 
ment opportunities that meet the stan- 
dards of rigor and excellence that 
Bread Loaf sets. Another paradigm 
shift in professional development is 
the increasing use of telecommunica- 
tions by Alaska teachers to communi- 
cate with other teachers in the lower 
48. Because we are a young state and 
because there are relatively few people 
in Alaska, we are able to do some 
things here that are innovative. Many 
people come to Alaska with a sort of 
rugged individualism and creativity, 
and new ideas are continually being 
tried. Being able to share those ideas 
with knowledgeable teachers in the 
lower 48 is important to us because it 
helps us reflect on our own practice. 
The use of telecommunications is an 
important part of professional devel- 
opment, though it can’t substitute for 
positive relationships forged in face- 
to-face meetings, institutes, follow-up 
seminars, weekend courses, and state 
conferences. These face-to-face meet- 
ings that Bread Loaf encourages, and 
often sponsors, have been absolutely 
vital because they help sustain ongo- 
ing professional development and col- 
laboration within an expanding net- 
work of teachers. 

DK: Alaska is at the forefront on the 
issue of setting standards in educa- 
tion. What has been done thus far? 

AC: Alaska is interested in setting 
high standards for students, teachers, 
and schools. For example, we adopted 
standards in English and Language 
Arts four years ago. We asked the 




Annie Calkins, Assistant Superintendent of 
Juneau School District 



question, “What do we want all Alas- 
kan students to know and be able to do 
by the time they leave the school sys- 
tem?” And then with a broad-based 
committee of 40 people from across 
the state including parents, teachers, 
university faculty, business people, 
and student representatives, we spent a 
year and a half thinking about that 
question. Because it was a serious un- 
dertaking and because the Commis- 
sioner of Education at the time was 
very committed to broad-based input, 
we traveled the state and revised nu- 
merous drafts of those standards. 

When the state board finally adopted 
them, they were voluntary standards, 
and each school district could choose 
how to implement them. This hap- 
pened several years before the federal 
emphasis on standards came to the 
forefront. We in Alaska were therefore 
several steps ahead in thinking about 
authentic assessment, in designing 
real-world applications, in having par- 
ents and communities involved in the 
assessment process, in having students 
reflect on their own work, in address- 
ing the issues of equity for all stu- 
dents, and in determining what was 
appropriate for all kids: for those with 
special needs, for students with a sec- 
ond language, for indigenous people, 
for home-schooled students, for char- 



4 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



ter school students. In Juneau we’ve 
actually been involved for the past 
eight years looking seriously at the 
issues of standards and assessment. 

DK: How has BLRTN helped other 
Alaska teachers to he involved in the 
development of standards? 

AC: BLRTN has been an important 
contributor to the work we’ve done 
with setting standards. Thanks to 
BLRTN, our work represents schools 
across the state: the smallest villages, 
bilingual communities, and geographi- 
cally remote places. BLRTN has 
helped us to understand how diverse 
our schools and communities are and 
at the same time to discover what we 
have in common. BLRTN has helped 
us to think about standards, to discuss 
issues on line, to place those issues on 
agendas in seminars, institutes, and 
university classrooms. BLRTN helps 
us to understand the value of a net- 
work. 

DK: What is the value of a teacher 
network? How do they empower 
teachers ? 

AC: As an administrator of a district 
where several teachers have partici- 
pated in Bread Loaf Institutes and in 
the BLRTN, I have had the opportu- 







nity to observe firsthand how a net- 
work benefits teachers professionally. 
They come back from Bread Loafs 
Institutes with a renewed zeal to advo- 
cate for all children and to improve the 
overall education system. They want 
to share what they know and to be 
supportive of their teacher colleagues, 
and they are committed to innovation 
and new ideas. BLRTN has helped to 
create a 
strong com- 
munity of 
teachers in 
our state, and 
this is espe- 
cially signifi- 
cant since we 
are a geo- 
graphically 
isolated group 
of people. I 
believe a lot of people come to Alaska 
because they love space and because 
they love the independence they find 
here; but in living here for a period of 
years, one realizes how important a 
strong community of like-minded, in- 
terested, creative people really is. As a 
state, Alaska is a very young place, 
and we are dealing with many issues 
concerning education, land use and 
our natural resources, and subsistence 
issues with Native people. These are 
and will continue to be big issues on 




the national agenda as well as on our 
state agenda. It’s only through a sense 
of mutual respect and community that 
this state will preserve what is best 
about this place. I think we can look 
for leadership from networks of teach- 
ers who are working with parents and 
children with a respect for diversity of 
the languages, the land, and the cul- 
tures of people who live in Alaska. 



DK: Now that there is an annual 
Bread Loaf Institute in Juneau, what 
qualities do you hope to find in teach- 
ers who are recruited to the Institute? 

AC: Because Alaska is such a huge 
state, we need leaders. We need 
people who are willing to contribute to 
discussions beyond their own class- 
rooms, to discussions at district and 
state levels. We also look at geogra- 
phy and want to attract teachers from 
all areas in the state because that kind 
of representation strengthens our state- 
wide network. We hope to attract 
teachers who will engage with school 
boards, talk to the public, write and 
publish, and make a commitment to 
the state’s teaching profession. ¥ 



The use of telecommunications is an 
important part of professional 
development, though it can’t substitute for 
positive relationships forged in face-to-face 
meetings, institutes, follow-up seminars, 
weekend courses, and state conferences. 



BLRTN Telecommunications Director Rocky Gooch with Doug Keel, 
Education Associate of South Carolina Department of Education 



I K|C fiddle bury, Vermont 



2H 



25 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Teacher Networks at Bread Loaf: 
The Endless Summer 



by Diana Jaramillo 
Pojoaque High School 
Pojoaque, NM 

C ome May, you might find me at 
my desk in my classroom with 
my head in my hands asking myself, 
“What am I doing here? I need a new 
job!” Fortunately, by the time August 
comes around and I’ve had time to at- 
tend a two-week AP Summer Institute, 
a Foxfire Workshop, or a reading 
seminar, I am eager to get back to my 
classroom. Because the school year is 
so hectic, summer is the only available 
time for teachers to pursue profes- 
sional development opportunities. 

This past summer was a little different, 
however. I furthered my education as I 
have done every summer, but this year 
I was awarded a fellowship to attend 
the Bread Loaf School of English as a 
member of the Bread Loaf Rural Chal- 
lenge Network, an opportunity funded 
by the Rural Challenge. At Bread Loaf 
I met with other teachers in intensive 
writing and literature classes. 

I have to admit I was reluc- 
tant to attend Bread Loaf after a very 



exhausting and challenging school 
year. I wanted to sleep late and read 
those books I’d set aside. I wanted to 
visit the new Georgia O’Keeffe mu- 
seum. I wanted eat a Navajo taco and 
visit the exhibits at Indian Market. I 
wanted to dance at the Spanish Market. 
Even though I had been reading about 
Bread Loaf for several years, I had so 



many things I wanted to do. Another 
look at the course listings, however, 
convinced me I really did want to go. 

And I did go. I enrolled in 
the “Women’s Fictions” class because 
I wanted to read Tony Morrison, Edith 
Wharton, Nella Larsen, Willa Cather, 
Gertrude Stein, Sarah Ome Jewett, 
Charlotte Perkins Gilman, Cynthia 
Ozick, and Zora Neale Hurston. What 
a list! I knew this was going to be a 
good experience for me, an inveterate 
book worm [Editor’s Note: see page 
42 for Summer of ’98 Bread Loaf 
course list]. My other course, “Writing 
about Learning,” proved as interest- 
ing. I enrolled in it because I hoped 
the writing I would do in the course 
would help me to document my own 
learning about how to be an effective 
teacher. 

The Writing about Learning 
class, taught by Dixie Goswami, was 
divided into two large groups, and 
each group was divided into smaller 
groups of three. This structure allowed 
us to share ideas with the larger group 
on line and work face-to-face in small 
groups to develop our writing. Small 
groups served their members by help- 
ing them clarify the ideas in telling 
their stories. 

Josina 

Reaves, Laura 
VanDerPloeg and 
I were in a group. 
The three of us 
seemed so differ- 
ent, yet the differ- 
ence made us a 
good group, and I 
was energized by their youth and en- 
thusiasm. I immediately knew they 
would be good for me. They in turn 
saw me, a teacher for fifteen years, as 
a voice of experience. Each of us was 
writing a nonfiction account dealing 
with a classroom issue. 

Josina’s story about her first 
years of teaching rekindled memories 



What made this a unique graduate 
course was that everyone was involved 
in a collaborative endeavor that 
consisted of many individuals’ goals 



o 

ERIC - 

jLV 




Diana Jaramillo , Pojoaque High School 



of the insecurity I experienced during 
my first year as a teacher. Josina 
wanted to be a good teacher, but she 
did not know what that meant. As she 
described her experience of being 
thrust into a room of cocky tenth grad- 
ers, I remembered my own fears when 
I first faced those students alone. 
Josina told her story with a sense of 
humor, though, and I laughed with her 
as she laughed at herself. But I also 
knew firsthand the loneliness Josina 
felt. Most people don’t know that 
teaching can be a lonely profession. 

Laura’s story, on the other 
hand, was primarily about students, 
and their discovery of language as a 
powerful tool of self-actualization. 
When Laura’s students disagreed with 
a school policy that dictated seating 
arrangement during the lunch period, 
they voiced their objections loudly and 
impulsively, and the school adminis- 
tration rebuffed their complaints. 
Laura’s story explained how she har- 
nessed her students’ passion and en- 
ergy toward putting their thoughts to 
paper, using the situation as a reason 
to do some action writing. Laura’s 
story was complicated by the politics 
of school discourse: who talks and 
who gets listened to. When students 
talk, does the administration listen? 

Do their teachers always listen? 

As I sat in this class, listening 
to the accounts of experienced teach- 
ers from Vermont, New York, Wis- 
consin, Mississippi, and many other 



29 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



places, I realized how much this was 
helping me. I felt a validation and was 
impressed by the commitment and 
concern for students expressed by 
those teachers. As I listened, it oc- 
curred to me that each of us was set- 
ting goals according to his or her own 
experiences, yet the act of sharing and 
encouraging each other to tell our sto- 
ries made our goals relevant to one 
another. 

Anne McManus told us of 
her goal of starting a charter school for 
foster children to give them a sense of 
constancy in their lives. Bette Ford 
described her goal of researching stu- 
dents’ use of African American ver- 
nacular and incorporating new per- 
spectives into her teaching of English. 
A math teacher and avid writer, Sue 
Van Hattum, expressed her goal of 
learning how to incorporate more writ- 
ing activities into her math curricu- 
lum. 

As I listened to these stories 
and shared my own, I realized that the 
varied interests of the participants 
made this an especially instructive and 
remarkable experience. The class was 



rich with the stories from different 
geographies, ethnic groups, and cul- 
tural experiences. We listened, asked 
questions of one another, and even 
ventured a suggestion or two. We 
shared our writing with our small 
groups, our larger group, the entire 
class, and finally with our professor 
Dixie Goswami and visiting profes- 
sors Andrea Lunsford, Jackie Royster, 
Courtney Cazden, and other guests 
Betty Bailey, Chris Benson, and Scott 
Christian. 

Each person in the class had 
something valuable to say, and the 
visitors had something valuable to of- 
fer. Dixie Goswami asked questions 
about our intentions in the writing. 
Andrea Lunsford asked us to consider 
the varieties of English that stem from 
different geographic regions and so- 
cial, cultural, or ethnic groups. Jackie 
Royster read our stories and offered 
suggestions as to publication possibili- 
ties. Courtney Cazden spoke with us 
about her friendship with author 
Vivian Paley, whom we were reading 
and discussing on line. Betty, Chris, 
and Scott were generous in helping us 



craft the writing. What made this a 
unique graduate course was that ev- 
eryone was involved in a collaborative 
endeavor that consisted of many indi- 
viduals’ goals. While the discussions 
in class were engaging, by no means 
did they end in the classroom; the dis- 
cussions continued with as much en- 
thusiasm and in more depth on line. It 
was intense and meaningful, and it 
didn’t end when we left Vermont. We 
are still communicating via BreadNet. 

I came away from the Writ- 
ing about Learning class with a piece 
of writing in progress and with a net- 
work of wonderful teachers who are 
there at the click of a mouse to offer 
help should I ask. The network on line 
functions to sustain the unique activity 
that was spawned in class. I came 
away with the validation that I am in 
an important profession, and what I do 
is meaningful work. When August 
arrived those feelings that I was expe- 
riencing in May were lost to the wind, 
and I was ready to return to my class- 
room with renewed spirit and vigor. 'W 




(from left) Bread Loaf students Josina Reaves and Laura VanDerPloeg, 
Bread Loaf faculty member Jackie Royster ; and Diana Jaramillo 






iddlebury , Vermont 



30 



27 




Fall / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Stepping Aside to See Ourselves 



Scott Christian 

Professional Education Center 
University of Alaska-Southeast 
Juneau , AK 

D uring the first five years of the 
Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Net- 
work, Research for Action (RFA), a 
nonprofit organization in Philadelphia, 
documented and assessed the changes 
that occurred in the professional lives 
of participating rural teachers, in their 
classrooms, and in their schools. In 
September, 1997, RFA researchers 
Eva Gold, Elaine Simon and Alisa 
Belzer issued a report “Networking 
across Boundaries of Place, Culture 
and Role,” presenting findings in four 
central areas: 

• BLRTN and the Bread Loaf 
Mission 

• Text, Talk and Telecommunica- 
tions 

• Building Powerful Educational 
Change Networks 
• Meeting the Challenge of Mak- 
ing Change in Rural Schools 
(see excerpts of RFA’s findings 
reprinted on page 29). 

The culmination of in-depth 
case studies, as well as numerous in- 
terviews and surveys, this document 
captures much of the power and en- 
ergy of the network. It describes not 
only the influence that Bread Loaf has 
on teachers, but the effect that the 
BLRTN has had on the Bread Loaf 
School of English itself. The research- 
ers report that teachers and students 
acquire knowledge and skill in inte- 
grating technology and teaching de- 
velopmentally, with distinct patterns 
emerging across the network. Most 
importantly, the report identifies the 
influences that the network has on ru- 
ral schools and communities. The 
project has been generative and flex- 
ible, moving in some unanticipated 
directions. 

As BLRTN moves into its 
second cycle (1997-2001) and tries to 



find ways to sustain and nourish 
growth within the network, BLRTN 
teachers, led by Scott Christian in con- 
sultation with Eva Gold of Research 
for Action, will document their 
BLRTN activities with the focus on 
student performance and understand- 
ing. In addition to surveys and inter- 
views, which will provide information 
about the entire network, we are ask- 
ing teachers, students and administra- 
tors throughout the network to as- 
semble portfolios which document a 
period of time when a classroom or 
school is engaged in a network activ- 
ity (see portfolio guide below). These 
portfolios will record — and interpret 



from several perspectives — what goes 
on in teachers’ classrooms, their 
schools and communities. Compiling 
and analyzing these performance port- 
folios will help us understand the rela- 
tionship between professional growth 
and classroom practice and the phi- 
losophy and practices of the Rural 
Teacher Network. Learning to docu- 
ment change and to become reflective 
teachers and students is an important 
part of this process, and analysis of 
these documents will help BLRTN 
teachers to view their professional 
achievements as part of the mission of 
the BLRTN. 

Over the next five years, we 
expect that the processes by which we 
document, evaluate, and reflect on our 
work will encourage and enable teach- 
ers to become researchers in their own 
classrooms and communities. W 



BLRTN Project Portfolio Guide 

Purpose: The purpose of the Project Portfolio is to document the work of students and 
teachers in the Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network in order to better understand how 
students and teachers learn. 



Tasks: 

1. Collect photos, drawings, video tapes and samples of student written work. 

2. Save project planning material (notes, charts, calendars, lesson plans). 

3. Write reflectively about the critical questions surrounding the project. 

4. Prepare a transcript of online work (Doesn't have to be fancy!). 

5. Collaboratively analyze the online discourse. 

6. Conduct and record one hour of focused interviews about the project. 



Persons Responsible 
teachers & students 
teachers 

teachers & students 
teachers & students 
teachers, students & principals 
teachers 



Critical Questions: Planning and Instruction 



What was the context of the 
project? 

What was the time line? 

What kinds of resources were 
used? 

How were parents and the 
community involved? 



What did the students do? 

What did the online component of 
the project look like? 

What kinds of decisions did 
students make? 

What were some of the essential 
questions that students grappled 
with? 



As you planned the project, how 
was the development guided 
by local curriculum, standards 
or standards frameworks? 

How were the planning and 
instruction influenced by your 
courses at Bread Loaf and your 
collaboration with other Bread 
Loaf teachers? 



Critical Qi 


uestions: Reflection a 


nd Analysis 


What did the students seem to 
enjoy most about the project? 
What did the students seem to 
find most challenging? 


What does this work say to you 
about student learning? 


If you were to do this project 
again, what would you do 
differently? 



This guide was developed by the Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network, adapted from work by the 
Harvard Research and Evaluation Team for the Annenberg Rural Challenge, 1997. 






Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



Research for Action Submits 
Four- Year Report on BLRTN 



A s the Bread Loaf Rural Teacher 
Network (BLRTN) finished its 
fifth year of operation (1997), the 
evaluation team from Research for 
Action, a Philadelphia-based nonprofit 
for community development, submit- 
ted its summary report. Eva Gold, 

Alisa Belzer, and Elaine Simon 
authored the report entitled “Network- 
ing across Boundaries of Place, Cul- 
ture, and Role,” which describes the 
positive beneficial contributions of 
BLRTN to students and teachers in 
schools in rural communities in six 
states: Alaska, Arizona, Mississippi, 
New Mexico, South Carolina, and 
Vermont. 

This report is the culmination 
of a four-year evaluation of the 
BLRTN program. Some key findings 
of the report (pages 53-56) are quoted 
below: 

* Cohorts of rural public school 
teachers coming to the Bread Loaf 
School of English and the empha- 
sis on telecommunications in the 
DeWitt-Wallace grant influenced 
the Bread Loaf School itself. Pro- 
gram planners learned the impor- 
tance of being flexible to a wider 
range of life styles and cultural 
expectations, which often meant 
altering norms for life on the 
Bread Loaf campuses. . . . 
[V]arying cultural backgrounds 
created different expectations for 
the ways in which members 
would be participants. . . . Bread 
Loaf faculty made changes in 
their courses and classrooms as a 
result of BLRTN. Some faculty 
learned to connect to teachers 
with a wider range of experiential 
and academic backgrounds than 
traditional Bread Loaf students. 
Others discovered that the greater 
range of experiences BLRTN 
teachers brought to their reading 
of texts and writing deepened dis- 
cussion of ethnic and gender is- 



sues. . . . The integration of tech- 
nology into the grant altered 
classroom boundaries: discussion 
which started in class often con- 
tinued on line after class. The 
expanding boundaries of the 
classroom carried over beyond the 
summer as small numbers of fac- 
ulty continued discussions with 
teachers during the school 
year. . . . 

* Learning to use technology in 
classrooms and to make telecom- 
puting an integral part of the cur- 
riculum is a developmental pro- 
cess that occurs over a period of 
years and requires intensive, di- 
rect and personalized support. 
Telecommunications can contrib- 
ute to creating student-centered 
learning environments that are 
inquiry-based. . . . The support of 
local administrators, principals, 
and school district personnel is 
often critical to getting technol- 
ogy inside classrooms. When this 
kind of support is forthcoming, 
Fellows often were repositioned 
in their schools, either formally or 
informally, to become leaders in 
using technology. . . . Reading 
and writing on line demand new 
teaching strategies; in particular 
they demand a shift from class- 
rooms where students’ reading 
and writing are assigned by the 
teacher for evaluative purposes to 
classrooms where reading and 
writing originate with students for 
communicative purposes with 
audiences outside the class- 
room. . . . Telecommunications 
has taken both teachers and stu- 
dents into previously unexplored 
subject areas through interdisci- 
plinary projects. In these circum- 
stances, the questions of both 
teachers and students become the 
basis for exploration and learning, 
making inquiry a more central 



feature of classroom pedagogy.... 

* An unanticipated outcome of 
the project was the influence it 
has had on local schools. Partner- 
ships have formed between 
BLRTN and the rural schools 
from which Fellows came. Fel- 
lows employed a variety of strate- 
gies for bringing new ideas to 
their local schools. . . . Teacher 
leaders used strategies congruent 
with circumstances in their local 
schools which they adapted from 
year to year with changes such as 
a new administration at the 
school, district, or state levels. . . . 
Although BLRTN’s primary iden- 
tity is as a professional network 
for Fellows and their students, it 
has begun to include principals, 
superintendents, and other teach- 
ers .. . [creating] a web of support 
for Fellows and facilitating 
school-wide change. . . . 

* BLRTN is a network for and in 
rural settings. It intentionally 
takes on one of the major dilem- 
mas of rural education: affirming 
tradition while introducing new 
ideas and opportunities. BLRTN 
has reduced the professional iso- 
lation of many rural teachers 
through their participation in the 
summer program and their online 
communication with other profes- 
sionals. . . . Use of telecommuni- 
cations in BLRTN sites supports a 
“pedagogy of place” that brings 
teachers and students simulta- 
neously into an appreciative yet 
critical stance toward their own 
community. It has reconnected the 
schooling process to the local 
community and thereby helped 
gain local support for academic 
work. Through online communi- 
cation across geographical and 
cultural differences, rural students 
have gained opportunities to por- 
tray themselves in their depth and 
variation. This has contributed to 
their sense of value of their own 
traditions and culture and has 
helped to challenge stereotypes of 
themselves as well as others, m 



IC iddlebury, Vermont 



*■ 

L v; 



90 



29 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Exchanging Lives: Middle School Writers Online : 
A Review 



by Chris Benson 
Clemson University 
Clemson , SC 



T^xchanging Lives: Middle School 
LL Writers Online (1997), a book by 
BLRTN Fellow and Researcher Scott 
Christian, was published by NCTE 
last summer. This book tells the story 
of a collaborative inquiry he and other 
BLRTN Fellows conducted with their 
students on line. Middle school stu- 
dents from all parts of the country — 
Alaska, Vermont, Mississippi, and 
New Mexico — read and wrote to each 
other about The Diary of Anne Frank. 
This inquiry and exchange of ideas 
resulted in a transcript of over one 
hundred single-spaced pages of writ- 
ings by teachers and students, from 
which Scott Christian quotes gener- 
ously as he describes the rare species 
of student (and teacher) writing that is 
generated by online collaboration. 

The book focuses on the pur- 
pose of the writing students did in the 
project, suggesting that real social 
contexts for writing are far richer in 
language use than narrow academic 
contexts in which students write 
merely for teachers to test their knowl- 
edge. The real-life rhetorical context 
of writing to peers in the Anne Frank 
project provided students with many 
purposes for writing, and when stu- 
dents apply their writing to multiple 
rhetorical tasks, their communication 
is varied, sincere, funny, detailed, pas- 
sionate, and engaging. 

Exchanging Lives provides a 
taxonomy of student writing that is 
useful to teachers because it presents 
the extraordinary range of writing and 
thinking of which typical middle 
school students are capable, and there 
are many examples. Scott Christian 
identifies a type of writing, which he 
calls “striving writing,” that experi- 
ments with language (metaphor, hu- 




mor, analogy, and wordplay); ex- 
presses sincerity; evidences a high 
level of risk-taking; provides insight 
into the writer’s life; and speculates 
about ideas. This is student writing at 
its best in a rich social context. 

While the social, experimen- 
tal, and risk-taking nature of the writ- 
ing may result in occasional “break- 
ing” of the rules of grammar, the con- 
tent of the writing and the quality of 
thought cannot be faulted. Here’s 
Shanna Duggar, from Guntown 
Middle School in Mississippi, giving 
an analysis of Anne Frank’s relation- 
ship to her family in the play adapta- 
tion of the diary: 

. . . Anne’s views on life are very 
much like her father’s. Mrs. Frank 
is quite a perfectionist in my way 
of thinking. Anne cannot and will 
not even make an attempt to try to 
behave the way her mother would 
like her to. She finds her a boring 
and dull character. If you are to 
enjoy life, you should definitely 
have a sense of humor. Anne can- 
not begin to imagine sitting on the 
sofa, still, knitting away. She 
would much rather be outside in 
her own world, lazily picking a 
bouquet of flowers and breathing 
in their fresh sweet beauty. Mrs. 
Frank is incapable of feeling the 
same feelings that Anne pos- 
sesses. It is quite obvious that 
Mrs. Frank favors Margot and is 
continuously complaining that 
Anne doesn’t act like a young 
lady like her sister. “Margot, 
Margot, Margot!” Anne cries out 
angrily in one of the scenes of the 
play. This young girl is caught in 
a web of silences and fear from 
which she cannot escape. She is a 
child longing to feel the sunshine, 
eat ice cream again, and smell the 
cool morning air. Her father wor- 
ries about Anne much more than 
Margot, and I believe that Anne 



should be worried about more 
than her tame sister. She is like a 
wild horse that even the best cow- 
boys could not defeat. . . . (83) 

In another sample of striving 
writing, student writer Twyla 
Schasteen, of Unalaska, Alaska, puts 
herself in Anne Frank’s shoes and 
imagines what it would be like to be a 
teenager in hiding for two years. 

Twyla speculates what it would be 
like to be released from hiding: 

After being in hiding for two 
years, once I got out I would 
probably still be paranoid to go 
outside, especially after a war. 

But I would want to see all my 
friends. Talk with them and go 
out to dinner, play basketball and 
go bowling at the Fishing-N- 
Bowl. 

You see, where I live we 
don’t have any malls, fast food, or 
anything like that. We have beau- 
tiful nature, two grocery stores, 
and a school and a bowling alley. 

Today is the 27th of January 
and it is so beautiful outside with 
perfect skiing snow. The sun 
makes the bay sparkle with the 
reflection of the nearby mountains 
on it. And surprisingly there is no 
wind! I was just thinking how 
wonderful it would be to come out 
of hiding on this day. [Scott 
Christian’s italics] 

The highly interactive social context 
of the telecommunications exchange 
enables students in these examples to 
write sincerely and articulately to their 
peers and teachers about the relevancy 
of literature to their lives. Through 
numerous other examples in the book, 
Scott Christian allows student writers 
to exhibit the wide range of writing 
skills they are capable of when they 
have opportunities to write in socially 
interactive forums. « 



33 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



You Have Mail with Telecommunications 




Emily Quirion and Doug Cummings ofWaccamaw High School 



by Emily Quirion , Junior 
Waccamaw High School 
Pawleys Island , SC 

F or the past five years, Waccamaw 
High School, in Pawleys Island, 
South Carolina, has been a role model 
and leader among schools by offering 
a telecommunications, or BreadNet, 
class as part of its course curriculum. 
Ms. Mary Ginny DuBose’s BreadNet 
class offers many exciting opportuni- 
ties for students at Waccamaw. From 
participating in online conferences to 
becoming journalists, most of us strive 
to take advantage of them all. 

One of the best features about 
the BreadNet class is that it is almost 
entirely student-run. As this is my first 
year participating in the telecommuni- 
cations class (the class can be taken as 
an elective more than once), I was 
thrilled to learn that I would have a 
chance to become an authority on run- 
ning conferences on the Internet and 
organizing cultural exchanges between 
students in remote places in our own 
country and in other countries. In the 
process, my classmates and I have 
learned how to manage our time more 
efficiently, which is crucial for any 
class, but even more so for this unique 
one. If time is not organized and the 
conferences are not efficiently run, 
weeks can go by without communicat- 
ing with our partners across the world. 
By honing our management skills, we 
have learned to prevent a problem 
such as this from occurring. 

These newly discovered lead- 
ership and management skills develop 
as we communicate with partners in 
South Africa, Arizona, New Mexico, 
and Pakistan. Learning about these 
cultures has opened our minds to new 
ideas about the political events and 
social organization in these different 
regions. Talking to kids in South Af- 
rica, for example, and learning about 
their typical daily routine, their reli- 
gious practices, and their country’s 
political activities fascinate everyone 



in the class- 
room. The New 
Mexico and 
Arizona confer- 
ences teach us 
just how differ- 
ent life can be 
even among 
people within 
the boundaries 
of our own 
country. In the 
Pakistan confer- 
ence, we have 
learned about 
the political as- 
pects in their 
nation, and ev- 
eryone has come to realize just how 
lucky Americans are. This new appre- 
ciation for the world around us and the 
fascinating knowledge gained about 
other cultures and life-styles make the 
teleconferences by far the favorite part 
of the BreadNet class. 

The conferences are wonderful 
experiences, but not without problems. 
Computer breakdowns and scheduling 
differences between our class and stu- 
dents in the remote schools conspire to 
frustrate our communication. Yet even 
more difficult are the misunderstand- 
ings that can arise when discussing cul- 
tural topics like politics and religion. 
We have learned that writing effec- 
tively is a complex process that must be 
done carefully and thoughtfully. We’ve 
learned to be sensitive about what we 
say to our peers in other cultures. 

Political problems have dis- 
abled our communication with Pakistan 
frequently this year. In fact, because of 
the many strikes and political boycotts, 
our partners have only been able to 
write a couple of times instead of the 
weekly correspondence we had hoped 
to receive from them. One particular 
strike against the transportation system 
lasted for weeks. Because of this, our 
partners were unable to travel to their 
school to communicate with us. 

Scheduling problems occur 
especially when writing to our partners 



in South Africa. At the very beginning 
of the conference, we learned that our 
partners were having a difficult time 
squeezing our correspondence into 
their busy schedules. Exams were 
quickly approaching for them and 
their year was coming to a close as 
ours was beginning. It was very disap- 
pointing to discover that while we 
were busy in school, they were on 
their spring and summer breaks! 

The most common and dis- 
couraging problem is that of computer 
difficulties. Instead of the usual chalk- 
board and textbooks, our class relies 
daily on the use of our computers and 
nothing can be achieved without them. 
Our computers, which are decent but 
not state-of-the-art, present us with 
problems that we can’t solve on our 
own. Reliable equipment has proved 
to be an essential ingredient to suc- 
cess. While heavy dependence on the 
computer makes up the many unique 
aspects of this class, it often produces 
the frustrating parts as well. 

In spite of, or perhaps be- 
cause of, these challenges, the tele- 
communications class is still one of 
the most popular, educational, and in- 
teractive classrooms at our school. For 
me, the class has been a fun way to 
develop my leadership and organiza- 
tional skills! « 



v L 



iddlebury , Vermont 



34 



31 



Fall / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Between Two Schools: 
Poetry, Magic, Connection 



by Doris A. Ezell-Schmitz 
Chester Middle School 
Chester , SC 

I t could have been the magic of 
Oxford’s bursting blue sky that 
nudged seventh grade language arts 
teachers Erika Brett and me to begin 
talking about a poetry project between 
our schools nestled in small rural 
places in different parts of the nation: 
Hatch Valley Middle School in Hatch, 
New Mexico, and Chester Middle 
School in Chester, South Carolina. 
Whatever it was proved powerful 
enough to insist that we commit to 
getting our students matched up with 
project partners shortly after school 
started. 

Erika and I sounded like two 
teenagers getting ready for the prom 
as we began to sketch out and plan the 
project, beginning with “bio-poems.” 
“I’ll start this on my end 
since I’ve got a bio-poetry pattern that 
they love!” Erika said. “Yours can re- 
spond in, say, two weeks time — two 
weeks is about what we’ll shoot for 
each time. Don’t you think every two 
weeks is a good interval for respond- 
ing?” I nodded yes. 

We chatted about the 
project’s objectives, time-line, and 
duration as we sipped British tea dur- 
ing a late afternoon in July of 1996. 
“Make certain to log into BreadNet for 
our poems!” 

“I’ll have to collect my stu- 
dents’ work and send it in care of a 
snail,” I told Erika. “Our computer 
system is sort of, well, primitive.” 
(And it was until this year when 
Chester County School District re- 
ceived a one million dollar technology 
grant that purchased computers and 
software for schools in the district.) 



Start-up time for our schools 
varied, thereby delaying our begin- 
ning. But two weeks isn’t so bad; 
promptly during the second week of 
September, our collaborative venture, 
“All About What’s All About,” offi- 
cially commenced. 

As promised, Erika’s 28 stu- 
dents’ bio-poems came over the wires 
and into our classroom like brilliant 
slants of New Mexico sun. Manuela, 
paired with O’Neale, wrote: 

Manuela 

Sensitive, talkative, shy, friendly 

Related to his parents 

Cares deeply about his family 

Who feels happy 

Who needs money 

Who gives to a friend 

Who fears life 

Who would like to see the world 
at peace 

O’ Neale responded in two weeks with 
the following: 

O’Neale 

Brother of two, son of four 
Crazy most of the time, very 
artistic. 

Related to all who use their 
imagination. 

Cares deeply about his pets 
Who needs all he can get 
Who gives what he can 
Who fears the last grain of sand 
in earth’s hourglass fade away 
Resident of a weird endless 
imagination. 

Using the bio-poems helped students 
to get into the project and become 
acquainted with their writing partners. 
Erika and I had intended for the stu- 
dents to learn that poetry says a little 
while telling a lot. And now they 
were ready to begin. 



Another of the project’s ob- 
jectives was to allow students to ob- 
serve their surroundings through sea- 
sonal changes along with celebrating 
the month’s unique gifts. Soon after 
the Christmas holidays, I took my stu- 
dents on a winter walk during which 
they had to experience January’s pres- 
ence. Yes, it was cold enough for 
folks to exclaim “Brrr!” But the stu- 
dents seemed happy to be involved in 
this different learning technique and 
welcomed the follow-up assignment: 
“Based on impressions collected dur- 
ing our winter walk, compose a poem 
about January.” The response was 
phenomenal. Samples lifted from this 
project segment included: 

January Joy 

J is for the juice we drink to give 
our bodies fluid. 

A is for absent days we are out of 
school because of snow. 

N is for nippy weather we have. 

U is for the umbrella we carry to 
protect our heads. 

A is for the awesome brightness 
of the snow. 

R is for the rain that comes. 

Y is for the yummy soup we eat 
to keep us warm. 

— Shameka 



“Ms. Ezell,” Shameka asked, 
“Do you think Marlynn will like my 
poem?” 

“I’m sure she will.” I told 
Shameka how much her own writing 
had improved since last September. 

Marlynn responded with an 
online note commending Shameka’ s 
poem and posting her own, “January.” 

January 

January, big angel of land, dead 
trees, 

thirsty grass, mountains bursting 
up. 

Humans making snowmen, snow 
angels, laughing 
and having fun. 

January is chimneys warming 



32 



35 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 




Erika Brett and students of Hatch, NM ' who corresponded with Doris Ezell 
and students from Chester ; SC 



your house while 
you drink hot chocolate. 

January is going back to school, 
seeing friends; 
when Christmas ends with 
sadness, yet happiness. 
January is the sound of children 
laughing in the snow, 
children coughing when they 
catch colds. It is silence 
in the night when you’re snuggled 
in your warm blankets. 

— Marlynn 

By the end of January, 

Erika’s students and mine had settled 
into a comfortable writing exchange. 
They had learned to manage time 
more wisely, realizing that fair game 
meant that everybody wrote to his or 
her partner so that every partner re- 
ceived poetry mail items. 

We took project breathers in 
March and April to accommodate 
state-wide testing in New Mexico and 
South Carolina. My students moaned 
and groaned and tried to get out of 
doing the required review skills. “Let 
us write poetry, Ms. Ezell!” they 
begged. “We’ll be good.” They 
needed to know that this would be 
done regardless ! 



Erika sent us an online pat- 
tern for color poems, along with a 
model. Our students got involved 
with this activity, I guess, because it 
offered so many opportunities to be 
creative. Students could look at the 
colors of the rainbow in terms of self, 
ideas, place, or environment. 

Blue 

Blue is the sky on the sunniest 
Southwest day 

and me at sunset on a dark cold 
evening. 

Ripened blueberries squish blue 
in my mouth. 

The mist of waterfalls and wild 
cold wind make me feel 
blue. 

Blue is the sound of a lost bird 
crying, and the snow hitting a 
window. 

Blue is nature calling out as it 
changes. 

— Jennifer 
( Hatch Middle ) 

And Jennifer’s partner responded with 
the following: 



Blue 

Blue is the tumble of ocean 
waves. 

Blue is the smell of summer. 

Blue is a paint-bucket splash, 
water, ice, and even a sky. 

Blue is love and sadness. 

Blue is sweet and tangy. 

It’s flowers and 

clear skies and joy. 

Blue is cold, like ice and snow. 

Blue is fragrance, hail, rain, sleet, 
and snow. 

— Kristie 
(Chester Middle) 



The project culminated with 
our seventh graders’ production of 
literary magazines that featured poetry 
from the exchange. Erika’s students 
produced Under the Rainbow: Paint- 
ing with Poetry . Chester Middle 
School students published Dancing 
Impressions. Erika and I and our stu- 
dents were amazed with the quality in 
the writing. Had it not been for the 
effect of the peer audience provided 
by the context of the exchange, the 
magazines would have lacked both 
content and quality. Students in both 
classrooms felt that since they had a 
“real audience,” their writing had to be 
near perfect. Mine enthusiastically 
used the thesaurus, searching for that 
perfect word. Students who had 
started the school year as writing 
skeptics actually maintained their own 
portfolios and writers’ notebooks and 
boasted about them to other students 
not in the project: “I’m a poet, you 
know! Wanna see my portfolio?” 



ddlebury , Vermont 



36 



33 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Maple Syrup and Desert Sand: 
A Heritage Exchange 



by Carol Zuccaro 
St. Johnsbury Academy 
St. Johnsbury, VT 

B readNet, the online service avail- 
able to Bread Loaf students and 
teachers, has allowed my students to 
participate in a variety of cultural and 
literary exchanges with teachers and 
students at great distances during the 
past five years. Some of these online 
exchanges have been literature-based 
while others have been related to place 
or culture. These exchanges have 
given students in my small town of St. 
Johnsbury, Vermont, an opportunity to 
correspond via telecommunications 
with students from other states and 
cultures. 

One of the most successful 
classroom exchanges in which I have 
participated has been an online cul- 
tural exchange with Vicki Hunt of 
Peoria High School, Peoria, Arizona. 

In these exchanges, my junior-level 
writing classes corresponded with 
Vicki’s eleventh grade classes. Our 
purpose, in addition to fulfilling writ- 
ing components in the curriculum, has 
been to foster a sense of identity in our 
students, an appreciation of their own 
culture, and an understanding of other 
cultures. We call this project a “Heri- 
tage Exchange” after Countee 
Cullen’s poem “Heritage.” We have 
just completed our fourth such ex- 
change. 

Our exchange began sponta- 
neously when I received an online 
message from Vicki four years ago 
asking if I would be interested in hav- 
ing my students reply to her students’ 
poems about heritage. As part of a 
heritage unit, her class had read 
Countee Cullen’s poem “Heritage,” 
which begins, “What is Africa to me?” 
and her students had written poems 
based on Cullen’s format. I agreed to 
do so. Vicki emailed the poems that 



night, and the next day I interrupted 
my own lesson plans to give my stu- 
dents the poems. To facilitate a quick 
turnaround, I gave my students time to 
respond in class. I took their responses 
home with me, typed them that 
evening, uploaded them, and emailed 
them to Vicki that night. (Some Bread 
Loafers enjoy the “luxury” of having 
several computers in their classrooms 
so students can type in their own 
work, but with only one computer in 
my class, I often find it necessary to 
type in their work myself and upload it 
from home.) Vicki’s kids were thrilled 
to get individual responses so quickly. 
My students later wrote their own 
heritage poems to which Vicki’s stu- 
dents responded. That was the extent 
of the exchange that first year, and I 
must say that because of its simplicity 
and swiftness, it remains one of the 
most satisfying I have had. Maybe the 
spontaneity had something to do with 
that as well. 



There is something to be said, 
however, for planning and anticipa- 
tion. That first heritage exchange has 
now become an important part of my 
junior-level writing curriculum and an 
activity that my students eagerly an- 
ticipate. Word must have spread 
among students at St. Johnsbury be- 
cause last fall, during the first week of 
school, one of my students asked, 

“Are we gonna write to those Arizona 
kids like you did last year?” We still 
exchange our own poems and re- 
sponses based on Countee Cullen’s 
poem; however, we now begin by hav- 
ing each student write a short biogra- 
phy of herself as a kind of introduc- 
tion, so the students have a personal 
interest in the person with whom they 
communicate. The first time I did this, 
I merely said, “Write a few facts about 
yourselves and your interests — you 
know, the kinds of things you would 
like to know about them.” However, 
after typing 54 “bios” that began, “I 
am an 1 1th grader at St. Johnsbury 
Academy,” I altered the directions the 
following year. I told them there was 
only one criterion: “Your first sen- 
tence must be interesting, and you 
may not begin with, “My name 
is. . . .” To those who had trouble be- 
ginning any other way, I said, 




Carol Zuccaro (right) with Tilly Warnock , Bread Loaf faculty member and director of the 
Bread Loaf campus in Rowe, New Mexico 




37 



Middlebury College 




Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



“Freewrite your bio any way you 
want; then pull out your most interest- 
ing sentence and start your revision 
with it.” That resulted in much more 
interesting bios, and the students got 
to learn more about each other and 
each other’s life-styles. 

The Arizona students re- 
sponded to our bios and wrote their 
own. Vicki and I try to assure that 
each student gets at least one indi- 
vidual response, and students often 
form “partnerships” for the exchange, 
although they are free to write to other 



students as well. Some of the com- 
ments I hear when I hand out the 
printouts of the Arizona bios are 
amusing: 

“This guy wants to know 
what “muddin”’ is.” 

“Hey, not fair; I want to go to 
Arizona. It’s 103 degrees there, and 
we just had snow on October fourth!” 
“I hope I get a girl.” 

“They don’t have to wear ties 
to school.” 

But besides discovering dif- 
ferences, students also learn that teens 
are the same everywhere. One girl in 
my class chose to respond to a student 
who had mentioned that his parents 
were divorced. Her response began, “I 
have complete sympathy for anyone 
whose parents are divorced; the way 
to put an end to hatred is through 
love.” Her response showed that she 
had found common ground with the 
boy in Peoria. 

The subjects of the poems 
students write in this exchange range 
from ethnic origin, sense of place, an- 
cestors, and family traditions to cur- 
rent family members. My students’ 
poems the first year seemed pat and 
cliched, but now that I’ve made the 



exchange part of a cultural awareness 
unit, the poems reflect more thought- 
fulness and cultural pride. And stu- 
dents pick up on that as their re- 
sponses sometimes show: “You seem 
very proud of your state; I can see 
why you like living in Arizona.” 

In addition to the poems and 
bios, we now exchange “artifact” 
boxes and class videos. Simply a col- 
lection of unique gifts “indigenous” to 
our respective states, the artifact boxes 
have been especially popular. Items 
vary each year, but the staples include 
photos, postcards 
and brochures of 
each state; 
school newspa- 
pers, pins, pen- 
cils, banners, and 
handbooks; hats 
and tee-shirts. 
Since our ex- 
change takes 
place during our 
fall foliage season, we enclose some 
red and orange leaves as well as foli- 
age pictures and student photos. Food 
is always a favorite: maple syrup and 
cheese from Vermont, salsa and blue 
commeal from Arizona. The Arizona 
kids always comment on how sweet 
maple candy is and ask if we eat that 
all the time. Our favorite item from 
Arizona for two years running was a 
rattlesnake skin, with rattler intact. 
We’ve created a sort of “Arizona 
shrine” in my classroom with maga- 
zines, postcards, bottles of desert sand, 
green chiles, and pieces of cottonwood 
trees displayed on bookshelves, and 
photos tacked to the bulletin board. 
Students really love to see what their 
“partner” looks like. Since many of 
my students come from very small 
rural communities nearby, they are 
amazed at the large size of Peoria 
High School and its campus. 

Some of the items placed in 
the artifact boxes are quite creative. 
One Arizona student sent a white pot- 
tery vase he had made. One of my 
girls this year contributed a jar of 
maple syrup that her family had made, 
and some have sent their own photo- 
graphs of moose or deer or snowmo- 



biles. One boy, when the class was 
brainstorming ideas of things to send, 
kiddingly said he would send mud; the 
others convinced him that that was no 
joke since mud is indeed a ubiquitous 
element of Vermont in spring. In fact, 
“mud season” is a common phrase in 
Vermont. He sent mud. All of these 
items, even amusing ones, have helped 
our students understand each other’s 
culture. 

These cultural exchanges 
with Arizona have helped relatively 
isolated kids in northeastern Vermont 
get a glimpse of life in another part of 
the country and of students from many 
ethnic backgrounds. While St. 
Johnsbury has broad cultural diversity 
for a small Vermont town due to the 
Academy’s resident program, we have 
few students from Hispanic or Native 
American ancestry, which Arizona 
does have. In spite of vastly different 
locations, climate, and customs, our 
students discover many commonali- 
ties. They have the same interests, 
concerns, and feelings wherever they 
are. Some of the bios, which have be- 
come more personal and philosophical 
in the last two years, reveal students’ 
feelings about their families, problems 
at school, interest in sports and hob- 
bies, and love of friends. 

While these exchanges are 
unlike traditional student exchange 
programs, telecommunication and arti- 
fact exchanges can help students learn 
a great deal about the geography, to- 
pography, climate, and customs of an- 
other culture as well as make new 
friends. As technology makes our 
world smaller, I am more convinced 
than ever that learning about other cul- 
tures goes a long way toward promot- 
ing acceptance and understanding. W 



These cultural exchanges with Arizona 
have helped relatively isolated kids in 
northeastern Vermont get a glimpse of 
life in another part of the country and of 
students from many ethnic backgrounds. 






ddlebury , Vermont 






35 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



New Mexico and Alaska Border Jumpers 



by Dianna Saiz 

Floyd Dryden Middle School 

Juneau , AK 

I s it dedication or just sheer stub- 
bornness that makes a BreadNet 
project happen? In this case, it took 
absolute, stubborn determination to 
bridge the thousands of miles between 
Anthony, New Mexico, and Juneau, 
Alaska. Last summer at the Bread 
Loaf campus at the Native American 
Preparatory School, we said our good- 
byes surrounded by sun-colored can- 
yon walls under a clear, azure sky. 
Soon I would be headed north to teach 
at a middle school in Juneau. Rose- 
anne Lara joked that she’d come to 
Alaska “maybe someday.” 

“Sure, sure,” I smirked and I 
waved good-bye. Roseanne and I had 
worked together for six years at 
Gadsden Middle School in Anthony, 
NM, becoming close friends, so I in- 
stantly recognized the ironic tone in 
her voice. She had teased me all sum- 
mer because she’d be taking my sev- 
enth grade position and would even be 
moving into my former classroom. An 
intense, challenging summer of study 
at Bread Loaf and the anticipation of 
the coming school year had left both 
of us plagued with self-doubt. 

“Change is good,” we repeated as we 
tried to reassure each other. 

The 1997 school year began 
with long hours, delayed BreadNet 
installation, much stress. First, 
Roseanne and I set up exchange ac- 
tivities between our classrooms using 
snail mail but eventually graduated to 
an online exchange with writing ac- 
tivities. Roseanne’s students live along 
the Mexican-U.S. border and attend a 
school with a population that is 98% 
Hispanic. My new school in Juneau, 
Floyd Dryden Middle School, has a 
mix of white, Native Alaskan, and 
Asian American students. Some of my 
students suggested that we put extra 
stamps on our letters since we were 
mailing them to “another country.” 



The first exchange brought much enthu- 
siasm and a quick lesson in New 
Mexico geography. I recall one of my 
blond-haired, blue-eyed hueros shout- 
ing out: “My New Mexico online part- 
ner has two brothers — I have two broth- 
ers. His favorite sport is basketball — 
my favorite sport is basketball. He likes 
pizza! Cool!” Next, the students wrote 
and responded to “bio-poems,” delight- 
ing in the many commonalities and be- 
coming more curious about differences. 
We decided to produce a short video 
and send original postcards depicting 
our community. 

As we corresponded in 
cyberspace, the idea of Roseanne mak- 
ing the trip to Alaska began to seem 
more and more like a possibility. Her 
sister who worked for an airline would 
help. Money, time, other personal and 
professional obstacles loomed con- 
spicuously before us. But if not soon, 
then when? There will always be ob- 
stacles, we thought, so why not do it 
now? Easier said than done! 

Most principals aren’t enthusi- 
astic about a teacher leaving the class- 
room for an entire week. We struggled 
to prepare a trip proposal that commu- 
nicated our common academic pursuits. 
We didn’t want anybody to get the 
crazy idea that this could be mere fun. 
The next problem was money, and we, 
of course, turned to the Director of 
Bread Loaf, Jim Maddox. Curiously, 
once our administrators learned that 
Bread Loaf would provide some fund- 
ing, the project was elevated to a higher 
status. Slowly plans began to come to- 
gether, then fall apart. It was obvious 
that a tight fall schedule including term 
progress reports, team activities, district 
in-service, and parent-teacher confer- 
ences might cause us to cancel the trip. 
But we shuffled and reshuffled appoint- 
ments, meetings, and due dates to final- 
ize the last-minute details. 

Finally, after surmounting all 
the obstacles, Dryden Middle School 
welcomed our “desert Rose” to the land 
of grizzlies and glaciers. Roseanne 
brought bags stuffed with New Mexico 



chiles, frijoles, y tortillas ; she even 
managed to bring student letters and 
souvenirs. My students were thrilled 
to see their online partners on video 
and insisted we rewind it to see it a 
second time. We, of course, had lan- 
guage lessons to learn — to roll those 
Spanish rr f s and pronounce the names 
like Jose and Jesus with the appropri- 
ate “h” sound rather than the English 
“j.” They savored every spicy morsel 
of homemade quesadillas. The Mexi- 
can candy with delightful names like 
garampihados, pelones de tamarindo, 
pica limon, and marzipan were a big 
hit. 

They bombarded Mrs. Lara 
with questions and pumped her for 
bits of information about their New 
Mexico partners. They wanted to 
know more about dress and hairstyles, 
recreation, school sports, the weather 
(Does it ever snow in the desert? 

What do people do when the tempera- 
ture gets over 100?), and wildlife (Are 
there lots of rattlesnakes? Do you 
have Saturday school like we do for 
ditching class?). Later, each student 
wrote a short entry on a postcard de- 
scribing the first time he or she saw a 
moose, bear, caribou, or the Northern 
Lights. 

Our Tongass Rain Forest and 
Mendenhall Glacier showed off their 
compelling beauty. Bobbing seals en- 
tertained us at Eagle Beach. And on 
Roseanne’s last day in Alaska, imperi- 
ous bald eagles circled the school, 
imploring her not to leave. After her 
very short visit, Roseanne seemed 
duly impressed! Now her bags were 
filled with home-canned salmon, silky 
glacier sand, beaver chips, and Alaska 
berry jam. Now there is a hopeful dis- 
cussion happening on line about 
bringing some kids to Alaska this 
summer. How stubborn can we really 
be? BreadNet activities surely enticed 
us to network across boundaries of 
place and culture, and now we see 
ourselves as border jumpers — deter- 
mined border jumpers! m 



3 36 









Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



Andover Bread Loaf 
Writing Workshop Makes 
Annual Visit to BL 

by Lou Bernieri 
ABLWW Director 
Phillips Academy 
Andover, MA 

On July 17-18, 1997, twenty 
participants and staff of the Andover Bread 
Loaf Writing Workshop (ABLWW) made 
their annua! pilgrimage to the Bread Loaf 
campus in Ripton, Vermont. The group 
included teachers from Lawrence, MA; 
East Orange and Newark, NJ; Washington, 
DC; and India, Pakistan, and Tanzania. 

The ABLWW visit to Vermont 
serves two purposes. First, visitors have 
the opportunity to network with teachers, 
professors, and Bread Loaf staff from all 
over the country as the visitors attend 
workshops and presentations throughout 
their two-day stay — thanks to the generos- 
ity and organization of Jim Maddox, Dixie 
Goswami, and Betty Bailey. Inevitably, 
this networking catalyzes exciting educa- 
tional collaborations such as the literacy 
project that developed between classroom 
teachers in Pakistan and BLRTN Fellow 
Ginny DuBose’s students at Waccamaw 
High School in Pawleys Island, South 
Carolina (see featured story on page 31). 

In addition, many of the workshops given, 
such as the brilliant one that Anne Scurria 
and Barry Press offer, give the visiting 
teachers powerful teaching methods to 
bring back to their own classrooms. 

The second purpose of the visit 
is to encourage ABLWW teachers to at- 
tend Bread Loaf and join the numerous 
other ABLWW alumni who have com- 
pleted or are currently completing a degree 
at Bread Loaf. This year, in addition to the 
U.S. teachers who were inspired to attend 
Bread Loaf after their visit, we also have 
the possibility of a teacher from Pakistan 
enrolling in 1998. Mohsin Tejani, a teacher 
and professional development leader in the 
Aga Khan Educational Service, is hoping 
to earn a Bread Loaf degree, but more im- 
portantly, to link up his international orga- 
nization of teachers with the networks of 
teachers that Bread Loaf fosters. . 

The 1997 ABLWW visit to 
Bread Loaf was our best yet. ABLWW 
teachers left knowing that they are part of 
a growing community of educators strug- 
gling to improve teaching and learning 
throughout the world. Even such a short 
time spent at Bread Loaf reaffirms teach- 
ers’ commitment to their profession and to 
their struggle to make a better world for 
the children they teach. 'W 



1997-1998 Announcements 



Janet Atkins has been appointed to the 
position of Project Coordinator for the 
U. S. Department of Education Technol- 
ogy Innovation Grant recently awarded to 
the Greenville County School District in 
South Carolina. Janet, who received her 
MA from Bread Loaf in August, will begin 
her work in Greenville in March, assisting 
teachers and administrators in making 
Greenville School District a demonstration 
site for the innovative use of technology in 
education. 

The New Mexico State Department of 
Education awarded Wendy Beserra 
$13,000 to establish a program which will 
identify and serve homeless children in the 
Deming-Luna County area. The program 
will be funded by the Stewart B. 

McKinney Act of the federal budget. 

Mary Burnham, Heidi Imhof, and Pat 
Truman won awards from the Fulbright 
Memorial Fund Teacher Program, which 
funds short-term study programs in Japan 
for American teachers. Sponsored by the 
Japanese government, the program was 
established to commemorate the 50th anni- 
versary of the Fulbright Program. In this 
program, these BLRTN Fellows visited 
primary and secondary schools, teacher 
training colleges, cultural sites, and indus- 
trial facilities and met with teachers and 
students. 

Kate Carroll presented “Discussing Lit- 
erature Using Telecommunications” at the 
Vermont Council of Teachers of English 
(VCTE) conference in October, 1997. 

Moira Donovan assumed the Chair of the 
English Department at Peoples Academy, 
Morrisville, VT, in academic year 1 997- 
98. 

In December, 1997, the South Carolina 
House of Representatives presented a reso- 
lution to Ginny DuBose and students in 
her telecommunications class, commend- 
ing them for innovative work using tech- 
nology to link Waccamaw High School, 
Pawleys Island, SC, with schools in South 
Africa and Pakistan. 

Vicki Hunt visited Erika Brett’s class- 
room at Hatch Middle School, Hatch, New 
Mexico, prior to attending the New 
Mexico BLRTN state meeting held in 
Hatch. Erika Brett has been a guest artist, 
quilter, and teacher at Peoria High School 
in Arizona, where Vicki teaches. 

David Koehn serves on the committee for 
the Standards in Action Forum, and the 
Alaskan State Writing Standards commit- 
tee. He has poems forthcoming in the 
1998 spring issue of the Alaska Quarterly 
Review. 



me 



ddlebury, Vermont 






Sharon McKenna Ladner of Pascagoula 
High School in Pascagoula, Mississippi, 
received the Milken Family Foundation 
National Educator Award in October, 

1997. She will receive a cash award of 
$25,000 at the Milken National Education 
Conference in Los Angeles in June, 1998. 

Roseanne Lara of Anthony, NM, and 
Sharon Ladner of Pascagoula, MS, at- 
tended the NCTE conference in Detroit in 
November and presented “Identities, 
Memoirs, and American Dreams: A 
Cross-Age Writing and Literature Ex- 
change Using Electronic Mail,” a collabo- 
rative cross-age partnership between 
Roseanne’s eighth grade language arts 
students and Sharon’s tenth grade English 
II students. 

Jill Loveless received one of twelve in- 
ternships in Arizona’s Equity in Education 
program. As a participant, Jill will receive 
$1,000 to fund her projects focusing on 
nontraditional careers and sexual harass- 
ment. 

Patricia Parrish was named the 1997 
Lamar County (MS) School District 
Teacher of the Year. She is a 1997 mem- 
ber of the Exemplary Teachers Network, a 
group of teachers sponsored by the Scho- 
lastic Network and the Mississippi State 
Department of Education to provide train- 
ing to and be liaisons between teachers and 
the state Department of Education. 
Patricia’s classroom is a pilot classroom 
that will be featured in Writer's Craft , a 
forthcoming textbook series (1998) by 
McDougal-Littell. Patricia received $1,200 
of textbooks and resource materials as a 
participant in the project. 

“Anything But Isolated,” an article about 
telecommunications and computer 
conferencing by Phil Sittnick was pub- 
lished in August, 1997, in the premier is- 
sue of Middle Ground , a new publication 
of the National Middle School Associa- 
tion. 

Risa Udall was named Apache County 
Teacher of the Year and selected as one of 
four finalists for the Arizona Rural 
Teacher of the Year award. She was hon- 
ored at the National Rural Education 
Association’s conference in September, 
1997, where she presented “Linking Up 
with the World,” a workshop using tele- 
communication conferences in curricu- 
lum.^’ 



37 



Fall / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



BLRTN State Meeting Notes 



State Moderators for BLRTN: 

Allison Holsten, Alaska; Vicki Hunt, 
Arizona; Sharon Ladner, Mississippi; 
Susan Miera , New Mexico; Monica 
Eaddy, South Carolina; Kate Carroll , 
Vermont. 



Alaska 

Alaskan BLRTN Fellows 
gathered in Anchorage in September, 
1997, to continue the work started by 
participants in the 1997 Bread Loaf- 
Juneau Institute, creating performance 
benchmarks for the new Alaskan stan- 
dards in language arts. Attending the 
Standards in Action Forum, which 
was held that week in Anchorage and 
sponsored jointly by the state Depart- 
ment of Education and the University 
of Alaska-Southeast, allowed the new 
members of the Alaska BLRTN to 
meet face-to-face with veteran Fel- 
lows, many of whom were recently 
back from summer experiences in 
Vermont, New Mexico, and Oxford. 

As one Juneau Institute participant 
said, “It is like being taken home to 
meet the new in-laws.” It is an apt 
simile, as often the discussion sounded 
like a family argument. In Alaska, 
BLRTN Fellows and associates num- 
ber fifty-four now, and the challenge 
remains in keeping the conversation 
going over distances that make gather- 
ing together rare occurrences. 

Alaska Fellows are facing a 
watershed year, working with DOE 
administrators on the complex process 
of creating the performance bench- 
marks for the standards, and partici- 
pating in the administration of a state- 
wide writing assessment in a region 
that offers wide diversity of lan- 
guages, communities, and cultures. 

We have some notable advantages: 
seasoned teachers, experienced in both 
urban and bush schools, the addition 
of university level teachers to our net- 



work, and the interest and support of 
many district principals. Difficulties 
remain, primarily in the differences 
that can seem insurmountable. 

Although face-to-face meet- 
ing of the entire BLRTN in Alaska is 
difficult to schedule, small groups 
gathering in south-central and south- 
east Alaska are likely possibilities, as 
we continue to work in conferencing, 
exploring new curricular options, and 
functioning as a team at the state level. 

Arizona 

The first Arizona BLRTN 
meeting of the year was held in Octo- 
ber on the Navajo Reservation at 
Ganado Intermediate School, Ganado, 
Arizona. The meeting was well-at- 
tended by Fellows and associates of 
BLRTN from the northern regions, as 
well as New Mexico. Telecommunica- 
tions Director Rocky Gooch and 
Bread Loaf Director Jim Maddox at- 
tended the meeting, which was hosted 
by Ganado principal Susan Stropko 
and Fellows Nancy Jennings and Judy 
Tarantino. The next formal Arizona 
meeting will be held following the 
conference of the Arizona English 
Teachers Association, in Tucson, on 
January 24. Jody McNelis will host 
the meeting. The most pressing issue 
for most Arizona teachers this year is 
assessment. Arizona is formulating a 
new assessment instrument which will 
be administered to every student in the 
state and will determination gradua- 
tion for each student. Fortunately, for 
teachers and students involved in the 
BLRTN, Fellow Risa Udall is on the 
state committee writing the instru- 
ment. 



Mississippi 

Mississippi BLRTN Fellows 
are in the midst of an active year. The 
1997 fall meeting was hosted by Bette 
Ford in late August in Hattiesburg at 



William Carey College. With the 
opening of school on everyone’s 
mind, the meeting was focused on 
1997-98 projects and Mississippi’s 
important role in BLRTN. Those in 
attendance included BLRTN Coordi- 
nator Dixie Goswami, Telecommuni- 
cations Director Rocky Gooch, and 
BLRTN Editor Chris Benson. Missis- 
sippi Fellows attending included 
Renee Moore, Bill Kirby, Brad 
Busbee, Patricia Parrish, Leslie 
Fortier, Myra Harris, Bill Clarke, and 
Sharon Ladner. 

In late November Mississippi 
Fellows made their presence known in 
Detroit at the National Council of 
Teachers of English national conven- 
tion. Renee Moore participated in two 
panels, “Teacher Research Network- 
ing” and “Bread Loaf Rural Teacher 
Network: Teachers and Students On- 
line.” With the aid of Myra Harris, 
Sharon Ladner collaborated with 
Roseanne Lara in a BLRTN project 
presentation “Identities, Memoirs, and 
American Dreams: A Cross-Age Writ- 
ing and Literature Exchange Using 
Electronic Mail.” Mississippi Fellows 
enjoyed attending a Bread Loaf gath- 
ering in Detroit hosted by Rocky 
Gooch. 

The next meeting of Missis- 
sippi BLRTN will likely be in the 
northern part of the state (perhaps the 
Tupelo area) for a late spring meeting. 
Tentatively, Peggy Turner is sched- 
uled to host the meeting. 

New Mexico 

Erika Brett hosted the New 
Mexico BLRTN fall meeting on Octo- 
ber 25, 1997 at Hatch Middle School, 
Hatch, NM. In attendance from New 
Mexico were Susan Miera, Roseanne 
Lara, Erika Brett, Juanita Lavadie, and 
Arlene Mestas. Three Fellows from 
Arizona also attended: Vicki Hunt, 
Sylvia Saenz, and Ceci Lewis. 

State moderator Susan Miera 
welcomed the group and encouraged 
Fellows to talk informally about the 
projects underway in their classrooms. 



38 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter /Winter 1997 



Erika Brett has served as con- 
sultant to several BLRTN Fellows in 
projects that combine literacy skills 
and quilting. Roseanne Lara showed 
her students’ American Dream quilt. 
The quilt is composed of squares 
made by her students and Sharon 
Ladner’s students in Mississippi. The 
quilt was exhibited during Roseanne 
and Sharon’s presentation at NCTE in 
Detroit in November. Vicki Hunt 
brought her students’ African Ameri- 
can quilt. Vicki and Erika Brett will 
present this quilt project at NCTE in 
Albuquerque next spring. 

Erika Brett spoke to the 
group about BLRTN’ s new role in 
documenting its work. The documen- 
tation is organized by project portfo- 
lios that include student and teacher 
reflections on the project. 

Susan Miera spoke about 
methods and opportunities for publish- 
ing student writing both on line and in 
standard print format. Susan’s tele- 
communication class provides other 
BLRTN classrooms with editing and 
layout services for student publica- 
tions. 

The possibility of producing 
a New Mexico/ Arizona BLRTN 
Newsletter was discussed. The news- 
letter would come out twice a year and 
include articles representing schools 
where BLRTN Fellows teach in Ari- 
zona and New Mexico. 

The next meeting of NM 
BLRTN will be hosted by Juanita 
Lavadie in Taos on April 25. 

South Carolina 

The South Carolina BLRTN 
met in November, 1997, at Mayo High 
School for Math, Science, and Tech- 
nology in Darlington, SC. State mod- 
erator Monica Eaddy hosted the meet- 
ing. At the meeting, the SC BLRTN 
planned a heritage project involving 
students from eight middle and high 
schools across the state. The project, 
which will begin in early spring, is a 
collaborative, online cross-age study 
of family and community heritage. 

The schools participating in 
the heritage project are located at both 

o 



ends of the state and in the middle, 
including Pawleys Island, Hampton, 
Greenville, Pelion, Darlington, and 
Travelers Rest, and will be linked by 
computer conferencing. The project is 
currently being planned on line by the 
participating teachers, and students 
will soon join the discussion. Students 
will read excerpts of Dori Sanders’ 
novel Clover as a means of learning 
how to research and write about their 
family and community heritage. As a 
capstone to the project, a celebration 
will be held for participating students 
at the Penn Center on St. Helena Is- 
land, S.C. Rich in South Carolina his- 
tory and heritage, the Penn Center in 
the 1860s became the site of the first 
school for African Americans in South 
Carolina. 



Vermont 

In their meetings during the 
fall of 1997, the Vermont BLRTN fo- 
cused on methods that motivate stu- 
dents in their classrooms. At their 
meetings, Fellows shared learning ma- 
terials that have proven successful 
with students. The state of Vermont 
requires all curriculum to be based on 
the New Standards, and Fellows are 
developing materials that meet the re- 
quirements. 

Rob Baroz received a grant 
from The Spencer Foundation to ini- 
tiate teacher practitioner research in 
his classroom. Shirley Brice Heath is a 
consultant to the project, and two of 
Rob’s students, Sahir Kalim and 
Elizabeth Rocheleau, have assumed 
research responsibilities in the project. 
As part of their research, they will sur- 
vey BLRTN teachers on line in the 
near future. Equipment purchased with 
grant funds for Rob’s project includes 
PZM microphones that record up to 20 
feet away and a transcribing machine. 
Rob invites all BLRTN Fellows to 
visit this exciting class. 

Sally Zitzmann is in Romania 
for the year on a Fulbright exchange. 
Several Vermont Fellows are consid- 
ering international writing exchanges 
with Sally’s students. 



Moira Donovan, Ellen 
Temple, and Rob Baroz (also serving 
as editorial consultant) are contribu- 
tors to the special spring/summer issue 
of BLRTN Magazine on teacher re- 
search. 

Setting benchmarks for stu- 
dent performance was discussed at the 
meetings. Kate Carroll at Middlebury 
Union High School is developing writ- 
ing across the curriculum by creating 
benchmarks using the University of 
Vermont Writing Contest pieces. 

Moira Donovan, as Department Head 
this year, is being asked to create 
benchmarks for her school’s English 
curriculum. Other topics of discussion 
included structuring individualized 
reading and writing programs, devel- 
oping writing units according to state 
standards, and reviewing the results 
from the New Standards test. 

Kurt Broderson has set up a 
hyperstudio (video, audio, stills, etc.) 
to demonstrate teacher and student 
online conferences. He has used this 
project at district in-services to teach 
colleagues how to set up a telecommu- 
nications conference, how to navigate 
the Web, and how to showcase suc- 
cessful student projects. 

Sue Locarno shared the 
“Friendly Feedback” evaluation form, 
which gives students an opportunity to 
provide teachers with input about their 
learning experiences (it’s not used for 
teacher evaluation). The evaluation 
system is voluntary and emphasizes a 
teacher’s goal to improve student 
learning environments. 

At the Vermont BLRTN 
meetings there was much talk about 
state-mandated standards. Ellen 
Temple shared a “progress report” that 
her school uses which emphasizes a 
curriculum summary and defines the 
standards students meet in the curricu- 
lum. Which standards are met in each 
grade level requires a complex discus- 
sion. The major question Vermont 
teachers raise in the standards discus- 
sion is “How do I assess this?” W 



ERJC iddlebury, Vermont 



42 



39 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Selected Resources on Technology and Education 



Most of the following references are 
selected from the resource section of 
The Nearness of You: Students and 
Teachers Writing Online (New York: 
Teachers & Writers Collaborative , 
1996). The Nearness of You is edited 
by Christopher Edgar and Susan 
Nelson Wood and includes an intro- 
duction by Dixie Goswami and Rocky 
Gooch and chapters by several teach- 
ers associated with the Bread Loaf 
Rural Teacher Network. 



Books 

Beckner, W. and B. O. Barker. Technol- 
ogy in Rural Education. Bloomington, 
Indiana: Phi Delta Kappa, 1994. Makes 
the case for technology (especially tele- 
communications) as a tool for overcoming 
geographic isolation. 

Birkerts, S. The Gutenberg Elegies: The 
Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age. New 
York: Fawcett Columbine, 1994. Takes a 
stand against the impact of electronic tech- 
nology. 

Bruce, B. C., J. K. Peyton, and T. Baston. 
Network-based Classrooms: Promises and 
Realities. Cambridge and New York: Cam- 
bridge University Press, 1993. Covers 
writing and computer networking. 

Christian, Scott. Exchanging Lives: Middle 
School Writers Online. Urban a, Illinois: 
National Council of Teachers of English, 
1997. Analyzes several categories of stu- 
dent writing online, emphasizing the social 
construction of discourse. 

Harasim, L. M., ed. Online Education: 
Perspectives on a New Environment. New 
York: Praeger, 1990. Provides a range of 
perspectives for understanding the educa- 
tional applications of computer networks 
and email. 



Hiltz, S. R. The Virtual Classroom: Learn- 
ing without Limits via Computer Networks. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1994. Describes an 
online mathematics course. 

Means, B. Technology and Education Re- 
form: The Reality Behind the Promise. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1994. 
Takes an international perspective on inno- 
vations and educational change. 

Papert, S. The Children's Machine: Re- 
thinking School in the Age of the Com- 
puter. New York: BasicBooks, 1993. Pre- 
sents notions of educational change in 
clear, readable style. 

Raizen, S. A., P. Sellwood, R. D. Todd, 
and M. Vickers. Technology Education in 
the Classroom: Understanding the De- 
signed World. San Francisco: Jossey- 
Bass, 1995. Examines curriculum stan- 
dards and supports education reform ef- 
forts. 

Reagan, S. B., T. Fox, and D. Bleich. 
Writing With: Toward New Identities for 
Students and Teachers. New York: 
Longmans, 1994. Explores collaboration 
and the social constructions of discourse. 

Rheingold, H. The Virtual Community: 
Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier. 
New York: Addison-Wesley, 1993. A 
book about the human potential of life on- 
line. 

Roberts, N., G. Blakeslee, M. Brown, and 
C. Lenk. Integrating Telecommunications 
into Education. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1990. A somewhat dated 
but useful resource for creating “global” 
classrooms in different disciplines. 

Selfe, C. L., and S. Hilligoss, eds. Literacy 
and Computers: The Complications of 
Teaching and Learning with Technology. 
New York: Modem Language Association, 
1994. Explores issues of literacy and is- 
sues of technology, using clear examples. 

Turkle, S. The Second Self: Computers and 
the Human Spirit. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1990. Considers the psychologi- 
cal aspects of the computer age. 



Tuman, M. C. Word Perfect: Literacy in 
the Computer Age. London: Falmer Press, 
1992. Defines “literacy” as it is being 
shaped by hypertext and telecommunica- 
tions. 

Tuman, M. C. Literacy Online: The Prom- 
ise (and Peril ) of Reading and Writing 
with Computers. Pittsburgh and London: 
University of Pittsburgh Press, 1992. A 
collection of stimulating essays on com- 
puters, literature, hypertext, multimedia, 
and the future. 



Special Publications 

“Connecting Children to the Future: A 
Telecommunications Policy Guide for 
Child Advocates.” The Center for Media 
Education, 15 1 1 K Street NW, Suite 5 1 8, 
Washington DC 20005. CME also pub- 
lishes InfoActive Kids, a newsletter to 
educate the public about critical media 
issues, especially as they affect young 
people. 

Email: cme@cme.org. 

Website: www.cme.org/cme. 

“Integrating Technology into Teaching.” 
Educational Leadership. Volume 55, No. 

3, November, 1977. 

“Special Technology Section: The Wave 
of the Future.” Teacher Magazine. Janu- 
ary, 1998. 

“Technology Counts: Schools and Reform 
in the Information Age.” Education Week. 
vol. XVII, No. 1 1, November 10, 1997. 

What's at Stake: Defining the Public Inter- 
est in the Digital Age. The Benton Foun- 
dation. An important resource on how to 
use technology in service to the commu- 
nity. Contact the foundation at 1 634 EYE 
Street, NW, 12th Floor, Washington DC, 
20006 for a free information-packed publi- 
cation. 



10 



43 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter / Winter 1997 



Online Resources 

The following World Wide Web resources 
were compiled by Bram Moreines and 
John Ruttner of the Institute for Learning 
Technologies, Columbia University, and 
Jordan Davis of Teachers & Writers Col- 
laborative. A word of warning: because 
of the changing nature of the Web, the 
addresses of these sites may not remain 
current. For a continually updated ver- 
sion of these resources, we suggest that 
you link to them through the following 
homepages: 

http://www.twc.org/tmhot.html 

or 

http://www.ilt. Columbia. edu/K 1 2/livetext/ 
index.html 

http://www.ilt.columbia. edu/K 1 2/livetext/ 
resources.html 

http://www.ilt.columbia.edu/K12/livetext/ 

english.html 

http://www.ilt. Columbia. edu/K 1 2/livetext/ 
poetry.html 

Language Arts 
Curricula & Pedagogy 

(Note: names in parentheses indicate the 
Web site author or host.) 

Humanities in Cyberspace 

http://www.teleport.com/~cdeemer/ 
humanities.html / 

(Deemer) A hypertext discourse on the 
Internet’s role in changing teaching and 
scholarship, by a playwright and hypertext 
author. 

Teachers & Writers Collaborative 

http://www.twc.org/tmmain.htm 
(Teachers & Writers Collaborative) Keep 
your eye on this beautifully designed site 
for resources on teaching writing and ways 
to connect to T&W projects. 

On-Line Writing Lab 

http://owl.english.purdue.edu/ 

(Purdue) Lots of information that will help 
you with your writing: how to avoid sexist 
language, fix run-on sentences, put to- 
gether a good resume, or follow MLA (or 
APA) format for citing your sources. The 
site also offers listings of writing materials 
and Writing Labs on the Internet. 



The Global Campfire Home Page 

http://www.indiana.edu/~eric_rec/fl/pcto/ 

campfire.html 

(Indiana) “Since the dawn of time, humans 
have entertained themselves and each 
other telling and retelling stories. You are 
invited to take part in this ritual that is as 
old as humanity itself. Read one of the 
stories that interests you, add the next part, 
and check back later.” 

Monster Exchange Program 
http://www.njcommunity.org/brunner/ 
projects/mon ster.htm 
(Brian Maguire’s fourth grade class, Heri- 
tage Heights Elementary, Amherst, N.Y., 
and Sherry Devlin’s fifth grade class, 
Brunner Elementary, Scotch Plains, N.J.) 
An example of how the Internet can help 
engage children in activities designed to 
develop basic skills through inter-class- 
room projects. 

On-line Libraries 

Alex (Gopher) 

gopher://rsl.ox.ac.uk:70/l 1/lib-com/hunter 
(Oxford) Alex allows users to find and 
retrieve the full text of documents on the 
Internet. It currently indexes over 700 
books and shorter texts by author and title, 
incorporating texts from Project 
Gutenberg, Wiretap, the On-line Book 
Initiative, the Eris system at Virginia Tech, 
the English Server at Camegie-Mellon 
University, and the online portion of the 
Oxford Text Archive. 

Anamnesis 

http://www.jhu.edu/~english/anamnesis/ 
(Johns Hopkins) This interface provides 
access to over 300 authors and over 3000 
of their novels, essays, poems, and trea- 
tises, located in various archives all over 
the Internet. 

New Bartleby (Project) 
http://www.columbia.edu/acis/bartleby/ 
(Columbia) Academically scrutinized edi- 
tions of classic works for readers and 
scholars. 

Children’s Literature Web Guide 

http://www.ucalgary.ca/~dkbrown/ 

index.html 

(Calgary) An astoundingly complete refer- 
ence, with links to all kinds of resources. 



ERIC; 



idle bury, Vermont 



Bibliomania 

http://www.bibliomania.com 
(Datatext) Online library of out-of-copy- 
right classic fiction. 

Gutenberg (Project) 

http://www.hensa.ac.uk/literary/ 

gutenberg.html 

An effort to create a hypertext catalogue of 
all books stored as electronic text on the 
Internet. 

The Modern English Collection 

http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/ 
modeng.browse.html 
(Virginia) A long list of locally digitized 
electronic texts, annotated and with illus- 
trations. 



Online Books 

http://www. cs. emu. edu:800 1/Web/ 
books.html 

(Camegie-Mellon) A state-of-the-art elec- 
tronic text finder and language resource 
meta-list. 



Language Arts Index Sites 

The English Server 

http://english-server.hss.cmu.edu/ 
(Camegie-Mellon) Camegie-Mellon’s stu- 
dent-administered server to English litera- 
ture and language arts. A top-flight re- 
source. 

The Written Word 

http://www-hpcc.astro.washington.edu/ 
sc ied/ word.html 

(Washington) An online English server. 



Teachers & Writers Collaborative’s On- 
Line Residency 

http://pindar.ilt.columbia.edu/twc/ 
(ILT/Columbia) In collaboration with a 
T&W poet, poetry students from New 
York’s School for the Physical City are 
creating multimedia exhibitions of their 
work. Visit the SPC Poetry Page showcas- 
ing student performances using RealAudio 
software and digitized video clips. 

Poets 

http://www.yahoo.com/Arts/Humanities/ 

Literature/Poetry/Poets/ 

(Yahoo Index) Poetry listed by author. 

Poetry 

http://www.yahoo.com/Arts/Humanities/ 

Literature/Poetry/ 

(Yahoo Index) Poetry listed by poem title. 



41 



Fall / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



1998 Bread Loaf Course Listings 



Vermont Campus, Ripton, VT 

Group I (Writing and the Teaching of 
Writing) 

Language, Culture, and the Development 
of Literacy (Jacqueline Jones Royster 
with Dixie Goswami) 

Poetry Writing (Paul Muldoon) 

Poetry Writing (Carole Oles) 

Fiction Writing (David Huddle) 

Rhetorical Theory and Practice (Andrea 
Lunsford) 

Histories and Theories of Writing (Andrea 
Lunsford) 

Playwriting (Dare Clubb) 

The Sense of Language: Narrative, Genre, 
and Performance (Shirley Brice Heath 
with Harry Elam) 

Memory, Writing, and Gender (Jacqueline 
Jones Royster) 

Group II (English Literature through 
the Seventeenth Century) 

Major Poems of Geoffrey Chaucer (John 
Fleming) 

Power and Disguise in Shakespeare 
(Susanne Wofford) 

Shakespeare’s Comedies in Performance 
(John Wilders) 

Spenser, Milton and the Idea of Epic 
(Susanne Wofford) 

Group III (English Literature since the 
Seventeenth Century) 

Modem Irish Drama (Michael Cadden) 
Romantic Poetry and Its Inheritors (Robert 
Pack) 

On Looking: Victorian Literature and the 
Visual Imagination (Jennifer Green- 
Lewis) 

The “Other” England in the Victorian Pe- 
riod (Margery Sabin) 

Victorian Poetry (and Some Very Good 
Prose, Too) (Jonathan Freedman) 
Bloomsbury, Modernism, and the Me- 
tropolis (Sara Blair) 

Modernist Literature in England and Ire- 
land (Victor Luftig) 

Group IV (American Literature) 

American Civilization and Its Discontents 
(Bryan Wolf) 

Contemporary American Short Story 
(David Huddle) 

Modem American Poetry (Robert Stepto) 
The African American Literary Aesthetic 
(Valerie Babb) 

Race and the Formation of Nineteenth- 
Century American Literature (Valerie 
Babb) 

Group V (World Literature) 

The Novel in Europe (Michael Wood) 
Dante’s Divine Comedy (John Fleming) 
Literature, Film, and Philosophy (Michael 
Wood) 



The Literature of Double Heritages 

(Shirley Brice Heath with Harry Elam) 
The English Bible (Kevin Dunn) 

From Page to Stage: Three Theatrical 
Styles (Michael Cadden and Alan 
MacVey) 

Literary Modernism: Woolf, Faulkner, 
Morrison, and Latin American Narra- 
tive (Jacques Lezra) 

Group VI (Theater Arts) 

Acting Workshop (Carol MacVey) 
Dramaturgy: Analysis and Collaboration 
(Morgan Jenness and Oskar Eustis) 



Lincoln College, Oxford 

Group I (Writing and the Teaching of 
Writing) 

Imagination, Culture, and Dialogue in the 
Teaching of Writing: A Britain-United 
States Comparison (Courtney Cazden) 

Group II (English Literature through 
the Seventeenth Century) 

Shakespeare in His Time (Dennis Kay) 
Poetry and Religious Change in Tudor- 
Stuart England (Peter McCullough) 
Shakespeare: On the Page and on the Stage 
(Robert Smallwood and Nigel Wood) 
Chaucer (Douglas Gray) 

Renaissance Romance (Peter McCullough) 
Reading Elizabethan Culture (Dennis Kay) 

Group III (English Literature since the 
Seventeenth Century) 

Wordsworth and Coleridge (Seamus 
Perry) 

Nineteenth -Century Fiction and the Mean- 
ing of Space (Isobel Armstrong) 

James Joyce (Jeri Johnson) 

Romanticism and Modernism in British 
Poetry, 1910-1965 (Seamus Perry) 
Studies in English Fiction: from Max 
Beerbohm to David Lodge (Stephen 
Donadio) 

Virginia Woolf (Jeri Johnson) 

Group V (World Literature) 

Colonial and Postcolonial Fiction (Robert 
Young) 

Native American Preparatory 
School, Rowe, NM 

Group I (Writing and the Teaching of 
Writing) 

Poetry Writing (Luci Tapahonso) 

Cultures of the American Southwest (John 
Wamock) 

Rewriting a Life: Teaching Revision as a 
Life Skill (Tilly Wamock) 



Group II (English Literature through 
the Seventeenth Century) 

Chaucer (Claire Sponsler) 

Contemporary Critical Issues in 
Shakespeare (Bruce Smith) 

Teaching, Reading (and Enjoying) Poetry 
(Bruce Smith) 

Group III (English Literature since the 
Seventeenth Century) 

Teaching, Reading (and Enjoying) Poetry 
(Bruce Smith) 

Fiction into Film (Kate Flint) 

Group IV (American Literature) 

American Indian Literatures: Writers of 
the Southwest (Luci Tapahonso) 

Chicano/a Literature (Gabriel Melendez) 

Theory and Method: Readings in Border 
Autobiography (Gabriel Melendez) 

Group V (World Literature) 

Crossing Cultures: Contemporary 
Women’s Writing (Kate Flint) 

Introduction to Cultural Studies (Claire 
Sponsler) 



University of AK, Southeast 

Group I (Writing and the Teaching of 
Writing) 

Writing and the Sense of Place (John El- 
der) 

Group II (English Literature through 
the Seventeenth Century) 

Shakespeare and the “Wilderness” (Emily 
Bartels) 

Group IV (American Literature) 

Native American Literature (Lucy 
Maddox) 



For more information about the Bread 
Loaf School of English and its programs, 
please write or call: 

Elaine Lathrop 

The Bread Loaf School of English 
Middlebury College 
Middlebury, Vermont 05753 
PHONE: (802) 443-5418 
FAX: (802) 443-2060 
BLSE@breadnet. middlebury. edu 



ER “ 

45 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter/ Winter 1997 



Rural Teacher Fellows 

Since 1993, the following rural teachers have received fellowships to study at the Bread Loaf School of English through gen- 
erous support of the DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund, the Education Foundation of America, the Annenberg Rural 
Challenge, and Middlebury College. 



Fellow School 



School Address 



Alaska 

Christa Bruce 
Robert J. Buck 
Patricia Carlson 
Scott Christian 
JoAnn Ross Cunningham 
Hugh C. Dyment 
Pauline Evon 
Allison Holstcn 
M. Heidi Imhof 
David Kochn 
Joe Koon 

Danielle S. Lachance 
Sandra A. McCulloch 
Taylor McKenna 
Rod Mehrtens 
Karen Mitchell 
Natasha J. O’Brien 
Mary Olsen 
Prudence Plunkett 
Sandra Porter 
Rosie Roppel 
Dianna Saiz 
Sheri Skelton 
Patricia A. Truman 
Kathleen Trump 
Linda Volkman 
Trevan Walker 
Claudia Wallingford 



Schoenbar Middle School 
Wrangell High School 
Lathrop High School 
University of Alaska-Southeast 
Haines High School 
Bethel Regional High School 
Kwethluk Community School 
Palmer High School 
Ella B. Vernetti School 
Barrow High School 
Bethel Regional High School 
Hydaburg City Schools 
Rocky Mountain School 
Schoenbar Middle School 

University of Alaska-Southeast 

Ketchikan High School 

Sand Point High School 

Houston Junior /Senior High School 

Susitna Valley Junior/Senior High School 

Schoenbar Middle School 

Floyd Dryden Middle School 

Shishmaref School 

Palmer Junior Middle School 

Susitna Valley Junior/Senior High School 

Colony Middle School 

Ketchikan High School 

(formerly of) Gruening Middle School 



217 Schoenbar Rd., Ketchikan AK 99901 

P.O. Box 651, Wrangell AK 99929 

901 Airport Way, Fairbanks AK 99701 

Bill Ray Center, 1108 F St., Juneau AK 99801 

P.O. Box 1289, Haines AK 99827 

P.O. Box 1211, Bethel, AK 99559 

Kwethluk AK 99621 

1 170 W. Arctic, Palmer AK 99645 

P.O. Box 70, Kayukuk AK 99754 

P.O. Box 960, Barrow, AK 99723 

P.O. Box 1211, Bethel, AK 99559 

P.O. Box 109, Hydaburg AK 99922 

P.O. Box 49, Goodnews Bay AK 99589 

217 Schoenbar Rd., Ketchikan AK 99901 

3760 Carefree Dr., Wasilla AK 99654 

10012 Glacier Hwy., Juneau AK 99801 

2610 Fourth Ave., Ketchikan AK 99901 

P.O. Box 269, Sand Point AK 99661 

P.O. Box 521060, Big Lake AK 99652 

P.O. Box 807, Talkeetna AK 99676 

217 Schoenbar Rd., Ketchikan AK 99901 

Juneau, AK 99801 

General Delivery, Shishmaref AK 99772 
1159 S. Chugach, Palmer AK 99645 
P.O. Box 807, Talkeetna AK 99676 
HCO 1 Box 6064, Palmer AK 99645 
2610 Fourth Ave., Ketchikan AK 99901 
9601 Lee Street, Eagle River AK 99577 



Arizona 

Priscilla Aydelott 
Timothy Aydelott 
Sylvia Barlow 
Sabra Beck 
Celia Concannon 
Jason A. Crossett 
Chad Graff 
Amethyst Hinton 
Vicki V. Hunt 
Beverly Jacobs 
Nancy Jennings 
Cecelia Lewis 
Jill Loveless 
James Lujan 
Jody K. McNelis 
Kevin T. McNulty 
Janet Olson 
Robin Pete 
Sylvia Saenz 
Stephen Schadlcr 
Karen Snow 
Nan Talahongva 
Judy Tarantino 
Edward Tompkins 
Risa Udall 
John Zcmbiec 



Monument Valley High School 

Monument Valley High School 

Chinle Jr. High School 

Marana High School 

Nogales High School 

Flowing Wells High School 

(formerly of) Monument Valley High School 

Catalina Foothills High School 

Peoria High School 

Marana High School 

Ganado Intermediate School 

Buena High School 

Globe Junior High School 

Ganado Intermediate School 

Academy at Santa Cruz Valley Union H. S. 

Calabasas Middle School 

(formerly of) Chinle Elementary School 

Ganado High School 

Sierra Vista Middle School 

Rio Rico High School 

Ganado Primary School 

Hopi Junior/Senior High School 

Ganado Intermediate School 

Lake Havasu High School 

St. Johns High School 

(formerly of) Chinle Junior High School 



P.O. Box 337, Kayenta AZ 86033 

P.O. Box 337, Kayenta AZ 86033 

P.O. Box 587, Chinle AZ 86503 

12000 Emigh Rd., Marana AZ 85653 

1905 Apache Blvd., Nogales AZ 85621 

Tucson Arizona 85705 

P.O. Box 337, Kayenta AZ 86033 

4300 East Sunrise Drive, Tucscon, AZ 85718 

11200 N. 83rd Ave., Peoria AZ 85345 

12000 Emigh Rd., Marana AZ 85653 

P.O. Box 1757, Ganado AZ 86505 

3555 Fry Blvd., Sierra Vista AZ 85635 

501 E. Ash St., Globe AZ 85501 

P.O. Box 1757, Ganado AZ 86505 

9th and Main St., Eloy AZ 85231 

220 Lito Galindo, Rio Rico AZ 85648 

P.O. Box 587, Chinle AZ 86503 

P.O. Box 1757, Ganado AZ 86505 

3535 E. Fry Blvd., Sierra Vista AZ 85635 

1220 Lito Galindo, Rio Rico, AZ 85648 

P.O. Box 1757, Ganado AZ 86505 

P.O. Box 337, Kearns Canyon AZ 86034 

P.O. Box 1757, Ganado AZ 86505 

2675 Palo Verde Blvd., Havasu City AZ 86403 

P.O. Box 429, St. Johns AZ 85936 

P.O. Box 587, Chinle AZ 86503 



Mississippi 

Brad Busbee Ocean Springs High School 

William J. Clarke Shivers Junior High School 



406 Holcomb Blvd, Ocean Springs MS 39564 
P.O. Box 607, Aberdeen MS 39730 



ERIC; 



dlebury, Vermont 



43 



Fall / Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Leslie Fortier Jones Junior High School 

Carolyn Hardy R. H. Watkins High School 

Myra Harris Pascagoula High School 

William E. Kirby North Forrest High School 

Sharon Ladner Pascagoula High School 

Renee Moore East Side High School 

Terri Noonkester (formerly of) Hawkins Junior 

Patricia Parrish Sumrall Attendance Center 

Patsy Pipkin Oxford Junior High School 

Peggy Turner Saltillo High School 

Penny Wallin Jones Junior High School 



1125 N. 5th Ave., Laurel, MS 39440 
1100 W. 12th St., Laurel MS 39440 
2903 Pascagoula St., Pascagoula MS 39567 
693 Eatonville Rd., Hattiesburg, MS 39401 
2903 Pascagoula St., Pascagoula MS 39567 
601 Wiggins Ave., Cleveland MS 38732 
School 523 Forrest St., Hattiesburg MS 39401 

P.O. Box 187, Sumrall MS 39482 
409 Washington Ave., Oxford MS 38655 
Box 460, Saltillo, MS 38866 
1125 N. 5th Ave., Laurel MS 39440 



New Mexico 

Kim Bannigan 
Wendy Beserra 
Erika Brett 
Dorothy I. Brooks 
Ann Eilert 
Nona Edelson 
Emily Graeser 
Annette Hardin 
Diana Jaramillo 
Susan Jesinsky 
John Kelly 
Carol Ann Krajewski 
Roseanne Lara 
Juanita Lavadie 
Timothy Lucero 
Carlotta Martza 
Theresa Melton 
Arlene Mestas 
Susan Miera 
Gary Montano 
Tamarah Pfeiffer 
Jane V, Pope 
Virginia Rawlojohn 
Stan Renfro 
Zita Schlautmann 
Norma Sheff 
Philip Sittnick 
Lauren Thomas Sittnick 
Bruce R. Smith 
Marilyn Trujillo 
Michelle Wyman-Warren 



Deming Public Schools 
Hatch Middle School 

(formerly of) Ojo Amarillo Elementary School 

(formerly of) Los Alamos High School 

Hopi Junior/Senior High School 

(formerly of) Twin Buttes High School 

Truth or Consequences Middle School 

Pojoaque High School 

(formerly of) Santa Teresa Middle School 

Shiprock High School 

Pecos Elementary School 

Gadsden Middle School 

Taos Day School 

Robertson High School 

Twin Buttes High School 

Tse’Bit’ai Middle School 

Bernalillo High School 

Pojoaque High School 

Carlsbad High School 

Tohajillee High School 

Lovington High School 

Estancia High School 

Wingate High School 

Bernalillo High School 

Hatch Elementary School 

Laguna Middle School 

Laguna Middle School 

Crownpoint Junior/Senior High School 

Taos Day School 

Mountainair High School 



205 Bryn Mawr SE, Albuquerque NM 87106 

501 W. Florida, Deming, NM 88030 

P.O. Box 790, Hatch NM 87937 

P.O. Box 768, Fruitland NM 87416 

300 Diamond Dr., Los Alamos NM 87544 

P.O. Box 337, Kearns Canyon AZ 86034 

P.O. Box 680, Zuni NM 87327 

P.O. Box 952, Truth or Consequences NM 87901 

Pojoaque Station, Santa Fe NM 87501 

P.O. Box 778, Santa Teresa NM 88008 

P.O. Box 6003, Shiprock NM 87420 

Box 368, Pecos NM 87522 

Rt. 1, Box 196, Anthony NM 88021 

P.O. Drawer X, Taos NM 87571 

5th & Friedman Streets, Las Vegas NM 87701 

P.O. Box 680, Zuni NM 87327 

P.O. Box 1873, Shiprock NM 87420 

P.O. Box 640, Bernalillo NM 87004 

Pojoaque Station, Santa Fe NM 87501 

408 N. Canyon, Carlsbad NM 88220 

Box 3438, Canoncito, NM 87026 

701 W. Avenue K, Lovington NM 88260 

P.O. Box 68, Estancia NM 87016 

P.O. Box 2, Fort Wingate NM 87316 

Box 640, Bernalillo NM 8704 

Hatch NM 87937 

P.O. Box 268, Laguna NM 87026 

P.O. Box 268, Laguna NM 87026 

P.O. Box 700, Crownpoint NM 87313 

P.O. Drawer X, Taos NM 87571 

P.O. Box 456, Mountainair NM 87036 



South Carolina 



Janet Atkins 
Michael Atkins 
Polly E. Brown 
Victoria Chance 
Raymond Cook 
Ginny DuBose 
Monica M. Eaddy 
Barbara Everson 
Doris Ezell-Schmitz 
Anne Gardner 
Joyce Summerlin Glunt 
Linda Hardin 
Tracy Hathaway 
Priscilla E. Kelley 
Nancy Lockhart 
Robin McConnell 
Carolyn Pierce 
Jim Schmitz 
Betty Slesinger 
Elizabeth V. Wright 



Greenville County School District 

North District Middle School 

Belton-Honea Path High School 

Travelers Rest High School 

Socastee High School 

Waccamaw High School 

Mayo H. S. for Math, Science (^Technology 

Belton-Honea Path High School 

Chester Middle School 

Georgetown High School 

(formerly of) Hunter-Kinard-Tyler High School 

Beck Academy of Languages 

Robert Smalls Middle School 

Pel ion High School 

Homebound Tutor, Colleton School District 
Calhoun Falls High School 
Cheraw High School 

Irmo Middle School 

Ronald E. McNair Junior High School 



301 Camperdown, Box 2848, Greenville, SC 29602 
P.O. Box 368, Varnville SC 29944 

11000 Belton Hwy., Honea Path SC 29654 
115 Wilhelm Winter St. Travelers Rest SC 29690 
4900 Socastee Blvd., Myrtle Beach SC 29575 
2688 River Rd., Pawleys Island SC 29585 
405 Chesnut St., Darlington SC 29532 
11000 Belton Hwy., Honea Path SC 29654 
112 Caldwell St., Chester SC 29706 
P.O. Box 1778, Georgetown SC 29442 
Box 158, Norway SC 29113 

302 McAlister Rd., Greenville SC 29607 
43 Alston Rd., Beaufort SC 29902 
P.O. Box 68, Pel ion SC 29123 

P.O. Box 290, Walterboro SC 29542 
Edgefield St., Calhoun Falls SC 29628 
649 Chesterfield Hwy., Cheraw SC 29520 
230 Miller St. Rock Hill SC 29730 
6051 Wescott Rd., Columbia SC 29212 
Carver Street, Lake City SC 29560 



Vermont 

Kurt Broderson 
Mary Burnham 
Mary Ann Cadwallader 



Mt. Abraham Union High School 
Waits River Valley School 
Mill River Union High School 



9 Airport Drive, Bristol, VT 05443 
Rt. 25, East Corinth VT 05040 
Middle Road, North Clarendon VT 05773 



o 

ERIC 



44 



47 



Middlebury College 



Bread Loaf School of English 



Winter /Winter 1997 



Katharine Carroll 
Moira Donovan 
Jane Harvey 
Margaret Lima 
Suzane Locarno 
Judith Morrison 
Bill Rich 
Ellen Temple 
Vicki L. Wright 
Carol Zuccaro 



Middlebury Union High School 
Peoples Academy 
Brattleboro Union High School 
Canaan Memorial High School 
Hazen Union School 
Hinesburg Elementary/Middle School 
Colchester High School 
Camel’s Hump Middle School 
Mt. Abraham Union High School 
St. Johnsbury Academy 



Charles Ave., Middlebury VT 05753 

Morrisville VT 05661 

50 Fairground Rd., Brattleboro VT 05301 

1 School St., Canaan VT 05903 

Main Street, Hardwick, VT 05843 

Hinesburg VT 05461 

Laker Lane, Colchester Vermont 05446 

Brown Trace Rd., Richmond VT 05477 

7 Airport Dr., Bristol VT 05753 

Main Street, St. Johnsbury VT 05819 



At Large 

Jane Caldwell 
Mary Juzwik 
John Morse 
John Rugebregt 
Janet A. Tracy 
Patricia Watson 



Board of Cooperative Educational Services 
Bridge School 

Mendocino High School 

Floyd County Schools 



Dix Ave., Hudson Falls NY 12839 
Boulder CO 80303 

135 Prospect St., Providence R1 02906 
P.O. Box 226, Mendocino, CA 95460 
949 Granby Way, Aurora CO 80012 
Prestonburg, KY 41653 



o 



| ]^J ( 'dlebury 



, Vermont 



45 



Fall /Winter 1997 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 



Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network 
Bread Loaf School of English 
Middlebury College 
Middlebury, Vermont 
05753-6115 



Nonprofit 
U S Postage 
PAID 

Middlebury College 



49 

Bread Loaf School of English, Middlebury College 

er|( 



Middlebury, VT 



® 

U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 

National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 



(Specific Document) 

I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title Bread Loaf Rural Teacher Network Magazine: Theme Issue Title “Networking 

Across Boundaries” Fall/Win 1997 


Author(s): C^ r lS | 


B)€f\So r> i €.cf)'io r 


Corporate Source: 

fcr4a.d loa{ School d'f /Mwkbvn/ Ce/ZfpL 


Publication Date: 

fk/ttfef" AT ^ 7 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 





If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2A documents 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2B documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

A® 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

A® 






c/ 




cJff 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

1 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

2A 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

2B 



Level 1 




Level 2A 

i 




Level 2B 

I 




Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival 
media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. 



Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media 
for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 



Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 



Sign 

here,-* 



ni*ase 



ERIC 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents wiii be processed at Level 1 . 



1 hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 


T Laa 


Printed Name/Position/Title: / ! “ t 

CUr'vs fc-e,r^/7r\ Vtdrmr 


Organization/Address: 

Qr/flJ Schvo! cf Zbcj/tsh 




F// £6* Y? So 




Da,e 

m+m 






t J u 



(over) 




III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 



If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 

ERIC/CRESS AT AEL 
1031 QUARRIER STREET - 8TH FLOOR 
P O BOX 1348 
CHARLESTON WV 25325 

phone: 800/624-9120 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 

ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
1 1 00 West Street, 2 nd Floor 
Laurel, Maryland 20707-3598 



Telephone: 301-497-4080 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-953-0263 



ERJC 



88 (Rev. 9/97) 



e-mail: ericfac@inet.ed.gov 
WWW: http://ericfac.piccard.csc.com 



PREVIOUS VERSIONS OF THIS FORM ARE OBSOLETE. 



