DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 478 406 



SO 035 103 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Muir, Sharon Pray 

Native Americans and Aboriginal Australian Stereotypes. 
2000 - 11-00 

12p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National 
Council for the Social Studies (80th, San Antonio, TX, 
November 16-19, 2000) . 

Reports - Research (143) — Speeches /Meeting Papers { 150 ) 
EDRS Price MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

Comparative Analysis; Cross Cultural Studies; ^Cultural 
Context; Cultural Differences; ^Ethnic Stereotypes; Foreign 
Countries ; ^Indigenous Populations 
^Australia; ^Native Americans; Similarities 



ABSTRACT 

Aboriginal Australians represent 1.5% of Australia’s 
population, nearly double the percentage of native people in the U.S. 
population. While indigenous peoples throughout the world share common 
similarities, particularly contemporary issues and their spiritual regard for 
nature, many aspects ^of their lifestyles are different, such as governance, 
education, religion, and regard for gender. This paper describes the five 
most prominent categories of similarities among aboriginal Australians and 
Native Americans (categories are based quantitatively only on data available 
for Australia, as no way to quantify works about Native American culture was 
found) . The term stereotype is defined broadly as referring to distortions, 
omissions, and other indignities as perceived by either group. The paper 
describes four circumstances where notable differences between the treatment 
of Native Americans and Aboriginal Australians were detected. (Contains 25 
references, 6 literature references, and 11 notes.) (BT) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



so 035 103 



Native, Americans and Aboriginal Australian Stereotypes 



O 



oO 




Sharon Pray Muir, Professor 
muir@oakland . edu 
Oakland University 
Rochester, MI 48309-4401 



Presented to the College and University Faculty Assembly 
Annual Meeting of the National Council for the Social Studies 



San Antonio, TX 
November, 2000 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

P. 




1 

V 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



1E§T COPY AmiMILi 

2 

1 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educationaf Research and Improvenrrenl 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
X CENTER (ERIC) 

yQ This document has been reproduced as 
^ received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

O Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



* Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI oosition or policy. 



Native Americans and Aboriginal Australian Stereotypes 

Background 

By our standards, Australia is sparsely populated; only 19 million people are dispersed 
unevenly across a continent almost the size of the continental United States. But, Aboriginal 
Australians represent 1.5% of the nation’s population, nearly double the percentage of Native 
people in the American population. When Europeans first became aware of Australia’s 
existence, the 300,000 people who lived there spoke 250 different lan^ages with over 700 
dialects (Geary, 1997). By comparison, when European explorers arrived in North America, the 
Native population is estimated to have been much larger — 7 million (Dobyns as cited by 
Edmunds, 1995; Reference Encyclopedia 1992). 

At the outset, I want to avoid suggesting too many comparisons between Aboriginal and 
Native cultures. The Aboriginal scholars with whom I worked^ took care to say that while 
indigenous people throughout the world share some common similarities — especially 
contemporary issues and their spiritual regard for nature — many aspects of their lifestyles are 
very different, especially governance, education, religion, regard for gender. Both groups can 
be as curious about and puzzled by some of the other’s habits as non-indigenous people are. 

With regard to this paper’s title, the term stereotype is defined broadly as referring to 
distortions, omissions, and other indignities as perceived by either group 

Research Design 

Over the last 20 years, considerable attention has been given to the ethnic and gender 
stereotypes in print and on film. Much of the writing is by members of those groups. I began 
with a seminal study by the Council of Interracial Books for Children (1977) that described 
stereotypes about women and five ethnic groups. The committee that wrote the chapter on 
Native Americans was chaired by the late Michael Dorris, of the Medoc Nation. Subsequent 
writing by others (Galloway, 1987; Mickinock, 1971; Popp, 1975; Slapin, Seale, 85 Gonzales, 
1996) continues to trace these stereotypes in more recent literature. 

The Australian portion of the study drew on a research library containing 2,500 materials 
meiintained by South Australia’s Department of Education.^ Materials in the collection are 
reviewed monthly by a panel of Aboriginal educators, which classifies each item into four 
categories: hi ghly recommended, recommended, recommended with caution, or not 
recommended. It is encouraging that only 1 1% of the materials are not recommended.^ 
Moreover, most of the undesirable materials were published over 20 years ago, though 40% of 
the not-recommended items were issued in the 1980s and 1990s (Table 1). What is 
discouraging is that many titles on the not-recommended list are the books and films most 
widely used in schools and well known to the general public (D. Fairey, personal 
communication. May 26, 1997). 

This paper describes the five most prominent categories of similarities, which overlap 
considerably. Those categories are based quantitatively only on data available for Australia; I 
have found no way to quantify works about Native culture. Finally, I will describe four 
circumstances where I detected notable differences between the treatment of Native Americans 
and Aboriginal Australians. 



^ The Faculty of Aboriginal and Islander Studies, University of South Australia, Underdale 
campus, Adelaide, South Australia. 

2 The Aboriginal Education Unit, part of the Department of Education and Children’s Services, 
is located Enfield, South Australia, an Adelaide suburb. 

3 No rating was assigned to 134 titles, or 5% of the collection. 




3 



3 



Similar Stereotypes 

Eurocentric perspectives. An African proverb tells us that “until the lions have their own 
historians, tales of hunting will always glorify the hunter,” It reminds us that history is written 
by the conquerors. The portrayal of Anglo superiority and indigenous inferiority has a long 
history in both U,S, and Australian cultures. In the early days of exploration, Christian 
missionaries to North America debated if Indians had souls and, thus, could be eligible for 
baptism (Campbell, 1996), Likewise, as recently as the late 1950s, Victoria’s state bureaucracy 
for Aborginal affairs was housed in the Bureau of Fisheries and Aborigines, In both countries, 
the continents were described as empty or unexplored, though the concept terra nullius lingered 
much longer in Australia where a High Court ruling acknowledged native title only 8 years 
ago.'^ 

Both Native Americans and Aboriginal Australians point out that the hordes people who 
followed Cook and Columbus are described as colonists, settlers, and pioneers only from the 
perspective of the newcomers. Instead, they are invaders in the eyes of the indigenous people 
who had inhabited both continents for tens of thousands of years. It also is a matter of 
perspective if indigenous people eagerly cooperated with colonists or were kidnapped, employed 
or enslaved. Students of U,S. history can easily believe Indians were obstacles to progress or 
massacring savages rather than dispossessed people struggling to retain self-determination and 
to defend their sovereignty. Some practices are blatantly Eurocentric, such as the past 
tradition of classifying Native People as friendly (Squanto and Sacajawea) or unfriendly 
(Geronimo or “King Philip”), Some Native Americans people question if their ways should be 
characterized as contributions to modem society or if, instead, Europeans of necessity had to 
adopt their medicines and methods of agriculture, fishing, and hunting techniques in order to 
survive. In Australia, Europeans sometimes rejected Aboriginal practices that they later 
regretted. For example European colonist once forbade Aboriginal people to bum undergrowth, 
a technique that is recognized today as essential to reduce devastating bush fires. 

These Eurocentric perspectives delayed granting popular sovereignty to Native Americans 
until 1924 and to Aboriginal Australians until 1967, contemporaneous with our Civil Rights 
Movement, Today, most people recognize that Eurocentrism underlies claims of Columbus’ 
“discovery,” yet that perspective still appears in textbooks, which rarely present other 
perspectives. Consequently, Janugiry 26 is celebrated as Australia Day by European 
Australians at the same time that it is observed as Survival Day by Aboriginal people, not 
unlike the different attitudes of Native Americans toward Columbus Day and Thanksgiving, 
Similarly, Aboriginal people looked upon Australia’s 1988 bicentenary celebration with grief 
much as Native Americans regarded the Columbus quincentenary in 1992. 

Misrepresentation of both groups occurs when people outside the culture recast events, 
language, and people through their own eyes. Condescending attitudes toward indigenous 
people remain in books, not necessarily new books but books that still reside in libraries and 
schools. Aeneas Ounn's We of the Never Never, which was first published at the turn of the 
century, has been reprinted, made into a movie, and resides even in several Southeast 
Michigan libraries. It portrays Aboriginal adults sometimes as childlike, other times with “the 
mentality of favourite pets” (Koumalatsos, 1980, p. 104). A touching documentary describes 
White officials as recently as the 1950s tossing hard candy, or “lollies,” about on the ground in 
Aboriginal communities then laughing as children scampered after them.^ 



^ In the 1992 Mabo case {Eddie Mabo and Others v, the State of Queensland) the High Court 
ruled that Aboriginal people have claims to Crown land and a 4-3 vote in 1996 (Wik) ^ 
overturned a legislative statute, asserting that pastoral leases, which account for 42% of the 
nation’s area, extinguished native title. 

^ “Lousy Little Sixpence” was a episode on Inside Story, which aired on ABC [Australian 
Broadcasting Corporation], July 8, 1997. 



4 



As in the American literature, where daughters of Native American chiefs were labeled 
princesses, a popular book about Aboriginal childhood written in this century was titled The 
Black Princess (Gunn, 1903). In Galloway’s study (1987) of books by Native American and non- 
Native authors, she discovered that he non-Native writers created characters who conformed to 
the dominant society or treated them with pity, condescending in their attempts to understand 
them. For example, the lead character in Jemmy, was described by author Jon Hassler as a 
“half-breed” who comes “from a different background and hasn’t had your adv^tages” (as cited 
in Carver, 1988). 

Eurocentric curiosity often seems fascinated by the supposed conflict of living in two 
cultures. Unlike Jean Craighead George’s The Talking Earth, in which a resourceful Seminole 
girl “finds ways to combine her school knowledge with the wisdom of the elders” (Carver, 1988, 
p. 29), most literature portrays indigenous people as making difficult choices between 
traditional life and modem, European ways. Aboriginal scholars with whom I worked were 
bemused by the seemingly endless questions posed to them about what others supposed were 
difficult personal struggles between cultures. Instead, they pointed out, people of European 
descent do not seem to “struggle” with managing cell phones and personal computers while at 
the same time cherishing their Old World heritage. The pointed out that most people manage 
to live in a modem world while still celebrating St. Patrick’s Day, observing Rosh Hashanah, or 
wearing kinte cloth. But the fascination with cultural adjustment is anticipated to be more 
exotic for indigenous people. They wondered if ethnic minorities in the U.S. were constantly 
asked if they are tom by their Irish, African, or Jewish heritage. 

Objectionable portrayals. Language is a matter of concern to many people in both 
indigenous groups, including terminology that refers to them. Most, though not all, indigenous 
people in North America’ scorn Indian, because it refers less to them and more to Columbus’ 
principal discovery ... that he was lost. Other terms — Natim American, American Indians, or 
indigenous people — also have problems. The preferred general term, though, is clearer Down 
Under where vocabulary is codified in the Australian government style manual. Aboriginal, 
with an upper case A, distinguishes the first people of Australia from the word beginning in the 
lower case, which describes indigenous people throughout the world. Also, the noun aborigine 
has been replaced by the adjective to better acknowledge the large number of Aboriginal 
cultures. It also can be a noun, as in “An Aboriginal said ....” (Jonas & Langton, 1993). 
Moreover, since 1978, Torres Strait Islanders, formerly recognized by the government as 
Aboriginal, have achieved a separate political identity to acknowledge that their Micronesian 
culture as distinctly different from mainland groups. 

In addition, indigenous people in both countries are offended by some terminology. 

Aboriginal Australians abhor being called Abos, gins, or ATSICs^ much as Native Americans 
react to redskin, squaw, and papoose. They actively oppose likening their lifestyles to Stone 
Age practices or being accused of cannibalism. Both groups dislike being called tribes. Native 
Americans point out that they were the People before Europeans arrived and that treaties with 
the U.S. government referred to them as nations; communities or clans are more accurate terms 
for Aboriginal groups. They also oppose attempts to quantify culture as part-Aboriginal, half- 
caste, or full-blood. The Commonwealth’s definition of Aboriginality is unique, based on 
“primary identity rather than degree of ancestry” (Gutman, 1991, p. 17). Australia considers a 
person Aboriginal if (s)he (a) has an Aboriginal ancestor, (b) identifies oneself as Aboriginal, and 
(c) is recognized by members of an Aboriginal community (Jonas & Langton, 1993). 

Aboriginal people are custodians of The Dreaming, an oral tradition that link a person’s 
identity with both place and kin, that teaches through an evolving spirituality, that maintain 
the continuity of law, and that explains the natural order of the continent’s creation (Groome, 
1994). Dreaming stories are symbolic, abstract, and contextual, relying on inductive learning 
so “hearers... work out for themselves what the meanings [are]” (Groome, p. 97). Because of 
their sacred nature, they should be likened to Biblical studies and be referred to as The 



^ ATSIC is the acronym for the leading political organization, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander Commission. 




5 



5 



Dreaming or as Dreaming stories. Dreamtime is believed to liken them to mjdhs, legends, or 
fairy tales.^ 

Finally, people with long oral traditions usually use language quite precisely. 

Nonetheless, books and films have led some people to wonder if Native and Aboriginal people 
were capable of mastering English (Slapin, Seale, & Gonzales, 1996, p. 2 1). Just as American 
television and film s sometimes depicted Indians speaking “Tonto English” (Carver, 1988), 
Australian scripts often put pidgin English in the mouths of Aboriginal people, though they 
were spared an5dhing quite as long lasting as the hated Indian greeting, “How.” While such 
exeimples usually are found in fiction, in the forward to a 1977 nonfiction book, a noted 
authority on Aboriginal culture wrote that he hoped “Aborigines would read the book since [the 
new edition] was free ... of technicalities and jargon” (Beckett, p. xiv, italics added). 

Overemphasis on traditional lifestyle. Today, it is estimated that more Aboriginal people 
have adopted modem lifestyles. Only 25% of Aboriginal people live in traditional communities 
while about 60% of Native Americans live on reservations (Reference encyclopedia ...,1 992). 

Both Native and Aboriginal people feel their lives are inappropriately depicted with too much 
emphasis on traditional practices and the exotic. Native Americans are usually shown wearing 
traditional clothing, living in traditional homes, and concerned only with historical issues, 
especially in illustrations and photographs. Indeed, Native Americans only began to emerge as 
post-frontier figure in American history in the last 20 years. Still, films about contemporeuy 
Native fife, such as Powwow Highway, are rare and the number of people who write in the 
Aboriginal voice is small. None of the commercial Australian films about Aboriginality that 
have been distributed commercially in the U.S. are endorsed by indigenous people Down 
Under. 

Cultural theft. Cultural theft occurs in two ways: by revealing cultural information 
without authorization or by falsely assuming a cultural identity. 

Eiarly researchers and curious outsiders often have divulge secrets about indigenous 
people, inadvertently or wantonly. They sometimes reveal practices and 
ceremonies — pejoratively likening them to magic and sorcery — that should be known only by 
some members of Aboriginal groups and Native people. Some of the Dreaming can be shared 
with anyone; other stories are known only by select people within Aboriginal groups. Likewise, 
skeletal remains have appeared in photographs, to the horror and distress of ancestors. 

Since the 1940s, Australians have debated who can write about whom. Many authors, 
including anthropologists — most solely of European identity,® believe anyone has a right to 
write about anything. Native and Aboriginal people feel differently. The reviews for 20 
Aboriginal books on the not-recommended list included words such as perceptive, interesting, 
or sensitive. Still,, they were not recommended because the writer’s “authenticity [was] not 
clear.” While Aboriginal input alone does not guarantee accuracy, non-Aborigin^ people are 
expected to acknowledge the Aboriginal group that granted permission to write about them or 
that helped prepare the material. 

Indigenous people in both countries have reason to be weuy of authorship, especially after 
recent instances in which people have fraudulently claimed heritage. 

• Three paintings — purqxjrtedly by an indigenous artist, Eddie Burrup— appeared in a 
traveling Aboriginal exhibit ... until the artist’s true identity was discovered. Burrup turned out 



^ Aboriginal people probably are unhappy with the title of a recent European Australian 
memoir. Dreamtime Alice by Mandy Sayer. (The book is published by Ballantine; it was 
reviewed in the March 19, 1998 issue of the Detroit Free Press, p. H7.) 

® About half of the Faculty of Aboriginal Studies at the University of South Australia and of 
the staff in the Department of Education’s Aboriginal Education Unit had Aboriginal 
backgrounds. 



to be a well-known, 82-year-old White, West Australian artist, Elizabeth Durack (Fitzgerald, 
1997). 

• In the same year. My Own Sweet Time (1995), was issued by one of the country's 
leading Aboriginal publishers. It purportedly was the autobiography of a young Pitjantjatjara 
woman, one of the “stolen generation" adopted by a White family.^ The book received several 
awards before the real author's identity was revealed: a White, male Adelaide taxi driver. On a 
personal note, after the fraud was exposed, three Aboriginal women urged me privately to read 
Sweet Time, the best book about a contemporary Aboriginal woman they had ever read. Still, 
the author's deception caused the team of Aboriginal reviewers to demote the book from highly- 
recommended to not recommended, 

• A similar example of fraudulent identity surrounded The Education of Little Tree^ a U.S. 
best seller believed for years to be the childhood memoir of an Okleihoma Cherokee, Forrest 
Carter (1970/ 1986). The featured character. Little Tree, was an engaging and clever child, 
much wiser than any White man. (I was among the Whites who loved it; as one reviewer said, 
“Reading it made us feel good.") I lived in Okleihoma during the 1970s and recall that I never 
met a Cherokee who liked the book or thought it was credible. They regarded it with suspicion 
and pointed out that it romanticized their difficult lives. Then, in 1991, a widely publicized 
expose revealed that the author, who had no Native heritage, was a former Alabama Klginsmsin, 
Asa Carter. He not only had written several Western novels but also penned George Wallace's 
1962 inaugural speech in which the governor vowed, “Segregation now, segregation tomorrow, 
segregation forever." 

• Mutant Message Down Under represents a different type of fraud. Author Marla 
Morgan, acknowledged that she was an American, but she described what she claimed were 
real experiences with an unidentified Aboriginal group “somewhere" in the Outback. Some 
Aboriginal people thought it was hysterically silly, but most of their reviewers regarded it with 
contempt, calling it “New Age" fantasy, “condescending," a “serious insult to the religious 
beliefs of desert Aboriginals," even “pernicious and damaging" (Laurie, 1995). They maintained 
that most of the places she described do not exist and that she mixed together sup>erficial 
knowledge about many different Aboriginal groups, ideas they believe she got from reading 
early works that described exotic practices. After the leading Aboriginal political group sent 
delegations to appear on talk shows in the U.S. and Japan — where the book was a best-seller — 
Morgan and her publisher, HarperCollins, reissued the book as fiction (Laurie). 

Generic anonymity. This category adheres most closely with the traditional definition of 
stereotype, inappropriately overgeneralizing characteristics of one person or group to all 
members of the group. Both cultures have suffered by being portrayed as generic Indisins or 
Aborigines without regard to their specific nations or communities. Individuals in both groups 
generally prefer specific group names — Mohawk and Pottawatomi or Kuyani and Yagsin — to 
broad labels, such as Native American or Aboriginal Australian. This category also includes 
illustrations in which Native or Aboriginal people all look alike. 

Native Americans have suffered by portrayals both in film and in book illustrations, often 
depicted as living in a tipi; wearinhg buckskins, loincloths, and long feathered headdresses; 
and chasing buffaloes, regardless of where they resided in North America. Characters 
sometimes were an amalgam of many Native nations: a Southwest tribal name and Plains 
clothing on a character that lived among wild ponies on the Atlantic Coast. Some tribal names 
were entirely fictitious, and ridiculous names have frequented stories for American children 
(e.g., Indian Two Feet, Little Chief Slapin, Seale, & Gonzales, 1996). They are so inauthentic as 
to mock the culture 



^ Just as the U.S. sent Native children, sometimes involuntarily, to boarding schools for a 
“civilized" education, Australia's states and churches forcibly removed many children, primarily 
those with lighter skin color, adopting some of them into white homes. Whereas the practice in 
the U.S. reached its height between 1885 and 1930 (Edmunds, 1995), the practice in Australia 
occurred primarily from the 1930s into the 1970s (HEROC, 1997). 



O 

ERIC 



7 



7 



In Australian literature, most Aboriginal people are dark-skinned nomads; in fact, some 
were very sedentary, depending largely on the availability of food. Where food and water were 
regularly available, people tended to settle in long-established communities; where food and 
water were limited, they searched for sustenance in predictable ways, not aimlessly and 
desperately. Returning boomerangs were developed and used only by some groups and non- 
returning boomerangs always were more common. In fact, boomerangs were not used at all in 
vast areas of the continent. Fair-skinned Aboriginal people are almost nonexistent in book 
illustrations, even though most of the Aboriginal people with whom I worked had strikingly 
European features, a result of a nondominant gene that cguries the dark-skinned Aboriginal 
features. 

As individuals, indigenous people often are anonymous. For example, works of art in 
Australia’s National Museum were, as recently as the early 1980s, attributed to “An Aboriginal 
Artist,” even though the artist’s name was actaowledged in the museum’s records. Likewise, 
one Aboriginal man from Victoria expressed surprise to see his photograph above a book 
caption that merely identified him as “An Aboriginal ...” (Black, 1982). 

Notable DifTerenoes 

Four notable differences emerged during my study. . I take full responsibility for them, 
because each one grew out of my personal experiences and observations, not from an analysis 
of quantitative data. The first two seemingly favor Native Americans; the latter two somewhat 
favor Aboriginal people. 

General level of knowledge. People in the United States are more informed about their 
indigenous people than Australians are about their counterparts. Even though the knowledge 
about Native Americans is superficial and rife with stereotypes, they at least know more. 

Until the last few years. Aboriginal history and culture has not been taught in Australian 
schools. Books with titles that imply they are comprehensive Australian histories, rarely 
mention Aboriginal issues, even titles with 1980s and 1990s copyrights. Students of European 
descent described being saturated in the history of European Australia as well as in British 
history. Many European Australians expressed dismay and embarrassment when they 
encountered the history of their indigenous people. One young dark-skinned Aboriginal 
graduate student told me of his shock, at age 15, when he began to realize that his ancestors 
did not come over on a boat from Europe! Because he had never been exposed to any history 
of his own people in school, he naively assumed that Aboriginal people arrived with and 
“discovered” the continent at the same time the Europeans did in 1770 (R Gwartney, personal 
communication. May 7, 1997). In fact, Australians know more about Native Americans than 
they do about their own Aboriginal people. No doubt due to Holl 5 wood’s influence, when asked 
to name Native American and Aboriginal groups, Australians can usually netme three or four 
times as many groups from North America (C. Bourke, personal communication, April 22, 
1997). 

A Commonwealth study on indigenous education charged Australia’s Ministry of 
Education with establishing a strategic plan for improving the education both of and about 
Aboriginal people {National Review of Education, 1994). One of the eight priorities established 
1998 as the target year for the states and territories to begin implementing school and 
university curricula that would be inclusive of its Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples 
(Ministerial Council on Education, 1995). But most teachers, whose average age is 48, were 
educated in the same system and are ill prepared to implement the new curriculum. Some 
teacher education programs began requiring a course in Aboriginal Studies in 1998, and the 
state of South Australia hopes to have trained all of its teachers in a meager one-day workshop 
by the end of 2002 (Aboriginal Education Unit, 1996). 

Overt racism. Without judging the relative merits of overt versus subtle racism, 
Australians express more overtly racist statements about its Aboriginal population than the 
general U.S. population expresses toward Native People. In my 2 months outside Adelaide, I 
encountered blatant anti-Aboriginal sentiment in Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and 
Tasmania. The general population was polarized between a political movement that promoted 
the old White Australia policy and opposed further immigration — especially from Asia. In those 
states, I spoke with only one Australian of European descent who referred to Aboriginal people 



ERIC 



8 



8 



in neutral terms. Often, when people were aware of the purpose of my study, their comments 
were reminiscent of what 1 heard as a child in the Deep South, a decade before the Civil Rights 
Movement:^®: “Have you heard about our Aboriginal problem? We should have wiped out all of 
them as Tasmania did.” “1 hope you stay away from those Aborigines — they’re all drunks and 
shiftless.” “Australia wouldn’t have nearly so many economic problems if we didn’t have all 
those Abos on the dole.” Upon learning about the purpose of my trip, one man exclaimed, “Oh, 
no! You’re going to leave with a horrible opinion of our country.” He did not realize that he was 
contributing to one lasting impression, my dismay at Australia’s general level of ignorance of a 
proud, misunderstood people. 

Trivialized objects. Aboriginal Australians do not seem to have been appropriated as 
objects in the way American Indians have. Native People have long opposed being used in 
alphabet books — E is for Eskimo, 1 is for Indian — especially when they were the only humans 
among objects, such as apples, boxes, and cats. Likewise, 1 found no instances in which 
Aboriginal people were used in counting rhymes, such as “Ten Little Indians.” Native 
Americans also are sensitive to children trivializing honors bestowed to its elders, such as 
when they dress up in feathers headbands and play games of cowboy and Indians (Slapin, 
Seale, 8& Gonzales, 1996). Additionally, Aboriginal Australians seem to have been spared the 
indignity of having sacred objects, such as peace pipes, feathers, and dances, mocked in 
cartoons or trivialized as team mascots in sports and athletics. 

1 found only one book containing “A is for Aborigine” (which surprised most of my 
Aboriginal friends, who didn’t think it had ever been done), an out-of-print work that used 
something Australian for each letter. One research librarian showed me an antique board 
game, probably published in the 1920s or 1930s, in which the object was to wiped out the 
most Aboriginal people. Except for Anglo tour guides who encouraged women travelers to play 
the didgeridu — an instrument that in Aboriginal culture is played only by men, who urged 
tourists to try spinning the sacred bullroarer, or who demonstrated bone pointing, sacred 
objects in Aboriginal ceremonies, Anglo Australians do not seem to emulate Aboriginal culture. 
These insults may be less common Down Under due to general disregard, resentment, or 
benign neglect. Even though some lame attempts are being made commercially to introduce 
Halloween to Australian society, 1 cannot imagine that Aborginal costumes would be very 
popular. 

Multicultural education. Multicultural education in the U.S. is a movement to increase the 
perspectives in the mEiinstream curriculum, among others, especially African, Asian, Latino, 
Middle Eastern, and Native Americans. At the request of Aborigmal Australians, however, 
multicultural education in that country does not include Abori^ality. Even though they 
recognize that most Australians are woefully ignorant of Aboriginal history and culture, with 
pride they maintain that their nation is multicultural because of immigration. Therefore, 
Australian culture is either European and Aboriginal, with the multicultural flavors brought by 
recent immigrants — ^Asian, African, American, and other European Australians. A more 
militant faction maintains that Australia’s culture should be regarded exclusively as Aboriginal 
and all immigrant groups, including Anglos, should be under the multicultural umbrella. 

Every Aboriginal educator 1 met expressed proudly that they had not “fallen into that trap” and 
allowed themselves to be marginalized in a category with recent immigrants the way Native 
Americans have in the United States (personal communication, C. Bourke, April 22, 1997). 

Reverse Perspectives 

It can be instructor for us to see how we are viewed by indigenous people. On an Amazon 
expedition a few years ago, a Peruvian native told me how sorry he felt for me because 1 was 



As the U.S. refers to its racially conservative region as the Deep South, so does Australia, 
except that its location south of the equator is reversed; thus, Queenland is sometimes called 
the Deep North. 

In addition to ethnicity, multicultural education includes gender, religion, exceptionalities, 
and socioeconomic class (NCATE, 1992). 



O 

ERIC 



9 



9 



the victim of White man's time. He thought having to wear a watch would ruin his life. One 
Aborigined woman who tried to help me understand the Dreaming, thought my life must be 
hollow and empty “because you don't have a Dreaming." They both had a very different 
perspective about success and happiness than most of us hold. 

In conclusion, enjoy — and consider — this perspective of 10 Little Whitepeople (Slapin & 
Esposito, 1995) by two Native educators of the dominant, contemporary culture in North 
America: 



10 little Whitepeople standing in line; 

1 lost his ATM card and then there were 9. 

9 little Whitepeople tried to lose weight; 

1 went too far and then there were 8. 

8 little Whitepeople in junk-bond heaven 
Came a hostile takeover and then there were 7. 

7 little Whitepeople didn't like to mix; 

1 moved to suburbia and then there were 6. 

6 little Whitepeople struggling to “arrive,” 

The corporation downsized and then there were 5. 

5 little Whitepeople shopping at the store; 

1 overran his credit line and then there were 4. 

4 little Whitepeople eating wine and brie; 

1 ate some mold then there were only 3. 

3 little Whitepeople watching the news; 

1 had a heart attack and then there were 2. 

2 little Whitepeople out to have some fun. 

Crash went the BMW and then there was 1 . 

1 little Whiteperson l 5 dng in the sun; 

The ozone hole grew bigger and then there was none. 



O 

ERIC 



10 10 



References 



Aboriginal Education Unit. (1996). Aboriginal perspectives across the curricuhiTn. Adelaide, 
South Australia: Department for Education & Children’s Services. ? 

Beckett, J. (1977). Forward. In A. P. Elkin, Aboriginal men of high degree. St. Lucia: 
University of Queensland Press. 

Campbell, D. E. (1996). Choosing democracy: A practical guide to multicultural education. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Carter, D. T. ( 199 1 , October 4). The transformation of a klansman. New York Times, p. 
A31. See also: Gates, J. L., Jr. (1991, November 24). “Authenticity,” or the lesson of Little Tree. 
The New York Times, sec. 7, pp. 9, 26-28; Leland, J., & Peyser, M. (1991, October 14). New age 
fable from an old school bigot? The rnurl^ history of the best-selling Little Tree. Newsweek, p. 
62; Marker, M. (1992). The education of Little Tree: What it really reveals about the public 
schools. Phi Delta Kappan, 74, Tl^-ITl . 

Carver, N. L. (1988). Stereotypes of American Indians in adolescent literature. English 
Journal, 77(5), 25-32. 

Cotterell, J. (1975). The image of the Aboriginal in modem Australian children’s fiction: A 
survey of the writing in the last ten years. The Aboriginal Child at School, 3(1), 19-40. 

Council on Interracial Books for Children. (1977). Native Americans. In Stereotypes, 
distortions and omissions in U.S. history textbooks. New York: Author. 

Craven, R., & Rigney, R. (1998). Misconceptions, stereotypes and racism: Time for a 
change. In R. Craven (Ed.), Undertanding and teaching indigenous Australian studies. Sydney, 
Australia. 

Edmunds, R. D. (1995). New visions, old stories: The emergence of a new Indian history. 
OAH Magazine of History, 9(4), 3-9. 

Fitzgerald, M. (1997, March 31). Hearts of whiteness. Time [Australia edition], p. 65. 

Firth, S., & Darlington, R. (1993). Racial stereotypes in the Australian curriculum: The 
case study of New South Wales. In J. Mangan (Ed.), The imperial curriculum, racial images and 
education in the British colonial experience. London: Routledge. 

Galloway, M. E. (1987, May). American Indian women in literature: Stereotypical 
characterizations of insufficient self-determination. Paper presented at the annual American 
Indian Conference, Mankato, MN. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 287 793) 

Geary, J. (1997, July 7). Speaking in tongues. Time [Australia ed.j, pp. 50-55. 

Groome, H. (1994). Teaching Aboriginal studies effectively. Wentworth Falls, N.S.W., 
Australia: Social Science Press. 

Harvey, K. D., Harjo, L. D., & Jackson, J. K. (1990). Teaching about Native Americans 
(Bulletin No. 84). Washin^on, DC: National Council for the Social Studies. 

Human Rights & Equal Opportunity Commission (HEROC). (1997). Bringing them home: 
Report of the national inquiry into the separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children 
from their families. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service. 

<http: / / www.austlii.edu. au / au/ special / rsjproject/rsjUbrary / hreoc / stolen/ > 

Jonas, B., & Langton, M. (1993). The little red, yellow & black (and green and blue and 
white) book: A short guide to indigenous Australia, [n.l.j: Australian Institute for Aboriginal & 
Torres Strait Islander Studies. 

Koumalatsos, E. (1980). Aborigines in Australian children’s literature. In S. Lees (Ed.), A 
track to unknown water (pp. 104-11 1). Proceedings of the 2nd Pacific Rim Conference on 
Children’s Literature. Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Melbourne State College. 

Laurie, V. (1995, September 26). Another story grows in the telling. The Bulletin [Sydney, 
Austrnliaj, p. 38. 




11 



Loewen, J. W. (1994). Lies my teacher taught me: Everything your history textbook got 
wrong. New York: New Press. 

National Review of Education for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People: Final 
Report. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service. 

Reference encyclopedia of the American Indian (6th ed.). Rye, NY: Todd Publications. 

Slapin, B., 8s Esposito, A. (1995). 10 little Whitepeople. Berkeley, CA: Oyate. 

Slapin, B., Seale, D., & Gonzales, R. (1996). How to tell the difference: A guide to 
evaluating children’s books for anti-Indian bias (Rev. ed). Berkeley, CA: Oyate. 

Wicks, G. (Ed.). (1994). Australia in brief {41st ed.). Canberra: Australian Government 
Publishing Service. 

Literature References 

Carter, F. (1976/1991). The education of Little Tree. New York: Delacorte (republished by 
Albuquerque’s University of New Mexico Press.) 

Brown, B., & Watts, H. (Producers). (1997). Dead heart [Commercial film]. Australia. 

Gunn, A.. (1905). Little black princess. London: Angus 8s Robertson. 

Gunn, A.. (1908). Wie of the never-never. London: Hutchinson. 

Koolmatrie, W. (1995). My own sweet time. Broome, Western Australia: Magabala Books. 

Morgan, M. (1994). Mutant message down under. New York: HarperCoUins. 




12 



12 



«tion Release http://www.ericfacility.org/reprod.htm: 








%i|| 

li^ss 

^ i 



fe 





0> 

CA 

eO 

% ^ 

X I 

§ ^ 

O o 



CJ ^ 
22 o 

S K 

^ CO 

2“ 

a 

<u 



o 

H 

U 



u 

a 

H 



P 

U 

O 

Q 




■‘iction Release http://www,ericfacility.org/reprod.hi 




O 

P 

0 

1 

I 

Z 

O 

z 

s 

o 



1 o 

iERiC 



o 



If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please provide the following 
information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly available, and a dependable source can be specified. 
Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 




N 




