DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 387 290 



RC 020 251 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Mel i ssa L. Johns 
Americans: A Seven Day Curriculum. 



- Classroom Use - Teaching Guides (For 



IDENTIFIERS 



Archer , 
Nat ive 
Sep 94 
123p. 
Guides 

Teacher) (052) — Books (010) 
MF0I/PC05 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; ''American Indian History; 
American Indian Studies; ''Consciousness Raising; 
Elementary School Curriculum; '"'Grade 6; 
Interdisciplinary Approach; Inter me diate Grades; 
''Learning Activities; Multicultural Education; 
•'Stereotypes; Teaching Guides; Units of Study 
''Native Americans; ''Oppression 



ABSTRACT 

Developed for sixth-grade students, this curriculum 
incorporates Native American issues into such areas as art, social 
studies, language arts, and literature. Specifically, the curriculum 
examines the oppression of Native Americans in American society. The 
curriculum takes 7 days to complete, with the final assignment 
requiring an additional 1 or 2 days. Each lesson includes objectives, 
learning activities, evaluation, and suggested lecture notes. Lessons 
aim to help students analyze their feelings and attitudes concerning 
Native Americans, examine the impact of negative stereotypes and 
misconceptions, identify common Native American stereotypes in 
literature, apply the concept of authenticity to their own artwork, 
recognize contributions of American Indians to American society, 
demonstrate an understanding of Native American stories and legends 
challenge their own previously held attitudes about Native Americans 
by visiting a reservation, acknowledge accomplishments of prominent 
Native Americans, and demonstrate an understanding of the oppression 
of Native Americans by writing a human relations letter to the author 
or illustrator of a children's book. Appendices consist of 
instructional materials and related information for teachers, 
including articles dealing with the oppression of Native Americans; 
poems and short stories; examples of stereotypes in advertisements, 
cartoons, and excerpts from children's books; criteria for selecting 
Native American visitors; information on famous Native Americans; 
information on evaluation and selection of multicultural literature; 
a listing of books containing negative images of Native Americans; a 
listing of Native American tribes; and additional ideas for classroom 
activities. (LP) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



o 
o 



00 



Native Americans: A Seven Day Curriculum 



Melissa L. Johns Archer 
Dept. of Human Relations and Multicultural Education 
St. Cloud State University 
September 1994 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



u s DePArrndCHT op education 

EDUCATIONAI Rr SOURCtS iNrORMATlON 



■PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



CNJ 





CD 



M-n(ji ; ra'^gp^ hatf* U&fr '^nde " '• vp 



o 



mp.-^i (Jo nol ne( ei!ia».i» ff p»es*»nt ,ffn 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) ' 



.0 

ERIC 



• ; 



Rationale for this Native American cuiTiculum project 



1 was taught as a child that the United States is the great melting pot of the world. 
Throughout my education. 1 have uncos ered the myths surrounding this analogy. The 
tmth is that the varied races, cultures, genders and ethnic groups of this country have 
never come even remotely close to melting into one homogeneous system. This is be^^ause 
in order for everyone to blend-to mix well together-they must become the same... white. 
The dominate white American society would love to force everyone to conform to their 
traditional ways of living, believing, dressing, talking, acting, etc. This has never 
happened before, and if this taily is the land of the free and the equal it never will. 

Students must learn that the United T.tates of America is not, and should not be a 
melting pot. If an analogy must be made, the U.S. should strive to be more like a toss 
salad. In this ideal situation, all people (not just the white man) would be considered 
essential ingredients in the success of this country. Success depends on everyone working 
together to achieve one goal, yet retaining individual identities so that we might not be 
reduced to role playing. The differences between people would be valued rather than 
condemned and no one would be forced to conform to anyone else's mles. 

The problem today is that differences are not valued. Minority groups in the U.S. 
are continually oppressed by a white system which is intolerant of diversity. 

Native Americans are an oppressed people in the U.S. Their existence in the white 
dominated society over the past 500 years has been a continuous struggle. American 
Indians have been victims of oppression that has had a profoundly negative effect on their 
self-esteem as well as on their potential advancement in this country. I believe students 
must be aware of the negative stereotypes and myths that surround the Native American 
cuhure. Children can only make changes for the better if they are made aware of the 
issues. With the right education, students can fight the injustices and inequalities forced 
upon Native Americans, which in turn, will help all minority groups. Ignorance is the 
problem. Education is the answer. 



ERLC 



The appropriate grade level for this Native American curriculum guide is grade si x. 

This is a seven day curriculum guide , although the final assignment will require one or two 
additional days to complete It makes no difference what day of the week the curriculum 
begins 

A whole-language approach has been used. Native American issues will be incorporated 
(in varying degrees) into the following areas of the general curriculum: art, social studies, 
language arts and literature. 



* * Be patient with your students. They have been molded by the white American system. 
They are products of the oppressive society in which they live. 



Possible Lecture Notes : 

1 . Emphasize that Columbus could not discover something that others 
(specifically the Native Americans) already knew about and considered their own. 
The Native Americans were here for hundreds of years before Columbus ever 
came here. 

2. Columbus , who was motivated by greed, took advantage of the American 
Indians. He wanted to use the riches and resources he found here for his own 
personal gain, at the expense of the Native Americans. Historical facts show 
that although most of Natives were accommodating, Columbus stole from them, 
maimed them, forced hundreds into slavery, and even killed them. 

3. Give a working definition of oppression. Explain that it all began the day 
Columbus came to America. Before that, the hundreds of Native American tribes 
lived in relative peace. From 1942 on, the American Indians have been struggling 
with the oppressive situations that American institutions have put them in. These 
institutions include among others: the government (at both state and federal 
levels), the educational system (schools), religious groups, etc. Suggest that the 
current oppression of Native Americans has been going on for hundreds of years, 
since the days of Columbus. 

4. Explain that for the rest of the week we will be discussing stereotypes, the 
unequal distribution of resources (employment, education, wealth....), and other 
inequalities. We will also be learning more about Native American people and 
their ways of life. The only way to battle the oppression is to overcome the fears 
and the ignorance about Native Americans that the dominate white society has 
held for years. Education is the answer. 

Materials : See appendix A 



Day 1 



Social Studies 

O bjectives : Students will analyze their feelings and attitudes concerning Native Americans 
by answering 13 questions about the people and their way of life. 

Students will relate, in writing, to the feelings of American Indians when 
Columbus came to America and "discovered'' things that already belonged to 
the Natives. 

Activities : 

1 . Explain to students that for the next seven days, they will be studying the 
oppression of American Indians in American society throughout history and today. 
Begin by giving them an informal questionnaire that asks for their ideas, opinions, 
and attitudes concerning Native Americans. Students do not need to put their 
names on the questionnaire. Tell students that their answers will be discussed 
tomorrow. The reason for the questionnaire is to get students thinking about 
Native American issues and to give you ( the teacher ) an idea of where your 
students stand before you get too involved in the curriculum. 

2. Read aloud story activity 3 from ''A Thanksgiving Lesson Plan." Make a 
connection with the students between the story and the actual situation involving 
Columbus and the Native Americans. 

3. Perform the skit where you 'discover' a students bookbag or pencil box and all 
of its contents. Ask students if what you've just done is fair. Does it make sense'^ 
Did you have the right to take the things that you did? Ask the student, whose 
items you took, how he/she felt. Ask the other students how they felt while this 
was happening to one of their classmates. 

4. Ask students to write one or two paragraphs explaining how they would feel if 
they were the American Indians who were here when Columbus arrived in 1492. 
Why would they feel the way they feel? 

Evaluation : Read the questionnaires to see if students have put some thought and careflil 
analysis into their answers. 

Read the students' paragraphs to see if they understand how Native Americans 
may have felt in 1942. 

I islen to the classroom discussion Are the students active participants'^ Do they 
seem to be grasping a basic understanding of oppression against American Indians'^ 



ERLC 



Day 2 



Social Studies 

Objective : Students will analyze, in classroom discussion, the impact that negative 

stereotypes and misconceptions have on the modem lives of American Indians. 

Activities : 

1 . Begin by discussing the students' answers to the previous day's questionnaire. 
Explain some of the common misconceptions concerning Native Americans. 

Be sure the students understand they are not wrong or bad for thinking the way 
they do. 

2. Discuss, as a class, some of the common stereotypes about Native Americans. 
These may involve appearance, lifestyle, history, etc. Also discuss some of the 
derogatory terms related to American Indians. Use transparency. Ask students to 
think of some that you may not already have listed. Show several examples of 
stereotypical American Indians in the form of comics, greeting cards, 
advertisements, etc. 

3. Put students into small groups . Have them discuss the ways in which the 
negative stereotypes and misconceptions could affect Native Americans. How 
might the stereotypes make Native Americans feel about themselves? bo they 
think it might be difficult for American Indians to find jobs or housing because of 
the labels they have been given? Could they see why the government might not 
want "those kinds" of people working for it? Could they see why the white 
society might not want "those kinds" of people as members of the educational 
system, teaching our future students? Can they see just how damaging the white 
society's judgments can be? 

Evaluation : Listen to the students' group discussions. Do they seem to understand the 
consequences of stereotyping others? Have they made connections between the 
misconceptions about American Indians and the lifestyles they have been forced 
lead? Do they seem to understand the injustices? 

Assignments: 

1 . Ask students to watch for stereotypical pictures of or writings about Native 
Americans. Ask them to bring in their examples as soon as they find them. All 
examples will be displayed on a bulletin board relating the prejudices the white 
society has of Native Americans. They may want to check merchandise catalogs, 
greeting cards, comics, newspapers, advertisements, and so on. This is not a 



ERLC 



graded assignment., but students only get credit if they bring in at least one 
example. 



2. Give students a word-search puzzle containing both positive and negative terms 
relating to Native Americans. This is not a graded assignment, but students 
receive credit for completing the puzzle. 

Possible Lecture Notes : 

1 . Make connections between the illogical stereotyping of hundreds of different 
.American Indians and the stereotyping of the thousands of different white people. 
Generalizations are sometimes O.K., but over-simplified, distorted, racist 
stereotypes are not only cruel, but senseless. All Native Americans are no more 
alike than are all white people. All human beings have unique qualities that 
differentiate them from all others of their culture or race. 

2. Emphasize the fact that these stereotypic representations are everywhere and 
that they, as well as the misconceptions, have been around for years. 

Materials : See appendix B 
Reading/Literature 

Objective : Students will identify, with the help of the teacher, common Native American 
stereotypes in literature. 

Activity : Show the class several examples of stereotypical literature. Also show some 

positive examples. Ask students to point out the distortions as a class. Ask them 
why the positive books are examples of good literature about American Indians. 

Evaluation : Listen to your students' answers about the stereotypical literature. Can they 
tell the difference between the positive images and the negative images of 
American Indians? 

Possible Lecture Notes : 

1 . Discuss the roles that Native Americans are given in literature. Are they always 
shown as hunters and gatherers (a role of the past)? Are they continuously 
depicted as savage warriors'^ Are they said to be members of an uncivilized race? 

2. Are the roles of the Native Americans shown as being typical of all Native 
Americans'^ Compare this logic with the gender issue. Not all women are 
housewives and not all men are doctors or firemen. Native Americans are as 
diverse a group as white people (whether we're discussing occupations, 
appearances, education, beliefs, habits, etc.). 



ERLC 



3. Discuss the many stereotypical illustrations of American Indians in literature. 



4. Explain that it is disrespectful for children to 'dress up like Indians' or for 
animals to be portrayed as Native American. It is equally bad for ABC books to 
illustrate Indians for the letter T or for counting books to count up 10 little 
Indians. 

References and materials : See appendix B 
Art 

Objectives : Students will apply the concept of authenticity, in writing, to their own 
authentic artwork. 

Students will demonstrate a basic understanding of Native American art by 
1 stening to a presentation on art, then creating their own. 

Activities : 

1. Begin by having the students look up the word ''authentic'' in the dictionary. 
Discuss what the word means. Relate it to the concept of art. 

2. Invite a Native American to show an authentic headdress with feathers. Have 
the visitor explain what the headdress is made of and what it represents. 

3 Have the American Indian visitor do a small art project such as making jewelry 
out of beads. Discussion should focus on the authenticity and meaning of the 
artwork. 

4. When the art project is done and the visitor has left, have students write 
'guarantees of authenticity' for their artwork. Students must be able to explain to 
a stranger, in writing, how he/she can be sure that particular piece of art is 
authentic. 

Evaluation : Did the students complete the artwork'^ Do their 'guarantees' demonstrate 
their knowledge of the concept of authenticity? 

Possible Lecture Notes : 

1 . Be sure to explain that not all Native Americans will make their headdresses or 
bead jewelry in the same way that today's artist did. Just as the tribes are diverse, 
so is their artwork. The may the meanings they hold for their artwork be diverse. 

2. Discuss the disrespect that society shows toward Native Americans when it 
trivializes such things as the sacred headdress. We don't see that in reverse- 
American Indians trivializing things that the white society considers sacred or holy. 



Why is that"^ Why do white institutions make light of important and serious 
traditions , artifacts, etc. belonging to the Native American culture'^ 

Materials : See appendix B 



ERLC 



Day 3 



Social Studies 

Objective : Students will recognize the contributions of American Indians to American 
society by doing research and writing about prominent Native Americans. 

Activities : 

1 . Discuss some of the many contributions American Indians have made to 
American society over the past 500 years. Begin by first asking students to make a 
list of as many things as they can that they think were discovered or created by 
Native Americans. It may be necessary to give them some hints. 

2. Introduce some prominent Native Americans to the class Ask students if they 
know of any other famous American Indians— perhaps from the history of the 
counties in which they live. 

Assignments : 

1 . The students must do a one to two page paper on any prominent Native 
American. This person may be male or female, young or old, dead or alive. 
Library research time will be provided and students will be expected to present 
their findings to the rest of the class. The students must include in the report their 
reason for choosing the person they did, and why that person is so admirable. After 
the presentations are done, the papers will be put into a book about the 
unforgettable, indispensable contributions and discoveries of Native Americans. 

2. Give students a cross-word puzzle containing the names of prominent Native 
Americans discussed in class. The puzzle will also contain words and terms related 
to American Indians that have already been discussed in the curriculum. This 
assignment is not graded, but students will receive credit for completing the 
puzzle. 

Eva l uation : Evaluation will be done after the research project and reports are completed. 
Make sure the students have selected Native Americans who have, in some way, 
made positive contributions to American society. 

P ossible Lecture Not es : 

1 . Explain that Native Americans are not a burden on society. They have helped 
to make America what it is today. Their accomplishments are worthy of 
recognition. 



2. Discuss some of the many discoveries the Native Americans have made 
throughout history such as : corn, potatoes, tomatoes, many medically healing 
plants, rubber, etc. 

References and material s See appendix C 



Literature 

Objecti ve: Students will identify stereotypes in literature by describing them orally to 
classmates. 

Students will be able to give logical explanations as to why certain negative images 
of Native Americans in books are indeed negative. 

Activities : 

1 . Begin by continuing with yesterday's look at negative images of Native 
Americans in literature. Read more examples of books containing negative 
images. Compare them with some books that show Native Americans in positive 
ways according to appearances, traditions, lifestyles, and so on. 

2. Have students get into small groups and identify the negative aspects of some 
books. Afterward, ask students from each group to take turns giving oral 
explanations to the rest of the class on what is wrong with their particular book. 

( Each group should have a different book. ) Ask the rest of the class if they agree 
or disagree with the presenting group's analysis. 

Evaluation : According to the presentations, were the groups successfully able to identify 
the significant stereotypes, racism, or discrimination found in their books 
containing negative images of American Indians'^ Could they not only identify the 
problems, but could they logically give evidence for why those were problem 
areas? Could they use previous learnings from this Native American curriculum 
to substantiate their arguments? 

Possible Lecture Notes : 

1 . Not necessarily related to literature, remember to ask students if they have any 
examples of negative images of Native Americans to turn in for the bulletin board. 

2. Perhaps as an extension of the literature lesson—show the class a portion of 
Disney's 'Teter Pan" containing Native Americans and ask them if they can see 
why it is bad. 



[)av 4 



Social Studies 

Students uill be doing research during this time on their prominent Native American 
project. They will receive assistance in the library if necessar>'. A review of research 
techniques will begin the library session. 

Language Arts 

O bjective Students will be able to eliminate stereotypical text in literature by 

reconstructing a passage containing negative images of Native Americans. 

ActLvity: Give each student a book containing negative images of Native Americans. Ask 
them to select a portion of the book and reconstruct it so that it is non-offensive, 
and non-stereotypical. They may change the ending of the story, or they may 
rewrite a section at the beginning or in the middle. They must write as much 
as is necessary to eliminate the problems in the area of the book they have chosen. 
A general guideline might be two to three paragraphs. 

Evaluation. In the student's writing, they must demonstrate that they can portray Native 
Americans in a positive light. Have they eliminated the stereotypes and racism, or 
have they just re-worded the text so that it is mildly less offensive']' 

Possible Lecture Nmes: Explain to the students that they don't need to make Native 
Americans look and act like Gods. They just need to show American Indians 
doing non-stereotypical things and looking like unique human beings. Positive 
images are ones that make Native Americans look, behave, speak, work, etc. the 
way that they truly do. 

\IateriaJ.s See appendix D 



13 



Day 5 



Social Studies 

Students are given more librarv* time to work on their prominent Native American papers. 
Literature 

Objective : Students will demonstrate an understanding of Native American stories and 
legends by listening to actual American Indian stories and making a short list of 
things they learned from the lesson/presentation. 

Activities : 

1 . Introduce the class to terms like 'legends' and 'myths. ' Explain that Native 
American storytelling is rich in meaning. 

2 Invite a Native American storyteller to share some of his/her culture through 
stories. Ask him/her to explain to the students the meaning that lies behind many 
of the legends (s)he tells. Ask him/her to explain the difference between sacred and 
secular legends. Ask him or her to share some of the oral stories that have been 
passed from generation to generation within his/her tribe. Encourage your 
students to ask questions. 

Evaluation : During the storyteller's presentation, ask the students to keep a list of things 
they have leanied for the first time about Native American stories and legends. 
Consider whether or not the students have given much thought to their comments. 
Did they learn anything from the visitor'^ 

Possible L ec ture Note s : 

1 . If time permits, share some poetry written by Native Americans. 

2. Be sure to focus on the fact that Native Americans have a rich heritage They 
are not a simple people. They are imaginative, creative and intelligent. Their 
stories are worthy of great respect. They have such positive outlooks on life and 
creation and mankind. If only we could all be so positive 

R esources : See appendix E 



Day 6 



Social Studies 

Today is the last day students will be given time to do research in the library for their 
prominent Native American papers. If they have completed their research, they will be 
expected to use this time to write their papers. 

Social Studies (extended) 

Objective : Students will challenge their previously held attitudes about Native Americans 
by visiting a reservation and answering some thought-provoking questions. 

Activity : Students will be taken on a field trip to a local American Indian reservation. 

Assignment : Have students fill out a 10 question worksheet on their attitudes about, and 
experiences at the reservation. They must also answer some questions with facts 
about the reservation. 

Evaluation : By discussion of the reservation visit and by the answers the students gave on 
their reservation worksheet, did the students seem to dispel some of their 
previously held misconceptions about Native Americans? Did they learn anything 
new'^ 

Materials : See appendix F 

Possible Lecture No tes: 

1 . Explain to your students that their visit to the reservation will cause them to 
rethink some of the responses they put cn the questionnaire they filled out at the 
beginning of the Native America^ curriculum. 

2. Encourage students to ask questions at the reservation that may not be included 
on their worksheet. Remind them that education is their best weapon in fighting 
the fijrther oppression of Native Americans. 

3. After the field trip, discuss the fact that Native Americans are a modern 
culture. Although they are very different ft-om other cuhures in the United States, 
they are also much the same. Both the similarities and the differences should be 
valued and respected 



Day? 



Social Studies 

Discuss the field trip to the reservation if there was not enough time to do so yesterday. 
Language Arts/Social Studies 

Objec tives : The students will demonstrate, in writing as well as in an oral presentation, 

their knowledge of the accomplishments of a prominent Native American in history 

Activity : Each student will give a 5-10 minute presentation to the class on the Native 

American that he/she researched. Students should focus on the contributions that 
Native Americans have made to American society. 

Evaluation : Papers will be graded on content as well as grammar, structure, etc. Students 
must demonstrate understanding of the significance of Native Americans in the 
United States. They must also demonstrate that they've done thorough research on 
the person that they've chosen to present. 

Possible Lecture Notes : Emphasize the fact that Native Americans are a valuable part of 
this society. We owe them a great deal of respect and gratitude for the 
accomplishments and contributions they have made over the years. They have 
never been a drain on society, the way that many white institutions would have us 
believe. 



literature 

Ob jective : The students will demonstrate an understanding of the oppression of Native 
Americans by writing a human relations letter to the author or illustrator of a 
children's book. 

The students will take control of the direction of oppression in this society by 
writing a powerflil letter demanding change of some kind. 

Activity:: Have the students select a book and write a letter to its author or illustrator 

following the criteria found in appendix G. The letters will actually be mailed at a 
future time. The completion of this activity will require additional days that go 
beyond the length of this curriculum. 

Evaluation Read the students' letters to see if they have gained a basic understanding of 
the oppression of Native Americans through the activities in this curriculum guide. 



ERIC 



See if they were able to recognize the negative images of American Indians in 
literature and explain why those images are oppressive to Native Americans. See if 
they were able to suggest a way of making some amends; of beginning the 
reconstruction of society into one that respects people, shares resources, and 
shares the power of decision making. 

M aterials : See appendix G 

Possible Lecture Notes : 

1 . The focus of this project should be on the empowerment of your students. 
Don't leave t^em at the end of this curriculum feeling guilty, angry and helpless. 
Yes, Nativ nericans have "had it bad'' for a long time now, but it doesn't 
always have to be that way if people care enough to change the way this society 
operates. Your students have the power to bring about change in this society. 
They can make a positive difference if they choose to do so. 

2. ( Remember that this final assignment is not only an empowerment activity for 
your students, but it is a way for you to evaluate how successful your curriculum 
was. Hopefully your students will demonstrate that they have learned a great deal 
over the last seven days. ) 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Teacher resources 

Carevv, Jan. ''Columbus and the Origins of the Racism in the .Americas: part one." 
Race & Class . Spring 1988, ppM9. 

Carew, Jan. ''Columbus and the Origins of the Racism in the Americas: part two." 
Race & Class . July-Sept. 1988, pp33-57. 

Colangelo, Nicholas, and Dustin, Dick, and Cecelia Foxley. Multicultural Nonsexist 
Education: A Human Relations Approach . Kendall/Hunt, Iowa. 1985. 

Debo, Angie. A History of the Indians of the United States . University of Oklahoma 
Press, London. 1970. 

Duff, Charles. The Truth About Columbus . Random House, New York. 1936. 

Harlan, Judith. American Indians Today: Issues and Conflicts . Franklin Watts, New York 
1987. 

Koning, Hons. Columbus: His Enterprise - Exploding the Myth . .Monthly Re\iew Press, 
New York. 1991. 

Lyons, Oren, and Hohn Mohawk, Vine Deloria. Jr., Laurence Hauptman, Howard 

Berman, Donald Grinde, Jr., Curtis Berkey, and Robert Venables. Exciled in t he 
Land of the Free: Democracy, Indian Nations, and the U.S. Constitution . Clear 
Light Publishers, Santa Fe. 1992. 

Lynch-Brown, Carol, and Carl Tomlison. Essentials of Children's Literature . Allyn & 
Bacon, Massachusetts. 1 993 . 

Rethinki ng Schools . "Rethinking Columbus: A Special Issue." 1991. 

Slapin, Beverly, and Doris Seale. Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in Books 
for Children . New Society Publishers, Pennsylvania. 1992. 



"Unbiased Teaching About American Indians and Alaska Natives in Elementary Schools.' 
Eric Digest . June 1990. pp2-3. (ED 321 968) 



Student Resources 



Asch, Frank. Elvira Evervthirm . Harper & Row, New York 1970. 

Asch, Frank. Popcorn . Parents' Magazine Press, New York. 1979. 

Ashabranner, Brent. Children oFthe Maya: A Guatemalan Indian Odyssey . Dodd, Mead 
& Co., New York. 1986. 

Alexander, Martha. We're in Big Trouble Blackboard Bear . The Dial Press, New York. 
1980. 

Allen, Joe. The Happy Golden ABC . Golden Press. 1968. 

Ancona, George. Powwow . Harcourt Brace & Company, Can Diego. 1993. 

Baker, Betty. Three Fools and a Horse . Macmillan, New York. 1975. 

Bridwell, Norman. Clifford's Halloween . Scholastic Book Services. 1967. 

Bruchac, Joseph. The Wind Eagle and Other Abenaki Stories (retold). Bowman Books, 
New York. 1985. 

Buckley, Helen. The Little Boy and the Birthdays . Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Co., Inc., 
New York. 1975. 

Daugherty, James. Daniel Boone . Viking Press, New York. 1940. 

Daugherty, James. The Landing of the Pilgrims . Random House, New York. 1950. 

DePaola, Tomie. The Legend of the Bluebonnet (retold). G.P. Putnam's Sons, New 
York. 1983. 

Edmonds. Walter. The Matchlock Gun . Dodd, Mead & Co , New York. 1941 . 

Jones. Hettie. The Longhouse Winter (adapted). Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New York. 

1972. 

Keegan, Marcia P ueblo Boy: Growinu Up in Two Worlds Cobblehill Books, New 
York. 1991. 



ERLC 



Nelson Big Crow, Moses. A Legend From Crazv Horse Cla n. Tipi Press, South Dakota. 
1987. 

Parin d'Aulaire, Ingri & Edgar. Pocahontas . Doubleday Books, New York. 1949 
Roth. Susan. The Story of Light . Morrow Junior Books. New York. 1990. 



Appendix A 



Bulletin Board 



Purpose : To expose children to the history of oppression that Native Americans have 
been living. To get children thinking about Native American issues. 



Description: This bulletin board would be set up ahead of time for Day 1 of the Native 
American curriculum. A number of important dates should be listed. These may 
include: 

1492 Christopher Columbus arrived in America and forever 

changed the lives of thousands of Native Americans. The 
Native Indians were stolen from, forced into slavery, 
maimed, and even killed. 



1512 Mission schools were established by Spain's emissaries 

to attempt to educate Native Americans in European ways. 
Young Native Americans were isolated from their tribal 
families and forced into non-Indian habits. 



1885 Major Crimes Act— Tribal courts were not allowed to hear 
any cases except civil suits and misdemeanors. The federal 
courts were given jurisdiction over these crimes, even if they 
were committed by one Indian against another on a 
reservation: murder, manslaughter, assault with intent to 
kill, rape, arson, burglary, and grand larceny. 



1 924 Indian Citizenship Act —Native Americans were now not 
only subject to tribal laws on reser\*ations, but to state and 
federal laws as well. Native Americans never wished to 
.become citizens 



1953 



Public Law 280— Certain states were given jurisdiction over 
reser\'ations, fiir:her reducing the status of Indian nations 



Native American Questionnaire 

Answer the following statements by circling Taie if you agree or False if you disagree. 

1 True/False I have read many of books about American Indians and/or I have seen 
many illustrations of American Indians. 

2. True/False Today's Native Americans usually wear headdresses with feathers on them 

and buckskin clothing with tassels or fringes on them. 

3. True/False Christopher Columbus discovered America. 
4 True/False Christopher Columbus was a villain. 

5. True/False When Christopher Columbus landed in America, he spent much of his 

time defending himself and his crew against the savage Indians 
who were already living there. 

6. True/False I know someone who is Native American. 
Answer the following questions in two or three sentences 

7. What kinds of homes do Native Americans live in today'^ What might they look 
like'^ 

8 Where do American Indians live in this country'^ For example, what states do 
they live m"^ 

0 What do today's Native Americans do for a living'^ 



10 



If you saw an American Indian walking down the sidewalk, could you tell that 
she/he was indeed Native American"^ If yes, how could you telP If no, why 
couldn't you telP 



How many different tribes are there in the United States'^ 

If you ever made a Native American really angry, what might she/he do to you"^ 

Draw a picture of what you think an American Indian looks like 



Questionnaire Answers 

I (opinion) 
1-alse 
False 

4 (opinion) 

5 F-alsc 

6 (opinion) 

7 Their homes are like anyone elses— not teepees or wigwams 

8 In ever>' state 

Occupations var>' as much for American Indians as for any other group in the I nited 
States 

10. (opinion) 

I I The United States gox ernment recognizes over 300 different Native American tribes 
1 2. (opinion) 

13 (opinion) 



r 



A Thanksgiving tesson plan provides new perspectives on traditional 
observances 

A Thanksgiving Lesson Pl^n: 

Celebration or Mourning? 
It's All in the Point of View 

By Arlene Hirschfelder arrd Jane Califf 



Traditional Thanksgiving obser- 
vances—even those prepared with the 
b^t intentions— often make use of 
stereotypes which perpetuate false im- 
ages of Native Americans and of U S 
history. In the hope of giving students a 
more accurate view of Thanksgiving 
and of raising their awareness, we offer 
the following lesson plan, 

0bl«ctlv«s: 

• To develop respect for the culture 
and values of the Native Americans 
who inhabited the Plymouth area in 
1620. " ^ 

• To learn how Native Americana 
helped Pilgrims survive. 

• To realize how the actions of the 
Pilgrim<i and other Europeane re- 
sulted in the destruction of almost. all 
Native Americans in New Eng^land. ^ 

• To learn more aSout "The First 
Thanks^ving.** 

•^To understand why many con- 
temporary Native Americans and 
their supporters consider Thanksgiv- 
ing a day of mourning. 

• To develop critical thinking by 
analyzing the ^accuracy of children's 
books about Pilgrimi. Native Ameri- 
cans and •*Thel First ThanKssfiving.** 

Aq« Level: Adaptable .(suggtstions 
are provided for various age levels)*. 

Time: " Two-three weeks. Note: These 
lesson plans can serve as the begin- 
ning of a niore in-depth itudy of- 
Native America^ life In -New England 
and other areas. Since many students 
think of .Native Aihericans only in 
terms of pant history, it is important 
to emphasize the oppression of Native 
Americans today and -their continuing 
•truggle to survive. 

Mat«r{alt: 

I. Background Reading (see pages 



• VOLUME 10. NUMBER 8 



IM3). 

2. Two-part imaginary story (sec 
paffe 8). 

3. Excerpts from children's books 
on Pilgrims. Native Americans and 
Thanksgiving for class to analyze. 

Teacher Preparation: Become famil- 
iar with the Background Reading that 
accompanies this lesson plan. i^The 
pages can be duplicated for distribu- 
tion to older students.) If possible, 
collect children's bo«ks and other 
relevant material to supplement the 
lessons. 



Activity 1 

Purpon^: To determine how stu* 
dents perceive the Pilgrims, tht- Na- 
tive Americans they met (the Wa/.npa- 
noags: pronounced Wamp-un-NO- 
aggs) and the celebration of Thanks- 
giving. 

Procedure: 

1. Tell younger students that 
^schools will be closed fof two days at 
the end of November. Ash. Does 
anyone know why? 

2. Pass out a questionnaire with the 
following ^questions, or ask students 
the questions and write the answers 
on .a cRarL 

a. Why is there a holiday called 
Thanksgiving? 

b/ Who wew the Pilgrims? Why <fid 
they leave England? 

c. Where did they land? 

d. Whom did they meet? 

e. HcjW did the Pilgrims treat the 
Indian people? 

f. Hotv did the Indian people treat 
the Pilgrims? 

V g. What happened at the Pilgrims' 

Thanksgiving celebration? 
h. If y(Ai were an Indian persqn, 

how would you feel about celebrating' 
■ JThanksgiving? 



3. Save the chart or questionnaires 
for discussion at the end of this unit. 

Activity 2 

Purpose: To learn about the life of 
the Wampanoags in the early I7th 
century before the Europeans landed. 

Procedure; 

1. Distribwte copies of the Back- 
ground Reading to older students and 
have them read Part I; tell younger 
children about V/ampanoag life, draw* 
ing upon fiie Background Reading. 
Explain that food, clothing, shelter , 
and customs varied from one Native 
American nation to' another. (Note: 
.The term "nation" is preferable to 
"tribe" in the context of this lesson 
plan because it better reflects the 
organized government and social sys- 
tem of Native. peoples.) Point out that 
the stereotypical headdress and/tipi 
were used only by Native Americans 
living on the Plains. Stress that Na- 
tive Americans were not "savage** or 
"wild" as often portrayed on TV and 
in books, that life in their villages was 
carefully organized and that they 
worked, raised families, made time for 
play and wanted fulfilling lives just 
as other people did. / 

2. Ask students to translate the 
information into drawings shgwing 
Wampanoag life. Have them describe 
in class or through an essay what 
might constituts a typical Wampa* 
noag day. 

-Activity 3* 

Purpone: To give students insight 



*Thii scu nty is bMcd upon student sctivi- 
tien for us« during the Thanktgiving ma- 
•on d«vcIop«d for th« D«p«rtm«nt of Hu- 
m§iT\^ flcUtions of the MsdUon (Wi4c.) 
MttropoUun School Dijtrict by Dorothy 
W. D^vida <StockbridftfMuns^/MohicAn) 
snd R\ith A. Gudinas. 



ERLC 



BMthi^ ^^oriht Center [of |n+erraCral Bcvsl^sf^rfttldren 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



into the fwlings of Native Americans 
about the coming of Europ^ana. 
Procedurt: 

1. Review information about Wam- 

panoatc life- 

2. Tell claiJ: Something happened 
to change^that way of life. Before we 
learn about this change, I want to 
read a make-belie^-* story to you that 
will help you understand how Native 
Americans felt about what happened 
to them. As I read, imagine yourselves 
in the scene I describe. 

• 3. Read Part I of the story in the 
box on page 8; ask: How do you feel 
about these people who have come to 
your house? What do you think you 
will do? VVhy? What do you think they 
. will do? Why-^ V 

4. R^ad Part 2; ask: How do you 
feel? Do you think that you are being 
treated fairly by these strangers? Why 
or why not? What will you do? 



Activity 4 

Purpose: To learn how Europeans 
(including the Pilgrims^ caused suffer- 
ing among the Native peoples of New 
Enj^land. 

Procedure: 

1. Review imaginary story read in 
previous lesson. Explain that today 
students will learn what happened 
when Europeans began coming tcs 
North America where Native peoples 
were already living. 

2. Look at a world- map. Find Eu- 
rope and North America. Tell class 
that the first foreigners to explore . 
North America were from Europe.. 
They came as explorers and fisher* 
men and to trade with the Indians. 
Some of them, such as Captain John 
Hunt, seized Native peoples to sell in 
the Mediterranean slave marketa. 

In addition, epidemics introduced 
by Europeans caused the deaths of 
thousands of Native peoples who had 
no immunity to smallpox and other 
European diseases. As a result, whole 
villages were wiped out or left de- 
serted by the few frightened survi- 
vors. 

Ask: FJow do you think Native 
peoples must have felt about white 
people after such events? 

3. Explain that the first foreigners 
to settle in North America came from 
England and Holland. Find these 
countries on a map. Descnl^e ho^ one 
group, the Pilgrims, left England and 
went to Holland to escape rehgious 
persecution. Not happy with their life 



in Holland. 102 of them managed to 
acquire a boot, the Mayflower, to seek 
a better life in what they called the 
New World. Shortly after they ar- 
nved, they began living in the Indian 
village of Patuxet. which had been 
deserted as a result of an epidemic. 

4. Distribute Background Reading. 
Part II to older students or relate 
events to younger students. Tell class 
that it is one Pilgrim's account of 
what he and other Pilgrims did soon 
after their boat landed. Suggested 
questions for discussion: (a) Do you 
feel the Pilgrims had a right to steal 
Wampanoag food and rob their 
graves? Why or why not? (b) If you 
were a Wampanoag. how would you 
feel about what the Pilgrims did? 
Why'' 

5. Ask students to role play an 
encounter between two Wampanoags 
and two Pilgrims after the event* 
described above. Set the t*^ene: The 
Wampanoags have just discovered 
that their com was taken and their 
graves disturbed. They encounter 
some Pilgrims and discuss the events 
and their feelings about them. (Before 
acting out this scene, allow the two 
"Pilgrims" and the two "Wampa- 
noags" to meet for a short period of 
time to plan what they will say. If 
they get **8tuck'* the teacher can offer 
suggestions. This scene may be Acted 



out more than once if there are other 
children who want to participate.) 



Activity 5 

Purpcue: To learn how Native 
Americans helped the Pilgrims sur- 
vive and to learn more about "The 
First ThanksgT-ang." 

Procedure: 

1. Tell students ihat despite the bad 
treatment that the Wampahoags and 
other Native Americans received from 
the Pilgrims and other Europeans, 
there were Indian people who were 
friendly to these foreigr.-'rs and . 
helped them survive. Distribute Backv 
gfround Reading, Part III to older 
children or tell younger children this 
information. Suggested questions for 
discussion: Why do you think th*t 
Tisquantum and Samoset decided to 
be so helpful to ihe Pilgrims when 
other Native people did not want to 
help them at all? Do you think .'that 
they made the right decision? Ex- 
plain. ; " 

2. Distribute, reed or tell stud«nt4 
about^ the letter' written by Edward 
Winslow (Background Reading, P*rt 
IV). Explain that this is th« only 
known written account of.' the Pil- 
grims' first Thanksgivingr *ttd that it 
was written with a very definite 
purpose— to encourage people in Eng- 




The iUuMtration above i$ from The Pilmips' Party (Dell). Like many other 
children's books about *'The First Thanks giving/* it portrays Native 
Americans TXT^ild savages. 



BULLETIN r 



^ STORY FOR ACTIVITY 3 



STORY. PART 1 

Imagine the folfo^mc You and your 
family five in a njce ^Ouse wii*^ a nuqe 
yard, tots of trees, a btg garcsen ano a 
pretty little stream You f^ave lots of 
friends, lots of pets and sieniy of good 
food to eat. You are safe and snug and 
very happy 

One day. yvhen you are home alone, 
a strange Object comos slowly into v«cw 
in the Sky You ve never seen anything 
like it before it is a strange snaoo ano 
.very large It InndS m your own back 
yard* Soon very siranqc-looki ng people 
get Out they are dressed m cioih^-s 
ve'^y different from yours and talk to 
each other «n a way that you cannot 
understand. 

You are hiding so that they cannot 
sec you You don i want ihcm to s^e 
yOu bocau'*'^ you are trying to figure 
Out wno they are and what they want. 
You have henrrj about poopie who look 
like this from your mother and father 
They. walk aoout. D'Ck up your toys and 
pets and examine them closely. One 
gets intd your car. turns the key and 
drives all around on the grass and 
through the garden Others are helping 
themselves to the tomatoes m the 
garden and the apples and plums on 
the trees. Then they fill a lot of big 
baskets with the fruit and -vegetables 
from your garden and put thorn in the 
big machine they arrived in ^ 

Then they come straight toward your 
house' Without even ringing the bell. 
#they come through the door and go 
through every room, picking up things 
and looking closely at them, talking 
and laughing among themselves. They 
really don't seem to be afraid or even 
embarrassed .about oemg m your 
house. 



STORY. PART 2 

The story goes on: The strange peo- 
pl^j4eave your house. You think they 
have' seen 'you but you're not sure. It 
doesn't matter, though, because you're 
so glad to see them go. Maybe they'll 
just get into their big atr ship and fly 
back to wherever they came from. Even 
if they have taken things that belong to 
you. you ll be happy to see them leavo. 

But as you watch, they don't seem to 



be leaving in fact, they appear to like it 
in your brg back yard They begin to 
bring things Out Of the machine. They 
set uD a saw and cut down one of the 
biggest trees! They are gomg to build a 
house with It. probahly m that f?vorite 
soot of yours back there by the stream 
because that's where they are clearing 
away the bushes and digging out the 
grass They Cut down another tree and 
another and another' They are build.ng 
two. three, a haff dozen houses They 
have furniture and pans and disfles and 
rugs and curtams — everythmg that you 
have in your house and some other 
!'-:mgs that you don I even recognize. 
They also have big weapons thafflash 
with a big bang You think that they 
could probably kill ^ou with one big 
bang just as they have killed some of 
the pets «n your yard 

You Stare at all the activity going on 
out there in your back yard. Suddenly 
you start to Cry. These strange people 
who have come from somewhere far off 
and who are so very rude are not going 
away— ever. They are going to stay. 
They are going to live m your own back 
yard and use your garden and your 
toys and fish in your stream and cut 
down your trees and act as if it all 
belonged to them! 

Then a very strange thing happens. A 
group of the strangers has been talking 
together and pointing toward the very 
place where you are hiding. Do you 
think they could have spotted you? 
Yes! They are coming right toWard you. 
talking and smiling. You don't know 
what to do. Should you run? Call for 
help? Stay perfectly stilP One. who is 
closer to you than the rest, takes your 
hand and pulls you out to stand in front 
of them. They are smiling ana pointing 
at your favorite place by the stream 
where they are building their houses. 
They want you to come with themi 

As you do. the. one holding your 
hand say^: "We like^ou. We like this 
place. We', are going to live here from 
now on." Without asking if you are 
Surprised or^if you want them here, that 
person poinTS tc^ a table set with a great 
feast, smiles^ and says: "Come. Cele- 
brate with us becBuse we nave re'ached 
.the end of our^long lourney and have 
found a wondeffuK place to live, * 



Continued from page 7 

land to come to New England and 
jom the Pilgrims. Tell students that it- 
was like an adverti.qomeni to attract 
new people. Aik\ (a) .Are most adver- 
tisemenu 100 per cent true? (b) Why 
do you think the Ptignma vanted to 
encourage more "settlers ' to come to 
Plymouth? (Teachers may wish to 
mention that recent research has 
raised doubta aa to whether or not 
"The First Thanksgiving" actually 
took place.) 

J. Kor older atudenta: diacu.sa the 
cartoon in the Background Reading; 
atudenta can also draw their own 
cartoons. 



Actfvlty 6 

Purpose: To realize how the actions 
of Pilgrims and other Europeans re- 
sulted in the de«tniction of almost all 
of the Native Americans in New Eng- 
land. 

Procedure: 

1. Review the information already 
supplied about the Pilgrims and the 
Wampanoags, 

2. Tell clasa: Today we will learn 
why the Wampanoaga and other Na- 
tive Americana began to fight the 
Pilgrima and others* who came to live 
here. 

3. EHstribute Background Reading. 
Part V or tell atudcnta the informa- 
tion it containa. Suggested questions 
for discussion: (a) Mctacomct waa an 
enemy to the Pilgrima and other Eng- 
lish people but a hero to Indian .-peo- 
ple. Why? <b) Why do you think that 
the Pilgrims and other English people 
made treatie.^ with Native Americana 
only to break them aoon after by 
taking their lands? (c) la there any 
way that the war between the Indian 
^>eople and the English people could 
have been avoided? Explain, (d) Do 
you think it ia fair for Indian people to 
be depicted aa warlike and savage aq 
many books and moviea have done? 
Explain. Do you think that Indiana 
thought the Europeana were warlike 
and savage? (e) WTiat do you think of 
the fact that Pilgrima and other Euro- 
peans came to the New World for a 
.better life, but when they got here 

* they killed thouaanda of Indian people . 
and stole their lands? 



Activity 7 

Purpose: To encourage critical 
thinking by having atudenta analyze 



ERIC 



VOLUME 10. NUMB6?' fi 



28 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



) 



pasaaj^es m children's books about 
the Pilgrims. Native" Americans and 
Thanksgiving. 
Procedure: 

I Tell class that many children's 
books have been cnlicized by Native 
.Americans and by others for not 
telling? tne truth about ThanksRwrng. 
the PiUrims and the Wampanoags. 
Give students quotes from some books 
(Background Reading. Part VI) and 
ask them if they think the books 
should be criticized. {For older chd- 
aren: distribute quotes and accompa- 
nying questions; students can work 
together in small groups to analyze 
passages, or each group can be given 
one passa^ce to analyze and report on 
to the clns«. For younger children: 
Read passages and ask questions. 
Encourasrc as many children as possi- 
ble to. express their opinions. Then 
have the class decide what the con- 
sensus is on each passage.) 

2. Ask: (a) Why do you think there 
are books that don't tell the truth 
about the Pilgrims and trie Wampa- 
noags.' (.\nswers may include: au- 
thors wnte from, a white and not a 
Native American point of view; people 
who publish books want children to 
respect the early "settlers"' and there- 
• fore don't want to tell them about 
their cruel treatment, of the Indians, 
etc.) 

3 Encourage children to bring in 
books about. Thanksgiving or other 
books about Native Americans. Look 
at them Co see if they portray Native 
Americans as "wild savages'* or if 
they show respect for their lives and 
cultures. (See Resource List.) 

4. Other depictions of "The First 
Thank.^Kiving" (on greeting cards, in 
pageants, stofe wmdows. etc.) can be 
analyzed. 



Activity 8 

Purpose: To understand why many 
contemporary Native Americans and 
others consider Thanksgiving a day 
of mourning. 

Procedure: 

I. Tell students that each year there 
18 a Thanksgiving Ceremony at PIy» 
mouth Rock grfen by the townspco- 
' pie. Th(»re are many speeches for the 
crowds who attend. In 1970. the Mas* 
Hftchusetts Department of Commerce 
asked the Wampannags to select a 
speaker to mark the J'jOlh anniver- 
HJiry of th«» Pilg-nms* arrival. Frank 
James, who la a Wampanoog. was 




iJ >^ i-.J JlKy 11*. di*xc«l irr«irt»l 



In Let's Play Indian (Wonder), a Thanksgiving play is a display of stereotypes 
when some children dress up "like Indians": "they all danced around the staM(*. 
screamtnf? and whonpinf^. beating their tomtoms and waving their tomahawks!'* 



selected but first he had to show a 
copy of hts speech to the white people 
in char^{e of the ceremony. When they 
saw what he had written, they would 
not allow him to read it. 

Distribute Frank -.James* speech 
(Background Reading. Part VII) to 
older students or read it aloud.* 
Discuss the speech; suggested ques- 
tions for discussion: (a) According to 
Frank Jame.H. the Wampanoag people 
have almost disappeared. What has 
happened to his people? (b) Why are 
there some Wampanoags that do not 
wish other people to know that they 
are Native Americahli? (c) Many Na« 
tive Americans are proyd of who they 
are. Why does James 'say that the 
350th anniversary of t)\e Pilgrims* 
landing in Plymouth is a new begin* 
ning for Native Americans^ (d) Why 
do you think this sp^h >yks sup- 
pressed by the planners of the 1970 
Thanksgiving celebration atx Ply- 
mouth Rock? («) What woula* you 
have done if you were Frpink James 
aAd the people who asked you ^to 
speak told you that your speech was 
unacceptable? / ^ 

\ 2. Tell class the following: Al- 
though Prank James was not permit- 
ted to speak at the 1970 Thanksgiving 
ceremony at Plymouth Rock. 200 Na- 



•This speech has b<^n condented for cla«i« 
room ua«?; the complete itxt, appean in 
Chrontcieit of Amtncan Indian Prctttt 
(CIHC Ketource Center. 1979). 



tive Americans from 25 nations and 
their non-Indian supporters gathered 
there on that day. They announced 
that they had decided to make 
Thanksgiving a day of national 
mourning for Native Americans. They 
held a demonstration at the statue of 
Massasoit who was the chief of the 
Wampanoag Nation which inhabited 
Plymouth before the Pilgrims landed. 
They dumped sand on Plymouth 
Rock. A group , of 25 demonstrators 
then boarded the Mayflower. They 
lowered the flag of England and 
threw a wooden dummy of a Pilgrim 
overboard. Police officers arrested 
them and charged' them with disor- 
derly conduct and criminal trespass. 
Suggested questiooM^ for discwiMiorv 
(a) Why would Native Americans call 
Thanksgiving a day of mourning? Jb) 
What is the significance of throwing a 
Pilgfrif^ dummy in the water? (c) If 
you were a Native American or a 
supporter of equal rights for Native 
Americans, would you have partici- 
pated in this demonstration? Why or 
why not? 

3. Role play this episode. Choose 
two or three students to be descend* 
ants of the Pilgrims who speak at the 
Thanksgiving ceremony. Also chooae 
two or three studenta to play the part 
of Native Americana in the demon- 
stration and a few others to play the 
part of police officers. 

Have students act out the event as 
it actually occurred. Then invite stu* 



eut.LeTiN • 




Grrednff cardft are ideal for clansrodm 
analysis: many Thanksfzivinf^ cards 
featun' animals dressed as "Indians," * 
a treatment that dehumanizes Native 
Americans. 



dents to role play this episode making 
any changes they like. Discuss the 
two versions. (In one third grade 
class, the second version went as 
followM: While the Pilgrim descend* 
ants spoke in honor of ThanksKiving. 
demonstrators boarded an imaginary 
Mayflower, hauled down the English 
flag and threw the dummy in the 
water. The Pilgrim descendants called 
the police— who promptly arrested the 
descendant3 instead of the demonstra- 
tors! The "police" said they were 
doing this because they thought the 
Indians were nfeht in their protest 
and the Thnnksifiving celebration 
was wrong because the Pilgrims had 
treated the Indians unfairly. This* led 
to a spirited class discussion: Should 
the descendants have been arretted? 
Should the demonstrators have been 
arrested? Should anyone have been 
taken to }ail?)' 



Activity 9 

Purpose: To learn about cohtempor* 
ary Native .\mencan efforts to regain 
control of their lands. 

Procedure. 

Tell the class that more and m^re 
Indian nations are trving to get back 
the lands that were stolen from them 
durmg the past .350 years. The Wam- 



panoags are one aOkh nation; they 
have taken a case to| court and hope 
the det>raion will be in their favor. 
Many non lndnn people who live on 
these lands now say that what hap- 
pened in the past is not their fault and 
that they shouldn't lose their land 
because of what their ancestors or 
others did m the past. Ask: Do you 
feel that Indian people should get 
their land back? Why or why not? 
How do you think this problem should 
be solved^ % 



Activity 10 

Purpose: To determine if students 
still agree with the statcmentg they 
made at the beginning of this unit. 

Procedure: 

Read the original list and discuss 
each fltatement. (If a questicmnairo 
was distributed, distribute the same 
questionnaire for students to annwer 
again. Have them ompare their first 
responses with their new answers.) 
Ask: Do you still agree with your 
original answers? Why or why not? 
Do you feel that the traditional 
Thanksgiving observances should be 
changed? If so, how? 



RESOURCES 
Thinktgtvlng Reioufcet 

Anderson. Joy, and (Jeetz. James. 'The 
Kthnohotany of Thanksgiving," Saturday 
Review of SctCiicr. Novtmb^r '2.">. 197'^. 
This illu.str;itetl nrticle cnntainii a study of 
Knkhsh foodways. the fir.Ht ye.ir of English 
settlement at Plymouth, and their first 
harvest festival. 

Bradford. William. Of Plymauth Planta- 
tion. Capricorn Books, IHH'2 (many editions 
available). This anttMourt's Relation (q.v.) 
are the two pnmary sources of events from 
the Pilgrims' viewpoint. 

CISC Resource Center' for Educators 
Unlearning "Indian" Stereotypes. 1977. 
This filmslrip anM bti^^klet contain ways to 
counter stereotypes about Nativf Amen- 
cans: a Thanksgiving lesHon plan is in- 
cluded. 

Marten. Catherine. Occasional Papers tn 
Old Colony Studies. Number 2. Plimoth 
Plantation Inc. (Box 1620. Plymouth, 
Mass. OZm), December 1970. This study 
explores Wampanoag culture in the I7th 
century. 

Mourt. G A Relation or Journal of the 
Proceeding of the Plantation Settled at 
Plymouth in New England (usually shor< 
tened to Mourt's Relation). Collections of 
the MassachusetU Historical Society. Vo' 
lumc 9. [i<:\2. This and William Bradford's 
account (q v ) are the two primary. sources 
about events from the Pilgrims' point of 
view. 



flamfley, Patricia "Beyond Ten Uttle 
Indians' and Turkeys Altern.itive Ap- 
proaches to ThanksffivmK " Youn;: Chil- 
dren. SeplcmbcT. P)Tm Thw rurrcnt nrticle 
descnbes several approaches for di:icu«,H- 
mk' ThnnkflK'^-inti in wnys tn cnunicr nega- 
tive images about Native .^q^oncana 

Sickel. HSJ Thanksgicmf! Its Source. 
Philosophy and History Philadelphia: In* 
ternational Pnnting Co. 19-10 This book 
contains the texts of the original proclama- 
tions of Congress. 1 777- 178.1. and presiden- 
tial ThanksRivinj? proclamniions through 
1939. 

GenersI Resources 

Asterisk (•) incJjcaies resources of special 
valuO tor classroom use 

*Akwesasnr Notes .Mohawk Nation via 
Itoost'veUown. N.Y I.lWi3. 

Carter. E. Rus.sell.* The Gift Is Ri^. 
Fnendship Press. l96Ji. 

CIBC Resource Center. Chronicles of 
American Indian Protest. 1979. 

•(MMC Resource Center. Stereotypes. 
Distortions and Omissions m U.S. History 
Textbooks. 1977. 

Cohen, Felix. "Americanizing the White 
Man." The American Scholar. Vol, 21. 
Spnng, 19.52. pp. 177-191. and in The Legal 
Conscience: Selected Papers of Felix S. 
Cohen, edited by Lucy Kramer Cohen, 
Yale University Pres*. I960.. pp. 315-327, 

Crosby. Alfred W. The Columbian Sx' 
change: Bit domical and Cultural Conse- 
quences of 1492. Greenwood PreM. 1972. 

Grindc. Donald A. The .Iroquois -and the 
Founding of th^ American Nation. Indian 
Hi«t<irian Press. 1977, 

Henry. J. author. K. Rosti. editor. Text- 
books and the American Indian. The In* 
dian Histoncal Press. 1970. 

"Native American Contributions to 
Science. Engmoortng. and Medicine," 
Science. Vol. 189. July 4. 1975. pp. 38-40. 
70. 

Vogel, Virgil. American Indian Medi- 
cine. Ballantint* Books. 1970, 

"Wampanoag: Totem of the World." 
Akwesasne Notes. Vol. 8. No, 1, 

*Weewish Trve. The Indmn riistonan 
Press (magazine f<ir children i, 

Wrone, D,R, and Nelson. R,S, Jr. editors. 
Who's the Savagi'^ A Documentary His- 
tory of the Mistreatment of the Native 
North American. Kawcett. 1973. , 

• ) 

About the Aulhort 

ARLENE HIRSCHFELDER. consultant 
on Indian affairs for the past ten years, 
has compiled Amencan Indian and ^Es- 
kimo Authors: A Comprehensive Biblio- 
graphy (Association of American Indian 
A(fairs) and has written several articles on 
teaching about Native Americxxns. JANE 
CALlFF^who has taught m the New York 
elementary school system, has written 
several articles on countering sttrtotypes 
about Native Americans m the classroom. 



10 VCLUMe 10. NUMeeH 6 



Discovery or Conquest? 

Relearning the Columbus Myth 



A hisioTv' lesson begins in .m unusual way: 
the high school leacherslarlsbystealing a 
studeni's purse. He announces to the class 
tliai the purse is his.obviouslv, because he 
possesses it. The students pro test, "That's 
not yours, it's Nikki*s. You took it, we saw 
you/' The teacher brushes these objec- 
tions aside and repeats that the purse is 
now his. 

To prove his point he shows the class its 
contents: lipstick, brush and comb, sun- 
glasses, some money. The class doesn^t 
buy this argument and becomes even 
more outraged that a teacher would snoop 
into someone's possessions with no re- 
gard for her privacy. (They do not know 
that the demonstration has been pre-ar- 
ranged with Nikki.) 

Tne class continues to protest: "We saw 
you take it...'* and "We know you don't 
wear lipstick." The teacher encourages 
their efforts to prove him wrong: "If we 
had a lest on the contents of this purse, 
w ho wo uld do be tte r? N ikki 0 r me ? Who se 
labor earned the money that bought the 
ihings in the purse? Mine or Nikki's?" 

"What if I said I discovered' this purse? 
Does that make it mine?" A few students 
laugh, but the class does not agree. 

"So/* the teacher asks, **why do we say 
thai Columbus * discovered' Axnerica?" 
.A.S the students begin to see where he is 
going, the teacher continues his ques- 
tions. "Were there people on the land 
before Columbus arrived? Who had been 
on the land longer, Colurabusor the Indi- 
ans? Who knew the land better? Who put 
their labor into making the land produce? 

•'What was the first thing Columbus did 
upon his arrival in the new world? He 
annv^uncod that he was 'taking posses- 
sion it."* 

Adapted from Bill Bigclo^K'*s 
"Ci>lunihiis llu* Classroom" 




It would be encouraging if this te acher's ere ative history le sso n we re t^^picnl 
of most high schools classrooms. Unfortunately, generations of students 
have been taught that Columbus was a brave hero, a fearless adventurer; 
a great explorer who overcame the doubts and superstitions of his time, 
undertaking a dangerous journey to prove that the world is round. Children 
have learned about the Nina, Pinta, and Santa Maria landing in the 
Bahamas where Columbus, sailing under the flag of Spain, first encoun- 
tered the naked, red-skinned natives. They learned that Columbus gave 
these people trinkets, converted them to Christianity, "civilized the sav- 
ages" of this "new world," and brought a few of them back to Spain for King 
Ferdinand and Queen Isabella. 

The approach of the 1992 Quincentenary, the 500th anniversary 
of Columbus's arrival in the Americas, provides an opportunity to re -think 
anH re-learn the story read by virtually every child and adult in America. 
Many teachers, historians, anthropologists, indigenous peoples, social 
justice activists and religious groups are revealing another histon', under- 
standing 1492 not as an occasion to be celebrated but as marking one of ihe 
bloodiest turning points in human history. They challenge us to take a new 
look at history by asking: What would it be like to view the arrival of 
Columbus through the eyes of the indigenous people he "discovered?" 

Insleadof spcndingbilHonsofdoUarsworldwide to commemorate 
Columbus with celebrations, what if a Quincentenary observance helped 
us reach a new understanding of his arrival and the consequences of that 
event which continue even today, 500 years after Columbus sailed the 
ocean blue." 

Exposing Myths and Legends 

Contrary to popular myth, Christopher Columbus's primary motivation 
was not his sense of adventure, curiosity about different cultures, evangelical 
religiosity, or navigational exploration. Columbus sailed west in order lo 
become rich. There were tremendous profits to be made in the Indies. 

From the begin nine. Columbus demanded ten percent of eve rv'thing 
shipped back to Spain from Asia (not only what he shipped back, but :hc 
anticipated shipments of any merchant subsequently traveling hiswcstcrn 
route I). His pitch financial backers was cloaked in religious imager.', 
with one of his stated aims to ^-c-.nverl the Asian "heathens" to Catholicism 



ERLC 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



or to use ihcir wealth to reclaim the lloly Land from the 
Moslems. But the "heathens" he encountered were not 
converted, rather ihcy were enslaved and killed; what gold 
he acquireci simply increased the economic power of the 
Spanish cLiic (ab<^ul two percent of vSpain^s population 
which owncwi ^5 percent of ihe land). 

It was ccon<^raic motives of the Spanish monarchy 
that permiileJ <rolumbus's expedition to sail al nil. At the 
end of the 15ih century- Spain was desperate to find gold, 
which was becoming a universally acceptable hard currency, 
llie monarchy's rationale for financing Columbus had less 
to do with their belief in him than with their frantic desire to 
pass Portugal in the race to the tradinggroundsof the Indies. 

Colunibus's profit-driven venture would be 
laughable were it not for the disastrous consequences for 
cultures, lanes, and whole nationsof people. Columbus was 
confused about the size of the earth and insisted until the 
day he died that the continent he wandered onto was part of 
Asia. His declaration of a "discovery'* of lands that were 
occupied by millions of people for thousands of years is a 
distortion as obvious as that of the high school teacher who 
stole the student*s purse. 




The population that found thisdisoriented explorer 
were the *Arawak (often called Taino), a people who had 
developed agriculture fcorn, yams, cassava) but had not 
domesticated animals or fashioned iron tools. Tlieirs was a 
society based on village communes, with most property 
jointly held. Evidence suggests they lived at peace with 
themselves and with their environment. But after just 50 
years of Spanish terror, most of the Arawak nation had 
vanished from the earth. 

Upon meeting the Arawak, Columbus wrote: 

"Tney do n s: bear anns, and do no: ruiow force. I showed 
them a swc^d. they took it by the edge and cut themselves 
out of igKo^ance.,.Tncy w ould make fine ser\'ants, and 
ihey are intelligent, for I sew that they repeated everything 
{ send to I h c ^: . Ibelie\ 'e 'J: e^,' could easih' be n: ::de Ch ristinns, 
f 't/uy apprr.red to have no idols. God wiUinz ^vhen I 
ni.iici^ my d'jp>:r:ure I will hnng half a dozen hark to their 
.\(aicsties. that thc^.' car, Irani to speak. ..Sr.ould your 
majesties Cs:**in:arid i:, all ihe inhabitants could be taken 

ERIC 



away to Castile, or made slaves on the island, \^^iih fifty 
men we couul subjugate them all a fid make them do 
whatever we want. " 

On the island renamed Mispaniolaby Columbus. he 
proceeded to do ji:si thai. Eager to fill the boats with 
treasures promised tv^ the crown, the Spaniards forced evcrv 
Arawak of 14 year:; and older to search for gold. Cokmbus 
had the hands cut ot"[ any Indian who did not fill a three- 
month quota. I 

Before returning to Spain from his second voyage 
in 1495, Columbus wont on a massive slave raid. He used 
dogs to round up 1,500 Arawak men, women and children | 
and imprisoned them in guarded animal pens. The best 500 
were chosen for the longjourney back:only 300 surv'i\'ed the 
voyage to Spain, where they soon died from cold, disease, 
and abuse. " \ 

Back in Hispaniola, Hfe for the Arawak was no 
better. Within several years, a Spaniard could violate any 
woman or girl, take any possession, and have any Arawak 
carr}' him on their back as if they were mules. According to 
log descriptions by Bartolome de las Casas, the Spaniards 
treated the Indians "not as beasts, for beasts are treated j 
properly at times, but like the excrement in a public square." 
Under such terrible oppression, hundreds of Arawaks 
committed suicide with cassava poison rather than be subject . 
to the torture and disease brought to the Caribbean by the 1 
Spaniards, 

As the indigenous population approached extinction 
in the early 16th century, the first shipsof slaves we re already j 
leaving Africa for the New World. Africans purchased from ' 
the Portuguese replaced the Arawaks as slave labor to 
exploit gold and other resources from the Caribbean. 
Eventually more than 10 million Africans were brought to 1 
the New World in chains (about one -third of those were 
seized in Africa: the rest died resisting their captors or en ^ 
route to the Americas). i 

Who profited from this conquest? Not the people 
of Spain, writes Hans Konig in his book, Columbus: His 
Enterprise. j 

"All the gold and silver stolen and shipped to Spain did not 
make the Spanish people richer. It gave their kings an edge 
in the balance of power for a time, a chance to hire m.ore 
m*ercenary soldiers for their wars. They ended up losing 
those wars anyway, and all that was left was a deadly 
inflation, a star\'ing population, the rich richer, the poor 
poorer, and a ruined peasant class. '* 

Columbus's assault on the Caribbean provided a 
model for the colonization of the Americas. When :he Nina. 
Pinta and Santa Maria arrived in 1492, the indigenous 
population of the Americas is estimated to have been ?0 
million. By 1650, S5 percent of those had been vvipcd out by 
torture, massacres, slavery, disease and suicide. What 
Columbus initiated in the Bahamas, Cortcz continued no 
less effectively in Mexico. Pizza ro followed suit in Peru. 
Cnbrnl in Brazil, and the English in Massachusetts. 



Interview with Suzan Shown Harjo 

"We Have No Reason 
to Celebrate an Invasion" 



Suzan Shown Harjo is president 
and director of the Morning Star 
Foundation in Washington, D.C. The 
foundation sponsors the 1992 Alli- 
ance, formed to provide an indig- 
enous peoples' response to the 
Columbus Quincentenary. Harjo, a 
45-year-oldCheyenne-Creek, agreed 
to answer questions about why some 
people are not celebrating the 
quincentenary. She was interviewed 
by Barbara Miner of Rethinking 
Schools. 

Why aren*t you joining in the 
celebrations of the Columbus 
quincentenary? 

As Native American peoples in this red 
quarter of Mother Earth, we have no reason 
to celebrate an invasion that caused the de- 
mise of so many of our people and is still 
causing destruction today. The Europeans 
stole our land and killed our people. 

But because the quincentenary is a cause 
cclebre, it provides an opportunity to put 
forth Native American perspectives on the 
next 500 years. 

Columbus was just "a man of his 
times.^ Why are you so critical of 
him? Why not look at the positive 
aspects of his legacy? 

For people who are in survival mode, it's 
very difficult to look at the positive aspects 
of death and destruction, especially when it 
is carried through to our present. There is a 
reason we are the poorest people in America. 
There is a reason we have the highest tccn 
suicide rate. There is a reason why our people 
are ill-housed and in poor health, and wc do 
not live as long as the majority population. 

That reason has to do with the fact that wc 
were in the way of Western civilization and 
wc were in the way of westward expansion. 
Wc suffered the "excesses" of civilization 
such as murder, pillage, rape, destruction of 
the major waterways, destruction of land, the 




Stmndlng bmform m rmpUcm of thm Ninm, mctMst Rum90ll MBmnm protmmtm 
mxhibit on Spmln'm mmrly Involvomont In thm Amorlcmm, 



destruction and pollution of the air. 

What are those "positive" aspects of the 
Columbus legacy? If we're talking about the 
horse, yeah, that's good. We like the horse. 
Indians raised the use of the horse to high 
military art, especially among the Cheyenne 
people and the tribes of the plains states. 

Was that a good result of that invasion? 
Yes. Is it something we would have traded 
for the many Indian peoples who are no 
longer here because of that invasion? No. 

We also like the beads that came from 
Europe, and again wc raised their use to a 
high art. Would we have traded those beads 
for the massacres of our people, such as the 
SandCreek massacre [in which U.S. soldiers 
massacred hundreds of Nadve American men. 
women, and children at Sand Creek, Colo- 
rado in 1864]? No. 

Why do wc focus on Columbus rather than 
any number of U.S. presidents who were also 
responsible for the death and dcsuuction of 
Indian people? Because it's his 5(X) years; 



it's his quincentenary. 

Isn*t criticism of Columbus a 
form of picking on the Span- 
iards. Were they any worse than 
other Europeans who came to 
America? 

In my estimation, the Spaniards were no 
worse than any number of other Europeans. 
The economy of slavery and serfdom that 
existed in northern Europe — how do you 
measure that in cruelty and in long-term 
effects against the Spanish Inquisition? 

I view the issue more as the oppressive 
nature and arrogance of the Christian reli- 
gions. And that continues today. 

Our Indian religions are not missionary 
religions. We are taught to respect other 
religions. It was a shock when we were met 
with proselytizing zealots, especially those 
who thought that if your soul can*t be saved. 
you*rc better off dead — or if your soul can 
be saved, you should l>c dead so you can go 



PAGE 4 



RETHtNKtNG SCHOOLS SPECIAL iDiTlON 



to heaven. And ihat*s the history of that origi- 
nal encounter. 

How does that arrogance and 
ignorance manifest itself today? 

How? Well, for example, the Catholic 
Church has said that 1 992 is a time lo enter into 
a period of grace and healing and to celebrate 
the evangelization of the Americas. My word, 
how can you be graceful and healing about the 
tens of thousands of native people who were 
killed because they would not convert to a 
religion they didn't understand, or because 
they didn't understand the language of those 
making the request? 

It's difficult to lake seriously an apology 
that is not coupled with atonement. It's as if 
they're saying, "I'm sony, oops, and we'll be 
better in the next hemisphere." That doesn't 
cut it We've had empty platitudes before. 

The combination of arrogance and igno- 
rance also results in making mascots of Indian 
people, of dehumanizing and stereotyping them 
— in the sports world, in advertising, and in 
society at large. The Washington Redskins 
football team is an excellent example. 

There is no more derogatory name in En- 
glish for Indian people than the name Redskins. 
And the Redskins is a prominent image right 
here in the nation's capital that goes by un- 
noticed. Because we are an invisible popula- 
tion, the racism against us is also invisible for 
the most part. 

You don't see sports teams called the White 
Trash, the Black Chicks, the Jew Boys, or the 
Jack Mormons. And if we did see that, it 
wouldn't be for long, you can be sure of that. 

Why can't we iise the Coliunbus 
quincentenary to celebrate Ameri- 
can diversity and the contribu- 
tions of ally Europeans and Native 
Americans alike? 

There will be lots of people who will be 
putting forth the perspective of rah rah Colum- 
bus, rah rah Western Civilization. Our per- 
spective is putting forth native peoples' views 
on our past and present. We also want to get 
into the public consciousness the notion that 
we actually have a future on this planet This 
is something missed by even what is hailed as 
the most progressive of American movies. 
Dances with Wolves. 

We're more interested in the 500 years 
before Columbus and what wi'J go on in the 
next 500 years. The truth of the intervening 
500 years is really known in the hearts of 
people worldwide, even though the particu- 
lars have been obscured by a cotton -candy 
version of history. 



Aren't some of the criticisms of 
Columbus j ust substituting Native - 
centrism for Euro-centrism? 

Oppressed people need to be centered 
within themselves. Racism and centrism be- 
come a problem if you are in the dominant 
society and are subjugating other people as a 
result of your centrism. I don't accept the 
question. 1 think it's an empty argument. 

Aren't criticisms of Columbus 
just another form of insuring 
**political correctness?^ 

The Eurocentric view, having been ex- 
posed for its underlying falsehood, now 
wishes to oppose any other view as either 
equally false or simply the flip side of reality: 
a secondary or dual reality. 

Feelings are usually dual realities; per- 
spectives are dual realities. But there are 
some things that don't have a dual reality. 
For example, if we look at who has polluted 
all of our water, causing a whole lot of death 
and a whole lot of illness in this country 
alone, then we have a bit of a clue where the 
problem might rest. We have a clue whose 
reality might expose the truth and whose 
reality might obscure the truth. 

It's about time for the people who are the 
true historic revisionists, who are on the far 
right side of this whole political correctness 
debate, to stop lying to themselves, to their 
readership and to their students. They must 
stop their silly ivory tower kinds of debates 
about whether muldculturalism should be 
used, and so forth. 

What is the true history? Just start dealing 
with some undisputable realities. The world 
is a mess. This country is a mess. The people 
who fare the worst in this country are poor, 
non-white children and poor, non-white old 
people. Societies who do not care for their 
young people and old people are decadent, 
decaying societies. 

I think there are a lot of good minds that are 
reflecting that decadence and decay when 
they choose to spend their time on these 
kinds of ivory tower debates. There are things 
about which they can do much, and they are 
doing nothing. 

What should be the goal and 
perspective of teachers when 
telling their elementary and high 
school students about Columbus? 

First, that no one knows the truth about 
Columbus. His story is a very complex his- 
t(xy in and of itself. Too often, this history is 
posed as romantic myth, and the uncomfort- 
able facts about Columbus are eliminated. 

Explaining the unpleasant truths about 



Columbus does not take away from the ract 
that he was able to lurch over to these shores 
in three little boats. In fact, it gives the story 
of Columbus more dimension. It also makes 
it easier for kids in school to accept not only 
Columbus but other things. 

Teachers need to respect the truth. What 
happens if I'm sitting in a classroom and 
teachers arc telling methat Thomas Jefferson 
was one of the greatest men in the world, and 
I also know that he owned slaves, but they 
don't tell me that? What am I going to do 
when I'm told "don't use or abuse drugs or 
alcohol"? Will I think there may be another 
side to that too? What else am I being told that 
isn't true? 

Kids arc smart. And they have not experi- 
enced enough setbacks to know that they have 
to be sheep. But that's what they're taught in 
the public schools — how to exercise not 
personal discipline, but top-down discipline. 
It's the "do as you're told" approach to the 
world, rather than trying to help kids under- 
stand their place in the world. 

We have to inject more truth in the class- 
room generally. And that only comes from 
discussion, I guess I'm a fan of the Socratic 
method. 

What are the key struggles that 
native people face today? 

We need, in the first instance, basic human 
rights such as religious freedom. Or how 
about life, liberty and the pursuit of happi- 
ness, and other things that many people in the 
United States view as standard fare butare out 
of reach for Indian people? 

There is also the issue of land and treaty 
rights. We have property that we don't own 
and we should, and we have property that we 
own that we don't control and we should. 

We have treaties with tlie United Stales that 
are characterized in the U,S, Constitution as 
the supreme law of the land. Yet every one, 
without exception, of nearly 400 treaties 
signed between native peoples and the U.S. 
government has been broken. Every one of 
them, 

A good place lo start would be for the 
United States to live up to every treaty agree- 
ment It's also the way you get at resolving 
some of the problems of poverty, alcoholism, 
unemployment, and poor health. 

If we don't handle the big things, we can't 
get to the manifestations of the problem. We 
have to go to the basic human rights issues, 
the basic trei\ty rights issues. 

If we don't resolve these issues, then all 
people i n this country arc going to be complicil 
in the continuing effort lo wipe out our Indian 
people. It's as simple as that □ 



PAGES 




ELEMENTARY SCHOOL ISSUES 



Why Fm Not Thankful 
for Thanksgiving 



By Michael Dorris 



In preparing this essay on stereotyping and Native 
American children, I did not concern myself with overt 
or intentional racism. Native American young people, 
particularly in certain geographical areas, are often 
prey to racial epithets and slurs — arui to physical 
abuse — just by being who they are. No amount of 
"consciousness-raising" will solve this problem; it 
must be put down with force and determination. 



Native Americans have more than one thing not to be thankful 
about on Thanksgiving. Pilgrim Day, and its antecedent feast 
Halloween, represent the annual twin peaks of Indian stereotyp- 
ing. From early October through the end of November, "cute little 
Indians** abound on greeting cards, advertising posters, in cos- 
tumes and school projects. Like stock characters from a vaudeville 
repertoire, they dutifully march out of the folk-cultural attic (and 
right down Madison Avenue!) ughing and wah-wah-wahing, 
smeared with lipstick and rouged; decked out in an assortment of 
"Indian suits** composed of everything from old clothes to fringed 
paper bags, little trick-or-treaters and school pageant extras 
mindlessly sport and cavort 

Considering that virtually none of the standard fare surrounding 
either Halloween or Thanksgiving contains an ounce of authentic- 
ity, historical accuracy, or cross-cultural perception, why is it so 
apparently ingrained? Is it necessary to the American psyche to 
perpetually exploit and debase its victims in order to justify its 
history? And do Native Americans have to reconcile themselves 
to forever putting up with such exhibitions of puerile ethnocen- 
trism? 

Being a parent is never uncomplicated. One is compelled, 
through one's children, to re-experience vicariously the unfolding 
complexities of growing up, of coping with the uncomprehendcd 
expectations of an apparently intransigent and unaffectable worid, 
of carving a niche of personality and point of view amidst the 
abundance of pressures and demands which secin to explode from 
all directions. Most people spend a good part of their lives in 
search of the ephemeral ideal often termed "identity,** but never is 
the quest more arduous and more precarious — and more crucial 
— than in the sa-caJlcd "formative years/* 

One would like, of course, to spare offspring some of the pains 
and fruslTdtions necessarily involved in maturation and self- 
realization, without depriving tliem of the fulfillments, discover- 
ies, and excitements which are also part of the process. In many 
."i ^ little or no parental control is — or should be — possible. 



ERLC 

rMWfc i2 



Learning, particularly about self, is a struggle, but with security, 
support and love it has extraordinary and marvelously unique 
possibilities. As parents, our lot is often to watch and worry and 
cheer and commiserate, curbing throughout our impulse to 
intervene. The world of children interacting with children is in • 
large part off-limits. 

Passivity ends, however, with relation to those adult-manufac- 
tured and therefore wholly gratuitous problems with which our 
children are often confronted. We naturally rise against the greed 
of panderers of debilitating junk foods; we reject dangerous toys, 
however cleveriy advertised; and we make strict laws to protect 
against reckless motorists. We dutifully strap our children into 
seatbelts, keep toxic substances out of reach, and keep a wary eye 
for the molesting or abusive stranger. 

With so many blatant dangers to counter, perhaps it is unavoid- 
able that some of the more subtle and insidious perils to child 
welfare are often permitted to pass. The deficiencies of our own 
attitudes and training may be allowed to shower upon our chil- 
dren, thus insuring their continuation, unchallenged, into yet 
another generation. Much of what we impart is unconscious, and 
we can only strive to heighten our own awareness and thereby 
circumvent a repetition ad infinitum of the "sins of the fathers*' 
(and mothers). 

And of course, we all make the effort to do this, to one degree 
or another. It is therefore especially intolerable when we observe 
other adults widessly, maliciously, and occasionally innocently, 
burdening our children with their own unexamined mental junk. 
Each of us has undoubtedly amassed a whole repertoire of 
examples of such negative influences, ranked in hierarchy of 
infamy according to our own values and perspectives. Even with 
the inauguration of certain broad controls, Saturday morning 
cartoon audiences arc still too often invited to witness and approve 
violence, cruelty, racism, sexism, ageism, and a plethora of other 
endemic social vices. 

Attitudes pertinent to "racial" or "sex-role** identity are among 
the most potentially hazardous, for these can easily be intemahzed 

— particularly by the "minority'' child. Such internalized attitudes 
profoundly affect self-concept, behavior, aspiration, arnl confi- 
dence. They can inhibit a child before he or she has learned to 
define personal talents, limits, or objectives, and tend to regularly 
become self-fulfilling prophesies. Young people who arc informed 
that they arc going to be under-achievers do underachieve with 
painful regularity. 

The progeny of each oppressed group are saddled with their 
own specialized set of debilitating — and to parents, infuriating 

— stereotypes. As the father of three Native American children, 
aged ten, six Juid three, I am particularly attuned (but not resigned) 
to that huge store of folk Americana presuming to have to do with 
"Indian lore.'* From the *'Onc little, two little..." messages of 



RETHINKING SCHOOLS SPECIAL EmTION ^ 0 



nursery school, to the ersatz pagconiry of boy scout/campfire girl 
mumbo jumbo, precious, ridiculo'js and irritating "Indians*' are 
forever popping up. 

Consider for a moment the underlying meanings of some of the 
supposedly innocuous linguistic stand-bys: "Indian givers" take 
back what they have sneakily bestowed in much the same way 
that "Indian summer" deceives the gullible flower bud. Unruly 
children are termed "wild Indians** and a local bank is named 
"Indian Head (would you open an account at a "Jew's hand," 
"Negro ear" or "Italian toe" branch?). Ordinary citizens rarely 
walk "Indian file" when about-their business, yet countless athletic 
teams, when seeking emblems of savagery and bloodthirstiness, 
see fit to title themselves "warriors/* "braves," "redskins/* and the 
like. 

On another level, children wearing "Indian suits," playing 
"cowboys and Indians" (or, in the case of organizations like the Y- 
Indian Guides, Y-Indian Maidens and Y-Indian Princesses, simply 
"Indians"), or scratching their fingers with pocket knives (the 
better to cement a friendship) are encouraged to shriek, ululate, 
speak in staccato and ungrammatical utterances (or, conversely, in 
sickeningly flowery metaphor) — thus presumably emulating 
"Indians." With depressing predictability, my children have been 
variously invited to "dress up and dance," 

portray Squanto (Pocahontas is waiting in b^^hb^h^h 

the wings: my daughter is only three), and 
"tell a myth." 

Not surprisingly, they have at times 
evidenced some unwillingness to identify, 
and thus cast their lot, with the "Indians" 
which bombard them on every front. My 
younger son Has lately taken to commenting 
"Look at the Indians!" when he comes 
across Ricardo Montalban, Jeff Chandler or 
the improbable Joey Bishop in a vintage 

TV western. Society is teaching him that 

"Indians" exist only in an ethnographic 
frieze, decorative and slightly litillatingly menacing. They 
invariably wear feathers, never crack a smile (though an occa- 
sional leer is permissible under certain conditions), and think 
about little besides the good old days. Quite naturally, it docs not 
occur to my son that he and these curious and exotic creatures are 
expected to present a common front — until one of his first grade 
classmates, garbed in the favorite costume of Halloween (ah, the 
permutations of burlap!) or smarting from an ecology commercial, 
asks him how to shoot a bow, skin a hamster, or endure a scrape 
without a tear. The society image is at the same time too demand- 
ing and too limiting a model. 

As a parent, what does one do? All efficacy is lost if one is 
perceived and categorized by school officials as a hyper-sensitive 
crank, reacting with horror to every "I-is-for-lndian" picture book. 
To be effective, one must appear to be super-reasonable, drawing 
sympathetic teachers and vice -principals into an alliance of the 
enlightened to beat back the attacks of the flat-carthers. In such a 
pose, one may fmd oneself engaged in an apparently persuasive 
discussion with a school librarian regarding a book titled some- 
thing like Vicious Red Men of (he Plains (Why, it*s set here for 20 
years and nobody ever noticed that it poru^ayed all lndi...uh, 
Nauve Americans, as homicidal maniacs!*'), while at the same 
time observing in silence a poster on the wall abc:)ut "Contribu- 
tions of the Indians'* (heavy on corn and cancx^s, short on as- 
Ln)nomy and medicine). 



Protecting children from 

racism is every bit as 
important as insuring tliat 
they avoid playing with 
electrical sockets. 



Priorities must be set. One might elect to let the infrequent 
coloring book page pass uncontested in favor of mounting the 
battlements against the visitation of a traveling Indianophile group 
proposing a "playlet" on "Indians of New Hampshire." These 
possibly well-intentioned theau-icals, routinely headed by some- 
one called "Princess Snowtlake" or "Chief Bob,** are among the 
more objecuonable "learning aids" and should be avoided at all 
costs. It must somehow be communicated to educators that no 
information about native peoples is truly preferable to a reiteration 
of the same old stereotypes, particularly in the early grades. 

A year ago my older son brought home a program printed by his 
school; on the second page was an illustration of the "First 
Thanksgiving," with a caption which read in part: *They served 
pumpkins and turkeys and com and squash. The Indians had never 
seen such a feast!** On the contrary! The Pilgrims had literally 
never seen "such a feast,'* since all foods mentioned arc exclu- 
sively indigenous to the Americas and had been provided, or so 
legend has it, by the local tribe. 

Thanksgiving could be a time for appreciating Native American 
peoples as they were and as they are, not as either the Pilgrims or 
their descendant bureaucrats might wish them to be. If there was 
really a Plymouth Thanksgiving dinner, with Native Americans in 

auendance as either guests or hosts, then 
^^^^^M^H^M the event was rare indeed. Pilgrims 

generally considered Indians to be devils in 
disguise, and u^eated them as such. 

And if those hypothetical Indians 
panicipating in that hypothetical feast 
thought that all was well and were thankful 
in the expectation of a peaceful future, they 
were sadly mistaken. In the ensuing months 
and years, they would die from European 
diseases, suffer the theft of their lands and 
property and the near-eradication of their 

religion and their language, and be driven 

to the brink of extinction. Thanksgiving, 
like much of American history, is complex, multi-faceted, and will 
not bear too close a scrutiny without revealing a less than heroic 
aspect Knowing the tnuh about Thanksgiving, both its proud and 
its shameful motivations and history, might well benefit contem- 
porary children. But the glib retelling of an ethnocentric and self- 
serving falsehood does not do one any good. 

Parents' major responsibility, of course, resides in the home. 
From the earliest possible age, children must be made aware that 
many people are wrong-headed about not only Native Americans, 
but about cultural pluralism in general. Children must be encour- 
aged to articulate any questions they might have about "other** 
people, and "minority** children must be given ways in which to 
insulate themselves from real or implied insults, epithets, slights, 
or stereotypes. "Survival humor** must be developed and positive 
models must, consciously and unconsciously, be available and 
obvious. Sadly, children must learn not to trust uncritically. 

Protecting children from racism is every bit as important as 
insuring that they avoid playing witli electrical sockets. Poison is 
poison, and ingrained oppressive cultural attitudes are at least as 
hard to antidote, once implanted, as arc imbibed cleaning fluids. 
No one gains by allowing an inequitable and discriminatory status 
quo to persist lt*s worth being a pain in the neck about. □ 

Reprinted with permission of the author. Michael Dorris is 
author of The Broken Cord, tlie novel Yellow Raft in Blue Water, 
and co-author of The Crown of Columbus. 



ERiC 



RETHINKING COLUMBUS 



PAGE i3 



Rethinking Terminology 



By Philip Tajitsu Nash and 
Emilienne Ireland 

Think about the people in your hometown. 
Is there any adjectiveihatdescribes them all? 
Are they, without exception, honest, wild, 
immoral, spiritual, ignorant, hostile, gener- 
ous, bmtal or noble? 

Are they all baseball fanatics or beer 
drinkers? Uniformly kind to strangers? 
Talkative or quiet? 

Sure, you may be able to come up with a 
few generalizations. But it would make no 
sense to describe them as a group in terms of 
personality trails, moral values, or even 
physical appearance. 

With this in mind, think about the words 
used to describe the events of 1492, and to 
refer to Europeans and Native Americans in 
general. You may find that the words you use 
reveal hidden assumptions or biases. 

People and cultures 
Many words used to describe peoples and 
cultures implicitly compare one group with 
another. What do we really mean by terms 
such as "primitive culture" or "simple soci- 
ety?" In what ways are the communitites 
"primitive" or "simple'7 Why is it that words 
with such negative connotations are used to 
describe some societies and not others? Do 
we mean merely that their material technol- 
ogy is less complicated and less expensive to 
produce than that of modem-day industrial 
societies? 

No human society is "primitive" or 
"simple." Every society is primitive in some 
ways and complex in others. 

If we put aside our fascination with tech- 
nology and material wealth, we may find that 
for many people in U.S. and European so- 
cieties today, life is primitive and stunted in 
tenns of family values, spiritual life, com- 
mitment to the comm unity and opportunities 
for rewarding work and creative self-ex- 
pression. These are the very areas most richly 
developed in traditional Native American 
communities. 

Nor can traditional Native American life 
be called '^simple" or "primitive" in an in- 
tellectual sense . A typical elder of the Wauja 
people in the Amazon rain forest, forexamplc, 
has memorized hundreds of sacred songs 
and stories; plays several musical instal- 
ments; and knows the habits and habitats of 
hundreds of forest animals, birds, and in- 
O 

ERLC 



sects, as well as the medicinal uses of local 
plants. He can guide his sons in building a 
two-story tall house using only axes, ma- 
chetes, and materials from the forest. He is an 
expert agronomist. He speaks several lan- 
guages Huently; knows precisely how he is 
related to several hundred of his closest kin; 
and has acquired sufficient wisdom to share 
his home peacefully with in-laws, cousins, 
children, and grandchildren. Female elders 
are comparably learned and accomplished. 

Other phrases to watch out for include 
Stone Age, trapped in time, prehistoric, 
timeless, and ancient All imply that cultures 
and people never change, that they no longer 
exist, or that they are somehow inferior or 
backward. And words such as warlike, 
bloodthirsty or treacherous do notask whether 
a group resorted to war in self-defense. 

Implicit assumptions and biases also af- 
fect geographic terms. The earth was ail 
formed at one time, so why is one hemi- 
sphere called old and the other new? Why do 
we choose Greenwich, England to serve as 
the center of the earth, determining East and 
West? (This is also related to the words 
oriental, "fi-om where the sun rises" in Latin, 
and occidental, "from where it sets"). 

Since it is universally agreed that Native 
Americans were around before Columbus, 
why do phrases such as "uninhabited land"i 
"virgin land", and "unknown land" persist? 
Do terms such as "untamed land" and "un- 
productive land" imply that deforestation 
and agriculture are the only suitable ways to 
use land? 

Maps also reveal biases. For example, the 
Mercator Projection Map is useful for sail- 
ing, but distorts geography. It makes the top 



XMIizing" or 
''Christianizing'' a 
people 

presumes that 
their own society 
and religion are 
inferior. 



half of the world two-thirds of the map ^ 
subtly but surely sending the message that 
the southern hemisphere is less important. 

Popular descriptions of the events of 1492 
are often one-sided. Seemingly neutral terms 
such as "encounter" and "discovery" are less 
painful to European Americans than the 
words some Native Americans would prefer, 
genocide, murder, rape, butchery, or con- 
quest. 

"Civilizing" or "Christianizing" a people 
presumes that their own society and religion 
are inferior. Calling the European conquer- 
ors "courageous" or "far-sighted" justifies 
their actions. Say ing that European atrocities 
in the Western Hemisphere were "unavoid- 
able" (or that the perpetrators of genocide 
were only "products of their time") dulls our 
sense of injustice regarding events both past 
and present. 

In articles written for Rethinking Colum- 
bus, we have tried to be sensitive to such 
biases. 

We have tried not to use the term New 
World, for that implies that somehow the 
Western Hemisphere was fonned after Eu- 
rope or Asia, or that history began with the 
arrival o f Europeans in the Americas. Because 
no geographically or politically neutral term 
is widely accepted for this section of the 
globe, we have generally used the term 
Western Hemisphere or the Americas. 

We have also tried to be sensitive to how 
Native Americans refer to themselves. When 
appropriate, cultures and peoples have been 
defined as narr )wly as possible, so that spe- 
cific names such as Apache or Wauja have 
been used. 

We encourage readers to think about the 
implicit assumptions of words. Ask yourself 
how people refer to themselves before de- 
scribing them \o someone else. Whose point 
of view is represented in the tenns you are 
using? Whose point of view is left out, mini- 
mized or distorted? 

Rethinking our terminology is essential to 
developing analytical minds. As we ap- 
proach the Columbus Quincentenary, we 
must teach our children to respcctall peoples, 
and to celebrate humanity rather than its 
destruction. □ 

Phil T ajitsu Nash is a hoard member of the 
Asian American Legal Defense and Educa- 
tion Fund, and a professor at City University 
of New York Law School, 

Emilienne Ireland is a co -founder of the 
Amazon Network. 



RETHINKING COLUMBUS 



PAGE 77 



WASHINGTON 



by Russell Shaw 




Christopher Columbus: hero or villain? 



WHEN thinking of Columbus, most people think 
p<j:>itive thoughts. Pope John Paul II expressed the 
^ndely held view of Columbus a while back in speaking 
of 'his genius, his tenacicy and his faith." and crediting these 
with the fact "that the populations of the New World were 
able to open themseKcs to the preaching of the gospel." 

Be w-amed then: with the 500th anniversary of Columbus' 
epic first vov-age to the New World coming up next year, there 
are ideologues and revisionists abroad in the land who'd like 
you to think very badly of Columbus and all he stands for. 

Consider the resolution adopted some months ago by the 
governing board of the National Council of Churches. It 
declared that Columbus' arrival on these shores was the 
beginning of an invasion by Europeans, not a discovery. 

The National Council is, unfortunately, not alone in foster- 
ing such guilt-inducing views. Its resolution was symptonoatic 
of Columbus criticism in a growing stream of books, articles 
and pronouncements. Taken together, these add up to a 
complex indictment with paniciilars touching on issues from 
environmentalism to evangelization. 

In soaing out these matters, it is necessary to start with 
an obvious fact. Columbus was a great man, but he wasn't 
perfect. Nowhere are his failings more obvious — with the 
advantage of hindsight, to be sure — than in his treatment of the 
native peoples of the New Worid 

Initially. Columbus approached the Indians benevolently. 
Eventualh', however, he tolerated and even encouraged the 
oppression and violence that have often since marked the 
uniaappy history of Native Americans. 

But the romanticism of the noble savage myth doesn't help 
to right these ancient wrong.5. Some Indians were peaceful and 
inoffensive. Others weren't. And although there were enor- 
mous differences among the native peoples of the Americas, 
some engaged in practices like human sacrifice and cannibal- 
ism. Clearly, the impaa of European culture was not entirely 
for the worse. 

Some Columbus criticism is simply off-target. One recent 
book, for example, complains about the "Columbian legacy" 
of environmental damage. Frankly, it strains credulity to blame 
Columbus for ecological offenses spanning five centuries. 

Often, though, it isn't Columbus the man who counts but 
Columbus the symbol. That's clear in the case of what is 
fashionably called "Eurocentrisra,** an abuse said to be rooted 
in the colonial experience and to have become embedded in 
popular history and American education. 

What's Euroccntrisra.^ Diane Ravitch of Columbia Univer- 
sity, a critic, describes it as an umbrella terra for the charge 
'*that American culture is . . hostile to anyone whose ancestors 
arc not European." Its alleged victims thus include Africa- 
Americans. Latinos, Native Americans, and indeed anyone of 
non- European ethnic background 

There is a truth embodied here. In the U.S., people of 
non- European ancestry have often been victims of discrimina- 
tion. In the nation's schools, however, Eurocentric excesses 
of the past have been countered in recent years by curriculum 
changes in the direction of "multiculruralism*' — tlic study of 
non-European cultures. 

Up to a fwint, this shift makes excellent sease Children 
and young people need to learn about not only the European 
roots of Amencan culmre. but the contnbutions of a broad 



array of non European cultures. The idea rums sour, how'cver. 
when it takes the form — is is now happening in school systems 
m many parts ot the country — of what Ravitch and others call 
'particularistic" multiculturalism. As she explains; 

' Parttcularists have no interest in extending or revising 
American culture: indeed, they deny that a common culture 
exists. Particularists reject any accommodation among 
groups, any interactions ittax blur the distinct lines between 
them. The brand of h/story that they espouse is one in which 
everyone is either a descendant of \ictims or oppressors. 
By doing so. ancient hatreds are fanned and recreated in 
each new generation," 

This readily becomes an clement in the repertoire of 
Columbus criticism. As the man whose voyages initiated 
European immigration to the New World he provides a 
convenient symbolic target for chose bent on assailing the 
alleged excesses of Eurocentrism. 

Often, too, all this takes on religious overtones. On the 
Op Ed page of The yew York Times, for example, one reads 
of the "phony baloney about the white man bringing Christian- 
ity" to the Americas. In fact, contends this writer, Columbus 
and those who came after him brought not religion but "greed, , 
cpjelty. slavery and genocide." 

The explorers and colonizers of the Americas were guilty 
of many excesses. But missionary zeal and Christian charity are 
also pan of the story. As Pope John Paul II wrote last year to 
Latin American religious, "the greatest testimony of the first 
missionaries was their heroic love for Christ, who prompted 
them to commit themscK'cs totally to the service of their 
indigenous brothers and sisters.'* Moreover, "many missionar- 
ies ., , felt obliged to raise their voices prophetically against 
the abuses of the colonizers who sought their own interests 
at the cost of the rights of the persons whom they should have 
rcspcaed and loved as brothers and sisters," 

Plainly there is something unhistorical — an abuse of the truth 
— in glossing over the painful episodes in the long process of 
exploration, colonization and, yes, exploitation that began 
with Columbus' voyages. But it is no less unhistorical — no less 
an abuse of the trum — to depict that experience in exclusively 
negative terms. 

History is complex because people are. Take Columbus. 
Neither an ogre nor an angel, ^ie was an imperfca human being 
whose achievements were simply stupendous. In his classic 
biography Admiral of the Ocean Sea, historian Samuel Eliot 
Morison concludes that Columbus did "more to direct the 
course of history than any individual since Augustus Caesar," 
That miay be an exaggeration — but not by much. It's a good 
reason for approaching Columbus and the process he began 
with respect for the comple.xiry of reality rather than a blind 
determination to smear him and what he represents, □ 



.\ veteran rqjorter on developments m the U.S. cipital. Russell Shaw 
is the director of publtc infomiation for the Knights of Columbus 



ERIC 



4 CoUimhui.M*nuoy IWI 



Columbus Day 

By Jimmie Durham 



In school I ivas taught the names 
Columbus, Cortez, and Pizzaro and 
A dozen other filthy murderers, 
A bloodline all the way to General Miles, 
Daniel Boone and General Eisenhower, 

No one mentioned the names 

Of even a few of the victims. 

But don't you remember Chaske, whose spine 

Was crushed so quickly by Mr. Pizarro^s boot? 

What words did he cry into the dust? 

Wh it was the familiar name 
Of that young girl who danced so gracefully 
That everyone in the village sang with her — 
Before Cortez' sword hacked off her arms 
As she protested the burning of her sweet- 
heart? 

That young man's name was Many Deeds, 
And he had been a leader of a band of fighters 
Called the Redstick Hummingbirds, who slowed 
The march ofCortez' army with only a few 
Spears and stones which now lay still 
In the mountains and remember, 

Greenrock Woman was the name 
Of that old lady who walked right up 
And spat in Columbus* face. We 
Must remember that, and remember 
Laughing Otter the Taino who tried to stop 
Columbus and was taken away as a slave. 
We never saw him again. 

In school I learned of heroic discoveries 
Made by liars and crooks. The courage 
Of millions of sweet and true people 
Was not commemorated. 




Let us then declare a holiday 

For ourselves, and make a parade that begins 

With Columbus* victims and continues 

Even to our grandchildren who will be named 

In their honor. 



Because isn*t it true that even the summer 
Grass here in this land whispers those names, 
And every creek has accepted the responsibility 
Of singing those names? And nothing can stop 
The wind from, howling those names around 
The corners of the school. 



Why else would the birds sing 

So much sweeter here than in other Ic ds? ^' 



ERIC 



RETHINKING COLUMBUS PAGE 59 



For 
the 
Love 
of 

Gold 




SpMnimrdm chopping off thm hand* of Indianm who failed to m««t 
th0 gold dumt quotm^ Drawing by BartolomS dm Lmm CasMS, 1619. 



One thought preoccupied Colum- 
bus after he landed on the islands of 
the Caribbean. Gold. Following are 
entries from his journal for his first 
voyage which underscore this preoc- 
cupation and expose the profit-mo- 
tives which guided his journeys The 
excerpts are from The Journal of 
ChrisiophcrColumhusjranslated by 
Cecil Jane. 

October 13, 1492: And I was attentive and 
labored to know if they [the Indians] had 
gold, and I saw that some of them wore a 
small piece hanging from a hole which they 
have in llie nosc» and from signs I was able to 
understand that, gomg to the south or going 
round the island to the south, there was a king 
who had large vessels of it and possessed 
much gold. 

October 16: This island is very large, and 
1 am resolved to round it, because as far as I 
caji understand, there is in it or neai it agold 
mine. 

(ktohcr 17: 1 desired to u\kc the route to 
llie soiJtli soutli-easi, because in iliat direc- 
tion, as all the Indians whom 1 have witli me 
viv and as another indicated, towards the 



south, lies the island which they call Samoet, 
where there is gold. 

October 19: Tomorrow I wish to go so fiir 
inland to find the village and to see or have 
speech with this king, who, according to the 
signs which these men make, rules all these 
neighboring islands and is clothed and wears 
on his person much gold. 

October 21: According to whether I shall 
find a quantity of gold or spices, I shall 
decide what is to be done. 

October 23: 1 sec that here there is no gold 
mine. .. I say that it is not right to delay, but to 
go on our way and to discover much land, 
until a very profitable land is reached. 

November 12: So Your Highnesses should 
resolve to make them Christians, for I be- 
lieve that, if you begin, in a litde while you 
will achieve the conversion of a great num- 
ber of peoples to our holy faith, with tlie 
acquisition of great lordships and riches and 
all their inhabitants for Spain. For without 
doubt there is a very great amount of gold in 
these lands, so that it is not without reason 
that these Indians, whom I carry with me, say 
that there are places in these islands where 
they dig gold and wear it around their necks, 
in tlie ciirs, and on the arms and legs, and that 
there are very large bracelcLs, pearls of great 



value and an infinite amount of spices. 

December 3: Whatever they [the Indians] 
have they give at once for anything that may 
be given to them, without saying that it is 
little, and I believe that they would do so with 
spices and gold, if they had any. 

December 12: 1 had given orders that they 
[my men] should lake >ome [Indians on 
Espartola], treat them well and make them 
lose their fear, that some gain might be made, 
since, considering the beauty of the land, it 
could not be but that there was gain to be got. 

December 23: Our Lord in His Goodness 
guide me that I may find this gold, I mean 
their m i ne, for I have many here who say they 
know it. 

December 29: There is so much [gold] 
and in so many places, and in this island of 
Espafiola itself that it is a wonder. 

January 6, 1493: Sovereign Princes, I 
rcali/.e that Our Lord miraculously ordained 
that the ship should remain there [at La 
Navidad], because it is the best place in all 
llic island [of Espartola] for fonning a settle- 
ment and nearest to the mines of gold." 

January 10: More honor and favor ought 
to be done to the people (on EspaAola], since 
in this island there is so much gold and gcxxl 
land and spices. H 



ERIC 



RETHINKING C0LVI4BUS 



i 



PAGE 61 



Columbus Day 



In school I was taught the names 
Columbus, Cortez, and Pizarro and 
A dozen other filthy murderers, 
A bloodline all the way to General Miles, 
Daniel Boone and General Eisenhower. 

No one mentioned the names 

Of even a few of the victims. 

But don't you remember Chaske, whose spine 

Was crushed so quickly by Mr Pizarro's boot? 

What words did he cry into the dust? 

What was the familiar name 

Of that young girl who danced so gracefully 

That everyone in the village sang with her— 

Before Cortez' sword hacked off her arms 

As she protested the burning of her sweetheart? 



ITiat young man's name was Many Deeds, 
And he had been a leader of a band of fighters 
Called the Redstick Hummingbirds, who slowed 
The march of Cortez' army with only a few 
Spears and stones which now lay still 
In the mountains and remember. 

Greenrock Woman was the name 
Of that old lady who walked right up 
And spat in Columbus' face. We 
Must remember that, and remember 
Laughing Otter the Taino who tried to stop 
Columbus and was taken away as a slave. 
We never saw him again. 

In school I learned of heroic discoveries 
Made by liars and crooks. The courage 
Of millions of sweet and true people 
Was not commemorated. 

Let us then declare a holiday 
For ourselves, and make a parade that begins 
With Columbus' victims and continues 
Even to our grandchildren who will be named 
In their honor. 

Because isn't it true that even the summer 
Grass here in this land whispers those names. 
And every creek has accepted the responsibility 
Of singing those names? And nothing can stop 
The wind from howling those names around 
The comers of the school. 

Why else would the birds sing 

So much sweeter here than in other lands? 



— Jimmy Durham 



Appendix B 



NAME: 



NATIVE AMERICAN WORD SEARCH 



D 


J 


R 


Q 


T 


L 


A 


S 


R 


V 


B 


M 


J 


B 


R 


D 


Y 


1 


G 


V 


1 


J 


1 


L 


B 


D 


D 


R 


N 


s 


L 


R 


1 


H 


c 


R 


0 


M 


J 


H 


F 


S 


S 


1 


M 


N 


M 


V 


A 


1 


1 


A 


R 


B 


s 


N 


1 


K 


s 


D 


E 


R 


C 


R 


R 


Y 


0 


J 


D 


s 


M 


c 


A 


K 


s 


E 


W 


N 


J 


X 


s 


L 


J 


C 


L 


E 


H 


Y 


T 


F 


G 


S 


1 


L 


N 


0 


E 


J 


c 


N 


0 


u 


G 


F 


M 


D 


z 


V 


N 


P 


N 


F 


D 


N 


Q 


N 


p 


1 


G 


L 


B 


T 


R 


H 


N 


R 


0 


F 


C 


1 


M 


S 


K 


A 


P 


A 


1 


W 


D 


Q 


K 


T 


Y 


V 


A 


B 


1 


s 


M 


1 


V 


G 


R 


E 


A 


L 


T 


0 


S 


D 


E 


B 


A 


M 


Y 


T 


F 


s 


E 


c 


M 


R 


R 


N 


J 


w 


Q 


V 


0 


1 


1 


D 


P 


R 


F 


s 


P 


1 


s 


J 


B 


N 


X 


E 


1 


A 


J 


U 


s 


P 


N 


M 


V 


u 


F 


0 


B 


K 


W 


T 


u 


N 


N 


T 


A 


N 


M 


1 


N 


G 


T 


D 


0 


M 


N 


E 


B 


G 


K 


M 


G 


E 


D 


J 


A 


0 


B 


P 


G 


D 


N 


B 


A 


H 


1 


N 


D 


0 


A 


T 


H 


M 


K 


P 


R 


R 


M 


1 


N 


R 


T 


N 


F 


E 


s 


F 


T 


E 


R 


0 


R 


M 


R 


J 


N 


0 


M 


T 


u 


N 


D 


A 


F 


1 


P 


P 


P 


0 


A 


U 


E 


V 


M 


E 


E 


E 


K 


B 


L 


1 


H 


N 


c 


N 




N 


M 


T 


G 


Y 


L 


L 


H 


B 


D 


D 


s 


R 


W 


L 


V 


T 


S 


Q 


K 


s 


1 


D 


F 


G 


Y 


Y 


U 


J 


R 


N 


A 


C 


A 


E 


1 

1 


Q 


C 


Z 


Y 


A 


K 


S 


s 


P 


W 


E 


K 


M 


P 


1 


N 


G 


D 


R 


T 


F 


G 


c 


S 


H 


L 


U 


V 


Y 


S. 


D 


1 


A 


D 


N 


0 


0 


G 


Y 


1 


P 


S 


S 


E 


A 


A 


V 


U 


M 


N 


N 


D 


P 


0 


J 


U 


0 


P 


P 


R 


E 


S 


S 


E 


D 


S 


F 


V 


N 


1 


L 


Q 


F 


T 


Q 


T 


L 


B 


Q 


E 


E 


A 


W 


R 


P 


1 


H 




V 


N 


A 


S 


N 


N 


S 


H 


Y 


S 


J 


N 


G 


S 


Y 


T 


C 


X 


S 


R 


E 


P 


L 


A 


C 


S 


P 


K 


B 


S 


R 


F 


A 


M 


E 


R 


1 


C 


A 


N 


1 


N 


D 


1 


A 


N 


S 


W 


X 


D 


G 


T 


U 


T 


H 


M 


E 


E 


E 


Q 


B 


N 


V 


G 


M 


1 


0 


P 


U 


F 


u 


P 


N 


B 


M 


1 


F 


U 


P 


V 


V 


S 


F 


D 


E 


P 


Y 


T 


0 


E 


R 


E 


T 


s 


P 


U 


F 


H 


J 


D 


J 


1 


1 


B 


K 


F 


D 


E 


P 


Y 


T 


0 


E 


R 


E 


T 


s 


D 


B 


J 


L 


E 


S 


D 


D 


c 


G 


P 


J 


W 


G 


B 


T 


Y 


R 


C 


S 


N 


1 


p 


M 


0 


■ U 


F 


G 


C 



Positive Terms or Facts Negative Terms 



NATIVE AMERICANS 
AMERICAN INDIANS 
(A) DIVERSE POPULATION 
HUMAN BEINGS 

OPPRESSED 
STEREOTYPED 
MINORITY 
DISCRIMINATED AGAINST 



SAVAGES 
INDIAN STYLE 
INDIAN GIVER 
DRUNKS 
REDSKINS 
SCALPERS 
INJUNS 
SQUAW 



FRir 



4<J 



NAME: 



NATIVE AMERICAN WORD SEARCH 

Answers 



D 


J 


R 


Q 


T 


L 


A 


S 


R 


V 


B 


M 


J 


B 


R 


D 


Y 


1 


G 


V 


1 


J 


1 


L 


B 


D 


D 


R 


N 


S 


L 


R 


1 


H 


C 


R 


0 


M 


J 


H 


F 


S 


S 


1 


M 


N 


M 


V 


A 


1 


I 


A 


R 


B 


S 


N 


1 


K 


S 


D 


E 


R 


C 


R 


R 


Y 


0 


J 


D 


S 


M 


C 


A 


K 


S 


E 


W 


N 


J 


X 


S 


L 


J 


C 


L 


E 


H 


Y 


T 


F 


G 


S 


1 


L 


N 


0 


E 


J 


C 


N 


0 


U 


G 


F 


M 


D 


z 


V 


N 


P 


N 


F 


D 


N 


Q 


N 


P 


1 


G 


L 


B 


T 


R 


H 


N 


R 


0 


F 


C 


1 


M 


S 


K 


A 


P 


A 


1 


W 


D 


Q 


K 


T 


Y 


V 


A 


B 


1 


S 


M 


1 


V 


G 


R 


E 


A 


L 


T 


0 


S 


D 


E 


B 


A 


M 


Y 


T 


F 


S 


E 


C 


M 


R 


R 


N 


J 


W 


Q 


V 


0 


1 


1 


D 


P 


R 


F 


S 


P 


1 


S 


J 


B 


N 


X 


E 


1 


A 


J 


U 


S 


P 


N 


M 


V 


U 


F 


0 


B 


K 


W 


T 


U 


N 


N 


T 


A 


N 


M 


1 


N 


G 


T 


D 


0 


M 


N 


E 


B 


G 


K 


M 


G 


E 


D 


J 


A 


0 


B 


P 


G 


D 


N 


B 


A 


H 


I 


N 


D 


0 


A 


T 


H 


M 


K 


P 


R 


R 


M 


1 


N 


R 


T 


N 


F 


E 


S 


F 


T 


E 


R 


0 


R 


M 


R 


J 


N 


0 


M 


T 


U 


N 


D 


A 


F 


1 


P 


P 


P 


0 


A 


U 


E 


V 


M 


E 


E 


E 


K 


B 


L 


1 


H 


N 


C 


N 




N 


M 


T 


G 


Y 


L 


L 


H 


B 


D 


D 


S 


R 


W 


L 


V 


T 


S 


Q 


K 


S 


1 


D 


F 


G 


Y 


Y 


U 


J 


R 


N 


A 


C 


A 


E 


1 


Q 


C 


Z 


Y 


A 


K 


S 


S 


P 


W 


E 


K 


M 


P 


1 


N 


G 


D 


R 


T 


F 


G 


C 


S 


H 


L 


U 


V 


Y 


S 


D 


1 


A. 


D 


N 


0 


0 


G 


Y 


1 


P 


S 


S 


E 


A 


A 


V 


U 


M 


N 


N 


D 


P 


0 


J 


U 


0 


P 


P 


R 


E 


S 


S 


E 


D 


S 


F 


V 


N 


1 


L 


Q 


F 


T 


Q 


T 


L 


B 


Q 


E 


E- 


A 


W 


R 


P 


1 


H 


G 


V 


N 


A 


S 


N 


N 


S 


H 


Y 


S 


J 


N 


G 


S 


Y 


T 


C 


X 


S 


R 


E 


P 


L 


A 


C 


S 


P 


K 


B 


S 


R 


F 


A 


M 


E 


R 


1 


C 


A 


N 


1 


N 


D 


1 


A 


N 


S 


w 


X 


D 


G 


T 


u 


T 


H 


M 


E 


E 


E 


Q 


B 


N 


V 


G 


M 


1 


0 


P 


U 


F 


u 


P 


N 


B 


M 


1 


F 


U 


P 


V 


V 


S 


F 


D 


E 


P 


Y 


T 


0 


E 


R 


E 


T 


s 


P 


U 


F 


H 


J 


D 


J 


1 


1 


B 


K 


F 


D 


E 


P 


Y 


T 


0 


E 


R 


E 


T 


s 


D 


B 


J 


L 


E 


S 


D 


D 


C 


G 


P 


J 


W 


G 


B 


T 


Y 


R 


C 


S 


N 


1 


p 


M 


0 


U 


F 


G 


C 



Positive Terms or Facts 



Negative Terms 



NATIVE AMERICANS 
AMERICAN INDIANS 
(A) DIVERSE POPULATION 
HUMAN BEINGS 

OPPRESSED 
STEREOTYPED 



SAVAGES 
INDIAN STYLE 
INDIAN GIVER 
DRUNKS 
REDSKINS 
SCALPERS 



ERIC 



MINORITY INJUNS 
DISCRIMINATED AGAINST SQUAW 



COMMON STEREOTYPES OF 
NATIVE AMERICANS 



Appearance 

large noses 
pot-bellies 
half-naked 
painted faces 
buckskin clothing 
headdresses with feathers 



Lifestyle 

live in teepees or wigwams 

scalp people 
are hunters and gatherers 
drink much alcohol 



COMMON STEREOTYPES OF 
NATIVE AMERICANS 



Descriptors 

treacherous 
bloodthirsty 

savage 
unciviHzed 
ancient 
warlike 



Derogatory terms 

sitting 'indian-style'' 
Indian-giver 

Injuns 
squaw, buck 



Stereotypes to "Unlearn" 



Many Indian-reference words and phrases -. 0 ay^^ 
form of stereotypes^ /.rve y offen ive Below Is.given a 
.;^f,^",,Pre?erencerth:rwn/be helpful in presenting an 
accurate picture of Indian life. 

1 "Sit like an Indian" ^,-^nw 

7~T. c c-f in cross-leqqed fashion, especially 

All people of a]! races sit ^J^g groups who do not use 

sitting on the grouno ^^ose cu ture g ^ 
chairs or benches may assume this position lor 

2. IndiarL:TnrK^ ' . .^e Europeans have, but 

Indian people did not ^/-.^/^^ J^p^rl^Lde An Indian 

instead, had ^^""^^^^^^'J^'luahter of one of the tribal leaders. 

7n^irdr;oTe. - ^ ^"^^^"^ 

had no kings. 

3 War Bonnet ^ *.»• tt- w;:^<; 

roLJrd'a "/r^^P cteS Z.fr.TtU. ?X were aUowed to wear 
such a bonnet and this honor must be earned. 

" "^T^ople did not .a.e a "war whooP-s ^^^^^ 

touching the hand to '''^ ^"^^^/^"^.'^'^I'^rd cr es in order to un- 
Tho Indian people in b*"!^ 2aI%'so one of Joy such as the modern 
nerve the enemy, ine souna wa^ c ^ 

"Yipee" . 

^ Sr^^e-NrTe ra.-: rt^sTe^nnro -o/t-ef^-er^i draiir 

manner. 

6. Buck 

Sarr.c as above. 

• ' !t7^, colonists and ^e-^^ .id bou^ - ^^t 

was^wrnfe^dVo^rt^^rr 

not practiced anong n u. peopl , but ^^^^^.^^ ^ ^^^^ 

hair was coinTon. Latei , ".-a^y Z;^'"''^ 
showing ferocity and retribution. 




8, Speak Indian 

There is no such language as "Indian". There were approximately 
220 distinct and different languages among Indian people (even in 
Coos County, three dialects existed, umntelligible from each other) 
Properly, it is stated - "Speak aja Indian language". 



9- 



10. 



11. 



"Ugh" 

Only Hollywood Indians use this. 
The use of "urn" after words 



Holb'wood also invented a broken speech pattern for Indians in 
which "urn" is added to words (»Mde-um, see-um, like-um) ^-^^ 
people have never spoken like this. 



Indian 



Like "a bunch of wild Indians" 

Again, thanks to Hollywood the Indian has been labeled as specifically 
"wild" and untamed. 



12. "How" 



Origin of this is unknown. More properly, perhaps "Kia-how-ya" a 
Chinook phrase for both hello and good bye. 

13. "One little, t wo little, three little Indians . . 
This is offensive to most Indian people. 

14. "Indian-giver" 

This has always been used to mean a person will take back what has 
been given. How this phrase came about in unknown, considering 
the fact that the Indian people historically have not been in a^ 
position to "reclaim" what was given away. Use of this phrase is 
also offensive to Indian people. 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




1 




■o 



^ > 



r 3 



TO O 
«^ O _ 
TO o n' 



3 



>P 

TO 13 
12. Q> 



1 „ "T TO 



TO_ Q. ' 



< S 3 

r-r t/, a> 

^ C 

O I ^ 

P a. =r 
, on 



3^ 

TO T3 



CO 

•TO -n 

o O 

>o rn 

03 30 



Oi TO 
UP ^ C^J ^ 

a. c 



2i 



TO 

O 



o ^ o Q 



X3 TO 



5: O. ; 
JQ 'J I 
O- ; 



TO 3 



TO «-.^ 
=3 2 : 

TO fO 




ERIC 



r maiden... 

0 pifCe Va!;ve American olav sei 
induces everv:r.:ng sne needs to 
cress ':p .ifCe P'^canonias: i^eace-'. 
eiasnc neaabanc ".vith :wo feathers, 
ieaaec n«?cK^a\;c. oeadea barrette, 
brown iuedo ir.e pouch, fringed 

V neck top ana "adiust to fit"* fringed 
SKirt. Suedod v:nvL Our own iT.port. 
i.")ne si::u 'i:s a»;e^ 3 (o 8 

1 4 I 6 7 I 6 PC. NATIVE AMERICAN 
PLAY SET. S\9S)^ 



A All dressed up... A Bt 

Tracitional Native American Exclusi 

heaccress ana vest are run :or roie- pretty ( 

plav -.vnen Halloween is over Full :n stvle 

72" long headdress sports ao colorfiil neck ih 

learners; 3" w:de headband trimmed sleeves 

with r meul decais-one 1 Vz" diameter black s. 

Indian Chief and six smaller wagon skiriwi 

wheels. Two black side strancs add to easily t 

the authentic look; elastic back Wide b 

ensures a secure fit. Black vest has chin in 

rrd irT.jzo trimi and Indian designs satin. \ 

front and back. Fits a^ts a :c 10. 6 3677 

058 171 INDIAN HEADDRESS COSTU 
AND VEST 514.98 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Vir^nia Slims remembers one of many 
soaeties where the women stood 
head and shoulders above the men. 



Princess 
Wash And Scrub 



Little Runnr:<^ 
Water Ft^tcher 



Keeper Of The 
Teepee 



Princess Breakfast 
Lunch And 
Dinner Preparer 



Woman Who 
Gathers Fireiivod 



Princess 
Buffalo Robe 
SeiL'er 



Little Woman 
Who Weaves 
All Day 



Woman Who 
Plucks Feathers 
For Chief's 
Hedaaresf 



C PSihp M«>rrn In, 



Warning: The Surgeon General Has Determined 
Thai CiQareiie SmoKing is Dangerous to Your Health. 



J mg"taf." 0.6 mg n:cjJ-^^ 3v j'»r ::garetle, FTC Rrdoh ^e: 



VIRGINIA 
SUMS 




>bu Ve come 
a long way, baby. 



ERIC 



[;4 



LEWEEDS 



by T. K. Ryan 




A^LK 70\}Bi.B Cm^s-V 




Red«ye by Gordon Bess 



inm TWXI9LA -DOiy, poksy 





THE GOOD GUYS 
WEAR TH£ V^H/re HATS 

AND THE 8AO (SOVS 
WEAR THE SLACK HATS/ 



ERIC 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Worid 







New York 1 626: Chief of the Manhattan Indians 
addresses his tribe for the last time. 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



PdciaingTon 



Story Bears 



23 




Preserves & Cookies 
< PADDINGTON'" MARMALADE 

This little suitcase features three 4 o/. jars of mar 
malade. Perfect for gift ^ivitiy or {o have a special 
little treat for tiiat unexpected yuest. Tiie little rattan 
basket includes a IV2 0Z. jar of iiiartiiaUKie and a 
t.i'j. Don't just buy them for gifts, though!! 

DF603 Marmalade Suitcase $12.75 

DF604 Basket Gift Set $10.50 



PADDINGTON"* DISH SET ► 

Now. . .to serve all those wonderful goodies on. we have a 
Paddington'^ melamine dish set. There's a divided plate, 
bowl and mug and there's also a spoon and fork set which 
is sold separately. Each piece features an adorable picture of 
our beloved Paddington'^'V A must for collectors of all ages. 

DP601 Dish Set (3 pc) $18.50 

DP602 
Utensil 
Set (2 pc.) 
. . .$6.75 





< PADDINGTON™ COOKIES 

This cute lunch box holds Paddingtons **just in case" 
cookies. Inside are 16 delicious honey cookies. Each 
box comes with a tag reading. **please look after 
these cookies. Thank you.** As we all know. Padding- 
ton liked gingerbread, so we also offer a gingerbread 
"book" cookie. Do enjoy these bearesistable treats. 

DF605 Lunch Box of Cookies $20.00 

DF606 Gingerbread Cookie $7.00 



By Oz: From the Legend of Lonestar... 

^ PACO Paco is from The Lonestar Bear collection by 62 
Co. Every care has been taken to insure quality and workmanship, 
with special attention to 
detail, from his hand frayed 
real leather tunic to his brass 
concho and anklet with 
brass bells. F^art of the LTD 
Collection, they are in 
limited supply, so do buy 
earlv. Each is signed and 
fullv jointed 
DF607 Paco 14' 

$91.00 




LITTLE MOON ► 



Golden \cdd\: .'\\cimi W/inner 
Sho's i\ tldilnu^ IndicHi bi\u 
with ti \\(\\\(\ woven head 
band and embroidered suecjeti clr-th (lr(»ss ( )ui > it 11 u» 1 ,iM,end 
I it Lonestar (that popular **(. owbcNU*" of (J vimis h.u k . he 
sure to gel one now so yon won't liavr to "scm h piiuiirs** 
fni hei Lwer I'ullv i<Mnte(l 
I)F608 Little Moon IT' $26.00 I)F609 Little Moon 15 




$43.00 



ERLC 



5j 



(Titeria for Selecting Native American Visitor to Discuss Art 



* The person must be a Native American man, vvoniaiK or child 

* The visitor must be able to make some kind of Nati\e American jewelry out ofbeads 

* The person must have knowledge of his/her tribe's reasons for wearing their 

headdress 

The visitor must have access to a iieaddress that can be shown to the class 



Description of artwork : 



Date artwork was made: 



Guarantee of Authenticity: 



Signature : 



ERJC (, , 



Headdresses Used 
by Some Native Americans 

Most of the time, we see the same kind of headdress worn by Indian men. Usually these are the 
Plains Indian war bonnets, which should not be worn except by a person who has been honored 
with this privilege. 

But there are many headdresses worn traditionally by Native nations that are extraordinarily 
beautiful. We show here just a few of them. Notice how they vary in shape, design and style. 




A Sioux war bonnet. 




A buffalo horn war 
bonnet. The cap is made of 
fur, covered with tiny 
down feathers. A sinew 
cord is tied to the tips of 
the horns. This holds the 
feathers, shown in the 
center, straight up. 



An eastern tribal 
roach. Can be worn with 
one or two eagle feathers. 
Usually tied under the chin. 




A Blackfeet headdress. 





An Iroquois headdress. 



A Mandan headdress, 
it is made of tail feathers 
and curled breast feathers 
from large birds. 




Reprinted, with permission, from The Weesvish Tree^ Vol. 4. No. 4. The Weewish Tree is **A Magazine of Indian 
America for Young People" published by the American Indian Historical Society, San Francisco. CA. . 



'^nlearntng *'fndian" Gteieotypes 



ERIC 



(;.J 



Appendix C 



Name 




ACCROSS 

1. She is an American Indian ballet dancer, 

2. A story handed' down fronn generation to generation 

3. She IS a well-known author of children's novels and poetry. 

4. She is a singer, and she also founded the Nehewan Foundation which helpsNatlve American 
students to go to college. 

DOWN 

1. She played an important role in American history by aiding in the famous Lewis and Clark 
expedition 

2. He was a legendary Native American who had magical powers. He was the subject of a long poem 
by Henry VVadswodh Longfellow. 

3. She v.tjS j writer and lecturer who helped make :-^ll Amencnns aware of the wrongs done to Native 
Americar.^ 

4 Tho ; •-•.'mI intiioiiiy ciKnip that w-^ h:iv(^ h'.MMi shKiyifVi .itv^ut tins wnok 

5 Ovi»: - '* ; <]tMi(M ali/.'Hions, «Utitu<l<^s 01 ()f)inioir, 



ERLC 



Name 



GsaiaiiaEiQiiiiQiniiiiii 



MM 



m a a la 
nasaiaQ id a m 



a aiQaaaaQnciaaisiai^a ^ 



ACCROSS 

1, She is an American Indian ballet dancer 

2. A story handed down from generation to generation 

3, She is a well-known author of children's novels and poetry. 

4. She is a singer, and she also founded the Nehewan Foundation which helpsNative American 
students to go to college. 

DOWN 

1. She played an important role in American history by aiding in the famous Lewis and Clark 
expedition 

2. He was a legendary Native American who had magical powers He was the subject of a long poem 
by Henry V\.^dswOf1h Longfellow 

3. She writ(?f and lecturer who helped make cill Amencans nware of the wrongs done to Native 
Ameii-w - 

4 Jhc .t«! 'MinM ily ijKMip th:it vv«^ fiav • Im'^ni .hi'Jyin } .il'^iMfii', vv»»rk 

5 Ov-'- *'«^ ! ;«Mi<Mali/ah()fv; :ittiludi*'. npiiii<):i'; 



ERLC 



Social "/ 

':crcn and Minoricies ia U.S. Histoi 
'Aori ties -Native A-T.er icar.s 
'avia Tall chief 



The daughcer of an Osa-e Ir.dian father and Sco Cch-Ir i sh -Du t: ih T.cther 
Maria Tallchief is a Cr^_ie American, She be^an studying ballet: at a^^- 
four and at eighteen made her Mew York debut in a leacin3 role. H-.ire 
S' e worked under the brilliant, farr.ous choreographer (dance instructor) 
G^-^or^e Balanchine, who created several ballets for her. Cne of her rest 
noted roles v;as the su^ar plur. fairy in The Mutcracher . 



: s e 



ut an^' particular feelir- 



Maria Tallchief says she is proud of her Indian he: 



Jsa~e Tribal Council held 



: n i e s l n n e r he no r , s : 



:ces: 















































O 














c 




i ' 




















^* 


















1- 


; J 








c 










n 










to 




u 




n 
















r. 






nJ 
















U 1 








4 J 


















• 


• 




I u 






> 




r 1 


( •) 








C 






<u 




» 


OJ 






CJ 


to 


CJ 










J J 






o 




a 


C 




^ J 


1 — 1 






u 


c 




x; 




-J 








a 






-C 


to 






a. 


J ^ 


Q) 




-r^ 












O 




f— 


0) 




o 


t.» 




*J 


o 








» ; 


4 






I" 


CJ 






X) 


nb 


CO 
<u 


C) 




J.: 
CO 


(U 


d 


J ' 








o 






1 

\ 1 












J-J 










CJ 




to 




4_J 


t-t 




C 


( ) 


.V 




• 








a 








AJ 


c 




c 








U 


xJ 


f , 






0 










i-> 


CJ 


n 




CO 




X' 


to 




:j 




X 






o 






to 








u 


> ; 






"to 


4- J 












CJ 


-r. 




jr 






tc 




[J 


'J 


QJ 












T ) 






I— 1 


o 
















o 


c 




o 


"t.'o 




u 


C 


j^. 






to 


• 




<u 






o 








u.i 




-r-4 






r< 


L-i 




C 




0) 


c 










CO 




QJ 


to 




U 








C» 






c 


CD 




to 








JJ 


CJ 


J-J 


to 








o 


to 


A-' 






o 


OJ 




►J 






p > 


C 


v» 




CJ 








J. ' 








c 


-H 


-J 


o 








Jj 


CJ 






u 




o 








..^ 






tA 


LO 








o 




E 


J-J 




u 


• 


u 






'J 






o 




c 




• 




c 


•— • 


QJ 


u 






to 


-r 4 




c- 


• r 1 








G 




c 








'^f 


> 


QJ 




to 


C 


AJ 






l-> 


to 








1 — > 


(1> 








JD 


o 


I— • 






to 


-r4 




c 


V4 






CO 


nj 




i-f 






o 


••'I 








QJ 


CJ 


'J 






to 


f-* 




to 






i-> 


c 




to 


to 




ri 


CO 


u 








J > 










"0 


> 








r— < 


C 


F 




o 


QJ 




X3 




c 




uL 






a; 










rd 


o 


^» 


c 


•—I 




o 


C 




C) 


to 












<u 


a' 






cx 


o 


0 


J'J 






to 




t-J 


c 


cn 




la 


c 




JC 


cr 




CO 


to 


















o 


CJ 




<u 


0) 


c 


u 






C 


OJ 


OJ 


*J 




QJ 








c 


-,4 






Xi 


*J 






- 










c 


H 




QJ 


c 




.ri 


J • 






E 






o 


to 










QJ 






> 


to 








J.J 




<u 


tn 






I— • 




QJ 




c 




to 






I— 1 






-o 


u 




B 




JC 




u 






o 


to 




rj 




J-J 








-u 


















to 




u 




L' 


• 


to 


c 




c» 


r? 






0) 


c 


to 


e 


CO 






QJ 




cr 


q 


u 




C) 




•—1 










t\j 


trj 


to 






to 


to 








o 




-.- 4 








CJ 










o 


C 




rJ 


c 


QJ 






JZ 


o 


J-J 






Cl 








t\j 


I— 1 




u 






nj 








4.* 




to 






J.J 


J-J 








I— 1 


0) 


o 




to 


to 




to 




o 




> 






rJ 








w 


0) 


CO 


*J 










o 




u 


CJ 


u 






.o 


•r; 






to 




•a 




« 




to 




t/) 


QJ 






a; 




yi 


-r ' 


Q 




jC 






0) 


to 


C 


to 






'J 






o 


to 




rrt 




U 




- nJ 




to 


f— » 




o 








to 






XJ 


Q} 




b 




X7 




e 




nJ 


U 




♦.-4 


4_J 


a> 


J-J 


u 




QJ 








O 








o 






o 


c 




x: 


QJ 


to 








to 








O 


TJ 










c 


tU 


to 


CO 


Ua 




(.1 


o 




CO 


tu 






CJ 


C 




c 


C 


to 






> 


•r-l 








J-J 


-u 


c 


> 








to 
















U 


0 




QJ 






o 






o 












I— 1 


u 


c 


o 




J_> 


c 


s: 


QJ 


to 




CO 




4-J 


X3 








c 


CO 


o 


(U 


%n 






to 


J-J 


jt: 












r: 


to 






o 


c 


U-l 


J-J 


CJ 






E 




J-J 


• - 








CJ 


CO 


p 












4J 


u 


o 


UJ 




CO 




Ua 


OJ 


■ CJ 




t 0 


•—1 


c 




o 








to 








CJ 


r: 


c 


QJ 




-H 




rd 


CO 


Q. 


• 


0> 






u 




trJ 




jj 






o 


.r-4 


*JJ 








r: 


to 


to 


0) 


> 


c 




o 


JZ 


QJ 


to 


J-J 


4 J 




r- 










tij 


c 


rj 


r-l 


u 


nJ 


to 




rO 


^: 






to 




CJ 


U-J 










tr 






a> 




0) 




E 


u 




u-i 


t-J 


QJ 




O 


TJ 


• 




xj 




to 




tn 




-a 




O 


to 


U-j 


o 


tn 




to 




QJ 


CO 


[■ 




c 


T: 




a 


o 




QJ 




(ij 


QJ 










Q' 


to 






rO 




O 


.J 




c 






OJ 






J-J 


to 


to 






to 
















0) 










ji: 


(>4 




r 




2 


tC 


'J 


a' 


CO 








t\J 


Vi 


a> 


u 






tJ 


tt 


CJ 




to 










ri) 


C 


J . 


XJ 








o 




fO 






r.. 


c; 


















tJ 


C 






U-l 




-J 






rt 








CO 


CJ 


^4 








CJ 


O 


c 






D 






to 


f- 


c 




CO 


rJ 


f ; 


CJ 




in 


u_< 


to 






-a 


XJ 












-) 


CO 


f- 




< 




CO 




O 








c 


c 


Vi 


CO 




to 






c: 
















to 


—) 






to 


a> 






rO 


b 






C J 


jJ 


QJ 




~ J 










c 




c 






J-J 




c 




-o 




CJ 








t 








a 




rj 


tj 












c; 




to 






J i 




' ) 




b 




C 


u 


to 




i4 


Of 


u. 




to 


tu 




J. • 


















u 


3> 




QJ 


.r: 


r.' 




4.-* 




r. 


ri 






r! 


Ui 












j-J 






CO 




[ ] 


CO 












r 






Social 7 

Woaeu and !tLnor:Lties 'J. 3* dlsxorj 
Colonial America-C lewis and Clark) 
Sacajawea 

Sacajawea, r_-:e ::aptured and enslaved Indian wiz'e of a French 
Canadian trapper, pla/ed a ver;/* iiaporxant role in the zar.oU3 Lewis and 
Clark expedition. 

vrnen her husband was hired as an interpreter lor Lewis and Clark, 
Sacajawea and their baby went along: the fac-c that thej were oresent \as 
a signal that the expedition was not a warring party. Her knov/ledge of 
Indian langr'aages and ability to speak with many tribes ereatly helned 
the expidition's progress. She helped cock, introduced the -nen to new 
foods, saved tools and writ-^en records froji being lost, and gained services 
and help iron c;:her .tribes for the party^ 

Legend says she also served as a guide; although this inf orr::ation 
wasn't -written dov/n, it is certain that she provided life-saving help 
and direction on their return trip^ ?hroughou-c the West, statues, 
(aonunents, streams, and aountian "peaks are named for the young Indian 
v/crran whose inpci-tanw role in American history has rarely been 'written 
in history bocks. 



Photo Card 



THE "REAL" BUFFY SAINTE-MARIE 

It is perhaps understandable that Buffy Sainte-Mane is active in helpmg In- 
dian people on both sides of the border. She is Cree. bom on a Saskatchewan 
Indian reserve, and raised by a couple in the northeastern United States. 

Buffy has started a foundation (fund) called Nehewan (Talk Cree), that 
has put about twenty-three Indian students through university. She also 
works with some elementary schools providing children with hot lunches and 
instruction in their own Indian language by Indian teachers. 

Buffy is known to most of us as a protest singer, because that is wnat 
the "image-makers" want us to see and hear. That side of Buffy is heard in 
such songs as "My Country, 'Tis of Thy People You're Dying", and "The 
Universafsoldier". In fact, she has written many love songs and happy songs. 
Did you know, for example, that Buffy wrote the song, "Until It's Time for 
You to Go"? Few people do, because it was Elvis Presley who made it a pop 
chart hit. Recently, she has written a script for a TV series about an Indian 
boy who plays basketball. 

Bu^fy's reputation of being only a protest singer is just one example of how 
our taste and opinion are shaped by the media and its "image-makers" Can 
you think of other examples? 



TT,e Globe and Mail. Toronto. Canada , Ifu dvlL"d T''" 

Copynght 0 Tlie Book Society of Canada Limited, 1975 Study l,ard 45. 




THE name Hiaw:uha is known to al! Amcii- 
cans because ot Longlellow's poem ai^oui: thib 
Insnoub hero ot Indian legends. Mia'.vatiia was 
a magical person who looked like a human being 
but had many magical powers. Among other thing;s. 
he could change himselt' into the shape ol any ani- 
mal or (Object. He could also talk to the !)irds and 
atumals in ilieir own language, and he considered 
them CO be his i)rotiicrs or his children. Manv excit- 
ing tales are toUi of his adventures. 

TIu^ l"am'U):> chara'..:cr was known bv two dirfer- 



ent names. The Iroquios tril^es called him Hiav.a- 
t!u. T!ie Algoncjuian tribes called him Manabo/ho 
(:r.an a bo zho'). Since the Chippewa or Ojibwav 
Ir.dians of Mmncsota were one of the Aigonquian 
tribes, they called their magical hero JUaria^mz]^^ 

Indian children learned the Icgencjs ol their tribe 
l)v listening to older people tell the stories around 
tiie campRre on winter evenings. Since the Red 
Men had no written language, the tales wore not 
ritten down until the white men catne. 

f.Mu: oi the white men who listened t- » ih.c taie^ 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




r.nd uTotf thcin down ^vas Henry Rowe Schoolcraft, 
t!^c explorer and Indian accent \vho lived a century 
ajo. We are fortunate that he preserved these leg- 
ends for us. 

Amon^^ those who read Schoolcraft's books wuli 
great interest was Ilenrv Wadsworth Longfellow. 
This poet was so fascinated by the legends that he 
\NTOte a long poem about the Indian hero, Hiawa- 



a. 



This poem became famous as soon as it ^^'as 



uritten ^nd is 'nuI 



popular. 

(■'.hippf'v< .1 fairs (M th;' a'lvcu 



tures of Hiawatha or Manabozho. which was told 
to Mr, Schoolcraft by his Indian friends. 
W HEN Nfanabozho was a child, he lived with his 
grandmother. Nokomis (no ko' miss) on the shores 
of Lake Superior. Nokomis was his only earthly 
relative. His mother had died when he was born 
and his father and three brothers were the four 
winds of heaven. 

One day when Manabo/ho returned home, old 
Nokomis told lum that his c^randfather had come 
to cnirh to l.x^k for her, and had been killed by 



13 



ERLC 



Pearl Feather. Pearl Feather was a powerful manito 
ur spirit who lived on the other side ot the lake. 

' When he was alive/' she said. "I was never out 
.■,f fish oil to put on my head. Now my hair is f.illing 
,nu and I have no oil to put on it." 

"Well Noko." answered Manabo^ho, "Vou get 
cedar bark and make me a strong hsh line, while I 
make a canoe. Then I will go fishing." 

When all was ready. Manabozho went out on the 
lake to fish. He put down his line, saying. "Kingfish, 
kiiigfisli, take hold oi my bait.*' 

xAlFTER he had repeated this many times, the 
kinefish. at the bottom of the lake, was bothered by 
his calling. At last he said to the trout, •'Manabozho 
bothers me. Here, Trout, you take hold of his line." 
The trout did so. 

When Manabozho felt something on his line, he 
began to pull it up. It was so heavy that his canoe 
nearly stood on end. He kept: crying, *'Wha-ee-he! 
Wha-ee-heT until he saw the trout. As soon as he 
saw w4iat he had hooked, he exclaimed angrily, 
'*Why did you get on my hook, you ugly fish?" 
After this scolding, the trout gOt off the hook and 
swam away. 

A<^ain Manabozho put his line down into the 
wate'i- saying, ''Kingfish, kingfish, take hold of my 
line." 

This time the kingfish told a monstrous sunfish 
to take hold of the hook. Again Manabozho pulled 
hard on his line to bring up what he had caught, 




while his canoe turned in swift circles. W hei\ ne 
broui^ht up the suhfish, he cried. "Shame! V^va evil 
f.shi Whv did you dirty my hook bv takin- i: iiuo 
vour mouth? Let go, 1 say. lee go/' 

So the sunfish let go. and went down to ;ei: ilx 
kingiish what had happened. 

Just then the bait came near to the kim; oi nslu's 
At last he decided to take hold of the hook and let 
lumself be pulled up. As soon as he reached the sui* 
face of the water, he opened his mouth wide and 
swallowed Manabozho and his canoe in one mighty 

When Manabozho came to himself, he was sitting 
in his canoe inside the fish's belly. At once he began 
lo think how he could escape. In the canoe .Manabo- 
zho saw his war club. At once he began to strike at 
the heart of the fish. Then he could feel the ?reat 
animal moving forward very fast. He also heard the 
fish say, **I am very sick in my stomach, because I 
swallowed this dirty fellow, Manabozho." 
When he heard that, Manabozho got very .scared 
and thought, 'If the kingfish has a sick stomach, he 
may throw me up in the middle of the lake. Then 
I would be drowned. I must prevent that." 

So he quickly placed his canoe across the fish'^ 
throat. Then he again started pounding at the king- 
fish's heart with his war club, until he knew that 
the great king of fishes was dead. Finally after a day 
had^'pa.ssed, Manabozho felt the ■ kingfish's body 
beating against the shore. Then he felt it being 
washed up on the sand. After some time he heard 
birds pecking at the carcass. Then, all at once, the 
light broke through, and he could see the gulls 
looking at him through the opening they had made. 

"Oh," cried Manabozho, "my younger brothers, 
make the opening bigger, so that I can get out." 

The gulls told each other that their brother was 
inside the fish, and at once began tearing away more 
flesh until at last Manabozho was free. 

♦ ♦ ♦ 

Once, on one of his travels, Manabozho spent a 
winter living with a young wolf wh6 was a good 
hunter. One day when Young Wolf did not return 
from the hunt, Manabozho learned that he had 
fallen into a big lake and been eaten by the s' l ;^onts. 

A: once Manaho/ho set out to aven-c Voun- 
s dc.ith. When he reac:hed ihe lake, the hiu; 



t'x. 



f 



ft"" 



f-Ser b:r.l -r.l.i M.mabo/.ho th.it the serpents rame 
o.irio ihemsolvos every .i:iv on .1 cert.iin spot 
on :he be.ich. So. uirnuiq himself into a stnmp. 
\I.ir.aho.>ho v..nte<! tor Im.s eiieinies to appe.ir. 

At r tr.ev r.iMie out ot the v.itcr. T:'.e prince 
o[ the'se:;;ents vos a henutiful ^^•hue. T:-,e others 
vcre red and veilow. Tiie prince sp.V^e to tiie others 
and <vi -That stump was never there before. I 
wonder It that isn t NIanaboz.ho. We have to l^e on 
guard a-rains: him. 

But s-ince thev couldn t prove that the stump was 
Manabozho. thev lav down in the sun on the sand. 
When thev were asleep at last, Manabozho turned 
hirr.seir into a man. drew his bow, and shot an ar- 
row through the heart of the serpent pnnce. Then 
he uttered a wild war cry and fled. 
When the serpents were awakened by the groans 

■ of their dvins prince they at once took off in pursuit 
■. of his r.urderer. Althou-h Manabozho was takmg 

steos a mile lon^, he soon realized that his pursuers 

■ weren't far behind him. In desperation, he headed 
. ■ for the highest mountain he could see, and then 
■: climbed the highest tree on its summit. 

When he looked down, he saw with horror that 
= the 'and below him was covered with water. Soon 
f-- he noticed that the water was rising. It came to the 
■ "-top of the mountain and still continued to rise. 

' When the water was up to his waistline. Manabozho 
■ spoke to the tree and said. "Grandfather. sTetch 

■ yourself 1" The tree grew taller, but the water still 
' rose -Vain Manabozho said to the tree. "Grandfa- 
"■ the- stre'ch vourselE" Again the tree obeyed. This 

happened even a third time. Now the tree said 
.-. "This is as far as I can go. I can't stretch myself 

■ any more." 

Meanwhile the waters continued to rise till they 
reached Manabozho's chin. Then, just as he was 
•': 'about to give up, the flood stopped rising. 

■■■ In despair Manabozho cast his eves over the 
■''eat evpanse of water around him. No land was in 
,-^Lht anvwhere. Finally Manabozho spied a loon 
-••■flYinc toward him. "Dive down, my brother," he 
'■'''said.''"and brin^ up some earth so that I can make 
'■. a new world." 

The bird obevcd. but soon came to the surface a 
' litVkss [Mrin. T'len M;mabn7ho saw a muskrat 



swimminq along. "Dive down, my brother." said 
Manabozho, "and bring up a bit of earth so that I 
can make a new world. If you succeed, you may 
liereafter live either on land or in the waters just 
as vou please." 

The muskrat dived down but came up senseless. 
Manabozho reached out and blew breath into his 
nostrils to bring him back to life. 

• Try again, my brother," begged Manabozho. So 
the muskrat did so. Again he came up senseless but 
this time he clutched a bit of earth in one of his 
paws. Out of this and the carcass of the dead loon, 
\tanabozho created a new earth, as big as the first 
one with all living animals, birds, fishes, and plants. 




FINDING A 
NEW WORLD 

By Martin Ridge 

Al dawHTthe morning of October >';h. 'hr« 
sn>a l ships were sailing slowly westward in he 
Stic Ocean when the sailor on lookout in the 
fint Ship saw a light. It may be that th.s was on 
of the ereaiest lights in history' 'h«: year was 
°^ and the light meant that Christopher Colum- 
biis had discovered America. 

Columbus had been commissioned by King Ferdi. 
nand and Queen Isabella, the rulers of Spain, to sail 
westward in search of a short route t° ^hina and 
India. Like all the other countnes of Europe Spam 
was eager to gain the rich and wonderful tr^de 
coods of the Orient. . , , u 

Columbus was not a Spaniard. V^,*^,', 
had devoted much of his life to travelling 
Furope explaining that he knew a short route to 
indU and China, that he could sail 'here and that 
in he needed was a ship and a chance. The King 
and Oueen of Spain finally gave him his oppor 
tunitv They gave him three small ships and a small 
;ioup' of m^ef to find India and prove ihat the 
world "was round. 

But Christopher Columbus was .^"^J'K 
appointed. He thought he had seen 'he lights o^ 
..\sia; he thought the people he found on the Island 
of sin Salvador were from India, and he called 
?hem Indians. He never really believed he had 
found a whole New Worldl He always thought he 
lould have been a far greater man if he had found 
a route to China! 

nut for us in .America, he is a great man for the 
liKht that was seen on October isth. .^"h^^h 
wf call Columbus Day, meant the beginning of 
European settlement of the New World. 



1 



ErIcv 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



(jiop}\er Reader 





GIFTS 

from the 
First Aiiiericaiis 



J^ew ot us realize how many things in our lives 
were given us by the American Indians. Without 
their gifts, we would miss a great deal of fun, do 
without many delicious foods and some valuable 
medicines, and lose some of our most important 
farm crops. 

Those people are mistaken who think that the 
Indian did r:ot know how to use the land and its 
resources. The red men not only discovered the 
most useful plants in North and South America, 
but also shelved us how to use them. If the white 
men had had to discover all these native plants for 
themselves, it would probably have taken tliem a 
century longer to build a civilization in the New 
World. In all the years since Columbus came here, 
not a single important plant has been found that 
the Indians had not found and used long before. 

We ofet some idea of the Indians' contribution 

o 

when we realize that more than half the income 
from our farm crops comes from plants which 
they taught us to use. These plant$. are corn, po- 
tatoes, tobacco, peanuts, and the short-fiber cot- 
ton that is native to North America. Cotton was 
known and raised in the Old World before Co- 
lumbus came to this continent, but the kind grown 
here has proved to be most profitable. 

When the first Europeans came here they found 
m*any kinds of food that they had never seen be- 
fore. Besides the all-important potato, there were 
many other vegetables. The commonest were sweet 
potatoes, sweet corn, squash, avocados, tomatoes, 
lima beans, and peppers. Among the sweets, the 
Indians gave us pineapples and maple syrup. And 
what would our traditional Thanksgiving dinner 
be H'ithout the roast turkey and pumpkin pie 



\\:uch \vere ur^known bctorc ch.e discovery or 
the Americas? 

Some foods ue jiuavs aisuciace wuh recrea- 
tion and good cur.cs. Do you like to eac pop- 
Lorn at the band concert? Or iiave a coca coh 
vou visit the county rair? Or mavbe you 
enjov salted peanuts, chocolate candy, and 
Llie'.ving gum. Did you kno\s' tiiat ue got all 
these things from the Indians? Coca cola con- 
tains an ingredient from the South .American 
cocoa shrub; chicle from the sapodilla tree is 
needed to make chewing gum; and chocolate 
is manufactured from the cocoa bean. With- 
out these foods we could hardly enjoy a ball 
game. 

In fact, without the Indians we might not 
even have a ball gam^e. It was the Indian who 
first discovered that the sap of the rubber 
tree could be made into balls which would 
bounce. When the Spanish explorers came to 
Mexico, they found the Indians playing 
games with rubber balls. Of course rubber is 
no^v used for making many other things in 
our civilization. 

Other contributions to our enjoymer: 
which came from* the red men are hammocks, 
canoes, snowshoes, and toboggans. 

The Indians taught us about some dyes and 
medicines which have not yet been surpassed 
in value. They found the plants from which 
indigo dye is made, and they first m.ade red 
dye from the cochineal insect. \V'e still use 
both of these dyes. They also understood 
which plants were valuable for m^edicines. 
Long ago they found out that cliewing the 
leaves of the coca shrub would lessen pam. 
From this we learned to make cocaine, which 
is still used as a painkiller. We also learned 
the uses of witch hazel, arnica, and cascara 
from the red men. But the greatest gift of 
medicine which came from the Indians was 
quinine, which is so successful in treating 
malaria fever. 

Thus we see what a great debt we owe to 
the Indians. We should be poor indeed if ^'/e 
were deprived of all the wonderful gifts that 
they have given us. 






ft 




ii 




1 Z-^j:Em>^ aid CW2B^ '. 



56 




1 



I BEST COPY AVMLABLEl 



Holu to Tell the Difference 



243 



Look at Picture Books 

In counting books, are "Indians" Are cliildren shown "plav-inLi; Indian"? 
counted? 



1 




^^^^^^^^^^^ 

t!?^'^ ^ 



Ten Little Ind 



lans 



J 



Well, Tm an Indian, 
and Indians can ,// 
ride. 




Figure 3 



Figure 4 



ERIC 



244 



Hoiu to Tell the Difference 



Look at Picture Books 



Are animals dressed as "Indians"? 



Do "Indians" have ridiculous names, 
like ''Indian Two Feet/' or "Little 
Chief"? 




LITTLE 
CHIEF 

Story and pictures by 
SYD HOFF 



Imitating Indians 






How to Tell the Difference 



Look for Stereotypes 

Are Native peoples portrayed as savages, or primitive 
craftspeople, or simple tribal people, now extinct? 




She was shot and scalped. 



Figure 7 



or 



Are Native peoples shown as human beings, members 
of higWy defined and complex societies? 




Figure 8 



lERiC 



oU 



242 



How to Tell the Difference 



Look at Picture Books 

In ABC books, is "E" for "Eskimo"? 



Eskimo 




Figure 1 



In ABC books, is "I" for "Indian"? 




The Indian wears bright colors. 
He likes to Hve outdoors. 



ERIC 



I 



172 PartTuo » C<tii.'gonL'i of Uleraiur,' 

SECTION ONE: MULTICULTURAL LITERATURE 
Definition and Inscription 

Multicultural literature refers to those trade l,ooks, regardless of genre having as the 
mam cha racter a person who is a n.ember of a racial, Religious, of language m'norin 
Th.s ect.on of the chapter will focus on the five most populous minori^ gToups^n 
he United States, each of which has an established and growing body of Sren'^ 
hterature that describes that experience. These groups afe M^il Ze^^ ^Z 
Amencan Oncluding people of Chinese. Japanese, KoLn. and Vietnamese descti 
H..pan.c Amencan (including Cuban Americans. Mexican Americans P^eno Rican ' 
ar.d others of Spanish descent); Jewish American; and Native American (a gener^ te^ 
reternng to the many tribes of .American Indians ) ^ ™ 

\au^fr!T^ '° ' T'"°"'^ '""P''" ^"''^^""^ °f ^ '^^8^^. different group-a ma- 
pnt>Mn this case, the majority- is the white. Anglo-Saxon population and thTlltrra 

rh-ldt^b^s^^ " '''' - — d -i's 

Y^ff Slj^^^^^^jj^-j^^ture for Children 

Multicultural literature has value for both minority and majority child^A^muh7 
cultural society, the United States benefits from cooperation and fri nthip^mong J 
people hvmg wunm its borders. The violence and destruction that often'^esTfforl 
acal and rehg.ous prejudice hun everyone. From a minority per^pecTve or^e 
toward effective, confident citizenship in a multicultural soc^ty^s an und;rstandS 
of one s particular social and cultural heritage. From a majority perspecTve the first 
thing that people must do in order to accept those differentTrom t wVes "s o 
earn about them, and reading is one of the best ways to do this. KnowMge gainiS 
T.;^t::'on' ^ -^-standing possible, and understanding olenTads 

Multicultural literature, then, is valuable for the following reasons: 

• Minority children who see people like themselves positively represented in hieh- 
quahty multiculu.n.1 literature derive self-esteem and pride in the' own heri- 
tage. Every child has a right to self-respect 

• Reading multicultural literature is a way for majority children (and tlieir par- 
ents, eachers and librarians) to leam about or to become aware of m S 
peoples and their cultures. Majority children who find only people kTrm 

elves represented in literature could easily get the impression that thev aTe 
omehow better or more woithy as a group than oti.ers. Multicultural 1 eratu e 
how. majority children that other groups are not only worthy but have s^m ' 
hing to teach the majority-. Also, school-based studies have hown th!t emo- 
fonal involvement and vicarious experience with minority characters thro"^. 



FRir 





Chapter 10 • Multicultural and fntemational Literature 173 



works of multicultural literature reduce student:/ prejudices ward the minor- 
uv. (For a summary of these studies, see Social EdnuUiorh April/May. 1988.) 
• Multicultural literature often addresses issues and problen.s peculiar to minor- 
ity children from the perspective of a minority character in the story. Reading 
about such problems as racial or religious prejudice and how book characters 
deal with these problems may help some minority children to cope with the 
same problems themselves. 



Evaluation and Selection of Multicultural Literature 

With respect to multicultural literature, your first concern as a teacher, librarian, or 
parent should be that well-wriaen books of this kind are available to tlie children under 
vour care. This task is often not as simple as it may at first seem. Some cultural groups 
in the United States are not yet well represented in children's books. Also, a wide 
variety of the most current ai.d best multicultural books are not readily available ev- 
ery^'here. Someone, perhaps you, has to take the time and the effort to learn about, 
read, evaluate, and then introduce the best of this literature into a school or commu- 
nicy. The following criteria should be considered when evaluating multicultural books: 

• Some evaluation criteria remain constant regardless of the t^pe of literature. 
Multicultural literature should exhibit high literary and artistic quality, worthy themes, 
and appropriate reading levels for the intended audience. 

• Racial and cultural stereotyping should be avoided; instead, multifaceted, well- 
rounded minority characters should be found in these stories. The nature of stereo- 
typing is that it unfairly assigns a fixed image or fixed characteristics to everyone within 
a group, thereby denying everyone within the group the right to any individuality or 
choice. No one likes to be the victim of stereotyping. 

Traditional racial, religious, and language minority' stereotypes that have devel- 
oped over the years in the United States make clear the damage and unwarranted 
denigration that can result from the practice. In evaluating children's books, you will 
want to be alert to anv portrayal of African Americans as coarse-featured, musical, and 
poor; of Asian /Americans as sly, overly diligent, and obsequious, of Hispanic Ameri- 
cans as lazy, holiday-minded, and impoverished; of Jewish Americans as greedy, ag- 
gressive, and penurious; and of Native Americans as savage, primitive, and wariike. 
Books perpetuating such stereotypes have no place in the classroom. 

♦ Positive images of minority characters should be evident. Good multicultural 
hooks go beyond avoidance of stereotypes to provide characters and situations that 
project positive, believable images of minorities in family, school, work, and play. 

• Culoiral details must be accurate. Much of what distinguishes the literature of 
a particular minority group from that of other groups is found in the details, such as 
idioms and dialect used in dialogue, descriptions of clothing, hairstyles, and food, 
architecture of homes, and customs Just as important, these details must be accurate 
ulion describing subgroups witbin a minority group. For example, customs of Native 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



I 



174 Piirt Tu t) • CatLVonc> of l.iterature 

Americans vao' greatly from tribe to tribe. Gross overgeneralization is not only inac- 
curate but is a form of stereotyping. 

• In selecting multicultural books for a young readership, variety^ is a key con- 
cern. Not only should there be books about the minorities represented in a classroom 
but there should be books about the many other minorities living in this country. Like- 
wise, there should be multicultural books of varying genres and multicultural charac- 
ters in these books from a variety of backgrounds. 

Variety also extends to authorship. Multicultural books written by both minority 
authors and majority authors should be readily available to children. Iri her landmark 
book, Shadow ayid Substayice, Rudine Sims (1982) established a classification system 
for books about African Americans that can be applied to any minority literature and 
can be helpful in evaluation and selection of these books. Adapting her labels and 
definitions to include all multicultural literature, there are: 

Social conscience books. These books about minorities are written to help 
both majority and minority '-eaders know the condition of their fellow hu- 
mans. Examples are The Slave Dancerby Paula Fox and Iggie's Hoitseby 
Blume. 

Melting pot books. These books are written for both minority- and majority' 
readers on the assumption that both need to be informed that nonwhite chil- 
dren are exactly like other American children, except for the color of their 
skins or their religious preference. Examples include A Syxotiy Day by Ezra 
Jack Keats and Jeytnifer, Hecate, Macbeth, William McKinley. &Me, Elizabeth 
by E. L. Konigsburg. 

Culturally conscious books. These books are written primarily (though not 
exclusively) by minority authors for a specific minority group of readers in 
which an attempt is made to reveal the tme, unique character of that minor- 
it\' culture. Examples are Stevie by John Steptoe and Roll ofVmnder, Hear 
My Cry^by Mildred Taylor. 

Having examples of all three types of multic .Irural books in your classroom will 
assure that your students will be able to read from the perspective of both the minor- 
it/ author and the white author. Minority students in particular should have the expe- 
nence of reading stories wntten about children like themselves from the perspective 
of someone within their minority group. 

Several book selection aids focus on multicultural books. Multicultural Children's 
and Young Adult Literature: A Selected Listing of Books 1980-90 by and about People 
of Color is a carefully selected, regularly updated, annotated listing of multicultural 
books of all genres produced by the University of Wisconsin, Madison's Cooperative 
Children's Book Center, ne Black Experience in Children's Literature, an annotated 
book list published about every five years by the New York Public Library, offers a 
comprehensive collection of African-American books in print at the time of publica- 
tion The nearly SCO entries in the latest edition C1989) arc organized by United States. 
South and Central American, and Caribbean, .'Vfncan. and British titles. Literature for 



Chapter 10 ♦ Multicui:ural ii,u/ Intcnuitioruit [.tlcniture 



175 



ChiUhvn about Asians and Asian A mencans A nalys ,s and A u>iatatcd Bthlioeraphy 
uvh Additional Reading for Adults(]i,nk\n!, & Austm. >.s arranged by nation and 
subdiviued into genres. Literature byandat)out tbeAmencan Indian (Stensland 1979) 
IS an annotated, retrospective bibliography of nearlv 800 children's and young adult 
titles of all genres having to do with North American Indians. A more recent resource 
on books about Native Americans, Books without Bias nrough Indian Eyes Vol 2 
(Slapin & Seale, 1988), also contains articles, essays, and poems written by' Native 
Amencans. Resource Reading List 1990: A nnotated Bibliography of Resources by and 
about Native People (ycmW & McDowell, 1990) focuses on .Native Canadians Books 
m Spanish for Children and Young Adults (Schon. 1989), a guide for choosing Span- 
ish .anguage books for Hispanic children, is organized by country of origin including 
a large section on the United States. These books are of all genres, and some are bi- 
lingual. (For ajrther information on these resources, see Appendix G.) 

The professional review sources are valuable guides to selecting the most recent 
•nulticultural books. Booklist, School Library Journal. The Bulletin of the Center for 
Children's Books ^nd Horn Book Magazine :^\\ regularly call attention to multicultural 
books, and sometimes gather helpRjl lists of these books by minority group, book 
genre, or intended audience. (For further information on Book Selection Aids see 
Appendix G.) 

Book awards for special content also can guide teachers and librarians toward 
high-quahty multicultural books. The best known of these is the Coretta Scott King 
Award, founded in 1969 and, since 1979, sponsored by the American Library Associ- 
ation. This annual award is given to the African-American author and (since 1974) 
illustrator whose books published in the preceding year are judged to be the most 
outstanding inspirational and educational literature for children. (For a complete list 
of award winners, see Appendix A.) 

In recent years small presses have given teachers and librarians yet another source 
of multicultural books. Several of these publishers have focused on multicultural liter- 
ature, and so their catalogues seem a treasure trove for those looking for minority- 
literature. Children's Press, ChUdren's Book Press, and Carolrhoda Books desei^e special 
notice for their multicultural publications. 

Evaluating, selecting, and then bringing multicultural literature to your classroom 
though essential, is not enough to assure that your students will actuallv read the books 
Since children, without adult guidance, tend to choose books about children like them- 
selves (Rudman, 1984), you must also purposefully expose majority' children to mul- 
ticultural lx3oks through reading aloud, booktalking, and selecting particular titles for 
small group reading. 



Historical Overvieiv of Multicultural Literature 

Minority- groups living in the United States were long ignored as subjects for children's 
books. On the few occasions that minorities did appear in children's books they did 
so as crudely stereotyped characters, objects of ridicule, (,r shadowy secondary char- 



176 



Part Ttio • Oitegones of Literature 



iiciers. Helen Bannemian's 77je Stor^' of Little Black Sanilx) (1900). Chiire Bishop's The 
Fire Chinese Brothers (,195S), Sara Cone Bryant's Epaminondas and His Auntie {\901), 
and Hugh Lofting's The Voyages of Dr. DoHttle (1922) come under this category. To- 
day, books such as these have either been rewritten to eliminate the racism or have 
disappeared from children's library shelves. 

Although many of the Newbery Award winners and honor books of the 1920s 
and 1930s were set in foreign countries, almost none had to do with U.S. minorities. 
Laura Adams Armers novel about Native Americans, Waterless Mountain, the New- 
ber>' winner in 1932, was the only exception. 

The 1940s offered little improvement. Although Florence Crannell Means wrote 
sympathetic and informative novels such as The Moved-Outers (.19^5) about American 
ethnic minorities during the 1930s and 1940s, negative stereotypes, such as those of 
Native Americans as savages projected in Newberv' winners Daniel Boone by James 
Daugherty (1939) and The Matchlock Gun by Walter D. Edmonds (1941) were more 
prevalent by far. 

The first harbinger of change came in 1949 when an African-American author, 
Ame Bontemps, won a Newbery Honor Award for his Story of the Negro and became 
the first member of a minority to receive this honor. A more sympathetic attitude to- 
ward American minorities, at least in literature, emerged in the 1950s, as evidenced by 
the positive treatment of minority- characters in such Newberv- winners as Amos For- 
tune, Free Man by Elizabeth Yates (1950) and . . . A7id Xow Miguelby Joseph Krumgold 



The Civil Rights movement of the 1960s focused attention on the social inequities 
and racial injustices that pre\'ailed in the United States. The spirit of the times resulted 
in two landmark publications. The first of these was The Snowy Dayby Ezra Jack Keats 
(1962), the first Caldecott Award-winning book to have an African American as the 
protagonist. The great popularity of this book no doubt encouraged other autliors, 
both minority and majority, to produce books with minority protagonists. The second 
publication was a powerful article by Nanc>' Larrick entitled "The All-White World of 
Children's Books." In this article, which appeared in the September 11, 1965, issue of 
Saturday Review, Larrick reported that in nearly all U.S. children's books the African 
American was either omitted entirely or scarcely mentioned (p. 63). American trade 
book publishers, the education system, and the public librarv* system were called upon 
to fill this void. 

For a time, the spirit of social consciousness bom in the 1960s had good results. 
In 1966, the Council on Interracial Books for Children wa^ founded and helped to 
promote young. African- American authors. In 1969, the Coretta Scott King Award was 
established to recognize distinguished writing in ciuMren's books by African-American 
authors. Also, a number of books with minority* protagonists or minority themes were 
chosen as Nevvbery winners in the early seventies: Sowider by William H. Armstrong 
won in \910\ Julie of the Wolves by ]ttzn Craighead George won in 1973; and The Slave 
Dancer by Paula Fox won in 1974. Judging from this record, the establishment had 
accepted minorities ab protagonists in award-winning books; but it was not until 197"^ 
that a minority author, Virginia Hamilton, author of M. C. Higgins, the Great, won a 
Newbery Award. 



(1953). 






Jishop's The 
untie {\9Qn)^ 
ategory. To- 
ism or ha\'e 

of the 1920s 
. minorities, 
in, the New- 
Jeans wrote 
.at American 
as those of 
ne by James 
were more 

"can author, 
md became 
- atti.ude to- 
evidenced by 
Amos For- 
n Krumgold 

il inequities 
les resulted 

ra Jack Keats 

•^ncan as the 
er authors, 
The second 

•:ite World of 
55, issue of 
ihe African 

':erican trade 
ailed upon 

jood results, 
helped to 
\ward was 

...i-American 

nemes were 
Armstrong 
J Hp e Slave 

.snment had 
' until 1975 
;at, won a 



Chapter W . J 

In quick succession, other mmonty .utiior.s ^vcre recoenized for rh 
mg literary and artistic effons. In 1976 Leo Dillon (in colhh^^ 1 L outstand- 
Dillon) won Caldecott Award or i;^7n ir ^o'l^horation w.th his wife, Diane 

1975) and Sharon Be 1 M:^I^L nd U^r^nc T T 

ne Hundred Pennl Bof^'A n ^ '"^^'^^'^ ^^^^^"^ ^^''^^ Awards for 

Miidred D. ^It^Z:^;"^;^ yea, 1977. 

can American to win the Newbery AwarrMe^rQ^S rS^' i""' 
U.S. Children's book publishers a^d ^.^^i^^:::^^^^'^ 
bers of a m noritv erouo wprp rh^ Z.^. '^'""^^^ seemea to be that mem- 

writing abou, ™„on,i« as ,hey w„e ,„ ,he °T^lt ' ™"" 

The politically conservative 1980s wpr^* nor nr...A • 
of multicultural literature in the Z^a StTes Perr k'"^^^ to a continued flowering 
or themes were published and fewer minolr;,' T """^ characters 

Toward the end of the decade Z^v.^T T '"'^^ 1970s, 

devoted exclusively to ^^^u .'^1;^:.;^^^^^^^^^^ ^ 
newed interest in multicultural literature and -,n in.r Currently there is a re- 

thors and illustrators is entering theTeS ""^ """'^^ 



TABLE 



Date 
1932 

1945 
1949 
1950 
1962 
1965 

1969 
1975 
1976 

1990 



l^lJVlil^^^^ of MultioHtu'ral Uterature " 



Event 



Significance 



Waterless Mountain by Amier wins 
Newbery Medal 

The Moved-Outersby Means wins New- 
bery Honor 

Story of the Negro by Bontemps wins 
Newbery Honor 

Song of the Swallows by Poliui wins 
Caldecott Award 

The Snotvy Day by Keats wins Calde- 
cott Award 

nrhe AlI-^X'htte \X'orId of Children s 
Books" by Urrick publi5hed in Satur- 
day Revieu; 

Coretta Scoit King Award founded 

M. C. Higgins, the Greatby Hamilton 
^'ins Newbery Award 

Vrhy Mosquitoes Buzz In People s Ears 
Illustrated by Leo and Diane Dillon 
Wins Caldecott Award 
Ion Po Po. A Red-Riding Hood Sto;y 
fvni China translated and illustrated by 
Fd ^V^un^^ wins Caldecott Award 



8/ 



One of the few children's books about minor-' 
ities in the first half of the twentieth century 

A move away from stereotyped depiction of 
minonties begins 

First minority author to win a Newbery Honor 

First picture book with an Hispanic-American 
protagonist to win the Caldecott Award 
First picture book with an African-American 
protagonist to win the Caldecott Award 
Called the nation's attention to the lack of 
multicultural literature 

African-American literature and authors begin 
to be promoted and supponed 

First book by a minority author to win the 
Newbery Award 

First picture book illustrated by an African 
AiTiencan to win the Caldecott Award 

First picture book illustrated by an Asian 
/Vmencan to win the Caldecott Award 




Appendix D 



80 



Books ( ontaiiHii^ Negative Images of Native Amerieans 



(1iflbrd''s Halloween by Norman iiridwell-dinbrd dresses up like an Indian for 
Hat!ov\een 

l:lvira^ByerytJ]n]g by l-rank Asch-A!! sorts of visitors eome to the house and the Native 
American is shown wearing a feathered headdress and a papoose on his back. 

DaniejJBoone by James Daugherty-American Indians are illustrated as naked and 
ferocious beasts. The story depicts them as blood-thirstv savages. 

The Happy Golde n ABC by Joe Alien-When you get to the letter in the alphabet, it is 
illustrated by a picture of an Indian. 

A House is a House for M e by Mary Ann Hoberman.-This rhyming stor>^ explains that 
Eskimos live in igloos and U.S. Indians live in teepees or wigwams. 

The Landing o f the Pilgrims by James Daugherty-CSame description as Daniel Boone 
above. ) 

The L ittle Boy and the Birthda ys by Helen Buckley-A little boy who believes no one will 
remember his birthday walks around all day in a headband with two feather in it. 
The reason for his wearing the headdress is never mentioned in the stor)'. 

The Matchlock Gu n by Walter Edmonds— American Indians are described as blood-thirsty 
savages. The illustrations are negatively stereotypical. 

Po pcorn by Frank Asch-A bear dresses like an Indian for his Halloween party 

Pocahontas by Ingri & Edgar Parin d'Aulaire-Pocahontas is an ^indian Princess'" who is 
reduced to the stereotypical roles of an Indian squaw\ 

Ten yttle_Rabbits by Virginia Grossman and Sylvia Long— Rabbits arc in Native American 
clothing performing in traditional ceremonies and living; the daily Native American 
life 

Three Fools and a Horse by Betty Baker-The three ridiculed, sloppy-looking fools are 
American Indians 

We^re in Big frouble,. Blackboard Bear by Martha Alexander-Little boys go looking for a 
thiel^and plan to gel their revenge with a bow <^ arrow and <i tomahawk 



ERLC 



Appendix E 



Native America Legends and Stories 



A Legend From Cra/y Horse (Man by Moses Nelson Big Crow 
Th.e Legend of.the Bluebonnet retold by 1 omie DePaola 
Longhouse Winter adapted by Heltie Jones 
Tb^Stj}nf:.. of Light by Susan Roth 
The Wind Eaule and Other Abenake Stories retold bv Joseph Bruchac 



Criteria for Selecting V isitor to Discuss 
Native American Stories and Legends 



The visitor must l,e a Nativ e American man, woman or child ( 1 lowcvcr the person 
cannot be the same gender as the first Msitor who was here lor the art lesson 1 
population as possible ) 

The person must know some oral legends from his/her Native American histo.v that 
she/he could pass on to your students 

The visitor must be able to describe the place of value that stories, mvihs and hi^end 
ho d m his/her tribe. (S)he must be able to explain whv his/her tribe has bee^i 
telling the stories for uenerations 



Storytelling and the Sacred 

On the Uses of Native American Stories 

Joseph Bruchac 



Storytelling is a serious business. It should not he undertaken thoughtlessly, for if stories should be retold 
during the growing season life must come to a halt as the friendly spirits of nature become enthralled by 
their magic spell and neglect their appointed function of providing sustenance for the coming zmnter. So 
then also that part of the spirit which remains and xvanders aimlessly when people die might be enticed 
into the community when stories are told, tTiaking them long again for the fellowship of the living and 
perhaps stealing the spirit of some newborn to keep them company. People must prepare for stories, and 
youngsters be protected by a buckskin thong on the wrist to tie them to the world so they might not be 
''spirited'' away by the dead. Just as many ceremonies must be postponed until tite cold- time, so also 
stories should be reserved until then, 

— William Guy Spittal, from his introduction to 
Myths of the Iroquois by E.A. Smith. ^ 

storyteller and historian Tehanetorens. He 
concludes that the American people of today 
live more like the Indians their ancestors first 
encountered — in terms of dress, food, and 
material culture — than they do like their 
European ancestors. Even the form of our 
government seems to owe a greater debt to 
the Constitution of the Six Nations of the 
Iroquois than to any European document.) 

The stories of the many Native Nations 
of what is now the United States speak to 
both the Indian and the non-Indian in ways 
unlike any other tales. Moreover, the many 
Native American tales already collected and 
in print constitute one of the richest bodies 
of myth and legend found anywhere in the 
world. There are currently to be found in 
books tens of thousands of Native American 



Native American Stories and 
Non-Indian Tellers: 
Some Problems 

There is a great deal of interest 
throughout storytelling circles in American 
Indian stories, and almost all storytellers 
seem to know and tell at least one such story. 
These tales are often among their favorites. 
They also find that their audiences ask for 
and respond to them with enthusiasm.. 

It is understandable that there should 
be this interest in Native American stories; 
after all, this country was founded on 
'Tndian Land." (And on more than that, if 
we are to take the v/ord of Mohawk 



92 



Storytelling and the Sacred 



tales from the more than 400 oral traditions 
of North America— tales filled with those 
memorable and exdting details which 
attract both storytellers and audiences. 
Iroquois stories, for example, abound in 
such wonderful creatures as stone 
giants, monster bears, flying heads, magical 
dwarves, vampire skeletons, and more d-ian 
a dozen different trickster figures. 

For many storytellers, American Indian 
tales are untapped and fertile ground. A 
storyteller first "finding" an American 
Indian story which speaks in that special 
voice to him or her must feel as Balboa (not 
Cortez) felt on that peak in Darien when he 
first saw the Pacific Ocean. 

There are, however, a number of 
problems related to the current uses— and 
misuses — of American Indian stories by 
non-Indian storytellers. These problems 
stem in part from that very newness, that 
undiscovered quality, which makes the 
stories so attractive and exciting to a 
storyteller seeking new ground. In addition, 
not only are the stories new to the potential 
teller, so too are all of the real (rather than 
stereotyped) aspects of Native American 
culture, past or present. 

Difficulties also arise due to the sources 
from which the majority of non-Indian 
storytellers appear to draw the stories they 
are telling. Although American Indian tales 
come from oral traditions, the storyteller 
usually encounters them first in a book 
rather than from the lips of an American 
Indian. Unfortunately, many of the written 
versions of Native American stories which 
are still alive in the oral tradition of a 
particular people are either incompletely or 
inaccurately recorded. 

It is a sad truth that the average 
non-Indian American today knows less 
about the American Indian than the first 
European settlers on the continent— who 
survived because of the help and friendship 
of Native Americans. Even people who live 



within a few miles of large and active 
American Indian communities either know 
little about their Native American neighbors 
or express disbelief that they even exist. 
Again and again I have gone into a town and 
on asking if there were any local Indians 
been told there are none, only to meet 
numerous local Indian people shortly 
thereafter. 

I ^ The myth of the "Vanishing Red Man" 
is more alive in the nrdnds of most Americans 
than the vital, continent-wide, growing 
population of Native Americans which 
prompted Simon Ortiz, Acoma storyteUer 
and poet, to say in one of his poems: "Indians 
are everywhere." 

Along with the lack of knowledge about 
the existence of the present-day Native 
American goes an ignorance of the place and 
proper use of American Indian stories. No 
story— in any culture — exists in isolation 
from the Ufe of its people. The problems of 
the rationale, effectiveness, and validity of 
transplanting stories from one culture to 
another do not just relate to American Indian 
tales. The best storytellers are usually aware 
of those problems and may even engage in 
heroic efforts to understand the origins and 
cultural contexts of the tales they use. 

Yet many storytellers— including some 
of the best— know only that the American 
Indian stories they tell came from this or that 
book or were told by this or that other 
non-Indian teller. Ironically, they may know 
less of the origin of an American Indian 
tale— which grew from this soil— than they 
do of one from andent Babylon or the Fiji 
, Islands. 

Almost universally, the non-Indian 
tellers using an American Indian tale have 
never heard a word spoken in the particular 
American Indian language from which that 
tale comes, have no knowledge of the 
intellectual or material culture of that 
particTjlar Indian nation, and have never met 
a living American Indian from that tribal 



storytelling and the Sacred 



93 



Nation. In many cases, they don't even know 
where the story comes from — other than 
that it is 'Indian." And they almost certainly 
do not know the strong relationship 
between storytelling and the sacred 
which exists throughout the many Native 
American Nations. 

Before going further, let me make it 
clear that my aim is not to discourage 
non-Indians from telling American Indian 
stories. The stories of Native American 
people are, to a degree, now part of the 
heritage of all Americans. The lessons they 
teach — and I will speak more about the 
lesson-bearing qualities of Native American 
tales — are probably more needed today by 
all of us than they were hundreds of years 
ago by those who first told them. 

These are powerful stories, powerful as 
medicine or tobacco. But, like medicine or 
the tobacco whose smoke is used to carry 
prayers up to Creator, stories must be used 
wisely and well or they may be harmful to 
both tellers and hearers alike. Every Native 
American storyteller I have spoken with 
about this — Vi Hilbert in Washington, Ed 
Edmo in Oregon, Kevin Locke in North 
Dakota, Simon Ortiz and Harold Littlebird 
in New Mexico, Keewaydinoquay in Michigan, 
Tehanetorens in New York, and many 
others — agrees that there is no reason why 
non-Indian storytellers who understand and 
respect should not tell American Indian 
tales. 

But there is a great deal to understand, 
and respect implies responsibility. It is my 
hope that this article may lead non- 
Indian tellers to a better understanding of 
American Indian storytelling and suggest 
some directions they may then follow to 
develop the proper relationship with the 
stories they wish to tell. 



Native American Uses of 
Stories 

Hey-ho-wey — I tell a story, 
A story from the Ancient Ones, 
Hey-ho-wey — I place asseyma 
For their spirits... 
Hey-ho-wey — I tell a story, 
Listen — and learn. 

Hey-ho-wey — Hey-ho-wey „. 

— Keewaydinoquay, from her 
Origin Tale Muicwah Miskomin, 
GifiofBear'^ 

How are Native American stories used 
by Indian people? Native American stories 
have been used traditionally to teach the 
people those lessons they need to know to 
cooperate and survive. American Indian 
cultures, throughout the continent, place 
high premiums on both the independence of 
the individual and the importance of 
working for the good of all. 

Coercion was seldom used to force an 
individual to conform and the lack of police, 
strict laws and jails was often remarked 
upon by European travelers who noticed 
that the American Indians they visited also 
seemed to have no crime. This lack of 
coercion was particularly evident in the 
child-rearing practices of Native American 
peoples. Universally, it was regarded as 
deeply wrong for any adult to strike a child. 
The European rule of "spare the rod and 
spoil the chiW seemed perverse to the 
Native Americans, who believed that 
beating children would produce only 
negative results. Striking a child could serve 
only to break the child's spirit or stir 
resentment. Such a cowardly act was a 
terrible example. One who beat children 
could expect one day to be beaten by those 
children when they became stronger than 
their parents. 

Instead, when children did wrong, the 
first thing to be done was to use the power 



94 



Storytelling and the Sacred 



'Of storytelling to show the right way. If 
children were disobedient, rude to an Elder, 
or doing things which might be dangerous 
to themselves, then they would be told one 
or more lesson stories designed to show 
what happens to those who n\isbehave. 

The power of the stories — which are 
told to this day — was usually enough. If 
stories and other measures — such as throwing 
water on them — did not work, then various 
shunning practices, such as pretending they 
did not exist or (in the case of the Abenaki) 
blackening their faces and sending them out 
of the lodge to be ignored by all in the 
community, were used. As soon as the 
children indicated willingness to behave 
properly, the shunning ended. 

(In the case of adults who consistently 
acted against the welfare of their people, 
the most drastic — though seldom used — 
measure was banishment from the lands of 
that tribal Nation. Adults, too, were told 
stories to help them see the right paths to 
follow.) 

Because such lesson stories were of 
great importance to the welfare of the 
individual and the Nation, they had to be 
charged with great power. A good story, one 
which is entertaining, creatively effective, is 
more likely to affect its hearer. The role of the 
story as a social guide makes it all the more 
important that the story be memorable. 
Because of this, it is important that 
non-Indian tellers understand clearly the 
message which a particular story is meant to 
convey. If you are unaware of the way in 
which the story is used, then you may be 
more likely to misunderstand or misuse it. 
Stories are like food. We eat food because we 
like it, but we also eat food because it keeps 
us alive. 

I think it i-^ iio exaggeration to say that 
all American Indian stories, when used in 
tlic right context, can serve as lesson stories 
and as important tools of communication. 
That is still true to this day among Native 



American people. In fact, even jokes may be 
used in that fashion in Native American 
CO mi?i unities. 

>r If an American Indian tells you a joke, 
listen closely to it Invariably that joke will 
apply to something which you have done or 
said. The joke may be intended as a lesson 
for you or even as a reprimand if you have 
overstepped your bounds in some way. But 
because Native American people still 
believe in non-interference in the actions of 
others — except in indirect ways — a joke may 
be the chosen way to point something out- 
It is important to remember, too, tl\at 
Native American culture is holistic. By this I 
mean that there is no separation between 
church and state, none of the convenient 
pigeon-holing we find in western culture 
which makes it easy to separate the ''sacred'' 
from the "everyday." In the American 
Indian universe, ev. ything is sacred. 

A book I strongly recommend to 
anyone interested in the role of stories in 
contemporary Native American life is Wolf 
That I Am by Fred McTaggert. It chronicles 
the efforts of McTaggert, then a graduate 
student at the University of Iowa, to collect 
and write about the stories of the Mesquakie 
People, whose settlement was not far from 
Iowa City. 

Although he thought he would be 
collecting quaint folktales from the remnants 
of a dying culture, he soon found himself 
confronted by people who believed strongly 
in themselves, their language, and their 
religious rituals. Far from dying, the 
Mesquakie way was very much alive. Far 
from being ready to share their stories with 
the tape-recorder-bearing graduate student, 
the Mesquakie people were protective of 
their traditions. 

At the advice of a Mesquakie friend, 
also a student at the University, McTaggert 
once trudged through a snowstorm to reach 
the house of a man who was said to know 
many stories. But when McTaggert knocked 



ERLC 



in) 



Storytelling and the Sacred 



95 



on the door and Tom Youngman stepped 
out, closing the door behind him, this is what 
happened: 

"I was told you might be able to help 
me out with some information about 
stories." 

The man's deep brown eyes looked into 
mine for several minutes. I sensed in his 
eyes a power and a calmness that I was 
not at all familiar with. He was wearing 
only a flannel shirt, but he did not even 
shiver in the cold, pierdng wind. As he 
stood in front of the closed door, looking 
deeply into my eyes, he somehow put me 
at ease, and I felt neither the fear nor the 
guilt that I usually felt when first meeting 
people on the Mesquakie settlement His 
silence was an adequate communication 
and when he finally spoke, I knew what 
he was about to say. 

'T can't tell you stories/' he said softly. I 
had no trouble hearing him over the 
whistling wind. '1 use my stories to pray. 
To me, they are sacred." 

I thanked him, and he opened the door 
again and retreated into his small 
lodge.. 

Later, McTaggert realized that he had 
been tricked by his Mesquakie student 
friend. At first he was angry and confused, 
then he realized that by being tricked — as in 
the Mesquakie story of Raccoon and Wolf 
which he read in an old collection {Fox Texts 
by William Jones) — he had learned a lesson. 

There are also stories, and this varies 
from one Native American Nation to the 
next, which are part of healing rituals. The 
most obvious example may be the Navajo 
stories which are part of the various healing 
way ceremonies. Figures from those stories 
are made in colored sand on the earth, and 
the person to be cured is placed on top of that 
sand painting — made a part of the story — in 
a ritual which may go on for days. 

In other Native American Nations some 
stories are only to be told to certain initiated 



people and even then only at certain times. 
What responsibility does the storyteller 
have when discovering one of these stories 
and wishing to tell it outside of the origina) 
context? I am not sure that I know the right 
answer, but I do know that taking sacred 
things lightly is not a good idea and 
that caution is more advisable than 
foolhardiness. There are stories told about 
characters. Coyote, for example, who take 
the sacred too lightly and do things the 
wrong way. Within the stories, they always 
pay for their mistakes. 

It appears to be a continent- wide tradition 
that all Native American legends are only to 
be told at certain times and in certain ways. 
Keewaydinoquay, an Anishinabe medicine 
woman and storyteller, has a song which 
begins each storytelling. She always offers 
asseyrm, or tobacco, for the ancestors during 
its singing. Those who have studied with 
Keeywaydinoquay do the same. 

In most parts of North America, stories 
are to be told only during the winter seasons. 
In some cases a story may be told only at 
night. Further, to mention the names of 
certain characters in stories — Covote, for 
example — outside of the stories is an 
invitation to bad luck. Coyote, say some of 
the California Indian people, might hear you 
mention his name and then come to visit you 
and do mischief. 

One can, I suppose, find logical reasons 
for these prohibitions. To engage in 
storytelling during the growing season 
when one should be working in the fields 
or gathering food might be seen as 
counter-productive. People have greater 
need for the stories in the winter when food 
may be scarce and nights are long and cold; 
then a good story helps keep up one's spirits. 
But the prohibitions against storytelling out 
of context are, I have been told, not enforced 
by human beings. Instead, the powers of 
nature step in. 



96 



Storytelling and the Sacred 



Tell stories in the summertime, the 
Iroquois say, and a bee will fly into your 
lodge and sting you. That bee is actually one 
of the Utile People, the }o-ge-oh, taking the 
shape of a bee to warn you that you are doing 
wrong. The Abenaki people say that if you 
tell stories during the growing season 
snakes will come into your house. 

For w^hatever reasons, I only tell certain 
stories in the months between first and last 
frost A non-Indian friend of mine who 
wanted to tell Indian tales, however, neither 
knew nor cared about such prohibitions. He 
looked up some stories from a 19th century 
text and began to memorize them. Finally, 
he had learned them well enough to tell 
them in public. But the first time he told one 
of those stories, he became ill. I advised him 
to learn more about the tales. Instead, he told 
another one in public and had a serious 
accident immediately thereafter. Once again, I 
suggested he nrdght look into the history of 
these stories and learn more about the 
Native people who tell them. His response, 
however, was that he now had to find out if 
this was just a coincidence. 

Quite deliberately, he told another of 
the tales in public. This time he became so ill 
that he almost died. He concluded that he did 
need to know more about the stories, made 
a trip to Oklahoma to visit with some old 
people from that ^^^ative American Nation, 
and discovered the stories he'd been telling 
were night-time stories, only to be told at a 
certain time of the year and never (as he had 
done) in the light of day. 

Native American Stories 
and Non-IndianTellers: 
Some Possible Directions 

What I want to share here is not a set of 
hard and fast rules, but some possible 
directions for a non-Indian storyteller to 



follow when wishing to use Native American 
tales. They come from my own approach to 
the stories that I tell, ones which come from 
the traditions of my own Abenaki ancestors 
and the other Native American people from 
whom I have learned: 

1. Instead of learning Native American 
tales solely from books, learn them from the 
life of the people. Visit with living American 
Indian people, try to find out more about 
their ways of life and their languages. When 
using written texts, fully research the 
versions of the story if more than one version 
exists. A knowledge of the language and 
people from which the story comes should 
help you develop a version truer to the 
original. 

2. When visiting with Native American 
people, remember that listening and patience 
are cardinal virtues. The old stereotype of 
the stoic Indian comes in part from the fact 
that all too often non-Indians monopolize 
the conversation. It is common practice in 
western culture to interrup^t others when 
engaged in conversation. Such interruptions 
effectively terminate conversation with 
Indian people. When asking questions, 
avoid leading questions or ones with a 
simple ''yes" or "no" answer. Native people 
place great value on politeness and will 
often say "yes" just to avoid disagreeing 
with you. 

3. Know what type of story you are 
learning. Find out if there were certain times 
when it was to be told and be aware of the 
way the stor/s construction fits into the 
culture and worldview of that particular 
Native Nation. If you are not certain of a 
stor/s use or origin, dont tell it. Further, if 
you wish to use a story which you have 
heard from a Native American teller, always 
get that person's explicit permission to tell 
it. 

4. When telling a Native American 
story, try to avoid subtly racist language or 
language that stereotypes. Many non- 



34 



I expected my skin and my blood to ripen 

Wlien thR blizzard subsided four days later {after the W. ^ Med Knee Massacre), a burial party was setit 
to Wounded Knee. A long trench was dug. Many of the oodies were stripped by whites who went out in 
order to get the Ghost Shirts and other accoutrements the Indians wore...the frozen bodies were thrown 
into the trench stiff and naked. ..only a handful of items remain in private hands...exposure to snofw lias 
stiffened the leggings and moccasins, and all the objects show the effects of age and long use...(Items are 
pictured for sale that were gathered at the site of the massacre:) Moccasins at $140, hide scraper at $350, 
buckskin shiH at $1200, woman's leggings at $275, bone breastplate, at $1000. 

— Kenneth Canfield, 1977 Plains Indian Art Auction Catalog 

I expected my skin 
and my blood to ripen 
not be ripped from my bones; 
like fallen fruit 

I am peeled, tasted, discarded. 

My seeds open 

and have no future. 

Now there has been no past. 

My own body gave up the beads, 

my own hands gave the babies away 

to be strung on bayonets, 

to be counted one by one 

like rosary-stones and then 

tossed to the side of life 

as if the pain of their birthing 

had never been. 

My feet were frozen to the leather, 

pried apart, left behind — bits of flesh 

on the moccasins, bits of paper deerhide 

on the bones. My back was stripped of its cover, 

its quilling intact; it was torn, 

was taken away. My leggings were taken 

like in a rape and shriveled 

to the size of stick figures 

like they had never felt the push 



35 



of my strong woman's body 

walking in the hills. 

It was my own baby 

whose cradleboard I held— 

would've put her in my mouth Uke a snake 

if I could, would' ve turned her 

into a bush or rock if there'd been magic enough 
to work such changes. Not enough magic 
to stop the bullets, not enough magic 
to stop the scientists, not enough magic 
to stop the money. Now our ghosts dance 
a new dance, pushing from their hearts 
? • ong. 



— Wendy Rose 



1 

i 




Cetemony 

By Leslie Marmon Silko 

I will tell you something about stories, 
[he said] 
They aren't just entertainment. 

Don't be fooled. 
They are all we have, you see, 
all we have to fight off 
illness and death. 

You dont have anything 
if you don't have the stories. 

Their evil is might 
bat it can't stand up to our stories. 
So they try to destroy the stories 
let the stories be confused or forgotten. 
They would like that 
They would be happy 
Because we would be defenseless then. 

He rubbed his belly, 
I keep them here 
[he said] 
Here, put your hand on it 
See, it is moving. 
There is life here 
for the people. 

And in the belly of this story 
the rituals and the ceremony 
are still growing, 

— From Ceremony 

lOl 

RETHINKINO SCHOOLS SPECIAL EDiTlON 




Ul. 

a story about an ugly man 

handsome braves and beautiful squaws P°^^;^^ "^^^^ ^^^^^'I,, fear of seeing 
ashamed of himself that he could not go to the stream any m ^^^^^ ^^^^ 

his terr,ble face in -"/•^';X"3^;iuhou a^ 

sharpened h.s knife until it would cut '^^'J^J^^^'^^'J^^;^, ,o,,/,ee his face very 
he went to the stream and '"-'^ ■^°",^tnl^^^ he "cut out his eyes, 

clearly, and he cut the corners of his 7°"'*: "'^//^^^^^^ back up the path to the 
he stayed in the forest until he had l^ealed. ^^en hejaw' P 
camp, when he came to the camp a 1 '^7'°P'^.t\t, h3d b^en responsible, but 
done and cried in great grief for thiy ^^J'^^^it h ^ courage and good humor all 
,he blind man only smiled and srn.led. then ^« ""^^^J i^^J,^,,, day forth 

the handsome braves and beautiful ma.dens ^'-^-'^J^^^^j Zl^, f^d the best 
the blind man was treated with great pa .ence ^nd -dness^ h ^^^^.^^ 
food and carried to each new camp, and m the "'g^ts ^^e" 

3i.ging he was brought and Pj^^ ^ ^tts^S wi^Tf^rom Ufe. and the 
Sir :::p;^"wer:Te%' hal'p;7oVthey had both sins and their atonement m 
caring for the blind man. 



19 



Appendix F 



Criteria for Selecting a Native American 
Reservation to Visit 



The resoi\atic>n must be located within a one hour's dri\ e of your school 

** The people who lixe on the reservation must be willing and able to accommodate a 
visit by a class of your size and to take them on a short tour. 

A Nativ e American (or several ) living on the reseiA-'ation must be available to answer 
questions for your students pertaining to American Indians and to life on that 
particular reservation 



Name 



Reservation Worksheet 



You may answer these questions at the reservation or wait until you return to class. Some 
of these questions may be answered by observation only. Others require that you ask a 
source at the reservation for the answer. Please respond to each question in three or four 
sentences 

1 What does the reservation look like'^ How exactly is it set up'' 



2. What are the Native Americans doing for work'' What are they doing in their leisure 
time'' 



3. How many people live on this reservation? ( What is the reservation's population'' ) 



4 What do the American Indians' homes look like'' Do they look the way you expected 
them to look? 



5. How many people did you see wearing headdress with feathers'' 

6. What were the Native American people wearing'' What did their clothes look like? 



7. Can non-Native American children go to school on this reservation'^ 
8 In what vear was this reservation established'' 



ERLC 



10,) 



Name 



9. Why do you suppose that 1/4 of the United States' Native American population 
chooses to Hve on reservations such as this one? 



10. What surprised you about the reservation and why did it surprise you? 



erJc 



Appendix G 



10 V 



Name 



Final Assignment 



Write a lelter to the author(s) or illustrator(s) ofany book that poilrays negative images of 
Native Americans. Please use the following criteria for this assignment. 

1 Select a book that has been published within the last six or seven years \ny book that 

is older than that is likely to have already been revised 

2 You may select a book that has been discussed in class or you may select one of your 

own. Please see me if you choose your own book. 

3 Your letter must be at least one page in length. 

4. Educate your audience as to what is wrong with their book from a human 

relations point of view. Give specific examples of stereotypes and racism of 
Native Americans in the book, citing page numbers whenever possible. 

5. Explain how that book has contributed to the oppression of Native American people 

6. Finish your letter by suggesting a way in which the author or illustrator could make a 

change for the better. Do you want them to revise that particular book and publish 
a more culturally sensitive edition? Do you want them to just be more aware of 
Native American issues when writing or illustrating fixture books'^ 

7 Include your return address in the letter so that your audience may respond 



Extra Resources 



A Thanksgiving Message We Could Do Without 




Indians... 

lived In houses of grass and bark 
cooked on a fire 
slept In deerskin 
dried out meal 

picked and killed their own (ood 
made fires with sticks 
used bow and arrows 



W«... 

live In houses of brick and wood 

use a stove 

sleep in beds 

keep meat In refrigerators 

buy our food from a grocery 

use matches 

use guns and sometimes bow and arrows 



Indians Ate 

Indian corn 

cranberries 

corn meal mush 

deer 

rabbit 

turkey 

beans 

blackberries 
strawberries 
water 



FOOD 

We Eat 

pork 
beef 

sweet corn 

oatmeal 

turkey 

chicken 

apples 

pineapples 

milk 

orange juice 
beer 



CLOTHES 

Indians Wore Wa Wtar 

headbands and feathers hats 

deerskin shirts cloth shirts with collars 

deerskin blankets and furs coats and sweaters 

leggins pants 

deerskin dresses and skirts cloth skirts and dresses 

moccasins shoes, sneakers, boots, socks 

The above was copied from a chart hanging in an elementary school 
corridor in Amherst, Mass. It is an example of the type of information 
presented to children across the country at Thanksgiving time. Note 
the objectionable elements in this material: The distinction between 
"Indians" and "we"; the implication that ^'Indians" are an extinct 
people (frequent use of the past tense when discussing '"Indians" V 
supports the ''Vanished Indian" myth, denying both the present 
existence of Native Americans and the continuity of their culture); the 
over simplification of Native cultures and the generalization of certain 
characteristics to apply to all "Indians"; the ethnocentric Western 
focus on material objects and artifacts rather than on the important 
values of Native cultures, such as their concept of harmony between 
material and non material aspects of life and their respect for the 
relationship between all aspects of Mother Earth. 



4* 



ERIC 



1.1) 



Uniesrning Indisn*' SlT^otyp^a 




NATIVE AMEWi^S:\VE ARE HEKK 




Algc ;Wn^^^ 
AlgonquUinp5i 

Calabaw.$^H/:' 

Cherokee^,?: 
Choctaw,^,, 



Creek 



Eastern Woodlands 

m 



Huron 



Uoquols ;v 
Menominee: 
Mohawk . -^v , 
Narmoanset . 
Ojibwa (CWppev/a) 
Onondaga A - 
Passamaquoddy 
Penobscotlv 

Pequol >vo" *\ 
Poosepatuck^ 

Sauk&Fox^^ 
Seminole 
Seneca ^^K:'; 
Shawnee '^c^ 
Shlnnecock.^ 

.Tuscarora;^>v 

Wampanoag 

:Vyi|i.n^tegp|: 

Arapaho^:: 

Asslnibblntj. 

Bannock 

Blackfoot;£- 

Cheyenne 

Comanche 

Crow VA- 

Dakota'(Sloux) 

. Rathead : 
, iMandan^; 

■-:KIowa^:^i'y' 
- KIckapoo 



Central Region 



Nez Perce 
Omaha 
Palute 
Pawnee 
Shoshone 
Ute 



Acoma 
Aoache 
Hopl 
Isleta 

Maricopa 

Navalo 

Ourays 

Papago 

Pima 

Taos 

Santa Clara 
San lldefonso 
Sanlo Domingo 
Unitahs 
Zunl 

Chinook 
Haida 
Lumml 
Swinomlsh 

Tlingil 
Subarctic 

Cree 
Inuit 

Aleut 

Eskimo 

Mexico 

Aztec 

Maya 

Olmec 

Toltec 

Zapotec 



SoulhNvcsl 



Northwest 



Arctic 



i) 



lit 



M..VSW.>.KMHlAUSn|nnvS.'UO(|KAM 



of Harih 




...;;:ru:i./-7^.ii:v. 

vNatlve# 
American 
Culture: 
Areas:? 

Arctic 



Sub- Arctic 



W///^ Northwest Coast 

I Plains 
Eastern Woodlands 
Southeast 





Ii; •I'lj Southwest 
^^o' Great Basin 
California 

^ \\\\ I 





VISUAL A 



NATIVt 



nrcT pnDV AVMI ARIF 



U) 





iiggested Classroom 

diagnostic Activity to assess your students' 
!nt image of Native American people 

your students to **Draw an Indian and the house the 
Indian lives in/* (Should any of the students ask if 
you mean today or in the past— an excellent 
questions-suggest that they draw whatever comes to 
mind first.) 

the class to name those aspects of their r' ings that 
identify the person as an ^Mndian." Write their 
responses on the board. (Chances are they'll also 
mention things not included in their drawings. In 
any case encourage them— after their initial 
responses— to think of additional things that they 
identify with "Indians.") Many— if not most— of the 
responses will be stereotypic and will reflect aspects 
^f the white-created "Indian" caricature. Some stu- 
dents may disagree with the typical responses, and 
vou can open discussion around such disagreement. 
The responses and discussion can help you determine 
which of the following activities will be helpful. 

ities for Unlearning Indian' Stereotypes 

the students if they have ever met an "Indian" person 
'n real life. (Some may have, and may talk about 

hat person, or those persons, they met.) Ask those 
children who never met an "Indian** how they knew 
the way to draw a picture of an Indian person. 

Vherc have tliey seen "Indians" if they haven*t met 

ny? (Responses such as TV. movies and books can 
be expected.) Talk about the fact that most movies 
"nd TV programs showing "Indians" usually have 

hite actors pretending to be ^'Indians.'* How does 
>omeone pretend to be an "Indian"? What does that 
T'^erson v/ear? 

luce the word, "stereotype," You might explain it as 
a mistaken idea about how a whole group of people 
?have. or think, or dress. Discuss why all stereo- 
pes are wrong and dehumanizing, since different 
people in any group behave, think and look different 
from one another. Give, as one possible example, "A 
erson knows two bullies who have blue eyes and 
I own hair. If that person decides that anyone with 
oluc eyes and brown hair is a bully, then that person 
as created an untrue stercotvpe." 

iin that while some Indian people do wear feathers 
or special occasions, like ceremonies, most do not 
ually wear them. But a lot of people think that all 
.dian people wear feathers all the time. I hat*s a 
icrcotypc. 

'fi O 7r?d/an" Stereotypos 

ERJC 



Activities 



♦Ask the children to identify some repeated stereotypes 
using some of the illustrations discussed in the article 
on page 5 : feathers, tipis, dancing, fierceness, etc. 
Explain that these stereotypes were used by the 
artists who drew the illustrations in order to identify 
the figures as "Indians." Then look at some contem^ 
porary photographs of Native peoples such as those 
lound in Native Americans: SCO Years After by 
Michael Dorris. How many are wearing feathers? If 
they do wear feathers, what are they doing? How 
many are carrying tomahawks? How many are living 
in tipis? This exercise can help to break down the 
image of Native Americans as people of the past, as 
well as the image that "Indian" people of today wear 
feathers and buckskins and live in tipis. 

*Ask the class what a European person Is? What is a 
Dutch person? An Italian? A French person? How 
are they different? Yet note that with all these 
differences, Dutch, Italian and French people are 
still Europeans— living on the European continent. 
Do all European people wear wooden shoes or do 
only the people of one European nation? Do all 
Europeans live in v,'ndmills? Note that just because 
the Dutch are Europeans, it doesn't mean that all 
Europeans do what the Dutch people do. 

Ask if all Dutch people of today wear wooden shoes 
and live in windmills? Note that while a few still live 
in windmills and some wear wooden shoes, most live 
in other types of buildings and wear contemporary 
clothing. But even though their dress and housing 
are similar to that of other Europeans, they are still 
Dutch, still speak Dutch, still have cultural differ- 
ences from other Europeans. 
♦Make the comparison with Native Americans. "Native 
American** or "American Indian" are terms like 
"European," that are used to identify many different 
groups of people living on this continent. Just as 
there are distinct nations and cultures among Euro- 
peans, there are also distinct nations and^^ultures 
among Native Americans (Navajo, Sioux, Mohawk, 
Cherokee, etc). All Native American peoples didn t 
live in tipis and wear headdresses. Tipis and head- 
dress (of the type usually seen in children's books) 
were found only among Native groups in the Plains 
area. Other nations in other areas of this contment 
had other forms of housing and different forms of 
dress. Pictures of various forms of housing are 
relatively easy to locate and you can show the 
students tipis, longhouses, wigwams, \hogans, etc., 
discussing the various cultures which use them and 
the environment they were designed for. Finally, the 
point should be made that just as most DUtch people 

1 3 



no longer live and dress as they once did— yet are 
still Dutch— so Native people no longer live and 
dress as they did in the past, but their diversity 
remains and their cultures continue. 

♦;Vsk students to look for examples of similar stereotyped 
images on TV. on food packages, in comic books, on 
greeting cards or in games and toys. Encourage 
students to bring such examples to class or to report 
what they have seen and to explain why they are 
stereotypes. 



Holidays 

Most schools celebrate Columbus Day, 
Washington's Birthday and Thanksgiving and 
most children can give a number of reasons for 
celebrating those holidays. But many, if not 
most. Native people do not consider them cause 
for celebration. To understand a Native Ameri- 
can perspective on these holidays, children need 
some new information and some new view- 
points. 

Thanksgiving Day: Student Information 

Most children know that Native Americans helped 
the Pilgrims and were invited to the first Thanksgiving 
feast. But most children do not know the following facts 
which explain why many Native Americans today call 
Thanksgiving a *'Day of Mourning." 

Before the Pilgrims arrived Plymouth had been the 
site of a i^awtuxct village wliich was wiped out by a 
plague— introduced by English explorers— five years 
before the Pilgrims landed. The nearest other people were 
the Wampanoag. whose lands stretched from present day 
Narragansctt Bay to Cape Cod. Like most other peoples in 
the area, the Wampanoag were farmers and hunters. These 
Native peoples had met Europeans before the Pilgrims 
arrived. 

One such European was Captain Thomas Hunt, who 
Slatted trading with the Native people in 1614. He 
captured 20 Pawtuxeis and seven Nausets. selling them as 
slaves in Spain. Many other European expeditions also 
lured Native people onto ships and then imprisoned and 
enslaved them. 

Ihese expeditions carried smallpox, typhus, measles 
and other European diseases to this continent. Native 
people had no immunity and some groups were totally 
wiped out while others were severely decimated. An 
estimated 72.000 to 90,000 people lived in southern New 
England before contact with iLuropeans. One hundred 



years later, their numbers were reduced by 90 
was Captain Hunt's expedition that brought the 
which destroyed the Pawluxct. 

After the Pilgrims arrived they spent four days 
exploring Cape Cod. They found that Native people 
buried their dead with stores of corn and beans. The 
IMlgrims dug up many graves, taking the food. To the 
Native people who had observed these actions, it was a 
serious desecration and insult to their dead. The angry 
Warnpanoags attacked with a small group, but were 
frightened off with gunfire. 

When the Pilgrims had settled in and were working in 
the fields, they saw a group of Native people approaching. 
Running away to get their guns, the Pilgrims left their 
tools behind and the Native people took them. Not long 
after, in February of 1621, Samosei, a leader of the 
Wabnaki peoples, walked into the village saying, **Wel- 
come,"* in English. Samoset was from Maine, where he 
had met English fishing boats and— according to some 
accounts — was taken prisoner to England, finally manag- 
ing to return to the Plymouth area, six months before the 
Pilgrims arrived. Samoset told the Pilgrims about all the 
Native nations in the area and about the Wampanoag 
people and their sachem (leader), Massasoit. He also told 
of the experience of the Pawtuxet and Nauset people with 
white men. Samoset spoke about a friend of his called 
Tisquantum (Squanto), who also spoke English, Samoset 
left, promising the Pilgrims he would arrange for a return 
of their tools. 

Samoset returned with 60 Native people including 
Massasoit and Tisquantum. Edward Winslow, a Pilgrim, 
went to present them with gifts and to make a speech 
saying that King James wished to make an alliance with. 
Massasoit. (This was not true.) Massasoit signed a treaty 
which was heavily slanted in favor of the Pilgrims. The 
treaty said that no Native person would harm a white 
settler or— should they do so— they would be surrendered 
to whites for punishment; Wampanoags visiting the white 
settlements were to go unarmed; the Wampanoags and the 
whites agreed to help one another in case of attack; and 
Massasoit agreed to notify all the neighboring nations 
about the treaty. 

The key figure in the treaty talks and^,^n later 
encounters was Tisquantum. He was a Pawtuxet who had 
been kidnapped and taken to England in 1605. He 
managed to return to New England, only to be captured 
by Captain Hunt and sold into slavery in Spain. He 
escaped to England and — returning to this continent —met 
Samoset upon a ship. Tisquantum found that all of his 
people had died of the plague, so he stayed with the 
Warn.panoags— some of whom had survived the disease. 

Tisquantum remained with the Pilgrinn^s for the rest of 
his life, and was in large part responsible fot their survival. 
The Pilgrims were mainly artisans, and Tisquantum taught 
them when and how to plant and fertilize corn and other 
Unlearning "Indian " Stereoty^ ys 25 



^^^i. He taught thcrn where the best fish were and how to 
•atch them in traps, and many other survival skills. 
Governor Bradford called Tisquanlum, "a special instru- 
ment sent of God." (While white-written history books of 
oday still speak well of Tisquantum— calling him 
Squanto— many Native people of today do not consider 
him a hero, since his actions in no way benefitted Native 
\mcrican people.) 

All the Native nations along the eastern seaboard 
practiced (and some still practice) some type of harvest 
cast and ceremony. The NVampanoag feast— called 
^ikkomosachmiawene, or Grand Sachem's Council 
Feast — is marked by traditional food and games, telling of 
•^lories and legends, sacred ceremonies and councils on the 
if fairs of the nation. It was because of this feast in 1621 
.hat the Wampanoags had amassed the food to help the 
Pilgrims, creating a new tradition known today as 
Thanksgiving Day." This first Thanksgiving ceremony 
astcd three days. Massasoit came with 90 men and 
brought five deer as well as other food: turkey, geese, 
duck, clams, oysters, fish, fruits, corn, molasses, salads, 
naplc sugar, wine. The Pilgrims, who had initially 
numbered 103, now numbered 55. Only five were women, 
and on them fell the difficult task of cooking for all these 
>coplc. 

Massasoit, who had done so much to help the 
Pilgrims, had a son named Metacomet. As time went on 
»nd more Europeans arrived and took more land, 
.vietacomet and other Native people began to sec the 
need to defend their nations. At the age of 24, Metacomet 
called "King Philip" by the English) became the leader of 
he Wampanoags. He worked hard trying to form an 
alliance of Native nations to work together to defend their 
»ands and way of life. In 1675 fighting broke out, and for a 
ime it looked like the Native nations would defeat the 
Europeans. But after a year of fighting, Metacomet was 
killed and food was running short. Hundreds of Native 
Dcople surrendered— including Metacomet's wife and 
rhildren— only to be executed or sold into slavery. 
Massacres of Native villages by white men, bounties paid 
for Native peoples' scalps, wars, broken promises and 
broken treaties resulted in almost total destruction of the 
Wampanoag and other New England nations. 

Thanksgiving Day: Suggested Activities 

•Present as much of the precedlnR information as you 

consider useful. Students might discuss what they 
think Tisquantum would have done if he had known 
what would happen in later years when more and 
more white people arrived. In a similar vein, they 
might discuss what caused such different reactions as 
Massasoit's, in 1621, and his son, Metacomet's, in 
1675. Why might many Native Americans today 
think that Metacomet is a hero and that Massasoit 
and Tisquantum are not heroes? Could Native 
peoples and while peot^le have lived together 
accfully? 



♦Tell your students that each year, at Plymouth Rock, 
there is a Thanksgiving Ceremony given by the 
townspeople, and there are many speeches for the 
crowds who come. In 1970, the Massachusctt.s 
Department of Commerce asked the Wampanoags 
lo select a speaker to mark the 350th Pilgrim 
anniversary. Frank James, who is a Wampanoag, a 
descendant of the nation who met the Pilgrims, was 
chosen to deliver the speech. But first he had to show 
a copy of his speech to the white people in charge of 
the ceremony. When they saw what he had written, 
they would not allow him to read it. This is the 
speech Mr. James wanted to make. 

♦Read the following speech to your class, prior to a 
discussion. 

350 YEARS OF PILGRIMS' PROGRESS 
It is with mixed emotions that I stand here to 
share my thoughts. This is a time of celebrating for 
you*-celebrating an anniversary of a beginning for 
the white man in America. A time of looking back — 
of reflection. It 1$ with heavy heart that I look back 
upon what happened to my People, 

Even before the Pilgrims landed, it was common 
practice for explorers to capture Indians, take them 
to Europe and sell them as slaves for 20 shillings j 
apiece. The Pilgrims had hardly explored the shores j 
of Cape Cod four days before they had robbed the j 
graves of my ancestors, and stolen their corn, wheat, j 
and beans. . . . 

Massasoit, the great Sachem of the Wampa- 
noag, knew these facts; yet he and his People 
welcomed and befriended the settlers of the Ply- 
mouth Plantation. Perhaps he did this because his 
tribe had been depleted by an epidemic, or his 
knowledge of the harsh oncoming winter was the 
reason for his peaceful acceptance of these acts. This 
action by Massasoit was probably our greatest 
mistake. We, the Wampanoags, welcomed you, the 
white man with open arms, little knowing that it was 
the beginning of the end; that before 50 years were to 
pass, the Wampanoags would no longer be a Tribe. 

What happened in those short 50 yyirs? What 
has happened In the last 300 years? Hlstor? gives us 
facts and there were atrocities; there were broken 
promises— and most of these centered around land 
ownership. Among ourselves we understood that 
there were boundaries— but never before had we had 
to deal with fiances and stone walls, with the white 
man's need to prove his worth by the amount of land 
that he owned. Only ten years later, when the 
Puritans came, they treated the Wampanoag with 
even less kindness In converting the souls of the so- 
called savages. Although Puritans were also harsh to 
some members of tlielr own toclety, the Indian was 
pressed between stone slabs tnd hanged ts quickly as 
any other •*wltch," 



ERJC /earning 'Indian** Stereotypes 



JL.J 



ERLC 



And so down through the years there Is record 
after record of Indian Unds taken, and in token, 
reservations set up for him upon which to hve. The 
Indian, having been stripped of his power, could but 
only stand by and watch -while the white man took 
his lands and used them for his personal gaut. This 
the Indian couldn't stanu, for to him. land was 
survival, to farm, to hunt, to be enjoyed. It wasn t to 
be abused. . . . 

Has the Wampanoag really disappeared? We 
know there was an epidemic that took many Indian 
lives-some Wampanoags moved West and jouied 
the Cherokee and Cheyenne. They were forced to 
move. Some even went north to Canada! Many 
WampanoaR put aside their Indian heritage and 
accepted the white man s way for their own survival. 
There are some Wampanoag who do not wish it 
known they are Indian for social or economic 
reasons. . . . 

History wants us to believe that the Indian was 
a savage, illiterate, uncivilized animal. A history that 
was written by an organized disciplined people, to 
expose us as an unorganized and undisciplined 
emity. Two distinctly different cultures met. One 
thought they must control life-the other believed 
life was to be enjoyed, because nature decreed it. Let 
us remember, the Indian is and was just as human as 
the white man. The Indian feels pain, gets hurt and 
becomes defensive, has dreams, bears tragedy and 
failure, suffers from loneliness, needs to cry as well 
as laugh. . . . 

Although time has drained our culture, and our 
language is almost extinct, we the Wampanoags, still 
walk the lands of Massachusetts. We may be 
fragmented, we may be confused. Many years have 
passed since we have been a People together. Our 
lands were invaded. We fought as hard to keep our 
land as vou the white did to take our land away from 
us. We were conquered, we became the American 
Prisoners of War in many cases, and wards of the 
United States Government, untii only recently. The 
necessity of making a living in this materialistic 
society caused us to be silent. Today, I and many of 
my people are choosing to face the truth. We ARE 
Indians! . . . 

What has happened cannot be changed hut 
today we work towards a more humane America, a 
more Indian America where men and nature once 
again are important. . . . 

You the white man are celebrating an anniver- 
sary. We the Wampanoags will help you celebrate in 
the concept of a beginning. It was the beginning of a 
new life for the Pilgrims. Now 3S0 years later it U a 
beginning of a new determination for the origmal 
American. ... 'I ^ 1^ 




We still have the spirit, we still 
culture, we still have the will and the determH 
to remain as Indians. We are determined that 
only a beginning of the .American Indian to regi 
the position in this country that is rightfully ours. 



♦Discuss the speech, raising some of the followi 
questions. Why did Wampanoags fight the Europe 
settlers? What did Mr. James mean when he s 
Native people were like *Trisoners of War*"? Sho 
he have been allowed to make his speech? W 
What does the word, "Mourning^ mean? Why 
many Wampanoags and other Native people • 
Thanksgiving a "Day of Mourning"? 

Further discussion may center around the fact t 
Native peoples believe thai land, like air, is 
everyone and no one person should own it 
themselves. Ask students what they think of 
notion. What did Europeans believe land was f 

♦Tell the students that the Massachusetts* officials 
Mr. James that, "The Indians were mistreated, 
now is a time to celebrate brotherhood.^^ Rercac 
last paragraph of Mr. James* speech to the class 
ask them how he disagrees with the offit 
viewpoint. Ask the class if they know of any o 
things for which Native American people in diffi 
parts of the country arc struggling today (Akwes 
Notes can be a very helpful resource here). 

Note' Much of the material in this Thanksgiving secti 
based on A Thanksgiving Curriculum: Offering a N 
American Viewpoint. That curriculum was prepare 
People Against Racism in Education (PARE), a 
York organization of parents, teachers, school wo 
and students working to combat racism. Their addr 
Box 972, Cathedral Station, New York, N.Y. 1002: 



Columbus Day: Student Information 



Most children know that Columbus was lost wl 
found his **New World," for he expected to land in 
His ships landed in what is now called trffe^-Bj 
Islands, and the first people he met were the Art 
1 heir society was based on village communes whert 
property was jointly held. They had a dev. 
agricultural system, and they spun and wove. Bern 
friendly, they were ready to share what they had w 
newcomers. But Columbus had other ideas ar 
October 12, 1492, he wrote, "It appears to me i\ 
people are ingenious and would be good servant 
October 14 he wrote. "With 50 men we could subjec 
all and make them do whatever we want." And, tha 
day, he also wrote that the land had great riches 
many ^'slaves as one could wish for." Columbu 



Uniearning "tncJian" Stereotyf. 



/iiBVcd many Natives, despite the fact that lie had written 
^^the King and Queen of Spain: 

They are a loving people without covelousness. So 
tractable, so peaceable are these people, that 1 swear 
to your Majesties there is not in the world a belter 
nation. They love their neighbor as themselves, and 
their discourse is ever sweet and gentle, and 
accompanied with a smile; and though it is true that 
they are naked, yet their manners are decorous and 
praiseworthy. 

Columbus, sure that he was in India, called the people 
•*lndians.*' And over the years, Europeans who followed 
him did the same, even though they knew that the land 
was a vast continent, occupied by hundreds of different 
cultures, each of which had its own language and name. 
But most of the Europeans were not interested in learning 
about the different nations and cultures and just kept 
calling all the different kinds of people "Indians,*" as if 
Ihey were all alike. 

The first Europeans had been sent by their rulers to 
find new ways to make money. And so Columbus, and the 
people who came after him, set out to find riches like gold, 
spices or slaves. In the process they killed and enslaved 
many Native people. Columbus made other voyages, 
searching for gold he never found. And he left the islands 
cruelly destroyed, sometimes killing all the people, like the 
Arawaks, who had greeted him on his arrival. 

Europeans believed that they had "discovered" the 
land and it was theirs. They called it the "New World." To 
the Native people, it was an "Old World.*" 

So most Native Americans today don*i celebrate 
Columbus Day. The arrival of Columbus was the 
beginning of an invasion by Europeans, who look the land 
of the Native nations, bringing them war, disease and 
death. 

Note: Columbus: His Enterprise by Hans Koning 
(Monthly Review Press, 1976) is a valuable source for a 
non-traditional view. 

You might read the students sections from Koning*s book 
and discuss why Native people don*l find much 
about Columbus to celebrate, and whether non- 
Indian people should celebrate everything he did and 
everything he stood for. 

Coiumbus Day: Suggested Activities 

•After presenting the students with the preceding 
informttion, have a few students volunteer to rolc- 
pl«y the Arawaks and a few to role-play the 
Europeans. Brief the role-playing students, making 
sure each side understands ♦he difference in view- 
points which they will be acting out. 
Afterwards, the class should discms the Issues, 
and decide whether the behavior of the Europeans 
was fair, kind or just, and how they would feel if 
^ someone came to their country to make them slaves 

ERJ C/n/garn/no 'Indian*' Stereotypes 




and to take away riches. 

♦Tell students about Adam Norwall, a professor from 
California, who is Ojibway. In 1973 he put on some 
traditional Native clothing, flew in a jet plane to 
Italy and said, when getting off the plane: "In the 
name of the Indian people, 1 claim the right of 
discovery and take possession of this land." He said 
that if it was valid for Columbus to **discover" 
America when Indians had been living there 
thousands of years, then he could claim Italy. Talk 
about the point Professor Norwall was trying to 
make. 

♦Tell students that Vine Deloria, Jr., a Standing Rock 
Sioux from South Dakota, has written many books 
explaining Native peoples* viewpoints. Deloria wrote 
the following imaginary diary entry, dating it 
February 12, 1510. 

We had a real crisis today. Another "Big 
Canoe" pulled up on the beach and another 
European got out. He is from Italy like Chris 
Columbus was and his name is Americus Ves- 
pucci. We have been running into quite a few 
Italians lately and they seem to share this Indian 
kick. Anyway the horrible thought suddenly 
occurred to the tribal council. It seems that since 
Columbus landed everyone has been calling us 
"Indians." We have pretty well convinced them 
that it is not India, but we know that sooner or 
later they will find a name for our country. They 
might do some nutty thing like name it after one 
of these Europeans, such as our guest. Then 1 
suppose they would call it "America" and since 
they still insist on calling us Indians we could end 
up with the tab of "American Indians" instead of 
our tribal names. That is ' 
plate but the council ihins> 

♦Discuss the points made by ' 
students why Native people 
their national (tribal) name. \ 
ask students to name some nations (inbcs) ihey 
know of, or you can introduce the names of some 
Native nations: Mohawk, Navajo, P<Jjobscot, 
Wampanoag, etc. Emphasize that while many'f^ative 
societies were totally destroyed by the white people, 
there are still over 200 in the United Slates today. 

^Explain that many people prefer the term "Native 
American" or "Native people"— rather than 
"Indian"— to describe themselves. Since their ances- 
tors were the original inhabitants of this land, they 
were native to this continent, whereas Europeans, 
Africans and Asians ar« originally * from other 
continents. (The attempt here is not to prevent 
children from using the term "Indian," but to help 
them understand why some Native people object to 
it.) 



117 



Washington's Birthday: Student Information 



While students are familiar with many aspects of 
Washington's activities, some uf his actions which 
impacted upon Native Americans are not widely known. 
Iherefore. you may wish to share some of the following 
facts with your students. The information is derived Jrom 
original historical documents, as reported in The Writings 
of George Washington, edited by John C. Fitzpatrick and 
from Charles A. Beard's An Economic Interpretation of 
the Constitution. 

George Washington fought Native peoples during the 
''French and Indian War." As payment he received 
thousands of acres of Native peoples* land on the south 
bank of the Ohio River— land given him by the British, 
not by the Native people who lived on the land. He also 
owned shares in the Mississippi Company, a land 
speculation group that "held" 2.5 million acres of Native 
land in the Ohio Valley. Native people still lived there and 
had never given it to the Company. 

Washington was a slaveholder (at the time of his 
death, in 1799, he held 317 Black people in slavery). Like 
other large plantation owners, he was often in debt to 
British merchants. To help meet this debt, he and others 
speculated (bought and sold) in Native lands, as a way of 
making quick profits. Because much of the land in the 
thirteen colonies was in large estates, common people who 
wanted to buy land were encouraged to "settle" west of the 
Alleghenies, paying the land speculatd s handsome profits, 
while the Native people, whose land it was, received 
nothing and lost their lands. 

In 1763 the great leader of the Ottawa nation, 
Pontiac, united 18 Native nations to fight this while 
in\a^i<^n of their lands. The confederacy he formed almost 
defeated the British, In an ellorl to slop such fighting, the 
British King issued the Proclamation of 1763. It said that 
no more white sclllcmenis could go west of the Allegheny 
mounuiins and demanded lhat white settlements already 
ihcie "forthwith . . remove themselves," 

I his action threatened the financial interests of 
Washington and other wealthy colonists (like Patrick 
Henry and Benjamin Franklin) who had bought land in 
the forbidden area. But the Kings Proclamation didnl 
stop Washington. He employed a surveyor to secretly 
locate more valuable land for him, Washington wrote to a 
friend: 

Between ourselves, [the restrictions should be 
viewed] as a temporary expedient to quiet the 
minds of the Indians. . , . Any person, 
therefore, who neglects the present opportu- 
nity of hunting out good lands . : . will never 
regain it. 

At his death, Washington **owned" 40,0(X) acres of Native 
American land west of the Alleghenies. 



Because of the activities of men like W 
most Native nations decided not to support the ccs 
in their struggle against Britain. But Britain^ too, 
record of breaking promises made to Native nations, 
is why many of them, like the Six Nations of the Iroquois 
Confederacy, tried to remain neutral during the Revolu- 
tionary War. However the British used lies to trick some 
warriors from the Confederacy into fighting for them at 
the battle of Fort vStanwix. In retaliation, George 
Washington ordered a military campaign against the 
Iroquois Confederacy, On May 31, 1779, Washington 
wrote to General Sullivan: 

The expedition you are appointed to com- 
mand is to be directed against the hostile 
tribes of the Six Nations of Indians with their 
associates and adherents. The immediate 
object is their total destruction and devasta- 
tion and the capture of as many persons ol 
every age and sex as possible. 

It will be essential to ruin their crops now or 
the ground, and prevent their planting 
more. . . 

Parties should be detached to lay waste al 
settlements around, with instructions to do i 
in the most effectual manner, that the country 
may not be merely overrun, but destroyed, . 

The records of the destruction by General Sullivan repor 
that: 

The force under Col. Daniel Brodhead burnec 
1 1 towns, containing about 165 houses, whici 
for the most part were constructed of logs an< 
framed timber. They destroyed more than 50i 
acres of cultivated land, and took loo 
estimated at $30,000. Many homes were larg' 
and beautifully painted, with architecture tha 
impressed the officers. 

As Sullivan wrote in his official report: 

The quantity of corn destroyed might amoun 
to 160,000 bushels, with vast quantitic* o 
vegetables of every kind. . , We have not lei 
a single settlement or field of corn in th 
country of the Five Nations, nor is there evei 
the appearance of an Indian on t^is side o 
the Niagara.** ^ 

Washington's Birthday: Suggested Activities 

•After presenting the prr vious information to the student! 

discuss why most Native Americans— as well a 
many Black people— do not consider Georg 
Washington's Birthday a day for celcbratior 
Another possible point of discussion is what th 
phrase, Father of Our Country," could mean to 
Native American child. 

Unl9tifning "Indian** St9r90typ9S i 



115 



%ickground 
Information 



The following background information is to assist you in 
explaining why Native people consider much of the 
imagery used by Illustrators to be insulting, and some- 
times sacrilegious. Most of the information concerns the 
Sioux, since so much of the "Indian" imagery Is based on 
their Plains culture. 



Religion 

For the most part, traditional Native religious beliefs 
are not a separate and distinct part of their society and 
culture, as is the practice of Christianity, for example. 
Rather, they are integral to every aspect of life and the 
natural world. Because all things are of the Creator, all 
natural things arc respected, be they human, animal, plant 
or otherwise. (It is not suggested that you involve your 
class in a discussion of Native American religious views 
and beliefs. Few non-Indian people have enough under- 
standing of the intricate and diverse nature of this subject 
to adequately deal with it.) 

While there arc specific religious ceremonies as well as 
social ceremonies, religious dances as well as social dances 
among the Sioux, the spiritual values that permeate the 
Sioux cultures tie religious aspects into social events. 
Tnus, to act out or "play" aspects of those cultures risks 
ridiculing them and involves sr>crilcgious contempt as well. 

The sacred pipe is the most sacramental object in 
Sioux religious belief. The drum, often the only instru- 
ment used , in sacred ceremonies, is played only by those 
who know the intricate songs. (The familiar drum beat of 
Hollywood movies is a simplistic whiteK:reatcd beat that 
does not reflect the range of sound found in traditional 
music.) And every Native culture has a repertoire of 
ceremonial dances which require precise steps (not the 
hopping up and down used by non-Indian children 
•*playing Indian"). 



Headdress 

Similar spirituality is reflected in traditiotial clothing 
and housing. For example, to the Oglala Sioux, the eagle 
is a symbol of freedom, pride and honor, a winged 
creature that is next to the Creator and represents 
freedom. Among the Oglala, 36 eagle feathers are used in 
m Wapaha« a traditional headdress that is a symbol of 
Drid^. honor and leadership. The privilege of wearing the 

E RsjC ^^rning "IndiBn " St9r9otypes 



11 di 



headdress has to be earned by acts of bravery, generosity, 
honesty and loyalty. The headdress is traditionally worn 
only in special ceremonies. The notching and coloring of 
the feathers and the addition of other materials also have 
symbolic meaning, telling of the wearer's deeds. While the 
headdress of other nations may have some similar 
meanings, cultural differences remain. 



Tipis 

Similarly, housing styles reflected cultural adaptations 
to environment. The tipi was used by nations in the Plains 
area. Some used a three pole foundation for the structure, 
while others used a four pole foundation. There were 
differences in the design of the smoke flapis and the 
fashioning of the entrances. The greatest diversity existed 
in the decoration of the tipi, where many symbols were 
used for religious meaning and to record historical events. 
The decoration of tipis was a highly developed form of art. 
Among the nations of the Plains, it was the responsibility 
of the women to design and erect the tipis. This job 
required great skill. 

Painted Tipis by Contemporary Plains Indian 
Artists is a useful source of inforn\ation on construction 
and design of tipis, and contains numerous color plates of 
decorated tipis [sec Resources, p. 31]. The book notes 
that: 

As a shelter, the Plains Indian tipi is 
extremely functional:— it is warm in the 
winter, cool in the summer, able to withstand 
wind and rain and it is easy to erect and 
dismantle. Smoke flaps or ears of the tipi 
cover serve as dampers to regulate the draft, 
ventilate the tipi and carry off the smoke. The 
tipi is especially adapted to provide good 
shelter against tornadoes: — the scourge of the 
Southern Plains region, as the strong winds 
cannot pick up the inverted surface of the tipi. 
Another architectural feature of the tipi which 
was a definite advantage in the hot, scorching 
summer climate of the Plains is tht pooling 
effect created by the movement of hot^ir up 
the sides of the tipi cover through the smoke 
hole and the influx of cooler air flowing in 
around the bottom of the tipi. At the same 
time, the tipi was snug and warm in winter 
due to well-designed interior furnishings such 
as a dew cloth hung from the poles around 
the interior of the tipi for msulation. During 
the winter months, a com ion method of 
protecting the tipi was to Iviild willow 
windbreaks, (p. 14) 

You can use the Painted Tipis book to compare the skilled 
decoration of tipis and their lymbolUm. with the caaually 
drawn tipis found in children's books. 



Because the image of "^Indians*^ presented to children 
in this society is one of fierceness, savagery and violence, It. 
is possible that some of your students may mention 
**Indian scalptnj;.'* If this happens, the following informa- 
tion may prove useful. 



Scalping 

Before the white invasion, warfare between Native 
nations was limited. It was often a kind of ritual with 
accepted rules, and less killing and economic loss than 
occurred in European warfare of the lime. In many 
societies, greater honor was attached to touching the 
opponent than to killing him. And killing, when it did 
occur, was generally limited only to warriors — noncom- 
balants were either assimilated into the victorious nation, 
forced to move elsewhere or expected to recognize the 
victor's preeminence with the payment of symbolic tribute. 
There was usually little attempt to systematically destroy 
food or property. 

Scalping had been known in Europe as far back as 
ancient Greece. The practice in the American colonies of 
paying bounties for Native scalps — similar to the English 
practice in Ireland of paying bounties for heads — is 
credited to Governor Kieft of New Netherlands. By 
attaching a profit motive to the practice of scalping, 
Europeans were encouraged to step up the slaughter of 
Native people to ease the take over of more territory. By 
1703 the Massachusetts Bay Colony was offering $60 for 
each Native scalp. And in 1756, Pennsylvania Governor 
Morris, in his Declaration of War against the Lenni 
Lenape people, offered **130 Pieces of Eight, for the Scalp 
of Every Male Indian Enemy, above the Age of Twelve 
Years,*^ and "50 Pieces of Eight for the Scalp of Every 
Indian Woman, produced as evidence of their being 
killed.*^ Massachusetts, in this period, was offering boun- 
ties of 40 pounds for a male Indian scalp, and 20 pounds 
for scalps of females or of children under 12 years old. 
Thus, the European practice of paying for the scalps of 
men and women reflected the intent of their warfare — the 
annihilation of the Native population. As this became 
clear. Native nations responded to the threat and changed 
their own methods of warfare, including the practice of 
taking scalps. 

Much of what is written about "Indian'* violence and 
scalping reflects the perspectives of the Europeans who 
wrote the early books and articles describing the period. 
Accounts written by Native American people would differ 
in their version of who was or was not cruel, or who was 
and who was not defcm' ng their homes. But it is always 
the victors who write the history books, and it is the white 
viewpoint which has dominated most accounts of our past. 

ERLC 



classroom 
Resources 

Akwesasne Notes: * Mohawk Nation, via Roosevehown, 
N.Y. 13683 

An invaluable newspaper for anyone concerned with 
obtaining current information on the lives and struggles of 
Native people today. Offers extensive listings of books, 
records, posters and other materials that can be utilized in 
the classroom. Free sample copies are available, subscript 
tions are $5/year, more if you can. 

Native Americans: 500 Years After, Photographs by 
Joseph C Farber. Text by Michael Dorris, Thomas Y. 
Crowell Company, N.Y., 1975 

An expensive book perhaps best purchased by the school 
library. Valuable for hundreds of photographs of Native 
peoples' life around the countrv' today. Useful in breaking 
down children's perceptions of Native Americans as 
people of the past. 

Vmeric-in Indian Authors for Young Readers, Mary 
ilo' ■ Rylcr. Association of American Indian Affairs, 

Nl.Y . ■ -73 

tion is an excellent discussion of common 
/r(>l^l•;!■:^ in children's books ahtxit Native peoples. Also 
provides an annotated bibliography of books, for children, 
written by Native people. 

The Weewish Tree, Published by the Indian Historian 
Press, 1451 Masonic Ave., San Francisco, CA 94117 

This is a magazine for young children. Subscriptions arc 
56.50 per year, bulk rates are available. It offers stories, 
poems and information about Native Americans. 

Painted Tipls by Contemporary Plains Indian Artists, 

U.S. Dept. of Interior, Indian Arts and Crafts Board* 
Anadarko, Oklahoma: Oklahoma Indian Arts and Crafts 
Cooperative, 1973 

Unlearning 'Indian'* Steraotyp^a 31 



68 



When Earth Becomes an ''It 



When the people call Earth "Mother/' 
they take with love 
and with love give back 
so that all may live. 

When the people call Earth "it/' 
they use her 
consume her strength. 
Then the people die. 

Already the sun is hot 

out of season. 

Our mother's breast 

is going dry. 

She is taking all green 

into her heart 

and will not turn back 

until we call her 

by her name. 

— Marilou Awiakta 



ERJC 



61 



Sure You Can Ask Me a Personal Question 



How do you do? 

No, I am not Chinese. 
No, not Spanish. 

No, I am American Indi— uh. Native American. 

No, not from hidia. 

No, not Apache. 
No, not Navajo. 

No, not Sioux. 
No, we are not extinct. 

Yes, Indin. 

Oh? 

So that's where you got those high cheekbones. 
Your great grandmother, huh? 

An Indian Princess, huh? 
Hair down to there? 

Let me guess. Cherokee? 
Oh, so you've had an Indian friend? 

That close? 
Oh, so you've had an Indian lover? 

That tight? 
Oh, so you've had an Indian servant? 

That much? 
Yeah, it was awful what you guys did to us. 

It's real decent of you to apologize. 
No, I don't know where you can get peyote. 

No, I don't know where you can get Navajo rugs real chea 
No, I didn't make this. I bought it at Bloomingdale's. 

Thank you. I like your hair too. 
I don't know if anyone knows whether or not Cher is really Indian. 

No, I didn't make it rain tonight 
Yeah. Uh-huh. Spirituality. 

Uh-huh. Yeah. Spirituality. Uh-huh. Mother 
Earth. Yeah. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Spirituality. 

No, I didn't major in archery. 
Yeah, a lot of us drink too much. 

Some of us can't drink enough. 
This ain't no stoic look. 

This is my face. 

— Diane Burns 



