ED348201 1992-09-00 Using Literature 
by American Indians and Alaska Natives 
in Secondary Schools. ERIC Digest. 

ERIC Development Team 
www . eric . ed . gov 

Table of Contents 

If you're viewing this document online, you can click any of the topics below to link directly to that section. 

Using Literature by American Indians and Alaska Natives in Secondary 



Schools. ERIC Digest 1 

LITERATURE AND CULTURE 2 

STEREOTYPES ABOUT AMERICAN INDIANS AND ALASKA 

NATIVES IN LITERATURE 2 

BREAKING THE STEREOTYPE 4 

CONCLUSION 4 

REFERENCES 5 



ERIC |||p Digests 

IRIC Identifier: ED348201 

Publication Date: 1992-09-00 

Author: Grant, Agnes - Gillespie, LaVina 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools Charleston WV. 

Using Literature by American Indians and 
Alaska Natives in Secondary Schools. ERIC 
Digest. 

THIS DIGEST WAS CREATED BY ERIC, THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 



ED348201 1992-09-00 Using Literature by American Indians and Alaska Natives in 
Secondary Schools. ERIC Digest. 



Page 1 of 7 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



INFORMATION CENTER. FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT ERIC, CONTACT 
ACCESS ERIC 1-800-LET-ERIC 

This digest describes the relationship between literature and culture and shows the 
significance for students who read a variety of literature about their own and other 
cultures. No aspect of American society, however, excludes American Indians and 
Alaska Natives more completely than the accepted canons of literature. The Digest 
describes the resulting loss for American culture, but also discusses the development of 
literature by Native writers. It explains why literature written about Native Americans can 
never take the place of literature written by Native writers. 

LITERATURE AND CULTURE 

Literature is a powerful vehicle for the transmission and interpretation of a culture 
(Grant, 1986). Literature can combine knowledge and feelings in ways different from 
other disciplines such as art and music. People of all ages need to read a variety of 
literature to help them understand the principles underpinning the values and traditions 
of their own culture and the cultures of others. 

Artistic expression can be conceived, in part, as an attempt to transform "otherness" 
into "ourness" (Grant, 1986). Studying the vivid and compelling myths, legends, and 
songs of traditional Native literature helps readers understand contemporary Native 
literature and appreciate its differences from the mainstream. Two invaluable books for 
helping secondary school teachers lead students through such subject matter are 
Lerner's "Dancing on the Rim of the World" (1990) and Silko's "Ceremony" (1977). 

Literature that portrays American Indian people as an integral part of the United 
States-transforming "otherness" into "ourness"-is a relatively recent phenomenon. Too 
often, the few examples that have secured a place in the secondary school curriculum 
are inauthentic, portraying cultural information inaccurately. By and large, books about 
American Indians and Alaska Natives written by people from outside the culture are still 
viewed as the best interpretation of Native cultures. 

STEREOTYPES ABOUT AMERICAN INDIANS 
AND ALASKA NATIVES IN LITERATURE 

Much of the literature about Native Americans written by non-Natives has perpetuated 
negative stereotypes. Unfortunately, many secondary students and even Native people 
themselves have come to believe the stereotypes. 

The earliest stereotypes came from explorers and missionaries who portrayed Native 
populations as uncivilized, simple, superstitious, and innocent children of God, ripe for 
conversion and, above all, dependent on colonizers and missionaries. Indians have long 
been portrayed as incapable of metaphysical thought and as inarticulate, 
communicating by saying "Ugh" or "How." These stereotypes were maintained despite 
early Jesuit missionary reports demonstrating that Indian people had a sophisticated 



Page 2 of 7 ED348201 1992-09-00 Using Literature by American Indians and Alaska Natives in 

Secondary Schools. ERIC Digest. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



belief system. One story recorded by a Jesuit in 1645 tells of a 70-year-old Huron who 
was told that God had no pity on him because He allowed a stroke to deprive the old 
man of the use of his arm. He replied, "What! Would you wish that there were no dried 
trees in the woods and no dead branches on a tree that is growing old?" (Petrone, 1983, 
p. 11). 

As the body of literature about Indians grew, the paternalistic representation of Indians 
was generally adopted by other writers. This stereotype changed as European rivalries 
over land were brought to North America. No longer perceived as childlike children of 
God, the Indians became "blood-thirsty savages," greatly feared by enemies. 

The horrors of the Indian wars fought to secure the continent for White settlers are not 
well documented from the Indian perspective. A biography of Daniel Boone, the 
notorious Indian fighter, demonstrates how dehumanized Native people were in 
Euro-American accounts: 

Now we shot them like dogs, and then set the house on fire and 
burned it up with 46 warriors in it. I recollect seeing a boy 
who was shot near the house. His arm and thigh were broken and he 
was so near the burning house that the grease was streaming out of 
him. In this situation he was still trying to crawl along, but no 
murmur escaped him though he was only twelve years old. So sullen 
is the Indian when his dander is up that he had sooner die than 
make a noise or ask for mercy (Daugherty, 1 940, p. 24). 

With the end of the wars, frontiers were opened for White settlement. Native people 
were no longer needed for trade or wars, thus they became irrelevant to mainstream 
society except when they occupied coveted land. Colonization all over the world at this 
time was leading to the destruction of Native, or "aboriginal," lifestyles. Philosophers like 
Hobbes and Rousseau expressed concern over this wanton destruction. They 
romanticized the image of aborigines, depicting them as "noble savages" who once 
lived in perfect harmony with nature. An Aborigines Protection Association was formed 
in the late 1800s and efforts were made to assist aboriginal people. 

There is hardly a trace of what this time was like for American Indians that is recorded in 
their own words. A few Christianized Natives left records. They worked largely for the 
Protestant churches and traveled widely to raise funds. Though exploited as curios by 
the churches, they left valuable records of their impressions of the times. One example 



ED348201 1992-09-00 Using Literature by American Indians and Alaska Natives in 
Secondary Schools. ERIC Digest. 



Page 3 of 7 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



is George Henry, who traveled in the United States and Europe. He described Queen 
Victoria's mustached guards as looking "fierce and savage like our American dogs when 
carrying black squirrels in their mouths" (Petrone, 1983, p. 88). 

The final phase in the subjugation of American Indians was to place them on 
reservations where, it was hoped, they would lapse into obscurity. A few Native writers 
recorded their observations of these times, but their work was not acknowledged as 
important, and is now generally out of print. There is a movement to reprint the works of 
some of these writers. An example is "Cogewea, the Half-Blood" by Morning Dove 
(1927, 1981). 

The most recent stereotype arose about a hundred years after Indians were placed on 
reservations. As concern grew for civil rights, equal opportunity, and other social issues 
during the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, American Indians and Alaska Natives again 
received the attention of creative artists and writers. A new stereotype surfaced, as 
destructive as all the others. It is the view of Native Americans as victimized, 
dispossessed nomads, without culture and unable to cope in either the traditional world 
or in the world of assimilation and integration. 

BREAKING THE STEREOTYPE 

The importance of American Indian and Alaska Native literature is revealed when 
Natives tell their own stories unvarnished by non-Indian interpretation. Some excellent 
examples of this sort of expression are currently available to secondary teachers (see 
suggested reading list). In these works, readers learn that the rugged individualism of 
the American frontier is antithetical to the sense of community in Native societies. 
Picaresque heroes exist in Indian writing, but have trickster-like qualities. A sense of 
alienation from society is often strong, but there is healing (Grant, 1986). The quest 
theme leads back home to one's roots where elders wait to teach Native ways to the 
young who may be floundering in alien cultures or questioning traditional ways. The 
writing style is often influenced by the aesthetically powerful oral narrative from which it 
springs. The shape and content of myths and legends influence what contemporary 
writers say. Visions and dreams play a vital role in the lives of traditional Natives and 
their influences are felt in contemporary writing. 

Like all culture, Native culture is not static. Native writing, as an expression of Native 
culture, likewise continues to develop. Some writers tell stories in traditional, oral 
narrative style like their elders do; others write in a purely Westernized style like E. 
Pauline Johnson (1913, 1987) in "The Moccasin Maker." In short, Native literature 
entertains, instructs, and speaks to audiences in ways other literatures seldom do. 

CONCLUSION 

Non-Native writers today continue to portray Native people as "other" when they 
acknowledge their existence at all. It is only by creating and widely circulating their own 



Page 4 of 7 ED348201 1992-09-00 Using Literature by American Indians and Alaska Natives in 

Secondary Schools. ERIC Digest. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



literature that Native peoples can become a part of the American "ourness," and thus 
take their rightful place in the American literary canon. Native writers have been 
engaged in this work for some time, and have made many excellent offerings. It is time 
for secondary schools to take note and introduce their students to this body of work and 
make the ongoing presence of Native Americans visible to a new generation of 
students. 

REFERENCES 



Daugherty, J. (1940). Daniel Boone. New York: Viking. 

Grant, A. (1986). Monographs in education: Native literature in the curriculum. 

Winnipeg: University of Manitoba. 

Johnson, E. P. (1987). The moccasin maker. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
(Original work published 1913.) 

Lerner, A. (Ed.). (1990). Dancing on the rim of the world: An anthology of contemporary 
Northwest Native American writing. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 

Morning Dove. (1981). Cogewea, the half-blood. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 
(Original work published 1927.) 

Petrone, P. (1983). First people, first voices. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
Silko, L. M. (1977). Ceremony. New York: Viking Press. 



SUGGESTED READING LIST 

Culleton, B. (1983). In search of April Raintree. Winnipeg: Pemmican. 

m 

A moving novel of two sisters, victimized by an uncaring social service system, as they 
search for lost identities. (Metis). Grades 9-12. 

Geiogamah, H. (1980). New Native American drama: Three plays. Norman: University 
of Oklahoma Press. 

m 

A compelling set of plays told from an Indian viewpoint. These plays will give Anglo 
readers a small glimpse into the reality of Native American life. (Kiowa). Grades 11-12. 

George, J. C. (1972). Julie of the wolves. Toronto: Fitzhenry & Whiteside Ltd. 



ED348201 1992-09-00 Using Literature by American Indians and Alaska Natives in 
Secondary Schools. ERIC Digest. 



Page 5 of 7 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



An adventure story set in the Arctic that will excite even the most lethargic reader. 
(Eskimo). Grades 7-9. 

Grant, A. (Ed.). (1990). Our bit of truth: An anthology of Canadian Native literature. 
Winnipeg: Pemmican. 



A showcase of Aboriginal writing: myths, legends, traditional and contemporary poetry, 
biography, autobiography, memoirs, short stories, and excerpts of novels. Grades 7-12. 

Momaday, N. S. (1960). The way to Rainy Mountain. Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico. 



A unique blend of myth, legend, history, and personal experience. (Kiowa). Grade 12. 
Penoi, C. R. (1987). Indian time. Yukon, OK: Pueblo Publishing. 



A delightful, fast-moving romance that keeps the reader entertained throughout the 
entire reading. Grades 10-12. 

Rockwood, J. (1975). Long Man's song. New York: Dell. 



Anthropological information is woven into a suspenseful novel of pre-Columbian times. 
(Cherokee). Grades 9-12. 

Silko, L. M. (1981). The storyteller. New York: Arcade. 



A valuable collection of poetry and stories handed down from the oral tradition. 
(Laguna). Grades 10-12. 

Slipperjack, R. (1989). Honour the sun. Winnipeg: Pemmican. 



Page 6 of 7 



ED348201 1992-09-00 Using Literature by American Indians and Alaska Natives in 

Secondary Schools. ERIC Digest. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



A compelling novel full of anguish and grief, yet touched by the sensitivity and joy of life 
only Indian novelists can portray. (Ojibway). Grades 9-10. 

Welch, J. (1990). The Indian lawyer. New York: Pemmican. 



Like a true storyteller, Welch weaves metaphor with reality in this poignant novel about 
Native Americans and the penal system. (Blackfeet). Grades 11-12. 



Agnes Grant teaches at the Brandon (Manitoba) University Northern Teacher Education 
Program, where LaVina Gillespie (Cree) is a Master's Degree candidate. 



This publication was prepared with funding from the U.S. Department of Education, 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement, under contract no. RI88062016. The 
opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of the 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement or the Department of Education. 



Title: Using Literature by American Indians and Alaska Natives in Secondary Schools. 
ERIC Digest. 

Document Type: Information Analyses— ERIC Information Analysis Products (lAPs) 
(071); Information Analyses— ERIC Digests (Selected) in Full Text (073); 
Available From: ERIC/CRESS, Appalachia Educational Laboratory, P.O. Box 1348, 
Charleston, WV 25325 (free). 

Descriptors: Alaska Natives, American Indian Culture, American Indian History, 
American Indian Literature, American Indians, Cultural Education, Ethnic Stereotypes, 
Multicultural Education, Racial Bias, Secondary Education, Social Attitudes, Social 
Integration 

Identifiers: ERIC Digests, Literary Canon 
### 



[Return to ERIC Digest Search Page] 



ED348201 1992-09-00 Using Literature by American Indians and Alaska Natives in 
Secondary Schools. ERIC Digest. 



Page 7 of 7 



