DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 460 806 



RC 023 290 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Susag, Dorothea 

Native American Literature : Montana and Northcentral 
Regional Publications . 

Montana State Office of Public Instruction, Helena.; Montana 
Association of Teachers of English and Language Arts. 
1998-00-00 

66p.; Also funded by the Montana Arts Council's Special 
projects Fund. 

Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

Adolescent Literature; *American Indian Culture; American 
Indian Education; *American Indian History; *American Indian 
Literature; Annotated Bibliographies; *Childrens Literature; 
Cultural Awareness; Elementary Secondary Education; 
Multicultural Education; Reading Materials 
Authentic Materials; * Mont ana; * Native Americans; United 
States (Northern Great Plains) ; United States (Rocky 
Mountain States) 



ABSTRACT 



This annotated bibliography is designed to help Montana K-12 
teachers integrate authentic Native American literature into their curricula. 
A thematic approach to literature is encouraged, so that students may make 
meaningful connections between the classroom and their personal worlds. 
Accordingly, the entries are categorized according to the following themes 
and instructional levels: remembering the old ways (primary, intermediate, 
secondary) ; at home within nature (primary) ; at home within family (primary) ; 
at home within circles (intermediate, secondary) ; change and growth 
(intermediate) ; between two worlds (primary, intermediate, secondary) ; 
lifeways and stereotypes (intermediate, secondary); and cultural and personal 
loss and survival (secondary) . The approximately 120 entries were produced by 
Northwestern and North Central publishers, including the Montana Office of 
Public Instruction, and by seven Montana tribal communities: Blackfeet, Crow, 
Flathead (Salish/Kootenai) , Fort Belknap (Assiniboine/Gros Ventre) , Fort Peck 
(Assiniboine/Sioux) , Northern Cheyenne, and Rocky Boy ( Chippewa /Cree) . Each 
entry includes genre, theme, grade level, annotation, and the tribal 
affiliation of text or author. Approximately 60 supplemental resources 
include materials that develop awareness of Native American culture and 
history and that help educators incorporate Native literature in the 
curriculum. (SV) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 460 806 



U.8. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

'5i.'s='.r,r:r.sss«s 

originating it. 

O Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality. 

• Points of view or opinions 

ment do not necessarily represent officia 
OERI position or policy. 



--PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN.GRANTED BY 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)/’ 




Native American Literature 
Hontana and Northcentral 
l^e^ional Publications 




NATIVE AMERICAN LITERATURE 



Montana and Northcentral 
Regional Publications 

by 

Dorothea Susag 



All people are equal 
Can you see our way? 

We offer our hand In equality 
lb show you the responsibility of mutual resped. 



Jason Wise Spirit (Sioux), Ccver Artist 



Copyright (c) 1998 by Dorothea Susag. Printed by the 
Montana Office of Public Instruction, Helena, MT 59620. 



ERIC 



4 



Native American Literature: 
Montana and Northcentral 
Regional 
Publications 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Foreword 2 

At Home Within Family 4 

Introduction 5 

Adcnowledgements 8 

At Home Within Nature 10 

Bibliography: Montana and North American Regional Publications 11 

LIfeways and Stereotypes 44 

BetweenTWo Worlds 45 

Supplemental Resources 46 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 60 

Survey 61 



NaVve American Literature: 

Montana and Northcentral Regional Publications 
is sponsored by 

the Montana Assodation of Teachers of English language Arts 
and has been funded in part by 
the Montana Arts Coundi's Spedai Projects Fund 
and by 

the Montana Office of Pubiic instruction. 



I FOREWORD 

TP he purpose of this book is twofold. First, to provide teachers with a bibliogra- 

I phy of books by and about Montana’s Indians. And secondly, to encourage 

educators to use them. 

Historically, teachers in Montana have had a difficult time fin ding books that 
accurately depicted this state’s Native American population. At best, man y of 
the books have portrayed sensationahzed, stereotyped, and in some cases, wholly 
inaccurate pictures of Native Americans. In the following excerpt from George 
Gatlin and the Old Frontier (1841) CatHn presents a perspective far different 
from that of most of the popular writers of his day. He states: 

I love a people who have made me welcome to the best they had ...who 
are honest without laws ... who worship (jod without a Bible, and I be- 
heve God loves them also ... who are free from religious animosities 
who never raised a hand against me or stole my property where there 
was no law to punish either ... who never fought a battle with whitemen 
except on their own ground ... and oh! how I love a people who don't live 
for the love of money. (14) 

It has not been imtil recent times that book companies have produced books 
that one might comfortably use in the classroom with some degree of confidence 
in their accuracy., Further complicating the problem for teachers, book compa- 
nies haven’t foimd it profitable to focus their resources on a target population 
with a relatively small demand. Consequently, teachers were left with either 
httle or no choice in secvuing texts, library books, or other educational materials 
for learning about American Indians. 

One of the most respected Native American educators, authors, and activists, 
Rupert Costo, former editor of the Indian Historian Press, many times alluded 
to the problem of selection of materials for the classroom. He indicated that 
most textbooks and instructional materials are designed to appeal to the widest 
possible market, and they are often presented from an ethnocentric viewpoint. 
Native Americans and other cxiltiiral groups are frequently stereot 5 q)ed, dis- 
torted, or sometimes omitted. In Textbooks and the American Indian (1970), he 
says: “The attempt to transmit a single view results in the denial of the heri- 
tage, values, and views of cxiltiirally diverse groups in a heterogeneous society.” 

It is so important that individuals in our schools who are responsible for secur- 
ing materials about Native Americans be knowledgeable and sensitive as to 
avoid selecting materials that degrade a student’s heritage, are inaccurate or 
unfair, or perpetuate negative generalizations. By using such materials, the 
Indian and non-Indian students alike may remain iminformed,’possibly becom- 
ing more biased and prejudiced. The importance of selecting proper materials 
cannot be imderstated, as Costo goes on to suggest in the following excerpt: 

Everyone has the right to their opinion, a person has the right to be 
wrong. But a textbook has no right to be wrong, or to evade, distort, 
falsify history, or to insult or malign a whole race of people. There is a 



O Bword 

ERIC 



o 



difference between a book used for general readership and one accepted 
for classroom use. In the first case, the individual has a choice, and this 
choice must be protected. The student has no choice. He is compelled to 
study from an approved text, and in this case we must insist on truth, 
accuracy and objectivity. (11) 

Students of Montana need to leam about the rich history of Montana’s Native 
population. They need to leam about their neighbors from eleven official Indian 
tribes who live in communities throughout the state and on the seven reserva- 
tions. This fact alone offers educators a wealth of information to share and 
exchange with their students. Not only is it important for schools to provide 
information and awareness regarding the Native American for students’ recre- 
ational reading, but it is also encotu-aged by legislation and public school direc- 
tives. Article X of the Montana Constitution guarantees “equality of educa- 
tional opportunity to each person in the state.” Further, it recognizes “the dis- 
tinct and unique heritage of the American Indians and is committed in its edu- 
cational goals to preserve their cultural integrity.” Subsequently, it was with 
this concept in mind that the 1973 Montana Legislatvu^ enacted the Indian 
Studies Law encouraging schools to prescribe to the intention of the law. 

In April 1997, Montana Governor Marc Racicot signed the American Indian 
Heritage Day Bill 117, which is “An act designating the fourth Friday in Sep- 
tember of each year as American Indian Heritage Day in the State of Mon- 
tana...” Therefore, “Commemorative exercises on certain days: All districts shall 
conduct appropriate exercises during the school day on the following commemo- 
rative days: (f) American Indian Heritage Day.” 

In an effort to help teachers with book selections by and about our region’s Na- 
tive American peoples, Dorothea Susag, classroom teacher in S imms High School, 
has developed an extensive listing of books which are intended to assist educa- 
tors who seek information and materials about Montana’s Native population. 
She has spent considerable time gathering and developing materials which are 
meant to encourage teachers to include Native American literature, history, 
and culture into their regular classroom activities. This book provides the reader 
with an extensive annotated bibliography and suggested resources for teaching 
about Montana’s Native Americans in primary through secondary grades. 

Ms. Susag does not intend the list to be an end-all in books about Indians of 
Montana, but perhaps only a beginning. Teachers are encouraged to add to the 
list, make comments, and share with others. 



M.L. McCluskey, Ed.D. 
Education Considtant 
Great Falls, MT 



AT HOME WITHIN FAMILY 



Northern Cheyenne 

I come from a respectful family that’s in good health. 

I learned that goodness from the heart is good wealth. 

I come from where the fields are long and the hills are filled with trees. 
I come from where the air is cool Emd only blows with a cool breeze. 

I come from where my heart beats with the sound of a drum, 

Emd the earth Emd s^ eu^ connected because they are one. 

I come from where the mountains kiss the sky, 
and only in circles do eagles fly. 

I come from a way of life, 

where the circle begins Emd never ends. 

Jessica Bixby (Northern Cheyenne), Age 15 
Lsune Deer, MT 



O 



INTRODUCTION 



merican Indian literatures, in print and in the movies, are enjoying 
more popularity today than ever before. Romantic images of noble 
individuals living in perfect harmony with a sacred and forgotten 
landscape attract many readers and viewers. Tragic images of lands and peoples 
suffering under exploitation and cultural genocide also draw the attention of 
conscientious people on both this continent and Europe. Furthermore, the so- 
cial, spiritual, and environmental values of surrounding Native American cul- 
tures particularly interest those who reject the idea of Euro-American cultural 
superiority. 



The responsibiUty for presenting meaningful and appropriate Native American 
Uteratures to students of all ages and races has become more important and yet 
increasingly difficult because so much of the published literature represents 
non- Indian cultural voices, having been written and promoted apart from any 
specific tribal or cultural context. Also, failing to represent the American In- 
dian experience honestly, much of the Uterature reinforces negative stereotypes, 
denigrates the cultural and personal pride of Indian peoples, and denies their 
humanity and integrity. 



Believing in the undeniable right of aU children to locate their identities in the 
stories and experiences of those who have gone before, I undertookiVa^iue Ameri- 
can Literature - Montana and Northcentral Regional Pnb/icaiio ns because of my 
increasing fhistration over trying to make regional and culturally specific lit- 
eratures available to my students. 

The project formally began in the Spring of 1992 when I left my English teach- 
ing position at Simms High School for one year, having received the Montana 
1992-93 Christa McAuliffe Fellowship for the proposal: "Personal Connections 
in Time and Place Through Native American Literature — The Development of a 
Study of Native American Literature for Montana Students from Kindergarten 
through Twelfth Grade." 



At the start, several educators suggested that a resource for using Native Ameri- 
can Literature would develop fairly easily since “there wasn’t much out there.” 
They were right. The lists in catalogs from major publishing companies and 
distributors featured limited selections of legitimate and cvilturally relevant texts. 
One catalog list under “Native American” included The Woman Warrior, by 
Maxine Hong Kingston, who is Chinese American. I also found that most teach- 
ers I svirveyed were relying on ppptdar non-Native authored storybooks and nov- 
els. But once I began visiting the seven Montana tribal communities, I found 
Ufetimes of volumes of oral and written resources. 



On rt^ first visit to Browning, Blackfeet Tribal Education Director, Harold Dusty 
Bull, handed me a printed bibliography twenty pages thick and said, “Tell me 
what’s in these books.” That conversation, and the commitment of Denise Ju- 
neau (Blackfeet/Hidatsa) to work with the elders and Uterature from her com- 
munity and to provide whatever assistance she could to make sure the project 



O 



would succeed, were the beginning of the pubUshed McAuliffe Fellowship project 
which would ultimately feature annotated bibliographies of available Native- 
authored works as well as provide geographical, cultural, and historical contexts 
and educational approaches to the literature. 

In October 1998, the National Coimcil of Teachers of English will release iioote 
and Branches: A Resource of Native American Literature Themes, Lessons, and 
Bibliographies, by Dorothea Susag, illustrated by Jack Real Bird (Crow), with a 
foreword by Joseph Bruchac (Abenaki). Because this book grew too large, the 
NOTE editor recommended we publish separately the Montana section and the 
majority of the primary-level materials. Native American Literature - Montana 
and Northcentral Regional Publications is that separate publication. A neces- 
sary complement to Roots and Branches, it is specifically tailored for teachers 
and librarians in Montana, providing them with access to those K-12 Native 
American literary arts resources that Montana teachers and Native American 
cultural leaders have worked so hard to collect. 

Native American Literature - Montana and Northcentral Regional Publications 
is designed to help K-12 language arts, social studies, and science teachers to 
integrate more authentic Native American literary arts resources into their cur- 
riculums so that both Native and non-Native K-12 students will: 

® better tmderstand and value their own identities; 

* develop an appreciation for their own cultures and artistic expressions, 
especially within their conimunities and sxirrovmding landscapes; and 

• further their imderstanding of cultures and peoples who differ from 
themselves. 

Although literatures may be taught chronologically to support a study of history, 
or literatures may be taught as representative of particular genres or as a means 
of acculturation, it is the thematic study which creates the opportunity for stu- 
dents to make “meaningful and useful” connections between the classroom and 
their personal worlds. When this connection occurs, teachers can more effec- 
tively use the literatures to explore other elements of language use, such as writ- 
ing, listening, speaking, viewing, grammar, diction, style, mechanics, and genre. 
This publication encourages the thematic approach by categorizing cited works 
according to the following themes: 

Remembering the Old Ways (Primary, Intermediate, Secondary) 

At Home Within Nature (Primary) 

At Home Within Family (Primary) 

At Home Within Circles (Intermediate, Secondary) 

Change and Growth (Intermediate) 

Between Two Worlds (Primary, Intermediate, Secondary) 

Lifeways and Stereotypes (Intermediate, Secondary) 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival (Secondary) 

Annotations of Uterary arts are included from seven Montana tribal communi- 
ties: Blackfeet, Crow, Flathead(Salish/Kootenai), Ft. Belknap (Assiniboine/Gros 
Ventre), Ft. Peck (Assiniboine/Sioux), Northern Cheyenne, Rocky Boy(Chippewa/ 
Cree), from Northwestern and Central regional pubUshers, including the Mon- 
tana Office of Public Instruction, regional journals, newspapers, and magazines. 
From across the state, tribal educators have expressed their willingness to share 



r- )duction 

cHJC 



10 



stories and publications which are not regarded as sacred or ceremonial with 
teachers who will respect the local cultural traditions. 

Many tribal people have also expressed concern that those who use or tell the 
stories acknowledge and respect their cultural, historical, and geographical con- 
texts. Such concerns are not peculiar to Native American peoples. Not too long 
ago, for instance, I met a woman who was very interested in my last name; 
apparently she had known my husband’s family for years. “Is your husband as 
stingy and penny-pinching as his grandfather?” Well, I thought, how much do I 
dare share? I’d never seen this woman before. But I didn’t need to worry. Step- 
ping on the end of her own question, she shifted her shoulders and began to tell 
me the story of “Grandpa and the buttermilk.” 

Three days a week, every week of the year. Grandpa and Grandma would load 
their wagon with Grandma’s hand-churned butter, fresh cream, milk, and but- 
termilk, and drive the seventeen miles to town. Invariably, they would meet old 
friends and neighbors who would stop by the wagon to visit. On hot summer 
days. Grandpa would offer each a glass of buttermilk. “But,” she chuckled, “he 
always made sure to charge them the full price, once they were finished!” When 
I told an elder member of my husband’s family the story I had heard, she was 
noticeably disturbed. “Those people don’t understand,” she said. “They don’t 
know the way Grandpa had to live and how hard he worked! They don’t know 
the whole story! Grandpa and Gr andma survived when thousands of bankrupt 
farmers on the dust-blown Montana plains packed up and moved east!” 

Like my elder family member, these tribal people have legitimate concerns about 
sharing their stories with people from other places, times, and cultures. They 
want their stories not merely told, but vmderstood. Native people are not con- 
vinced that non-Natives can ever know "the whole story," much less communi- 
cate it without distortion to others. In an attempt to address this problem, both 
Native American Literature — Montana and Northcentral Regional Publications 
and Roots and Brancheshawe been written with one goal paramount: to particu- 
larly respect the Native voices that honestly express their own historical and 
cultural heritages and to support each student’s discovery of his/her cultural 
ties to ancient and contemporary writers. 

In truth, those of us from outside the culture cannot teach Native American 
Uteratures. But we can affirm their right to be heard and read. Although this 
text is by no means the complete Ust of Native American literature and resources, 
I hope that for teachers in Montana and beyond who might see it, it is a begin- 
ning. I hope, too, that other books will be written from these and from other 
geographical areas, specifically respecting particular and unique tribal cultures. 

Dorothea Susag 



ERIC 



Introduction Q 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 




Ithough I am responsible for putting this work together, Native American 
Literature — Montana and Northcentral Regional Publications and Roots and 
Branches represent the voices of many. For the last six years, at the Univer- 
sity of Montana, with tribal peoples from across the state, and with numerous 
educators and authors, I have been privileged to study North American tribal 
histories and cultures. Native American literatvu^s, and the writing of language 
arts curricula. 



I am greatly indebted to those whose vital contributions have made this pubUca- 
tion possible: the Department of Education and the Christa McAuhffe Fellow- 
ship Program which provided the initial funds for study . . . the Montana Arts 
Covmcil Special Projects Grant which provided funds for the final publication ... 
Authors and consultants — Dr. Murton McCluskey, Joseph Bruchac, and Denise 
Juneau, who all read and responded to a number of complete drafts, graciously 
answering my many phone calls; and Beverly Slapin, who provided expert at- 
tention and meticulous detail to the entire draft . . .the Montana Advisory Coun- 
cil for Indian Education and the Northern Cheyenne Tribal Council, who pro- 
vided written letters of support. 



Tribal elders, leaders, and tribal college personnel encouraged me and entrusted 
me with materials they considered especially relevant for their children, as well 
as for children outside their communities — ^Minerva Allen, Tim Bernardis, Bob 
Biggard, Norma Bixby, Julie Cajune, LeRoy Comes Last, Judy Davis, Harold 
Dusty Bull, Elsie Geboe, Long Standing Bear Chief (Harold Gray), Kevin Hewlett, 
Tony Incashola, Leonard Littlewolf, Dr. Joe MacDonald, Sharon Magee, Victor 
Miller, Peggy Nagel, Jennie Seminole Parker, Bob Parsley, Linda Pease, Mar- 
garet Perez, Dr. Janine Pease Pretty on Top, Anita Scheetz, Joyce Silverthome, 
Loren Stiffarm, Ron Terriault, Dr. William Thackary, and Curley Youpee. 



Principals, teachers and students who graciously responded to my requests for 
information regarding what Uteratures are available and what they believe would 
benefit yovmg people include Marge Abbott, Jeri Azure, Ron Belcourt, Maij 
Berhnger, Peggy Beswick, Laura Bleazard, Diane Boley, JeanetteA. Borchert, 
CeitoI Capps, Bill Chambers, Bernadette Dimas, Silvia Denny, Deana Dolberg, 
Sandra Evenson, Carole Filler, Josephine Corcoran, Jay Eagleman, Megan Fite, 
Alan Gardipee, Pam Geboe, Stacy Gordon, Bonnie Granbois, Laura Hafer, Kathy 
Hess, Pam Jackson, Heidi Juel, Stan and Carol Juneau, Denise Juneau, Eileene 
Karge, Peggy Kimmet, Roberta Kipp, Laima Lake, Laura Lowe, Pat Littlebird, 
Linda Littlewolf, Sharon Magee, Karin Morrison, Myrna Mitchell, Tom 
Mollgaard, Sandra Murie, Laurie Nelson, Elaine Neese, Herman and Randee 
Pipe, Avis Prentice, Tim Rosette, Frances Russette, Warren Schwartz, Mel Ser- 
geant, Carol Single, Francine Small, Diane Spencer, Bill Stops, Rusty Tatsey, 
Daisy Three Irons, Ken and Theodora Weatherwax, and Wilma Windy Boy. 



These University of Montana professors shared in the vision and guided me 
through the research and writing: Dr. William Bevis, noted authority on West- 
ern American and Montana literature; Dr. Beverly Chin, past president of Na- 



g J^Qhowledgemeni 



Its 



i 



o 



tional Council of Teachers of English and Professor of English Education, Dr. 
Richmond Clow, Professor of Native American Studies; Debra EarUng, writer of 
fiction and poetry and Professor of Native American Hteratiire; Dr. Lois Welch, 
former chair of the Creative Writing Department; and Dr. Bonnie Craig, the 
director of the University of Montana’s Native American Studies Program from 
1991 to 1997, when cancer took her life. 

My colleagues in education, friends and relatives provided invaluable encovu*- 
agement, support, collaboration, and feedback time and again when I asked 
several to read — ^and reread — drafts of sections and chapters. They include Marge 
Abbott, Clara Beier, Jan Clinard, Marg£u«t EUer, Megan Fite, Laurie Henthome, 
Donna Miller, Sandy Nypen, HoUy Pepprock, DeHa Rains, Dawn Sievers, Diane 
West-Mott, the Board of Simms High School, the administration and staff, my 
students at Simms, and the students of Poplar School who provided inspiration 
to me and written responses to many texts and lessons included in Roots and 
Branches, my own grandchildren, my mother, Louise Harrisville, my daughter 
and her husband, Lori and Hugh Maxwell, both educators, and my husband. 
Sylvan Susag, a career covmselor in Poplar on the Fort Peck Reservation. For 
their encouragement and continuing support over the last six years, I am most 
grateful. 

To these and to others I may have failed to mention who have also shared in the 
vision, to those who have contributed their own voices and translations to my 
rethinking and rewriting, and to those who beUeve in the undeniable right of all 
people to tell their own stories and the right of all children to hear and read the 
stories of their heritage, I dedicate this work. 



Dorothea Susag 



O 

ERIC 



13 



AT HOME WITHIN NATURE 



Mission Canyon 

I see the water flowing.into its big brother 
River in the sw immi ng hole so they can 
Communicate, when the birds sing and 
Fly around them 

The canyon walls look like dinosaurs 
When you are far away from them 
Because long time ago the sea 
Overflowed so the dinosaurs 
Became fossils in the canyon walls 
So they’ll be there forever 

Mandi L. Fox (Assiniboine), 5th grade, Hays, MT 



Snake Butte 

Snake Butte is a long beautiful 
mountain. It has all of the Fort Belknap 
Reservation buffalo around it. I remember 
the first time I saw it, it looked like 
a giant buffalo jump. That peirt was very 
beautiful. All of those buffalo. As I was 
riding along, I saw the biggest buffalo 
of the herd. And we looked each other in 
the eye. 

Garrett Morin (Gros Ventre), 5th grade. Hays, MT 



The Missouri River 

I see the Missouri Uke it was flowing into the rainy clouds. 

As it starts to rain and hits the water down below 
it makes a beautiful song. 

When the bees fly 

the buzz adds more deUght to the song. 

When the frogs croak 
it adds more love 

When the river flows 

it sounds like a bunch of rocks falling down the hill side. 

Then the sun comes up and the day begins. 

Dwight Flansburg (Gros Ventre) 5th grade. Hays, MT 



O 



Montana and North American 
Regional Publications 



uthor's Note: Each annotation in this section and the next is pref- 
aced with general grade level, genre, and thematic designations. In 
addition, the tribal affiliation of text and/or author(s) is included in 
the bibliographic citation. Since most Native authors regard themselves first as 
members of tribal nations and second as “Native American” or “Indian,” I have 
made references to q>ecific tribal affiliations of individual storytellers and writ- 
ers whenever possible. However, accm*ate identification of nation names is prob- 
lematic because the French, Spanish, and English conquerors and agents of the 
federal government mistranslated and misnamed them. Today, many of those 
misnomers, such as Sioux, Gros Ventres, and Crow, remain “legal” and familiar. 

As I attempted to resolve these issues for the purposes of this resource, I relied 
on publishers’ and distributors’ designations, on references within the text them- 
selves, on whatever individual storytellers and writers called themselves, and 
on Native consultants. As a result, occasionally spelling varies. I have also 
avoided assigning what some scholars consider “culturally appropriate” nation 
names, especially when the texts or writers themselves suggest differences. Still, 
I realize that nation name errors probably exist, and I would appireciate any 
suggestions that would make futiire editions more accm*ate. 

I have used the terms “Native American” and “Indian” interchangeably for two 
reasons. Many people regard the misnomer “Indian” as derogatory — ^“Colvunbus’s 
mistake” — and prefer the term “Native American,” viewing it as an attempt to 
“set things right” and to demonstrate long-neglected respect. On the other hand. 
University of Montana Professor Debra Earling (SaUsh) maintains that Native 
people, having survived 500 years of genocide, alienation, and discrimination, 
have given dignity to the term “Indian.” 

Some of the annotations that follow are more developed than others, even at the 
risk of telling too much of the story out of context, because I believe teachers 
need to see the way the values and story lines exhibited in these materials might 
compare — and contrast — with those they ciirrently use. Also, several of the se- 
lections represent primary resources for historical events. However, I would 
caution against using the descriptions of stories as included here without first 
obtaining the published materials and without establishing their place in com- 
munity, in a time, in a landscape, and for a piirpose. 



❖ Ahenakew, Freda (Cree). How the Mouse Got Brown Teeth. Saskatoon, 
Canada: Fifth House, 1988. 27 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Family 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Translated and edited by Freda Ahenakew, and illustrated in color by 
George Littlechild, this is a story about a boy who doesn’t listen to his grand- 



i5 




Ahenake»v, Freda 



Bibliography Q| 



mother. When he accidentally catches the sun, only a small mouse can free the 
sim by chewing through the snare. The story demonstrates the importance of 
listening to the wisdom of elders and the way even the smallest living beings 
can prove their worth for others^ 

♦ Allen, Minerva (Assiniboine). Basal Bilingual Readers. Hays, MT: 
Hays/Lodge Pole Schools, 1988. Illustrated in black and white by Hank 

Chopwood, Frank Cuts the Rope, and Mike Brokie. 

Genre: Traditional and Contemporary Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways (and other themes) 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Allen welcomes both Native and non-Native teachers and students to use 
these little books. Most represent traditional stories told by elders, but some 
are based on historical events. Although they are basal readers for teaching the 
Assiniboine and Gros Ventre languages at the primary level, even secondary 
students can appreciate the themes, conflicts, and traditions which they por- 
tray. 

When a Native first-grade teacher on the Ft. Peck Reservation used these 
books, she read the story in Assiniboine and then explained to her Siovix stu- 
dents that this language represents the Nakota dialect of the language their 
people speak. The students enjoyed hearing and reading the stories themselves, 
and then they participated in discussion and drawing activities developed from 
the suggested themes. 

♦ . “Bandit the Racoon.” (Assiniboine). 

Theme: Between Two Worlds 

This story may be used at all levels to teach about the problems individu- 
als experience when they five in one culture and misunderstand the rules of the 
alien culture. The story also may be used to teach about the way individuals are 
judged by their appearance. “Bandit looked Uke a bandit alright, standing be- 
hind the bars. But he was only a racoon.” Primary children on the Ft. Peck 
Reservation could understand the problems for racoon when they imagined how 
they would feel if they went to dance in a classical ballet dressed as Indian 
dancers. They also wrote different endings to the story, endings which gave 
Racoon more power. Like all of Allen’s Bilingual Readers, the text is written in 
both Assiniboine and EngUsh. Still, children who don’t know the Assiniboine 
lemguage can appreciate the importance of this language which the text affirms. 

♦ . “Chinook Winds.” (Assiniboine). 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Nature 

This is a story about the origin of warm winter winds and the way the 
elements of earth respond to the needs of htunan beings, especially when hu- 
mans respect and revere their power. When the “Chinook” winds blow, the 
temperatures may change within a few hovirs, from -10 degrees to 40 degrees 
above zero. 

♦ . “Inktomi Goes Visiting.” (Assiniboine). 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Nature 

Inktomi — Iktomi in the Nakota dialect — ^the Indians’ brother is also a 
brother to all the animals and birds. Because he is wise and cautious, he ob- 
serves the behavior of his little brothers, the snakes, and does not eat the meat 
they have poisoned. 






Native students who have heard Iktomi stories from parents and grand- 
parents especially appreciate hearing these stories read and told in school, and 
they want to tell other stories they know. 

♦ . “Pretty Flower.” (Assiniboine). 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Nature 

This is a story about the origin of the sunflower and the intimate and 
interdependent relationship between human beings and things of the earth. 
After reading the story, a primary teacher on the Ft. Peck reservation drew a 
picture of a sunflower on the board. In the petals of the flower, students wrote 
about particular aspects of the story which they remembered, and then they 
placed the name of the main character in the center of the flower. In leaves 
drawn on the stem, the students filled in the setting for the story. 

♦ . “The Fat Pig.” (Gros Ventre). 

Theme: At Home Within Family 

This story teaches the consequences of selfishness. 

♦ . “School Days at Big Warm.” (Assiniboine). 

Theme: Between Two Worlds 

“School Days” presents a positive experience in the acculturation of Indian 
children. It takes place in the mid-1900s when children traveled by horse, cars 
and wagons to a one-room day school with no electricity. The children bring 
their own Ivmches, play games and put on a play for Christmas. “It was a happy 
school.” 

♦ . “Selhng Wood in Lodgepole.” (Assiniboine). 

Theme: At Home Within Family, Between Two Worlds 

In a more contemporary story, a yovmg boy, whose family sells wood for a 
hving, demonstrates his responsibiUty to help his family without being told. 
Although the family fives in the covmtry outside a town, they still participate in 
the local market economy. 

♦ . “The Little Rat & The Big Rat.” (Gros Ventre). 

Theme: At Home Within Family 

This story teaches the negative consequences of refusing to help a relative 
or friend in need. 

♦ . “The Rat and the Cat.” (Gros Ventre). 

Theme: At Home Within Family 

A little rat frightens the bigger rats when he plays a trick on them. But 
the little rat also learns what it feels like to be chased and frightened himself. 
He later learns, “I will not play that trick on the rats!" 

^ . “Vanishing Braves.” (Assiniboine). 

Theme: At Home Within Nature 

Lost braves are fovmd when a grandmother shows a brave how to use medi- 
cine to turn trees into missing braves. The story teaches the importance of spiri- 
tual power, and the wisdom of elders and their concern for their commvmity. 

♦ , ed. Campfire Stories of the Fort Belknap Community. (Gros Ventre/ 

Assiniboine). Hays, MT: Hays/LodgePole Title IV Program, 1983. 



Genre: Traditional and Historical Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Circles, 

Lifeways and Stereotypes 
Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Through this collection, we can hear the voices of Fort Belknap elders as 
they tell the stories for their co mmunit y. 



Allen, Minerva 



♦ . Spirits Rest. (Gros Ventre/Assiniboine). Hays, MT: Hays/ 

LodgePole Title IV Program. 24 pages. Aaron Freeland, artwork; 

Claude Pablo, printing. 

Genre: Poetry 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, 

Personal and Cultural Loss and Svu-vival 
Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

Secondary graphic art students have illustrated Minerva Allen’s poetry. 

♦ . ed. Stories By Our Elders: The Fort Belknap People. (Gros Ventre/ 

Assinihoine). Hays, MT: Hays/LodgePole T^tle IV Program, 1983. 
Genre: Traditional and Historical Story 

Grade Level: Primary, Intermediate and Secondary 
Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Nature 

Illustrated by Frank Cuts The Rope and John D. Doney, this collection 
includes 35 illustrated stories told by Jenny Gray, Hank Chopwood, Lucille 
Chopwood, Wallace Chopwood, Vemie Bell, Estelle Blackbird, George Shields, 
Dora Helgeson, Theresa LamebuU, and Andrew LamebuU. 

Useful at all levels, these stories, which may be read or told, communicate 
traditional values: the importance of generosity, of personal sacrifice, of ingenu- 
ity and courage, of natural beauty, and of trusting in the power of medicine. In 
some stories, characters Uke Iktomi play jokes on others, but the stories also 
warn Usteners to watch out for those who might deceive or hvirt them. Several 
stories recreate actual events in the Ufe of the Assinihoine and Gros Ventre 
tribes. 



Assinihoine 

Memories 



♦ Assinihoine Memories: Legends of the Nakota People. Fort Belknap, MT: 
Fort Belknap Community Covmcil, 1983. 138 pages. 

Genre: Traditional and Historical Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Between Two Worlds, 

At Home Within Circles 

Grade Level: Primary, Intermediate and Secondary 
Illustrated by Harvey King and George Shields Jr., and produced by the 
Curriculum Development Project of the Fort Belknap Education Department, 
these stories represent personal accoimts of Assinihoine elders. In the introduc- 
tion, Preston L. Stiffarm tells that the Assinihoine call themselves Nakota, which 
means “The Generous Ones” in English, and he suggests these stories reflect 
the ways and beUefs “the Creator had given” this “proud and courageous people.” 
The collection of 33 stories is organized as follows: sacred stories, "the 
nucleus of their way of life”; legends, which “serve to explain unnatural phe- 
nomenon”; historical stories, which “give them a sense of being”; and humorous 
stories about Ik-Tomi, which give them “hope and laughter in a world filled with 
many trials and tribulations.” In the “Assinihoine Creation Story,” Ik-Tomi “made 
everything that we now see,” and he made seven men and seven women. Want- 
ing to locate a better place for them to live, he finds oyster shells that he and the 



lERJQogfapi^y 



< O 

io 



people float on. A fisher is able to dive down to the bottom of the lake and bring 
back clumps of mud. Ik-Tomi uses this to make the land “we are now on.” Then 
he creates a lake — Lake Winnepeg, which to the Assiniboine represents the 
center of the world. 

The Assiniboine were known to the eastern tribes as Cut Throats because 
“they delighted themselves in the throat-cutting of their enemies when in battle.” 
Later this group split so the people known as Assiniboine went to the Provinces 
of Canada and the United States. The other party was called Cut Throat (Santee 
Sioux). The name Assiniboine came from their practice of boiling water with 
hot stones. If teachers have questions about appropriate grade levels and ways 
to use these stories, they may contact Minerva Allen in Hays. 




♦ Bass, Althea. Night Walker and the Sm^oZo .(Southern Cheyenne/ author 

non- Indian). BiUings, MT: Montana Coimcil for Indian Education, 1972. 

32 pages. 

Genre: Contemporary Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Between Two Worlds, 

Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Intermediate 

In this contemporary Southern Cheyenne story. Old Man Night Walker 
tells his “great” grandsons about his days as a Dog Soldier, the most courageous 
society of Cheyenne men. He tells them about the Battle of the Rosebud; he tells 
them about White Shield’s powerful medicine which protected him and the people 
when there was danger, and he tells them about the traditional importance of 
the buffalo to the Cheyenne when he sees James carving a “living” buffalo out of 
an old walnut log. 


Bass, Althea 


♦ Beaverhead, Pete (Salish). Eagle Feathers the Highest Honor. St. Ignatius, 
MT: Flathead Culture Committee, 1978. 

Genre: Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Intermediate 

According to the Salish /Kootenai Bibliography, this is a description of 
“the role of eagle feathers in the Salish cvdture.” 


Oeaveirhead, E^efte 


❖ . Legends ofScewene. St. Ignatius, MT: Flathead Ctilture Committee, 

1978. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Olds Ways, Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate. 

These are stories about the legendaiy Bigfoot. 




O . Wild Horse Roundup. St. Ignatius, MT: Flathead Culture Committee, 

1978. 

Genre: Memoir 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Circles 

Grade Level: Secondary 

As noted in the Salish /Kootenai Bibliography, this book represents 
“Beaverhead’s memories of some of the wild horse roimdups on the Flathead 
during the early years of the twentieth century before the reservation was open 
to white homesteading.” 





o 




19 



Bibliography |Q 



Bennet, Ben 


♦ Bennet, Ben. Death, Too, for the Heavy Runner. (Blackfeet). Missoula, 

MT: Mountain Press Publishing Company, 1980., 

Genre: Historical Narrative 

Theme: Cultmal and Personal Loss and Survival, 

Lifeways and Stereotypes 
Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

With a chapter on “The Ancient Blackfeet” before 1830, Bennet begins his 
historical narrative of the Blackfeet, culminating in the tragic story of the Baker 
Massacre in the winter of 1870. Demoralized and frozen from days of travel 
without fires, a troop of yoimg military men fmm Ft. Shaw mistook the “peace- 
ful” Heavy Rimner and his band — near the Two Medicine River — for the band of 
Owl Child, the Blackfeet “renegade.” Heavy Rimner and nearly all of his band of 
Blackfeet women, children, and a few warriors were massacred. 

Bennet purposes to tell the story from the point of a traditional Blackfeet, 
incorporating Napi or Old-Man stories and using the formal and metaphorical 
rhetoric which readers may assume “sounds Indian.” “And if the raid were fa- 
vored and the raiders fortunate, many coups would be counted, many horses 
captured, and new voices heard in the councils” (7). Bennet has used available 
letters and diaries of military men involved in the massacre, suggesting that the 
personal need for glory superseded careful judgement, finally concluding that 
the massacre resulted more from a combination of unfortunate circumstances 
than from a combined and purposeful effort to kill innocent people. 

Other sources argue that Bsiker knew he was attacking the wrong camp. 
James Welch used this book as a resource for his novelFoo/s Crow, and students 
may read Bennet’s book in conjunction with their study of Fools Crow. Students 
should also examine Bennet’s bias to see where the story Bennet wishes to tell 
might overshadow the historical. 


Bilingual Readers 


♦ Bilingual Readers (Cree). Box Elder, MT: Rocky Boy Bilingual Program, 
1988. 

Genre: Traditional Story, Historical Fiction, Contemporary 

Short Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Family, 

At Home Within Nature 
Grade L<evel: Primary and Intermediate 

Teachers wishing to use these stories that teach the Cree language should 
contact Bonnie Granbois or Wilma Windy Boy at Rocky Boy. 


Boas, Franz 


♦ Boas, Franz. Kutenai Tales. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 59. 

U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1918. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: Secondary 

Boas is the same anthropologist with whom Ella Deloria worked in her 
translation of traditional stories for the publication Dakota Texts. This collec- 
tion includes the Kutenai versions of the tales as well as English translations. 
According to the Salish/ Kootenai Bibliography, it “includes a tale (269-271) which 
may refer to the 1780 smallpox epidemic as kilHng all but three Kootenais.” 


Bull Shows, Harry 


♦ Bull Shows, Harry (Crow). Legends of Chief Bald Eagle. As told to Hap Gill- 
iland. Billings, MT: Montana Council for Indian Education, 1977. 40 pages. 


lgpJ(^iography 


-0 



Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

In the introduction, Harry Bull Shows tells Hap Gilliland that he has de- 
cided to tell these stories “so our children will have them.” Gilliland has made 
every effort to keep the language as Harry Bull Shows used it, a free translation 
from the beautiful Crow. Although the English may not soxmd appropriate, 
GilUland beUeves it is most appropriate since it is closer to the Crow language. 
In this collection of stories. Chief Bald Eagle, with other birds helping him, saves 
the thunderbirds from the two-headed monster. Although the stories are excit- 
ing and fun to read, they also demonstrate the importance of personal commit- 
ment to the welfare of the group. 

♦ Chamberlain, A.F. “A Kootenay Legend: The Coyote and the Moxmtain Spirit.” 

Journal of American Folklore. Vol. 7, No. 26 (Jul.-Sept.1894), pp. 195-196. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Secondary 

David MacLaughlin, whose wife was Kootenai, told Chamberlain this story 
on September 1, 1891. 

♦ . “The Coyote and the Owl: Tales of the Kootenay Indians,” Memoirs of 

the International Congress of Anthropology. C. Staniland Wake, ed. 
Chicago, 111: Schultz PubUshing Company, 1894, pp. 282-286. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Secondary 

Several variations of a basic tale involving the Owl and the Coyote are 
included in this article. 

♦ Char-Koosta. Dixon and Pablo, Montana, November 1956- 

This pubUcation is the newspaper of the SaHsh, Pend d’Oreilles and Kootenai 
Tribes of the Flathead Reservation. 

♦ Charging Eagle, Tom (Dakota) and Ron Zeilinger. Black Hills: Sacred Hills. 

Chamberlain, SD: Tipi Press, 1987. 

Genre: Traditional Tale, Memoir, Essay 

Theme: At Home Within Circles, Between Two Worlds, 

Remembering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: Secondary 

Teaching the value of nature, respect for nature, and responsibility to tribe, 
this story provides a description of the Black Hills and their value as a spiritual 
and physical home to Dakota Indians. 

^ Cheyenne Short Stories. Billings, MT: Montana Council for Indian Education, 
1977. 32 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering The Old Ways, At Home Within Circles 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

The Introduction explains that the stories are flexible, depending on the 
situation, and that in the Cheyenne culture, there are at least three kinds of 
stories: history, tales, and moral stories. “The first two stories in this booklet 



Chamberlain, A.F. 



Char-Koosta 



Charging Eagie 



Cheyenne Short 
Stories 



Bibliography |Q 



are history. The remainder are tales.” Each of the eight stories is written in 
Cheyenne as well as English. The story, “Crossing on the Ice,” told by Mrs. 
Albert Hoffman, tells about a time when the Cheyennes lived “on the other side” 
and how they crossed a “big river” of thick ice. “Sweet Medicine,” also told by 
Mrs. Hofi&nan, foretells the coming of the person who “will destroy the things 
you used to depend on... who will take over all the land.” “The Seven Stars,” told 
by Dorra Torres, tells about the “seven sisters” in the Big Dipper. Other stories 
teach the importance of staying one step ahead of the enemy and surviving 
through wisdom rather than force. 

♦ Cheyenne Stories (tmpublished) collected by Jennie Seminole Parker 

(Northern Cheyenne), DuU Knife College, Lame Deer, MT. 7 pages. 

Genre: TYaditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Oild Ways, At Home Within Nature 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

This excellent resource provides six traditional stories: “How the Buffalo 
Himt Began,” “Eagle War Feathers,” “The Frogs and the Water Snake,” “When 
the Dogs Left the Cheyennes,” “Ant and the Grasshopper,” “Bear, Coyote, and 
Skunk,” “Why the Bear Started Walking on Four Legs,” and “The Animals Went 
to War.” Parker begins with an explanation of oral traditions and their values 
for teaching children lessons about “the importance of kinship and family obli- 
gations; the maintenance of unity and harmony between nature and mankind 
(knowing right and wrong); the reliance on nature for what it offers; the impor- 
tance of positive role models; self awareness; the celebration of vmity between 
people and nature through expression of art, music, and recreation, and the 
offering of thanks through ceremonies.” 

♦ Chief Chariot (Salish/Flathead). “Chief Chariot’s Speech of 1876.” 

Montana Journalism Review. No. 15 (1972), pp. 20-21. 

Genre: Speech 

Theme: Between Two Worlds, 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Svirvival 

Grade Level: Secondary 

In this speech. Chief Chariot speaks against a government decision that 
the Bitterroot Flathead Indians would be subject to state and local taxation. It 
was originally published in The Weekly Missoulian, April 26, 1876, page 3. 

♦ Chief Joseph (Nez Perce). Chief Joseph’s Own Story. Billings, MT: Council 

for Indian Education, 1972. 31 pages. 

Genre: As-told-to-Autobiography 

Theme: Lifeways and Stereotype, Between Two Worlds, 

Remembering the Old Ways, At Home within Circles 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

From Chief Joseph’s own words as he traveled to Washington, D.C. in 1879, 
this story poses dramatic contrast to the Chief Joseph stories by Thomasma and 
by Troll publications, which carry the Vanishing Indian and Noble Savage ste- 
reotypes. In Joseph’s translated words, he says, “I will tell you all about our 
people, and then you can judge whether an Indian is a man or not.” Joseph tells 
the story of his encounters with the government and the military before and 
after his flight and final surrender. 

♦ Clark, Ella. Guardian Spirit Quest. Billings, MT: Montana Reading 



o o 



Publications, 1974. 35 p^es. Illustrated by Alex Bull Tail. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Primary, Intermediate and Secondary 

These storiesj reprinted from other published sources, tell about the guard- 
ian spirit quests of seven individuals. The spirit quest is important to the Old 
Ways of Native American peoples. Most of the stories in this collection are Nez 
Perce stories, and the rest are Yakima, Assiniboine, Chippewa, Salish, and 
Kalispel. Although the stories represent the quests of individuals, they are as- 
sisted by the wisdom and help of elders and family members. 

♦ . In the Beginning: Indian Legends of Creation. Billings, MT: 

Montana Council for Indian Education, 1977. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Nature, 

Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

The explorer-geographer, David Thompson, first recorded “The Beginning 
of the Cree World” before the Crees* first contact with Christian missionaries. 
The Creator is displeased with Wisakedjak who has “let the creatures do what- 
ever they wished to do.” So Creator causes a fiood to destroy everything except 
“one Otter, one Beaver, and one Muskrat.” When neither Otter nor Beaver can 
recover some old earth below the water, Wisakedjak sends Muskrat. From the 
earth on his paws, Wisakedjak re-creates an island. The story concludes with a 
question about who was responsible for the rest of Creation, Wisakedjak or the 
Creator. Still, Creator takes all Wisakedjak’s power, only leaving him *^he power 
to flatter and to deceive.” “The Beginning of the Cree World” teaches the conse- 
quence of irresponsible behavior — ^the Salish in particular, or humanity in gen- 
eral, may lose forever the things they value the most. 

In the story “Creation of the Red and White Races,” Old Man Coyote grows 
lonely after Old-Man- in -the-Sky has created the world, and only Chief Beaver, 
Chief Otter, Chief Bear, and Chief Buffalo exist to keep him company. So Old- 
Man-in-the-Slgr tells him to find red earth and bring it back. While Old Man 
Coyote sleeps, Moimtain Sheep pour out the red soil and replace half of it with 
white soil. After shaping two men and two women in the darkness. Old Man 
Coyote realizes he has two different colors of people. Knowing he “can’t keep 
these two colors together. Old Man Coyote places the white ones by the “big salt 
hole,” and he takes the red ones to his own land where he can “visit with them.” 

“Creation of Three Races of People” was recorded from Chief Walking Buf- 
falo in 1954. It tells how the animals took earth and shaped “living souls.” But 
the first time they tvim out “sickly looking”; the next time they bake in the sun 
too long and bum to a black color. On the third try they are satisfied — ^the man 
had “healthy-looking skin. ..copper brown.” Each of the different races go to live 
in separate parts of the world. This story explains the difference in races, but it 
also co mmun icates the intimate relationship between human beings and the 
earth and the animals. 

❖ Comes at Night, George (Blackfeet/Flathead). Roaming Days: Warrior 

Stories. Browning, MT: Blackfeet Heritage Program, 1978. 67 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 







Comes al Night, 
George 



23 



Bibliography DU 



The history and culture of the Blackfeet people are reflected in the ten 
short warrior stories which demonstrate the powerful influence of visionary and 
magical experiences the Blackfeet people have accepted as real. They are ex- 
amples of the kind of stories told long ago that recoimt many brave deeds of 
Miah-wa, Mik-ka-pi, Eagle Head, First Rider, Iron Pipe, and White Qviiver who 
were assisted by their “secret helpers.” 

Three of the stories are short vignettes about teaching bravery to yovmg 
boys constructing a sweat lodge and feasting after a bviffalo hunt. They recount 
a piece of Blackfeet history from a time “not long ago.” According to the SaUsh/ 
Kootenai Bibliography, “this also includes a story of a Flathead or Kalispel raid- 
ing party which left some stolen Gros Ventre horses with the Blackfeet herd 
and so started hostilities between the Gros Ventre and Blackfeet— 1861.” 

♦ Cron; Bilingual Books and Readers. Crow Agency, MT: Bilingual Materials 

Development Center, 1985. 

Genre: Traditional and Historical Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways (and other themes) 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

The following elementary level books, written in both Crow and English, 
are available through the Crow School District: The Story of the Daytime Dance, 
the story of a yoimg m a n ’s vision and the ensuing ceremonial dance of the Crow 
people; Big Metal, foretelHng the future of the Apsaalooke; Old Man Coyote and 
the Ducks Search for Land, the Crow legend of creation; Old Man Coyote Does it 
a Fourth Time; An Elk, a story about the elk who didn’t get away; Mischievous 
Meets a Skunk; Meets a Turtle; the My Name Is Harold series for the Environ- 
ment Quadrant of the Crow BiUngual Curriculum; This Old Woman, the story 
of Mary Helen Medicine Horse’s “zany family;” Our Summer Trip to the Moun- 
tains; Coyote and Bluebird; and Cleora’s Little Story. Upper level Crow bilin- 
gual books include: Lodge Lining and Spring Boy, a traditional Crow legend 
about twin boys estranged from their father; Legend of the Horned Toad; With 
Grandmother, the story of a powerful and evil people who had faces on both 
sides of their heads; and The History of the Crow Tepee, the legend of Yellow 
Leggins, Ant Woman, Red Hair, and the significance of the Crow Tepee. The 
Crow Bilingual Program also includes curriculum guides, supplementary work- 
books and audio-visual materials. 

♦ Denny, Walter A. (Chippewa/Cree). Bird Stories. Rocky Boy: Transitional 

Bihngual Program 1975, 1977. 36 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Family, 

At Home Within Nature 

Grade Level: Primary 

Bom in Fort Macleod in 1911, Walter A. Denny came to the Bear Paw 
Moimtains in 1921. Having learned these legends from “his Old People,” Walter 
Denny is regarded as a great storyteller by the Rocky Boy people. The book 
begins with an explanation of the Bird People who were changed into “the kind 
of creatures we know as birds today” because some had begun to brag about 
their superiority. Consequently, “a powerful spirit was sent to change them.” 
The text of each story includes names written in the Cree lan guage using both 
Cree and EngUsh syllabaries. Each story closes with a lesson. For example: “So 
don’t think that no one sees us, no matter where we are. There is someone 
watching us from somewhere” and “So it is not right or nice to make fun of 



anyone.” These stories have been passed down by elders to teach cultural val- 
ues to children. If teachers wish to use this material, they should contact either 
Wilma Windy Boy or Bonnie Granbois at Rocky Boy Schools, Rocky Boy, MT. 

♦ . How the Turtle Got Its Shell. (Chippewa/Cree). Box Elder, MT: 

Rocky Boy Transitional Bihngual Program, 1987 

Genre: Traditional Stoiy 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Family, 

At Home Within Nature 

Grade Level: Primary 

This traditional stoiy tells about a wanderer who is often cold and wet 
imtil he meets an old man who gives him the home on his back. 

♦ . Stories From the Old Ones. (Chippewa/Cree). Harold E. Gray and 

Patricia Scott, eds. WiUiam Daychild, Illustrator. Browning, MT: Bear 

Chief Educational Consultants, 1979. 79 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Stoiy 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

This collection of 23 as-told-to stories, pubhshed for the first time, was 
made possible in part by a grant from the National Endowment for the Humani- 
ties. The introduction provides background information about Denny, the sto- 
ryteller. It also briefly explains the Chippewa-Cree storytelUng tradition, as 
well as the individual styles of the storytellers, which Denny has tried to respect 
within the limitations of printed text. Beginning with a more distant point of 
view, the storyteller moves into and is present as the story progresses. The first 
stoiy provides a brief histoiy of the Rocky Boy Chippewa and the Little Bear 
Cree who were finally granted reservation status by Woodrow Wilson in 1916 
after roaming Montana, Canada, North Dakota, Idaho, and Wyoming. 

“Moons” is one stoiy which may be used at all grade levels. In his introduc- 
tion, Denny says, “There are many stories about moons, or months of the year. 
Other Tribes also have stories about the twelve moons. But amongst my people, 
the Chippewa-Cree, there are names of moons and these are what they are sup- 
posed to do”(20). Many of the stories conclude with lessons: people should re- 
spect the behefs of others; yotmg women should not refuse to respect the wishes 
of fathers and brothers; the Chippewa-Cree tradition is important because it 
conveys the meaning of fife; it is not good to be a gossip; it is important to watch 
everything closely; truthful actions, generosity, proven courage and kindness 
are respected qualities in leaders; it is healthy for all people to bathe eveiy day; 
children should be brought up to be proud; and young people should grow up to 
be useful not lazy. 

Several stories tell about the origin of natural phenomena such as the size 
of ants, “Why Earth Worm Has No Eyes,” “Why Snake Has A Forked Tongue,” 
and one stoiy tells about the “Spirits of the Winds of the Four Directions.” To- 
day, these natural phenomena serve to remind children of the lessons revealed 
in the stories. This book may be fotmd in the Indian Resources Center Library, 
Great Falls. 

♦ . The Butterfly. (Chippewa/Cree). Rocky Boy School: Transitional Bi- 

hngual Program, 1987. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Family, 




r\ P*" 

2d 




Bibliography ^9 




Denny, Walter A. 




Dion, Joseph R 



At Home within Nature 
Grade Level: Primary 

Primary books with lessons. The Butterfly teaches children to accept them- 
selves as they are. 

♦ . Th^ Eagle. (Chippewa/Cree). Rocky Boy School: Transitional 

Bilingual Program, 1987. 

Genre: Traditioneil Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Family, 

At Home within Nature 
Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 
The Eagle teaches the custom and significance of the eagle. 

♦ Dion, Joseph P. (Cree). My Tribe the Crees. Calgary: Glenbow Musemn. 

Genre: Cxiltural and Historiced Resource 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Cultural and Personed Loss 

and Survival, Change and Growth, Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

This is the story of the Crees told by a descendant of Big Bear. Dion, who 
lived between 1888-1960, tells about his people before the coming of the Europe- 
ans and about the effects of white contact, the treaties, and settling on the re- 
serves. It is important that Dion’s book be read and studied either before or in 
conjimction with Dempsey’s or Dusenberry’s works. 



Durgeloh, Bill 



Feather Earring, 
Turns Back, 

Old Coyote, 
Puffer, Lela 



♦ Durgeloh, Bill, et.ed.(Salish/Kootenai)“Skool Loo— Legends from Here 

and There.” The Dovetail Magazine. Ronan, MT. Vol. 1, No. 2, Spring 
1973, pp. 30-40. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

This publication includes three legends from the reservation. 

♦ Feather Earring, T\ims Back, Old Coyote and Lela M. Puffer (Crow). 

Prairie Legends. Billings, MT: Montana Coimcil for Indian Education, 

1978. 32 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Family, 

Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

In the first story, “How We Got the Great War Dance,” Red Wolf learns the 
dance from watching prairie chickens. In the second story, after years of sepa- 
ration, a “Lost Boy” returns to his camp because his parents followed the advice 
of a yoimg man. In “Crow Courtship,” Sim Eagle wishes to marry beautiful 
Dawn Star. Although she gives him no encouragement, he persists and contin- 
ues to bring her presents. One day Sioux warriors captime Dawn Star, but she 
risks her life to escape and return to Sun Eagle. The fourth story, “Redman’s 
Grandfather,” begins with the creation of the earth. Of all the animals, the 
grizzly is master. After Great Spirit’s daughter marries a grizzly son, she bears 
children who were the first Indians. These stories reflect the values of close 
observation, fortitude, commitment to a purpose, and interdependence between 
humans and animEds. 



lERlC iography 



26 



♦ Flathead Culture Comrmttee. A Brief History of the Flathead Tribes. St. 

Ignatius, MT: Flathead Culture Committee, 1978. 

Genre: History 

Theme: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival, 

Remembering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

According to the Salish/ Kootenai Bibliography, this publication provides 
“a brief introduction to the history and culture of the Flathead Indians.” 

♦ Gathering. (Assiniboine/Sioux). Poplar, Montana: Fort Peck Community 

College, 1992. 43 pages. 

Genre: Poetry, Essay, Short Story 

Theme: Between Two Worlds, Remembering the Old Ways, 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: Secondary 

This is an illustrated literary magazine, published by students at the Ft. 
Peck Co mmuni ty College. 

♦ Gingras, Louie (Kootenai). Growing Up Indian: Stories from the Life of 

Louie Gingras, an 82-Year-Old Kootenai Indian. As told to Jo Rainbolt. 
Billings, MT: Montanaindian PubUcations, 1975. 35 pages. 

Genre: As-Told-To Autobiography 

Theme: At Home Within Circles, Change and Growth, 

Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

♦ . Coyote and Kootenai. (Kootenai). As told to Jo Rainbolt. Billings, 

MT: Montana Council for Indian Education, 1977. 35 pages. 

Genre: As-told-to Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

During the winters when Louie was little, his grandmother would tell him 
these hmnorous stories about the oldtimers (animals) and “Coyote and his brave 
and silly deeds,” and about the ways “Coyote got in a lot of trouble, but Fox 
always got him out of it.” When Coyote misbehaves, he is often aided by his 
friend. Fox, who is quick to point out Coyote’s mistakes. These tales teach the 
value of following directions, being yourself, and showing respect for wildlife. 
There are also tales of how Coyote prepared the animal world for the coming of 
people and how he tricked and changed animals like the owl and the mosquito. 
The stories communicate the importance of being satisfied with who we are, 
what we have, and what we can do, but they also tell about the origins of animal 
characteristics, about natural landmarks, and about the Kootenais’ conflict with 
the Blackfeet. 

♦ Glacier Reporter (Blackfeet). Browning, MT 59417. 

Official publication for Browning, MT, and the Blackfeet Reservation. 

♦ Gladstone, Jack (Blackfeet). Noble Heart, Buckskin Poet Society, Wolves 

on Sea and Plain, In the Shadow ofMt. Lassen. Audio Cassettes and 
CD’s. Kalispell, MT: Hawkstone Productions. 

Genre: Song and Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Cultural and Personal 



Flathead Culture 
Committee 

Gathering 



Gingras, Louie 



Glacier Reporter 
Gladstone, Jack 



27 



Bibliography 



Gone, Fred R 



Good Strike, 
The Boy, and 
Assiniboin, Joe 



Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

Jack Gladstone is Blackfeet. Writing his own ballads, Gladstone sings, 
plays the guitar and drum, and performs throughout the country. In “The 
Hawkstone Report” Jack Gladstone describes his latest album. Noble Heart. 
“The themes of this album are self-sacrifice, love of sport and homeland, and the 
bond of fiiendship, and the songs reaffirm a sense of awe, wonder and playful- 
ness. I employ a lot of metaphor, so interpretation can occur at whatever level 
the listener is comfortable with. Thus the songs on Noble Heart appeal to both 
children and adults.” Gladstone is a storyteller; he writes original songs, songs 
based on historical events and persons, and songs based on traditional Native 
stories. 

♦ Gone, Fred P. (Lakota/Gros Ventre). The Seven Visions of Bull Lodge As 

Told By His Daughter Garter Snake. George Horse Capture, ed. Lincoln: 

University of Nebraska Press, 1980. 125 pages. 

Genre: Biography and Culture 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: Secondary 

Healer and keeper of the Feathered Pipe, Gros Ventre (White Clay) reli- 
gious leader Bull Lodge was bom in 1802 and died in 1886. The stories of these 
visions outline Gros Ventre cultural geography, and they provide insight into 
the religion of the Gros Ventre people. 

♦ Good Strike, The Boy, emd Joe Assiniboin (Assiniboine). How Horses 

Came to the Ha’ANinin. BiUings, MT: Montana Council for Indian 

Education, 1980. 35 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Family, 

Change and Growth, At Home Within Circles 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

On July 27, 1937, at Hays, Montana, The Boy told three stories which 
Thomas Main translated into English: “How Horses Came to the Ha’A’Ninin,” 
“Red Bird’s Death,” and “Chief Mountain’s Medicine.” In the first story, a boy 
must travel to the east where he will find the Red Otter skin for his Red Otter 
Medicine Bundle. Warned of the dangers, he still continues his journey. When- 
ever he fails to follow the advice from those he meets, he suffers the conse- 
quences. Along the way, he takes pity on a little garter snake and is helped by 
a Water Monster and a Bald Eagle. Finally he meets an old man who gives him 
a Red Otter skin for his Medicine Bundle and then promises to give him horses 
if he will carefully follow the old man’s advice. Because the boy has been obedi- 
ent, a “whole herd of horses” follows him to his camp where he gives them away 
to any person carrying a rope. 

While the story is entertaining, it also communicates several important 
valued behaviors: to respect the words and advice from elders, to be generous, 
and to treat all people with kindness. 



Ground, Mary 



♦ Ground, Mary (Blackfeet). Grass Woman Stories. Janet Bailey, ed. 
Browning, MT: Blackfeet Heritage Program, 1978. 59 pages. 
Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Between Two Worlds, 

At Home Within Circles 



l ERJC ography 28 



Grade Level: Intermediate, Secondary 

During her lifetime, Mary Groimd, whose Indian name was Grass Woman, 
experienced extreme changes in the Ufe of Blackfeet Indians, from the travois 
and teepee days to the time when the reservation was a fenced compound pa- 
trolled by U.S. military. Mary Groimd told these stories to her granddaughter, 
Cynthia Kipp, during the winter of 1977-78, and the Blackfeet Heritage Pro- 
gram Culture Committee reviewed them all. The fourteen stories in this vol- 
ume are a blend of customs, folklore, and real-Ufe events in the life of the Pikuni 
people. Many, including marriage customs and childbirth rituals, reflect the 
culture from a woman’s point of view. Some of the stories tell of magical events 
that result in a lesson being taught, while others tell the true-life stories of men, 
women, and children who suffer harsh and sometimes violent consequences when 
they neglect, betray, or show disrespect for their relatives and friends. 

The most appropriate story for the Intermediate Level is “Calf Coat,” which 
communicates the interdependent relationship between h uman beings and ani- 
mals. When a young warrior is shot in the leg, and his comrades can carry him 
no longer, they stop to fix him a teepee where he might rest and heal his wound. 
Before leaving, they provide him with warm robes and dried meat. After a time. 
Coyote and Bear come to Calf Coat’s teepee and help him. After he recovers and 
he returns to his people. Calf Coat’s father — ^in gratitude — offers to feed Coyote 
and Bear, the “friends who brought [Calf Coat] home.” 

♦ Hatheway, Flora (Crow). Chief Plenty Coups. BiUings, MT: Montana 

Reading Publications, 1981. 35 pages. 

Genre: Biography 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Illustrated with black and white photographs, this little book covers the 
significant relationships and experiences in the life of Chief Plenty Coups (Crow, 
1838-1932) from the time he was ten years old to his death. 



♦ . Old Man Coyote: Crow Legends of Creation. Indian Culture Series. 

Billings, MT; Montana Reading Publications, 1970. 36 pages. 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Nature 

Grade Level: Primary, Intermediate and Secondary 
In Hatheway’s introduction, she defines Old Man Coyote Isaka Wata, “The 
Wise One, sometimes also called Old Coyote, as the father of all — ^The Creator 
and Supreme Being.... The story of Old Man Coyote’s creation of earth and man 
is very similar to our Bible story of creation.” In the “Creation of Earth and 
Man” story. Old Man Coyote sends ducks down below the earth’s covering of 
water. From one speck of mud grow trees, flowers, and then Old Man Coyote 
makes Fox to keep hiin company. But Fox is not satisfied to eat plants, so Old 
Man Coyote makes birds so the Fox won’t be always chasing the ducks. 

The story teaches the value that all creatures should remain “busy as well 
as healthy.” Teaching that all creation exists in an interdependent relation- 
ship, Old Man Coyote shows the creatures how to live to support themselves 
and how to live with each other. As he leaves his creation, he says, “Remember 
your bodies are of the earth; it came from the water, so you will use much water 
to live. Keep your bodies clean with the water, drink much water, use water to 
cook your food. Remember this and you will always be healthy and happy .” It is 
a lesson from the Old Ways which still applies today. 

O 




Hatheway, Flora 



29 



Bibliography m 



Hatheway, Flora 


♦ . The Little People: Crow Legends of Creation. Billings, MT: Montana 

Council for Indian Education, 1971. 36 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Nature 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

This collection includes the following stories: “How the Crows First Re- 
ceived Corn,” “The Gift of the Dog from the Little People,” “How the Bears Came 
to Earth,” “Buffalo Boy,” “The Crow Indian’s Introduction to Coal,” and “How 
Oil Got in the Grovmd.” They communicate humor, gratitude for those who help 
and protect the people, and the importance of ceremony for the remembrance of 
gifts. 


Hildreth, Dolly 
LIndblad, Viola 
Albent, Richaid 


♦ Hildreth, Dolly, Viola LIndblad, and Richard Albent. The Money God: 

Stories of the Modern Indian. (Taos, Navajo). Bilhngs, MT: Council for 
Indian Education. 32 pages. 

Genre: Short Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Change and Growth, 

Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: . Intermediate 

In “The Money God,” Mr. Channubii responds to a white reporter who ad- 
mires Channubii’s material wealth. “Rich? Poor? he thought, how can I tell you? 
They do not mean the same in my language and yours.” In “Jon’s Dilemma,” a 
young boy and his father conflict over the importance of education to modern 
Indian children. In Albent’s story, “Cougar Trail,” a boy experiences pride in 
tracking a cougar, “Uke Indians used to do.” The stories demonstrate the values 
of the Old Ways and their continuing relevance for Indian life today while they 
also provide means for hving in the two cultures. 


Hungry Wolf, 
Adolf and Beverly 


♦ Hvmgry Wolf, Adolf and Beverly (Blackfoot). Children of the Sun. New 
York: Quill, 1987. 203 pages. 

Genre: Children’s Story and Poetry 

Theme: Between Two Worlds, Cultural and Personal Loss 

and Survival, At Home Within Circles 
Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

This is an illustrated collection of traditional and contemporary stories by 
and about Indian children who grew up during the early 1900s. 


Hungry Wolf, Adolf 


♦ Hungry Wolf, Adolf. Good Medicine in Glacier National Park: Inspirational 
Photos and Stories from the Days of the Blackfeet People. Golden, British 
Columbia: Good Medicine Books, 1971. 




♦ , compiler. Legends from the Old People. (Blackfoot). Invermere, 

British Columbia: Good Medicine Books, 1972. 62 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Circles 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 




♦ . Legends Told by the Old People. Summertown, TN: (jood Medicine 

Book Pubhshing Company, 1972. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary, Intermediate, and Secondjuy 


lERXC'ography 


30 



With his encouragement to read these stories aloud on cold winter nights 
and to “think Good Thoughts” while reading, Adolf Hungiy Wolf begins this 
collection of 22 stories from Sioux, Mandan, Hidatsa, Assiniboine, Coeur d’Alene, 
Nez Perce, Gros Ventre, Flathead, and others. Some of the stories are origin 
tales, while others are Trickster stories. 

♦ In the New World. (Crow). Ashland, MT: St. Labre Indian School, 1988. 

Genre: Poetry 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Between Two Worlds, 

At Home Within Nature, At Home Within Family 
Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

This is a collection of poetry written by students of the Pretty Eagle School 
and the Saint Charles Mission. 

♦ Indian Reading Series. Northwest Regional Laboratories. Ichelium, WA: 

Sundance Educational Publishers, 1977-82. 

Genre: Traditional Legend and Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Family, 

At Home Within Nature, Change and Growth, 

Between Two Worlds, Lifeways and Stereotypes 
Grade Level: Grades K-6 

Intended as a supplemental reading program to help children improve read- 
ing comprehension and enhance verbal and written communication, this series 
also intends to develop and reinforce students’ positive self-image and pride. 
All of the story content has been researched, written and illustrated by Ameri- 
can Indians. The National Institute of Education, participating tribes, and the 
Pacific Northwest Indian Program of the Northwest Regional Educational Labo- 
ratory, over 250 “reservation-based planners, writers and artists” cooperated to 
produce this series which was tested for over five years. It has been used in the 
following programs: Language Arts, Indian Language and Culture, Special Edu- 
cation, Multi-cultural Awareness, Gifted and Talented, Head Start, Adult Basic 
Education, and Libraries. 

According to The Northwest Report, Northwest Regional Educational Labo- 
ratory: 

The pages are alive with the animals and birds that shared the Indian’s 
domain — coyotes and buffalo, eagles and ravens, bears, whales, and wild 
horses. Told with grace, wit and wisdom, the stories have been handed 
down over many generations from a time when storytelling was the ve- 
hicle for transmitting culture, for teaching values and survival skills, and 
for explaining natural phenomena. 

Although each of the four teacher’s manuals suggest activities to accom- 
pany the stories, almost sixty pages in the “Levels I, II, and III Teacher’s Manual” 
explain and illustrate the following teaching activities: Dramatization, Talking 
About, Retelling the Story, Writing Down, In Other Words (Making Books), and 
Word Study. “Level IV Teacher’s Manual” provides historical information re- 
garding the participating reservation communities, including Flathead, 
Blackfeet, Fort Belknap, Fort Peck, and Northern Cheyenne. “Teacher Guided 
Activities” accompany each story for this level. “Level V Teacher’s Manual” pro- 
vides vocabulary studies and science and social studies activities. The series 
also includes a parent/teacher guide. Elementary as well as secondary schools 
will find this an invaluable resource for the teaching of Native American litera- 
tures. The series includes 99 student booklets, 4 teacher’s manuals, 1 book, and 



O 




In the New World 



Indian 
Reading Series 



31 



Bibliography ^3 



1 parent/teacher guide. The series is available on ERIC, beginning with docu- 
ment number ED 258 758. 



Kammen, Robert 
Marshall, Joe 
Lefthand, Frederick 






: :v:^ 



♦ Kanunen, Robert, Joe Marshall, and Frederick Lefthand. (Dakota, 

Cheyenne). Soldiers Falling Into Camp: The Battles at the Rosebud and 
the Little Big Horn. Encampment, WY: Affiliated Writers of America, 
1992. 229 pages. 

Genre: Memoir, History 

Theme: Between Two Worlds, Cultural and Personal Loss 

and Svuwival 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

This narrative of these two battles incorporates the participants' voices. 



Kicking vybman, 
George and Moily 



■■■ 






Kipp, Neil 




♦ Kicking Woman, George and Molly (Blackfeet). Sikawakassihokaan: 

Black Deer Lodge Design, Blackfeet Lodge Coloring Book. Browning, 

MT: Browning BiUngual Program, 1990. 20 pages. 

Genre: Culture 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary 

In both Enghsh and Blackfeet, the book explains the design and use of the 
Blackfeet Lodge, using the Blackfeet elders’ Black Deer Lodge design as the 
basis of the story. An activity for students to create their own lodge design and 
to tell a story about it is suggested at the end of the book. 

♦ Kipp, Neil. (Blackfeet). Pre-Columbian History of the Red Man (before 

Anglo-Saxons). Roxarme DeMarce, editor. Browning, MT: Blackfeet 
Heritage Program, 1960. 48 pages. 

Genre: Culture, History 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Secondary 

Represeriting the author’s view of precontact Blackfeet experience, this 
book provides information on how the Blackfeet communicated with other tribes, 
the importance of children, their reUgion, and different societies. It can be used 
as an introduction of prehistoric Blackfeet history from the holistic approach. 



Kipp, Woody 







♦ Kipp, Woody (Blackfeet). “Living in the Absence of the Sacred.” Words on 
Wilderness. Newsletter of the Wildlands Studies and Information 
Center. Missoula, MT: University of Montana. Spring 1993, pp. 1-2. 
Genre: Contemporary Essay 

Theme: Between Two Worlds, Cultural and Personal Loss 

and Survival, Remembering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

Woody Kipp, a member of the Blackfeet tribe, works at the University of 
Montana as a counselor and instructor in the School of JournaUsm. His editori- 
als have been published in major newspapers across Montana. In this essay, 
Kipp contracts the Native and non-Native world views, exploring the questions 
“What is sacred?” and “What on this earth is deserving of mankind’s respect?” 
especially regarding wilderness issues such as the Badger-Two Medicine area 
and exploration for oil. This essay will work well with stories featuring vision 
quests and the value of the interdependence between humans and their sur- 
rounding landscape. It also can be used in conjunction with the following nov- 
els which deal with the conflict over natural resources and their sacred value to 




tribal peoples: Linda Hogan’s novel Mean Spirit, McNickle’s novel Wind from 
an Enemy Sky, and Louis Owens’ novel Wolfsong. 

♦ Kootenai Cultiu'e Committee. Coyote and Trout. Beaverton, Oregon: 

Educational Systems, Inc., 1978. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways , 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

This may be found in the Salish/Kootenai College Library. 

♦ . Hom; Afariin Goi His Spofe. Beaverton, Oregon: Educational 

Systems, Inc., 1978. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 



♦ Law, Kathryn. Salish Folk Tales. Billings, MT: Montana Indian Publications, 

1972. 40 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Nature, 

At Home Within Family 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

The storytellers in this collection are Sophie Adams, Eneas Pierre, and 
Agnes Vanderburg. One story tells how the animal people took away the 
mosquitos’ power. “From now on, you aren’t going to have any killing power. 
When Indians come to this world, you won’t be able to kill any of them. You will 
only be bothersome! And that is where all the mosquitos at Little Falls on the 
Spokane Reservation came from and why there are so many there today.” In 
some of these stories, the selfish or greedy monster — or inividual — ^is killed, 
especially when his/her behavior jeopardizes the life of a relative. 



♦ . Tales from the Bitterroot Valley and Other Salish Folk Stories. 

Billings, MT: Montana Indian Publications, 1971. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary, Intermediate and Secondary 
Tales is a collection of coyote stories as told by Agnes Vanderburg, Jerome 
Lumpry, Ignace Pierre and Adele Adams. In the introduction. Law tells how 
“Coyote was sent to earth by God to protect the animal people. Coyote was 
forever getting into trouble and often got killed by monsters and other evil be- 
ings. Then Fox, his brother, would bring him back to life by jumping over him.... 
When Coyote had taught the animal people all he knew, he left the earth, going 
to where the Sun rises. His wife. Mole, went to where the Sun sets. People say 
Coyote will return at the end of the world.... Today, when one person mocks 
another, they call him Sin-Cha-lay, which means Coyote in the Salish language.” 
The stories in this collection include “Coyote and Rock,” where Coyote is 
saved by two old women; “How Skunk Lost His Killing Power,” where Coyote 
restricts the Skunk’s power because he had abused it; “Mole Leaves Coyote,” 
where Coyote is left alone because of his tmwillingness to share his food with his 
family; “The Swallowing Monster,” which tells the story of why the “ant, the bed 
bug, and the wood tick look as they do today;” “The Race,” where Coyote thinks 
to win the race but drowns because he failed to heed the warning of an old 




33 



Kootenai Culture 
Committee 



Law, Kathiyn 



Bibliography El 



Long Standing 
Bear Chief 



Magorian, Jim 



lERJC°g^^p^^y 



woman; “Coyote Loses His Eyes” and “Coyote, Chickadee, and Grouse.” These 
stories show the folly in setting unreahstic goals. The stories may be compared 
with Coyote Stories by Mourning Dove. 

♦ Long Standing Bear Chief, a.k.a. Harold Gray (Blackfoot). Ni-Kso-Ko-Wa: 

Blackfbot Spirituality, Traditions, Values and Beliefs. Browning, MT: 

Spirit Talk Press, 1992. 68 pages. 

Genre: Memoir and Culture 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Circles, 

Between Two Worlds, Lifeways and Stereots^es 
' Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

This book represents a collaboration between a student from Carroll Col- 
lege, Lenore Mclfelvey Puhek, and her teacher in Browning, Long St anding 
Bear Chief, at the Blackfeet Tribal College. The chapter headings represent the 
questions Puhek asked Bear Chief, and his responses reveal his concern for 
dispelling many misconceptions about Indian people. 

According to the author, this book represents the “values [he wants his] 
children to know, xmderstand and respect.” He also admits what is written “has 
a sacred origin,” so readers should use this book with particular respect for that 
value. In the first chapter. Bear Chief explains the origins of his people’s names: 
Pikuni, Blackfoot, Blackfeet (assigned by the Federal (jovemment in 1935 since 
it indicates the plural). Blood. He also explains the enemy origins of other tribal 
names: Cheyenne, Sioux, Cree, and Navajo. Following chapters include discus- 
sions about many aspects of the Uves of contemporary Indian people from the 
author’s point of view, especially.the Pikunis Uving on the Blackfeet Reserva- 
tion. 

♦ Magorian, Jim. Keeper of Fire, f Cheyenne). BilUngs, MT: Council for 

Indian Education, 1984. 78 pages. 

Genre: Historical Fiction 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Change and Growth, 

Lifeways and Stereot 3 q>es 

Grade Level: Intermediate 

After his Cheyenne father is killed in the battle of the Little Greasy Grass 
(The Little Big Horn), Shanni experiences a vision where he is called notio be a 
mighty warrior; instead he is called to be The Keeper of Fire — ^the guardian of a 
mighty power for his people. Under the direction of Old Badger, the medicine 
man, Shanni studies the Cheyenne traditions so he might bring honor to his 
father’s name. However, he is separated from his tribe when white soldiers 
attack a Cheyenne hunting party and only Shanni survives. On his journey to 
rejoin his Cheyenne people, he meets a fiiendly family of homesteaders who 
treat his woimds, feed and house him, and teach him some of their language. 
Shanni helps them fight a wild prairie fire. When he hears the prairie fire 
speaking to him in a “voice puUing him deeper into the jagged flames,” he is led 
to rescue their child fi*om the midst of those flames. Shanni has learned he has 
the power to create and destroy fire. 

Although the author is non-Indian, this short novel lacks the romanticism 
and simphstically polarized view of Indian- white relations which dominates much 
contemporary literature about Indian peoples. Instead, Keeper of Fire portrays 
both Indians and whites in a realistic coming-of-age story. Teachers may use 
this in combination with more romanticized historical works about Plains Indi- 
ans. 



31 



♦ Many Guns, Tom (Blackfeet). Pinto Horse Rider. Browning, MT: Blackfeet 
Heritage Program, 1979. 67 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Stories and History 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

As part of an effort to preserve oral tradition and produce a history about 
the Blackfeet people, Tom Many Guns related the story of his life in his native 
language, revealing the rich cvdtural heritage of the Blackfeet. Gathering these 
recollections through interviews, translators used every effort to preserve Tom 
Many Gun’s narrative style. Excellent reading material, this collection includes 
legends and personal stories either experienced by Many Guns or handed down 
to him. 


Many Guns, Tom 


♦ Martinson, David (Ojibway). Manabozho and the Bullrushes. Duluth, MN: 
School District 709, 1975. 34 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Manabozho is the Ojibway Trickster/Transformer figure. According to 
Slapin and Seale, in Through Indian Eyes, this is “an exemplary story about the 
consequences of pride, anger, competitiveness, and excess.” 


Martinson, David 


♦ . (Ojibway). Shemay/The Bird in the Sugarbush. Dvduth, MN: School 

District 709, 1975. 29 pages. 

Genre: Contemporary and Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Circles 

Grade Level: Primary 

Illustrated in color, this is a contemporary story about a grandmother who 
tells a story and a girl with a special sensitivity for the sadness of a bird. 






❖ McDonald, W.H. Creation Tales from the Salish. BilUngs, MT: Montana 

Council for Indian Education, 1973. 32 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Circles 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

This collection of eight Coyote stories begins with the creation of the earth. 
In the first story, Amotken follows his mother’s advice, creates Coyote, and gives 
him power to be the special helper of “wicked” human beings “until they learn to 
get along.” Although Coyote is falhble and the “fool” of his pride, he uses his 
wits and his power fium Amotken “to make the world safe for the human people.” 


McDonaid,W. H. 


♦ Mogor, Robert A. (Salish /Kootenai). Flathead, Kutenai, Pend d'Oreille 
Flannelboard Stories. Mimeo. St. Ignatius, MT: Native American Cul- 
timal Awareness Program, St. Ignatius Elementary School District, 
1975-76. 

Genre: History and Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Cvdtural and Personal Loss 

and Survival 

Grade Level: Secondary 

These are traditional and historical stories of the Confederated Tribes drawn 
primarily from Char-Koosta, the Salish/Kootenai tribal newspaper. 


Mogor, Robert 



o 




35 



Bibliography 



Nicholsen, John 


♦ Nicholsen, John. Chii-la-pe and the White Buffalo. (Crow). Billings, MT: 

Montana Covincil for Indian Education, 1981 (1941c). 41 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Nature, 

At Home Within Family, Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

When a boy befriends and protects a white buffalo calf, the buffalo bull 
grows to return, year after year, “bringing comrades [more buffalo] so.. .the Crows 
will never be hungry.” At the beginning of this book, RosaHe BearCrane, Crow, 
says: “This story is a vivid portrayal of the adventures of a young Indian boy 
during the era when Plains Indians relied on the buffalo to survive. It is a 
beautifully written characterization of the boy, interspiersed with mystery, cul- 
ture, tradition, and history, which can stir the emotions of yovmg readers and 
would spark the imagination, even without the superb illustrations. A true 
picture of the life of our people.” The story teaches that rewards come to those 
who demonstrate respect and compassion for others. In this story, the reward 
comes to all the Crow people because of Chii-la-pe’s respect for the white buffalo 
calf. 


Old Coyote, Elnora A. 
Reyhner, Jon 


♦ Old Coyote, Elnora A. and Jon Reyhner, eds. Teepees are Folded: American 

Indian Poetry. Billings, MT: Montana Council for Indian Education, 

1991. 44 pages. 

Genre: Poetry 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Circles, 

Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

Although the specific tribal affiliation for each poet is not mentioned, the 
poems do represent a variety of backgrovmds. This is contemporary poetry which 
connects with the Old Ways while it also reflects the issues which so many yovmg 
Indians experience today. The following Hnes are from a poem by Don Watson 
regarding the importance of the Old Ways: Like “a drink of water held within/ 
the cupped hand.. .that precious liquid sHpping away/becomes a matter/of Hfe/ 
and death.” The speaker warns of a time “when the old ways will be needed by 
all people...” AU of these short poems are written primarily by Plains Indian 
poets, and they sing of “The Old Ways” of Buffalo days and “folded” teepees, they 
sing of a “Summer Afternoon” and Grandmother’s ‘Winding Fingers,” and they 
tell their stories of culture conflict and survival. 


Old Coyote, Henry 
and Barney 


♦ Old Coyote, Henry and Barney Old Coyote (Crow). Crow Stories. Crow 
Agency, MT: Crow Tribal Publication, 1985. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

This local publication includes three stories: “Saga of Red Bear,” “Story of 
Spotted Horse,” and “Story of Rabbit Child,” as translated by Henry Old Coyote 
and Barney Old Coyote. The pubUcation includes a Crow alphabet and pronun- 
ciation guide and an appendix of the Crow Tribal structure. 


Old Coyote, Sally 
Toineeta, Joy 
Yellowtail 


♦ Old Coyote, Sally and Joy Yellowtail Toineeta. Indian Tales of the Northern 
Plains. Billings, MT: Montana Covmcil for Indian Education, 1971. 31 pages. 
Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Family 




J 0 



Grade Level: Primary and IntiSnnediate 

Six stories from various tribes comprise this collection. The Blackfeet story, 
“Napii and the Bullberries,” may be compared with Goble’s hooklktomi and the 
Berries, where the Trickster/Transformer is tricked by the reflections of berries 
in the water. The story teaches a lesson about the folly of pursuing illusions as 
though they are reality. 

In the Crow story, “Chipmunk and the Chick- A-Dees,” while Chipmunk is 
out gathering pine cones for winter, he hears Chick-a-dees playing hide-and- 
seek. Chick-a-dees stop to help him fill his hole, but when they finis h, all the 
older Chick-a-dees have left the young ones behind. Because the Chick-a-dees 
help him. Chipmunk offers to share his nuts with them throughout the winter. 
And that is the story of how the Chick-a-dees became “snow birds.” Many les- 
sons are present in this story, but it certainly demonstrates the advantages of 
cooperation between individuals who are different. When they behave like rela- 
tives, they are At Home Within Family. 

In the “Blackbird and the Buffalo” Arapahoe story, blackbird marries a 
buffalo cow. After a time, she retiims to her people and takes their only son 
with her. The blackbird goes to the buffalo people to ask for his son, but is told 
he must prove himself first. Although this story involves two very different 
animals, it communicates the problems which occur when individuals from two 
different worlds marry. However, the story also demonstrates that strength and 
wisdom will be respected and rewarded, even by an enemy. 

“The Girl and the Horses” may be compared with Goble’s story The Girl 
Who Loved Horses. When a girl’s parents forbid her to marry a certain warrior, 
she becomes separated from her people and joins a herd of horses. The story 
ends with an explanation of the Native belief that h uman s can change forms. 
“In this case the warrior changed into the stallion. In another version of the 
story the girl changed into a horse, too.” The story may also be used to illustrate 
ways humans, plants, and animals still change from one form or behavior to 
another. 

♦ . Indian Tales of the Northern Rockies. Billings, MT: Montana Indian 

Publications, 1971. 31 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

This collection includes several short tales from the Gros Ventre, Flathead, 
Crow, Shoshone, Blackfeet, and Nez Perce. “How the Animals and Birds Got 
Their Names” was recorded by Nez Perce Headstart Teachers, and it tells how 
the “Great Indian Maker, who ruled over the world, called on the wise Coyote” 
to give animals and birds their names. In this story he names Skunk, Deer, 
Bluebird, Bear, and Raccoon. 

♦ Recollections of Fort Belknap’s Past. (Gros Ventre/Assiniboine). Fort 

Belknap Community Council. Fort Belknap, MT: Fort Belknap 

Education Department, 1982. 204 pages. 

Genre: Memoir 

Theme: Cultural and Personal Loss and Svu*vival, 

Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

From 1910-1945, the survival of the Gros Ventre and Assiniboine people is 
demonstrated in these twenty recollections of tribal elders. Morris “Davy” Belgard 



O 




Recollections of 
Fort Belknap's Past 



37 



Bibliography 



Reese, Montana 
Lisle 



Reyhner, Jon 



erIc 



is credited with recording these stories and Linda (Gone) Miner for transcribing 
them. According to Preston L. Stiffarm in his introduction, “these people dem- 
onstrate through their stories, an intense desire to not only preserve their unique 
way of life but to be part of the overall effort to improve the lives of the whole 
tribe and not just themselves.” 

♦ Reese, Montana Lisle, ed. Legends of the Mighty Sioux. Interior, SD: 

Badlands National History Association, 1987. 158 pages. 

Genre: Traditional and Historical Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Gathered by Reese and Indian workers of the South Dakota Writers’ Project, 
this collection represents the traditional Sioux stories, as told in their own lan- 
guage. The Rosebud Sioux Tribal Council read the material and endorsed the 
book, and the University of South Dakota, and the Dakota Department of Public 
Instruction were also instrumental in its publication. Although elders and pu- 
pils in rural elementary schools suggested the pictures, Oscar Howe, Indian 
artist of the South Dakota Art Project, completed the drawings. 

The collection is organized into five sections: “The Mighty Sioux,” which 
includes the land, life, the life of boys and girls, and the traditions of songs and 
stories; “Traditional Lore,” which includes creation stories and stories providing 
answers to questions of natures; “Canapfire Tales,” with several stories about 
Iktomi; “Legends of Places,” such as “The Black Hills” and “Standing Rock”; and 
“Himting and Battle Stories,” which concludes with the story “Sitting Bull’s 
Dancing Horse.” Many stories in Legends of the Mighty Sioux are two to three 
pages, and an illustration accompanies each one. Because this collection has 
the support of the tribal and educational co mmuni ties in South Dakota, it should 
be considered a reliable and usable resource for teaching Sioux legends from 
Primary through Intermediate levels. 

♦ Reyhner, Jon, ed. Stories of our Blackfeet Grandmothers. Heart Butte and 

Billings, MT: Council for Indian Education, 1984. 23 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story and Memoir 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Between Two Worlds, 

Personal and Cultural Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

Based on stories told by Blackfeet elders to students at the Heart Butte 
School during the spring of 1983, this book describes Indian life in early Mon- 
tana during the time of Indian Agency control. The stories reveal information 
about trading, preparation, and eating of rationed food, farming and gardening, 
tribal relocation \mder Agency direction and attitudes toward land. “The Story 
of Blackfoot Ridge” describes raids between the Crows and Blackfeet and an- 
other contains reminiscences about how the Pikunis lived before the white man 
brought liquor to the Indian. A glossary of place names in English and Blackfeet 
is also provided. 

^ . Heart Butte, A Blackfeet Indian Community. Heart Butte and 

Billings: Coimcil for Indian Education, 1984. 24 pages 
Genre: Photographic Essay 

Grade Level: Primary 

A collection of photographs published by the Heart Butte Bilingual Pro- 
gram depicts student life in Heart Butte with first-grade English and Blackfeet 



33 



captions. A Blackfeet glossary of words used is appended. 



♦ Rides at the Door (Blackfeet), and Darnell Davis, compiler. Napi Stories. 

Browning, MT: Blackfeet Heritage Program, 1979. 38 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

All Blackfeet People knew of Napi, from the serious side of his creation to 
the foolish and spiteful deeds he performed. He could talk with all living things, 
and he teased and pulled pranks many times on himself and others. His actions 
began a cycle of existence. Although each family had its own interpretation of 
the various Napi stories, each story has a co mm on mored. Through these sto- 
ries, it is hoped that Blackfeet children and others will begin to obtain an under- 
standing of the Blackfeet people. Full page black and white illustrations by 
Blackfeet artists Barbara GUham Aubert, Tracy Rutherford, and Kenny Doore 
accompany the stories. 

♦ Roop, Peter (Blackfeet). Little Blaze and the Buffalo Jump. Indian Culture 

Series, Stories of the Blackfeet. Billings, MT: Council for Indian 

Education, 1984. 28 pages. 

Genre: Historical Fiction 

Theme: Change and Growth, Remembering the Old Ways, 

At Home Within Circles 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Little Blaze, a Blackfeet boy, experiences jeedousy and anger when his fa- 
ther chooses another to be the buffalo runner. Little Blaze wants to prove he is 
grown up, and even dreams one night of being the buffalo r unn er himself. On 
the day of the stampede, his brother falls in front of the running buffalo herd, 
but Little Blaze runs to pull him to safety. As a reward, his father gives him his 
new name — Charging Bull. The story teaches the values of respect for elders 
and others, humility, and responsibility to clan, group, or tribe. 



♦ . (Blackfeet). Sik-ki-mi. Heart Butte Bilingued Program and Billings, 

MT: Council for Education, 1984. 23 pages. 

Genre: Story 

Theme: Change and Growth, Remembering the Old Ways, 

Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

This children’s story, illustrated by Shawn Young Running Crane, is the 
story of Eagle Head, who proves his bravery as he faces the first steamboat on 
the Yellowstone River and recapttxres his chiefs favorite buffalo horse, Sik-ki- 
mi, in a raid on a Crow camp. His coxirage wins him the right to ride the horse 
in races against the Atsinas. 



♦ Rudolph, Stormy. Quest for Courage. Heart Butte School and Billings, MT: 
Coxmcil for Indian Education, 1984. 102 pages. 

Genre: Young Adult Novel 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Intermediate 

Quest for Courage is one of a series of stories of the Blackfeet which takes 
place when the tribe was at the height of their power during the early 1800s. 
Lame Bear, a boy who has been crippled by a broken leg, overcomes his handi- 



ERIC 



Rides at the Door 



Roop, Peter 



Rudolph, Stormy 



Bibliography 



39 



Ryniker, Alice 
Durland 



Salish Culture 
Committee 



cap in the pursuit of a wild stallion that has eluded the greatest of all warriors. 

♦ Ryniker, Alice Dtu*land. Eagle Feather for a Crow. Kansas City, MO: The 

Lowell Press, Inc., 1980. 71 pages. 

Genre: Story 

Theme: Change and Growth, Remembering the Old Ways, 

Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Alice Durland Ryniker taught art at Rocky Moimtain College, Bilhngs, for 
twenty-three years, and she and her husband have hved near the Crow Reser- 
vation. Set on the Crow Reservation at the time of Chief Plenty Coups, this is a 
story about a boy, Charley Little Otter, who longs to ride his uncle’s pinto mare. 
Ignoring the warnings of Plenty Coups, Charley moimts the mare and rides into 
the moimtains without permission. There he is bucked off the. horse when a 
rattlesnake scares her, and Charley is left alone on the sacred mountain. In a 
vision, he sees the Little People and receives an eagle feather for his bravery. 

Through this e^^erience, Charley Little Otter learns that “One must work 
to become wise. A foolish person [who does nOt think carefully before he acts] is 
not honored for long.” Ryniker demonstrates a sensitivity for the day-to-day 
cultural traditions of the Crow as well as for their hardships. 

♦ Sahsh Culture Committee. Coyote and the Man Who Sits on Top, and 

Coyote and the Mean Mountain. Beaverton, Oregon: Educational 

Systems, Inc., 1978 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Both stories are pubUshed individually and illustrated for young readers. 

♦ . Salish Coyote Stories. Beaverton, Oregon: Educational Systems, Inc., 

1979. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

This is a collection of stories for the fovirth-grade reading level. 



Salish/Pend D'Oreille 
Coyote Stories 



♦ Salish/Pend D’Oreille Coyote Stories. SaUsh Flathead Culture Committee 
of the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, 1981. 79 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Secondary 

Compiled by Clarence Woodcock, Director of the Flathead Culture Com- 
mittee, this collection of stories is used in a Native American Studies class and 
is available in the Salish/Kootenai College Bookstore. Several stories resemble 
Mourning Dove’s Coyote Stories, but nothing has been edited from these — ^they 
are transcribed from the tellings of contemporary tribal elders. Consequently, 
they are best taught by teachers who are very familiar with Salish and Pend 
D’Oreille culture and storytelling tradition. 



Spirit Talk 



♦ Spirit Talk. Volume 1, Number 1, Summer 1994. Browning, MT: Spirit 
Talk Press. 44 pages. 

Genre: Essay, Poetry, Traditional Story 



O 



ERIQography 



40 



Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Lifeways and Stereotypes 

Grade Level: Secondary 

Long Standing Bear Chief Mii-sa-mii-pai-poi-ii Nii-nohk Kyi-yo(Blackfopt) 
is the publisher of this first edition of a new quarterly magazine. This volume 
begins with a message from the publisher wherein he defines the title, philoso- 
phy, intended audience, and his welcome for readers to “a magazine in celebra- 
tion of Indian culture. May you always walk in a sacred manner and in beauty.” 
Glossy color photos by Layout and Design Editor Celeste River and others ac- 
company a variety of articles and poetry featuring “what non-Indians have come 
to discover about the spiritual traditions of native peoples, and what indigenous 
people have been practicing all along.” 

The journal also includes two book reviews, an article about “Hollywood’s 
Rediscovery of American Indians,” and a list of stimmer “Celebrations in Indian 
Covmtry” fh)m across the nation. This journal may be used as a classroom re- 
source, but it also wiU work as a supplemental text, especially for courses in 
Native American literature or culture. 

♦ Spirit Whispers Three: St. Ignatius Anthology of Student Writing. 1992-93. 
(Salish^ootenai). St. Ignatius, MT: St. Ignatius High School Writing 
Lab., 1993. 123 pages. 

Genre: Poetry and Prose 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Circles, 

Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: Primary, Intermediate and Secondary 
This is the third issue of Spirit Whispers. This and other issues present 
the art, poetry, prose, and reading, typing, designing, editing, and organizing of 
St. Ignatius students, grades 7-12. In a letter to readers, Sarah Reeve says: 
“Hear our students remember childhood games, mourn lost friends, recovmt 
shared events, encovmter wildhfe, and celebrate traditions... when you’re done 
reading, share this anthology with a friend. It is a gift to us from our children.” 
In “Racoon,” Nacoma Gainan (Sahsh), a seventh-grade student, teUs a story 
which emphasizes the problems for individuals who are judged because they 
look hke “criminals, even though [they] never did anything to deserve the kind 
of treatment” they got. This may be combined with Minerva Allen’s bilingual 
story about “Racoon the Bandit.” Made possible through a federal Title VII bi- 
lingual grant. Spirit Whispers is a beautiful book that teachers can use to read 
aloud to students of all ages. 



Spirit Whispers 
Three 



♦ Sta-Al-TSA-Nix-SIN: Ghost. (Blackfeet). Browning, MT: Blackfeet 
Heritage Program, 1979. 47 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

This collection includes various Blackfeet authors: Bill Big Springs, Sr., 
Louie Fish, Tom Fo\md A Gim, Francis Potts, Annie Short Robe R unning Crane, 
Mike Swims Under, Dave Wells, and Vernon No Runner, Illustrator. Told and 
heard in different cultmes throughout the world and centered on incidents or 
experiences that are true but cannot be easily explained, ghost stories such as 
these are universal. 

These are stories told in the winter; in contemporary Blackfeet hfe, they 
are told primarily for entertainment and for social control. Traditionally, they 
were told to reinforce Blackfeet religious beliefs, to expleiin events that were 



Sta-Al-TSA-Nix-SIN 





Bibliography 



m 



Swaney, Thomas 
"Bearhead" 


forewarned, and to link the known with the unknown. These stories are a part 
of Blackfeet culture that is still intact. 

♦ Swaney, Thomas “Bearhead” (Salish/Kootenai). "Bearhead’ Swaney 
Takes Strong Stand.” Montana Indian Health Board Newsletter. 

BiUings, MT. Vol.l, No. 1, Oct. 1978, pp. 4-6. 

Genre: Oratory 

Theme: Between Two Worlds, Cultural and Personal Loss 

and Survival 

Grade Level: Secondary 

This is the text of a keynote address for the September 1978 meeting of the 
Montana Indian Health Board at Bilhngs, Montana. According to the Salish/ 
Kootenai Bibliography, Swaney comments on the need for Indian unity and also 
some of the things going on in the health area on the Flathead. 


Tales from the 
Longhouse 


♦ Tales from the Longhouse. (Salish). British Columbia Indian Arts Society. 
1973. 112 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Prepared by Grandmothers, these books are written by Indian children 
who learned the stories from their older relatives. They may be used as ex- 
amples for story (re)telling activities for children from all cultures. 


Tall Bull, Henry 
Weistlbm 


♦ Tall Bull, Henry (Cheyenne) and Tom Weist. Cheyenne Fire Fighters. 

Billings, MT: Montana Reading PubHcations, 1971. 39 pages. 

Genre: Story 

Theme: At Home Within Circles, Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Intermediate 

In this contemporary story, Cheyenne fire fighters battle a fire in the Bob 
Marshall Wilderness west of Great Falls, Montana. Students value this book 
because it provides evidence of living Indian heroes. 

♦ . Cheyenne Legends of Creation. Billings, MT: Montana Cotmcil for 

Indian Education, 1972. 32 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

The introduction to this collection suggests these stories may represent 
the “oldest surviving form of oral literature known to man.” The stories begin 
with Maheo, the Creator, turning mud into dust to make the “earth we walk 
on.” Maheo makes man to live in the south, and woman to live in the north, and 
he shows them the migratory patterns of birds and how the seasons will change. 
In the “The Great Race,” the buffalo men hold a race to settle the conflict be- 
tween humans and the buffalo. 

After the magpie wins the race for the people, the buffalo bull promises to 
supply the people “with meat, skins, and bones,” and he promises to teach the 
people “how to give a Sim Dance.” These stories teach about the interdepen- 
dent relationship between human beings and the animals, as well as between 
human beings and their environment. The stories also teach the importance of 
ritual and ceremony for the perpetuation of the good life. 


Igpj^Cliography 


42 



♦ . Cheyenne Warriors. Billings, MT: Montana Council for Indian 

Education, 1983. 32 pages. 

Genre: Biography 

Theme: Rememhering the Old Ways, Change and Growth, 

Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

The stories of six 19th-century Cheyenne warriors and their battles, as 
told hy those who participated in these events, are recounted in this collection. 
In the 1830s Big Head, a warrior and leader of the Kit Fox Society, led a war 
party of Cheyennes against the Utes and Shoshoni to take horses. Although 
seriously wounded and left for dead hy his men, he survives and retimis to his 
people. 

The second story about Mouse’s Road’s death in battle with the Kiowas 
and Commanches took place in 1837, and it comes from the Kiowas, since none 
of the Cheyemies hved to tell his story. “Perhaps the greatest honor a warrior 
could receive was that the story of his bravery be told and retold by his en- 
emies.” 

The third story is about White Bull, the most well-known medicine man 
among the Northern Cheyenne. The fomth story is about a Cheyerme woman 
warrior, Ehyophsta, Yellow Haired Woman, who died in 1915. 

The last two stories feattu*e Sun’s Road, who fulfills a vow in battle, and 
Bull Could Not Rise Up, who risks his hfe to recover his friend. Although the 
names may not sound famihar to those who are not Cheyerme, these men repre- 
sent the character and bravery which Cheyerme people today still admire and 
honor. 

♦ . (Cheyenne). Grandfather and the Popping Machine. Billings, MT: 

Montana Council for Indian Education, 1970. 32 ps^es. 

Genre: Autobiography 

Theme: At Home Within Family, Change and Growth, 

Between Two Worlds, At Home Within Circles 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Without taking one driving lesson, old man Raven buys the first Ford owned 
by a Cheyerme. Assuming he will understand the machine since he knows how 
to “break horses,” Grandfather takes his grandson, Johrmy, on an adventurous 
ride from Fors 5 i;h to Lame Deer. Although the stories in this collection repre- 
sent the effects of culture conflict on reservation people, they are delightful and 
humorous stories that all. grade levels can appreciate. 

♦ . (Cheyenne). The Rolling Head. Billings, MT: Montana Council for 

Indian Education, 1971. 31 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

Several plains tribes have tales about the rolling head, and in his introduc- 
tion to the story. Hap Gilliland tells how this tale is still told today. 

♦ . (Cheyenne). The Spotted Horse. Billings, MT: Montana Reading 

Publications, 1970. 32 pages. 

Genre: Story, History 

Theme: At Home Within Family, Remembering the Old Ways, 

Change and Growth 





Tall Bull, Heniy 
Welst, Tbm 



Bibliography ^ 



Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

This is the story of a Cheyenne hoy who breaks a horse, saves the herd, 
and learns how to hvmt buffalo from his father. In the end. Swift Hawk gives a 
feast in honor of his son’s accompUshments. “I am so proud of him and what he 
has done. I have invited you here so that you may share my happiness.” Inter- 
mediate level students enjoy the action in the story while they can experience 
the positive relationship between a father and son. The story also demonstrates 
the contemporary yet traditional Cheyenne custom of giving a feast to honor 
individuals for their accomplishments. 

♦ . (Cheyenne). The Winter Hunt. BilHngs, MT: Montana Coxmcil for 

Indian Education, 1971. 31 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story, Historical Fiction 

Theme: Change and Growth, At Home Within Family, 

Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

This short collection relates three stories that teach the values of wisdom, 
courage, bravery, and commitment to relatives. In the first story. Little Thvmder’s 
father returns home with frostbitten feet and no game. Little Thunder decides 
he must do the hvmting so his family can eat. The wolf helps him find the 
buffalo; and when Little Thunder returns to camp, the medicine man tells him 
that the wolf is now his medicine: “he is wise, able to take care of himself, and 
knows how to surprise his enemies.” The other two stories are entitled “Snake 
Medicine,” and “Horses for the Cheyenne.” 

♦ . VeHo: Cheyenne Folk Tales. Billings, MT: Montana Reading 

Publications, 1971. 32 pages. 

Genre: Traitional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Ve’Ho, the Cheyenne Trickster/Transformer figure is disgmsed as the 
“White man,” who is both clever and fooUsh. In this collection, Ve’ho has the 
adventures of “Pltims in the Water,” “The Elk Skull,” “The Lost Eyes,” “Catch- 
ing Fish,” and he has an adventure with “his fiiend. Coyote.” Through these 
stories, children can be entertained while they learn the importance of being 
very observant and cautious; they can learn also to use ingenuity in solving 
problems. 

♦ Tatsey, John (Blackfeet). The Black Moccasin-Life on the Blackfeet Indian 

Reservation. Paul T. DeVore, editor, and introduced by Mike Mansfield. 

C.W. Hill Printers, 1971. 

Genre: Essay and Memoir 

Theme: Between Two Worlds, Lifeways and Stereotypes, 

Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Secondary 

This is a collection of Tatsey*s weekly columns for the Glacier Reporter of 
Browning, MT, during the late 1950’s and early 1960’s. Born in 1894, Tatsey 
writes about many aspects of contemporary tribal life, including insights gained 
from his eighteen years as a Blackfeet tribal policeman. Also included is a ver- 
batim transcription of tape recordings made by Tatsey where he interprets 
Blackfeet names, legends, and tribal ceremonies. The illustrations are by Albert 
Racine. 



♦ Teit, Janies A. (Salish/Pend d’Oreille). “Pend d’Oreille Tales.” Memoirs of 

the American Folk-Lore Society. Vol. II, 1917, pp. 114-118. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Secondary 

Included in this book are six Pend d’Oreille tales related by Michel Revais. 

♦ Throssel, Richard. Blue Thunder, Crow Indian Legend. Billings, MT: 

Montana Indian Publication Fund, 1976. 31 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

The story of the conflict between Little Light (Son of the Morning Star) and 
Blue Thimder (Crow) teaches the tragic consequences of selfish competitiveness 
and disregard for the responsibilities between friends. When two friends are 
matched against each other in an arrow shooting contest, the loser forgets “all 
the traditions of friendship and generosity” and grows bitter when Little Light 
wins. However, the yoimg man proves himself to the Thimder Bird and earns 
adoption, giving him the right to be called Blue Thimder. Other events follow, 
and the story ends with the affirmation that the yoimg boy’s spirits are “at last - 
united in friendship.” 

♦ Through the Eyes of an Indian. Browning, MT. 

This weekly publication serves the Blackfeet Nation. 



♦ Van Ahnen and Joan Azure Yoimg Bear. Charlie Young Bear. Billings, MT: 

Montana Coimcil for Indian Education, 1991. 32 pages. 

Genre: Story 

Theme: At Home Within Circles, Change and Growth 

Grade Level: Intermediate 

This story is based on an 1955 incident in Tama, Iowa, when the U.S. Gov- 
ernment paid the Mesquakie Indians for past treaty rights. With the money, 
Charlie Yoimg Bear’s mother will get a new stove, his father will get new tools, 
and Charlie asks his grandfather for a bicycle. He prays and makes offerings to 
the Great Spirit. One day his grandfather drives the truck to town and returns 
not with a stove, not with tools, but with a truck full of shiny silver bicycles for 
Charlie and all his friends. From this experience, Charlie grows to appreciate 
gifts and the importance of making offerings to the giver. 

♦ Wagner, Curly Bear (Blackfeet). Curly Bear's Blackfeet Stories. Hawkstone 

Productions, 1996. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Nature, 

At Home Within Family 

Grade Level: All levels 

This audio cassette of seven Napi stories and the stories “Scarface” and 
“Why the Mountains Are Sacred” is an excellent resource for use in the class- 
room. An experienced storyteller, Wagner tells the stories, asks questions of the 
audience, and explains the important morals or traditional values in each. In 
his capacity as the Blackfeet Cultural Director, Wagner successfully worked to 
return the skeletal remains of 29 tribal members to Montana from Washington, 
DC. He has worked to register the Sweet Grass Hills in the National Register of 




A 



Teit, James A. 



Throssel, Richard 



Through the Eyes 
of an Indian 



Van Ahnen 
Young Bear, Joan 
Azure 



Winner, Curly Bear 



Bibliography Q| 



Historic Landmarks and has constantly toiled to identify and preserve sacred 
sites in and around the Blackfeet Reservation. Curly Bear Wagner is the great 
grandson of Chief Red Crow, and he continues to tour the U.S. speaking on 
Blackfeet history and culture. 

♦ War Stories of the White Clay People. (Gros Ventre). Curriculum Develop- 

ment Project. Fort Belknap, MT: Fort Belknap Education Department, 

1982. 138 pages. 

Genre: Traditional Story and Memoir 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Cultural and Personal Loss 

and Survival 

Grade Level: Primary, Intermediate, Secondary 

According to Preston L. Stiffarm, Fred Gone Sr., a tribal member, recorded 
these stories in the original local syntax. They tell of the days when the White 
Clay People followed the buffalo. Most of the stories are accounts of personal 
exploits, but others are of “unusual events that happened in Gros Ventre 
history.. .which served to explain unnatural phenomenon that occmred in their 
daily Uves. The White Clay people lived in a harsh and brutal world but they 
Uved to siuvive and prosper amidst trial and tribulation and to tell of their 
exploits in their circle of life that the Creator had given to them.” 

“Grows Tallest — A Tepee” is a story from the “early days of the Gros Ventre 
Tribe” about a yovmg man who follows a dream. While pursuing the commands 
in his dream. Southern Rabbit changes from being fooUsh to wise and is given 
the name Wolf Neck Lace. After his people see how his wisdom can help them 
also, he is elevated “to the highest ranks of chieftain as well as medicine man.” 
This is a complex story, but teachers can read it to students, episode by episode. 

♦ Weisel, George F. Ten Animal Myths of the Flathead Indians. Anthropology 

and Sociology Papers, No. 18. Missoula, MT:University of Montana, 1959. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Th erne: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

According to the SaUsh/ Kootenai Bibliography, this is a popular 
collection of Flathead animal, tales as told by Ellen Big Sam. 

♦ Weist, Katheryn. Belle Highwalking - The Narrative of a Northern Cheyenne 

Woman. BilUngs, MT: Montana Covmcil for Indian Education, 1982. 

66 pages. 

Genre: Memoir, Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Circles, 

Between Two Worlds, Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

At 79 years, the half-sister of John Stands in Timber told Katheryn Weist 
the stories she had heard and lived through on the Northern Cheyenne Reser- 
vation. Those reservation years brought dramatic change to the Cheyenne people, 
and this memoir blends Cheyenne cultural ways with historical events and gov- 
ernment programs as they affected the people. With sadness she tells how times 
are different now, since people have moved to town: they eat white-man’s food 
and their teeth fall out; the men are educated and forget how to work, and they 
forget their relatives and drink too much. But she writes this memoir so her 
grandchildren will know what it was like for her and their people in the Old 



Days. Several stories featvire the Trickster character, but wise women succeed 
in outsmarting him. Although her stories are frequently tragic, her sense of 
humor, her personal strength, and her love of and co mmi tment to her people 
and especially her grandchildren sinvive in this memoir. Because of the sensi- 
tivity of some sexual issues, teachers should select the readings. 



4 Woodcock, Christine (Salish/Kootenai). How the Chipmunk Got His 
Stripes on His Back. St. Ignatius, MT: Flathead Cultiu^ Committee, 
1978. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

With illustrations, this is a traditional animal story. 



Woodcock, Christine 




4 Woodcock, Clarence (Salish/Kootenai). "The Heritage of the Flathead: Woodcock, Clarence 

Worthy of Centennial Preservation.” Montana: Magazine of Western 
History. Vol. 14, No. 2. April 1964, pp. 120-121. 

Genre: Ess^, Memoir 

Theme: At Home Within Circles, Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: Secondary 

This article calls for the preservation of the Flathead heritage. 

4 Wotanin Wowapi. (Assiniboine/Sioux). Poplar, MT: Fort Peck Reservation. Wotanin Wowapi 

A weekly newspaper of the Fort Peck tribe. 




Bibliography QQ 



LIFEWAYS AND STEREOTYPES 











BEING INDIAN IS: 

In mind being Indian is: 

:putting up with whites' ways. 

:having yoim opinion not coimt. 

:being treated as if we are not supposed to be here. 
:being limited to land in oim own coimtry. 

:being watched extra closely or even 

being rejected by white owned stores. 

:not being able to speak oiu* native tongue. 

:being the butt of white jokes. 

:being called "prairie nigger" in white towns. 

:having some t hink we don't exist anymore. 

:being known as drunken dirty savages. 

:people just turning their heads when an Indian accomplishes 
something which gains attention. 

:being put at the bottom of the list or at the end of the line. 
:being better than whites at sports but 

only being recognized with om own kind. 

:having to be better than most just to break even with them. 

BEING INDIAN WILL PROBABLY BE MY HARDEST JOB IN LIFE. 

Scott Azime (Sioux/Assiniboine) 

Age 16, Poplar, MT 



Gratification * 

Through the great big swinging 
doors imder the double arches, I sway 
slow and cool up to the clean, shiny 
counter. The clerk steps over from the fries 
bringing a warm, greasy smell with her smile. 

I order the $2.99 bacon double cheese burger 
with fries, sweet *n sour sauce, I don’t supersize. 
She beeps the register, grins and repeats 
my order like it fills her life 
to take my money. I pay, she makes me 
a frozen meal. I think. This lady is really nice, 
so I leave her a tip. As I walk out I look 
back at her snatching the money 
like it was food. 



Drew Dumont (Salish/Kootenai) 
Age 14, Charlo, MT 



* Reprinted with permission - originally published in 
1998 SIGNATURES FROM BIG SKY 






In Between 

If I am Indian, and 
I am white 

does this make me the 
one who causes the 
fight, or does this make 
me half less than 
the white man 
Why can’t we get 
along, we are not 
half or less, we 
are of all one 
equal race in God’s eyes 
mankind. 



Jamie Gorder (Sioiix) 
Age 16 
Poplar, MT 



I Am Me 

I will not let them invade my space 
to judge my looks or eternal race. 

I hold my head high 
My q>irit ever more alive. 

I am free 
I am me. 



Jessica ThreeFingers 
(Northern Cheyenne) 
Age 16, Lame Deer, MT 





BETWEEN TWO WORLDS 



SUPPLEMENTAL RESOURCES 



All My Relations 




uthor's Note: The resources listed in this section are intended to supple- 
ment the bibliography of Montana and regional Native American literatme 
with materials that develop awareness of Native American cultme and his- 
tory and that help educators incorporate Native American literature in the cm*- 
riculmn. 



♦ All My Relations: Sharing Native Values Through the Arts. Catherine Verrall 
and Lenore Keeshig-Tobias, Compilers. Canada: Canadian Alliance in 
SoUdarity with Native Peoples, 1988. 

Genre: Story, Poetry, Drama, Art, Song 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, At Home Within Family, 

At Home Within Natiu^, At Home Within Circles 
Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Intended primarily for non-Native teachers of children in grades K-6, "this 
kit is for parents, group leaders (Brownies, Guides, Clubs, camp, religious edu- 
cation...) and others who care. ..[about] discovering Native values in stories and 
music, poetry and symbols.. .[and] expressing these values through creative 
drama, words, songs, art, and action.... Inspired by the Elders, child-tested, com- 
piled by a teacher [fior the survival of all the grandchildren — ^bird and tree and 
fish and 4-legged, as well as human. And for the survival of our mother the 
Earth.” 

Using the words of David Suzuki, Basil Johnston, Chief Dan George, and 
Chief Seattle, “The Beginning” offers an introduction to the purpose of this pub- 
Ucation. The “Stories” section featiires Cree, Okanagan, Seneca and Wabenaki, 
Ojibwe, Salish, and Iroquois stories. The “Poetry” section shows children how to 
“make a poem.” The “Symbols” section illustrates the following: Circle; all my 
relations; Mother Earth; Thanksgiving; 4 Elements— air, water, fire, rock; Moon/ 
Calendar; and Understandings of Drum, Elders, Feather, Hair, Moon, Pipe, Pow 
wow, Sweetgrass, Tobacco, Tree of Peace, Trickster, Turtle Island, and Wam- 
pum. Primsiry and Intermediate teachers find this an essential tool for provid- 
ing their students with creative, comprehensive, and authentic lessons from the 
Original Peoples of this land. 



Ashabranner, Brent 



♦ Ashabranner, Brent. Morning Star, Black-Sun. New York: Dodd, Mead and 
Company, 1982. 

Genre: Environmental, Cultmal, and Sociological Resomce 

This book examines the issue of strip mining for coal and its impact on the 
reservation communities, specifically the Northern Cheyenne. 



Bevas, William W. 



^ Bevis, William W. Ten Tough Trips, Montana Writers and the West. Seattle, 

WA: University of Washington Press, 1990. 

Genre: Literary Criticism 

WilUam Bevis is Professor of Enghsh at the University of Montana in 
Missoula, where he has estabUshed himself as a significant authority on the 
Uteratiire of Western America and of Montana in particular. Believing that 
discussions about literatiu^ should involve all people, Bevis has worked with 
the Montana Committee for the Humanities to bring his expertise and western 




esources 




0 



literatures to the general public. Clearly defining his terms, and drawing the 
reader into more personal co mmuni cation through his use of the understood 
“you,” Wilham Bevis succeeds in making Uterary scholarship accessible to lay 
readers through these “personal essays for a general audience.” 

Ten Tough Trips addresses issues of western identity through three phases 
in Montana’s Uterary history; stories “set in that nineteenth century of empire 
and hope”; works of Native American culture and literature from the late 1930s, 
including the collaborative works of Linderman and Plenty-Coups, and the sto- 
ries and novels of D’Arcy McNickle, and James Welch; and the “final phase, 
1960 to the present,” where realism shifts to psychological modernism. 

Most important for readers of Native American Uteratures, as well as for 
those who would better understand the “western” mind, is the essay “McNickle: 
Homing In”(92-108). Here Bevis explains the concept of “primitivism,” that 
“nature” is the opposite of civiUzation; it is this notion which “shapes the ex- 
treme ‘white plot”* in Uteratures. Going West, Europeans and Americans were 
frequently fleeing civiUzation, to advance “with little or no regard for family, 
society, past, or place.” 

Fxirthermore, Europeans expected — (and Americans still do expect) wild 
and unciviUzed Indians — since the Indians inhabited the American West. Con- 
trasting this view with the tribal world, Bevis goes on to describe that world as 
revealed in memoirs and contemporary novels. “... most Native American nov- 
els are not about going out, diverging, expanding, but about zooming in, con- 
verging, contracting.” The search for identity, for the Native American charac- 
ters in contemporary novels, “is not a matter of finding ‘one’s self,’ but of finding 
a ‘self that is transpersonal,” with respect to “society, past, and place.” As a 
result of western expansion, “European individualism came face to face with 
Third World tribaUsm” in a “huge coUision of cultures and values.. .The result- 
ing conflicts and misimderstandings continue to this day.” 

His second essay, “Native Nature: Chickadee Jive”(109-116) deals with 
“primitivist expectations of the sacred earth prior to the evils of civilization,” 
and the contrasts between that notion and the Native American world, as exhib- 
ited in the novels of McNickle and Welch: ““Mother Earth’ is not wild. Nature is 
part of tribe ... impredictable and various.” Ten Tough Trips is an excellent 
resource for teachers as weU as students, especiaUy for understanding the works 
of McNickle and Welch. 

♦ Bowker, Ardy (Eastern Cherokee). Sisters in the Blood: The Education of 

Women in Native America. Newton, MA: WEEA Publishing Center, 1993. 

354 pages. 

Genre; Cultural, Historical, and Sociological Resource 

In Sisters in the Blood, probably the most comprehensively researched study 
of Native Americans in education and of women in particular, Bowker examines 
the history of Indian education; racism and stereotyping; American Indian drop- 
outs; the correlation between substance abuse, problems with the law, low self- 
esteem, mental health problems and pregnancy with family background and 
school factors. Part 2 reflects the information gained when “American Indian 
female high school dropouts and high school and college graduates talk about 
their lives,” and Part 3 addresses solutions based on the information gained 
from the research. 

One of BowkeFs most positive conclusions relates to her attitude towards 
young Native American women: 

“...I completed this study with a renewed sense of pride in being a 'Sister 




Di. 



Bowker, Ardy 



Resources Q 



Brewer, Linda 
Skinner 


in the Blood.’ The women in this study demonstrated a striking ethos of 
family support, independence and interdependence (not dependence), and 
resourcefulness. Memy of them shouldered the burden of family responsi- 
bilities, often at great cost to emy personal ambition. And however painful 
their personal experiences were and are, they have maintained their com- 
mitment to family emd, in the majority of cases, to their traditional values 
and cultures” (267). 

Some Montema reservation school districts have made this book mandatory read- 
ing for teachers in the school system; emd with Bowker’s conclusions regarding 
the critical position of teachers in the lives of these women, it is easy to see why 
they have made such a decision. 

♦ Brewer, Linda Skinner (Choctaw). 0 Wakaga: Activities for Learning 

About the Plains Indians. Seattle, WA: Daybreak Star Printing, 1984. 40 
pages. 

Genre: Educational Resource 

Grade Level: Primaiy and Intermediate 

Beverly Slapin and Doris Seale, in Through Indian Eyes, respect this book 
because it is informative, with “a remarkable amount of information on lifeways 
Emd language, with accurate phonetic speUings, which is unusual for a children’s 
book.” 


Bryan, Wiiiiam L 


♦ Bryem, William L. Montana’s Indians: Yesterday and Today. Helena, MT: 
Montana Magazine, Inc. 1992. 

Genre: History, Geography, Culture 

Grade Level: Intermediate emd Secondary 

This book presents the geographic, economic, historical, and cultural situ- 
ation of each of the seven Montema Indiem Reservations: Crow, Cheyenne, Flat- 
head, RockyBoy (Chippewa/Cree), Ft. Belknap (Assiniboine/Gros Ventre), 
Blackfeet, Ft. Peck (Assiniboine /Sioux). It includes a short history of the people 
emd interviews about contemporary issues with leaders on those 
reservations. 


Carriker, Robert C. 


♦ Carriker, Robert C. The Kalispel People. Indian Tribal Series. Phoenix, 
Arizona lUniversity of Arizona Press, 1973. 

Genre: Historical emd Cultural Resource 

Theme: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival, 

Between Two Worlds, Lifeways and Stereotypes 
Grade Level: Secondary 

According to the Salish/ Kootenai Bibliography, this is “em interesting and 
well written high school level history of the Kalispel Indians of Washington 
State.” 


Crow Fair 


♦ 1993 Crow Fair: 75th Diamond Jubilee. August 18, 1993. 

A special supplement from the Billings Area Newspaper Group Newspa- 
pers. 


Crummeitt, Michael 


❖ Crummett, Michael. Sundance: The 50th Anniversary Crow Indian Sun 
Dance. Helena, MT: Falcon Press, 1993. 92 pages. 

Because for over half a century, such ceremonies were forbidden by federal 
law, a 50th Anniversary of the Sun Dance for the Crow is especially important. 


- R I r" asources 


sr O 



This book is beautifully illustrated with photographs taken during the anniver- 
sary celebration. 

♦ Curtis, Edward. 1970. The North American Indian. Vol. 4: The Absaroke or 

Crows. New York: Johnson Reprint. (1909c) 244 pages. 

Genre: Historical and Cultural Resource 

This book provides a cultural review of the Crow and Hidatsa peoples: 
tribal organization, arts, social customs, daily life, history, rehgion and ceremo- 
nies, war and the chase, myth and legend, and songs. 

♦ Dempsey, Hugh A. Big Bear: The End of Freedom. Lincoln, Nebraska: 

University of Nebraska Press, 1984. 198 pages. 

Genre: Biography 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

While teaching a covirse at Rocky Boy Reservation during the summer of 
1974, Hugh Dempsey met Big Bear’s grandson. Four Souls. After listening to 
many stories “about Big Bear and his family and of the terrible struggle the 
Cree had gone through to gain a reservation in Montana after the Riel Rebel- 
lion,” Dempsey decided to pursue research which would lead to the pubhcation 
of this biography. Big Bear: The End of Freedom tells not only Big Bear’s story, 
but also the story of the Cree people — their culture and social systems; the mi- 
gration from the north-central woodlands to the plains in Canada and Montana; 
conflicts with Blood, Blackfoot and Crow people; varying relationships with the 
Assiniboine and the Ojibwa people; himting and trading practices with both 
Indians and whites; and their impoverishment and death due to the disappear- 
ance of buffalo, starvation and disease. 

Born in 1825, Big Bear, a respected warrior leader, was also a holy man 
who trusted the power of his visions to lead him. Even as a yoimg boy, he had a 
vision of the coming white man. Relying on extensive research, Dempsey goes 
beyond biography to cover the Louis Riel rebellion against the Canadian gov- 
ernment, especially as it involved Big Bear and his people. Dempsey’s depen- 
dence on dociunentation and on the remembered stories of Big Bear’s descen- 
dants makes this a credible historical work. Intermediate and secondary stu- 
dents will find Big Bear: The End of Freedom both interesting and readable. 
Dempsey beheves the “bottom line of the whole dispute” between the Indians 
and the Canadian government was “himger,” suggesting that the government 
could have avoided the terrible violence had they begun their “agricultural pro- 
gram" earlier: “Big Bear had tried to sow the seeds of co mmuni cation and coop- 
eration between Indians and whites, but the seeds had fallen on barren'ground.” 
Other books by Dempsey include: Crowfoot, Chief of the Blackfeet, University of 
Oklahoma Press; Indian Tribes of Alberta, Glenbow Museum Press; Red Crow, 
Warrior University of Nebraska Press. 

♦ Dusenberry, Verne. The Montana Cree. Almquist and Wiksell, 1962. 

Although this represents the most comprehensive study of the Montana 
Cree, some elders in the Rocky Boy community resisted its pubhcation because 
of the sacred nature of some material. 

♦ Fahey, John. The Flathead Indians. Norman, OK: The University of 

Oklahoma Press. 1974. 

Genre: History 



Farr, William E. 



This book is part of a series on American Indians published by The 
University of Oklahoma Press. 

♦ Farr, William E. The Reservation Blackfeet, 1882-1945: A Photographic 
History of Cultural Survival. Washington: University of Washington 
Press, 1984. 210 pages. 

Genre: Historical and Cultural Resource 

This resource is a photographic study of the Blackfeet, covering a time 
span of 63 years. Photographs have been gathered from many private collec- 
tions, depicting the dignity of the people. According to Denise Jimeau, Blackfeet/ 
Hidatsa educator and native of Browning, Montana, written captions reflect a 
strong bias by the author making references to “squaw men,” portraying full- 
bloods as less capable, less intelligent than mixed-bloods. Facts are accurate 
but some opinions of the author are questionable. The book helps the student 
visualize Blackfeet tribal history, cultural values and lifestyle. Through the 
photographs one could make a comparative stu(^ of the great changes the People 
have imdergone in a short period of time. 



Fedullo, Mick 



♦ Fedullo, Mick. It’s Like My Heart Pounding: Imaginative Writing for 

American Indian Students. Ogden, Utah: Moimtain West Educational 

Equity Center, Weber State College, 1990(c). 

Genre: Educational Resource 

Mick Fedullo now lives on the Crow Reservation in Pryor, Montana. He 
has taught writing to Indian students throughout the United States, and this 
excellent publication represents his educational philosophy, his approaches for 
the teaching of imaginative writing, and eighteen specific assignments which 
may be adapted for all grade levels. 

Chapter One: “Copyright; Plagiarism; Words Not to Use; Titles; Stanzas; 
When and How to End a Poem; Rhythm; The Matter of Rhythm; Revision.” 
Fedullo recommends this curriculum for grades four through nine, but any of 
the lessons may be adapted for lower or higher grades. Even teachers who have 
little experience with writing poetry will find this resource easy to use. 

Chapter Two: “Setting the Mood; Technical Terms; Focusing; Writing Time; 
Creative Silence; Positive Criticism.” 

The eighteen lessons “follow a sequence which advances from an emphasis 
on learning new expressive language techniques to exploring both personal and 
tribal values, while always involving the students in writing their own experi- 
ences.” Fedullo has foimdthat older students are more interested in the values, 
and so he suggests teachers might want to “work backwards, or mix up the 
value-oriented lessons with the technique-oriented lessons”(vii). 

Fedullo suggests his “Formula for Success” is the “four- step” pattern: 

(1) Model poems, (2) discussions, (3) writing time, and (4) oral reading of work 
Fedullo doesn’t intend to create a multitude of “Indian poets;” instead he wants 
to “take the fear out of writing” and to “build the self-confidence so necessary in 
completing an education and facing the future.” Evidence of his program’s suc- 
cess exists in the enthusiastic commimities of poets he leaves behind, and in the 
increasing number of publications which feature his students’ poetry. No other 
“Imaginative Writing” resource for teaching Indian children, or for teaching non- 
Indian children who are living in commimity with Indian peoples, can equal this 
one. 

❖ Fedullo, Mick. Light of the Feather. New York: William Morrow and 



ERIC 



esources 



Company, Inc., 1992. 256 pages. 

Genre: Memoir 

In an easy-to-read narrative, Fedullo, an adopted Crow, discusses his ex- 
periences with the various tribal groups and the way those experiences caused 
him to drop his own stereotypes for more reahstic images of Indian peoples to- 
day. Light of the Feather can he used as a resource for discussion of contempo- 
rary Indian Ufe among different tribes, but it can also be used to discuss stereo- 
types and the way individuals overcome them. 




♦ “Finding Your Roots.” No. 2364. Carson, CA : Educational Insights, 1978(c). 

Through self-examination, through interviews with family members, and 
through other individuals in their communities, this activity provides direction 
for intermediate and secondary students to discover and examine their heri- 
tages. The second activity directs further research into heritage, using old news- 
papers, marriage and death certificates, inscriptions on books, family Bibles, 
etc. The final activity looks at historical migrations of all peoples. 


Finding Your Roots 


♦ Fitzgerald, Michael 0. Yellowtail: The Medicine Man and Sun Dance Chief 
Speaks of the Sacred Ways of the Crow. Norman, OK; University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1991. 234 pages. 

Genre: Cultvire and Biography 

In the preface, Fitzgerald comments: "This book is intended to give us in- 
sights into the reUgious center of the Crow Indians through the eyes of Thomas 
Yellowtail.. .Modem society, with its materiahstic outlook, has orientations com- 
pletely opposite the concepts of the old-time Indians and of those present-day 
Indians faithful to their heritage." 

Told in first person, Thomas Yellowtail closes his memoir with the follow- 
ing words: 

No one person is to blame for our present state. Everyone who fails to Uve 
up to his spiritual duties causes further problems for everyone. Therefore, 
I tell people, "Don’t criticize your neighbor; that will not help anyone. It is 
not good to fight Indian against Indian; it just makes matters worse. Work 
on yourself first; prepare yourself to meet your Lord." 


Fitzgerald, Michael 0. 


♦ Flannery, Regina. The Gros Ventre of Montana. Washington: CathoUc 
University Press, 1953. 

Genre: Culture and History 

Dr. Flannery met the Gros Ventre through Father Cooper and obtained 
her stories from some of the oldest women in the tribe. 


Flannery, Regina 


♦ Gildart, Bert. “Mary Ground: A Memory of Two Centuries.” (Blackfoot) 

The Great Falls Tribune. Great Falls, Montana. March 4, 1990. 

Genre: History 

Theme: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival, 

Lifeways and Stereotypes 

Grade Level: Secondary 

When Grass Woman (Mary Groimd) died on February 8, 1990, she had 
lived 107 years and had seen nearly two centuries of change. This lengthy ar- 
ticle tells about her own Ufe as a Canadian Blackfoot and the way her people 
survived through starvation, disease and war. Grass Woman was a woman who 
kept the ways of her people alive for the yoimg today. 


Gildart, Bed 


ERIC 


Resources QQj 



Gilham Sr, Dan 


♦ Gilham Sr., Dan. Handbook ofBlackfeet Tribal Law. Browning, MT: 
Blackfeet Heritage Program, 1979. 73 pages. 

Genre: Law Resource 
Grade Level: Secondary 

This book offers a brief history of Indian law and order, outlines all of the 
laws that are in place on the Blackfeet Reservation and dehneates the maxi- 
mum sentences and fines if these laws are broken. 


Grinnell, George Bird 


♦ Grinnell, George Bird. The Fighting Cheyennes. Norman, OK: The 
University of Oklahoma Press. 1955. 450 pages. 

Genre: History 

One of a series on American Indians. 


Hansen, Bert 


♦ Hansen, Bert, Consultant and Writer. Historical Dramas. Missoula, MT: 

University of Montana, 1947-1960. 

Genre; Drama 

Theme: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival, 

Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level; Secondary 

This collection includes eighteen mimeos, articles, a speech and a disserta- 
tion by Hansen. They cover community dramatic productions of historical events 
and people aroimd the Flathead and Bitterroot Valleys. According to iheSalish / 
Kootenai Bibliography, Hansen was trying to educate the people about the Indi- 
ans to increase intergroup understanding. 


Harrison, Michael 


♦ Harrison, Michael. “Chief Chariot’s Battle With Bureaucracy.” (Salish). 
Montana: The Magazine ofWestem History. Vol. 10, No. 4, Autiunn 
1960, pp. 27-33. 

Genre: History 

Theme: Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level; Secondeuy 

According to the Salish /Kootenai Bibliography, this article tells the back- 
ground and story of the struggle of Chief Charlo to remain in the Bitterroot 
Valley and especially General Garfield’s 1872 visit to the Bitterroot Valley to 
negotiate with Charlo. 


Hassrick, Royai B. 


❖ Hassrick, Royal B. The Sioux: Life and Customs of a Warrior Society. 
Norman, OK: The University of Oklahoma Press. 1964. 

Genre; History 

This book is part of The University of Oklahoma Press series on American 
Indians. 


Hirschi, Ron 


❖ Hirschi, Ron. People of Salmon and Cedar. New York: Cobblehill Books/ 
Dutton, 1996. 42 pages. 

Genre: Juvenile Literature, Culture, History 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, Change and Growth, 

Between Two Worlds, At Home Within Circles, 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: Intermediate 

Having grown up in the Pacific Northwest, Hirschi worked as the fisheries 
biologist to protect the salmon habitat for the Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe. His 
first book about the S’Klallam people was Seya's Song. In a letter I received 


G 

g j^Qesources 


ty^ in 

5b 



from Hirschi, he wrote, “I like [this book] because it says some things I wish we 
were taught in school - back when ALL my S’Klallam friends dropped out of 
school in eighth grade. We were taught nothing about their culture.” 

Illustrated by Deborah Cooper, using the faces of S’Klallam people, and 
with tum-of-the-century photographs by Edward S. Curtis, this book provides a 
clear description of the history of the People of Salmon and Cedar since 1850 
and the ctdtural practices which surroimd the salmon. It contradicts the stereo- 
type of Chief Seattle as portrayed in books like Susan Jeffers’ Brother Eagle, 
Sister Sky, which uses an 1855 Seattle speech that Hirschi says has been copied 
and changed many times. 

People of Salmon and Cedar begins with an excerpt from Seattle’s speech 
in 1850 when he welcomed white settlers, but Hirschi follows this optimism 
with recorded destructions in poptdation and ctdture: 

Within ten years, during the 1850’s, as many as nine of every ten North- 
west Coast Indians died of diseases. They vanished because they were not 
immvme to smallpox and other diseases.... The new ways of the United 
States citizens replaced traditions of the Squamish, S’Klallam, Chimaciim, 
Quileutte, Makah, Tulalip, Nisqually, Skagit, Lummi, Muckleshoot, 
Duwamish, Quinaidt, and other Northwest Coast tribes. (3) 

Following chapters describe the importance of the rivers, the salmon, the 
cedars, and the ways the Salmon People nearly starved because of the construc- 
tion of dams and imregulated fishing and logging practices by non-Indians. “.. .al- 
most 90 percent of the original forest is now gone”(29). However, as a result of 
court battles to regain fishing rights, the tribes won the “Boldt Decision,” which 
gives them the right to 50 percent of aU salmon and 50 percent of all fishing 
management. Hirschi ’s Afterword asks yoimg readers to imagine what it wotdd 
be like to lose their language and their right to sing and pray in their language, 
and he closes with the following hope: “Once the ocean, river, and forest are 
healthy, all cultures will be able to share that great wealth, borrowing from but 
not destroying the future.” 

Although it is written for the intermediate grade level, the pictures and 
short sentences make it easy for teachers to read aloud to yotmger students, and 
older students can examine the ways Hirschi achieves an objective yet sensitive 
narrative voice. 

♦ History of the Flathead Reservation, 1841-1934. Prepared by Ron Terriatdt, 

Sahsbi/Kootenai College, Pablo, MT. 

Genre: History 

Grade Level: Secondary 

This is a study grnde for a course taught at the Sahsh/Kootenai College, 
and it includes an extensive bibhography of primary source material which may 
be obtained through Terriault or the college library. 

♦ Holmes, Oliver M., Ed. “Peregrinations of a Politician: James A.Garfield’s 

Diary of a Trip to Montana in 1872.” Montana: The Magazine of Western 
History. Vol. 6, No. 4. Autumn 1956, pp. 34-45. 

Genre: History 

Theme: Between Two Worlds, 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
According to the SaJish/ Kootenai Bibliography, "This is Holmes’ version 
of James Garfield’s diary of his trip to negotiate with Charlo in 1872. Charlo 
(Sahsh) refused to remove from the Bitterroot Valley or sign the agreement; but 

ERIC 



History of the 
Flathead Reservation 



Holmes, Oliver E\/l. 



57 



Resources Qj 





when it was published, it looked as if Charlo had signed.” It is similar to what 
the Eastern tribal peoples experienced when treating with early English colo- 
nists, as recorded in The Invasion of America by Francis Jennings. 


Horse Capture, 
George R 

? ‘••'i 

:< : 

:=:vf 

• 

If- 


♦ Horse Capture, George P. (Lakota/Gros Ventre). Pow Wow. Cody, WY: 
Buffalo Bill Historical Center, 1989. 64 pages. 

Genre: Cultural Resovux« 

With color and black-and-white photo^aphs of dress and regional partici- 
pants, this book can contribute to a better understanding of the Great Plains 
tradition. This is a non-traditional catalog for the Plains Indian Museum in 
Cody, Wyoming, but school hbraries, of this region especially, should all have 
this book. According to Horse Capture, 

The catalog focuses on the coimtry and people I know and what they mean 
to me. No one publication can ever tell the complete story of a powwow, 
and these glimpses of my perceptions are but vignettes of what it is to be 
an Indian and to participate in powwows. To obtain the total picture and 
emotion one must attend an actual powwow. You will be welcome there. 


Howard, Helen 
Addison 


♦ How8ird, Helen Addison. “Indians and an Indian Agent: Chief Chariot and 
the Forged Document.” Journal of the West. Vol. 5, No. 3, July 1966, pp. 
379-397. 

Genre: History 

Theme: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival, 

Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: Secondary 

According to the Salish/ Kootenai Bibliography, this is the story of the re- 
moval of Charlo(Sahsh) from the Bitterroot Valley, reprinted from Howard’s 
Northwest Trail Blazers. 




♦ . “The Men Who Saved the Buffalo.” Journal of the West. Vol. 14, 

No. 3, July 1975, pp. 122-129. 

Genre: History 

Theme: At Home Within Circles, Cultural and Personal Loss and 

Survival 

Grade Level: Secondary 

Accor^hagio the Salish /Kootenai Bibliography, Howard “sketches the story 
of Pablo-Allard buffalo herd with special emphasis on the role of Peter Ronan 
and Sam Walking Coyote in estabUshing the herd.” 


Howaid, Joseplhi 
Kinsey 

1 :§ 
i: 


❖ Howard, Joseph Kinsey. Strange Empire: A Narrative of the Northwest. 

New York: Wilham Morrow and Co., 1952. 601 pages. 

Genre: Biography and History 

In this historical narrative, Howard integrates the life and death of Louis 
Riel with the history of contemporary Canadian and United States military and 
economic policies and actions, as well as with the history of other related Indian 
peoples — Sitting Bull and the Sioux, who sought refuge with the M^tis and the 
Cree people under Poundmaker and Little Bear in Canada. From a settlement 
called Rupert’s Land, present day Winnipeg, Riel fought for the rights of these 
people of French and Cree ancestry to hve independently as a nation, with the 
right to choose whether to be aligned with Canada or the United States, and he 
fought for their right to own and manage their own land. Louis Riel led a pohti- 
cal and religious crusade from Manitoba, to Montana, and finally to Regina, 


ERJC'So^^ces 


o 

DO 



Canada where he was tried and hanged for treason against Canada and the 
Queen. 

Howard’s story is certainly a defense of Riel and his cause, but he does 
include substantial evidence to support a possible insanity or at least fanatic 
claim against Riel. It would seem Howard has explored every possible docu- 
ment which would explain and clarify Riel’s life and purpose, but the book fails 
in areas where he has moved outside this specific expertise. For example, his 
account of the motivation and role of Sitting Bull, in the Sioux and Cheyenne 
resistance, conflicts with those of others who actually knew Sitting Bull. Many 
descendants of the Mdtis who followed Riel are scattered all over Montana to- 
day, but they know their heritage and their loss of a homeland, and they con- 
tinue to grieve for one of the strongest hopes for Native nationhood that ever 
persisted in contemporary North America. 

♦ Huberman, Robert G. assisted by Karen Pale Moon Huberman. Our Only 

Homeland: An Ecological Look at the Land of the Gros Ventre and 
Assiniboine. Hays, MT: Hays/ Lodgepole Public Schools, 1980. 

♦ Himgry Wolf, Adolf. Charlo's People: The Flathead Tribe. Invermere, 

British Columbia: Good Medicine Books, 1971. 

Genre: Memoir and History 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways, 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: Secondary 

According to the Salish /Kootenai Bibliography, this is a popular book which 
"includes sketches from Flathead history and personal sketches of some Flat- 
head leaders,[as well as] some new material finm older Indian people whom 
Himgry Wolf knew personally.” 

♦ Hungry Wolf, Adolf, and Star Hungry Wolf(Blackfoot). Children of the 

Circle. Summertown, TN: Book Publishing Company, 1992. 160 pages. 
Genre: Culture and History 

The Hungry Wolfs provide black and white pictures of Native children 
from the Plateau, Plains and Pueblo peoples. 

As part of our family’s cultural hfe, we have a large collection of old photo- 
graphs showing Indian people, their camps, and scenes of many traditional 
activities. Among our favorites of these are ones that include native chil- 
dren, perhaps because four of them have grown up in our own household. 
Accompanying the photographs are the names (when available), the tribes, 
places, and the approximate dates of the photos, as well as the Hungry Wolfs’ 
explanation of the background of the situation in the picture. Despite the im- 
pact of European-American culture on these people “their more modem outlook 
[has helped] to bring about changes that have resulted in people like the Sioux 
still maintaining their heritage near the year 2000" (30). 

♦ Indians of North America Series. New York: Chelsea House PubUshers. 

Hoover, Herbert T. The Yankton Sioux. 1988. 

Hoxie, Frederick E. The Crow. 1989. 

Porter, Frank W. The Coast Salish Peoples. 1989. 

Genre: History and Culture 

Chelsea’s EngUsh catalog includes curriculum programs with literatures 
traditionally taught in America’s EngUsh classrooms as well as works by Black 



ERIC 




Huberman, Robert G. 



Hungry Wolf, Adolph 



Hungry Wolf, 
Adolf and Star 



Indians of North 
America Series 



59 



Resources 



Indians of 
North America 


and Hispanic writers and modem men and women writers. As of this publica- 
tion, it doesn’t offer any Native American literatures, but the historical series is 
one of the best available. Other titles: The Apache, The American Indians, 
Archaelogy of North American, The Aztecs, The Cherokee, The Cheyenne, The 
Chickasaw, The Chumash, The Comanche, The Iroquois, The Iroquois, The 
Lenapes, Literatures of the American Indian, The Maya, The Mohawk, The Na- 
vcyos. The Nez Perce, The Ojibwa, The Pueblo, The Seminole, The Wampanoag, 
and Women in American Indian Society. 


Indian Sentinel 


♦ Indian Senrine/. (Salish). St. Ignatius, MT. 
A CathoUc Mission P^iblication. 


Josephy, ADvin i\/9. Jr. 


Josephy, Alvin M. Jr. The Nez Perce Indians and the Opening of the 
Northwest. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press, 1965. 


Katz, William Loren 


Katz, William Loren. Black Indians: A Hidden Heritage. New York: 

Atheneum Press, 1986. 196 pages. 

Genre: History 

With black-and-white photos, this book traces the history of relations be- 
tween Blacks and American Indians through pioneer days. This is important in 
Montana because troops of African-Americans were sent to Ft. Assiniboine be- 
tween Ft. Belknap Reservation and the Rocky Boy area south of Havre, as well 
as to Ft. Shaw, Montana. 


Kidder, John 


♦ Kidder, John. “Montana Miracle: It Saved the Buffalo.” (Salish/Kootenai). 

Montana: The Magazine of Western History. Vol. 15, No. 2. Spring, 1965, 
pp. 52-67. 

Genre: History 

Theme: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival, 

Remembering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: Secondary 

This is the story of the Pablo-AUard buffalo herd on the Flathead 
Reservation. 


Kroeber, A. L. 


❖ Kroeber, A.L. Ethnology of the Gros Ventre. Anthropological Papers of the 
American Museum of Natural History. Vol. I, Part IV. 1978. 281 pages. 
In this illustrated ethnology, Kroeber describes the tribal organization, 
food and hunting, industries and implements, decorative art, social customs, 
games, individual war experiences, the supernatural, ceremonies andbeUef sys- 
tems of the Gros Ventre people. 


Lewis, Elizabeth 


O Lewis, Elizabeth. Black feet Language Coloring Book. Browning, MT: 
Blackfeet Heritage Program, 1978. 67 pages. 

Genre: BiUngual Education text 

Grade Level: Primary 

Arranged in alphabetical order, the pictures are accompanied with the 
names of animals, plant life, foods and numbers printed in both the English 
and Blackfeet languages. A Southern Piegan/Blackfeet pronunciation and 
spelling guide is included for the teacher. 


Lifeways of 
inter^oimtaon and 
Plains Indians 


^ “Lifeways of InterMontana and Plains Montana Indians.” Museum of the 
Rockies Occasional Papers. Leslie B. Davis, Ed. Vol 1, 1979. 



sources 

^ r. n 




Genre: Cxilture and History 

Grade Level: Secondary 

This edition includes articles by or about the Crow, Chippewa-Cree Pend 
d’Oreille, Blood, Crow, Cheyenne, Flathead, and others. 


•’ ■ :> 


♦ McAlear, J.F. The Fabulous Flathead: The Story of the Development of 

Montana’s Indian Reservation. Poison, MT: Treasure State Publication 

Company, 1962. 

Genre: History 

Theme: Between Two Worlds, Cultural and Personal Loss 

and Survival 

Grade Level: Secondary 

According to the Salish / Kootenai Bibliography, this includes anthropo- 
logical information, the history of tribes before reservations, the cattle and buf- 
falo, and “transportation, economic development, the irrigation system, and other 
topics in Flathead history.” 


McAlear, J.F. 

. ,: . . : : 

•. ' ' 

: •••• .: 


♦ McCluskey, Murton L., Ed.D. (Blackfeet). Evaluating American Indian 
Textbooks and Other Materials for the Classroom. Helena, MT: Office of 
Public Instruction. 

Genre: Educational Resource 

This is an excellent resource for teachers and librarians who are selecting 
books, especially because it provides interesting and important information re- 
garding stereotypes and soi^s. The booklet provides: (1) Eleven Content Guide- 
lines. For example, “Textbooks should not give the impression that the history 
of the American Indian began when Columbus landed on this continent"; (2) 
Ten Illustration Guidehnes. For example, “Statistical data in textbookgraphs 
... should be figuratively and numerically accurate"; (3) Background informa- 
tion about twenty common stereotypes and answers to common questions about 
Native Americans; (4) Evaluation forms for textbooks and for audiovisual mate- 
rials; and (5) Reference Bibliography and List of Resources and Addresses. 


McCluskey, 
Murton L. 


♦ Medicine Crow, Joseph (Crow). A Handbook of Crow Indian Laws and 
Treaties. Crow Agency, MT: Daniel S. Press, 1966c. 

Genre: Tribal Law, History 

This handbook has been prepared by Joe Medicine Crow, B.S., M.S., Tribal 
Historian and Anthropologist. 


Medicine Crow, 
Joseph 


♦ . The Effects of European Culture Contacts Upon the Economic, 

Social, and ReUgious Life of the Crow Indians.” Thesis, Department of 
Anthropology, University of Southern California, 1939. 




♦ Merriam, Alan P. “Songs and Dances of the Flathead Indians.” New York: 
Ethnic Folkways Library, 1953. 


Merriam, Aian P. 


♦ Montana Indians: Their History and Location. Helena, MT: Montana Office 
of Public Instruction, 1992. 

Genre: History 

Grade Level: Intermediate and Secondary 

Each of the seven sections provides a brief summary of the tribe’s location, 
population, history, organizational structure, land status, medical facilities, 
housing, education, employment and income, recreation and annual festivities. 


Montana Indians: 
Their History 
and Location 


ERIC , 6i 


Resources 



Old Coyote, Lloyd G. 
Smith, Mickey and 
Heiene 



Parsons, Jackie 



Patacsil, Sharon 
Neal, Colleen 



Riggs, Stephen R. 



Roberts, Chris 



This publication and subsequent updated versions should be an important re- 
source for all people teaching in Montana. The Office of PubUc Instruction has a 
hst of fifteen Indian Education resources which are available at no cost. Call: 
(406)444-3013. These resources include the work by McCluskey, Evaluating 
American Indian Textbooks, and From Boarding School to Self-Determination, 
by Willard Bill, which tells how the American Indian educational process has 
been affected by growth and expansion of the United States. 

♦ Old Coyote, Lloyd G.(Crow), Mickey and Helene Srmih.. Apsaalooka: The 

Crow Nation Then and Now, Children of a Large Beaked Bird.Green'^xyig, 
PA: MacDonald/Sward Publishing Company, 1992/93. 251 pages. 

Genre: History 

A comprehensive history of the Crow Nation, together with their poUtical, 
economic, and social situation today. Organized on the basis of questions by 
Smith with responses by Old Coyote, the text is also supplemented with photo- 
graphs, maps, charts, and figures. It begins with a Chronology of Native Ameri- 
can dates and events which affected the Crow Nation. Apsaalooka: The Crow 
Nation Then and Now is an excellent resource. 

♦ Parsons, Jackie. The Educational Movement of the Blackfeet Indians: 1840- 

1979. Browning, MT: Blackfeet Heritage Program, 1980. 45 pages. 
Genre: History 

Grade Level: Secondary 

Descriptions of mission schools, reservation day schools, government board- 
ing schools, public and private schools on the Blackfeet Reservation, with inter- 
views from some of the elders on the reservation that attended these schools, 
comprise this book on the history of education on the Blackfeet Reservation. 

♦ Patacsil, Sharon (Blackfeet) and Colleen Neal (Squamish). Daybreak 

Star Preschool Activities Book. Seattle WA: Daybreak Star Press, 1979. 
Genre: Culture 

Grade Level: Primary 

This guide for the teacher of young children “provide[s] children with the 
opportunity to learn from materials that are reflective of the cultures of all chil- 
dren. The Native American child is provided the opportunity to develop a posi- 
tive self-image.... These kinds of materials build in the non-Indian child an 
awareness and sensitivity towards a culture ... different from her/his own.” 

♦ Riggs, Stephen R. A Dakota-English Dictionary. St. Paul, MN: Minnesota 

Historical Society Press, 1992. 665 pages. 

First published by the Smithsonian Institute in 1852, this edition repre- 
sents the expanded version pubhshed in 1890. Riggs worked with Dr. Thomas 
S. WilUamson to create this and prayer books and hymnals. Both this book and 
a companion voliime An English-Dakota Dictionary by John P. Williamson re- 
main the most comprehensive and accurate lexicons available. 

♦ Roberts, Chris. Pow Wow Country. American and World Geographic 

Publishing, 1992. 

Genre: Contemporary Indian Culture 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Participants offer short commentaries about their experiences, along with 
photographs of contemporary Pow-wows. Many individuals in the book can be 



O 



isources 



identified easily by young Montana Indian people who have attended pow-wows. 
The text provides opportimities for discussions of students’ personal experiences 
while it promotes self-esteem in Indian children, especially. 

♦ Rodnick, David. The Fort Belknap Assiniboine of Montanan A Study in 
Culture Change. Thesis, New Haven, CT: The University of 
Pennsylvania, 1936. 124 pages. 

Genre: History and Culture 

Rodnick provides a historical introduction, 1640- 1887, and then covers the 
period of Assimilation, 1888-1935. He describes the “Aboriginal Background,” 
and the “Present-Day Culture” in 1936. 



Rodnick, David 



♦ Rutledge, Don (Cree). Center of the World: Native American Spirituality. 

North Hollywood, CA: Newcastle Publishing Co., Inc., 1992. 128 pages. 
Genre: Culture 

A Plains Cree Pipe Keeper, Rutledge explains the world view of early Na- 
tive Americans, basic beliefs and ways of the Native American tradition, cer- 
emonies and rit\ials, sacred pipes. Mother Earth ceremonials, medicine and foods, 
good medicine, the sacred animal world, and "ways to help heal Grandmother 
Earth.” The book closes with annual Powwow events and a glossary of common 
Cree words. Although Rutledge makes general reference to Native Americans, 
he does refer specifically to individuals by their tribal affiUation. This book 
presents the culture of Native Americans in an easy-to-imderstand format. 

♦ Scott, Patricia. Chippewa and Cree. Rocky Boy, MT: Rocky Boy School, 

1976. 277 pages. 

Genre: Bibliography 

A bibhography of books, newspaper articles, government documents, and 
other printed/written materials in various United States and Canada hbraries. 

♦ Teit, James A. “The Salishan Tribes of the Western Plateaus.” Annual 

Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, No. 45 1927-28, 295-396. 

♦ United Indians of All Tribes Foimdation. Daybreak Star Indian Reader. 

Seattle, WA: Daybreak Star Press. 24 pages. 

Grade Level: Primary and Intermediate 

Illustrated with black-and-white drawings, this is pubUshed ten times a 
year. According to Slapin and Seale's Through Indian Eyes, each issue contains 
information about the peoples of a particular location, legends, word games and 
puzzles, and a nature and science section. Back issues are available. 

♦ Williamson, John P. An English-Dakota Dictionary. St. Paul: Minnesota His- 

torical Society Press, 1992. 264 pages. 

First produced in 1902, this book is the work of the son of a missionary 
who grew up speaking both English and Dakota and spent most of his adult life 
on the Santee Reservation. In her foreword, Carolynn I. Schommer describes 
the historical and cultxiral context in which the dictionaries were created. 

♦ Windy Boy, Sam and Ruth Weasle (Chippewa/Cree). Sign Language. 

Rocky Boy, MT. 

This video can be used to show the differences between Indian Sign lan- 
guage and sign language as used by deaf people today. 



Rutledge, Don 




Scott, Patricia 




Teit, James k. 



United Indians of All 
Tribes Foundation 



Williamson, John P. 



Windy Boy, Sam 
Weasle, Ruth 



ERIC 



Resources ^ 



63 



AND SURVIVAL 



Your Svirvival List ... 

Take a look around you, 
and find what you have missed. 

Start with your elders, 
and begin with your list. 

Please don’t forget the Creator, 
he gmdes from up on high. 

For he gave you life and happiness, 
as well as the sun, moon, and sky. 




your list of survival, 
put down your power and pride. 

You should not be ashamed, 
for you have nothing to hide. 

Take a look at your list, 
and try hard to see. 

That we are not only a nation, 
but a proud family... 

Melissa S. Hopkins (Sioux/Cherokee), Age 17 
Choctaw, OK 








Reahze... 

Have you ever noticed, 
we are struggling to survive? 

Have you ever wondered, 
why we need to keep traditions alive? 

Have you ever seen, 
our own people cry? 

Have you ever heard, 
why our people die? 

Have you ever walked, 
our old warrior’s road? 

When will you begin to see, 
our vision of reality? 

Look at your past, 
realize your fatality. 

Survival is our piupose, 
will you stand up with me? 

Can we change our hearts, 
and represent our nationality? 

Melissa S. Hopkins (Sioux/Cherokee), Age 17 
Choctaw, OK 



O 

g isources 



A 

bi 



SURVEY 



Native American Literature: Montana and Northcential Regional Publications 

Native American Literature: Montana and Northcentral Regional Publicationsis sponsored 
by the Montana Association of Teachers of English Language Arts (MATELA) and has 
been funded in part by the Montana Arts Council’s Special Projects Fvmds and by the 
Office of Public Instruction, Helena, Montana. 

Please answer the questions helow regarding Native American Literature: Montana and 
Northcentral Regional Publications and return the completed siuwey to MATELA, P.O. 
Box 9261, Helena, MT 59604. MATELA will use this information to provide feedback to 
the Montana Arts Council, as well as to improve the design and implementation of future 
projects like this one. 



Section 1 



1. Where did you learn about this resoimie? 

OPI resoiirces 
NCTE communications 



2. How did you obtain this resource? 



3. What is your position? (In what capacity have you examined/used iVia^oe American 
Literature: Montand and Northcentral Regional Publications?) 

Teacher Libreuian Principal 

Parent — Student Constdtant 

Commimity Member 



4. At what grade level do you teach/hold this position? 

Secondary 



MATELA publications 

Indian Education organization 

Other: 



Primary 

Post Secondary 



Intermediate 

Adult Education 



Section 2 



Please rate Native American Literature: Montana and Northcentral Regional Publications 
in the following areas. Circle the rating you select. 



Afea 




Rating (circle one) 




General format and readability 


Excellent 


Good 


Acceptable 


Poor 


Cultural accuracy 


Excellent 


Good 


Acceptable 


Poor 


Usefulness for your grade level 


Excellent 


Good 


Acceptable 


Poor 


Usefulness for your subject area 


Excellent 


Good 


Acceptable 


Poor 


Appropriateness of content 


Excellent 


Good 


Acceptable 


Poor 


Appropriateness of language 


Excellent 


Good 


Acceptable 


Poor 


Balance of materials from Montana’s 
diverse Native American cidtures 


Excellent 


Good 


Acceptable 


Poor 


Interest level 


Excellent 


Good 


Acceptable 


Poor 



Make any comments/suggestions you wish regarding your ratings of the evaluation criteria: 



Section 3 



Please list any suggestions for texts that you believe shovdd be included in future editions. 



FROM 

Reproduction Release 



FAX NO. 



Feb. 22 2002 09:04AM P2 
i->age 1 01 3 . 




U.S. Department of Education 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
(OERJ) 

National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




Reproduction Release 

(Specific Document) 

I. DOCUMENT roENTIFICATION; 



Title; 


% 

\ 


Author(s); 'Dd'UDTHC /V* 




Corporate Source: 

'fvblkl Ui/srPoxr^. 


Publication Date: 
V 





II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 






In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of intere^ to the educational community, 
documents announced in tlie monthly ab-stract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually 
made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if rqjroduciion release is 

granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 



If permission is granted to r^iroduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECR ONE of the following 
three options and sign in the indicated space following. 



Tlic sample sticker shown below will be 
afTixed to all Level 1 documents 


The sanqilc sticker shown below will be affixed to all 
Level 2A documems 


The sample adeker shown below will be affixed to oil 
I^vel 2B documents 


K;R>nSSION TO RErRODbCE.vMO 
5HS.SKMlNATIiTHLS MATERIAL HA.S 
Hir£N GR.\^^KY 


PERMlSSlOXTOm'ROUUCE ANT> 
DtSSEMl NATE THIS MATERlAl IN 
MfCROr ICHE. AND IN ELECTRONI.C MEDIA 
FOR EReC COi.t,ECilON SUBSCRIfiERS ONLY, 
RaS BEENGRAmD BY 

^ 


PERMISSION TO REPROD UCE AND 
OI5SE.VnNATETHIS .M.ATERIAL IN 
\flCROFtClt£ ONLY ItAS OELANTFO hV 








10 1 Hk kDUC.ATlONAl. RkSOUKCkS 
INFORMATION' CENTER c'l-IRIC) 


to Tl ?H EUbCATIONAE RESOURCES 
INFORM ATION CENTER flJRlC) 


10 THE EEX-iCAltONAl, RESOURCtS 
INFOR-VlATiON CCNTFS (CRfO 


I.eve11 


Uvel2A 


Uvel2B 


t 


i 


t 








Check here for Level 1 release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemnifltion in microfiche 
or other ERIC archival media (c.g. electronic) 
and paper copy. 


Check here for Level 2A release, pemiiuing reproduction 
and dissemination in imcrofichc and in electronic media 
for FtlTC archival collection subscribers only 


Check here for Level 2B release, pcimining 
reproduction and dissemination in microGche only 



^ ^ ' tp://www.aelorg/eric/relfonrLhtm 




2/21/2002 




FROM : 

Reproduclion Release 



FAX ND. 



Feb. 22 2002 09:05AM P3 

rage / ui j 



DoeurtWiiti vrill be processed »l indicated provided reproduction quality permiw. 

If petiniaion to leprodoco is gnuttcd. bul no boa is checlied. docunenls will be procosaed at Level I 



/ hereby arant lo the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclus^e permission to reproduce and 
disseJume this document ai indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche. 
persons other than ERIC employees and its system contractors requires permission from the cojyi^hi ho der. 
£cefoiTismade for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satvfy trformation needs oj 

Ofkirntlirx in rcsoonse to discrete inguiries.^ •* 




Printed Name/Positionn’itio: pl^hLli H 

Tio'PorHB/^ /V. 


Organization/Address; ^ 

f Lf m IfirdB 
F'nmnEto 


Telephone: 




E>mai) Address: ^ 


Date: / / 



t\ n/clvs . "Tie + 



in. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availabiEty of the d^ent from 
another source, please provide the following information regarding the availability of the docuinent (CTIC wll not 
announce a document unless it is publicly available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also 
be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more stringent for documents that cannot be made avaUable 

through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price: 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is hold by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate 
name and address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 






2/21/2002 



FROM : 

Reproduction Release 



FAX NO. : 



Feb. 22 2002 09:04flM PI 

t a^K, j vt J 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 

Acqaisitions 
eric/cress at AEL 
P. O. Box 1348 
Charleston, WV 25325-1348 
Toll Free! 800-624-9120 
y FAjG^304-347-0467j ) 
ericfc (aiael.flg; 

WWW; htli>://w ww.ael.Oi‘g/cric/ ===^== 

How^JfsoMMlytheEMCf.cilily,<»itm iJd,^anu..solidtric«.mb.tto.lohR]C.re^ 

document being contributed) to. gme Processing and RnteronceFneiUty 

1100 West Street, 2nd Floor 
Laurel, MB 20707-3598 
Toll Free; 800-799-3742 
Fax: 301-953-0263 
E-mail: eric fac«iiinfet.cAg oy 
WWW: http://erIctac.pic gatd.csfe£fl!D 



EFF-088 (Rev. 9/97) 



g tp://www.ael.org/eric/relform.htm 



2/21/2002 



