DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 474 128 



RC 023 978 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Demmert, William G. , Jr.; Towner, John C. 

A Review of the Research Literature on the Influences of 
Culturally Based Education on the Academic Performance of 
Native American Students. Final Paper. 

Northwest Regional Educational Lab., Portland, OR. 

Department of Education, Washington, DC. 

2003-02-10 
143p . 

Information Analyses (070) — Reference Materials - 
Bibliographies (131) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. 

* Academic Achievement; Alaska Natives; * American Indian 
Education; American Indian Students; Annotated 
Bibliographies; ^Bilingual Education; Cultural Context; 
■^Culturally Relevant Education; ^Educational Research; 
Elementary Secondary Education; Hawaiians; Literature 
Reviews; Research Needs; Research Problems; School Community 
Relationship 



ABSTRACT 

There is a widespread, firm belief among Native American 
communities (American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians) and among 
professional Native educators that meaningful educational experiences require 
an appropriate language and cultural context. From their perspective, such 
context supports the traditions, knowledge, and language (s) of the community 
as a starting place for learning new knowledge. This review collects, reports 
on, and critically analyzes the research literature to determine whether a 
culturally based education (CBE) curriculum improves the school performance 
of American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian students. Introductory 
sections discuss events of the past three decades supporting development of 
CBE, three theories underlying CBE interventions, an operational definition 
of the elements of CBE, definitions of experimental and quasi-experimental 
research, and the difficulties in conducting such research. The review found 
only four studies that could legitimately be classified as experimental or 
quasi-experimental. Because of these limited numbers, a small number of non- 
experimental comparative studies were added. Only one research project was 
found that provides insights on how researchers might show a direct’ . 
connection between CBE and improved academic performance. Recommendations are 
presented for improving the research base on CBE for Native Americans. Data 
tables summarize the studies examined. Appendices describe the resources used 
in the literature search and present a lengthy annotated bibliography. 
(Contains 41 references.) (SV) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



'RjkJ' 2 3 9 7 8 



oo 

<N 



r- 

n- 




Final Paper 



A REVIEW OF THE RESEARCH LITERATURE ON THE 
INFLUENCES OF CULTURALLY BASED EDUCATION 
ON THE ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE OF NATIVE 
AMERICAN STUDENTS 



iui I 1WJUUI N-J 1 ai iu 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
xS CENTER (ERIC) 

[Jr This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it, 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERt position or policy. 



February 10, 2003 




Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory 
101 SW Main Street, Suite 500 
Portland, Oregon 97204 
(503) 275-9500 



3 

=KLC 



2 



i BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Final Paper 



A REVIEW OF THE RESEARCH LITERATURE ON THE 
INFLUENCES OF CULTURALLY BASED EDUCATION 
ON THE ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE OF NATIVE 
AMERICAN STUDENTS 



William G. Demmert, Jr., Ed.D., and John C. Towner, Ph.D. 



February 10, 2003 



Kim O. Yap, Ph.D. 
Project Director 




Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory 
101 SW Main Street, Suite 500 
Portland, Oregon 97204 
(503) 275-9500 



3 

ERLC 



3 



This publication is a product of work sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education 
under contract number ED-01 -CO-003 8/0002. The publication’s authors are responsible 
for its content, and the views expressed herein are not necessarily those of the department 
or any other agency of the U.S. Government. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Preface and Acknowledgments iii 

Foreword iv 

Introduction 1 

Overview of the Literature Search on Culturally Based Education 

Programs 6 

Definitions of Culturally Based Education Interventions 7 

Definitions of Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Research 9 

Difficulties in Implementing Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Research.. 10 

Experimental or Quasi-Experimental Studies 12 

The Effective Instruction of Comprehension: Results and 

Description of the Kamehameha Early Education Program 12 

Guided Affective and Cognitive Imagery to Enhance 

Self-Esteem Among Hawaiian Children 16 

Effects of a Computer-Assisted Instruction Program on 

Aboriginal Student Achievement 17 

Art Activities to Improve Self-Esteem Among Native Hawaiian Children 17 

Improving Alaska Native Rural and Urban Students’ Mathematical 
Understanding of Perimeter and Area 18 

Families and Schools Together: An Experimental Analysis of a 

Parent-mediated Early Intervention Program for At-risk American 

Indian Children 19 

Discussion 20 

Non-Experimental Comparative Studies 23 



O 

ERLC 



1 



TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued) 



Creole and English as Languages of Instruction in Bilingual Education With 



Aboriginal Australian: Some Research Findings 23 

Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative: Year Three Annual Progress Report 24 



The Effectiveness of Bilingual Instruction With Cherokee Indian Students 24 



Using the Gap Reduction Model to Evaluate a Successful 

Bilingual/ESL Program 25 

The Rock Point Experience: A Longitudinal Study of a Navajo 

School Program 26 

Subtractive Bilingualism and the Survival of the Inuit Language: 

Heritage Versus Second-Language Education 27 

Adding Cognition to the Formula for Culturally Relevant Instruction 
in Mathematics 28 

Bilingual Education in San Juan County, Utah: A Cross Cultural Emphasis 29 

Discussion 30 

Improving the Research Base on Culturally Based Education 

For Native Americans 34 

Observations on the Quantitative Research on Bilingual Education: 

An Annotated Bibliography 38 

Concluding Remarks 40 

Bibliography 47 

Appendix I: Resources Utilized in the Literature Search 51 

Appendix II: Annotated Bibliography of the Research Literature on 



Culturally Based Education (CBE) Programs Serving Native American Students.. 5 8 




ii 6 



Preface and Acknowledgments 



This review of the research literature on the influences of culturally based education 
(CBE) on the academic performance of Native American students focuses on the 
quantitative and select qualitative research identified through a number of sources, 
including: 1) the ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools 
(ERIC/CRESS); 2) Digital Dissertations, DIALOG, ProQuest, and Info&Leaming; 3) a 
variety of other resources and select individuals (e.g., Center for Applied Linguistics; 
Center for Research on Education, Diversity, and Excellence (CREDE); the effective 
schooling research from the Northwest Regional Education Laboratory (NWREL); 
Cambridge Scientific Abstracts; 4) Anthropological Abstracts, Psychological Abstracts, 
Social Sciences Index, Sociological Abstracts; and 5) reports on bilingual programs that 
include non-Native students. 1 

Special thanks must go to Patricia Cahape Hammer of ERIC/CRESS for her personal 
attention to ensure that a wide variety of sources were covered in the search. In addition, 
special thanks to Western Washington University students Renee Barut and Kelly Smith 
for their work in tracking down and accessing articles selected to be used in this study. 
Kelly must also be recognized for the excellent work she did in reviewing and reporting 
information on the different reports on bilingual education included in this document. 
Recognition must also be expressed for the significant support given by Roland Tharp in 
reviewing the document and providing a detailed description of the methodology, 
expectations, and results of the KEEP study conducted under his direction. 

This review of the literature uses footnotes at the bottom of each page. The citations are a 
combination of reports of research on Native American, as well as non-Indian or other 
groups and a number of secondary sources such as literature reviews. A separate 
bibliography is included at the end of this document. Appendix II includes an updated 
annotated bibliography originally published in ERIC (Demmert, 2001), and expanded for 
a RAND Study (Demmert & Towner, 2002). 

The availability of quantitative research literature on culturally based education programs 
for Native American children is severely limited. Possible experimental or quasi- 
experimental research models appropriate for a national quasi-experimental and/or 
experimental study of Native education are also in short supply. In spite of these 
shortcomings, this report does provide suggestions, with the addition of a select number 
of qualitative studies, on what might be possible, what would be necessary, and what 
might not be appropriate to use in a search for research models appropriate for a national 
study of Native education. 



i 



See Appendix I for a complete listing of descriptors and search sources used. 




ill 



7 



Foreword 



A partnership has been formed to work on this project that includes the Northwest 
Regional Educational Laboratory, a leading institution in the field of school reform and 
the effective schooling movement; the Center for Research on Education, Diversity, and 
Excellence, with Roland Tharp as the director, and member researchers and institutions 
that excel in their individual fields; and David Grissmer, from the RAND Corporation, 
recognized for excellent work in educational research and in other fields. 

In addition to partnering with well-established research institutions, the coalition includes 
Native American organizations as well as Native professionals and non-Native 
professionals who have extensive experience in working with Native people. The 
National Congress of American Indians, the National Indian Education Association, and 
the National Indian School Boards Association are all partners in this endeavor. Their 
collective support and cooperation are critical if a national study of Indian education is to 
be planned and implemented. Individual researchers who are members of this coalition 
include Professor David Beaulieu, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee; Professor John 
Tippeconnic, Pennsylvania State University; Joseph Trimble, Professor, Western 
Washington University; Professor Karen Swisher, President of Haskell Indian Nations 
University; Professor Rick St. Germaine, University of Wisconsin, Eau Claire; Professor 
Gerald Mohatt, University of Alaska, Fairbanks; and William Demmert, Professor of 
Education, Western Washington University. 

An internal review panel will monitor the information, progress, and process used in 
developing this report. This group includes Joseph Trimble, Ph.D., Western Washington 
University; Karen Swisher, Ph.D., Haskell Indian Nations University; and John 
Tippeconnic, Pennsylvania State University. 

An external review committee to monitor progress and quality includes Diane August, 
Center for Applied Linguistics; David Grissmer, RAND Corporation; and Lee Sechrest, 
University of Arizona. 



ERIC 



IV 



