DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 343 763 RC 016 622 

AUTHOR Butterfield, Robin; Pepper, Floy 

TITLE Improving Parental Participation in Elementary and 

Secondary Education for American Indian and Alaska 

Native Students. 

SPONS AGENCY Department of Education, Washington, DC Indian 

Nations At Risk Task Force. 
91 

75p.; In: Indian Nations At Risk Task Force 
Commissioned Papers. See RC 018 612. 
Information Analyses (070) 

MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

Alaska Natives; "American Indian Education; American 
Indians; "Change Strategies; Demonstration Programs; 
Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary 
Education; Literature Reviews; "Parent Participation; 
"Parent School Relationship; "Parent Student 
Relationship 



Home and family are important predictors of student 
attitude and achievement. However, the coercive assimilation policies 
of the past have left a legacy of barriers between schools and Native 
parents. Parent participation in schools goes beyond a supportive 
role and includes activities influencing decision making. Key issues 
for Native parents inclv.de attitudes of teachers and other staff, 
school building conditions and learning environment, alienation of 
students and parents from school, misunderstanding by the school of 
extended family dynamics, anc? the sparsity and cultural isolation of 
urban American Indians. Additional community and family factors 
inhibiting parental involvement include dysfunctional families, 
poverty, illiteracy, and drug and alcohol abuse. According to 
research, parent participation in any form improves parent attitudes 
and behavior, as well as student achievement, attendance, motivation, 
self-esteem, and behavior. A literature review describes Native 
cultural influences on student learning, traditional values, child 
rearing practices, learning styles, and self-esteem issues. Effective 
activity-oriented model programs are discussed that improve personal 
relationships between parents and students or teachers. Federal 
legislation is described that encourages local school districts to 
consult with Native parent groups. Strategies are outlined, in which 
schools begin to change their images to centers of advocacy for 
parents and children, and state and federal agencies encourage the 
participation of Native parents. This paper contains 100 references. 
(SV) 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



ABSTRACT 



***************************************************** 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can ^e made 

* from the original document. 



Improving Parental Participation in Elementary and 
Secondary Education for American Indian and 

Alaska Native Students 



Robin Butterfield, Principal Author 
Floy Pepper, Co- Author 



U.S. OCPAMTMENT Of CDUCATtON 

ONice o* 1 0uc*!»ontl flMMrch and fmptoyamafu 

EDUCATIONAL SOURCES INFORMATION 
y CENTER (ERIC) 

/\ir\w documam hat bte* reproduce ai 
f rectivtti Irom 1h« pt'ton or orgamiaiion 

originating il 
H Minor chtngtt *e t>a«n mada 10 improve 

reproduction Qu^dly 

• Poinlt 0( v«w or opmiont itatcd m Ihii docu 
mtnl do not n«c*t»arily rapretanl official 
OfcRi ponlion or policy 



Introduction 

Tho notion that home and family are important 
predictors of student attitude and achievement is 
well documented in research and emphasized 
repeatedly by hundreds of Native people testifying 
nationwide at the Indian Nations at Risk (INAR) 
hearings. Surfacing as one of the most universal 
themes, improving the participation of Native 
parents provides one of the greatest opportunities 
for success in Native educational endeavors; re- 
quiring strong administrative commitment, 
limited financial resource?, significant staff train- 
ing, and a variety of options to ensure that par- 
ticipation is meaningful. This paper will: 
summarize hist Heal barriers for Native parents, 
explore key issues, highlight significant research, 
describe successful models, and recommend 
strategies for improving Native parental support 
and Native parental involvement. 

Transformational Leadership 

A prerequisite to Native parental participation 
is transformational leadership. Historically 
education has been a process through which one 
was supposed to be changed or perhaps enhancer 1 . 
Education needs to become a process through 
which one feels empowered. Native children can* 
not become empowered unless educational leader- 
ship understands the implications of what 
empowerment really means. 

Empowerment means equipping one's self to be 
responsible and self-regulating while exercising 
positive regard for others. There is no way one can 
empower others. Empowerment is a personal mat- 
ter. 

Native education desperately needs transfor- 
mational leadership, leaders who are empowering 
and changing themselves. Instead of attempting 
the impossible ~ trying to change others - high 
performing leaders change the way they interact 
with others. They recognize that people have the 
capacity and competence to grow and to function 
from an internal self responsible locus of control. 



In schools and Native communities transforma- 
tional leaders provide growth-producing climates 
of openness, acceptance, and participatory power- 
sharing. The transformational leader provides a 
context in which people tap their own power and 
move toward self-transcending behavior. 

Distinguishing Between Parental 
Involvement and Parental Support 

There is a distinction between the termsparen- 
tal involvement and parental support. Parental 
support includes such activities as sending 
children to school, attending parent-teacher con- 
ferences, encouraging the completion of 
homework, doing math games, or reading to 
children. Parental involvement not only supports 
the educational process of each individual child, 
but includes additional activities which impact 
school systems, such as: serving on Johnson 0'- 
Malley Committees, Indian Education Act Com- 
mittees, or tribal culture committees; participating 
in parent teacher organizations; or serving on local 
school hoards or state, regional or Native education 
organizations or associations. Participation of Na- 
tive parents is critical at all levels, but parental 
support is within the capabilities of all parents, and 
according to research, has the greatest impact on 
the achievement, behavior, and attitudes of stu- 
dents. 

A Native parent at the National Indian Educa- 
tion Conference, Parental Involvement Issue ses- 
sion summarized the allowing: 

• I would like to distinguish between parent 
involvement and parent support. Parent 
involvement requires parents to be in- 
volved as committee members, policy 
makers, Title V advisors, and even tutors. 
On the ot>ier hand, parent support 
programs such as Family Math and Family 
Science build upon what parents can do for 
a child. Because our parents haven't come 
through the system with the kind of skills 
that they need in terms of parenting, we 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



haven't been very good at giving them 
concrete things they can do with their 
children. When you actually get parents 
and children together having fun around a 
content area like Family Math or Family 
Science, you start breaking down some of 
the barriers and fears that parents grew up 
with. They want to be there for their 
children but nobody has even shown them 
how to in very concrete, enjoyable, suppor- 
tive kinds of ways. (INAR/NACIE, Issue 
Session on Parental Involvement, 1990, p. 
1) 

• Parents who participate in our schools, 
who come to parent- teacher conferences, 
who come to basketball games and music 
concerts, who support all of the extracur- 
ricular activities that their children par- 
ticipate in, generally do not have children 
who are at risk. The parents of at-risk 
children are those we do not see in the 
schools. They are usually involved in so 
many other things and issues of their own 
that they do not have time to come to 
school. Other life issues make it hard for 
them to support education... When 
parents are not available, we need to work 
with whoever is key in that child's life, 
whether it is the grandmother or 
grandfather, the sister or brother, aunt or 
uncle. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on 
Drop Out Prevention, 1990, p. 15) 

The New Jersey Department of Education pub- 
lication entitled Effective Practices for Successful 
Bilingual Parent Involvement Programs: An 
Administrator's Handbook, identifies the various 
roles parents can play in the education of their 
children. 

Parental support encompasses the roles of 
parents as learners, parents as teachers, parents 
as counselors, and for some, parents as resources. 
Parental involvement includes parents as resour- 
ces, parents as decision makers, and parents as 
agents of change* 

• Parents as Learners: This role focuses on 
increasing a parent's own educational ex- 
periences to improve the home environ- 
ment for the child in areas related to suc- 
cess in school. In the case of parents of 
limited English proficient children, learn- 
ing may involve orientation to the lan- 
guage of school, the school system, child 
development information, and other kinds 
of support for school. 



• Parents as Teacliersi This role focuses on 
the fact that parents are the child's first 
teachers. Special training and education 
are given to parents so that they become a 
means of working with the child at home 
to foster good study habits and reinforce 
learning. 

• Parentsas Counselors: In this role parents 
provideemotional support to their children 
in setting goals and in understanding the 
goals of the American school system. 

• Parents as Resources: This role uses 
parents as a resource with special talents 
and skills in the actual classroom situa- 
tion. It increases communication between 
the parents and the school, and 
demonstrates a school's responsiveness to 
the local needs of the community. 

• Parents as Decision Makers: In this role 
parents participate in the whole education- 
al process from the needs assessment and 
program planning to the evaluation of the 
entire program. 

• Parents as Agents of Social Change: 
Parents work with agencies outside the 
school tohelp them attain the goal of home- 
school partnership. 

Once these distinctions of parental roles are 
clarified, it is easier to discuss the kin d of participa- 
tion which is essential and realistic for most Native 
parents, versus participation which is desirable 
but, perhaps in some cases, unrealistic for many 
Native parents. Due to the concerted, intentional 
omission of Native parents historically, much 
needs to be done to rebuild both Native parental 
support, and Native parental involvement With 
Johnson O'Malley and Indian Education Act 
programs, Native parental involvement has be- 
come a means through which schools can redefine 
the role of education given in the uniqueness of 
Native communities. These programs have sig- 
nificantly increased the quantity and quality of 
Native parental involvement Native parental sup- 
port, however, has not received nearly as much 
attention. The support aspects of Native parental 
participation in schools needs to be boosted 
tremendously. All schools need hoik parental sup- 
port and involvement, but little has been ; ne to 
date about support. 

Historical Barriers to Native 
Parents 

1 am a parent of six children and have dealt 
with the public school system for twenty four 



ERIC 



2 

3 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



year*. 1 have taught my children to respect 
all people, like 1 was taught by my grand 
mother. But 1 have learned that the school 
system does not understand American In- 
dian children or their culture. I b rieve the 
school system needs to have respect for 
American Indian children. When 1 sent my 
children to school they were feeling good 
about themselves, their culture, and their 
heritage, but they came home feeling inferior 
about themselves and full of questions about 
our value system. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Ses- 
sion on Parental involvement, 1990, p. 10) 

The sentiments expressed so eloquently by a 
veteran Native parent during the issues forum at 
the National Indian Education Association Con- 
ference in San Diego summarizes hundreds of 
others' deep concern that schools in America are 
failing American Indian/Alaska Native children, 
families, and communities. Inclusion of Native 
parents in the educational process has the poten- 
tial of transforming a system which historically 
imposed values and expectations on communities 
rather than supporting, reinforcing, or empower- 
ing them. True parental participation is the most 
critical element necessary in order to radically 
reverse the downward trend in achievement and 
improve the dismal Native student dropout statis- 
tics* 

• Parents are not to be blamed You need to 
look at the parents 1 parents and the 
parents before them to find out what the 
influences have been and how they have 
impacted students today. In iry education 
and in educating these American Indian 
students, I had to take a very hard journey 
back to the boarding school conflict that 
was placed upon us by the United States of 
America. Indian students today have no 
understanding of this and both they and 
non-Indian teachers are like sponges once 
they learn about what might be the root of 
many of the problems they encounter 
today. (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, Ojib- 
way, 1990, p. 16) 

• The first reality I wish to address is that of 
educational expectations. While most of 
us today recognize the harmful and some- 
times devastating effects that the boarding 
school experience had on previous genera- 
tions of Indian people, we seldom consider 
the educational legacy bestowed on future 
generations by this one single action. The 
purpose of the boarding school was, after 
all, cultural genocide, and there are few 
Indian families who managed to escape its 
reaches. The boarding school was for 



many Indian people the first encounter 
with formal institutionalized education, 
and the relationship that was established 
was oppositional. Indian parents, forced to 
relinquish their children without recourse, 
hoped for two things: that their children 
would be returned to them and that in the 
process of being "civilized," their children 
would not be destroyed. The oppositional 
relationship established between Indian 
people and institutionalized education has 
been reinforced through subsequent 
generations of educational failure in public 
schools. Educators speak in flowery terms 
of quality educational outcomes, and yet 
many Indian parents of today are not un- 
like those of previous generatio ns — ex- 
pecting only that in the process of educa- 
tion, their children will not be destroyed. 
As a distinct group, Indian people have 
learned to expect little from education and, 
unfortunately, their expectations have 
been fulfilled. The first reality we must 
then confront in the education of Indian 
children is that there is a tremendous dif- 
ference between the rhetoric of education 
and what many Indian people have 
learned to realistically expect from public 
schools. (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, 
Salinas, 1990, p. 24) 

One tragedy In the history or Indian educa- 
tion is that originally education was used by 
the federal government as a weapon to 
estrange Indian children from their culture, 
their parents, their people. Education was 
an intentional act of intellectual genocide as 
it was originally introduced into Indian 
country. This is no longer the intent of 
education planners dealing with Indian 
education. But the scars or this shameful 
legacy remain. They remain in the estrange- 
ment of many Indian parents from the school 
environment They remain In the persistent 
tendency of too many federal education offi- 
cials to try logo around the grassroots Indian 
people in planning educaUon— to decide for 
them what should be done with their 
children. The Navajo Nation is committed to 
overcoming this tragic legacy. We are com- 
mitted to building with our Navajo people 
educational programs and structures that 
educate our children to the highest levels of 
competence fay building upon all that is 
strong and good in our Navajo people. (INAR 
Southwest Hearing. Haskie, 1990. p.45) 

• Indians do not necessarily want to become 
part of the melting pot. Historically, In- 
dians have been used as the kindling to 



ERIC 



3 4 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



heat the melting pot t and they do not neces- 
sarily want to be assimilated into the 
dominant society and be forced to adopt its 
values* Our community needs assess- 
ments have told us repeatedly over the 
years that Indian parents strongly want to 
retain their Indian language, culture, and 
values within their educational programs. 
Unfortunately for Indians in the schools 
today, it is like looking in a mirror and not 
being able to see your own reflection. The 
shockingly high dropout rates are a testa- 
ment to this feeling of alienation that In* 
dians feel in a non-Indian setting. (INAR 
Great Lakes Hearing, Beaulieu, 1990, p. 
29). 

Parents 1 interest in school, attitudes about 
education, amount of time spent reading to their 
children, and positive expectations about learning 
are the kinds of things that influence their own 
children's school achievement Many times, at- 
titudes of parents are rooted in their own experien- 
ces with school* If parents have had negative 
experiences themselves, they may consciously or 
even unconsciously transmit their negative feel- 
ings to their children. These attitudes are not likely 
to change without intervention. Clearly American 
Indian/Alaska Native education abounds with jus- 
tification for parental fear, caution, and open hos- 
tility towards schools and educators. As one 
Indian Nation at Risk (INAR) testifier explained, 
f The BIA has had a record of taking our Indian 
children away from their communities and sending 
them to schools 100 miles away. That was a 
deliberate effort on the government's part to as- 
similate and indoctrinate these children. We need 
to turn this around and let the family and parents 
assume more responsibility." (INAR/NACIE, Issue 
Session on Parental Involvement, 1990, p. V 

It has been well documented that the separa- 
tion of Native children from their families was the 
accepted strategy used tc assimilate the Native. 
When children were removed from their families, 
whole generations lost access to Native parenting 
models, culture, language, and traditional values. 
Not only were bonds between children and their 
fathers and mothers broken, but those with others 
who had parenting responsibilities as well. In 
more traditional Native communities, the ex- 
tended family shared responsibilities for dis- 
cipline, nurturing, guidance, and skill building. 
"As early as 1744, an Indian elder described tribal 
members who returned to tribal life from schools 
of the white man as being unfit for tribal life, not 
able to speak the tribal language well, unfit to be 
counselors, and hence were unable to make a 



worthwhile contribution to the tribe." (Christen- 
sen, Demraert, 1978, p. 139). Early on, these ties 
were intentionally severed by missionaries and by 
government policy. For example, the treaty 
negotiated in 1867 with the Comanches and 
Kiowas clearly described this intent: 

Article 7. In order to Insure the civilization 
of the tribes entering Into this treaty, the 
necessity of education is admitted • • . and 
(hey therefore pledge to compel their 
children, male and female, between the ages 
of 6 and 16 years, to attend school; and it Is 
hereby made the duty of the agent for said 
Indians to see that this stipulation is strictly 
complied with; and the United States agrees 
thai for every 30 children between said ages, 
who can be induced or compelled to attend 
school, a house shall be provided, and a 
teacher competent to teach the elementary 
branches of an English education shall be 
furnished . . .the provisions of this article to 
continue for not less than 20 years, (Hagan, 
p. 99). 

It is understood that the culture of a people is 
reflected in and passed on through their education- 
al system. Serious attention to methods and con- 
tent of education ensures that the values and the 
lifestyle of a culture are passed on to children. 
Separated from that system, other values and life- 
styles begin to dominate the child. "A major con- 
flict between cultures occurred when the federal 
government attempted to bring American Indians 
into the mainstream of society following the 1071 
conclusion of the treaty-signing period. The board- 
ing school was the primary institution encouraging 
acculturation of American Indian/Alaska Native 
youth due to the schools 1 adherence to a regime 
that reflected the military fortifications in which 
schools were housed. Different conceptions of time 
and history were taught in boarding schools, and 
Indian students were confronted with a school 
culture and curriculum vastly different from their 
own tribal reality. Students were asked to study 
history as a progressive development of societies 
as expressed by the European thought processes 
rather than a cyclical experience of nature as 
taught by their elders." (Bill, 1987, p. 37) 

Our Voices; Our Visions: American Indians 
Speak Out for Educational Excellence succinctly 
describes the coercive assimilation policy aimed at 
destroying Indian culture. 

Architects of assimilaUon targeted Indian 
children for radical resociallzation as a 
means of destroying tribal life. Traditionally, 
parents, dan members, and religious leaders 
taught children tribal values, religious 
precepts, political ideology, and other skills 
to live a well-balanced life. Under white 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Buttcrfteld* Floy Pepper 



authority, Indian children frequently suf- 
fered a torrent of abuse. Government offi- 
cials sent children to distant boarding 
schools where they were punished for speak- 
ing their own language* taught to believe that 
their Indian ways were evil, and IncuK Hed 
with values antltheUcal to tribal life. In the 
1950s, when the federal government sought 
to cancel Its trust obllgaUon to Indian tribes, 
federal budget cuts shifted emphasis from 
boarding schools to local public schools. Al- 
though most Indian students thereafter lived 
at home and attended local schools, the aim 
of state administered education remained 
essentially the same: assimilation. (AISES, 
1990. p.l) 

Numerous investigators have documented the 
imposition of education upon Native people, one in 
1928, commonly called the Meriam Report, and the 
other most notable, in 1969, enti tied Indian Educa- 
tion: A National Tragedy, A National Challenge, 

The major findings of the Meriam Report 
were that (1) Indians were excluded from 
management of their own affairs, and (2) 
Indians were receiving a poor quality of ser- 
vices (especially health and educaUon) from 
public officials who were supposed to be 
serving their needs. These two findings 
remain Just as valid today as they were more 
than 60 years ago. 

The report was highly critical of boarding 
schools, both because of their inadequate facilities 
and the manner in which they were operated. It 
condemned the practices of taking children from 
their homes and placing them in off-reservation 
boarding schools. It stressed repeatedly the need 
for a relevant instructional curriculum adapted to 
the individual needs and background of the stu- 
dents. It chided the schools for failing to corsider 
or adapt to the language of the child. It asked why 
Indians could not participate in deciding the direc- 
tion of their schools. And it suggested that public 
schools, with their traditional curriculums, were 
not the answer either. 

"The most fundamental need in Indian educa- 
tion, 11 according to the report, "is a change in point 
of view." 

The Indian family and social structure must be 
strengthened, not destroyed. The qualifications of 
teachers in Indian schools must be high, not poor 
to average. The Federal school system must be a 
model of excellence. (Kennedy, 1969, p. 83) 

At the heart of the matter, educationally at 
least Is the relationship between the Indian 
community and the public school and the 
general powerlessness the Indian feels in 
regard to the educaUon of his children. A 
recent report by the Carnegie FoundaUon 



described the relationship between white 
people, especially the white power structure, 
and Indians as 'one of the most crucial 
problems In the education of Indian 
children/ The report continued: This 
relationship frequently demeans Indians, 
destroys their self-respect and self-con- 
fidence, develops or encourages apathy and 
a sense of alienation from the educaUonal 
process, and deprives them of an oppor- 
tunity to develop the ability and experience 
to control their own affairs through par- 
ticipation In effective local government.' 
(Kennedy, 1969, p. 24) 

The conclusions of these studies echoed that the 
attempts by the federal government to educate 
Native people has dramatically eroded both the life 
style and economic position of tribes and in- 
dividuals. Historically, American Indian/Alaska 
Native people, through the intrusion process of 
education, have learned to fear schools and 
educators, while at the same time understanding 
the necessity of their existence. In the summary 
of historical findings the report entitled Indian 
Education: A National Tragedy, A National Chal- 
lenge, described the policy of coercive assimilation, 
national attitudes, and the failure of education. 

The coercive assimilation policy had disastrous 
effects on the education of Indian children. It has 
resulted in schools which fail to recognize the im- 
portance and validity of the Indian community. 
The community and child retaliate by treating the 
school as an alien institution. 

"As public opinion became more tolerant of cul- 
tural pluralism during the 1960s, Congress 
authorized funds for Indian education and cultural 
retention programs. Numerous tribes and com- 
munities took advantage of the opportunity by 
contracting with Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) 
schools, establishing local school boards, and set- 
ting up alternative schools. 11 (AISES, 1990, p. 1) 
Federal budget cuts during the late 1970s and 
1980s, however, eliminated or weakened many of 
these self-determination initiatives in education. 

The process of rebuilding communities, nurtur- 
ing and educating or re-educating Native parents 
will require tremendous time, energy, and commit- 
ment on the part of schools and tribal communities. 
Gi ven the potential for succe ss an d th e substantive 
impact that Native parental participation could 
have on the educational outcomes of Native stu- 
dents, inclusion of Native parents is critical. 
Therefore, the re-education process must begin, 
must be supportive, accepting, and participatory, 
and must allow Native parents opportunities to 
learn and build skills necessary for themselves; 
skills which, in turn, they can pass on to their 
children. 

s a 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



*.?* 



Education cannot be treated as an Institu- 
tion separate from communities. It Is part of 
us. Just as the sun, moon, stars, rain, snow, 
and wind affect us as we walk on Mother 
Earth. 

The recommendations addresskey elements for 
holistic integration. This will lead to cooperation 
from tribal leaders and elders, improve self-image 
and analytical skills among Indian children, and 
ensure that accurate cultural portrayals are in- 
tegrated in the teaching of academic competencies 
and subject areas. Ultimately, the recommenda- 
tions are offered in the interest of self-respect and 
partnership— self-respect for educators and In- 
dians alike—so that a partnership of cultural 
equality can be fostered. (AISES, 1990 p.8) 

Key Issues For American 
Indian/Alaska Native Parents 

This section will highlight contemporary at- 
titudes of American Indian/Alaska Native people 
shared during the regional hearings and issue 
forums sponsored by the Indian Nations At Risk 
(INAR) Task Force. Comments have been or- 
ganized around t<vo general headings: those over 
which educational institutions have control or in- 
fluence, and those which describe dynamics 
operating in Native communities. 

School Focused Issues 

A large number of concerns expressed during 
the INAR hearings described and criticized the 
attitudes, practices and environments of schooling 
institutions. Testimony in general did not always 
distinguish between Bureau of Indian Affairs 
schools, public schools, tribally controlled, or con- 
tract schools. These contemporary opinions con- 
tinue to reinforce historical documentation which 
maintains that schools appear to be cold, in- 
hospitable institutions, unwilling to actively reach 
out to communities, acknowledge differences in 
culture and values, and promote educational excel- 
lence validated and supported by Native people. 

Staff Attitudes 

Native people continue to have concerns about 
the attitudes and behavior of educational staff who 
seem uninformed about Native cultures and un- 
willing to change behavior. Native teachers are too 
few in number. 

Most tribal youth are attending public 
schools that are Euro-American dominated 
and controlled. In a recent article entitled 
American Indian Nation Demographics for 
1990, John Tlppeconlc reports that 82 per- 
cent of Native Americans attend public 



schools and the enrollment In BIA schools is 
decreasing. Therefore, more and more stu- 
dents are taught by non-Indian teachers. At 
a time when there is an increase In the 
cultural diversity of students, there is a 
decrease in the cultural diversity of teachers. 
According to the American Association of 
Colleges for Teacher Education, only .6 per- 
cent of the public school teachers are of 
Native American ancestry. (INAR Plains 
Hearings* Bradley, 1990. p. 1 1) 

The vast majority of teachers must learn about 
traditional Native culture. Though much has been 
done in recent history to re-educate teachers and 
principals, many still remain abysmally ignorant 
about how best to acknowledge cultural differences 
and how best to reinforce those cultural differences 
in the classroom. When Native students ex- 
perience problems, schools tend to blame parents 
and community. 

Native parents, however, expect schools to be 
responsible for correcting problems on their own 
and view educators as the professionals. Robbed 
of the opportunity to influence education, genera- 
tions of Native parents have never learned how to 
be an advocate for their children. Many Native 
parents will say they want their children to be 
educated, yet do not understand which behaviors, 
on their part, reinforce that opinion. As a result, 
schools perceive Native parents as unsupportive. 
"There is lack of parent involvement. Almost all of 
our parents want their children to get an educa- 
tion, but they do not know what education is. They 
do not have Readers Digest National f^ographic- 
or even a dictionary in their house." (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Academic Performance, 1990, p. 
15) 

Interaction with Native parents tends to focus 
on the negative, initiated most often when there is 
a problem with a student. "Often we think in 
negative terms about parents coming to school and 
being involved. When parents come to school, you 
wonder why they are there. Are they there because 
a child is in trouble? Are they there because they 
are upset and angry with the school or the 
teacher?" (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Paren- 
tal Involvement, 1990, p. 4) 

• We, as parents, don't feel welcome in public 
schools. In fact, when I go to schools, it's 
always because my child was not listening 
or some small reason, and I'm sure there 
are bigger problems faced by other 
parents. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on 
Parental Involvement, 1990, p. 4) 

♦ We can all pretend that there is a wonder- 
ful partnership between schools and 
parents, but there is not. When you come 



ERIC 



6 7 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfield, Floy Pepper 



in with a problem, you can bet that the 
institutional response is that your vhild 
has been a problem. Then they start focus- 
ing in on your child because this is how 
many institutions protect themselves. If 
you are educated and know how the system 
works, you can respond to that. If you are 
not, the school shuts the door and pegs you 
and your child as troublemakers. I think 
it's asking a lot to expect parents, who 
aren't comfortable in this foreign setting 
anyway, to go in there and assert themsel- 
ves and demand change. (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Parental Involvement, 
1990, p. 4) 

• I regret to say that the public school system 
has been abusive to my children physically 
and emotionally. I've tried to work with 
the school system, and I've talked to many 
other Indian parents who have tried to 
work with them. Most of the time when 
they ask you to work with them, it is 
regarding a discipline problem. Some- 
times a death in the family occurs, and my 
children have to be out two or threes days, 
and they are punished for supporting their 
family and its values. (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Parental Involvement, 
1990, p. 4) 

Native people repeatedly express concern about 
staff attitudes, behavior and lack of knowledge. 
Because of these perceptions on the part of Native 
parents, they are reluctant to approach the school. 

• We need to encourage non-Indian teachers 
to work with Indian parents so the children 
can see that the Indian parents and the 
non-Indian teachers have the same ideas 
about education. This is important so 
children will have confidence in their 
teachers and teachers can recognize that 
these children are just as important as 
other children in the school. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Partner- 
ships of Schools, Tribes, Communities, 
Parents and Businesses, 1990, p. 5) 

• I am a parent and was involved in Head 
Start because of the parent involvement 
component written into that program. 
However, when our son when into kinder- 
garten, our involvement tailed off. I don't 
know if that was because we were in- 
timidated by the teachers, if we were some- 
how discouraged from participating, or if 
we were made not to feel welcome. 



(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Parental 
Involvement, p. 2) 

Ignorance certainly influences staff, but Na- 
tives also report blatant racism as a contributing 
inhibitor for student success and Native parental 
participation. 1 come from a tribe that has two 
public schools within a seven-mile radius on each 
side. Why do we need a tribal school when we are 
so close to public schools? It is because we suffer a 
lot of racism in the State of Washington." 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Parental Involve- 
ment, 1990, p. 9) 

• Our kids going into ninth grade at the high 
school are facing institutionalized racism 
and cultural in sensitivity. This is espe- 
cially true in areas where there is competi- 
tion between the non-Indican and the In- 
dian communities for a treaty resource, 
such as in the Pacific Northwest where the 
tribes are fishing tribes. Some of the 
teachers are commercial fishermen them- 
selves, and thus there is a lot of an- 
tagonism because they are competing 
during the summer months for money. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Parental 
Involvement, 1990, p. 9) 

• Students face blatant racism in their clas- 
ses. In one district in Northwest 
Washington, high school students were re- 
quired to take a class in Pacific Northwest 
history. Because teachers could use sup- 
plemental materials that did not have to 
be reviewed by a curriculum board, some 
teachers were using materials that were 
extremely racist and sexist. One teacher 
showed a movie and clapped every time an 
Indian got killed. 

This school imposed an attendance policy that 
was extremely punitive. If a student missed ten 
days of school within a semester, he or she had to 
petition for academic credit for that semester, 
regardless of academic standing. The school 
doesn't consider whether you might be sick, attend- 
ing ceremonials, or helping your family fish. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Parental Involve- 
ment, 1990, p. 9) 

• Three years ago I had traditional people 
and parents come to a meeting. They 
began to discuss some of their problems 
and I couldn't believe what I heard. Indian 
children were not allowed to hang their 
coats with the white students, they were 
never chosen for classroom help, they were 
chosen last to do anything, and they were 
never chosen to be student of the month. 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



One of the biggest proolems is the 
prejudice of teachers. They only acknow- 
ledge Indians on Thanksgiving or when it 
is time for filling out funding papers. All 
Indian students are geared toward voca- 
tional education, they are never counseled 
for college-bound courses. I had a problem 
with my son and asked the school to change 
his courses, I was told all Indians go to 
voc-tech. (INAR Plains Hearing, 
Kootswtewa, 1990, p. 83) 

Reluctance to change on the part of some school 
personnel is a mqjor issue in too many Native 
communities. 

• Lower Kuskowim School District in 
Bethel, Alaska has 23 schools serving 
3,000 students, 19 of which provide in- 
struction in the Native language up to 
grade three, when the transition to English 
begins. We have 270 teachers, 200 of 
whom are Anglos. We are looking for some 
kind of academic preparation by the 
teachers to fully understand the Native 
students and what we've been going 
through the past couple of years has been 
very troublesome. In teacher negotiations 
we asked that teachers become academi- 
cally prepared with at least six credits of 
our Yipik language and culture before they 
become permanent. 

There has been severe teacher resistance to 
doing this, while the board and parents feel it is 
absolutely essential. Teachers argue that they can 
become familiar with our language and culture just 
by being there. Our stand is that they need formal 
academic preparation in these areas. We have 
added incentives to the negotiations by (1) offering 
every teacher a $1,000 across the board raise, (2) 
offering a one percent increase over three years, 
and (3) offering to pay for all of the courses and 
materials. But the teachers said absolutely not, so 
it has been very difficult and I am not sure how you 
formulate a successful policy. (INAR/NACIE, Issue 
Session on Native Language and Culture, 1990, p. 
7) 

Another aspect of school related issues, relative 
to teachers is the concern for high staff turnover 
rates in rural, isolated Native schools. 'The turn- 
over rate of non-Indian teachers on reservations 
creates a lack of continuity in staff development 
and systematic planning of high quality instruc- 
tional delivery. Many non-Indian teachers have 
the empathy, understanding, caring, cultural 
awareness, and sensitivity that is necessary to 
teach Indian students; the important point was 
that they quite often do not stay in rural/reserva- 



ERIC 



tion areas where they are sorely needed." (INAR 
Southwest Hearing, Swisher, 1990, p. 10) 

School Environment 

The physical location and condition of school 
buildings also influences perceptions of Native 
parents. Many times schools resemble compounds 
enclosed within fences. Still others are set apart 
from the community in inaccessible places. Off 
reservation schools are so remote that access for 
most Native parents is not only unlikely but impos- 
sible. 

• This is particularly true of Indian students 
living in rural settings like the Navajo and 
Hope reservations. Extreme distance be- 
tween high schools in the Navajo Nation 
necessitates boarding schools for these 
young people. Unfortunately, this form of 
isolation from home and community 
creates emotional hardships for Indian 
youth. The resultant problems most often 
cited by staff at these boarding facilities 
are disruptive behavior, lack of motivation 
and career goals, drug and alcohol abuse, 
and teen sex and pregnancy. (INAR 
Southwest Hearing, Sakiestewa, 1990, p. 
5) 

• In one area, students are traveling 60 
miles to attend public schools when there 
is a boarding school nearby. Nothing could 
be done about this situation because public 
school policy overrides the desires of the 
tribes and parents have a choice of where 
to send their children. 

• Our Indian students are isolated from the 
world at large and are subject to print and 
media poverty, as well as low income. 
Teachers commute from long distances- 
Phoenix, Tucson, Ajo, and Santa Rosa 
Boarding School*- and must commute 35- 
130 miles and have a lot of car problems. 
San Simon School has high retention of 
staff and teachers. The school needs a 
satellite dish and cable hookups for access 
to educational TV and university 
programs. (INAR Southwest Hearing, 
Mason, 1990, p.27-28) 

Many schools are closed and unavailable 
during evenings and on weekends. Grounds and 
structures too often are not maintained, giving 
schools a run down appearance. Tribally control- 
led schools often are relegated to the most 
Hilapidated buildings. This implies that education 
occurring in these types of facilities is not as good 
as that which occurs in "the real" school building. 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfield, Floy Pepper 



If Native parents make it through the school 
door, they rarely see evidence of culture in the halls 
or on classroom bulletin boards. Simple validation 
of the community in which the school sits is severe- 
ly limited. For example: In a school on the North* 
ern Cheyenne Reservation during March, every 
classroom had shamrocks and little green 
leprechauns except for one. That classroom alone 
had displayed a Native in regalia reaching out to a 
cavalry officer with a caption designating March as 
a time when Cheyenne people ceded land to United 
States government. 

The exclusion and intimidation of parents may 
occur because of subtle things. 

• I went to visit Chemawa with my mother 
because my grandmother had gone there. 
We walked into that place and the 
secretarial area was built up at least a foot, 
maybe two feet, off the floor from the recep- 
tion area so that when the secretary came 
up and talked to us, she looked down over 
this counter. And my mother, this adult 
person whom I always thought of as being 
forward, could not talk. That, I think, is a 
trained, learned response. When schools 
are all designed that way, how do you ex- 
pect Indian people to come in, take control 
and develop policies and curriculum? 
There are horrible breakdowns in com- 
munities that need to be regenerated. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Parental 
Involvement, 1990, p. 4) 

• The parents just got tired of putting up 
with the racism and bigotry in the public 
schools and decided to start their own 
school. One of the schools, Circle of Life at 
White Earth, was funded and started with 
a Title IV grant. The other schools joined 
in the contracting route and got on a two- 
year funding cycle. All of the schools have 
very poor physical facilities. 

Chief Bug-o-nay-ge-shig is probably the best 
school around. They have a brand new building 
and they keep adding as they grow. Nay-Ah-Shing 
started out in a trailer house and eventually moved 
over into the tribal headquarters offices. Fond du 
Lac is in a building that was originally designed as 
a Head Start facility for little kids. So it has little 
bitty sinks and little bitty desks. The building was 
really inadequate even for Head Start because it is 
so small. 

We have an Ojibwe school that is wood frame 
construction. It is not very good in terms of fire 
safety or having water. Circle of Life is in a build- 
ing that was at one time turned over to the state to 
serve as a public school. A clause in the contract 



stated that when the state returned it to the tribe 
it would be in the same condition as when it was 
originally turned over to them. The state has 
never lived up to that contract, if it isn't up to 
standard. We are now in the process of trying to 
remodel those buildings, but the money we have 
received is not adequate to brirt; them up to stand* 
ard. (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, Tanner, 1990, 
p.57) 

Schools which do not integrate Native culture 
into the core curriculum, give the message that 
education has little to do with the everyday life of 
Native people. Rather than ignoring Native cul- 
tures, schools should be celebrating them. It's 
difficult for parents to be part of something which 
appears to be so alien. 

• In order fbi Western education to be a part 
of the value system of Indian communities, 
Indians have to see the worth of education. 
After several hundred years of having 
education imposed upon them, it's never 
really been a part of the value system. It's 
been a long, hard, struggle, but I think thrt 
a lot of parents are beginning to realize 
that there is value in education. However, 
there are still people who are punished for 
speaking their Native language and who 
experienced Christianity coming in and 
saying that their culture was the devil's 
work. It hes to take a whole re-education 
of Indian people to make them committed 
to this kind of education. (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Partnerships of Schools, 
Tribes, Communities, Parents and Busi- 
nesses, 1990, p. 5) 

• It would be very nice to think that the 
teaching of culture could occur at home, 
but that's not always the case. A lot of our 
traditional language and culture is being 
lost right now and it can't be taught in the 
home. That is why we reinforce it at 
school. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on 
Parental Involvement, 1990, p. 9) 

One Chickasaw educatorfrom the University of 
Alaska, Fairbanks, summarized eloquently that 
schools should be Indianized. 

So my belief Is that we need to lndianize 
Indian Education. We need to lndianize the 
philosophy, the texts, the approach, the 
methods, the content, etc.. .We also need a 
different yardstick and we need to raise the 
standard for Indian education. Indian 
education maintains a continuity with tradi- 
tion. Our traditions define and p'eserve us. 
It is important to understand that this con- 
tinuity with tradition Is neither a rejection of 



ER?C 



9 10 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



the artifacts of other cultures nor an attempt 
to turn back the clock. 

Indian education demands relationships of per- 
sonal respect Respect between different age 
groups, between humans and the rest of nature, 
and respect for different cultures and beliefs is an 
essential value of Indian people. This emphasis on 
respectful relationships recognizes that the quality 
of individual life depends on the quality of group 
life. Similarly, a respectful relationship with na- 
ture means that we are not the conquerors but 
nature's equal. In education the respect between 
students and teachers is a personal relationship 
that recognizes the knowledge and worth of each. 
(INAR Northwest Hearing, Hampton, 1990, p. 34- 
35) 

Declining Native Parent 
Participation 

Schools tend to involve parents less and less as 
children progress through the grades. Interesting- 
ly enough, achievement and attendance tend to 
drop as students progress through the grades. As 
research suggests, parental support has powerful 
affects at the early childhood level, yet it should be 
sustained throughout the schooling years. Since 
Native students begin dropping out at the junior 
high school levels, involvement and support of Na- 
tive parents should increase, not decrease. 

The departmentalization of junior high and 
high schools further isolates and alienates not only 
Native students, but their parents as well. Rather 
than having to communicate with one teacher, 
Native parents must interact with half a dozen 
teachers in many different classroom settings. 

In many Native communities, urban and reser- 
vation alike, parental involvement starts during 
Head Start but deteriorates by the end of middle 
school The middle school years are extremely 
crucial times; times when Native parents really 
need to give support and assistance to the youth 
who are facing adolescence. 

• At the same time it is important to prepare 
students and parents by telling them that 
they are going to find these kinds of people 
at the high school and they may be grouchy 
and give you a hard time. This way they 
will know what to expect when they get 
there. In our Indian education program we 
try to cushion and buffer this process as 
best we can, but we can't be everywhere at 
once. If students know what to expect, it 
may be easier for them to take and they 
will be willing to put up with a little of it to 
stay in school. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Ses- 
sion on Drop Out Prevention, 1990, p. 8) 



• It would help if there was a way to enable 
parents to go and visit their children in 
college. I know it would have helped me 
when 1 was struggling through my first 
year of Khool. When a relative shows up 
and sees that you're really trying, it makes 
you try harder. (INAR/NIEA, Issue Ses- 
sion on Postsecondary Education, 1990, p. 
3) 

Native Community Issues 

The other side of the school-community 
partnership is the Native community. The Native 
community itself is a contradiction; offering 
tremendous strength and pride yet struggling with 
inordinate abuse, alcoholism, poverty and dysfunc- 
tion. 

• We are a distinct and proud people with a 
heritage which is as old as time and as new 
as tomorrow. Our culture and our unique 
view of this world and man's place in it 
have much to give to the larger society of 
the United States and to the world com- 
munity. In this age of nuclear threat and 
environmental crises, the Navajo perspec- 
tive on man and his world is being looked 
to in order to bring Man into harmony with 
his world once again. We want to be equal 
to this challenge. We want our children to 
be so strong in their educational attain- 
ment and so solid in their Navqjo heritage 
that they can bring to the world some of the 
wisdom and insight that it will need in the 
21st century. (INAR Southwest Hearing, 
Haskie, 1990, p. 6) 

• When children are born into dysfunctional 
families-whether it be alcohol or drugs, a 
parent with mental illness, or the absence 
ofa parent-this is the beginning of victim- 
less. They are unconscious of becoming 
victims as they get caught up in compul- 
sive behavior and replay their victim role. 
These people make negative choices that 
negatively affect self-esteem. In other 
words, self-esteem is damaged by the dys- 
function students are brought up in. 
(INARPlains Hearing, Young, 1990, p. 20) 

Issues Which Apply to Most Native 
Schools 

Many factors continue to inhibit Native paren- 
tal participation with schools Dynamics over 
which larg* numbers of Native parents have min- 
imal contra* include illiteracy, low socio-economic 
status, poor parental self-esteem, dysfunctional 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Ploy Pepper 



family relationships and poor health conditions. 
These issues exist across communities whether on 
the reservation or in the cities. 

Illiteracy 

The lack of educational role models continues 
to plague Indian communities. Evidence that Na- 
tive people can get a good education and still main* 
tain a traditional lifestyle are needed. The ability 
to read directly impacts the ability of Native 
parents to chart their own course. 

I teach adult educaUon at the Denver Indian 
School. We are all educators speaking here 
today, and we are all Into pushing our 
children into educaUon. I am educaUng 
people whose academic grade levels are zero 
through three or eight. One of the reasons 
they want to learn is so they can teach and 
work with their children. They want to be 
able to read to their children. (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Academic Performance. 
1990, p. 15) 

• Family illiteracy keeps Indian youth from 
mastering basic literacy skills. Therefore, 
the Adult Basic Education and GED 
preparation classes offered at Seattle In- 
dian Center are critical to achieving 
literacy for the Native American com- 
munity as a whole. When the children 
acknowledge that education is important 
to their parents, it then becomes more im- 
portant to them (INAR Northwest Hear- 
ing, Egawa p.48) 

Economic Conditions 

• Sixty-six percent (66%) of our Indian 
families in St. Paul live in poverty. By the 
free lunch program guidelines, we are talk- 
ing about a family of four living on $452 a 
month, a family of six living on $675 every 
two weeks. I know that this high incidence 
of poverty is not news to you. (INAR Great 
Lakes Hearing, Gagnon, 1990, p. 59) 

• The economic situation of approximately 
69% of the enrolled members is well below 
the poverty level, as the 69% are un- 
employed. Therefore, the Colville Indian 
children of this area are entering schools 
with a low esteem of their families, as well 
as of their communities which have little 
extra curricular activities available for 
school-aged children. Our goal is to edu- 
cate and keep the children in school, 
providing technical assistance in any way 
possible through the school system. (INAR 
Northwest Hearing, Aripa, 1990, p.50) 



Lack of Parental Self Esteem 
Certainly, parent's perceptions of their own 
personal worth and influence will in some way 
impact their children. Many Native parents are 
strongly grounded in Native culture and feel good 
about themselves. Yet far too many others have 
severe self-esteem problems, resulting in be* 
haviors of alcoholism and abuse. 

• The Nespelem Elementary School District 
has 99* of enrolled Indian children being 
served in grades K-6, The children in the 
elementary school system do not progress 
academically as expected in a non-Indian 
situation. The megority of parents did not 
have an opportunity to integrate socially, 
therefore, children have developed the at- 
titude that to integrate with other races is 
demeaning to their heritage as the 
aboriginal habitants. There are occasions 
when students can excel if motivated to the 
point where their self-esteem regarding 
their Native American Heritage has been 
developed by parents, school teachers, as 
well as the community leaders. (INAR 
Northwest Hearing, Aripa, 1990, p.50) 

Dysfunctional Families/Drugs and 
Alcohol 

• We do a disservice to our people when we 
always stress the families that are dys- 
functional and abuse alcohol. We need to 
also give credit to those families who do 
ra se their children well and are providing 
vupport for their education and personal 
growth. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on 
Health, Wellness, and Substance Abuse 
Prevention, 1990, p. 1) 

• Our tribal council passed a resolution stat- 
ing that our tribe would be alcohol and 
drug free within the next year or two. Con- 
sequently, there has been a lot of study on 
the addictive and dysfunctional com- 
munities and families. We discovered that 
even if you don't drink now, you may have 
inherited dysfunctional behaviors, and 
this is one of the reasons that we as adults 
can't help our children. I think that federal 
agencies have to better coordinate the 
programs and the resources that we have 
to educate our tribal leaders and parent 
committees because then this information 
will filter down to the communities* 

• With therecent emphasis on the identifica- 
tion and treatment of Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome (FAS) and Fetal Alcoholic Af- 



ERJC 



1 Q 
11 l£ 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



fects (FAE), we are expecting a significant 
increase in the number of special education 
students served due to theae conditions. 
We have discovered that we are beginning 
to serve FAS students who have one or 
both FAS parents. Fourteen and nine 
tenths percent (14.9%) of our students 
have been identified as needing special 
education. With ongoing efforts to identify 
and treat FAS and FAE children, we an- 
ticipate that this number will increase sig- 
nificantly. (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, 
Thacker, 1990, p.3) 

Parental Choice 

Movement within urban areas from school to 
school is a real issue which can detrimentally affect 
student achievement and parental participation. 
Movement between schools may be due to parental 
choice, family dysfunctioning or poverty. 

• However, it is actually not the parents 
making choices, but the students. Conse- 
quently, the mobility rate is high and these 
students are not achieving because they 
spend a lot of time transferring from one 
school to another. The students enter one 
public school and are not able to identify 
with the curriculum so they go to another 
school. This goes on throughout the year. 
(INAR/NIEA, Issue Session on Partner- 
ships of Schools, Tribes, Communities, 
Parents and Businesses, 1990, p.6) 

• My area of concern is in the realm of paren- 
tal rights, and according to the Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR), code 25 CFR 
states that parents have the right to send 
their students to whatever school they 
deem appropriate to meet the needs of the 
child. We are a tribal boarding school- 
and I must underscore tribal in that we feel 
we are not in the realm that we were 30 to 
40 years ago as far as boarding schools go. 
As day schools go, we are among the top in 
Indian education and many parents would 
like to send their children to Marty School, 
but they are denied this option because we 
are not "an approved BIA facility." This 
determination by BIA officials is contrary 
to CFR and should no longer be practiced 
or allowed. (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, 
Wright, 1990, p.30) 

• Educators across the nation seem to be 
using parental choice as a front or a reason 
to allow students to go to schools of their 
choice, but many times those students will 
go to no less than two schools in a year. We 

ERLC 



have three BIA schools within a radius of 
50 miles that are surrounded by a public 
school system and we have kids leaving our 
school within the first three months to go 
elsewhere. However, they end up coming 
back to our school because it is close to 
their home and their community. We end 
up receiving those kids back in late March 
or April, and we don't know if we should 
promote them, 

I agree that parents should have a choice of 
where \o send their children, but the problem is 
that the students are the ones making those 
decisions. We need to form a partnership with 
parents so they trust the schools and don't leave 
the choice up to their children. (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Parental Involvement, 1990, p. 1) 

• Parents have a role to play in dropout 
prevention, especially as advocates for 
their child's education. Sometimes 
parents have to make a choice between 
living in an urban setting where you may 
lose touch with your language and culture. 
These are hard choices, but to me it is 
important that parents maintain their 
sense of direction. When you do have your 
culture and your language, it is a big plus 
and something you can resort back to. But 
my two children are going to a prep school, 
by my choice, so they will be prepared for 
a better life. As parents we do have a 
choice of preventing our children from 
dropping out by saying, "Hey, this is the 
direction I want you to take." Most 
children are looking for direction from 
their Elders, from family, teachers, coun- 
selors, and other adults. (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Drop Out Prevention, 
1990, p. 15) 

• In support of a statement made by Lauro 
Cavazos at the Alaska NIEA meeting last 
year, I believe that Indian parents should 
have a choice of education. If they feel that 
their children could be provided a higher 
quality education in another district, they 
should be free to send them there. Again, 
specifying the State of New York, we have 
the unique situation where the state 
provides funds to schools that have a large 
Indian population on a per student basis, 
which is used by the schools to cover school 
expenses, including transportation. Al- 
though improved from 20 years ago, Indian 
input on the spending of these funds is 
limited, and Indian parents would prefer 
to have a direct voucher system whereby 

23 



I 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfield, Floy Pepper 



they could enroll their children in the dis- 
trict of their choice, (INAR Eastern Hear- 
ing, Stock, 1990, p. 6) 

Extended Family 

Unlike the other issues addressed in this sec- 
tion, issues related to the nature of Native ex- 
tended families is nfll a deficit It is a dynamic 
which is often not acknowledged, or is 
misunderstood by educational staff. Extended 
family relationships have significant implications 
for parenting in Native communities. Extended 
family members may be very effective supporters 
of education for Native children. When biological 
parents are not available, grandparents and aunts 
or uncle should be utilized. 

• The traditional extended family provides 
Ojibwe communities with a balanced 
division of tasks and workers for genera- 
tions. This natural support system 
provided roles for individuals of all ages. 
Elders were a particularly important part 
of the extended family and were revered for 
their experiences — in individual and fami- 
ly life, child rearing, history, music, and 
crafts — but especially because they were 
the link with the past and the bearers of 
tradition, culture, and spirituality. One of 
their key functions was the transmission 
of Ojibwe cultural heritage to the young... 
Today, a breakdown of the extended family 
unit and a de-emphasis on cultural tradi- 
tions is very evident on the Lac Courte 
Oreilles Indian Reservation, and the role 
of the Elders has been diminished in the 
community. As a result, the community is 
weakened and traditional cultural beliefs, 
values and Ojibwe language are not being 
passed on to children and families as they 
were in the past Many factors leading to 
instabilities operate in a complex way to 
exert pressure on families, but the follow- 
ing areas can be singled out as large con- 
tributors to the breakdown of cultural 
values systems and traditions on the 
Reservation. (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, 
Benton, 1990, p.63) 

Issues of Reservation Schools 

Reservation communities because of isolation 
and unique funding requirements for schools, face 
additional hurdles over which Native parents must 
negotiate. 

• The South Dakota Department of Educa- 
tion ranks school districts in the state 
regarding the number of M needy n students. 




They rank Todd County School District as 
fifth (88.32%). The top four are districts 
serving a majority of American Indian stu- 
dents. We are a rural and isolated district. 
We transport 81.45% of our students, 
which ranks eighth in the state. We rank 
third in the state for the percentage of 
dropouts. Numbers one and two are also 
districts serving a majority of American 
Indian students. Our FY 90 expenditures 
per student, $4,098.24, ranked 55th of 191 
public school districts in the state. Be- 
cause of our taxable land, we are able to 
generate only $406.95 of our expenditure 
per student at the local level. In this 
regard, we rank last in the state. (INAR 
Great Lakes Hearing, Thacker, 1990, p.3) 

• It is our strong belief, and one that is 
shared by the Governor of the State of 
South Dakota, that the education of an 
American Indian student is more costly 
than the education of the majority student. 
Governor Mickelson estimated that the 
cost is about 65 percent higher for the 
American Indian student. To name a few 
areas of need which cause our expenditure 
per child to increase: We need smaller 
classes, more instructional aides, support 
for the cafeteria fund to provide breakfast 
and lunch, support for the transportation 
fund, more varied materials, more sup- 
plemental programs, remedial programs, 
programs to help students lean and retain 
culture, programs which help with lan- 
guage deficiency problems found in iso- 
lated bilingual cultures, support for 
parents to purchase school supplies and 
clothes, support for parents to be able to 
participate in school functions, programs 
which provide personnel who help improve 
the communication between the home and 
the school, programs which provide incen- 
tive for students for improved attendance, 
behavior, and grades, and many other 
programs which are too numerous to men- 
tion. (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, Thack- 
er, 1990, p.3) 

• Many veiy young children serve as the 
primary care providers for their younger 
siblings while their parents are on a binge. 
Less than half of the families have 
transportation. Less than 30% of the 
households have a telephone. The average 
age on the Rosebud is approximately 26. 
Over 50% of the population is under 20. 
This portends an increase in school-age 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



population. (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, 
Thacker, 1990, p.3) 

Impact Aid and School Funding Issues 

• School districts that receive Impact Aid 
should have a board of Indian education 
commissioners comprised of parents, 
school district employees, and tribal repre- 
sentatives to address problems or improve- 
ments that need to be made. This board 
should have clout with the federal govern* 
ment to make recommendations for sanc- 
tions against school districts so that dis- 
tricts can't get Impact Aid unless they 
respond to the needs of our students. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Parental 
Involvement, 1990, p. 10) 

• My recommendation... would be that the 
federal government stop providing any 
funds whatsoever for any kind of Indian 
education programs or aid to public schools 
unless and until there is a way to tie that 
aid to programs that are dirsctly controlled 
by Native Americans themselves. The 
other approach has not worked and in fact 
has given people an excuse to point to all 
the efforts that have been made as a way 
of excusing the virtually worthless results 
they bring about. My recommendation 
suggests a radical approach, but I think 
that the public education system in our 
country is so entrenched and 
bureaucratized that good teachers, ad- 
ministrators and parents feel handcuffed 
when it comes to making change. (INAR 
Great Lakes Hearing, Wallace, 1990, p.10) 

Issues of Urban Schools 

Natives who live in urban communities under- 
go many hardships which make it difficult to main- 
tain a stable home environment. American 
Indian/Alaska Natives who leave their rural reser- 
vation settings for the city are confronted with 
different problems and needs than those Natives 
who remain on the reservation. The move to the 
city puts a strain on families, especially families 
with traditional ways. " We're not trying to take 
away from the reservation people at all,* the Urban 
Indian says. "But the needs are as great for In- 
dians in the city as they are for Indians on the 
reservation — perhaps greater because they are 
away from friends and family in what amounts to 
a foreign world." 

• While statistical data regarding Indian 
education is limited, what is clear is that 
public institutions in Chicago fail Indian 



students at a level greater than that of any 
other racial minority. Currently, Indian 
enrollment in Chicago Public Schools is 
689; 510 are in elementary school, and 179 
are in high school. 

Based on statistics provided by the Chicago 
School Board 65.9 percent of these students will 
not graduate from high school. While the specific 
data in regard to achievement is sketchy, what 
appears to occur is a sharp decline after the fourth 
grade. By the eighth grade, most Indian students 
are about two years behind in their reading level. 

For those students who do make it to high 
school, informal statistics indicate that they are 
three years below grade level in reading by the 
time they enter the tenth grade. The largest 
dropout rate appears to be after the tenth grade. 
Of special concern is that the dropout rate for 
Ameri :an Indian students in Chicago Public 
Schools is increasing in contrast to all other 
minority groups who are experiencing slight im- 
provements. 

The Chicago Panel of Public School finance 
reports that a primary indicator for success in 
school is family income level. The 1980 U.S. Cen- 
sus indicated that Indians represented the poorest 
group in the city, with 40 percent at or below the 
poverty level. Low family income would indicate 
that these children attend schools in poor neigh- 
borhoods in schools already plagued with problems 
of drugs, gangs, and limited resources. (INAR 
Great Lakes Hearing, Eichhorn, 1990, p.44) 

• The second reality, closely tied to the first, 
is that thefuture of Indian education in our 
area is intrinsically tied to the future of 
public education. While we are fortunate 
to have non-public alternative Indian 
schools in our cities, the funding needed to 
expand these alternatives is not available 
at the state or federal level, nor from the 
private sector. 

The education of the majority of Indian children 
in our urban area will continue to be carried out at 
the mercy of the public schools. I say "mercy" 
because good things happen for Indian children in 
public schools. At the discretion of those in power, 
At times, our very activist Indian community is 
able to influence the outcome, but too often we are 
not. As urban Indian people we do not have sus- 
tained access t those who make educational 
decisions, so we do what we can when we can to 
advocate a more responsive educational system for 
our children. 

The third reality we must face, and one which 
I think makes the Minneapolis situation different 



9 

ERIC 



14 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



from others, is that our young people are increas- 
ingly assuming the profile of other disadvantaged 
intercity youth. We have at least two organized 
Indian gangs in Minneapolis ranging in age from 
12 to the late 20s. During the past summer, we 
have experienced increased inter-gang rivalry be- 
tween Indian gangs and more sophisticated groups 
like the Bloods and Crips. Drive-by shootings, long 
common in other large urban centers, are begin- 
ning to routinely occur in Minneapolis and increas- 
ingly involve innocent Indian community victims. 

Young people are afraid on their way to school 
and afraid once they get to school that they or 
someone close to them will be the next victim of the 
violence. Many of our young men routinely carry 
weapons in the community and into our schools. 
During the past year, there were reports of Indian 
children as young as third grade carrying guns to 
school. 

While both the Minneapolis and St. Paul school 
systems are making what I believe to be legitimate 
attempts to become more responsive to Indian 
students, urban Indian people actually have less 
influence in broader educational policy decisions 
than at previous times. Due to the resettlement of 
large numbers of Southeast Asian refugees in Min- 
nesota, we are now the smallest minority group in 
the metro area and possibly in the state. We are, 
based on racial identification, subsumed under 
policies designed to respond to the needs of other 
groups of color. And because we are urban Indians, 
decision makers are less willing to accept our ar- 
guments for distinct legal/political status. (INAR 
Great Lakes Hearing, Salinas, 1990, p.25) 

American Indian/Alaska Natives in urban 
areas live in the middle of other cultures and 
environments that are foreign to them. They may 
face unemployment or minimum wage jobs and 
lack of help from welfare. They may feel lonely, 
frightened, and fear losing their cultural identity. 
They may be confronted with impersonal behavior, 
attitudes and values and a different type of poverty 
from that of the reservation. They may encounter 
a physical environment of concrete walls, and so- 
cial organizations that turn a deaf ear. 

• There are no programs available for urban 
Indians. The Indian Head Start money 
goes to reservations and it does not go the 
urban areas for Indian children. Further- 
more, Indian children and families do not 
usually participate in urban programs run 
by the region. Either they don't know 
about the programs because the recruiting 
isn't right, or they don't stay in programs 
because they don't feel wanted. 



(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Early 
Childhood Education, 1990, p. 8) 

• Indian children who are unaffiliated with 
a ' ribe are being denied services. We need 
unaffiliated Indian early childhood educa- 
tion monies available because currently we 
are recognized as Indians on the state 
level, but because we are not affiliated with 
a tribe, we are not granted federal status. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Early 
Childhood Education, 1990, p. 8) 

American Indian/Alaska Natives living in 
urban areas usually rely on other urban Indians 
tor mutual aid, and develop a system of exchange 
goods, services, and emotional support. However, 
they may have limited means of communicating 
with other Indians in the urban area. Many may 
have limited means of having their needs and 
demands heard by social service agencies. 

Urban Native families face the lack of work- 
able .culturally sensitive services and they face 
rapid social change. There is a gap between the 
needs of urban Native families and available ser- 
vice. However, not all Native family systems ex- 
perience these problems at equal levels. 

When working with Native families, the worker 
often falls into the trap of working on ill-defined, 
symptomatic issues or needs. These issues or 
needs are often translated into objectives for 
educational projects. Then the service agency lays 
the blame directly on native parents for lack of 
discipline and guidance and indirectly on Native 
families by blaming Native students. In this 
scenario each side may blame the other. It is the 
tendency of the dominant society to blame those 
who suffer from a problem as causing the problem. 
They seldom, if ever, look at agency behavior. 

One of the most devastating aspects of Native 
life in the urban area is the use of alcohol and 
drugs. Alcohol is the principle social and medical 
problem of the Native population. This, in turn, 
leads to other devastating problems such as low 
self esteem, domestic violence, unemployment and 
a multifaceted ranpe of compounded social 
problems. These problems cause many Native 
families to become dysfunctional. For the 15 to 44 
year old Native, the death rate is twelve times 
higher than for any other race. 

Native life in the urban area is highly mobil. 
Trucks, vans, and cars are more than a means of 
transportation. They provide Natives access to 
Indian ceremonies and pow-wows, visits to other 
Native gatherings, and reservations. 

Acculturation plays a large role in a family's 
sense of identity. The style of communication in 
the traditional Indian family is one of patience and 



ERLC 



15 16 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



respect. The acculturation process motivates 
urban Native families toward belonging, wanting 
to be part of the whole in order to contribute. 
Native families may try to socialize their children 
to be able to survive in a majority culture by train- 
ing them to deal with racism through anger. They 
may feel they have to fight to belong in order to 
overcome the social and economic obstacles placed 
before them. 

The educational system of urban life provide 
one more institutional hurdle over which Native 
parents must learn to negotiate. Because of their 
isolation, insecurity and fear, many urban Native 
parents require exceptional support, reassurance 
and assistance. On the other end of the spectrum, 
however, are many urban Native success stories; 
individuals who have completed their formal 
education process and have learned a great deal 
about how to impact institutions. There are Na- 
tives from all social, economic, and educational 
levels who are Urban Natives by choice. Many 
natives mif, ate to the cities, stay and raise their 
families. They represent a successful Native in a 
modern world. 

Many Urban Native youth feel the need to 
identify and assert their culture and maintain or 
reestablish weakened connections with tribes, 
tribal life and reservations because only through 
tribal enrollment is one technically validated as an 
Indian. This dichotomy, or other extreme, tends to 
fragment the possible community cohesiveness in 
urban areas, culturally bringing people together, 
yet keeping them apart. 

Desegregation in Urban Schools 

Desegregation has been viewed as harmful to 
Native education. It has hurt Native students by 
scattering and isolating them from their peers and 
making it costly and difficult to provide effective 
cultural programs and support services. Brown vs. 
BoardofEducationhasbeen a benign weapon with 
a disastrous impact on Native American students. 

• The specter of metro-wide desegregation is 
a frightening one for me. I hear horror 
stories from middle class Indian families 
who have children attending suburban 
school districts, and those of predominate- 
ly white districts seem even less tolerant of 
a diverse student population than those 
schools in the inner city. American In- 
dians are tribal people. Our social system, 
cultural values, and interdependence have 
been essential to our survival in the face of 
systematic attempts to exterminate us. 
Successful Indian education programs af- 
firm this tribal membership, and use group 



approaches and a culturally relevant cur- 
riculum to help Indian students survive 
the gauntlet of the mcgority educational 
system. 

Because of the tribal nature of Indian students, 
they need to be gathered together to survive in a 
non-Indian system. An Indian school would also 
help to counteract the discriminatory effects of 
desegregation toward Indians. After all, what is 
the value of espousing the values of diversity and 
integration if the result is that there are few In* 
dians left to contribute to its diversity? 

Choice is meaningless unless you allow access 
to those choices. (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, 
Beaulieau, 1990, p.30) 

• Historically, to isolate and ostracize a 
member from their tribe in a hostile en- 
vironment was to sentence that person to 
certain death. Currently, to isolate an In- 
dian student in the hostile environment of 
the public school system without the sup- 
port of the group or respect of their cultural 
differences is to sentence that student to 
certain failure in school and a future 
without hope. 

No two minority groups share the same ex- 
perience. Neither have all minorities been dis- 
criminated against in the same manner. A remedy 
to redress the injustices suffered by one minority 
group can be, unintentionally, a further form of 
discrimination when applied to "help" a different 
minority group. Such is the case with the public 
school's desegregation policy when applied to 
American Indians. In implementing such policies, 
each distinct group must be examined in light of its 
own unique set of circumstances, and not simplis- 
tically lumped together as "minorities." (INAR 
Great Lakes Hearing, Beaulieau, 1990, p.29) 

• Even in cities with strong Indian ac- 
tivist/advocate groups and responsive 
politicians and school administrators, Na- 
tive people are a small enough minority 
that their needs are subsumed under 
policies designed to serve the needs of 
other groups of color. When the impact of 
these policies can be demonstrated to be 
negative, waivers and other alternatives 
must be allowed to reverse this impact. 

American Indian/Alaska Natives are a tribal 
people and Native students learn best when there 
is a "critical mass" together in one site. Therefore, 
urban Native children should be brought together 
in schools of choice, such as magnet schools. 

I am here today to call out on behalf of Indian 
parents who have children attending urban public 



ERLC 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



schools. From my experience, school desegrega- 
tion, as it has been practiced in Minneapolis and 
other cities, has been harmful to Indian education, 
and I feel that we must allow Native American 
students the option of an "Indian choice" as an 
educational opportunity. 

Over the past 10 years the Minneapolis School 
District has drastically reorganized to achieve ra- 
cial balance. Phillips Junior High, a school in the 
heart of the Indian community with one of the 
largest Native populations in the state, was closed. 
Racially controlled enrollment was enforced, at- 
tendance boundaries were manipulated, magnet 
schools were started, and suddenly, Indian stu- 
dents found themselves scattered to all corners of 
the city and isolated from their peers and Indian 
support services. The adverse effects of desegrega- 
tion were immediately and keenly felt by Indians. 
(INAR Great Lakes Hearing, Beaulieu, 1990, p.28) 

• In advocating an Indian school choice for 
Native American children, we are not 
trying to undo all of the hard-fought gains 
that have been made in civil rights in the 
past. Indians have a unique status dif- 
ferent from all other minorities in this 
country. Our unique legal and political 
status, as well as our special educational 
and cultural needs, have been acknow- 
ledged on federal and state levels. Statis- 
tics have made clear that the system has 
failed Indians, and we want the oppor- 
tunity to utilize our unique status to allow 
Indians to be educated together. 

The purported purpose of desegregation is to 
make financial and educational resources more 
equally available to all. However, the desegrega- 
tion methods used in Minneapolis have actually 
diluted supportive services funded for Indians. 
For example, one Indian support program went 
from working in four schools with 85 students 
before the district reorganized to following the 
same students to fourteen different locations after- 
ward. As a result, delivery of service to Indian 
students suffered, staff burnout and turnover in- 
creased, and Indian students were and continue to 
be isolated, alienated, and drop out at a much 
higher rate than non-Indian students. (INAR 
Great Lakes Hearing, Beaulieau, 1990, p.29) 

Review of Research and 
Literature 

The following section will present a synthesis 
of research primarily on parental support but will 
include to some extent information relevant to 
parental involvement as well The studies cited are 



not necessarily specific to Native education but 
have implications which could impact American 
Indian/Alaska Native education. Following the 
citations of research with major finding, will be a 
section discussing relevant topics in the literature 
on parent participation. 

Research 

Using the publication Parent Involvement: A 
Review of the Literature, prepared by the Ap- 
palachia Educational Laboratory, one can see that 
parent-school partnerships can facilitate better 
education for children. Also included in this sec- 
tion is a summary of the success of Native parental 
involvement activities in Indian Education Act 
Programs. 

Research on Parental Support 

According to the research, parent participation 
in almost any meaningful form affects student 
behavior, achievement, attendance and attitudes 
about self and school in general. Achievement 
gains are most significant and long-lasting when 
parents are an integral part of the teaching-learn- 
ing process in preschool programs. But parents 
who receive some direction from the school about 
specific ways to help their children can also be 
effective at the elementary and secondary levels. 
Gains in basic student skills are reported when 
parents directly teach their children and when 
they are involved in supporting and reinforcing 
school learning. 

Changes in Parental Attitudes 
All parents communicate important values 
about school and learning. These parental at- 
titudes toward learning help shape children's at- 
titudes. From some parents, children may learn 
that school is fun, reading is important, and learn- 
ing is exciting. From others, children may learn 
that school is necessary, but they will probably fail 
(as their parents did), and that they should do their 
best but should not really expect to be successful 
or to be treated fairly by the system. Native educa- 
tion abounds with this latter message about school- 
ing. 

• Schaefer reports that Douglas, in a sample 
of 5,000 children in England, found that 
parent "interest and involvement with the 
child's education were far more important 
than the quality of the schools, even after 
statistically controlling for family 
socioeconomic status" (Schaefer, 1971, p. 
19). 

• Linney and Vernberg review Rankin's 
findings that children who are high 



ERJC 



17 -i c 
L 5 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



achievers are much more likely to have 
active, interested, and involved parents. 
Some of the parental behaviors associated 
with high-achieving students are: provid- 
ing a wide variety of experiences for their 
children, showing an interest in school ac- 
tivities, helping children develop an inter- 
est in reading, and taking the initiative in 
contacting the school. (Linney, 1933, pp. 
78-79) 

• Dobson and Dobson report Gallup's find- 
ings that "70 percent of high-achieving 
first-graders were read to regularly in 
their early years, while only 49 percent of 
low-achieving first-graders were read to by 
their mothers" (Dobson, 1975, pp. 50-51). 
They further report findings by Ware and 
Garber that parental "press" for reading 
and the availability of materials in the 
home are predictive of school success, con- 
cluding that certain home-centered ac- 
tivities could improve school performance. 

• Nafziger discusses research by Hansen 
that parents 9 reading to children, parents 1 
own reading habits, and having books in 
the home all have a positive effect on the 
child's IQ, school achievement, and read- 
ing readiness. (Nafziger, 1982). 

• Mize cites research by Hicks that students 
whose parents have positive attitudes 
about school have higher academic 
achievement, social adjustment, and emo- 
tional stability. The study concludes that 
if parents become involved in school ac- 
tivities, not only will their own attitudes 
improve, but their children's attitudes and 
achievement will likewise improve. 
(Mize, 1977, p. 76) 

As these citations indicate, parents' attitudes, 
demonstrated by their behaviors, change student 
performance when parents participate with 
schools. As parents become more familiar with the 
school, they become more supportive: 

• In surveys, parents who participate more 
in schools express higher levels of satisfac- 
tion with both the school and their own 
children's achievement. (Herman, 1983, 
pp. 11-17) (Stough, 1982) 

• Parents who are trained as tutors have 
significantly more positive attitudes 
toward school after their involvement in 
the program, and differ from control group 
parents who are not trained as tutors. 
(McKinney, 1975) 



ERLC 



• In Houston, the Computers Can Project | 
made home computers available for loan to 
low-income families who participated in 12 
hours of training in computer use. After 
involvement in this program, 96 percent of 
the parents rated the schools responsive to 
their children's needs, in contrast to 15 
percent of parents prior to the computer 
program. (Lloyd, 1984, pp. 1-2). 

Clearly, parental attitudes and behaviors are 
influenced by how they participate with schools. It 
is logical that these positive attitudes get com- 
municated to their children. Studies of preschool 
programs report that long-term gains occur when 
parents are involved. Over time, not only are 
parents 1 behaviors and attitudes influenced in 
positive ways, but also these parent values and 
attitudes serve to shape a child's school perfor- 
mance. 

Since there is another INAR paper focusing o:\ 
Early Childhood Issues, this paper will not dwell 
on this area other than to stress that research 
suggests the greatest benefits for students can be 
seen when parents are supportive early in the 
educational process. 

Parental Impact on Student 
Achievement 

Student achievement is the most frequently 
reported benefit of parental support. Other factors 
correlated with achievement are also reported, in- 
cluding improved student attendance, increased 
motivation, higher self-concept, and a reduction in 
behavior problems. 

Some programs have involved parents directly 
as home teachers or tutors. Other programs util- 
ized parents in a support role (parents as coun- 
selors) rather than in a direct teaching role. 
Although parental support in almost any form 
seems to improve student achievement, the re- 
search indicates that student achievement is 
greater with high levels of support and with support 
that is meaningful. 

Studies show that when parents of low-per- 
forming children are trained as tutors, their 
children make significant gains in both reading 
and mathematics. (Hoffmeister, 1977); (Mc- 
Kinney, 1975); (Shuck, 1983, pp. 524-528) This 
"parent as teacher" role is, however, most effective 
with young children. Through grade three, 
parents are able to master the content Children 
at these ages still view their parents as teachers. 
Beyond grade three, parents are not as comfortable 
with direct teaching. Not only does the content get 
increasingly sophisticated, but children seem less 
willing to take instruction from their parents. 



Hi 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfield, Floy Pepper 



Some studies suggest that parents do not have 
to be involved directly in the teaching role. 
Achievement gains can occur without specific 
training for parents* Gains have been reported 
when parents function in support roles which en- 
courage learning: 

• In one study, a first grade teacher recorded 
a daily telephone message for parents. It 
was available for parents of the 21 stu- 
dents in the class 24 hours a day. They 
could call anytime. Monitoring the num- 
ber of calls made to the phone recorded an 
average number of 20.5 calls per day. 
When spelling words were included on the 
phone message, every child (except those 
already scoring 100%) showed improved 
scores on the spelling test The average 
number of spelling test errors dropped 
dramatically from 35 percent to six per- 
cent. (Bittle, 1975, pp. 87-95) 

• Project STEP (Systematic Training for Ef- 
fective Parenting) included parents repre- 
senting all socio-economic levels from four 
elementary schools. Parents signed a con- 
tract! agreeing (1) to meet with their child 
at least twice a week to discuss the ac- 
complishments of the past few days and to 
spend time sharing thoughts and ideas, 
and (2) to spend time each week with their 
child on a reading-related activity. 
Children in the STEP program gained 12 
months in reading compared to the control 
group's one-month gain. (Nize, 1977) 

• A similar program was conducted in two 
schools whose students were described by 
the authors as "culturally deprived. 11 In 
this project, parents attended discussion 
groups that emphasized the importance of 
school in preparing to get a job in today's 
technological society and the importance of 
parents in setting an example. Parents 
were asked to read daily to their children, 
to listen to their children read, to provide 
a routine "quiet 11 time at home for reading 
and study, and to be sure that children had 
the proper school supplies. Over the 
program's five-month duration, children 
showed overall gains of 5.4 months in read- 
ing compared to 2.7 months in a com- 
parison school. (Smith, 1963, pp. 314-318) 

Achievement gains such as these are impres- 
sive. Apparently, when parents have access to 
information they need (like clear dire ons for 
helping with homework) and know what they can 
do to help (such as listen to their children read 15 



minutes a day, or provide a quiet time for study), 
they dramatically affect their own student's perfor- 
mance. Parents want their children to do well in 
school, but often don't know what they can do to 
help. 

Student achievement gains can also be made 
when parents encourage and reinforce learning in 
the role of parents as counselors mentioned earlier. 
Parents don't need to be involved in a clearly 
defined role for their participation to make a dif- 
ference. In some studies, achievement gains oc- 
curred when parents were simply informed about 
their child's progress. Parental encouragement 
and reinforcement of a child's school accomplish- 
ments can significantly affect school performance. 
Obviously, parent support for education in almost 
any form — as teacher, supporter, or reinforcer of 
school activities —can affect student achievement. 
Most importantly, for parent participation to have 
a significant impact on achievement, it must be 
meaningful. For a program to become meaningful 
to parents, they must be able to see: (1) a direct 
benefit to their children, (2) a commitment from 
teachers and administrators that parents are im- 
portant, and (3) clear evidence that what they, as 
parents, are doing makes a difference. 

Parental Impact on Attendance 
Attendance and achievement go hand in hand. 
Attacking attendance problems will lead to 
promoting higher achievement. According to re- 
search "time-on-task" is an important predictor of 
achievement What better way to increase the 
amount of instructional time than to be sure stu- 
dents are present? High rates of absenteeism are 
related to school failure and increase the risk of 
dropping out. Understandably, a student who 
rarely experiences success in school may try to 
avoid school. Chronic absenteeism compounds the 
problem. It leads to more failure, and may even- 
tually lead to the student quitting school per- 
manently. Attendance and achievement can 
reinforce each other. Improved attendance 
promotes increased achievement, and success in 
school results in improved attendance. 

Student attendance improves when parents are 
informed about student absences. Several studies 
address attendance problems directly. Schools 
have involved parents to correct this serious prob- 
lem: 

• The school principal made calls to parents 
of first and second grade children who had 
high rates of absenteeism. Not only did the 
children's school attendance improve, but 
parents more frequently contacted the 



ERJC 



190Q 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



school to report absences. (Parker, 1977, 
pp. 84-88) 

• Phone calls can be made just as effectively 
by the sch%wl sect ary. (Sheats, 1979, pp. 
310-312) Mery senools utilize parent or 
commute volunteers to make these 
routine i - 1 

• Daily notes home, in conjunction with a 
home-based reinforcement program, can 
be helpful in reducing absenteeism. Barth 
reports a study by Thorne in which an 
adolescent's truancy rate decreased from 
65 percent (during the baseline) to 6.6 per- 
cent during the three months of the project 
(Barth, 1979, pp. 436-458) 

• In a rural middle school, eighth graders 
with low achievement and high absen- 
teeism were targeted for a special pro- 
gram. On the day of an absence, parents 
were called (or written to if they had no 
phone). Attendance improved significant- 
ly. (Fiordaliso, 1977, pp. 188-192) 

Parental support can affect school attendance, 
even when it is not a primary objective of a pro- 
gram. As parents become more involved, they may 
feel more responsible for getting their children to 
school, and they may take extra steps to that end. 
Similarly, as children become more academically 
successful, they become more motivated to attend 
school. Changes in both student and parent at- 
titudes toward school and toward learning may 
produce a home environment where regular school 
attendance becomes an expected behavior. 
Several examples of improved attendance are 
reported in the literature: 

• Student attendance has improved in Hous- 
ton, Texas, since parents have been attend- 
ing parent-teacher conferences with a 
focus on student achievement. (Cioffi, 
1982) 

• Cioffi describes Simmonds' report of 
Project FAME (Family Activities to Main- 
tain Enrollment), which targeted students 
who were likely to drop out of school. Not 
only did student attendance and achieve- 
ment test scores improve, but 79 percent of 
the parents reported that their children 
would probably continue school because of 
their involvement in FAME. (Cioffi, 1982) 

• When teachers were trained in the Family 
Involvement Communication System 
(FICS) to improve communication skills in 
relating to parents and made subsequent 
home visits, students' average daily atten- 



dance rates and grade point averages im- 
proved significantly. (Shelton, 1973) 

• In another study, counselors met in- 
dividually with all parents the summer 
before their children entered junior high 
school. After three years these students 
were compared to the class who had 
entered the year before, for whom no in- 
dividual parent meetings had been held 
except by request Average daily atten- 
dance was different at the .001 level of 
significance, favoring the group whose 
parents were met individually. In addi- 
tion, students' mean grade point average 
were higher, there were fewer school 
dropouts (two vs. eight), and the parents 
continued to be more involved. During 
their children f s three years of junior high, 
the parents made significantly more con- 
tacts with school staff. Only 13 percent 
made no contacts at all, compared to 73 
percent of a comparison group. Thirty- 
eight percent made between three and five 
contacts, compared to eight percent of the 
comparison parents. Parents not only 
made more contacts, they more frequently 
came to see the school counselor concern- 
ing grades and curriculum, in contrast to 
the comparison parents, who came more 
often to seethe school principal because of 
discipline problems and failing grades. 
(Duncan, 1969) 

Parent Impact on Improved 
Motivation 

Parental support has a positive effect not only 
on parents' attitudes toward school, but also on 
students' attitudes toward learning. In the studies 
that have measured student attitudes toward 
learning and motivation to learn, most report a 
significant and positive change. Like attendance, 
this variable is related to student achievement. 
Children who begin to experience success in school 
view it more positively. Their success builds their 
motivation. Improved student attitudes toward 
school are reported in several studies: 

• Fifty-three percent of Project FAME 
parents reported a positive attitude 
change in their children. (Cioffi, 1982) 

• The Project PAL (Parents and Learning) 
program in Albuquerque, New Mexico, 
part of a Title I program that involved 
parents in teaming activities with their 
children at home, produced an increase in 
positive attitudes toward school and learn- 



2021 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld. Floy Pepper 



ing. Children also improved their class- 
room performance and made excellent 
gains in speech and language development 
(Bush, 1981). 

Parental Impact on Student Attitudes 

about Self and School 

Parent support results in increased achieve- 
ment, attendance, and motivation to leam. In 
addition, positive results in student self-esteem or 
self-concept can also occur. In dealing with 
children who have serious behavior problems, 
school personnel often attempt to help children feel 
better about themselves. When parents are also 
part of the intervention, positive gains have been 
made: 

• In a study of fifth and sixth graders who 
had classroom behavior problems, one 
group was provided with direct counseling 
and a second (experimental) group 
received assistance indirectly: their 
parents were involved in counseling. The 
parent-counseled group scored more 
favorably on three separate measures of 
self-concept than did a control group who 
received no counseling. (Hayes, 1977, pp. 
8-14) 

• Dobson and Dobson report Wechsler's find- 
ings in another study of counseling, this 
time with mothers of under-achieving 
boys. Boys whose mothers participated 
showed improved self-acceptance as long 
as six months after the counseling program 
had been completed. (Dobson, 1975) 

• In a review of studies, Cioffi reports on 
Project ACT (Accountability in Citizenship 
Training), in which teams of parents, stu- 
dents, and teachers worked together to 
reduce inappropriate student behavior. 
Peer parents made home visits. The fifth, 
sixth, and seventh graders who were in- 
volved in the program showed improved 
self-esteem and improved attendance at 
school (Cioffi, 1982) 

Improved self esteem is sometimes a secondary 
effect. As a result of improved achievement, sig- 
nificant gains in self-concept have occurred from 
parental support programs with low-achieving stu- 
dents: 

• Mize reports a study by Brookover in which 
parents were taught to increase the 
academic expectations they held for their 
children. With the resulting change in 
parent expectations, students' self-percep- 



tions improved, as did their school grades. 
(Mize, 1977) 

• Likewise, in a study reported by Cioffi, 
third through sixth graders received tutor- 
ingfrom their parents in the school setting. 
Among the results were improved student 
self-concept and achievement gains. (Ciof- 
fi, 1982) 

Parental Impact on Student Behavior 
The final area in which parental support can 
play a role is student behavior. Following are 
studies which target student behavior improve- 
ment and others which report it as a secondary 
result. 

Disruptive behavior can prohibit learning for 
all students in a classroom, because the teacher's 
time and attention become focused on disruptive 
behavior rather than on instruction. Good class- 
room management skills can reduce the amount of 
disruptive behavior, but enlistingparental support 
can produce significant results. Parents, more 
often than teachers, can control a student's most 
important reinforcers such as home-based 
privileges, free time outside of school, and rewards. 
These kinds of reinforcers, along with daily or 
weekly notes to parents, can significantly improve 
a student's behavior at school: 

• A study by Blackmore, reported in Barth's 
review of home-based reinforcement 
programs, was conducted during summer 
school. Preadolescent took home daily 
school-behavior notes. Good reports were 
exchanged for privileges or money, 
depending on the agreement between the 
parents and students. Student behavior 
improved and continued into the regular 
school year. Children were on task 83 per- 
cent of the time, which equaled their peers 
and bettered their own baseline perfor- 
mance by 19 percent. (Barth, 1979, pp. 
436-458) 

• Daily checklists sent home to the parent 
were found to be effective in grades K-12 
in increasing the number of accurately 
completed class assignments and in in- 
creasing the amount of time spent in ap- 
propriate social behaviors. Teachers 
report that the checklist was not only effec- 
tive and easy to use, it actually decreased 
the amount of class time they spent on 
problem behaviors. (Edlund, 1969, pp. 
121-127) 




22 



21 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



In some studies, improved behavior was not the 
objective of the program, but was one of the 
reported results. 

• In the HOPE followup study, based on 
teacher reports, children who at preschool 
age were involved with their parents in 
home-based activities differed significant- 
ly when they were junior high aged from a 
matched control group in the following 
categories: disorganized classroom be- 
havior, symptoms of depression, aggres- 
sive behavior, responsible behavior, and 
significant behavior problems (28 percent 
vs. 40 percent). (Gotts, 1980) 

• A study by Schiff, which is reviewed by 
Mize, reports fewer school behavior 
problems, greater gains in reading, better 
school attendance, and better study habits 
for an experimental group, whose parents 
were trained to offer home lessons through 
parent teacher conferences, compared to 
control students whose parents had 
received standard report cards. (Mize, 
1977) 

• CioflVs review of literature includes a 
study by Hornbuckle in which parents par- 
ticipated as tutors and as members of 
school advisory committees. Across 44 
schools and 8,000 families, the number of 
suspensions was reduced as a result of 
improved communication. (Cioffi, 1982) 

• Another result of Project ACT in Jackson- 
ville, Florida, was a reduction in un- 
desirable behavior and fewer referrals to 
the office for students in grades five 
through seven. (Cioffi, 1982) 

Research on Parental Involvement 

The importance of parents is further supported 
by research that examines parents in decision- 
making roles. When parents are involved as ad- 
visors or school board members, th ere is usually no 
measurable benefit to student achievement. Per- 
haps one explanation of this fin ding is that parents 
do not view participation on an advisory council as 
meaningful. These parents may not see a direct 
benefit to their own children. Furthermore, ad- 
ministrators may not be convinced that parents are 
important in this role. Parents themselves may 
fail to see that their efforts make a difference. 
Parent advisory committees most often function as 
committees on paper only. When they are estab- 
lished to meet federal mandates, as they frequently 
are, administrators may feel minimal commitment 
to making them effective. Participation on such a 



paper committee can become frustrating. It can in 
fact generate negative attitudes and promote feel- 
ings of powerleasness. 

Advisory committees can be effective, even 
though many are not. Parent involvement can 
only impact student achievement when that invol- 
vement is meaningful to parents. For a school to 
have an effective parent involvement program, ad- 
ministrators, teachers, and parents must believe 
that parental involvement is important. They 
must be willing to work together. Responsibility 
for taking the first step falls on school ad- 
ministrators and teachers. Not only do they have 
information but. if they open the door to parents, 
parents will respond enthusiastically. Schools 
generally, and Native school specifically, need to 
provide opportunities for meaningful parent invol- 
vement. At all levels, teachers and administrators 
need training in how to relate effectively to parents 
and involve them in the education process. 

Parents and educators know intuitively what 
research has demonstrated: parental support 
benefits children, parents, and schools. However, 
meaningful parent support and involvement with 
schools is not commonplace. It requires (a) com- 
mitment from administrators, (b) training for 
teachers, and (c) a variety of options for parents. 

Committed school leadership that is truly em- 
powering is critical to effective parent participa- 
tion programs* Formal, written policies can 
directly increase levels of meaningful participation 
in schools. Parent-teacher conferences and school 
newsletters are more likely to be found in districts 
that require them than in districts that do not. 

Parent participation may occur because of 
parent initiative, bat this is rare. Parent-initiated 
involvement is more likely to occur in exceptionally 
well-educated communities, where mothers or 
civic clubs spearhead the effort. It may, however, 
occur in exceptionally poor schools where parents 
have been shut oat and organize out of frustration. 
This is the exception, not the rule. Parents are 
interested, but generally they wait for direction 
and guidance from the educational professionals. 
Regardless of socio-economic level they will 
respond to an invitation, especially if it has r likely 
benefit for their children. 

Commitment means more than lip service. 
Mandates may help, but they are not sufficient. 
School districts need to express commitment with 
time and money. Most teachers have not received 
adequate training in working with parents. 
(Chakin, 1984) (Gotts, 1985) (Moles, 1980) To be 
successful, teachers and administrators need to be 
involved in tha planning, taking and evaluating 



ERJC 



22 23 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleldt Floy Pepper 



long-term in-service which encourages parent sup- 
port and involvement programs for their schools. 

In addition to school staff and teacher training, 
parents also need to develop skills and knowledge 
necessary to be good partners with the school. 
Basic communication, discipline and child i earing 
practices may not come naturally to many parents, 
especially vhen the culture of parents does not 
match that of the school. In all cases, training for 
parents should focus on something that is under- 
standable, fan, and likely to be successful. Finally, 
parents should always have the option of choice in 
any school-initiated program. Appropriate oppor- 
tunities for parents is important (Gordon, 1978) 

At the elementary and secondaiy school level 
parental involvement takes different forms. An 
important consideration is the age of the student. 
Gotts and Pumell suggest a model that distin- 
guishes between effective school-family relation- 
ships at the elementary and secondary levels. 
(Gotts, 1985) The parent-child relationship itself, 
tends to become more distant as children begin to 
assert their independence and become more in- 
volved with their peer group. There are differences 
in the teacher-student relationship at the secon- 
dary level. Teachers may have at least five dif- 
ferent classes, in contrast to the self-contained 
classroom in elementary schools. Teachers have a 
great deal more trouble establishingandmaintain- 
ing close working relationships with so many 
families. Teachers tend to hold adolescents ac- 
countable for their own behavior. Teachers and 
students work things out without parents unless 
serious problems, such as failing grades, inap- 
propriate behavior, or absenteeism occur. 

Teachers and administrators can make parent 
involvement at the secondary level meaningful and 
realistic, however, if they understand that parents 
want to stay informed hut may not require, or even 
want, the same level of personal involvement they 
had with their children in elementary school. Good 
communication is essential. 

In conclusion, the research on school-family 
relations is consistent. Meaningful parental sup- 
port yields gains in student achievement, and the 
related factors of attendance, motivation, self-con* 
cept, and school behavior. Reading to children, 
havingbooks in the home, positive parent attitudes 
toward school, and high parental expectations for 
achievement relate positively to school achieve- 
ment. These parental attitudes and behaviors are 
influenced in positive ways when parents become 
involved with schools. The greatest and longest 
lasting impact on children occurs when parents 
become actively involved in learning at the pre- 
school level. However, studies in elementary and 



secondary schools also show significant changes in 
both parent and student attitudes toward school. 
At all levels, a commitment to parent support and 
involvement is a worthwhile investment for 
schools. Elements basic to a successful program 
include (1) a commitment from district and school 
administrators, (2) ongoing training for teachers 
and staff to improve communication with parents, 
and (3) a variety of options so that parents can 
select the activities most appropriate for themsel- 
ves and their children. Parental participation 
musttakeintoaccountchangesin the parent-child, 
and peer group relationships as children progress 
through school. 

Research on the Indian Education Act 
The following excerpts were prepared by the 
Office of Indian Education in order to document the 
nature of Native parental involvement as a result 
of the Act. Portions of the text of that report are 
included here. 

Many members of the Indian community view 
changes in parental attitudes and relations toward 
public schools and toward the formal schooling of 
vheir children as one of the most important areas 
of the Indian Education Act, Part A program im- 
pact. Traditionally, Native children were educated 
by their parents and community members, but 
with the loss of their independence came a decline 
in involvement in their children's education. From 
the time children began to attend Bureau of Indian 
Affairs operated schools in the latter part of the 
nineteenth century until recent years, Native 
parents had few structured opportunities to in- 
fluence school decision -making. In 1972, with the 
passage of the Indian Education Act, public schools 
that qualified were given the opportunity to apply 
for funds to support "programs specifically 
designed to meet the special educational needs of 
Native children." Further provisions of this action 
required that these public school programs be 
developed: 

• in open consultation with parents of Native 
children, teachers, and where applicable, 
secondary school students, including 
public hearings at which such persons 
have a full opportunity to understand the 
program, and 

• with the participation and approval of a 
committee composed of and selected by 
parents of children participating in the 
program teachers, and, where ap- 
plicable, secondary school students of 
which at least half the members shall be 
parents. 



ERJC 



23 24 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



The Indian Education Act also contains a 
provision which requires that the funded programs 
"will be operated and evaluated in consultation 
with, and the involvement of, parents of the 
children and representatives of the area to be 
served, including the committee' previously estab- 
lished. Finally , a subsequent amendment to the 
Act expands the definition of "parent" to include 
legal guardians or others who stand in loco paren- 
tis! including foster parents and grandparents 
with whom Native children may reside. 

Role of the Parent Committee 
The Indian Education Act, as amended, clearly 
defines the make-up and responsibility of Part A 
project parent committees. It requires the use of 
an advisory board consisting of parents, legal guar- 
dians, teachers, and secondary school students, 
with the stipulation that at least half of the group 
be parents of students to be served by the project. 
These requirements respond directly to many 
years of testimony and reports to Congress attest- 
ing to the alienation of Native parents from public 
schools and their lack of involvement in the school- 
ing of their children. 

The committee has authority which goes 
beyond that described for advisory groups in many 
other federal programs. The Part A project parent 
committee has a legal mandate which requires 
schools receiving funds under the auspices of the 
Indian Education Act to consult with its members 
and seek their approval of applications submitted 
for funds to which they are entitled by their levels 
of Native enrollment. Additionally, the 
committee's consultation, along with that of other 
community members, is required in connection 
with the operation and evaluation of the project. 
Policies and procedures which provide for this are 
required to be included in each local project ap- 
plication. 

Each Part A project, then, must establish a 
parent committee. That committee by regulation 
must: (1) participate in the needs assessment, 
design, operation, and evaluation of the project; (2) 
review and approve in writing the project applica- 
tion; (3) advise the school district on policies and 
procedures regarding the hiring of project staff; 
and (4) make recommendations concerning ap- 
plicants for project staff positions. 

From a survey of Part A projects, the following 
information was obtained. The areas of greatest 
in volvemen t for Native parents h ave been in decid- 
ing goals, budgets, project activities, and in com- 
municating with other parents. 

Chairpersons were asked to indicate which 
methods their parent committees had used to get 
Native parents and community members more in- 

o 

ERLC 



volved with the Part A project. Results show that 
the methods most frequently used were messages 
sent home with parents (69%); local newspapers, 
radio, and TV messages (61%); public meetings 
(51%); home visits (19%); personal contacts with 
community groups and leaders (48%); project 
newsletters (38%); dinners, carnivals, and other 
attractions (37%); phone calls (21%); word-of- 
mouth (13%); and surveys and needs assessments 
involving parents (10%). 

When asked how effective these approaches 
were in getting people involved, 31% of chairper- 
sons indicated they were very effective; 55% said 
they were somewhat effective; and 15% said they 
were not effective. As a follow-up to these ques- 
tions, chairpersons were asked to list how parents 
could be motivated to get more involved with the 
Part A project. The most frequent responses were 
that project staff should do more personal contact* 
ing of parents (33%); food should be provided at 
meetings and special events (17%); and parents 
should be educated in their responsibilities toward, 
and the needs of students (12%). 

Almost all (96%) project directors reported that 
their project's Native parent committee was in- 
volved in monitoring and evaluating the Part A 
project. When asked to list the types of involve* 
ments, project directors said they consisted most 
frequently of receiving monthly or quarterly 
reports from the project, discussions at parent com- 
mittee meetings, and visiting classes and observ- 
ing activities. Thirty-eight percent of project 
directors said parent committees were very in- 
volved in monitoring and evaluation; 44% said 
committees were moderately involved; 14% said 
they were slightly involved; and 4% said they were 
not involved. 

Frequently, parent committees assist the 
projectby securing parent and community support. 
Over three-quarters (79%) of the project directors 
said that the parent committee had made a dif- 
ference in getting members of the Indian com- 
munity or tribe to support the project. Over half 
(57%) of these directors reported that the commit- 
tee members particularly helped in disseminating 
information and making the community aware of 
the project, and 40% said the committee members 
helped by interacting informally with members of 
the community in order to get parents and others 
involved. 

Finally, when asked if the parent committee 
needed more training to be more effective, 50% of 
project directors said that some members need 
training, and 30% said all members do. The most 
frequently mentioned types of needed training con- 
cerned rules and regulations, roles and functions 



25 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfield, Floy Pepper 



of the parent committee, parliamentary proce- 
dures, and goals and objectives of Part A. 

Impac cf Parent Committees 

Potentially, Native parent committees have im- 
pacts beyond their Part A project and its staff. 
Over two-fifths (45%) of the project directors 
reported that the parent committee had submitted 
recommendations to the school district ad- 
ministration or school board. In those project sub* 
mitting recommendations, 58% of the project 
directors reported the recommendations were 
adopted as recommended, 30% reported they were 
adopted with modifications, 4% reported they were 
adopted for later review, and 8% reported that no 
actions had been taken on parent committee 
recommendations. The areas of most frequent 
recommendations were use of project personnel, 
approval of project proposals, project plans and 
objectives, and general school programs and 
policies toward Indians. 

In addition, Native parent committees often 
benefit their own members. Parent committee 
chairpersons were asked the open-ended question; 
"What useful skills, knowledge and/or experience 
have you gained as a result of being b member of 
the Parent Committee?" Their responses included 
a number of different skills and areas of knowledge 
and experience. Most frequently (51%) mentioned 
was increased ability to function in the school and 
in the community. Another frequent (30%) 
response was an increase in organizational and 
program skills, including budgeting, proposal 
development, needs assessments, and communica- 
tion skills. The third most frequent (28%) response 
was an increased ability to help children with 
school, through a better awareness of student 
needs and familiarity with education materials. 

Besides collecting data on skills, knowledge, 
and experience gained by committee chairpersons, 
current committee members were asked whether 
or not, after leaving the parent committee, any 
former members had become engaged in each of 
the specific activities listed in Table 1. As the 
Table shows, many former committee members are 
reported to have gone on to become active in other 
aspects of their local school district or tribe. Al- 
though the information is second hand and it is 
possible that only a fow active former members in 
a project could confound the results, these respon- 
ses from active parents are judged to provide a 
reasonably accurate indication that parents have 
gone on from Part A committees to other involve- 
ments in their schools. 



General Native Fa* ental Involvement 
On a somewhat different plane, Part A projects 
were concerned about the general involvement of 
Native parents in local schools and the formal 
education of Native children. Thus, members of 
the parent committee were asked to indicate the 
extent to which Native parents in their school 
districts are involved in their children's education. 
The data show that 8% of the committee members 
said most parents are very involved; 55% indicated 
most parents are somewhat involved, and 37% 
indicated most parents are not very involved. 

When asked, "In your opinion, what are the 
most important reasons why Indian parents do not 
become more involved in their children's educa- 
tion?/ 1 the most frequently cited reasons were that 
their children do not want them to participate 
(93%); that the school discourages participation 
(93%); and that parents have no time (84%); or 
have too many other activities (82%). Project staffs 
were asked a similar question concerning parent 
involvement. Their most frequent answers were: 
that parents believe education is the job of the 
school (46%); parents have other children at home 
to care for (42%); and parents do not know what 
kinds of things they can do for the school or project 
(40%). 

All committee members were then asked if, 
over the past threeyears, they though t parents had 
become more involved in their children's education 
as a result of the Indian education project. The 
parents were specifically asked about five areas 
and given an opportunity to list other areas as well. 
The results indicate that parents have a greater 
interest in what the school is doing, a.id have been 
involved to a greater extent in attending school 
activities. 

Teachers were also asked whether parents had 
become more involved in their children's education 
in the past three years. The data show that 60% 
of teachers indicated that Native parents had be- 
come more involved. Of these, 87% said there was 
more contact between parents and students 
regarding studentprogress and behavior, 7 1% said 
there were more parent-teacher meetings; 55% 
said there were more Indian parents at PTA meet- 
ings and school functions; and 26% said there were 
more Indians elected to school board committees. 

Relative to the way project staffs contacted 
Indian parents, 72% of staff members said they did 
this through messages sent home with students. 
Other ways staff members contacted parents were 
through the parent committee (56% of staff) andby 
telephone calls to parents (55%). The most effective 
ways to contact parents, according to staffs, were by 
personal visits to koines (41%) and by telephone 



ERLC 



25 CU 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



calls (35%). With respect to keeping parents in- 
formed, 32% of project staff said the project had 
been very successful; 56% said moderately success- 
ful; and only 13% said slightly successful or not 
successful at all. 

Native parents' general satisfaction with 
projects was influenced most strongly by their per- 
ception of the extent to which their children's cul- 
tural needs were being met The next most 
important causal factor in determining parents' 
general satisfaction was how much the project 
communicated with parents. The extent to which 
cultural needs were perceived to be met was the 
strongest factor influencing Native parents 9 per- 
ception of the extent to which the pijject was 
helping Native students to improve their academic 
performance. 

The most important reasons given by parent 
committee members for Native parents not becom- 
ing more involved in the project or in school were 
that their children do not want them to participate, 
the school discourages participation, and parents 
have no time or have too many other activities. 
However, as a result of the project, committee 
members report that parents have taken a greater 
interest in the school and have become involved to 
a greater extent in attending school activities. 
Data from teachers and principals support these 
findings. 

Parent committee members also indicated they 
themselves had benefitted from committee par- 
ticipation, most frequently indicating that they 
had developed more ability to function in the school 
and community (51%), specific skill acquisition 
(30%), and increased ability to help their children 
in school (75%). Some also indicated former com- 
mittee members had gone on to other involvements 
with the school but the actual number was unclear. 

With regard to overall Native parent participa- 
tion, the results were more mixed, with 37% of the 
parent committee members indicating parents 
were not very involved and 34% of the staff indicat- 
ing the project was only slightly successful in in- 
volving parents as a whole. However, the 
committee generally indicated that the project had 
stimulated some or a lot more involvement by 
Native parents: in their interest (85%), attendance 
at function (78%), communication with teachers 
(73%), their relationship with school (74%), and 
helping their children with school work (73%). 
Principals (73%), staff (65%), and teachers (60%) 
generally agreed with this. 

In summary, Native parent committee involve- 
ment appears quite high and, while considerably 
less, Native parental involvement was also sub- 
stantial. The Native parents and school personnel 



were able to cite impacts on individuals and their 
schools. Further, it appears that satisfaction with 
the project is strongly influencedby specific project 
activities in the area of communication. (Develop- 
ment Associates Inc., 1983, pp. 279-298) 

Literature Review 

The following section will present information 
in the literature which more directly describes 
cultural influences specific to American In- 
dian/Alaska Native students, parents and com- 
munities. Cultural influences on Native student 
learning, traditional values, child rearing practices 
and learning styles, self-esteem issues and child 
development information will be discussed. 

Culture plays an important role in the 
socialization and personality development of Na- 
tive youngsters. What has not been accepted is 
that the values, attitudes, and behaviors of Native 
culture have been influenced by the dominant 
society, as well as, by the student's immediate 
cultural community and family. 

The high rate of dysfunctional families in the 
Native population is in part due to the high rate of 
alcohol and substance abuse, low self-esteem and 
limited education. The combination of these 
obstacles may be further aggravated by financial 
problems, depression and loneliness, low self- 
worth and negative stereotypes. 

Indian children walk away from earliest 
childhood and their dysfuncUonal families 
with many wrong beliefs about themselves. 
The core belief is Ttn not okay". The deepest 
level is that of shame. If a child believes 
he/she Is flawed and defective as a human 
being they cannot stay inside themselves but 
must go outside themselves. Co-dependency 
leads children to make wrong choices be- 
cause they develop the core belief that hap- 
piness lies outside themselves — In another 
person, alcohol, or other drugs. Family 
members suffer the consequences of one 
member's alcoholism. One of the many emo- 
tional problems affecting children of al- 
coholics is low se{f esteem The most notable 
problems encountered by Native adolescents 
are problems with separation, embarrass- 
ment and stigma, depression and guilt, 
(Developing 1EA Projects for Student Self 
Esteem* N. Dakota, p. 29) 

With the recognition that children of alcoholics 
suffer the consequences of parental alcoholism, 
education of school personnel, parent committees, 
and parents should be emphasized to improve and 
increase intervention, diagnosis and treatment of 
Native students in an attempt to build self esteem. 
Schools continue to report that Native student 
populations manifest low self esteem, poor atten- 



ds 

ERLC 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



dance, drug/alcohol problems, limited education 
goals, influence of peer group, poor decision 
making skills, *iack of responsibility, and poor so- 
cial relations. 

Home, Culture and Community 
Influence 

Alfred Adler suggested we are who we are be- 
cause we observe things around us, make choices, 
and reach conclusions about what constitutes ef- 
fective ways to get along in the world. Adler 
believed a child has an inner and outer environ- 
ment. The child's inner environment is hereditary 
intellectual capacity. There are three factors in 
the child's outer environment. 

• The first is the family atmosphere. This is 
the family's cultural setting. The attitudes 
and values of the parents, their character 
traits, the general quality of their marital 
relationship, as well as the influences of 
their parents and relatives, all have an 
impact upon the family atmosphere. 

• The second is the family constellation 
(birth order), or the characteristic relation* 
ship of each family member to the other. 
Each family member has his or her own 
distinct pattern. In the interaction of 
responses and influences with each other, 
the role a family member plays will have 
an effect upon the whole family and the 
personality of each member. 

• The third factor in the child's outer en- 
vironment is the practices used in child 
rearing and discipline. Each child inter- 
prets experiences with the inner and outer 
environment Each child draws unique 
conclusions about effective approaches 
toward social living, and develops at- 
titudes toward life in general, which con- 
stitute a pattern of life. (Dreikurs, Grun- 
wald and Pepper, 1982, p. 57) 

The basic influences as presented by Adler 
seem to offer learning contexts which account for 
the phenomenon of ethnic development presented 
by Longstreet who says, "Ethnic development is 
'behavior learned., .as a result of direct contact with 
people... and immediate environment." 
(Longstreet, 1978, p. 63) Such learning con- 
tributes to behavior patterns associated with an 
ethnic learning style. The behavior patterns in- 
clude such things as the areas of learning a student 
is disposed to feel are relevant and preferred modes 
of learning (i.e. visual). 

In the cognitive development of children, the 
lifestyle and culture of the home is the important 



factor, not the social class or race of the family. As 
seen in the research, when parents place a high 
value on education, prepare their children to come 
to school emotionally and physically ready to learn, 
and promote intellectual development, then school 
achievement will increase. 

Samuels states that the types of family be- 
haviors related to intellectual development are: 

• Parental pressure for achievement in the 
form of intellectual and academic expecta- 
tions for the child, career goals for the 
child, control over the child's types of 
friends, and the rewards and sanctions 
given to the child for school performance. 

• Parental pressure for language develop- 
ment in the form of providing good lan- 
guage models, enlarging the child's 
vocabulary, and emphasizing correctness 
of usage. 

• Parental provisions for learning in the 
home and beyond by providing a place for 
the child to read and do homework, provid- 
ing books and magazines, taking the child 
to museums and libraries, and estab- 
lishing a model of the parent who reads 
and respects scholarship. (Samuels, 1986, 
p. 10) 

These values need to be fostered in the home 
and supported in the community. Messages to 
Native students from home and community need 
to be very clear. Students should come to school 
eager and ready to learn. 

By way of contrast, if the children of Euro- 
American families have trouble mastering the 
basic skills, their parents often tutor them. Many 
Native children do not receive this kind of support, 
since Native parents may be unable to provide the 
home tutoring necessary to help their child. This 
point is further supported by Samuels. 

Research suggests that when the culture of 
the home and community are not supportive 
of Lhe efforts of the school, when students fall 
to appreciate the value of hard work and 
education, when high moral standards are 
missing, and when parents do not help their 
children at home, conditions are ripe for 
failure. 

(Samuels, 1986, p. 13) 

Traditional Values, Child Rearing 
Practices, and Native Learning 
Style 

Traditional Native child rearing practices have 
been labeled by some as "permissive" in com- 
parison to Euro-American standards. This 



27 2 8 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



misunderstanding usually occurs because Native 
child rearing is more self-exploratory rather than 
restrictive. Many Native children are trained to be 
self-directed and self-reliant, having the freedom 
to make many of their own choices and decisions. 

Many American Indian/Alaskan Natives 
believe a child should be a child for as long as 
possible. 

Indians engage In non-verbal nurturing like 
holding, beaming, smiling, demonstrating, 
listening and Just being nearby for children. 
Many Indian families feel guilty about spank- 
ing, embarrassed about kissing, uncomfort- 
able about excessive praise, and other public 
demonstrations designed to draw undue at- 
tention to a child because modesty, humility 
and gentility are prized attributes, strived for 
and achieved In a peaceful en^ronment. 
However, most Indians also give greater 
responsibility to their children at an early 
age. For example, Navajo children can herd 
sheep alone as early as six years old* (MulU- 
ne. 1990, p. 1) 

An outgrowth of the self-exploratory method of 
child-rearing is that many children come to regard 
individual freedom or absolute non-interference as 
normal. This does not mean that the child or any 
individual has the right to do anything they want 
to do. Elders or teachers give good advice and the 
individual can make a decision about what is best. 
Respect for individual freedom, dignity and 
autonomy are Native values. Native children are 
taught not to interfere in the affairs of others. 
Resentment may occur when Native children are 
forced to conform without having an opportunity 
for input into the decision making process. 

American Indian/Alaska Native children are 
included and participate in all types of family and 
community affairs. Young children go with their 
parents to bingo, community meetings, church, 
po w-wows, hunting, fishing, or even to their places 
of employment. This provides the Native child 
with a holistic education where life is integrated 
and consistent from one sphere to another. It gives 
the child valuable opportunities to become ac- 
quainted with a multitude of tasks in the adult 
world. 

'The values of generosity and sharing are a 
foundation for many other values, and are inherent 
in Native child rearing practices. Native peoples 
share food and shelter, and praise and shame." 
(Bryde, 1971, p. 52) In the old days, if one had 
meat, everyone shared. So it is today. If a child in 
school needs supplies or materials, the Native child 
may take what is needed without thoughtof repay- 
ment, and certainly without the idea of stealing. 



This behavior may be misunderstood by the school 

system. 

When a Native person does something great, 
like when Billy Mills won a gold medal, most In- 
dian people feel good and share in the greatness. 
Conversely, when a Native does something dis- 
graceful, many others feel sadness and shame. 

Cooperation, group harmony and the extended 
family are necessary for the survival of the family 
and the tribal group. From a Native perspective, 
being a member of a group requires that no one 
individual be singled out or placed in a position 
higher or lower than others. However, individuals 
should be encouraged to improve on and compete 
against self. Many Natives work hard not to put 
others in a position of losing face. In a classroom 
situation this might mean not answering a ques- 
tion after another student has had trouble 
responding. Emphasis is placed on the group and 
on maintaining harmony within the group. 

The extended family also plays a part in 
cooperation and group harmony. The large net- 
work of extended family members provide support 
and a strong sense of security. Within this milieu 
there is a feeling of belonging, of cooperation, of 
group harmony that still mystifies some educators. 
Many educators do not understand the sometimes 
devastating difference between cooperation and 
competition from a Native point of view. 

Placidity, patience and the ability to remain 
silent are considered good qualities by American 
Indian/Alaskan Natives. These virtues are ap- 
parent in the delicate, time consuming works of 
art, such as beadwork, quillwork, sand painting, 
weaving, pottery and scrimshaw. Educators may 
press Native students, or parents, for rapid respon- 
ses or decisions. They may become impatient with 
slowness, and incorrectly label Natives as shy, slow 
or backward. Silence is considered a useful trait 
since it allows one to listen and learn by observing. 
However, in the classroom, where higher rates of 
verbal activity are the norm, the use of too much 
silence may present problems for the Native stu- 
dent. 

These cultural influences have a powerful effect 
on the Native child's performance in school. 
Educators need to be careful not to assume a "cul- 
tural deficit 11 approach to viewing Native student's 
self esteem. Research is only beginning to inves- 
tigate the relationship between cultural varia- 
tions, outside influences and dysfunctional 
behavior in the classroom. 

Much of the formal training that takes place 
in Indian families is non-verbal in nature. 
The children learn the customs and skills of 
their society by sharing directly in the ac- 
tivities of others. In such situations, verbal 



9 

ERLC 



28 2 { J 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



instruction is neither offered nor required 
because the close proximity to the observ- 
able action makes instruction giving quite 
redundant TTiere is a growing body of re- 
search to suggest that distinctly different 
child rearing practices — one stressing ob- 
servational learning and another emphasiz- 
ing learning through verbalization — has 
fostered the development of very different 
styles of learning between Indian and Euro- 
American children. Many Euro-American 
children, by virtue of their upbringing and 
their linguistic exposure, are oriented toward 
using languafc ; as a vehicle for learning. 
Indian children have developed a learning 
style characterized by observaUon and imita- 
tion. (Pepper/Henry, 1986, p. 57) 

It would appear then, that many Native 
children, by virtue of their predisposition to a 
visual style of learning, may be handicapped in 
their ability to succeed in school because schools 
and teaching methods tend to cater to the auditory 
learner. Educators must be careful not to 
stereotype Native learners. All students have 
skills in other learning styles. Use of a variety of 
learning styles needs to be encouraged to avoid 
locking Native students into a certain mold. 
Educators must remain flexible in their approach. 
There is no "absolute" Native learning style. A 
wide variety of individual differences have been 
identified which can be viewed as tendencies or 
learning style inclinations. 

Parental Influence on Self Esteem 

Self esteem is about feeling good, worthwhile, 
and effective* Because self esteem is a feeling, it 
will be expressed in the way a youngster behaves. 
Self esteem can be understood by observing what 
and how individuals do things. Self esteem is hard 
to identify because it is experienced continuously 
and constantly and changes from day to day, from 
situation to situation — even from minute to 
minute. Self esteem is part of every other feeling. 
It is involved in one's every emotional response. 

The Job that parents face is seldom spoken 
of in the context of the world in which they 
must do that Job. Parents are expected to 
provide a safe nurturing environment, to 
help their child develop the Internal 
strengths of trust, self control, and self es- 
teem, to teach social skills and how the world 
works and to help their child develop good 
Judgement. They act as role models* pass on 
spiritual strength and faith in self. (Cross. 
1986, p. 13) 

Everybody knows that parents are "models" for 
their children. Parents' feelings and attitudes are 
expressed in subtle non-verbal ways. American 



Indian/Alaska Native children are acute observers 
of these subtle expressions that convey parental 
attitudes. Children pick up from their parents the 
cues on how to act or behave. Children are in- 
fluenced by their parents' emotional reactions even 
though the parents may not verbally express them. 
When parents have low self-esteem, patterns of 
behavior emerge which affect their children. Such 
patterns produce stress and result in self-esteem 
problems in children. 

In attempting to help build self-esteem in 
children, it is good to remember that it will tf ke a 
while for it to happen — maybe months. Children 
will need to learn how to handle different kinds of 
relationships. They will need to develop trust and 
to know what the limits are. 

Children look to others in life to confirm or deny 
that they are important or significant. In order to 
have high self-esteem, Bean says that children 
must experience the conditions or the positive feel- 
ings that result when parents affirm the child's 
sense of: 

• Connectiveness — a sense of relation- 
ships—by letting children know that they 
belongs and are accepted. 

• Uniqueness— a feeling of being special — by 
letting children know that what they did or 
said was special. 

• Power — a sense of accomplishment — by 
letting the children realize they are com- 
petent and can he successful. 

• Models— a sense of knowing— by letting 
the child know that their goals and stand- 
ards are appropriate and important. 
(Bean, 1978, p. 8) 

Every family has a "family atmosphere", that 
results from the feelings, beliefs, attitudes, rules, 
values, strengths, ways of communicating, and 
functional patterns that characterize the Native 
family. The family patterns provide for periods of 
self-reliance balanced with mutual interdepen- 
dence. 

Connectiveness 

Attachment or connectiveness is a basic need of 
children. A child will not develop spiritually, emo- 
tionally, or cognitively without some kind of bond- 
ing or attachment. Lacking connectiveness, the 
child may have short term memory deficits, may 
not learn to read, and may be termed "learning 
disabled". Some Native children may hang 
around, get underfoot, but when adults try to deal 
with them directly, will squirm, become silent, and 
appear uncomfortable and embarrassed. 



2930 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



Some Native children don't necessarily pay at- 
tention to a task; they are usually paying attention 
to others, or thinking about them. They watch 
other children relating and they become anxious 
when related to. They are doing what they need to 
do for themselves, not what they are supposed to 
do. A loss such as divorce, death or disappearance 
of a parent or loved one, or moving to a new location 
is severe to a Native child. They are trying to deal 
with a low sense of connectiveness. 

Parents can do a great deal to increase a child's 
sense of connectiveness: 

• The Native parent needs to support posi- 
tive relations among the family, help the 
child to feel that he/she is a part of some* 
thing — an important member of the fami- 
ly — with shared feelings, warmth, and 
good communication. 

• Help the child to feel connected to the past 
or a heritage — to know one's identity as a 
Native person, to know the history of one's 
culture — to know that one belongs to 
parents and family and will be cared for 
and protected. A child needs to know that 
he/she is important and wanted and 
respected by family and others. 

Parents may be surprised by the dramatic 
changes in a child if the suggestions above are 
consistently followed. 

Uniqueness 

Emotionally the children may have no sense of 
11 who they are," may be unable to express and 
handle emotions, and may have some parts of life 
blocked out or missing. Children with uniqueness 
problems may show off a lot. Some children will 
retreat when singled out or called upon in school, 
but will show off when others are the center of 
interest or when others are engaged in some crea- 
tive activity. Native children may become easily 
embarrassed and apologetic if it is pointed out to 
them that they are doing or saying something that 
is different from others. 

Native children may have a narrow range of 
emotional expression when they are intermixed 
with other ethnic groups. They may rarely express 
spontaneous joy or elation, and similarly may not 
show sadness and depression. They may appear to 
be un-self-conscious, not reflecting on or evaluat- 
ing their own behavior or feelings. 

For a child to have a firm sense of uniqueness f 
he/she needs to have experiences that confirm their 
specialness or individuality. This does not mean 
that the child becomes spoiled, uncontrollable or 
has temper tantrums. Parents can have a positive 
influence on a child's sense of uniqueness by: 



• Encouragingthe child ta express ideas that 
maybe different from their own and allow- 
ing the child to express him/herself crea- 
tively. 

• Communicating acceptance to the child. 

• Pointing out how something the child did 
or said is different or special and also by 
letting the child know he/she is special. 

• Helping children to find acceptable ways of 
expressing themselves and their special 
interests in creative ways. 

• Using lots of encouragement in a private 
quiet manner — whispering in the child's 
ear — reviewing their accomplishments for 
the day at bedtime. Building a sense of 
uniqueness requires considerable 
flexibility and patience from parents but 
the efforts are worth it. 

Power 

Havinga sense of power means that a child feels 
he/she has some kind of influence over what hap- 
pens in life. Children with a low sense of power are 
quite often stubborn and bossy and refuse to take 
responsibility for themselves or take responsibility 
for others. 

Some Native children have a low sense of 
power. One can observe actions which are quite 
predictable and patterned. The child responds 
similarly to many events and has little flexibility. 
Spoiled or power children avoid taking respon- 
sibility, and manipulate parents and others to take 
responsibility for them. By avoiding respon- 
sibility, power children invariably put others in a 
position where others have to take responsibility 
for them. They not only make parents get them 
things, but force their parents to make decisions 
for them. 

Some Native children may act helpless and give 
up easily in the face of mild frustration. Many 
children do not know how to handle pressure or 
frustration well at all. Many Native children have 
not learned to solve problems on their own. If 
spoiled children begin to experience the conse- 
quences of what they do, not being protected by 
overly nurturing parents, their sense of personal 
power will begin to grow. 

Setting limits and rules adequately, providing 
the opportunity for Native children to take respon- 
sibility, and requiring them to share in duties in 
the home and school are critical factors in helping 
children develop their sense of power. Building 
children's sense of power is an important step in 
raising their self-esteem. Many of the issues 
having to do with power deal with the way conflict 



9 

ERIC 



30 j, j 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



is handled. When conflicts are settled by having 
"winners" and "losers" we all lose. Kindness, fair- 
ness, consistency, and concern are more likely to 
result in parents and children respecting each 
other. When parents admit mistakes, apologize 
and change, it increases children's faith in parents, 
and makes for better relationships. 

There are a number of things a parent can do 
that serve to increase the sense afpower in children 
— without giving the kind of power that they are 
unable to handle. Parents can: 

• Encourage children to take on more chal- 
lenging tasks and responsibilities. 

• Provide alternatives when planning ac- 
tivities — making choices. 

• Let children know that they are respon- 
sible for what they feel and to not blame 
others. 

• Teach their child how to influence people 
in a positive way. 

• Help children be aware of how they make 
decisions. 

• Teach children a better way to solve 
problems. 

• Plan activities so the child can experience 
success. 

• Show children that they can do something 
well and let them do it. 

• Involve family members in significant 
decisions that affect them. 

• Be sure the resources the family have are 
distributed to family members in a fair and 
equitable way. 

Parents need to be very clear, about what areas 
they need to maintain control, and what decisions 
they are willing to let the children make. Children 
need to learn many skills, have the opportunity to 
make choices and be encouraged to take respon- 
sibility. 

Models 

Model issues have to do with personal values, 
(^s, and ideals and the ability to clarify one's own 
5 tandards to live up to them. A child needs to know 
people who are worthy models for own behavior. 

Because modeling is unconscious, children 
learn more from example than being told. This is 
especially important when teaching values, 
religious attitudes, and interpersonal behavior. 
Native children watch, making what sense they 
can out of the observation, rather than fully under- 
standing and accepting verbal messages about 
complex issues from others. "Do what I say, don't 



do what I do" often does not work. When parents 
espouse values and beliefs that a child associates 
with strong positive feelings, these values and 
beliefs are usually accepted by the child. If Native 
parents' values are not congruent with their be- 
havior and they do not fulfill children's needs, 
negative feelings will be associated with many 
experiences. 

A child needs to make sense out of what is going 
on in his/her life. Some Native children may have 
excessive change, unpredictability, conflict, 
emotionality, and inconsistency which keep them 
confused. When patterns of living keep changing, 
a child's anxiety rises because accurate predictions 
cannot be made nor can goals be reached. 

Chronic confusion is a major symptom of some 
Native children with Models problems. They have 
difficulties carrying out even the simplest instruc- 
tions and appear disinterested in most tasks very 
quickly, even those in which they have stated some 
interest. Keeping them on task and on target is 
often akin to trying to hold mercury in your hand. 
This characteristic is the result of a deeper problem 
that Native children may have, which is a general 
absence of a goal orientation. 

When Native children have a low sense of 
Models they tend to be quite disorganized, sloppy, 
and messy. Their spaces, desks, and rooms become 
disaster areas. When they are required to 
straighten them f they frequently take a very long 
time to do so, and still may not have them or- 
ganized in any logical manner. These children 
may have a hard time making decisions because 
they lack an organizing principle or sense of direc- 
tion. 

The whole area of ethics and morals is a prob- 
lem for some Native children with a low sense of 
Models. Many tend to be unsure about what it is 
they believe; their decisions about true-false, right- 
wrong, and good-bad tend to be contradictory and 
inconsistent. They may voice high moral beliefs, 
but their behavior doesn't correspond. They may 
be confused about the way to handle a situation. 

Children with Models problems tend to shy 
away from experiences for several reasons. First, 
is that their experience is probably limited. 
Secondly, new experiences are only chosen if they 
make sense in terms of some goals they may have. 
Problems with goals often diminish the children's 
enthusiasm for new experiences. 

Children with this type of problem are a little 
bit "off 1 in relating to other people. They make 
others uneasy, because their manner of relating 
seems strained or awkward. This will show up as 
laughing a bit more than is appropriate, being 
more or less enthusiastic than a situation calls for, 



3i 32 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



being to.» "lovey", etc. They are either too much or 
too little of something, and other people, including 
their peers, sense it. Reinforcing and encouraging 
the times when thev do well in relating, is an 
important way to help them make sense out of 
what they do. Help them review what happened 
when something goes wrong in their relationships 
with others. 

A child needs to have a sense of order. By living 
with a relative in an ordered environment, in 
which neatness, time commitments, and clear com- 
munication is practiced, a Native child develops 
skills in organization, planning and effective prob- 
lem solving. Disorder in a Native child's environ- 
ment makes it hard to learn good organizing 
tactics. This has serious consequences for school 
performance. 

Once children have adopted models, it is very 
hard to change them. Both parents and teachers 
know how much time and energy are needed to 
change a child's behavior, and even more is re- 
quired to alter feelings or attitudes. Even if a 
pattern of behavior results in pain or criticism, 
children tend to carry out the model that they have 
« until they get a new one that they are convinced, 
by their own experience, works better for them. 

Improving a child's sense of Models requires a 
good deal of patience. The fact that children with 
Model problems have difficulty organizing them- 
selves, learning and setting goals, means parents 
should be ready to work on this condition, an- 
ticipating that they might not see immediate 
results from their efforts. Parents can help im- 
prove their child's sense of Models by: 

• Being a good model for their children. 

• Teaching their children to have orderly 
habits. 

• Teaching their children how to organize 
themselves. 

• Having children participate in keeping 
things organized through household 
chores and tasks. 

• Helping their children set reasonable and 
achievable goals. 

• Helping their children understand what 
they believe. 

• Helping their children to understand the 
consequences of their behavior. 

• Helping their children broaden their range 
of experience. 

• Letting their children know what you as 
parents expect. 



• Setting appropriate standards for behavior 
and school performance, 

When a youngster has low self-esteem, the 
parent will observe weakness in all conditions of 
self-esteem. When the youngster is missing one of 
the fouramditions, he/she feels uncomfortable and 
out of sorts. When a child is missing more than one 
condition* the intensity or severity of behavior 
increases. 

Feeling* control the behavior NOT the belief. 

The Allowing Medicine Wheel Charts will help 
explain self esteem. 

The Medicine Wheel-Intact-High Self Esteem 
depicts the "good" things in life when one believes 
in self and has high self esteem. 

The Medicine Wheel-Brcken-Low Self Esteem 
shows the probable negative thinking and behavior 
when one has low self esteem. 

(Figure 2 and Figure 3) 

Home — School Communication 

Communication between the school and 
parents isan essential element in parentparticipa- 
tion. Native parents can be meaningfully involved 
in a number of ways: through joint decision 
making; m improved school/community relations, 
as allies in problem solving, and most importantly, 
as part of a comprehensive service delivery system 
to students. 

Many times the lines of communication be- 
tween the school and parent are not clear, and 
Native parents may be confused about where to go 
for help or assistance. The larger the school, the 
less likely a Native parent is able to identify 
resources* Lines of communication may be only 
one way — from school to home — with the schools 
not hearing the Native parent's voice. Schools 
should provide a clearly defined procedure for 
parent communication, requests, information, 
visits and participation. 

With an effective home-school communications 
system, it is possible to have all parents observe 
their child in the classroom. By having monthly 
parent group meetings, the teacher can suggest 
that Natiro parents visit the classroom by schedul- 
ing a particular week for a certain family. By 
scheduling* specific week rather than a specific 
day, the Native parent will in all likelihood visit 
the classroom sometime during that week. 

Parentscould be given an observation checklist 
which they could fill out on their own. By having 
such a checklist, the Native parent would become 
a participant in the classroom rather than feeling 
like an octsider. The Native parent can then begin 
to appreciate and to experience the daily workings 
of a classroom. The teacher could also make an 



9 

ERIC 



32 33 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfield, Floy Pepper 



appointment with the Native family to make a 
home visit in the evening on the same day or the 
day after the observation. (Alan-Haig-Brown, 
1983). 

The first contact the parents have with the 
school is at the time they enroll their children in 
school. All staff in the building should make the 
parents feel comfortable in the school It should be 
remembered that the parent often comes to school 
with as many apprehensions as the child. ANative 
person may feel strange and disoriented when com* 
ing into a school, and the first impressions the 
parent has of the school sets the tone for parent- 
school relations. Having established good com- 
munication on a one-to-one basis makes other 
formal school-parent communicative situations 
easier. 

There are many ways in which schools can 
engage in ongoing positive communication with 
parents. 

Effective Practices in Indian Education: An 
Administrator's Monograph , lists specific ways to 
involve and communicate with parents: 

• A variety of formal and informal methods 
should be used to inform the community. 
In terms of general program and informa- 
tion and school news, use the existing com- 
munication network. Attend parent com- 
mittee meetings, tribal education meet- 
ings and publish releases in the tribal 
newsletter. Rely upon the mass media 
which reaches members of the tribal com- 
munity. 

• Encourage teachers and other school staff 
to present their programs and describe 
their services at tribal education, Chapter 
1, Indian Education Act and Johnson-O'- 
Malley committee meetings. Conduct 
school meetings at times which do not con- 
flict with other community activities, or 
hold them jointly with the meetings above. 

• When communicating specific classroom 
and student information, encourage 
parent-teacher communication at school, 
in the home and in the community. School 
is almost as much of an intimidating place 
for parents as parent's homes are for 
teachers. The use of a community liaison 
or other community representative may 
help in establishing rapport between the 
parent and teacher. 

• Non-judgmental, positive regard is re- 
quired when working with parents. Na- 
tive parents are concerned about their 



child's education. If there is a problem, 
cooperatively negotiate a plan of action for 
which parents and the school 6hare respon- 
sibility. Parents do want to know what's 
going on, particularly when it affects their 
children. Information must be provided in 
plain English. Avoid conferences with 
parents that focus only upon the shortcom- 
ings of the child. There should be abalance 
between strengths and areas needing im- 
provements. Be honest and open. If 
problems do exist, deal with them directly. 

• When meeting with parents on an informal 
basis, keep the meeting relaxed. Show 
them concern, and respect the child and 
family and view them as individuals. 

• Reinforce desirable behavior. Recognition 
should be given to parents, students and 
teachers who become involved and com- 
municate effectively. A brief note to a 
parent thanking them for their help is a 
small investment. Furthermore, when 
conducting meetings, conferences, or open- 
house, provide activities and information 
of real interest to parents. Budgets and 
needs assessment surveys aren'w very ex- 
citing to listen to, whereas student presen- 
tations and teacher demonstrations of 
materials are. 

• Establish student, faculty and teacher 
councils as necessary to assure com- 
munication among the various school and 
community groups, and provide a sys- 
tematic avenue for the discussion of school 
programs, practices and procedures by all 
interested people in these groups. Avoid 
creating new groups which may duplicate 
existing groups. 

• Keep parents, student and faculty in- 
formed of the factors which affect 
decisions, thereby gaining increased un- 
derstanding and support in all areas of the 
school program. Parents don't like 
surprises, 

• Use information flyers and newsletters. A 
quality newsletter may well be the most 
effective way of reaching parents and 
grandparents and informing them of the 
school's activities and expectations. (The 
function of the newsletter is to inform, 
announce, teach, interest, and communi- 
cate.) 

• Schedule regular meetings of parents such 
ao Parent-Teacher Association meetings, 
School Advisory Committee meetings, or 



ERLC 



33 3<1 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



general parent-community meetings. Pro- 
vide interpreters, if necessary. Offer a 
meal or snack when possible. 
Schedule parent-child-teacher conferences 
at least twice a year. Consider the use of 
home-visits as part of the conferencing 
process. 

Provide preschool or Head Start programs 
and emphasize cognitive development as 
opposed to a play-oriented program. Such 
a program would have a strong component 
of parent participation in the classroom. 

Actively seek to involve parents in class* 
rooms to assist individual students. In 
some locales, parent volunteers may be 
recruited; in other situations, pay may be 
more appropriate to local custom. 

Make extensive use of parents as resource 
persons in the classroom. 

Train parents to reinforce school learning* 
of youngsters at home. Include general 
parent-child learning activity suggestions 
in school and tribal newsletters. 

Offer parent education classes to assist 
parents in understanding the growth and 
development of their youngsters as well as 
the psychological aspects of growing up 
and relationships. 

Solicit parents and tribal councils for input 
for procedures such as the student hand- 
book, disciplinary procedures on atten- 
dance, tardiness, suspension and expul- 
sion. 

The sharing of ideas to guide the school 
districts 1 operation is critical. Com- 
munication between the district and the 
community must be reciprocal, sincere and 
positive. Too often communication is one- 
way: administrators may "talk at" the 
community and do not do a very good job of 
listening. Attend parent and community 
meetings to assess opinions. Seek out the 
advice of elders for their guidance. Con- 
duct informal meetings to share plans and 
ideas. Spend time just "hanging out" in the 
Indian community. Attend sporting 
events and other activities which Indian 
parents attend. Encourage parent con- 
tributions to school newsletters and pro- 
vide school news to the community tribal 
newsletter. Hold community meetings, 
pow wows or other special events peri- 
odically on Saturdays for parents, teacher, 



students and other community members to 
meet on "neutral ground." 

• Sincerity reflects another form of open- 
ness. Don't seek guidance unless you are 
willing to act upon the suggestions 
provided. A sincere interest in community 
opinion will require an administrator to 
moderate his/her place. Educators need to 
be patient. Silence at meetings may mean 
approval or disapproval. Learn to "read" 
the nonverbal cues of community mem- 
bers. Educators also need to be aware of 
social protocol which may exist, dictating 
who may speak in a given order. 
Educators tend to speak in ways which 
maybe viewed as elitist. It is not just what 
one knows, but rather whether one shows 
respect and is respected in turn by the com- 
munity- Respect requires integrity. In- 
dian people expect promises to be kept. 
Following through on commitments is very 
important. (Pepper, 1985, pp. 69-71, 77-78) 

Child Development and Parent 

Education 

Rearing children is a major challenge. A posi- 
tive relationship with their Native parents gives 
children the best possible start in this world. 

Indian mothers were taught the importance 
of child development very early. Parents 
traditionally taught that the child is always 
learning, changing, and growing and that 
they must be helped along their path. 
Growth and development were recognized 
through different ceremonies. One way child 
development was recognised was in the 
freedom that children were given. Today's 
theories tell us that children need a chance 
to practice new skills in order to master 
them, Traditional culture was uniquely 
suited to encourage this because children 
were allowed to experience many things and 
participate in their own way. They could 
explore the world and test their skills. Many 
modern theories exist about child develop- 
ment, but none really contradict what our 
culture has known for centuries. What can 
be learned from the old ways grows from the 
awareness of how children grow and develop. 
(Cross. 1986, pp. 161-162) 

The traditional view of being "child centered' 1 is 
one that is usedin early childhood education at the 
present time. A child centered program is based 
upon an attitude of respect for and a delight in 
children. Children are free to accept as much 
responsibility for their behavior as is appropriate 
for their developmental level. 



34 .35 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



The first years of a child's learning ex- 
perience must be connected to that with 
which he/she is familiar in order to build a 
foundation for successful school experience. 
(1NAR Alaska Hearing. Sakeagak, 1990. p. 
11) 

Alfred Adler recognized that children need 
much more than academic subjects; they need an 
environment that promotes learning, about life 
and ways of living. He perceived human beings as 
capable of making decisions that control the direc- 
tion of their lives. Adler believed that a child's 
style of life was determined by age five. (Reynolds, 
1990, pp. 14-15) 

• Young children profit from being talked 
with, read to, and led by the hand to ex- 
plore their world. There is no reason why 
these activities cannot take place in the 
context of home and school in their Native 
language and English. 

• Young children need to hear the important 
events of their families and tribes. They 
need to experience the origins of their own 
traditions before Halloween, St. Patricks 
Day, etc. 

• Native American/Alaskan Natives share a 
long history of oral tradition in legends, 
which historically was the means of 
preserving information. Oral storytelling 
by elders, parents, teachers, and other 
resources is a way of sharing values and 
traditions for young children. 

• Young children have a natural curiosity 
that can be nurtured through their senses 
using physical surroundings through the 
use of plants, rocks, vegetation, etc. 

• Every culture has music, art, and a unique- 
ness that children can be introduced to and 
taught to appreciate. 

• Even very young children can come to ap- 
preciate, respect, and take pride in their 
own culture, which will later help them to 
understand others who may be different. 

• In multicultural settings, young children 
can also be helped to expand their cultural 
understandings. 

Successful programs encourage parents to be- 
come involved in the school. One such exemplary 
program is the Wounded Knee School in Mander- 
son, South Dakota. At their elementary srhool the 
attendance rate of 1989 was 97.9 percent. Char- 
lotte Black Elk, a school board member, claims 
that, "We have done this by including parents as a 
key part of the programs. Each parent is required 



to spend a certain amount of time in their child's 
classroom." (INAR High Plains Hearing, Black 
Elk, 1990, p. 6). She goes on to explain that such 
a high rate of parental participation is possible 
because of the compactness and smallness of the 
community which allows them to "draw on the 
talents within the community and do innovative 
programs." 

One of the underlying tenets of American In- 
dian/Alaska Natives is a tie with the family. A 
Native American community must consider that 
the formative years of each child are crucial and 
that early childhood learning must be a priority. 
The attitudes, values, beliefs, and the way children 
th ink and accept people and accept their way of life 
are learned very early in life. 

Successful Models 

The following section will highlight several 
strategies or models for effective parental support. 
The models mentioned could be explored further 
for implications for future adaptations elsewhere 
in Native communities. Most of the models focus 
on the parental support ideas but the federal and 
state programs described offer strategies for im- 
proving parental involvement 

Models Which Build More 
Effective Parental Support 

Models which build more effective parental 
support, focus on improving the one on one 
relationship of Native parents or extended family 
members with the Native student and the class- 
room teacher. The models chosen here, not only 
give advice to Native parents about how best to 
interact with their child, but show parents more 
productive, supportive behaviors which could sig- 
nificantly improve educational outcomes for their 
children. There may be many other models which 
also focus on parental behaviors. The ones chosen, 
however, include some critical variables which 
seem to be particularly effective with American 
Indian/Alaska Native parents. 

Positive Indian Parenting 

The Positive Indian Parenting curriculum is 
designed to provide a brief, practical culturally- 
specific training program for Native parents. The 
first goal of the curriculum is to help Native 
parents explore the values and attitudes expressed 
in traditional Native chiid-rearing practices and 
then to apply those valvies to modern skills in 
parenting. Since there is no one tradition among 
Native people for child rearing, several examples 
from numerous tribes are used ps examples. 




Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



Traditional is defined as "the old ways" — ways 
that existed prior to white influence. Because the 
concept of traditional varies amongpeople, positive 
Native parenting refers to the ways as old ways or 
historical way. It is up to reach individual using 
the material to tailor them to fit their own com- 
munity. There are some universal values, at- 
titudes, or customs that may be expressed 
differently in local communities, which give the 
trainer a basis to build on. These universals in- 
clude the oral tradition, story telling, the spiritual 
nature of child rearing and the role of extended 
family. It is the assertion of this curriculum that 
valuable lessons are to be learned from the old 
ways and that Native parents can find strength in 
cultural traditions. 

A second goal of the Positive Indian Parenting 
curriculum is to help parents develop positive and 
satisfying attitudes, values, and skills that have 
their own roots in our cultural heritage. Promot- 
ing the growth and well-being of the Native child 
through positive parenting, which is culturally in- 
spired, is the underlying message to parents. 

This curriculum is intended for parent trainers 
and provides information on how to train, training 
issues, organizing training and suggested content 
and structure for parent sessions. In addition, 
material for parents is available. The curriculum 
is designed so that even someone with little pre- 
vious experience couid implement the program. 
However, a basic workshop for leaders can be very 
helpful. 

The section, entitled "Part Two: Parenting 
Curriculum," is arranged in a format that might be 
used as a lesson plan. There are eight topic areas. 
Background reading is suggested to help the 
trainer prepare. Each topic area is designed to be 
the subject of a two- to three-hour session. 

New Parents as Teachers 

Another successful model worth mentioning 
has been featured in What Works, Schools That 
Work Educating Disadvantaged Children. The 
New Parents As Teachers Project in Missouri shows 
results in working with parents of young children 
which could have implications for parents of older 
children as well. Though this model has not been 
used with Native parents specifically, it has pos- 
sibilities, given the indications of results produced. 
The three key components of (1) monthly visits to 
the home by parent educators trained in child 
development; (2) monthly discussion groups with 
other parents; and (3) a parent resource center, 
housed in a school, offering learning materials for 
families and facilities for child care, have yielded 
significant results worth replicating in schools for 
Native children. 



The program began in 1981 and is available 
through every school district in Missouri. The 
program facilitates voluntary participation by 
parents, numbering 34,000 in 1987, representing 
families of all income levels and types. However, 
no specifics were give about success with Native 
parents. The results indicated the following: 

• In 1985 an independent evaluation was 
conducted to assess the program's effects 
on participating children and their parents 
compared with a matched control group of 
nonparticipating families. The 
evaluation's findings show: 

• NPAT children demonstrated greater in- 
tellectual and language development 

• NPAT children demonstrated significantly 
more aspects of positive social develop- 
ment, including the ability to cope and to 
get along with adults. 

• NPAT Parents were more knowledgeable 
about child-rearing practices and child 
development, including the use of con- 
structive discipline. 

• NPAT parents were more likely to rate 
their school districts as very responsive to 
their children's needs; the figure for NPAT 
parents was 5*> percent, compared with 29 
percent for control group parents. 

Family Math 

The Oregon Indian Education Association 
(OIEA), through a grant from the National Science 
Foundation in the fall of 1986, began to offer train- 
ing in Family Math throughout Native com- 
munities in Oregon. A Program, designed to 
encourage students (primarily minorities and 
females) to go on in advanced mathematics, gives 
parents and children opportunities to participate 
in activities which reinforce and supplement the 
school mathematics curriculum. 

The OIEA trained Native educators from over 
twenty communities throughout Oregon, at least 
twelve of which offered classes for parents locally. 
In addition, Native educators in Alaska, Utah, 
Washington, Wisconsin, Montana and Florida 
have participated in training as a result of the 
National Science Foundation grant. Classes run 
from four to six weeks, with once-a-week classes 
that last an hour or two, usually in the evening. 
The activities consist of: 

• The development of problem-solving skills. 
Students and parents learn to look for pat- 
terns, draw pictures and diagrams, work 
backwards, guess at the answer and then 



9 

ERLC 



36 37 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



check, and apply a host of other strategies 
when solving problems. 

• An emphasis on working together. Talk- 
ing about the activities not only opens the 
door for Native parents to help their 
children (and for Native children to help 
their parents) but adds a new dimension to 
the learning. 

• An active "hands-on" approach, usinginex- 
pensive materials. Employing concrete ob- 
jects such as blocks, beans, pennies, and 
toothpicks, Native children learned to un- 
derstand the meaning of numbers and spa- 
tial concepts. 

• An exposure to all of the topics of mathe- 
matics. These include geometry, measure- 
ment, probability, statistics, estimation, 
logical thinking, and the use of a calculator 
as well as numbers and arithmetic. In this 
model, Native children are not 
shortchanged by spending time only on 
arithmetic drill and practice. 

• An emphasis on the importance of mathe- 
matics to future learning and work. 

The Oregon Grand Ron de tribal community has 
been offering Family Math classes for over three 
years. The program boasts at least 32 parents a 
session, once a month. The tribe itself sponsors the 
activities and contributes a meal as well. It has 
become a very popular community event 

Family Science 

Like Family Math, Family Science offers 
parents and their children an opportunity to par- 
ticipate in activities together. The primary pur- 
pose of the program is to give parents ideas about 
how to help children develop better science skills 
which will enable them to think critically and 
creatively using simple household items to conduct 
experiments and explore scientific concepts. 

Some Native communities in Oregon and Min- 
nesota are currently field testing Family Science 
activities which will be compiled into a book being 
funded by the Chevron Corporation, to be com- 
pleted by the fall of 1991. 

Preparing for the Drug Free Years 

• Preparing for the Drug Free Years is 
probably one of the best parent support 
programs in terms of dealing with parental 
prevention strategies. This program not 
only deals with how parents can anticipate 
the problems that their children are going 
to have around drugs and alcohol, but also 
focuses on what they can do within the 



family structure to build support, create 
the needed bonding, and encourage the 
specific skills it takes to say no to drugs and 
alcohol 

Based on research conducted by the University 
of Washington, School of Social Work, the Prepar- 
ing for the Drug Free Years Program offers parents 
and students opportunities to learn how to prevent 
involvement leading to abuse of drugs and alcohol. 
The program highlights research based risk factors 
and provides parents with family structures and 
parenting skills which can effectively address each 
risk factor. Using a series of videos, parent 
manuals, and activities with the whole family, 
parents begin to define expectations for their 
children, and learn how to most effectively convey 
those. The risk factors addressed include the fol- 
lowing: 

• family/community history of alcohol/drug 
abuse 

• family management problems 

• early anti-social behavior 

• parental drug use and positive attitude 
toward use 

• academic failure 

• little commitment to school 

• alienation, rebelliousness, lack of social 
bonding 

• antisocial behavior in early adolescence 

• friends who use drugs 

• favorable attitude toward drug use 

• early first use of drugs/alcohol 

All of the models identified are activity 
oriented, require that Native parents demonstrate 
new skills mastered, are fun and finally are adapt- 
able to Native cultural specifics. For example 
many of the Family Math activities can support the 
notion that traditional American Indian/Alaska 
Native cultures reinforce many mathematical con- 
cepts. 

Models Which Encourage Native 
Parental Involvement. 

Following is a brief description of the variety of 
federal legislation which encourages local school 
districts to consult with Native parent groups. 
Most require committees to help formulate policy 
and practice at the local level. Many of these 
committees, however, in practice, feel insignificant 
impact in terms of institutional change. 

The public schools are compensated with 
special federal funding to support the task of 



9 

ERIC 



37.3 S 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



educating Native students. Public school 
districts are responsible to the state and 
federal governments for their performance in 
educating Native Students, but not to tribal 
governments. Election of Native individuals 
to school boards is very rare outside of reser- 
vations. In most public school districts, per- 
functory parent committees required by 
meagerly funded federal projects constitutes 
the total involvement of Native people In the 
administration of education of Native 
children. Legislative requirements for tribal 
and parental Involvement are largely ignored 
by school districts, and state and federal 
agencies. (INAR Charleston, 1991, pA3.) 

Prepared by Teresa L. McCarty, Ph.D. at the 
Arizona Department of Education, Indian Educa- 
tion Unit, June 1986, the following legislation 
provides mandated structures which if utilized 
have tremendous potential for Native parental in- 
volvement 

Johnson-O'Malley Act of April 16, 
1934 

Johnson-O'Malley (JOM) supplies suppK v Vi- 
tal funds to public school districts for eligiKa Na- 
tive students. The Johnson-O'Malley Act was 
amended in 1975 when Congress passed the Indian 
Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act 
allowing tribes and Native organizations to con- 
tract directly for funds, and providing for Native 
parent input (advisory committees) in public 
school education programs. The kinds of services 
provided by JOM should be decided at the local 
level; these services might include tutoring in basic 
skills, cultural activities, providing teacher aides 
and paraprofessional counselors, and/or parental 
costs. 

Bilingual Education Act of January 
2, 1968 

Though not designed specifically for American 
Indians or Alaska Natives, this legi slation current- 
ly supports nearly 100 American Native bilingual 
programs. The legislation provides funds for in- 
struction to limited English proficient (LEP) stu- 
dents; this instruction should help students 
become proficient in English and meet grade 
promotion requirements in all their subjects. As 
amended in 1984, the Bilingual Education Act 
supports these programs: 

• transitional bilingual education programs 
use the native language to the extent 
necessary to help students master English 
and meet grade promotion standards, and 
can incorporate students' cultural heritage 
in instruction; these programs are called 



transitional because the native language is 
used as a vehicle to help students stay at 
grade level in all subject areas while they 
master English. Once students make the 
transition to English, the native language 
is dropped from the curriculum; 

• special alternative programs are designed 
for situations in which it is administrative- 
ly unfeasible to implement a transitional 
program (because of a large number of 
language groups to be served, or because of 
the absence of qualified bilingual staff); 
this approach provides structured English 
instruction and uses "special alternative" 
techniques to meet LEP students' needs; 
generally these are English-as-a-second- 
language (ESL) programs; they are not 
bilingual programs; 

• programs of academic excellence 
demonstrate a model or exemplary ap- 
proach that can be replicated elsewhere; 

• family literacy programs work with 
parents and their children to promote 
English literacy; 

• developmental bilingual programs provide 
structured English instruction and in- 
struction in a second language in all cour- 
ses of study; such services can be provided 
to both limited English proficient students 
and to fluent English proficient (FEP) stu- 
dents, but FEP students cannot constitute 
more than 50 percent of the students 
served; because both LEP and FEP stu- 
dents benefit from instruction, develop- 
mental programs are similar to enrich- 
ment programs; and 

• special populations programs serve pre- 
school and gifted students with language- 
related needs. 

Indian Education Act of June 23, 
1972 

This legislation assists local education agencies 
(LEASs) in implementing programs to meet the 
special needs of American Indian and Alaska Na- 
tive students. Subpart 1 monies supply sup- 
plemental funds for tutoring, aides, and 
enrichment activities. Subpart 2 funds provide for 
planning, pilot, and demonstration projects in 
bilingual-bicultural curriculum development and 
instruction, and teacher training. Subpart 3 
provides for adult education and training. 

The Indian Education Act created a federal 
Office of Indian Education and a National Advisory 
Council on Indian Education to review, recom- 



ERLC 



38 3<j 

M 



Improving Parental Participation 

mend, and disseminate information on American 
Indian and Alaska Native education. 

Indian Self-Determination and 
Education Assistance Act of 1975 
(Public Law 93.638) 

This legislation is for the benefit of Natives 
alone and is intended "to promote maximum Na- 
tive participation in the government and education 
of the Indian people." The Act allows federal funds 
to be channeled directly to tribes and Native or- 
ganization for the operation of education programs 
and for Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and health, 
Indian Public Health Service (IPHS) programs and 
services. It amends JOM to provide greater Native 
control in public school programs and authorizes 
the Secretary of the Interior to provide construc- 
tion assistance to public schools enrolling Native 
students. One of the most significant pieces of 
legislation affecting Native people, this law paved 
the way for the establishment of community-con- 
trolled or "contract" schools. 

Tribally Controlled Community 
College Act of 1978 (Public Law 
95-471) 

This Act provides grants for the operation and 
improvement of tribally controlled community col- 
leges. 

Title XI of the Education 
Amendments Act of 1978 (Public 
Law 95.561) 

This legislation provides for the development of 
standards for the basic education of Native 
children attending BIA schools or BIA contract 
schools. It also created: (a) national criteria for 
dormitory living (b) a priority system for school 
construction; (c) a funding formula based on per 
capita student counts; (d) direct and uniform 
standards for funding contract schools; and (e) a 
policy of active recruitment of Native educators. 

Impact Aid (Public Law 81-874) 

Impact Aid provides funds for public school 
districts on or near "federally impacted" areas (like 
Indian reservations), where no property taxes can 
be assessed to finance school construction and 
operations. These laws, passed in the 1950s, 
facilitated the development of public school sys- 
tems on Indian reservations. 

Chapter 1 

Chapter 1 of the Augustus F. Hawkins/Robert 
T. Stafford Elementary and Secondary School 1m- 



ERLC 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 

provement Amendments of 1981 was enacted as 
part of Public Law 100-297— April 28, 1988. The 
purpose of Chapter 1 is to continue to provide 
financial assistance to state and local educational 
agencies to meet the special educational needs of 
"educationally deprived 1 ' children, on the basis of 
entitlements. 

The programs authorized by Chapter 1 provide 
financial assistance to: 

• Local educational agencies for programs 
designed to meet the special educational 
needs of educationally deprived children 
and children in local institutions for 
neglected or delinquent children; 

• State agencies to support programs 
designed to meet the special educational 
needs of children with disabilities; 

• State agencies for programs designed to 
meet the special educational needs of 
children in institutions for neglected or 
delinquent children, or in adult correction- 
al institutions; 

• Local educational agencies for programs 
designed to m^et the special educational 
needs and provide supportive services to 
children of migratory agricultural workers 
or migratory fishermen; and 

• Local educational agencies (through the 
Secretary of the Interior) to meet the spe- 
cial educational needs of Indian children. 

Chapter 1 Parent Involvement 
Programs 

Recent legislation requires major parent invol- 
vement projects. The focus is always on the "c hild." 
The parent and child are actively involved in home- 
learning activities. Staff and parent education is 
provided at regional and state conferences. 

Specific strategies include the following: 

• Improving school-to-home communica- 
tions. 

• Assisting families to support positive 
relationships through parenting and child- 
rearing. 

• Improving the recruitment, training, and 
involvement of parents and volunteers. 

• Involving parents in learning activities at 
home. 

• Inviting and cross-training staff and 
parents of all children, 

• Improving team participation and leader- 
ship of parents. 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



Warm Springs Memorandum of 
Understanding 

The following document has significant im- 
plications for many districts attempting to clarify 
roles of parents, tribes, school districts, the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs, and others. 

1 want to share with you a couple of docu- 
ments our tribes have produced with the 
local schools district of Jefferson County, 
Oregon. One is an Intergovernmental 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) be- 
tween the tribes, the BIA and the Jefferson 
County School District regarding education 
of Indian students. 

We recently reviewed our MOU with the 
Oregon State Department of Education (ODE) and 
an addendum was added to draw them in as a 
fourth party to the document. The purpose of this 
review and addendum was to enlist the ODE in 
helping us evaluate and assess our programs that 
are using this document as a guide to improving 
education. We bring these documents to the Task 
Force because we are always happy to share what 
has worked for us. 

The purpose of our MOU is to define and estab- 
lish a system of policies and procedures to ensure 
effective inter-governmental consultation, plan- 
ning and delivery of service for tribal students. 
Inherent in the acceptance of this document is a 
solemn pledge to adhere to the agreements herein 
contained. The expected outcome of these agree- 
ments will be the advancement of tribal student 
performance to a level comparable with all stu- 
dents in the district. 

The goal of this document is to promote clear 
understanding of the roles, interests and expecta- 
tions of each agency for the education of tribal 
students. This goal is to be attained by joint con- 
sultation and planning in the areas of (1) equal 
educational opportunity, (2) instructional services 
and curriculum, (3) support services, (4) equip- 
ment, buildings and transportation, and (5) gover- 
nance and administration. Progress is being 
measured by the consistency of objectives and 
results of each agency's long range and manage- 
ment plans, which are evaluated annually. 

Although this document is a statement of 
mutual policy and interest, it is not intended to 
have the legally binding effect of a contract, but the 
signing parties also fully expect and agree that 
each entity shall voluntarily follow both the letter 
and the intent of this Joint Statement as far as 
reasonably possible, and to the extent consistent 
with applicable state, tribal and federal constitu- 
tions, laws, treaties and rules. It is not intended 
to either enlarge or diminish the legal obligations 



of the parties as they existed prior to the execution 
of this Joint Statement, but it is intended to set 
forth in a concise and coherent way in a single 
document, the goals, policies and obligations of the 
parties. (Northwest, Sahme, p.28) 

As noted in the research section, parental par- 
ticipation is more likely to occur when policies exist 
and students are in place which clarify roles and 
expectations for both school and parents. The 
Warm Springs MOU does this. 

Blandin Foundation 

Another model which surfaced during the 
INAR hearings provides suggestions for how foun- 
dations could support the advancement of Native 
educational excellence. Incentives for Native 
parental support and involvement are described. 

The Blandin Foundation was created by Char- 
les Blandin in 1941, who said at the time that he 
was creating it "to promote the well-being of 
mankind as the Board of Trustees may from time 
to time determine. 11 It is a private foundation and 
its mission is to improve the viability of rural 
communities in partnership with many in* 
dividuals, groups, and organizations. 

In 1987 the Board of Trustees wanted to make 
a commitment to Native education, but since there 
were not Native people on the Board or at the 
Foundation, they formed a task force group. The 
purpose of the group was to help the Foundation 
better understand the problems faced by Natives 
in Minnesota and to recommend the role that the 
Foundation should play in providing a strategic 
educational solution. The task force included 44 of 
Minnesota's Native educators and leaders. Their 
recommendations helped to define the program 
areas the Blandin Foundation will support to ad- 
vance Native education in our state. 

In July 1988 the Foundation made a commit- 
ment of $1 million for a two-year Native education 
program. The task force recommendations in- 
cluded: 

1. Programs focused on Native parents to en- 
courage them to take an active role in their 
children's education and programs that in- 
crease their parenting skills. 

2. Programs targeted at retaining Native stu- 
dents in education and assisting students 
who have dropped out of school to resume 
their education. 

3. Programs designed to provide direct ser- 
vices to Native students including special 
prep programs and programs for gifted and 
talented students with special emphasis 
on science and math. 



9 

ERLC 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



4. Programs designed to advance the cause of 
Native self-determination including 
programs designed to teach Native lan- 
guage, culture, and values; and programs 
designed to assist Indian tribes in the for- 
mation of codes. 

5. Programs designed to impact public policy 
related to the advancement of Native 
educators, including programs focused on 
policy makers. 

6. Programs designed to educate the public 
on tribal sovereignty and to increase the 
involvement of Natives in public policy 
making. 

At this time the policy's age focus is from about 
three years of age to high school graduation. It is 
hoped that the program will also cover the interim 
period between high school and college. 

Nonprofit institutions and organizations are 
eligible for funding. Grant requests of up to 
$25,000 for one year and $50,000 for two years are 
considered. 

Preference is given to programs under Native 
control, cooperative or joint projects between tribal 
agencies, school districts and state of federal 
education agencies, and projects involving incor- 
porated Native parent committees. This is very 
important. Several requests have been turned 
down because they did not have Native ownership. 

Some of the task force continue to act as ad- 
visors to the Foundation. Blandin is currently 
working with 20 grantees. The Foundation has 
funded 27 projects, and there are five projects 
being considered. The Foundation hired two 
evaluators and a Native education consultant. The 
Foundation considers itself a partner to the 
programs it funds and offers assistance and sup- 
port. 

The programs funded have been varied and 
tend to be in two categories: ( 1 ) Reservati on schools 
that already have support systems in place and are 
bringing in more creative programs to work with 
their students; (2) Students off -reservation in 
schools that are bringing more tutoring programs, 
support programs, anu so forth, so that students 
will stay in school. 

One example program is in the Onamia School 
District. It shows how a whole community can 
work together. It is a curriculum development 
program, that has a firm commitment from the 
school. They will implement the curriculum as 
soon as it is developed. The superintendent and 
principal are working with them; they have a 
strong Native parent subcommittee and an ad- 
visory council of Elders who are working with 



them. It is really the whole community working 
together. 

Another program is a Teen Parenting Program 
at Cass Lake. This program has already completed 
one grant and is working on another. The first one 
was for getting teenage parents back into school. 
Some had already dropped out and were brought 
back. They had parenting classes and made a 
video tape telling their life stories and how difficult 
it is to be a teen parent and go to school at the same 
time. The video was done in a traditional way. 
This year the same teen parents will act as mentors 
and tutors to the third and fifth grade students who 
are at risk. That will give both groups a reason to 
be in school. The younger students will have a 
mentor and the older students will be helping the 
younger ones. 

The original plan of the Foundation was for a 
ten-year commitment. The Board of Trustees 
decided that they wanted to evaluate it after two 
years, and we are up for evaluation now in 
February 1991. We expect the evaluation to be 
very positive and the commitment to Indian educa- 
tion will continue. We are hoping that other 
private foundations will join us in making similar 
commitments. (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, 
Schmidt, 1990, p.67-68). 

Minnesota Indian Social Work Aides 

The need for Native parent advocates is ful- 
filled by the Minnesota Indian Social Work Aide 
program. 

There still exists in .Minnesota a need for 
trained Native personnel to work in public schools 
that have significant numbers of Native students. 
The program described in this paper represents a 
step toward fulfilling this need by training Native 
community members as Native social work aides. 
The 204 Native social work aides trained from 1980 
to 1990 were drawn from Minnesota Ojibwe and 
Sioux communities across the state. The majority 
of Native social work aides are women, ranging in 
age from early 20s to the early 60s. Approximately 
one-third provide services in urban areas, while 
two-thirds serve rural areas, usually connected 
with reservations. 

Native social work aides are considered 
"paraprofessionals" since many lack the academic 
credentials and training for working with school- 
age children and their families. These Native 
people bring with them very valuable life and child- 
rearing experiences specific to Native urban and 
reservation realities. They are funded by a com- 
bination of special education monies, Indian 
Education Act funds, Johnson O'Malley monies, 
and local education agency funds. 




Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



A pilot program was started In Minnesota In 
1974 to address the problem of American 
Indian children and youth with handicap- 
ping condlUons. While this program was 
veiy successful in the 16 school districts it 
served, there was a dearth of data on the total 
extent of the need, the services being 
provided, or the extent of unmet need. 

From the pilot program in 1974 and the needs 
assessment of 1978*79, the Indian Social Work 
Aide Program developed. This program recruits 
American Indian persons at the community level 
and provides them with special education training 
to impact the assessment, review, placement, and 
follow-up on American Indian children in special 
education programs or in need of special education 
programs. Most recently, in the 1989-90 school 
year, 75 persons were employed as Indian social 
work aides and received training in areas of special 
education. These persons have had a substantial 
impact in identifying, assessing, placing, review- 
ing, and serving American Indian children and 
families with special education needs. (INAR 
Great Lakes Hearing, Hakala, 1990, p. 48) 

The Indian Education Section of the Minnesota 
Department of Education conducts training 
programs which consist of three two-day training 
sessions in three-four consecutive years. This 
design was chosen to facilitate continuity and a 
gradual and consistent increase of professional 
competence. After each year a certificate is given 
to Native people demonstrating competence in the 
offered material. This facilitates further training 
and integration in continuing education programs 
for those who desire such training. Seventy or 
more persons participate each year. Levels of 
training have been standardized; new persons 
enter at Level I and progress on an annual basis 
through Levels II and III. College credits may be 
earned. Since all handicapped Native children and 
youth are served (as well as parents, teachers, and 
service providers for those children), training in- 
cludes all areas of special education. 

The objectives of the Indian Social Work Aide 
Program are: 

♦ To provide training to Indian social work 
aides in order to alleviate concerns regard- 
ing American Indian students in need of 
special education services. 

♦ To provide trained persons to school dis- 
tricts and cooperating special education 
centers who will assist with proper assess* 
men t, facilitate parental involvement, con- 
tribute to appropriate programs, and pro- 
vide resources to the child, the parents, the 
special education staff, and the school. 



Benefits of the Indian Social Work Aide Pro- 
gram fall into four areas: 

• benefits for the handicapped child; 

• benefits for the families of those children; 

• benefits to the school or school district; and 

• benefits to the Indian social work aide as a 
paraprofessional teacher. 

The benefits for the handicapped Indian child 
are in identifying and providing special education 
services when needed. The child is referred by 
either the parentis), family, school, or the aide. 
The Native social work aide acts as an advocate, 
facilitator, and coordinator throughout the steps of 
referral, assessment, staffing, development of in- 
dividual education plans (IEPs), placement, follow- 
up, and reporting. With the Native social work 
aide as advocate, the Native handicapped child is 
more likely to be identified, appropriately assessed 
and properly placed, and is more likely to have an 
educational plan that meets both educational and 
cultural needs. (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, 
Hakala, 1990, p.49) 

Minnesota Indian Education Act 

The following information, by David Beuillieu, 
Manager. Indian Education Section, Minnesota 
State department of Education, described a model 
for state leadership in improving the quality of 
Native education. Implications for the role states 
can play are significant 

Among the states. Minnesota represents a 
model of cooperation with American Indian 
Tribes and the Federal Government in the 
provision of educational services for 
American Indians. The inter-government 
cooperation in Indian education in the state 
has been sustained and enabled through the 
development of a distinct and unique 
responsibility on the part of the state to 
enable American Indians to have access to 
educational opportunities. The state s pro- 
gram in Indian education currently Includes 
a number of grant programs and services 
related to Indian educaUon which provide 
state appropriations for Indian Postsecon- 
dary Scholarship Assistance, and school 
based programs designed to improve the 
educational environment In which Indian 
children find themselves and to improve the 
effectiveness of schools in the education 
American Indian learners. (INAR Great 
Lakes Hearing. Beaulleau. 1990. p. 49) 

Programs designated to meet special needs and 
enable access to educational opportunities, Native 
consultation and representation and the leader- 
ship of the Minnesota State Board of Education 



ERIC 



42 43 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



currently define Minnesota's efforts in Native 
education. 

Special Needs and Access to 
Education Opportunity 

The state program in Native education current- 
ly includes the American Indian Language and 
ulture Education Program. The program passed 
by the state legislature in 1976 was developed in 
recognition of the need for more adequate educa- 
tion for Native pupils, to provide positive reinfor- 
cement of the Native self-image, and to develop 
intercultural awareness among pupils, parents 
and staff. The program provides state revenue for 
projects broadly related to improving the nature 
and quality of education services to Native children 
enrolled in elementary and secondary schools. 
Projects may include instruction in Native lan- 
guage and culture, improving the nature and 
quality of teaching, the provision of personal and 
vocational counseling and the modification of cur- 
riculum instruction methods and administrative 
procedures to meet the needs of Native pupils. 
Interestingly consistent with the original Johnson 
O'Malley contract regarding the special needs of 
Native students, the preamble to the American 
Indian Language and Culture Act asserts that in 
order for American In dians to have an equal educa- 
tional opportunity, Native students must have 
their language and culture represented in the 
schools curriculum. 

The American Indian Post Secondary Prepara- 
tion Program provides grants to school districts for 
Native students in grades 7-12 for projects which 
broadly seek to enable and facilitate the enroll- 
ment and successful attendance of Native students 
in Minnesota post-secondary educational remedial 
and tutorial service, incentives for improved atten- 
dance, career counseling, etc. 

The Minnesota Indian Scholarship Program 
provides financial assistance to Natives who are 
residents of the state, who are accepted for enroll- 
ment in post-secondary institutions. 

The State's Native education grant programs 
are implemented through a unique structure of 
Native representation and consultation. The In* 
dian Post-Secondary Preparation Program and the 
Indian Scholarship program are implemented by 
the Minnesota State Board of Education with the 
assistance of the Minnesota Indian Scholarship 
Committee. The committee, which has existed 
since 1955, was uniquely established as a commit- 
tee by statute in the 1985 legislature. The 
American Indian Language and Culture Program 
is similarly implemented by the State Board with 
the advice of the American Indian Language and 



Culture Task Force. Both groups, which are 
broadly representative of the Native populations 
in the state, are appointed by the State Board with 
the advice of the Minnesota Indian Affairs Council. 
This council which is composed of elected tribal 
chairmen in the state is charged by state statute 
to, among other things, advise the legislature and 
state agencies in matters related to Native Affairs. 

The Native education advisory groups recom- 
mend to the State Board criteria for the implemen- 
tation of the state Native education grant 
programs and in the case of the school based grant 
program review and recommend proposals for 
funding to the State Board. The state school based 
grant programs further require Indian parent and 
community involvement in the development and 
implementation of the program* 

Central to the structure of Native repre- 
sentation and consultation which is the focus of 
cooperation between Tribal governments and the 
state of Minnesota is the Minnesota Indian Affairs 
Council. 

Under the direction of the Minnesota State 
Board of Education, the state has been involved in 
a significant sustained effort to determine the 
educational needs of its Native citizens and has 
initiated as one of the Board's goals a process to 
develop a comprehensive plan for the significant 
improvement in the public education of Natives. 

The current effort on the part of the Minnesota 
State Board of Education to identify and focus on 
Native education as a priority issue and to develop 
a comprehensive plan for Native education 
proceeds from the adoption of an Indian Education 
Policy Statement by the Minnesota State Board on 
February 9, 1982. The State Board's Indian 
Education Policy statement "supports and en- 
courages (1) programs and services to meet the 
unique education needs of Indian youth and adults; 
(2) the involvement of tribes communities, youth, 
and parents in the total education program; (3) 
incorporation of Native languages, literature and 
heritage into the general curricula; (4) the concept 
of equal educational opportunity; and (5) viable 
programs which will permit Native people to com- 
plete and excel in areas of their choice. 

Strategic Plans for Increasing 
Native Parental Support and 
Involvement 

Today, most schools embrace the concept of 
partnership, but few have translated their 
beliefs Into plans or their plans Into practice. 
Sometimes educators feel that It Is simply 
impossible to Jump the hurdles, remove the 
barriers, and solve the real problems that 



43, 4 



Indians Nations At Risk; Solutions for the 1990s 



prevent them from viewing families as 
resources for promoting children's learning. 
This view is too pessimistic. Shared vision 
and concerted effort have led to a variety of 
successful programs to connect schools, 
families, and communities. There is no ex* 
cuse for not taking the first sure steps down 
one of the many paths to partnership. 
(Epstein. 1991. p. 349) 

Given all of the information about the school- 
parent partnership presented thus far, there is 
significant evidence to suggest that schools can 
turn the current lack of Native parental participa- 
tion around. In doing so, schools could dramatical- 
ly improve the educational experiences of Native 
youth. This final section will focus on recommen- 
dations for the future. Beginning at the local 
school district level. Strategies for improving both 
parental involvement and parental support will be 
discussed. Where possible, specific examples 
shared during the INAR hearings will be included. 
Included also will be recommendations pertinent 
to tribes. Secondly, strategies for states will be 
explored, including legislation possibilities as well 
as technical assistance. This paper will conclude 
with recommendations for federal intervention 
and support* 

Schooling does not proceed in a vacuum; 
there Is a direct link between a child's ability 
to succeed in school and the web of other 
circumstances affecting the child's life out of 
school. Although there are many children 
who are being born M at risk" and who may be 
labeled "disadvantaged." it is time for us to 
acknowledge that we - the adults are 
permitting all children to be at risk, if we do 
not respond promptly and systematically to 
the disruptive and pervasive social changes 
affecting their lives. 

(Shedlin, 1989, p. 3) 

Certainly, the history of American Indian/Alas- 
ka Native education has a track record of not only 
discouragingNative parental participation, but in- 
tentionally destroying those nurturing bonds so 
vital to the success of student progress in school. 
Research is clear about how critically influential 
parental support and involvement is to the im- 
provement of achievement, attitude and behaviors 
of students. M A number of national organizations 
are encouraging their members to understand and 
to develop partnerships. The National Governors 
Association and the Council of Chief State School 
Officers have initiated new projects on the topic of 
family and community involvement The National 
Association of State Boards of Education has pub- 
lished a thoughtful booklet, Partners in Education- 
al Improvement: Schools, Parents, and the 
Community. The Education Commission of the 



ERIC 



States (ECS) held a conference and issued a report, 
Drawing in the Family: What States Can Do. ECS 
is continuing to pay attention to parent involve- 
ment through its All Children Can Learn program 
and many others, " (Epstein, 1991, p.346) 

Concerns and issues raised by Native people 
during the Indian Nations At Risk hearings sup- 
port that what has been tried relative to Native 
parents is too little, under-funded, and largely 
unsuccessful. There are a number of individual 
school based efforts making a difference. These 
efforts represent significant examples of 
strategies, programs and practices which are en- 
couraging. Many of these,however r need to be 
adapted for use by greater numbe " Native com- 
munities. This final section will aobunbe some of 
these Native success stories. Recommendations 
for future consideration will be proposed. 

The January, 1991, Phi Delta Kappan issue 
describes succinctly many accessible, reproducible 
parent participation suggestions. Specific findings 
of parent participation programs include the fol- 
lowing: 

• Programs at all levels reveal similarities 
between parents and educators where dif- 
ferences were once assumed. Parents and 
teachers are finding that they share com- 
mon goals and need to share more informa- 
tion if they are to reach those goals. 

• Programs must continue across the years 
of childhood and adolescence. Educators 
and policy makers, who may once have 
thought that family involvement was an 
issue only in the early years of schooling, 
now recognize the importance of 
school/family connections through the high 
school grades. 

• Programs must include all families. The 
examples in this special section show that 
leaders at the national, state, district, and 
school levels are working to involve all 
families in the education of their children, 
including those considered by some schools 
to be hard to reach. 

• Programs make teachers 1 jobs easier and 
make them more successful with students. 
In visits to several schools, Shepherd Zel- 
din found that "those teachers who allo- 
cated time for collaboration rarely ex- 
pressed hesitation in working with poor 
parents, were motivated to go beyond 
policy directives, and concluded that work- 
ing with parents improved the teachers' 
effectiveness. 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



• Program development is not quick. The 
examples reveal the long and the sensitive 
work that are required for real progress in 
partnerships: 15 years and counting in 
Indianapolis; seven years in McAUen, 
Texas; more than three years of activities 
in San Diego; three years for developing a 
state policy in California; and between two 
and three years to see small but real steps 
in the School Reaching Out demonstration 
sites, in the projects funded by grants in 
Illinois, and in the Baltimore School and 
Family Connections projects. 

• Grants encourage unusually productive 
behaviors in teachers and administrators 
who might otherwise feel that they lack the 
time to initiate partnerships with families 
and communities. Benefits are evident 
with both small and large grants (as small 
as $200 or as large as $30,000) across all 
levels of schooling. The larger invest- 
ments, however, are more likely to ensure 
principals 1 commitment and leadership — 
and school-wide change. 

• Family/school coordinators (under 
whatever title) may be crucial to the suc- 
cess of school, district, and state programs 
to link schools, parents, and communities. 
Coordinators guide school staffs, provide 
in-service training for educators, offer ser- 
vices to parents, and perform other tasks 
that promote partnerships. 

• Programs should literally make room for 
parents. "Parent rooms" or "clubs" in 
school buildings or "parent centers" in the 
community are important ways of making 
parents feel welcome. In these sites, 
parents share and discuss ideas, obtain 
information and resources (including bor- 
rowing print materials and video and 
audio tapes), learn from each other about 
family problems and solutions, and so on. 

• Even with rooms for parents, practices 
need to emphasize reaching and involving 
families without requiring them to come 
frequently to the school. Along with struc- 
tures to involve a few families as volun- 
teers or in decision-making roles, many 
schools are finding that much can be done 
to help families work with their own 
children at home to help them do better in 
school. Once considered the most difficult 
type of involvement, this is becoming the 
most relevant kind of involvement for 
families, schools, and student learning. 



ERIC 



• In the 1990s technology can help improve 
many types of involvement. This includes 
radio, television, video and audio tapes, 
computers, and other electronic connec- 
tions between home and school, some of 
which offer the possibility of two-way com- 
munication. 

• There are still vast gaps in our knowledge 
that can only be filled by rigorous research 
and evaluation of particular types of 
school/family connections in support of 
children's learning. We need both formal 
studies and clear documentation of exist- 
ing practices. (Epstein, 1991, pp. 348-349) 

Strategies for Local School 
Districts and Tribes 

Beginning at the local level, there is a great deal 
that will significantly improve parent-school 
partnerships in Native communities. Strategies 
require that schools begin to change their image to 
one of a locus of advocacy for all children and 
families. As an advocate, schools can facilitate the 
empowerment of parents. Parental support and 
involvement can be accomplished through resource 
identification, outreach activities, Native parent- 
ing classes, school staff in-service, and in general, 
trust building. 

Native Parental Involvement: 
Schools as the Locus of Advocacy 

Arguments for schools as the locus of advocacy 
for all children offer a sound framework on which 
to build a better education for Native children. In 
his publication, The School as Locus of Advocacy 
for All Children, Allan Shedlin writes: 

Despite Important innovations and experi- 
ments implemented around the country in 
recent decades, the prevailing conception of 
the school and its relationship to the child 
has not changed significantly. Even where 
responsive institutional reform has been at- 
tempted and new educational strategies 
have been implemented, change generally 
has taken place within the conventional 
school improvement paradigm. Such ap- 
proaches are usually additive, focusing on 
the adoption of a parUcular InnovaUon in the 
context of the school, as is. 

Program reforms are thus expected to effect 
change within a static concept of the school and the 
social system in which it exists. By struggling to 
implement a concept of education developed for a 
different era, the American public school is failing 
to meet the basic goal for which it was conceived: 
the optimal intellectual development of all 

46 



I 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



children. The magnitude of this failure is under- 
lined by the Children's Defense Fund assertion 
that "not only does each child's future hinge on 
education, but our nation's economic and social 
survival hinges on the collective education of all 
American children. (Shedlin, 1987, p. 4) 

Concurring with this position, the latest Na- 
tional Advisory Council on Indian Education legis- 
lative report recommended: "Federal agencies 
should work cooperatively to address the 
socioeconomic impediments to educating Indian 
and Alaska Native people to their full potential, 
including addressing the health, housing, nutri- 
tion, substance abuse, family violence, and other 
problems which affect the whole child and the 
whole adult person in reaching his/her educational 
goals." (NACIE, 1989 p.89) 

Shedlin continues that what has been lacking 
to date is a comprehensive framework for examin- 
ing responsive changes in schools. The framework 
must articulate both a new concept of schooling 
and a plan of action for restructuring schools to 
implement that concept. He suggests any 
proposed reconceptualization of schooling must be 
based on sound principles of child development and 
educational theory, and at the same time, must 
advocate the needs and rights of ALL children. 
The action plan must represent a comprehensive 
approach, one that will lead to intensified national 
awareness of the severity of the problem, and, 
ultimately, to national implementation of the new 
concept. 

School is the social agency with greatest poten- 
tial for interaction with families. For the elemen- 
tary school child, the school plays a key role in the 
developmental-transitional rites of passage from 
home to outside world. 

Schools as a locus of advocacy envisions the 
school, working together with families and 
the community. It is the appropriate and 
strategic agency to serve as ombudsman, 
broker and advocate on behalf of children* 
Advocacy In its broadest sense means acting 
to insure that the rights of all children are 
being protected and the needs of all children 
are being met Advocacy means increasing 
the responsiveness and accountability of all 
social and political institutions on the local, 
state and national levels, in the interests of 
all children. (Shedlin, 1987. p.6) 

For the school, Shedlin writes: 

An advocacy role means accepting respon- 
sibility for mobilizing available resources and 
generating new ones as needed; an advocacy 
role does not mean that the school itself must 
provide or perform the necessary services. 
As the locus of child advocacy the school in 
cooperation with other agencies will support 



ERIC 



families on all socio-economic levels in meet- 
ing the needs of their children. Where such 
resources are fragmented, Incomplete, dif- 
ficult to find, or non-existent, the school 
acting with the family will take the lead in 
mobilizing available resources, or demand- 
ing and generating new ones. What is 
needed to enact this concept are coalitions of 
individuals and groups, spearheaded by 
schools, working together as advocates on 
behalf of all children. (Shedlin, 1989, p. 7) 

With advocacy defined and enacted on the com- 
munity level, and with the school as the designated 
locus for child advocacy, a structure is in place for 
mobilizing health, social, legislative, judicial, 
governmental, business and industry resources 
directly and systematically. 

Fundamental principles of the school advocacy 
concept must be apparent in both commitmen t and 
practice in a community and its schools. Com- 
munities and schools that adopt the school ad- 
vocacy concept would be expected to express their 
commitments in these ways: 

• Local and state governing structures ac- 
cept the school system as the locus of ad- 
vocacy for children. 

• Child advocacy applies to all families in a 
community, regardless of their socio- 
economic status. 

• Pervasive commitment to the school ad- 
vocacy concept is evident in planning and 
in allocation of resources. 

• Complementary roles of families and 
schools in working together on behalf of 
children are acknowledged. 

• Coalition building with community and 
outside resources on behalf of children is 
ongoing. (Community resources should in- 
clude: health, recreation, social, cultural, 
political, judicial and recreational agen- 
cies, programs and services.) 

• Change is viewed as a process, not as a 
single event. 

• Changes in structure and functioning of 
school are viewed as proactive, intrinsic 
and systematic rather than as reactive or 
incremental additions. 

• Respect for differences and diversity exists 
among all students, all school personnel, 
and all administrators. 

Although varied patterns of implementation 
may be expected to unfold in different com- 
munities, the efforts will have in common these key 
conditions and actions: 

•17 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfield, Floy Pepper 



• Total school commitment to the concept 
sparked by informed leadership on build- 
ing, district and system-wide levels. 

• Leadership accepts responsibility for 
providing needed services and programs or 
seeing to it that the services and programs 
are provided. 

• Coalition building to include families, com- 
munity organizations, professionals and 
other individuals. 

• Ongoing community assessment of the 
particular needs of its children. 

• A comprehensive plan for changes in 
schools to meet children's needs, including 
long-range goals as well as immediate ob- 
jectives. 

• Procedures for implementing immediate 
objectives without losing sight of the 
community's long-range goals for its 
children. (Shedlin, 1989, p. 9) 

Too rarely is a child viewed as a complete 
being; most often a child is thought to be 
comprised as separate entities rather than a 
single whole. We need a new approach to 
education that says we, the state, federal, 
and tribal providers are serving the whole 
child and the whole family. 

We must cross functional lines. The child and 
the family are most important. Different agencies 
cannot say they will communicate and collaborate, 
but then just meet together only to leave and work 
on separate programs. We must find an approach 
that will cross functional lines and deliver im- 
proved services. The concept is that the same child 
and the same family drives the system's approach. 
Through this concept we can see that health, 
education, and all social service programs must 
address the child and the family as one. This 
requires a change in our system and a change in 
the roles of the governmental entities. 

Today, several educational models address this 
concern. One example is educational compacts 
between businesses, schools, and institutions of 
higher education. Head Start is another example 
that combines health, nutrition, parental involve- 
ment, and education. There is also a social system 
change model that's being demonstrated in three 
Arizona Indian communities including Pima, on 
the Navajo reservation; New Paspa, on the Pasua- 
Yaqui reservation; and Santa Rosa, on the Tahono 
O'odham reservation. This model brings schools, 
parents, and other community members together 
in a combined effort. We need a new framework 
such as these, although there is a serious reality 
about funding and needs for increased service. 



We must consider the role changes and the 
personnel needs of the BIA, tribal, and public 
schools. They have begun to cooperate out of neces- 
sity. Their convergence of managing educational 
resources is aided through "lateral relations" by 
which each entity can address the same education* 
al needs for the same family and the same child. 
(INAR Southwest Hearing, Stevens, 1990, p. 2) 

If the notion of schools as the locus of advocacy 
is to prevail, each Native community must begin 
the assessment process by examining the actual 
needs of its children. This means analyzing avail- 
able resources, as well as gathering data on factors 
such as the characteristics of families, the quality 
of home and community environments, the health 
profiles of children, the history of the educational 
progress of its youth and the economic status of its 
constituents. 

Consistent with this notion, many Native 
people presented testimony which reinforces the 
success of such a holistic view of educational in- 
stitutions. 

• There are so many health related 
problems, whether you work on the reser- 
vation or in an urban setting, it is essential 
to draw on all of the available resources — 
parents, teachers, social service workers, 
clinic services, and tribal medicine people 
— to have a meaningful impact. It is espe- 
cially important to have a networking sys- 
tem that includes those who know and 
understand the ways of indigenous people 
in the area you serve. Traditional 
medicine is a teaching mechanism and it 
needs to be available as a choice. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Health, 
Wellness, and Substance Abuse Preven- 
tion, 1990, p. 2). 

• Window Rock High School in Arizona has 
selected and trained teachers to conduct 
small group peer counseling sessions on a 
weekly basis for students who want to dis- 
cuss issues of personal importance. Staff 
training includes coverage of issues such 
as substance abuse prevention, working 
with children of alcoholics, and suicide 
prevention. Sessions take place during the 
regular school day so students are excused 
from class and teachers each use their prep 
period one day a week to facilitate. When 
things come up that are beyond the skill of 
the teacher-facilitator, they can make 
referrals to local social services. Wherever 
possible, family-based problems are ad- 
dressed through social service based fami- 
ly-counseling. This has been so successful 

•IS 

47 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



that almost all teachers in the high school 
will have trained to conduct these counsel- 
ing groups. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session 
on Health, Wellness, and Substance Abuse 
Prevention, 1990, p. 2) 

• Head Start involves parents in the class- 
room and allows parents to make 
decisions. The program encompasses 
education, social services to support the 
family, and health, nutrition, and mental 
health. There needs to be much better 
coordination between Head Start, Health 
and Human Services regional offices, and 
the U.S. Department of Education, There 
also needs to be correlation between BIA 
early education programs and the state 
programs. In the reviews that I have done, 
I see Bureau, private, and state schools on 
the reservation not even talking to each 
other. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on 
Early Childhood Education, 1990, p. 1) 

• In Cinle, AZ, the school has introduced a 
Peer Helper Program where students are 
trained through a counselor to listen to 
other students and help them deal with 
their problems. The first year activities 
were offered within a club format, but this 
year they have been changed into classes. 
If problems are too serious, the peer hel- 
pers refer them to the school counselor. 
This approach has been very effective in 
preventing suicide and helping kids who 
have problems at home. The Peer Helper 
Program is also linked to the Community 
Action Through Children and Youth Pro- 
gram (CACY) where students are involved 
in community service projects of their own 
design. 

Many students are involved in drugs and al- 
cohol because they have nothing else to do in the 
small communities where they live, so community 
service projects meet this need with a positive 
alternative. Also the Student Council is involved 
in setting up Red Ribbon Week and Substance 
Abuse Week where the entire community i s drawn 
in to participate in conferences and workshops. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Health, Wellness, 
and Substance Abuse Prevention, 1990, p. 6) 

Others recommend restructuring the school 
day or the school facility to accommodate the needs 
of families, like child care among other things. 

• I am an advocate for rostructuring educa- 
tion. I feel that reforming a system that 
has never really worked for the majority of 
our children is of no value. I think we need 



to look at every single education issue. For 
instance, I think we should restructure the 
school day. Cognitive research tells us 
that 90 minutes is a natural time frame for 
getting involved in, experiencing, and com- 
ing to a conclusion regarding a new concept 
that has just been introduced. So the 50- 
minute hour is not enough and is not con- 
gruent with what we know about how 
people learn. Furthermore, since families 
have a lot of problems with adequate child 
care, I believe the school day should coin- 
cide with the parental work day. We 
should be able to take our children to 
school when we go to work and pick them 
up on the way home, (INAR/NACIE, Issue 
Session on Academic Performance, 1990, 
p. 4) 

• Evaluate the current role and standards of 
those who work in Indian education. 
There is a growing need for educators to 
interface with other disciplines like social 
worker, health, engineering, science, etc., 
to insure that educators are adequately 
prepared to meet the needs of their stu- 
dents. (INAR Northwest Hearing, Martin, 
1990, p. 56) 

Building Trust with Outreach to 
Native Parents 

Ways in which schools have responded to Na- 
tive parental needs which foster the development 
of trust include one on one contacts and a willing- 
ness to seek Native parental advice. 

• Based on my experience working with In- 
dian families from one of the Pueblo com- 
munities in New Mexico, I know that get- 
ting parents involved takes time — it is not 
something that will happen overnight. 
Once parents trust you, know you, and 
know what you think,it is easier for them 
to decide to attend parent meetings. I 
work directly with many of the parents in 
the Pueblo community. In the beginning 
there were parent meetings that some- 
times no parents, or only one parent at- 
tended,but I kept going back. Once I was 
a1o to establish trust and a good relation- 
ship, parental involvement increased. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Parental 
Involvement, 1990, p. 2) 

• In developing relationships w'th parents, 
schools may initially have to deal with 
considerations that are difTerentfrom their 
original goals. Schools need to listen to 



9 

ERIC 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfield, Floy Pepper 



what parents are thinking rather than 
only following their own agenda, because 
what concerns parents at a particular time 
might be different from what schools think 
should concern them. However, if schools 
first address what concerns parents, even 
if it seems irrelevant, then parents will be 
ready to move on to other items and that is 
when schools can make their own sugges- 
tions. (INAR/NACIE, Parental Involve- 
ment Session, p. 2) 

• We need to involve parents by asking for 
their opinions and having them analyze 
what previously has and has not worked, 
and brainstorm solutions. In my work 
with parents as a community development 
counselor, this approach has helped me 
succeed. Instead of me telling to them, I 
try to elicit their input by asking, "What do 
you think: What has worked and what 
hasn't worked? Why hasn't it worked and 
what are some possible solutions?" 

Once parents realize that they have solutions 
within themselves and within their communities, 
they don't need to go to outside sources as much as 
they might have in the beginning. Many times 
solutions are right there within the communities 
themselves and it just takes time for parents to 
realize that they have tried something that works. 
Once they realize that many things are possible, 
they start to feel good about themselves. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Parental Involve- 
ment, 1990, p. 3) 

Home School Advocates 

When reaching out to parents, verbal com- 
munication is usually more effective than written. 
Parents from other cultures often are not accus- 
tomed to receiving the barrage of notes and papers 
that schools tend to send. For communicating with 
parents from Native backgrounds, personal, verbal 
communications are usually more effective. When 
planning meetings, a phone call or personal contact 
is more effective. When notes are written, they 
should be sent both in English and the native 
language, keeping in mind the protocol of the par- 
ticular cultural group. 

The use of home liaison outreach workers 
provides many districts a direct link to Native 
parents who may otherwise be unwilling or unable 
to approach the school. The growing interest in 
parent involvement nationally has not been 
around long enough to have developed "conven- 
tional" wisdom but, if there were some, it would be 
that person-to-person communication is best. 
Well-planned parent/teacher conferences and 



home visits are usually successful in removing 
barriers and building healthy home/school 
relationships, especially if done with cultural sen- 
sitivity. 

The Chapter 1 program in lima Ohio, has 
as a main goal the establishment of a per- 
sonal relationship with eveiy parent Hie 
face-to-face meeting goes directly to the 
heart of parents' role In helping their 
children do better in school. At an Initial 
parent/teacher conference, parents are 
given a packet that will help them engage in 
learning activities with their children at 
home. Lima's conferences, regular phone 
calls, and home visits set a tone for mutual 
understanding that makes other kinds of 
communication (progress reports, report 
cards, activity calendars, or discussions 
about problems that arise during the year) 
more welcome and more successful. Many 
schools around the country are establishing 
parent centers that serve a variety of pur- 
poses: not only do they allow person-to-per- 
son contact between parents and teachers, 
but they also give parents materials and 
information to take home, and serve as 
places for parents to practice new skills and 
meet other parents. (Adler. 1991. p. 351) 

Examples from Native communities are equal- 
ly as successful as that from Lima, Ohio. 

• When non-Indian school personnel are 
trying to deliver health services to teens 
and encounter cultural barriers, they are 
advised to seek assistance through Indian 
Health Service community health repre- 
sentatives who know the culture and lan- 
guage of the youth and family being served. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Health, 
Wellness, and Substance Abuse Preven- 
tion, 1990, p. 1) 

• In Juneau, AK, the Native Parent Commit- 
tee has developed support activities by 
raising money to fund special events as 
incentives for improved school perfor- 
mance. This is important because in small 
communities throughout Southeast Alas- 
ka there isn't much to do in the evenings 
or on weekends. The committee is also 
currently working on attendance and has 
learned that alcohol and drug abuse is a 
key contributor to high absenteeism. They 
have learned that parents are not that 
concerned about their students' atten- 
dance records, so th ey have implemented a 
home-school counseling strategy to enlist 
the parental help in getting their children 
to school on a regular basis. By identifying 
the problem at an early age, they feel they 



9 

ERLC 



50 

49 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



can have a more successful impact than if 
the problems are left until middle school or 
high school. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session 
on Health, Wellness, and Substance Abuse 
Prevention, 1990, p. 6) 

• The Indian student dropout prevention 
program in Phoenix Union High School 
District consists primarily of early inter- 
vention by Native American counselors 
who work with eighth graders. They help 
them identify their interests, abilities, and 
career aspirations, and visit their homes in 
the summer and sit down with both the 
student and parents to share information 
about the high school academic program, 
what the requirements are, what they can 
and can't expect, and work out a four year 
plan with the student. This way they have 
a general guideline for the next four years 
if they wish to use it. 

At the same time, they gather a lot of informa- 
tion about the family and student which they can 
integrate into the record that is available when the 
student enters in the fall. This way the school 
knows whether or not students need financial as- 
sistance, free lunches, bus tokens, and all of the 
other little things that add up to big obstacles. One 
the students are on campus, our counselors con- 
tinue to offer them support. Out of a total of 20,000 
students, Indian students make up 3.6 percent. 
When we started the program five years ago, we 
were operating with close to an annual 25 percent 
dropout rate, and now we are down to 17.3, so it 
has been fairly effective. (INAR/NACIE, Issue 
Session on Dropout Prevention, 1990, p. 7) 

• Our tribe is near the Nevada border and 
we have tried several strategies to combat 
the dropout situation. Working with the 
tribal government and the local com- 
munity government, we were able to place 
our own Native American member on the 
County Board of Education. Then we have 
taken Impact Aid monies that the school 
receives and hired an Indian liaison who 
works with parents, the school, and 
children who have truancy and attendance 
problems. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session 
on Dropout Prevention, 1990, p. 10) 

• I am a certified drug counselor and cur- 
rently a parenting specialist with the 
Chinle public schools (AZ) which is the 
largest public school system on the Navajo 
reservation. I set up an in-house referral 
system within the school and made a refer- 
ral form for teachers to identify students 



who have behavioral problems, who might 
be undernourished, who are wearing the 
same clothes for three days, or who are 
suspect of being abused or neglected. 
From the teacher, the students go through 
the principal or nurse who does a lot of 
physical investigation, and then I provide 
individual counseling and make assess- 
ments on these students. As a parenting 
specialist, I then go out to the home to 
gather information. Sometimes I find 
parents are drunk, divorced, dysfunction- 
al, or even deceased* I then call a case 
conference with the school social workers 
and we develop a treatment method. A lot 
of the cases in Chinle schools might create 
a similar parenting specialist position to 
deal with these parents. (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Parental Involvement, 
1990, p. 7) 

Empowering Leadership 

In addition to hiring home-school advocates, 
other individuals in the school system have in- 
itiated direct contact with Native parents with 
some success. This kind of outreach begins with 
administrative leadership which has an empower- 
ing effect on others. 

• Instructors and administrators need to be 
enthusiastic about parental involvement. 
The White Mountain Apache had a prin- 
cipal who was chosen principal of the year 
throughout the United States, and this 
principal has really encouraged a lot of 
parents to become involved in school ac- 
tivities. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on 
Parental Involvement, 1990, p. 6) 

• As a principal, I want my teachers to get 
out into the homes and visit with the 
parents. You really don't know how to 
meet a child's needs unless you know 
where he or she is coming from. However, 
when I announced that I expected every 
teacher to at least make one home visit, 
they shied away from it. I think we need 
to do more for those kinds of things because 
parents think that they are not accepted by 
the schools. 

The parents we have now are people who have 
gone through strict BIA boarding schools that did 
not allow the students to speak their own lan- 
guages. These parents feel abused by the system 
and feel they have no choice but to send their own 
kids there. They think that their kids are ex- 
periencing the same things. These parents are 
intimidated by the system because of their own 



50 51 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



experiences. To overcome the intimidation, we 
need to go into their homes and let thera know that 
we accept their lifestyle, and therefore, we will 
surely accept their children. (INAR/NACIE, Issue 
Session on Parental Involvement, 1990, p. 3) 

• The more administrators, teachers, and 
parents go out into the community, the 
more parents will become involved. Our 
district is in central Phoenix where 90 per* 
cent of our people are below poverty level. 
We are starting to get more parents in- 
volved simply because we have some 
parents who go door-to-door to talk to other 
parents. Title V and Johnson (FMalley 
staff should contact the parents directly. 

There are not many educated Indians or 
qualified staff, and they don't have much time 
available, but to really make a difference, we need 
to actually go into homes and talk with parents. 
We need to keep letting them know that the schools 
are going to support them and help them as much 
as possible. I see some of these parents start to 
come out and check on their children, or visit the 
school. If our educators have such expertise, and 
they are good speakers and dynamic people, they 
should visit the homes more often rather than 
staying in their offices. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Ses- 
sion on Parental Involvement, 1990, p. 3) 

• At the White River Unified School District 
(AZ), we have a parent/teacher counselor 
who goes out and visits with the people in 
the community. We have young girls who 
got pregnant before they were out of high 
school and find it very difficult to go back 
and walk the halls that they walked maybe 
a year or two ago. When they go bade, they 
think that they made a mistake andrealize 
that their parents made the same mistake. 
You have to talk to them. We also have 
very concerned teachers who during the 
summer time will go out on their own and 
visit the children that they will have the 
following year. Our parent advisory com- 
mittee holds potlucks as anothermethod to 
bring parents out. (INAR/NACIE, Issue 
Session on Parent Involvement, 1990, p. 7) 

• The Mesa Public Schools (AZ), have gotten 
parents involved and feeling comfortable 
with principals and teachers through a 
Hemako Govk'cuth, or home-school fes- 
tival. This is held at the beginning of each 
year to bring the school staff out into the 
community to meet people on their own 
turf. Within the last two years this has 
been successful in bringing our parents out 



to participate. It is organized like a car- 
ival festival where schools and tribal 
youth programs set up booths, hand out 
information, and speak with parents and 
teachers on an informal basis. In addition 
to booths, the schools have worked with the 
students to provide some type of presenta- 
tion, and a meal in the evening. The first 
year of the festival 150 parents attended. 
The next year parental attendance was up 
to 450. (INAR/NACIE, Parental Involve- 
ment Session, p. 5) 

In addition to schools reaching out and staff 
going out into Naive communities, Native parents 
need to be brought into school buildings. 

Schools need to be creative in exploring ways to 
draw parents in to begin a two way dialogue. 
Schools should become the hub of learning in Na- 
tive communities. Some suggestions which have 
proved successful are mentioned below: 

• At my school, in addition to requiring 
teachers to go out and meet the parents, I 
have brought the adult education that used 
to be held at our community center right 
into my school. The whole effort is to get 
more parents familiar with and involved in 
the school. We will focus on a specific type 
of training to develop our parent group as 
a working functional parent group, rather 
than just a general parent assembly. 
(INAR/NACIE, Parental Involvement Ses- 
sion, p. 3) 

• Claremore, Oklahoma has organized a 
Running Club and gathers Indian students 
together two or three times a week for 
practice, and on Saturday mornings to par- 
ticipate in runs held throughout Ok- 
lahoma. This program was originally con- 
nected to the Community Center in Tulsa, 
but has become so successful that it is now 
an independently incorporated group. 
Participation is primarily for youth and 
children, but adults and parents are also 
encouraged to join. (INAR/NACIE, Health 
Issues Session, ^ 2) 

• The key thing is parental involvement. We 
have a lot of kids from dysfunctional 
families. In looking for ways to pull them 
into school, we decided that if a kid is 
ineligible for activities, we have a 90- 
minute study hall after school. Parents 
have to come in with their kids and sit with 
them through these study sessions. It is 
the little goofy things like that have helped 

52 



51 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



us. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on 
Academic Performance, 1990, p. 15) 

• When the Heart of the Earth Survival 
School in Minneapolis had a change in 
administration, parent involvement was 
very low. This was a special issue that 
parents and administrators felt needed to 
be addressed. They have since imple- 
mented changts and their parent involve- 
ment has doubled. The school now re- 
quires parents to come to the school for at 
least one of their special events. 

We utilize traditional practices such as feasts 
where we have presentations by our drum and 
dance club. Parents sign in to show they are 
present, and our lunch room gets very crowded. 
This helps build the trust level because parents 
come to the school and feel comfortable and wel- 
come. They are not just there because their child 
is in trouble or because there is a problem — they 
come on a good note. 

Another thing we do in our school is to utilize 
traditional counseling or sweatlodges. We are lo- 
cated in the middle of the city, but have a sweat- 
lodge that is only ten miles away from our school 
We hold them on Friday nights, and the parents 
who are trying to overcome any kind of drag or 
alcohol problem are able to attend. They attend as 
a family with their children, and with their 
children's friends and families. They can go to a 
sweat and learn about their own culture and prac- 
tices. 

Other tactics we use to encourage parent invol- 
vement include a school -wide parent newsletter 
that the teachers can contribute to, and some of the 
teachers developed their own newsletters such as 
the first grade parent newsletter. There is a lot of 
parent-teacher interaction because of open houses 
and feasts, and the parents are welcome to see the 
classrooms and interact with the teachers. 

Another thing that we do is provide transporta- 
tion. If there is a problem with a student or if there 
is going to be a recognition of the student, we 
provide transportation to the parent. We have also 
developed a parent involvement coordinator whose 
number one job, goal, and objective is to retain and 
increase parental involvement. (INAK/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Parental Involvement, 1990, p. 6) 

The use of sports as an avenue for contact with 
parents has significant possibilities. 

• In Montana, basketball is king in athletics. 
To improve our academic standings, we 
have incorporated a simple eligibility plan 
that if you don't pass a class, you don't 
participate. All of a sudden parents are 
coming up to me and saying, "Geez, my kid 

o 

ERIC 



is opening books/ 9 They want to par- 
ticipate, and we have about 80 to 90 per- 
cent involved in some kind of activity. 
They want to play ball, they want to play 
in the band, they want to go to the speech 
contest, so they are opening their books. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Academic 
Performance, 1990, p. 15) 

• Because parents like to get involved in a 
little recreation, we always have an ac- 
tivity during our parent advisory commit- 
tee meetings. We usually put up a vol- 
leyball net before we start our meeting and 
then after we go through our agenda, we 
have an activity with parents. We, as 
parents, sometimes like to challenge our 
high school students '^nd pretty soon we 
include our young students in our activity. 
Children also really like to challenge their 
parents. This has really become a big area 
of involvement 

Activities for our younger population, such as 
Head Start, are those where the real serious parent 
involvement takes place. We have a little youth 
basketball tournament which is a major fundrais- 
ing activity for parents. A lot of parents get in- 
volved in sports events. During basketball games, 
our community fills the gyms. Even though it 
might not be in a classroom setting, parents are 
participating with their children. When the 
children see their parents participating in these 
activities, they feel motivated. (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Parental Involvement, 1990, p. 6) 

Native Culture Awareness Classes for 
a&*Staff 

For Bureau of Indian Affairs teachers and 
administrators and teachers and ad- 
ministrators in all school districts which 
receive Indian Education Act Impact Aid. or 
Johnson-O'Malley funding, there should be 
established a mandatory in-service teacher 
training program, forwhich the teachers/ad- 
ministrators will receive continuing educa- 
tion credits, which will provide them with 
training on cultural differences from a posi- 
tive perspective to facilitate a better under- 
standing of the behaviors and learning styles 
of Indian and Alaska Native children and an 
appreciation of their backgrounds and the 
contributions of their people to educating 
Indian and Alaska Native student" (NACIE. 
1989. p. 85) 

Without sensitivity and knowledge specific to 
the American Indian/Alaska Native community, 
school staff will continue to resist beginning and 
continuing outreach efforts. Considerable energy, 

53 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfield, Floy Pepper 



resources! and Native expertise must be devoted to 
staff development or re-educr Mon, Teachers and 
administrators who make mistakes in dealing with 
Native children or parents, do so out of ignorance 
more often than out of maliciousness. Once they 
become aware of some of the dynamics of culture, 
learning styles, and traditional child rearing prac- 
tices, they are better equipped to respond and 
interact with Native parents more appropriately. 

• In order to ensure understanding among 
educators regarding uniformity of ap- 
proach to the education of American In- 
dian students, it is essential that Indian 
communities develop and provide in-ser- 
vice training to teachers, administrators, 
and school personnel through community 
training of educators. (AISES, 1990, p. 8) 

• We begin our remarks by bringing to your 
attention the strengths that exist in Indian 
communities and Indian families because 
one defect which we in NASBA have so 
often noted in programs aimed at Indian 
children is that the strength of the local 
Indian community is overlooked or ig- 
nored. 

We also see too often experts consulted by 
federal education leaders speaking of Indian 
children only in the negative — stressing their 
"educational deficits," "environmental deficits, 11 
even alleging "cultural deprivation. 11 Our children 
come from culturally rich environment. Often 
educators unfamiliar with Native American cul- 
tures and societies do not know how to respond to 
that richness. They make mistakes and the 
children suffer. (INAR Southwest Hearing, 
Begaye, 1990, p. 35) 

• Tribal customs often interfere with school. 
Some youth want to take part in 
ceremonies and they stay up all night and 
are sleepy the next day. However, the 
teachers won't let the students make up 
the work, and sports coaches make the 
students sit out of games. We would like a 
little understanding or make teachers 
more culturally aware of why these things 
go on. 

I suggest that teachers have a week for com- 
munity-type orientation. All of the tribes in that 
school could develop a manual so the teachers can 
be aware of all the issues I have discussed (INAR 
Plains, Kootswatew, *990, p. 83) 

• I teach a class on parent and community 
relations. It is the one required course for 
teachers going into elementary and early 
childhood education. I see that there is a 



lot of work required to sensitize teachers to 
cultural diversity and dealing with 
parents. Teachers need to know to reach 
out and build partnerships between 
parents, the community, and the school. 
They need to know how to deal with 
problems and contact families. They need 
to learn to balance between sharing school 
knowledge with families and under- 
standing what families expect from school. 
(INAR Plains Hearing, Haulman, 1990, 
p.45) 

• At the outset I want to make clear that 
what is NOT wrong is the children them- 
selves. I do not want to hear more tales 
about what they lack, what is missingfrom 
their personal backgrounds, what is defi- 
cient in their families. The children are a 
gift to us all — to their families, to their 
Indian Nations, to the United States, and 
to the world. The question is not what is 
lacking in them. The question is what is 
lacking in US that we cannot nurture the 
richness of these children. 

Another thing that is lacking, I would submit, 
is faith in these children and what they can 
achieve. We talk as if something was wrong with 
them. What is really wrong is that those educating 
them are failing to succeed in THEIR task. Studies 
of education environments have demonstrated 
that one of the environmental factors most highly 
associated with student achievement is the belief 
by the teacher that the child can learn. In looking 
at the situation of Indian children in schools, I 
would urge the Secretary of Education to consider 
what is missing in the approaches and the expec- 
tations of teachers, administrators, education 
planners. Do we perhaps expect too little? (INAR 
Southwest Hearing, Haskie, 1990, p. 45) 

Parent — Teacher Conferences 
Parent — teacher conferences serve a number 
of purposes. Knowing the home situation, the 
family's values, the family's view of discipline, 
whether the child has any responsibilities at home, 
and if so, whether the child carries them out volun- 
tarily or has to be forced or coaxed, what the 
parents expect of their child, the position the child 
holds in the family, the child's relationship with 
siblings and friends, and other pertinent informa- 
tion, enables the teacher to plan long-term proce- 
dures for the individual child more successfully. 
Having the teacher and the parents talk together 
serves to unite the two areas of the child's life — 
home and school — and enables both to plan more 
effectively for the child than when the teacher and 



53 54 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



parents do not know whether they differ in their 
methods. 

The parent learns about the child's behavior at 
school, the teacher's evaluation and expectations 
of their child. They acquaint themselves with the 
various rules and regulations of the school, as well 
as those made by the teacher or by the other 
children in class. Finally, the parents have a 
chance to learn something about the general pro* 
gram of the class in which their child spends so 
many hours each day. Too many parents have no 
idea what their children do in school. The more the 
parents and teacher understand each other, the 
less the child will play school against home, and 
vice versa. (Dreikurs, Grunwald and Pepper, 
1982, p. 304-306). 

One of the most essential building blocks of 
home-school communication is the parent-teacher 
conference. Conferences can be successful when 
teachers and the school system create a climate 
that invites collaboration with parents. Creating 
this climate involves planning and effort Con- 
ferences should be planned on a regular basis for 
all parents, not only for those children who are 
experiencing problems. Teachers need the help of 
parents to do the best possible job of educating 
every child and can help parents play an active 
educational role at home. (Oregon State Board of 
Education, 1990, p. 8). 

It is important for teachers to approach parent 
conferences in a manner that is beneficial to both 
school pev sonnel and Native parents. Both teacher 
and Native parents may be reluctant to par- 
ticipate. They may have negative attitudes based 
on previous experiences with conferences which 
achieved nothing and/or promoted feelings of 
blame or guilt. The following is an example of what 
one teacher did to help ease the conference situa- 
tion. 

Mrs. Moore, fourth grade teacher, realized that 
the various Native parents would be coming to 
parent-teacher conferences "cold". She prepared a 
booklet of information that described in simple 
terms the purposes of the conference; defined 
terms such as: grade level, up to the child's poten- 
tial, overambition, underachiever, etc; developed a 
set of questions parents might want to ask Mrs. 
Moore; as well as outlined the expected outcome of 
the conference. Mrs. Moore mailed the booklet to 
the parents two weeks prior to the scheduled con- 
ference date. 

The advance preparation assisted the Native 
parents in understanding the conference process 
and made them more comfortable. Mrs. Moore 
found that the par 3nts participated fully and asked 
additional questions pertaining to the academics 



and specific items on the report card as a direct 
result of her efforts in preparing the booklet. Items 
discussed included: method of student progress; 
what the student had learned; what the student 
had not learned; areas in which the student needed 
additional helpjhow the student stands in relation 
to the rest of the class, and how the parent could 
help the child 

Sometimes a teacher invites the child to par- 
ticipate in the conference. Since the conference 
concerns the child, there is no reason why the child 
should not be present. Occasionally a teacher sen- 
ses that a child is afraid to have her parents come 
to school. The teacher can assure the child that 
parents are not coming to accuse, but to plan what 
they can do to help. At this point the teacher may 
invite the child to participate in the conference. 
Actually, this helps the child to accept respon- 
sibility and accountability for his/her own learning 
and behavior. As a result of this kind of parent- 
child-teacher conference, the child comes away 
with a feeling of belonging. With this sense of 
belonging comes an increase in social interest — 
the ability and willingness for a person to function 
socially in terms of cooperation, responsibility, 
belonging, and concern for the welfare of others. 
(Pepper and Henry, 1986, p. 265). 

In many instances, it has been difficult to get 
Native parents to attend parent-teacher conferen- 
ces. One method used in Nebraska for rewarding 
parents for attending parent-teacher conferences 
was to offer a full tank of free automobile gas. All 
Native parents attending conferences with 
teachers were eligible for the gas. Parent par- 
ticipation for that event was improved from 15 to 
85 percent. A barrel of fuel oil was offered in a 
Selawick, an Alaskan village to increase Native 
parent attendance to 100 percent. The reward 
winner was di awn like a raffle winner at a com- 
munity wide dinner sponsored by the school and 
staff at the con elusion of parent-teacher conference 
day. 

• The White Mountain Apache reservation 
has established a regular series of 
parent/teacher conferences. Every nine 
weeks the school is recessed half a day and 
conferences are held from 1:30 in the after- 
noon until 6:00 in the evening. All of the 
parents are welcome to come into their 
child's classroom to discuss their child's 
situation and go through the grading sys- 
tem. The parent has a chance to be in- 
volved with the school and to understand 
their child's placement. Furthermore, 
parents receive their child's report card at 
these conferences. Parent involvement be- 



ERJC 



54 55 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



comes strong at those meetings, and pretty 
soon they start influencing different areas. 
Parents are also involved through the 
parent policy council, parent advisory com- 
mittee, and parent/teacher visitation in 
which all the parents at all levels, kinder- 
garten through high school, have a chance 
to experience their children's classrooms. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Parental 
Involvement, 1990, p. 6) 

Native Parental Involvement in Policy 
Development 

It is clear that when policies are written for 
Native parental involvement, there is a greater 
likelihood that there will be success. The San 
Diego County Schools (SDCS) provide a good 
model: 

In early 1988 the SDCS established a task force 
to explore ways in which parent involvement could 
be strengthened in the district. Made up of thirty- 
three community and school representatives, the 
group became convinced that the best way to move 
forward was to persuade the board of education to 
adopt an official policy on parent involvement The 
task force spent several months, sometimes in 
heated debate, framing a policy statement to 
present to the board. The policy, adopted in July 
1988, is consistent with the California state policy 
in most areas and outlines a multifaceted defini- 
tion of parent involvement. 'The task force's 
decision to draft a policy has proved to be a wise 
one, giving shape and direction to district actions 
and to the wo: of individual schools. The im- 
plementation plan that flowed from the policy has 
focused on three major efforts: building the 
capabilities of staff members, creating partner- 
ships, and providing follow-up and support ser- 
vices." (Chrispeels, 1991, p. 370). The board 
committed itself to: 

• involve parents as partners in school 
governance, including shared decision 
making and advisory functions; 

• establish effective two-way communica- 
tion with all parents, respecting the diver- 
sity and differing needs of families; 

• develop strategies and programmatic 
structures at schools to enable parents to 
participate actively in their children's 
education; 

• provide support and coordination for 
school staff and parents to implement and 
sustain appropriate parent involvement 
from kindergarten through grade 12; and 



• use schoois to connect students and 
families with community resources that 
provide educational enrichment and sup- 
port. 

The memorandum described in the models sec- 
tion of this paper is an excellent example of Native 
community parental involvement, describing roles 
and responsibilities of various decision makers in 
Native communities. School goals, policies and pro- 
cedures neeU to be understood by the Native com- 
munity. Many Native testifiers attested to the 
need for community and Native parental involve- 
ment at the decision making policy level. 

At the local level, parental and community 
input is largely the result of federally- man 
dated participation in Title One, JOM, and 
Title Four programs. The federal govern- 
ment requires that Indian parent committees 
approve all Indian education programs 
before they will be funded by the federal 
government A few local education agencies 
request Input Into decisions involving the 
education of Indian children. For the most 
part, however, parents and tribal com- 
munities have little Impact upon and input 
into the decision-making process that invol- 
ves the education of the Indian child, beyond 
the scope of special categorical Indian educa- 
tion programs. (Antel, ECS, (1990), p. 17) 

• Parent involvement is needed as part of a 
basic restructuring of the schools. As a 
small school, I think we have much more 
community support than ) see in other 
places, but I still feel that the parents as a 
whole don't feel as though it is their school. 
Regardless of the programs we design, the 
structure of the schools is still essentially 
based on an Anglo model that has been 
around for hundreds of years. As long as 
we have that model, parents are not going 
to consider school ? as their own institu- 
tions. In the future we need parents, 
tribes, and the communities to take over 
schools. Parents should not just be on a 
board that makes a few decisions, but 
should assume responsibility for the 
schools. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on 
Elementary Schools, 1990, p. 6) 

• Too often schools bring parents in, ask 
them what they want, and they don't know 
what they want. It's not that parents don't 
want to be involved and it's not that they 
don't have ideas; I think it is the way we 
ask them for their ideas. I think that 
parents not only have to feel as though they 
are a part of the school, but they have to 
somehow run the school. Until that hap- 




Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



pens, we will always have a problem with 
parental involvement (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Elementary Schools, 
1990, p. 6) 

• We are not suggesting that there are no 
problems with the education being 
received by Indian children or that real 
problems do not exist in the lives of many 
Native American children as they seek to 
build lives that are satisfying, meaningful, 
and appropriate to two cultures. What we 
are suggesting is that along with these 
problems, many of which arise from the 
encounter of two cultures, are resources 
residing in the heart of the cultures of 
Indian people. 

We urge education leaders addressing the 
"problems" of Indian children to also acknowledge 
the richness of this resource and to begin planning 
to utilize some of the richness existing in Native 
American families an d communities to address the 
educational needs of Indian children. The best way 
to assure that the resource of local Indian com- 
munities will be incorporated into programs for the 
education of Indian children is to make a commit- 
ment to include Indian parents and grassroots 
Indian community leaders in planning educational 
change for our schools. (INAR Southwest Hearing, 
Begaye, 1990, p. 36) 

• Most areas that must have pare* a\ invol- 
vement such as Title V and Impact Aid 
tend to put parents on parade. You bring 
parents in to look at your back-to-school 
night. You bring them in to look at yout* 
school activities. You get them to bake 
cakes for your class. But parents as col- 
laborators and parents as decision makers 
are not roles that most schools allow. How 
many schools have a sign that says, 'Wel- 
come parents?" How many schools have 
chairs for them to sit in the office, or even 
sit in the classroom? No schools do because 
they want to send a message. Most of our 
schools in California have fences around 
them and gates to keep people out That's 
the message that schools are sending. 

(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Elementary 
Schools, 1990, p. 7). 

• We have a difficult time involving parents 
in the schools because there seems to be a 
reluctance on the part ot the professional 
staff to allow any non-professional people 
to actively participate in decision making. 



ERJC 



When teachers are trained to believe that there 
are only four teaching styles and four learning 
styles, and you come in and tell them there are 
culturally-based learning styles, it goes against 
eve ything they believe* When the textbooks and 
curricular material reflect those teaching styles, 
we are designing a system for failure for parents. 
The tribe has the ability to socialize children, and 
we have educational systems that are deliberate, 
systematic, and sustained that have been operat- 
ing for generations. We train people how to be 
Hoopas. We educate them to be Kiowas. We edu- 
cate them to be Hopis. When we send our children 
to school, we do not want them to be socialized as 
general Americans. The laws and the structures 
of this land are designed so that schools are a social 
imposition for social control. We oppose that. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Elementary 
Schools, 1990, p. 7) 

• Parents should have the ability to sit down 
and make a decision on what textbooks are 
going to be used in the school, what 
programs are going to be taught, and what 
the curriculum should look like. But ap- 
proaching parents and giving them two 
days to choose a textbook is a strategy that 
is bound to fail because what you have not 
done is train the parents to know what 
should be included in the textbook. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Elemen- 
tary Schools, 1990, p. 7). 

Native Parent Input on School 
Discipline 

When a school has a comfortable climate, 
people feel proud, connected and committed. They 
support, help, and care for each other. When the 
climate is right, there is a certain joy in coming to 
school. Climate is a term used to describe how 
people feel about their school. It is a combination 
of beliefs, values and attitudes shared by students, 
teachers, administrators, parents, bus drivers, of- 
fice personnel, custodians, cafeteria workers, and 
others who play an important role in the life of the 
school. Part of the school climate has to do with 
the disciplinary procedures outlined by the school. 

The administrator is responsible for all staff 
assigned to the school. In discharging this respon- 
sibility, the administrator should establish and 
maintain reasonable and acceptable standards of 
pupil behavior. The administrator should be 
aware of the needs of the students and accom- 
modate these needs insofar as it is possible to do 
so. 

Schools need to confer with Native community 
members concerning behaviors which may be a 

57 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



cultural conflict between home and school, and 
clarify how to appropriately deal with such be- 
havior. 

Good systems for handling all school proce- 
dures should improve the chances that students 
will work hard, complete assignments, participate 
in classroom activities, learn more and, conse- 
quently, have fewer serious behavior problems. To 
minimize suspensions, expulsions, absenteeism 
and tardiness, an administrator should: 

• Develop an understanding of the factors 
that affect social behavior in this par 
ticular Native community. Learn about 
the home environment of each child. 

• Develop a knowledge of the value systems 
of Native and European-Americans and 
their influence on the individual and 
society. 

• Identify areas where behavioral expecta- 
tions may be contradictory between Native 
and European-Americans. 

• Develop productive and satisfying rela- 
tions with students based on respect, 
trust, cooperation, consideration and 
caring. 

• Involve tribal government in setting dis- 
ciplinary consequeifces and rewards, as 
well as attendance procedures. 

• Keep law enforcement, social service and 
other non-educational agency personnel 
out of the classroom when contr "ting in- 
dividual children. 

• Use attendance counselors and home- 
school liaison coordinators. Have them 
work together with the tribal government 
and Native parents when problems arise. 

• Keep lines of communication open with 
Native parents. 

• Have conferences with the attendance of- 
ficer, the home-school liaison coordinator, 
parents and members of the tribal govern- 
ment to help find alternative solutions. 
Cooperatively negotiate solutions, rather 
than laying blame. 

• Use suspension and expulsion as a last 
resort. Find alternative methods to work 
out the students 1 problems in school. 

• Provide activity buses for students who 
wish to participate and/or attend school 
activities. 

• Develop skill in democratic action in large 
and small groups. Develop a system of 
shared responsibility with the students. 



Students should know the expectations 
and the limits. 

Native parents must accept equal respon- 
sibility in helping to solve the discipline problems 
of their children. Parents, like teachers and school 
administrators, must work closely together with 
the school and community personnel to solve young 
peoples 9 problems. No one group can do the job 
alone. Native parents must become part of the 
team in developing and carrying out disciplinary 
action. 

Discipline is handled differently from tribe to 
tribe and from traditional to non-traditional com- 
munities. If the Native community is involved * n 
setting these standards, Native parents will sup- 
port disciplinary actions. 

Native Parental Involvement With 
Curriculum 

Native parents should have the opportunity to 
determine the values from both the dominant cul- 
ture and Native culture, which should be part of 
the curriculum. More specific information about a 
culturally appropriate curriculum appears else- 
where in the 1NAR commissioned papers. It is 
sufficient to emphasize here that without Native 
community cultural experts' involvement, cur- 
riculum will continue to invalidate the worth of 
Native contributions, values and lifestyles. In 
order to have the degree of influence necessary, 
Native parents need training in all aspects of cur- 
riculum development and improvement. 

• If Indian parents are going to take part in 
the education system, they have to realize 
that they do have a role in influencing the 
school curriculum. They have the right to 
say what they want their children to be 
taught, and they have the ability to do so 
through politics, electing the school board, 
and electing committees. I feel that these 
programs that require parents participa- 
tion have changed a whole generation of 
people who are now sophisticated and 
making those changes for their children. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Partner- 
ships of Schools, Tribes, Communities, 
Parents and Businesses, 1990, p. 5) 

• There needs to be a certain perspective 
when talking about training for Indian 
parents. If you want input on curriculum, 
you need to teach parents what curriculum 
means and how it is applied in the class- 
room. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on 
Parental Involvement, 1990, p. 5) 



57 58 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



Tribal Encouragement for Parents 

It is not enough for tribes to talk about support- 
ing educational efforts, rather they must take ac- 
tive roles in decision making, must commit 
personnel and financial resources whenever pos- 
sible. 

Strategies for successful parental participation 
are not complete without the insistence of tribal 
involvement. Involvement by definition influences 
policy or decision making at the local level. 'Tribal 
people need to come to the aid of tribal children. 
Their education must be fashioned by us from start 
to finish. Our tribal governments must provide us 
with leadership to educate tribal citizens. That 
big, powerful, rich system called public schooling 
in these United States may be all right and just 
right for the immigrants and their children. It is 
not and has not been even close to all right for our 
children. 

We tribal people must structure the education 
of our children. We must, because as citizens of 
dependent nations we must appeal to and demand 
through American laws and Congress the 
wherewithal to structure the educational system of 
our children with our tribal governments and with 
public funds." (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, Chris- 
tensen, 1990, p. 53) 

Many testifiers nationwide reiterated the criti- 
cal role which tribal governments must play in all 
levels of Native education: 

• We need a federal policy that supports 
direct tribal regulatory authority over 
state public schools on reservations and in 
other Indian country. Indian control is the 
key to effective Indian education for Indian 
people, but recent efforts in the federal 
arena have centered on trying to develop 
that control through funding mechanisms, 
parent committees, and administrative 
processes. 

The sovereignty of Indian tribes gives them 
authority over their members and their territory, 
and that sovereignty should include — at least con- 
currently with the state — authority to directly 
regulate state public schools that serve Indian 
children on reservations and in Indian country. 
This authority needs to be recognized by federal 
law because tribes will need to devise and adopt 
education laws that regulate the schools, as well as 
policies and programs provided for under those 
laws. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Partner- 
ships of Schools, Tribes, Communities, Parents 
and Businesses, 1990, p. 4) 

• Tribal governments, dialogue participants 
noted, have the power to become active 



partners with Indian parents and school 
districts in educational reform and com- 
munity initiatives. In doing so, tribe 
must pass resolutions setting education as 
a priority. They must develop education 
codes for all local schools mandating the 
integration of basic curriculum with tribal 
values, language, intellectual concepts, 
and spirituality. 

Tribal councils must assist students by estab- 
lishing scholarship and summer-work projects. 
They should also encourage college students to 
return home after graduation. Dialogue par- 
ticipants also stated that tribal leaders should 
serve as positive role models for students by lead- 
ing drug- and alcohol-free lives. They also pointed 
out that tribal councils must link tribal drug and 
alcohol abuse programs with local schools as a 
means of combating social problems. (AISES, 
1990, p. 4) 

• Rather, education of children from the dif- 
ferent Indian Nations must be par- 
ticularized to the educational and nation- 
building needs and aspirations of in- 
dividual tribes and schools within the dif- 
ferent Indian Nations and national groups. 
The need for a tribally particularized com- 
ponent to the education provided in our 
schools should be incorporated into the 
recommendations for educational im- 
provement arising out of this hearing 
process. (INAR Southwest Hearing, 
Begaye, 1990, p. 37) 

• Any reform of the educational system 
which serves Indian students needs to 
recognize that Indian communities are the 
most qualified group to identify Indian 
educational needs and what programs are 
most necessary to meet tribal educational 
objectives. Indian tribal leaders place a 
high priority on education for their people. 
Eighty-two percent of the respondents 
placed education as either the highest 
tribal objective or among the highest tribal 
objectives. The primary reasons they cite 
for educational failure are inadequate 
funding, poor facilities, no incentives to 
learning, poor home environments, sub- 
stance abuse and lack of education support 
programs. (Wells, 1991, p. 8) 

• The issue of government control just points 
out one factor that is so important. We are 
still struggling with transforming the kind 
of education we provide to our children in 
Zuni, but the opportunity is a much greater 



ERLC 



58 59 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



and the response time is so much quicker 
than they are able to do that. Just the fact 
that Zuni Indian people are in control of 
the destiny of their children's education 
has radically changed some m^jor condi- 
tions almost overnight. This same thing is 
likely to happen in a metropolitan urban 
setting, but you have a rarity of Indian 
people there who have very similar con- 
cerns. It will take more dialogue, more 
relationship development, and refocusing 
of resources. But the empowerment of In- 
dian people is the key factor that is going 
to make major differences. The major 
recommendation is that an urban Indian 
school be created that would allow Indian 
parents in the metropolitan area the op- 
portunity to become responsible partners, 
so that they can become publicly account- 
able for the kind of education system that 
their children need (INAR Great Lakes 
Hearing, Lewis, 1990, p. 56) 

Tribes inundated with a variety of economic, 
health and human concerns, have not put time, 
personal, and financial resources into redefining 
education on tribal terms. Developing tribal 
education codes is occurring more and more with 
significant results. The efforts of the Navsgo Na- 
tion provide an excellent example. 

Four and a half years ago, the Navajo Nation 
adopted a comprehensive set of eduction 
policies to establish in a general way the 
goals which the Navajo people set for the 
education of their children. These policies 
were developed with the total involvement of 
local and reservation-wide Navajo education 
organizations. Persons from all areas of 
educational involvement— school ad* 
minis tra tors, teachers, school board mem- 
bers, parents— were asked for their input 
and involvement The Navajo Education 
Policies were endorsed overwhelmingly by 
community-based Navajo education or- 
ganizations, such as the Navajo Area School 
Board Association, before they were finally 
presented to the Navajo Tribal Council and 
adopted as tribal law. 

The Navajo Education Policies arc not a com- 
prehensive implementation program, nor were 
they intended to be. They did, however, set the 
parameters within which any comprehensive plan 
for the implementation of a Navajo Tribal Govern- 
ment can work cooperatively with the education 
providers serving our youth. They commit the 
tribe's education agency to a willingness to work 
with the local schools, school boards, and local 
communities to develop plans for the development 



of Navajo education. Through the education 
policies, the Navcgo Nation has ratified in its laws 
the principle of local control of education. Parents 
also are recognized in the Education Policies as 
essentia] and active participants in the process of 
education improvement. Curriculum is intended 
to reflect the needs and aspirations of our local 
communities. 

I stress the emphasis of the Navajo Education 
Policies on local control because I am convinced 
that involvement of our local parents and com- 
munity members is an essential part of any effort 
to make our schools more effective. Effective 
schools research has identified participation of 
parents and the entire local community in develop- 
ing, supporting, and implementing school objec- 
tives and activities as an essential characteristic of 
an effective school. Our own experience in the 
Navajo Nation supports these research con- 
clusions. We too have found that active participa- 
tion at the local level in the development and 
support of school programs is associated with suc- 
cessful school outcomes. 

This statement expresses the hope and the ex- 
pectation of the Navajo Nation for educational 
change in the years ahead. We ARE committed to 
change. We ARE committed to educational im- 
provement. We ARE committed to building effec- 
tive schools where our children experience 
academic success. But we ARE committed to un- 
dertaking this process as an integral part of the 
transformation of our Navajo Nation. 

The Navajo Nation is standing on the threshold 
of the 21st century. All of us are looking toward 
that future time filled with hopes and dreams for 
all our people and for our nation. We do not just 
seek individual success and happiness for in- 
dividual Navajo children, although we do, in our 
love for our children, work for and offer prayers 
toward their success and happiness. Beyond the 
individual outcomes, we seek to assure the con- 
tinuity, growth, and development of the Navajo 
Nation and the cultural persistence of the Navajo 
people. 

The Navajo Nation is committed to work for the 
improvement and regeneration of our schools. WE 
welcome the concern and interest of the Secretary 
of Eduction and invite him to work WITH the 
Navajo Nation and with the Navajo people in this 
effort Unless we work in cooperation with each 
other and with respect for each other's gifts, even 
plans which look good on paper will be fatally 
flawed. They will lack legitimacy with the very 
people they affect With this involvement, we can 
work together on the critical task of building our 
schools and our society. Our children, our future 



9 

ERLC 



60 

59 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



leaders, can flourish in this atmosphere of mutual 
respect and understanding. (IN<Ul Southwest 
Hearing, Haskie, 1990, p. 45-46) 

Conclusion 

Native parental involvement at the local level 
can be significantly improved through conscien- 
tious efforts and strategies which include: 

• Building trust with outreach to Native 
parents 

• Transformational leadership 

• Native culture awareness classes for staff 

• Home-school advocates 

• Parent-teacher conferences which are well 
planned and culturally respectful 

• Native involvement in policy development, 
discipline and curriculum development 
and review 

• Tribal encour agemen t for Native parents. 

Native Parental Support: Building 
and Reinforcing Native Parents as 
Children's First Teachers 

Since children learn daily from interacting with 
their parents, it would be helpful if Native parents 
could receive formal education which describes 
how they can best promote learning. "Parent in- 
volvement should be changed to parent commit- 
ment in making sure their children get up, go to 
school, and have a structured environment in 
which to study. Increased success is connected to 
family support." (Southwest, Toosie, p. 56) Na- 
tive parents affect their children's growth and 
development by: (1) the way they communicate 
with their children; (2) the variety and meaning of 
the experiences they provide for their children; and 
(3) the way they guide their children in developing 
skills in relating to other people. A Native parent 
education component can focus on ways that this 
interaction can be positive and contribute to school 
success. 

Native Parental Education and 

Parent Study Groups 

"Although elders usually have more of life and 
wisdom to teach than to learn, that is not the case 
for younger adult members of a community. Since 
parents are a child's first teachers, they should 
have access to the training and support they need. 
During the work day, the "learning 1 ' of the in- 
dividuals must be prepared to "teach" the 
youngsters and influence them. To promote early 
recognition of the importance of reading, writing, 
and math skills, the parent(s) or caregivers must 

9 

ERLC 



show that they can perform in these areas. Even 
after the child begins preschool and after kinder- 
garten and into elementary and secondary school, 
the importance of the skills of the parents or 
caregivers cannot be overestimated. Consequent- 
ly, in order to reach the youngsters, one must begin 
in a community with the education needs of its 
adults." (NACIE, 1989, p. 80) 

• Native parents have been forced to become 
involved with an increasing number of 
complex problems, such as academic un- 
derachievement, irresponsibility, apathy, 
destructive behavior, drug and alcohol 
abuse, child abuse, and unemployment. 
They have been forced to meet these 
problems with little preparation for the 
most challenging task in life — being an 
effective parent "We need to fund parent- 
ing classes that include culturally specific 
parenting skills. In your packet today I 
have given you some materials on Native 
American parenting classes that are given 
in St. Paul. Early Childhood Family 
Education has worked well for us for the 
past couple of years. We find that parents 
really want to come in and learn how to be 
successful parents. They want to know 
how to discipline their children, how to 
feed them, all those kinds of things. In 
fact, the program is becoming so successful 
that it is getting too big for us to handle. 
(INAR Great Lakes Hearing, Gagnon, 
1990, p. 59) 

• Parents are confronted with a confusing 
array of advice through books, magazine 
articles, newspaper items, suggestions 
from neighbors and friends, and advice 
from teachers, counselors and social 
workers. No wonder Native parents are 
confused. Many suggestions are quite 
often contradictory. Raising children is a 
major challenge. Being a parent has long- 
lasting consequences for the development 
of each child with basic attitudes about self 
and others. "Parents must assume a pivo- 
tal role in education. Parents must instill 
pride and self-esteem with Indian 
children. They must pass on values and 
beliefs that give children an Indian orien- 
tation toward academic and professional 
life. Finally, parents are important lan- 
guage and cultural resources in Indian 
communities. 11 (AISES, 1990, p. 4) 

Many Native adults have had limited oppor- 
tunity to continue learning and would appreciate 
the opportunity. 

Cl 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



• There is currently in the United States 
great concern about parental involvement 
in the education of children. Many parents 
have been criticized for lack ofinvolvement 
in their children's school programs. "It is 
very important for Indian and Alaska Na- 
tive parents to feel comfortable in their 
children's school settings. This may in- 
volve many factors, sometimes including 
the parents' own educational needs being 
met so that they do not feel intimidated by 
the school system or any teacher of ad- 
ministrator. Sometimes this requires 
some understanding about the Indian com- 
munity on the part of teacher and some 
outreach to the parents. Poorly educated 
parents who feel that they have nothing to 
share at a parent-teacher conference are 
not likely to attend any such conference, 
especially in an intimidating environment. 
In-service training for teachers and school 
administrators could assist in this area. 11 
(NACIE, 1989, p. 81) 

Parent education and parent study groups are 
excellent ways of teaching parents how to handle 
some of the complex problems they face. Parent 
education classes usually have a trained teacher 
and a pre scribed curriculum complete with reading 
and study materials as well as assignments on 
various topics. 

The Northwest Indian Child Welfare developed 
a training manual for parents, Positive Indian 
Parenting, Honoring our Children by Honoring our 
Traditions, a Model Indian Parent Training 
Manual, which states: "Traditionally, Indian 
education has emphasized learning how to live, 
rather than learning how to make a living. En- 
hancing the strength of the group was considered 
more important than enhancing the individual's 
ability to be self-sustaining. Seldom was the 
responsibility for teaching others placed on any one 
individual or group. Rather, teachers were elders, 
family members, story tellers, and orators, who 
passed on to younger generations information in a 
variety of forms. Teachers were strict in the sense 
that the lessons to be learned meant survival and 
thus, by necessity, had to be learned well. The 
survival aspect gave relatives and elders a vested 
interest in teaching the young and made them 
committed teachers. 

Teaching and learning were accomplished 
through the telling of stories and legends that were 
repeated time after time so that the spirit of the 
story's words became more important than the 
words themselves. The values, attitudes, and eti- 



quette contained within these stories were rein- 
forced in daily life experiences. 

Other teaching methods included the use of 
examples and demonstrations. Most skills were 
learned by watching those who were accomplished 
at them; the individual observed the tasks over and 
over until he or she felt ready to participate in 
them. Encouragement was central of the instruc- 
tional process. In many tribes, the first attempt at 
crafts, no matter how meager, was given to an elder 
who praised and encouraged the maker. Group 
recognition was another form of encouragement, 
the "first kill ceremony" was an example of how the 
community recognized a youth's prowess as a 
hunter. Often the game was given to an elder. 

The teaching format was characterized by 
patience and the belief that learning took place in 
its own time, Thus, instruction respected the in- 
dividual learner for who he or she was as a person, 
not for how much he or she knew or did not know 
about a particular subject. Individuals were sel- 
dom expected to have the "right answer"; questions 
were used primarily to stimulate thought and self- 
examination, rather than to test acquired 
knowledge. For example, before learning to hunt, 
children were often instructed to go out and ob- 
serve the behavior of animals. They were then 
asked by the elder what they had learned and 
encouraged to think about what different animal 
behaviors meant to them as hunters. In the 
process of lea ning, it was important for the 
learner to examine the task in relation to himself 
or herself as it was to master the content. This 
understanding gave meaning and form to his or her 
knowledge, which could then be passed on to future 
generations. 

Furthermore, the traditional learning situation 
was characterized by multi-sensory input. 
Learners saw demonstrations, heard stories, ex- 
perienced "hands-on 11 participation, and were 
called on to observe and reflect on the meaning of 
the lesson. Verbal instruction was closely and 
concretely linked across time and space with actual 
experiences. 

In sharp contract to the Indian's view cf teach* 
ing/leaming as aholistic, experience-based process 
with many teachers, the dominant society favors a 
linear process with a single teacher or authority 
emphasizing abstract, conceptual skills. "We 
believe that each approach has its own strengths 
to lend to our undertaking. The dominant society's 
focus enables us to create an appropriate instruc- 
tional design. We can then draw on the old ways 
of teaching to facilitate learning." (Cross, 1986, p. 
21-24) 



9 

ERLC 



C2 

61 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



A number of guiding principles should be kept 
in mind when working with Native parents. Those 
principles include: 

• Native parent education functions with a 
commitment to take the best available 
from both the traditional child raising 
beliefs of Native culture and modern 
parenting skills. 

• Native parent education and practice are 
based on a belief and pride in the 
strengths of Native culture and history. 

• Native parents can most effectively learn 
from educators who are a part of and in 
tune with Native culture. 

• Effective Native parent education is br sed 
on a belief in the value of sharing ex- 
perience and expertise, both between 
educator and participants and among par- 
ticipants. 

• In Native parenting, "experience" is the 
best teacher. 

• An effective learning environment for Na- 
tive parents requires that participants be 
viewed as worthy of respect as people, 
regardless of background. 

• Native parent educators are not superior 
to participants simply by virtue of their 
role as trainers; learning is a mutual 
process. 

• Participants in Native parent education 
bring their own unique strengths and 
weaknesses to the training and will learn 
at their own pace in their own style and 
should be accepted at their individual skill 
and performance level; mistakes are a 
natural and accepted part of the learning 
process. 

• The story tellers, elders, and teachers of 
Native culture, past and present, provide 
an example to guide the growth process. 

• Native parent education functions with a 
value and respect for different views and 
experiences. 

Curriculum which could be covered in parent 
education classes can be as wide and varied as 
needed to fit the needs of parents: 

• Child Development/Early Childhood 
Education 

• Child Management 

• Coping with Child Misbehavior 

• Babies and Toddlers 

• The Elementary School Years 

9 

ERLC 



• Teen-Age Years 

• Building Self-Esteem 

• Family Math 

• Family Science 

• Other topics of interest and/or need 

Strengthening Native parental support re- 
quires that local school districts provide oppor- 
tunities for parents to define their needs 
themselves and refine their skills as learners, 
teachers, counselors and educational advocates. 
Native parents should have the opportunity to 
determine the values from both the dominant cul- 
ture and from their Native culture which they 
want Many Native parents are doing an excep- 
tional job like the one who offered examples of their 
support. 

• I was wondering about parents and how 
much they should participate in school. I 
know that a lot of people believe schools 
should teach Native American culture, but 
I think that should begin at home. When 
students go to school, they should already 
have a very strong understanding of their 
culture and heritage. We used to take our 
kids to the supermarket and have them 
pick out the different foods that the In- 
dians contributed to society. We also 
taught them the old legends and stories. 
Maybe our family is different because we 
have a functional family with parents and 
grandparents. They took an avid interest 
in the culture and read about the Indians 
in Mexico. This summer we went to the 
desert where there was a ball court and my 
kids determined that the Indians had cal- 
culated the parabolic reflex of this court. 
They had read in National Geo graphic 
about how the Indians did that so they 
could stand in two temples and whisper 
and hear each other's communication. 
Culture and heritage should come from the 
home so that when they go to school they 
have a better understanding of their own 
self. (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on 
Parental Involvement, 1990, p. 2) 

• Parents who don't know a lot about the 
subject matter can provide a good place for 
their children to do homework, reserve 
time for it, and have an opportunity for 
their children to study at home. Parents 
can talk about school and schoolwork with 
their children on a regular basis, en- 
courage them, motivate them, and shape 
their attitudes about school and learning. 

03 



Improving Parental Participation 

In this process, parents will become closer 
to their children and have a better working 
relationship with them. (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Parental Involvement, 
1990, p. 1) 

Types of options for parent training are dis- 
cussed below: 

• All children, including Native American 
children, tend to grow along similar 
developmental patterns. Therefore, it is 
necessary that people be aware of the 
developmental activities that children per- 
form at different ages. When Head Start 
was first established, the teachers treated 
the students as if they were older and 
consequently didn't give them a lot of 
hands-on activities. Interaction should be 
different for two and three years olds than 
for five and six year olds. (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Early Childhood Educa- 
tion, 1990, p. 3) 

• Paren ts Anonymou s program s can be help- 
ful in providing education toyoungparents 
about how to be good parents, including 
nurturing skills, teaching children about 
values, behavior management, and the dif- 
ference between punishment and dis- 
cipline. This kind of program should be 
more widely available. (INAR/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Health, Wellness, and 
Substance Abuse Prevention, 1990, p. 3) 

Native Language and Culture Classes 
for Parents 

Not only do school staff' need culture and lan- 
guage classes, but many Native parents need these 
classes as well. Grounding in traditional aware- 
ness can do a great deal to strengthen individual 
self knowledge and community awareness. 

• We need to redefine Indian education so 
that it does not mean Johnson O'Malley, 
Title IV, Title V, or remedial programs. 
We need Indian education to mean using 
the best of the old and new to educate our 
people whose histories, cultures, belief sys- 
tems, and languages are different from the 
majority culture. Traditional education 
assisted children in finding meaning in 
life. Curriculum was tied to experience 
and is related to the affective side of learn- 
ing through oral tradition and learning 
from the Elders. The physical side of life 
was fully developed with games and ac- 
tivities. Social development came through 
social activities that demonstrated the 

ERIC 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 

philosophy that we are bom into a life of 
service. All learning was interrelated and 
connected with the spiritual side of life. 
(INAR Plains Hearing, Skinner, 1990, p. 
78-89) 

• Late intervention, treatment programs, 
and eventual self-esteem seminars at- 
tempt to heal a wound that never should 
have been inflicted. Why wait for the in- 
evitable damage? Put the money and time 
and effort into programs of high quality 
from the very beginning. The Native 
American state of mind is nowhere else 
duplicated and must not be squandered. 
Only this singular state of mind holds out 
the realistic hope of optimistic solutions to 
predicaments of the non-Indian world, 
solutions that only another viewpoint, an 
Indian viewpoint, can create and imple- 
ment. The minds of young Indians must 
not be neglected, their saving attitudes 
ignored, nor their education squandered. 
Effective education begins with preschool 
programs and continues through graduate 
school. No program, no matter how well 
funded or staffed, can succeed if it fails to 
incorporate and reflect the values of its 
community. American Indians fail to see 
their own values reflected in the majority 
educational system and until they do, they 
will continue to drop out. They too, must 
be given reasons for success and must be 
treated as cherished and valued members 
of our culture. The state of Indian schools 
tells them one thing: Indians don't count. 
(INAR Southwest Hearing, Vigil, 1990, p. 
39) 

Parents and Children Together 
Classes 

Parents should be provided with suggestions 
for learning activities that they can carry out in the 
home. At the same time, the skills reinforced by 
such activities and their importance for the 
children's learning should be discussed. 
Strategies which demonstrate for parents how to 
work with their children are proving to be not only 
motivational and fun, but extremely effective. 
Many of the successful models like Family Math 
and Preparing for the Drug Free Years consist of 
significant amounts of time working with parents 
and children together. Addressing the needs of the 
family as a unit was described by others. 

• A lot of dropouts, perhaps 70 percent, come 
from families of dropouts, where their 
brothers and sisters and maybe even their 

R4 

63 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



parents were also dropouts. One year in 
our GED program we graduated two 
mothers and their daughters, which was 
really outstanding for them. But we feel 
that there is promise in establishingfamily 
literacy programs, where the total family 
comes in together to work on reading and 
writing. They discover that learning is 
fun, and it is fun to go to the library. This 
works in a positive way on both the 
children's and the parent's self-esteem and 
their attitude toward schooling and educa- 
tion* (INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on 
Dropout Prevention, 1990, p. 12) 

• During the past year, considerable 
dialogue was established with Robeson 
Community College for the development of 
family literacy programs utilizing the 
Kenan Family Literacy Model as a comple- 
ment to the preschool programs. The lack 
of sufficient Chapter 1 resources to provide 
for a full-time coordinator for family 
literacy hampered our ability to ap- 
propriately and adequately implement a 
preschool family literacy component. In 
recognition of this need, we have twice 
unsuccessfully applied for an Even start 
grant to enable us to implement such a 
program. We are, however, planning to 
utilize Title V funds this year to establish 
six Title V Parent-studen t learning centers 
utilizing computer-assisted instruction for 
parent-student engagement in learning. 
(INAR Eastern Hearing, Johnson, 1990, p. 
19) 

• Parental involvement must be encouraged. 
In one Southeastern Oklahoma com- 
munity, the Legislature provided funds for 
the purchase of computers. Parents were 
then instructed on their operation and they 
were made available to be checked out for 
home use. This produced three positive 
results: (1) parents learned, (2) children 
learned, and (3) parents and children spent 
time working together toward a common 
goal. (INAR Plains Hearing, Haney, 1990, 
p. 5) 

On the national level I would consider the pos- 
sibility of establishing Indian learning centers-not 
like Haskell, tribal community colleges, or new-age 
boarding schools. I am talking about something 
different like the Aspen Institute or the Old 
Chautuaquas, located in beautiful settings where 
people will want to go. Attract students and 
professionals. Forget the standard age break- 
downs of junior high, high school, and college. A 

o 

ERLC 



teenage model is a "white model." Create an 
"adult 9 * learning situation that will serve multiple 
generations. Bring in the Elders to talk about 
history and their childhood experiences and recog- 
nize them as professionals. Get these places ac- 
credited as junior colleges or colleges. 

Until the learning environment feels like a 
family or a clan, the Indian student will not be 
engaged. Somehow we have to create a bunch of 
"weird families." American education isn't work- 
ing well for anyone, and we can lead the way to a 
new model. 

A multigenerational approach is natural and 
makes a lot of sense. I think there are possibilities 
in there that we haven't even tapped. Unfor- 
tunately, although we see it happening in various 
places across the country, it is all too rare. (INAR 
Great Lakes Hearing, 1990, p. 18) 

• We now are serving younger brothers and 
sisters of older students who have been in 
our programs and graduated. In some 
families we are working with kids at three 
different grade levels. We have parents 
who are really committed, and the whole 
family is invoVed in our organization. We 
believe that motivation and creativity are 
just as important as receiving additional 
money from the federal government. 
(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Drop Out 
Prevention, 1990, p. 11) 

• The Phoenix District has two programs for 
young women with babies, and in both 
cases we work with the Phoenix Indian 
Center by having them refer students to us 
that they know are out in the community 
and not attending school because of preg- 
nancy. On the basis of referrals, we are 
able to register eligible students in these 
programs, where they are required to take 
a child development course, or they are 
matched up with their regular high school 
program, wherever they left off. We also 
offer counseling of the students in terms of 
what happens after the baby is born. It is 
our experience that being pregnant is less 
likely to keep a young mother out of school 
than what happens after the baby arrives. 
They usually think that "Grandma, Mom 
or Auntie are going to take care of the 
baby." well, Auntie takes care of the baby 
until the first opportunity for employment 
comes along, and then the mother is out of 
school again. So we help young mothers 
access social services for help with child 
care in the local community. We have had 
fair success with that approach. 

65 



Improving Parental Participation 



R . jin Butterfield. Floy Pepper 



(INAR/NACIE, Issue Session on Drop Out 
Prevention, 1990, p. 11) 

Such education for Native parents can take into 
account the unique cultural orientations of each 
community 9 exploring both traditional child rear- 
ing practices and more contemporary practices. 

Family planning should be encouraged for Na- 
tive American Families. 

• Prenatal care and education are essential 
for young women expecting their first 
child. 

• Traditional ways emphasize caring for 
your mind, taking care of your hygiene, 
and proper eating and exercise - all within 
the context of having respect for the gift the 
Creator is given us through this woman- 
hood, the doorway into the spirit world. 
School and health systems must allow us 
to share this concept even though it does 
not fit any of their structured guidelines. 

The possibilities for parental support are end* 
less given the needs of the community and the 
creativity of both educators and Native parents. 
Funds should be earmarked for exemplary train- 
ing models, topics and designs. These should be 
researched and disseminated when found to be 
effective. The curriculum for such projects should 
be developed and marketed for broader use. 

Continuing Parental Support 
Throughout the Schooling Years 
Research suggests that parental support has 
tremendous implications throughout the schooling 
process. Too often Native parents discontinue the 
level of support needed to sustain student efforts 
at the junior high and high school levels. These are 
critical years for all youth but even more so for 
Native students who begin dropping out in junior 
high school. 

Parents need training in advocacy. They need 
to know how to help their children throughout their 
entire school career. They need to have a voice and 
a right to talk about what's needed for their 
children. 

• In Santa Barbara County it seems easier 
for parents to be involved and supportive 
of their children when they are young. We 
encourage a networking support for 
parents, so they will not give up on sup* 
porting their children. (INAK/NACIE, 
Issue Session on Drop Out Prevention, 
1990, p. 15) 

• Many other district initiatives for parent 
involvement exist in addition to those 
described in this special section. An early 



leader was Houston with its sensible Fail* 
Safe program of innovative approaches to 
connecting school? with families, including 
strategies for organizing parent/teacher 
conferences in the secondary grades so 
that families could meet with many 
teachers on the same visit and programs to 
allow families to borrow school computers 
for home use to strengthen children's skills 
and adult literacy* More recently, the 
schools in Hamilton County, Ohio, and the 
local parent/teacher organization have 
coordinated efforts to build the capabilities 
of teachers, administrators, and parents to 
work and plan together at the elementary, 
middle, and high school levels. (Pipho, 
1991, p. 347) 

Parental support for Native into college was 
mentioned also. 

• There are young adult members who would 
like to go back to school but they don't have 
the necessary funds, transportation, or 
child care. To be able to improve their 
intellectual status would give incentive for 
them to assist their children in attaining a 
higher education. Parents hold a sig- 
nificant role in the educational system. 
Their involvement in academic, social, and 
extracurricular activities helps their 
children prepare for higher education. 
They can assist their children in getting 
finan* \\ assistance and decide whether 
their c'rild is ready for a junior college, 
vocational school, or university. (INAR 
Plains Hearing, Pratt, 1990, p. 35) 

Conclusion 

Apparently many American Indian/Alaska Na- 
tive communities and schools in urban centers, on 
reservations, and in rural communities have at* 
tempted to draw Native parents into the education* 
al process. Strategies which tend to yield success 
include: 

• School and district wide commitment to 
the notion that schools should be the locus 
of advocacy for all children. This insures 
that Native parental support and involve- 
ment is a high priority. A commitment 
requires continually providing access to 
Native parents in the classroom and on 
committees and boards, thus enabling 
them to offer advise, as well as, set policy 
at the building and district level. 

• Adoption of policies and procedures which 
clearly describe why and ho w the inclusion 



65 



I 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



of Native parents will occur, with recogni- 
tion and appreciation for the traditional 
cultural orientation of parents. 

• Regularly scheduled staff in-service which 
focuses on specifics about American In- 
dian/Alaska Native cultural orientation, 
as well as strategies for successfully relat- 
ing to Native parents. 

• A variety of options for Native parents to 
receive additional education, including op- 
portunities in die areas of child develop- 
ment.drug and alcohol prevention, 
literacy, parent-child support activities, 
and language and culture reinforcement. 

• Documentation of a wide variety of crea- 
tive outreach suggestions for staff. 

Strategic Plans for Slates 

In recent years a number of surveys, regional 
gatherings and documents have continued to em- 
phasize that need for greater state responsiveness 
to American Indian/Alaska Native people. Some of 
the documents include: 

The Education Commission of the States (ECS), 
Overview of State Laws and Policies (1980); the 
National Advisory Council on Indian Education 
(NACIE) 16th Annual Report Educating the 
American Indian /Alaska Native Family (1989); 
the American Indian Science and Engineering 
Society, (AISES) Our voices, Our Visions: 
American Indians Speak Out for Educational Ex- 
cellence (1990); and most recently St. Lawrence 
University, Indian Education from the Tribal 
Perspective: A Survey of American Indian Tribal 
Leaders. All of these reports describe the necessity 
for state responsibility in supporting and involving 
Native people in all aspects of the educational 
process: 

• Many states and local school districts 
stress Indian parental and community 
input into the decision-making process for 
schools. In the State Department of 
Education in South Dakota, the Division of 
Curriculum and Instruction, for instance, 
has an Indian advisory board that includes 
people from the Ir J; an community, 
parents and tribal leaders. This board 
meets with the state curriculum and in- 
struction staff and advises them on specific 
Indian education concerns. Indian people 
also serve on the state textbook review 
committee, on the needs assessment 
development committee, and on the State 
Standards of Excellence for Indian Educa- 
tion Committee, thus providing input into 

o 

ERJC 



decisions made by the Division of Cur- 
riculum and Instruction for the South 
Dakota Department of Education. 

Oklahoma and South Dakota have state Indian 
advisory boards that work primarily with cur- 
riculum and instruction personnel to effect chan- 
ges in Indian education throughout these states. 
The state of Minnesota has a state advisory task 
force on American Indian language and culture 
education. Minnesota Indian parents are also ac- 
tive in the formulation of policy and procedures 
relating to their 1977 legislated American Indian 
Language and Culture Education Act. (ECS, An* 
tell, 1980, p. 17) 

• State educational agencies (SEAs) with 
more than five Indian Education Act for- 
mula grantees should receive funding for a 
state Indian education office to assist in 
the monitoring of and technical assistance 
to formula grantees; to interact with other 
programs to assist in ensuring against sup- 
planting state and other federal funds with 
Indian Education Act funds; to interface 
with state-administered programs, such as 
adult education and vocational education, 
to assure that Indians and Alaska Natives 
are included in the state plans; and to serve 
as educational resources to Indian and 
Alaska Native communities. (NACIE, 
1989 p. 88) 

• Before culturally based education can be- 
come a reality, federal and state legislators 
must set a harmonious tone for change by 
enacting supportive legislation. (AISES, 
1990, p. 6) 

• Education is without doubt the key to In- 
dian self-determination and cultural sur- 
vival. Without knowledgeable tribal mem- 
bers, Indian tribes will continue to be de- 
pendent upon others for expertise and ad- 
vice in the several areas of tribal respon- 
sibility. It should be the policy of the 
federal government to enhance Indian con- 
trol over educational programs designed to 
serve Indian people by promoting local 
tribal control and strongly encouraging 
state educational leadership to develop 
programs which improve the educational 
advantage of Indians and preserve their 
cultural identity. (Wells, 1991, p. 8) 

States should be doing a great deal more to 
encourage the participation of Native parents. 
Some of the specific activities states could do in- 
clude the following: 



C7 



Improving Parental Participation 

• Like Minnesota, states could mandate 
parent advisory committees for every dis- 
trict with a significant number of Native 
students. " A constant theme we heard was 
that Indian parents often do not have an 
opportunity to become involved in the 
public schools and in the education of their 
children. We therefore established Paren 
Advisory Committees modeled after what 
was required by the federal government. A 
year later we learned that school boards 
were not listening to the parents, so we 
empowered those advisory committees to 
develop resolutions of concurrence or non- 
concurrence, and that was passed in 1989 
as an amendment to the original act." 
(INAR Great Lakes Hearing, DeCramer, 
1990, p. 54) 

• Offer incentive grants to local school dis- 
tricts to help promote exemplaiy outreach 
efforts to Native parents. The actual im- 
plementation should be left up to the In- 
dian community as much as possible. If 
there is to be any state money involved, we 
can set some basic guidelines and still 
recognize the sovereignty of the people who 
are recipients of the funds. I am hesitant 
to tell the people of Minneapolis and St 
Paul how to do it* I would rather listen to 
their proposals. We go into a stall when 
there is disagreement or when we don't 
have a big enough budget. But when we 
look at the lives of Indian youth, we find 
that when their parents got involved we 
see the graduation rate increase as well as 
the pride and self-esteem that come with 
empowerment, and it is so much better 
than what we have been doing. I think it 
is self-evident. (INAR Great Lakes Hear- 
ing, DeCramer, 1990, p. 57) 

• Provide technical assistance to requesting 
communities which need help in either the 
paren t involvement or parent support area. 

• Develop and disseminate effective parent 
education materials. 'The last thing I 
would like to talk about and very briefly — 
the Indian Parent Committee Manual — 
was cooperatively developed by the Min- 
nesota State Department of Education, the 
Minnesota Chippewa Tribe, the North 
Plains Evaluation and Resource Center, 
and the Bureau of Indian Affairs. The art 
work on the cover was developed in loose- 
leaf from so that it can be periodically 
updated. It is an excellent resource for 
working with parents and parent commit- 



Robin ButterfleldL Hoy Pepper 

tees. If they have questions on any of the 
laws, on Special Education, or Head Start, 
whatever, there are chapters to address all 
of these subjects. This is available through 
our office/ 1 (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, 
Hakala, 1990, p. 51) 

• Monitor exemplary programs or support 
research efforts which capture successful 
strategies. 

• Legislate statewide home-school advocate 
programs which include continual educa- 
tional growth opportunities and career lad- 
der options. 

• Support the notion that schools should be 
the locus of advocacy for all children and 
families. 

Several states are highlighted for their leader- 
ship in the growingparent participation movement 
in the Phi Delta Kappan, January (1991). Using 
the work of Joyce Epstein the state of Illinois has 
documented how important it is for state depart- 
ments to foster meaningful parent participation 
programs in schools by providing both financial 
and technical assistance. (Epstein, 1987, p. 4*9) 

Staff members with the Illinois program en- 
couraged all schools applying for grants to take 
into account the five elements of Epstein's model 
of parent involvement: 

- basic obligations of families, including health, 
safety, and a positive home environment; 

- basic obligations of schools, including com- 
munication with parents regarding their child's 
programs and progress; 

• parent involvement at school, including volun- 
teer activities and support for sports, student per- 
formances, ant? other activities; 

- parent involvement in learning activities at 
home, including supervising homework and help- 
ing children work on skills that will help them 
learn in the classroom; and 

- parent involvement in governance, decision 
making, and advocacy, including participation in 
parent/teacher organizations and in various 
decision-making and advisory roles. (Epstein, 
1987, p. 357) 

• The Illinois experience with the awarding 
of sizeable, multi-year, competitive grants 
may prove helpful to other states. 
Through the use of grant-funded 
demonstration projects that design, imple- 
ment, and evaluate combined approaches 
to school improvement and paren t involve- 
ment, we have learned valuable lessons 
about altering the practices of the par- 
ticipating schools and those of other 



^8 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



schools that benefit from the experience at 
the demonstration sites. 

First, we learned that multi-year grants are 
important. Most state grants are award for a 
single year, but it often takes longer than a year tn 
see progress in improving urban schools and in* 
volving parents. With support that lasts longer, 
the schools are able to establish and stabilize their 
programs. 

We also learned that it is important to consider 
multiple outcomes, not just scores on achievement 
tests. Improving scores on achievement tests 
takes longer than improving other measures of 
school success, such as attendance, discipline, 
report card grades, level of parent involvement, 
and so on. 

The ftinded programs were highly successful. 
The grants energized the schools that received 
them and helped increase parent involvement over 
the course of the grant periods. Outside evaluators 
hired by the Illinois Siatd Board of Education to 
determine whether the schools were meeting their 
stated goais confirmed that parent involvement 
affected student achievement and that many more 
parents had become involved with their children's 
education as a result of the schools 9 efforts. The 
evaluators interviewed people in 20 of the schools 
that received grants and collected quantitative and 
qualitative and that showed the 87% of the schools 
in the program accomplished more than 90% of 
their stated goals, this evidence that such low-cost 
strategies yield relatively high returns is very en- 
couraging. (Chapman, 1991, p. 358) 

Other state examples which are encouraging 
are documented in: 

• Its Parents as Teachers program. 
Missouri's state department cf education 
has been a leader in the development of 
programs to involve all families in the 
education of their children from birth to 
education of their children from birth to 
age 3. The state is poised to cc -'tinue lead- 
ing with Success Is Homemade . new pro- 
gram that will extend family involvement 
from kindergarten through grad 12. From 
the outset, Missouri plans to evaluate 
school processes and the effects of new 
practices, making this promising program 
one tc watch. (Epstein, 1991, p. 347) 

• Other activities on the part of states that 
include Washington's requirements that 
competence in parent involvement be one 
of the "generic standards" for state cer- 
tification of teachers and administrators. 
Were this activity to be undertaken in 
many states, more courses would be in- 

o 

ERIC 



stituted at colleges and universities to 
prepare teachers and administrators to 
work more productively with parents as 
partners. (Epstein, 1991, p. 347) 

• Zelma Solomon describes the development 
of California's policy on parent involve* 
ment. Her account is testimony to the long 
hours and hard work needed to move from 
a simple awareness of the importance of 
state-level policy to the framing of 
guidelines, the issuing of mandates, and 
the passage of state legislation requiring 
all districts and schools to act to develop 
their own policies and practices designed 
to involve families in their children's 
schooling. 

California's policy is important because it 
recognizes the connections that link school cur- 
ricula, family involvement, and student success. It 
is unique, as well, in that the state recognizes the 
importance of parent involvement at all grade 
levels and with all families and does not isolate 
those in categorical programs. Perhaps most im- 
portant, California's policy is written to replace 
top-down dictates with "enabling" actions to help 
districts and schools understand, design, develop, 
and implement their own policies and programs. 
(Epstein, 1991, p. 346) 

Believing that any school can be more success- 
ful if parents are productively involved in their 
children's education and any student can be more 
successful if schools link comprehensive parent 
involvement programs to curricula and to teaching 
and learning. The California state board adopted 
a policy on parental involvement which states: 

Comprehensive programs of parent involve- 
ment require schools to involve parents at all grade 
levels and in a variety of roles. These programs 
should be designed to: 

• help parents develop parenting skills and 
foster conditions at home that support 
learning; 

• provide parents with the knowledge of 
techniques designed to assist children in 
learning at home; 

• provide access to and coordin com- 
munity and support services for waildren 
and families; 

• promote clear two-way communication be- 
tween the school and the family as to the 
school programs and children's progress; 

• involve parents, after appropriate train- 
ing, in instructional and support roles at 
school; and 

G9 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfield, Floy Pepper 



• support parents as decision makers and 
develop their leadership in governance, ad- 
visory, and advocacy roles. 

In Conclusion, states should be exerting in- 
fluence in the parent participation area. Yet while 
doing so, states must continue to honor the govern- 
ment to government relationships with tribes. 
Only in consultation with tribal and Native com- 
munities can long range success become a reality. 

Strategic Pi is for Federal 
Influence 

"Local school and reservation-based efforts 
should be continued to encourage parental and 
community involvement in the education of 
American Indian children. The congressional 
mandate for parental involvement in Indian educa- 
tion programs must be maintained. Federal, state, 
and local education agencies must make a cohesive 
commitment to increasing this involvement to 
overcome all of the barriers that exist based on past 
history and current attitudes. Training for Indian 
parents and parent committee organizations 
should continue to focus on basic parental roles and 
responsibilities, coping with cultural bias and 
racism in schools, and strengthening home-school 
relations through positive communications and 
conflict resolution/' (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, 
Gipp, 1990, p. 13) 

Certainly all of the recommendations offered in 
the previous section for states, could be replicated 
at the federal level. Specifically those recommen- 
dations include: 

• Mandating parent advisory committees or 
policy boards at the local school district 
level. 

• Enforcing the regulations to insure Native 
parental involvement. "In my thinking, 
there are enough laws to improve Indian 
e4ucation; the problem is to enforce the 
laws. When those employees, who are 
mandated to assist, help, and carry out the 
laws of the U.S. government, fail to carry 
out their assigned duties, then the ad- 
ministration needs to do something about 
it" (INAR Plains Hearing, McCormick, 
1990, p. 22) 

My concern is that regulations are not being 
followed. The school law register says that 
children will participate equally in the school; the 
involvement of parents is necessary; hearings on 
Impact Aid will be held; and, the school is respon- 
sible to discern the needs of the students. It is clear 
to me what the register lays down: parent commit- 
tees decide how the spend the money. What is 



happening is that all funds are being put into a 
common fund and used as individual schools dic- 
tate. Impact Aid sometimes far exceed other 
funds. We need to uphold the school law register. 

I've heard many comments today about elemen- 
tary and secondary schools. With help from Indian 
parents and Indian personnel, I believe that some 
of these funds could be used for cultural classes, 
tutors, and counselors without relying on Title V 
funds. I don't know how long these will be in effect, 
but I imagine support will continue. We need to 
challenge school boards to take this information 
back and abide by school law. (INAR Plains Hear- 
ing, Bums, 1990, p. 38) 

Strategies for ensuring that LEAS concentrate 
efforts to successfully meet the original intent of 
tL_ Indian Education Act to utilize grant funds to 
develop the appropriate methods and activities to 
address the special educational and culturally-re- 
lated academic needs of Indian and Alaska Native 
children and then integrate LEAs may become 
more effective at addressing Indian/Alaska Native 
student needs not as Indian education problems 
but as local eduction concerns that warrant unique 
and specialized approaches. (NACIE, 1989, p. 88) 

Provisions of the Impact Aid law which require 
Indian policies and procedures to be in place in 
each school district and active consultation and 
involvement by Indian tribes and parents in the 
planning and development of programs for their 
children. There should be a resolution by the Con- 
gress indicating that the federal payments under 
the Impact Aid Program to districts counting stu- 
dents who reside on Indian lands are in lieu of and 
represent the tax payments of the Indian tribe, 
since the tribe made the payment many years ago 
with the ceding of lands. The school districts 
should never be able to think that Indians do not 
pay property taxes and that, consequently, LEAs 
do not have to be as responsive to them as they are 
to other taxpayers. (NACIE, 1989, p. 86) 

• Offering incentive grants for exemplary 
outreach programs to Native communities. 
Target funds specifically for Native paren- 
tal support projects. 

• Providing technical assistance in both the 
parental involvement as well as parental 
support area. Federal legislation has been 
largely focused on Involvement (decision- 
making) responsibilities of school districts 
and Native parents. As research suggests, 
the parental support technical assistance 
will yield significant results. Much more 
needs to be done to rebuild effective Native 
parental support. 

70 



69 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



• Monitoring exemplary programs or sup- 
porting research which capture successful 
strategies and results in parent participa- 
tion. 'There is no one response to the many 
situations that limit the ability of Indian 
students to have a successful school ex* 
perience form level to level or from one 
community to another. Clearly, few data 
exist, nor are enough Indians engaged in 
educational research that would provide 
some guidance to communities struggling 
to keep their children in school. Sharp 
declines in federal funding at all levels is a 
serious issue to be addressed. More 
serious is the lack of educational programs 
that are integrally linked to the Indian 
community and that work to maintain the 
linkage between student and community. 
Those institutions that will make a strong 
and positive impact are those which rein- 
force issues about and of importance to 
Indian tribes and communities." (INAR 
Great Lakes Hearing, Eichhorn, 1990, p. 
45) 

"It seems logical that we, as Indian parents and 
Indian educators, are the best determiners of what 
successful or effective practices are and should be. 
Why not an Indian National Diffusion Network? 
Why not an Indian Program Effectiveness Panel? 
There are numerous qualified Indian educators to 
staff review panels and set-up qualifying review 
and selection processes. In the long run, that type 
of process could prove much more beneficial than 
the one that now exists." (INAR Plains Hearing, 
Brittan, 1990, p. 65) 

Conclusion 

Native Parental participation in the education- 
al process, both as decision-makers (involvement) 
and as encouragers of individual students (sup- 
port) has long been the critical ingredient missing 
in Native education. The research is clear; without 
parents student progress is severely Mrwed. 

Models exist which can be adap> /idely in 
Native communities. There are mai , samples of 
intermittent success. The examples provide en- 
couragement. They describe the need for transfor- 
mational leadership from tribes and schools. 
Schools should be the locus of advocacy for all 
children and families. As such, schools should 
provide educational opportunities for both school 
staff, Native parents, and community members to 
continually grow and understand each others uni- 
que role in the advancement of Native student 
achievement. 

o 

ERJC 



And finally these models describe how commit- 
ment and creativity have overcome the dismal, 
social economic issues and conditions that confront 
all areas of Native education. 'The Indian com- 
munity must revise their own expectations of 
public education, looking to what their children 
deserve rather than accepting what schools have 
been willing to deliver. We have a right and 
responsibility for our children's future to expect 
that education be an enriching rather than 
demanding experience. We must stop thinking of 
success as reduced dropout rates and fewer 
suspensions and start thinking of success as high 
graduation rates and postsecondary enrollments. 
As a community, we have allowed schools to per- 
form at their very minimum, and this must 
change." (INAR Great Lakes Hearing, Salinas, 
1990, p. 26) 

"The Indian child had a rich and colorful 
heritage, and I feel we have to instill in our children 
an insatiable desire to excel in the classroom as 
well as in life. The time has come for Indian people, 
as well as educators to exercise our strength-our 
children-for they are the heart of our people and 
they are our future." (INAR Plains Hearing, Soap, 
p. 26) 

References 

Abidin, Richard R. Parenting Skills: Trainer's 
Manual and Workbook. New York: Human 
Sciences Press, 1976. 

Arbess, S. New Strategies in Indian Education. 
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada: Ministry 
of Education, 1981. 

Arms worth, James, & Pollock, Larry. Teenage 
Parent Self-Development Program. Nacog- 
doches, Texas: Stephen F. Austin University, 
1978. ©REFERENCE = Bean, Reynold, & 
Clemes, Harris. Raising Children's Self Es- 
teem . Santa Cruz, California: Association of 
Personal and Organizational Development, 
1978. 

Bean, Reynold, & Clemes, Harris. The Four Con- 
ditions nf Self Esteem . Santa Cruz, California: 
Association of Personal and Organizational 
Development, 1979. 

Becker, Wesley C. Parents are Teachers: A Child 
Management Program . Research Press, 1971. 

Bemal, Martha E., & North, Juel Ann. A Survey 
of Parent Training Training Manuals. Journal 
of Apnlied Behavior Analysis. 1978,11,533*44. 

Bill, Willard. From Boarding School to Self Deter- 
mination . Olympia, Washington: Washington 
Department of Education, 1987. 

Bittle, R.G. Improving parent-teacher com- 
munication through recorded telephone mes- 

71 



Improving Parental Participation 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 



sages. The Journnl nf Educational Research. 
1975, 69, 87-95. 
Bryde, John. Modern Indian Psychology. Vermil- 
lion, South Dakota: Institute of Indian Studies, 
1971, p. 72. 

Bush, C. S. Language Remediation, and Expan- 
sion: Workshops for Parents and Teachers . 
Tucson, Arizona: Communication Skill 
Builders, 1981. 

Chapman, Warren. The Illinois Experience, 
Grants to Improve Schools Through Parent In- 
volvement. Phi Delta Kanngn. January, 1991. 

Chavkin, N. F., & Williams, D. L. Critical Issues 
in Teacher Training for Parent Involvement. 
Educational Horizons. Winter, 1988. 

Chavkin, N. F., & Williams, D. L. Executive Sum- 
tti ht*v guidelines and Strategies for Training- 
Ifiachfiia Ahout Pare nt Involvement. Austin, 
Texas: Southwest Educational Development 
Laboratory, 1984. Chrispeels, Janet District 
Leadership on Parent Involvement. Phi Delta 
Kappan. January, 1991. 

Chrispeels, Janet, Boruta, Marcia, & Daughtery, 
Mary. Communicn tinp With Parents. San 
Diego, California: San Diego County Office of 
Education, 1988. 

Chrispeels, Janet, Fernandez, Bea, & Preston, 
Jenna. Home and School Partners for Student 
Success: A Handbook for Princinals . San 
Diego, California: San Diego City Schools, 
1990. 

Cioffi, M. R. Professional and Lav Group Percep- 
tions of Advisory Council Participation in 
TWisinn Making in New York Citv Public 
Schools . New York City, New York: Doctoral 
dissertation, Fordham University, 1982. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 
218 394). 

Cohn, Ann, & Gordon, Thomas. Tips on Parenting. 

National Committee for Prevention of Child 

Abuse, 1984. 
Comer, James P. New Haven's School-Community 

Connection. Educational Leadership,. March, 

1987. 

D'Angelo, Diane A, & Adler, C. Ralph. Chapter 1 
- A Catalyst for Improving Parent Involve- 
ment. Phi Delta Kappan. January, 1991. 

Deloria, Vine. The Indian Student Amid American 
Inconsistencies. The Schooling of Native 
America . Washington, D.C.: American As- 
sociation for Teacher Education with the 
Teacher Corps, United States Office of Educa- 
tion, 1978. ©REFERENCE^ Development As- 
sociates Inc. Final Repor t The Evaluation of 
the Impact of the Part. A Entitlement Program 
Funded Under Title I V nf the Indian Education 



Afit Arlington, Virginia: May 27, 1983. (Con- 
tract No. 300-80-0862). 
Dobson, R., & Dobson, J. S. Parental and Com- 
munifcv Involvement in Education and Teacher 
Education . Washington, D.C. : ERIC Clearin- 
ghouse on Teacher Education, 1975. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 100 
833). 

Dreikurs, Rudolf, Grunwald, Bromin & Pepper, 
FloyC. Maintaining Sanity in the Classroom. 
New York City, New York: Harper Row, 
Second Edition, 1982, pp. 304-306. 

Duncan, L. W. Parent-Counselor Conferences 
Make A Difference. St. Petersburg, Florida: 
ERIC Clearinghouse on Teacher Education, 
1969. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 031 743). 

Earle, Janice. Restructuring Seattle's Middle 
Schools. Alexandria, Virginia: National As- 
sociation of State Boards of Education, 1989. 

Edlund, C. V. Rewards At Home To Promote 
Desirable School Behavior. Tearhinp Excep- 
tional flhildren. 1969, 1, 121-127. 

Educating the American Indian/AlnsVnn Native 
Family. 16th Annual Report to the United 
States Congress, Fiscal Year 1989. National 
Advisory Council on Indian Education, 1989. 

Efft. tive Practices for Successful Bilingual Parent 
Involvement Programs; An Administrator's 
Handbook . Trenton, New Jersey: New Jersey 
State Department of Education. 

Epstein, Joyce L. California's Policy Recognizes 
the Connections that Link School Curricula, 
Family Involvement, and Student Success. Ehi 
Delta Kapp an. January, 1991. 

Epstein, Joyce L. Parental Involvement: State 
Education Agencies Should Lead the Way. 
Community Education Journal. 1987, 14, pp. 
4-9. 

Epstein, Joyce L. What Principals Should Know 
About Parent Involvement. Principal, 1987, 
66. 

Evaluation Resources Inc. ITrhan Education 
Partnership Grants. Illinois State Board of 
Education, 1990. 

Fantini, Mario D., & Cardemas, Rene. Parenting 
in a Multicultural Society . New York: 
Longmans, 1980. 

Fiordaliso, R., Lordeman, A, Filipczak, J., & Fried- 
man, R. M. Effects of Feedback on Absenteeism 
in the Junior High School. The Journal of 
Education Research . 1977, 70, 188-192. 

Goldsmith, Ellen, & Handel, Ruth. Family Read- 
ing. New York City, New York: New Reader's 
Press, 1990. 



72 

71 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



Gordon, I. J. The Effects of Parent Involvement on 
Schooling. Partners: Parents and Schools. 
Brandt, R. S. (Ed.). Alexandria, Virginia: As- 
sociation for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development, 1979. 

Gotts, E. E., & Purnell, R. F. Improving Home. 
School Communications. Bloomington, In- 
diana: Phi Delta Kappa Educational 
Foundation, 1985. 

Haig-Brown, Alan. How to Organize Effective 
Home-School Communication. Canadian .Tour. 

nal of Native Education . 1983, 11 (1). 
Hart. Plains States Hearing. 1990, p. 40. 
Hayes, E. J., Cunningham, G. K, & Robinson, J. 

B. Counseling Focus: Are Parents Necessary? 

Elementary School Guidance and Counseling. 

1977, 12 (1), 8-14. 

Herman, J. L., & Yeh, J. P. Some Effects of Parent 
Involvement in Schools. The Urban Review. 
1983, 15 (1), 11-17. 

Hofmeister, A. M. The Parent Is A Teacher . 
Logan, Utah: Paper presented at the 56th An- 
nual Faculty Honor Lecture in the Humanities, 
1977. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 161 541). 

Honig, Alice S. Parent Involvement in Earlv 
Childhood Education. Washington, D.C.: Na- 
tional Association for the Education of Young 
Children, 1975. 

Honig, Alice S., & Lilly, J.R. Infant Caregiving: A 
Design for Training Caregivers. New York: 
Media Projects, 1972. 

INAR/NACIE Joint Issues Sessions, NIEA 22nd 
Annual Conference, Academic Performance. 
San Diego, California: October 15, 1990. 

INAR/NACIE Joint Issues Sessions, NIEA 22nd 
Annual Conference, Dropout Prevention. San 
Diego, California: October 15, 1990. 

INAR/NACIE Joint Issues Sessions, NIEA 22nd 
Annual Conference, H ealth. Wellness, and 
Substance Abuse Prevention. San Diego, 
California: October 15, 1990. 

INAR/NACIE Joint Issues Sessions, NIEA 22nd 
Annual Conference, Native language nnH finl- 
tui£. San Diego, California: October 15, 1990. 

INAR/NACIE Joint Issues Sessions, NIEA 22nd 
Annual Conference, Partnerships of Schoo ls. 
Tribes. Communities. Parents ard Businesses. 
San Diego, California: October 15, 1990. 

INAR/NACIE Joint Issues Sessions, NIEA 22nd 
Annual Conference, Early Chi ldhood Educa- 
tion . San Diego, California: October 16, 1990. 

INAR/NACIE Joint Issues Sessions, NIEA 22nd 
Annual Conference, Elemen t ™ Schools. San 
Diego, California: October 11, 1^90. 



INAR/NACIE Joint Issues Sessions, NIEA 22nd 
Annual Conference, Pnrpntal involvement 
San Diego, California: October 16, 1990. 

INAR/NACIE Joint Issues Sessions, NIEA 22nd 
Annual Conference, Postsecondarv Education . 
San Diego, California: October 16, 1990. 

Indian Education: A National Tragedy - A Nation- 
al Challenge, 1969 Report of the Committee on 
Labor and Public Welfare, United States 
Senate, made by the Spec tl Subcommittee on 
Indian Education S, Res. 80. Washington, 
D.C.: United States Printing Office, 1969. 

Indian Education: Improvement of Federal, State 
and Tribal Government, Report #135, Educa- 
tion Commission of the States, Antel, et al, 
September, 1980. 

Indian Education: Problems in Need of Resolu- 
tion, Report #136. 

Indian Education: Selected Programs and Prac- 
tices, Report #137. 

Indian Education: An Overview of State Laws and 
Policies, Report #139. 

Indian Education: Final Project Report, Report 
#140. 

Indian Nations at Risk (INAR). Eastern Regional 
Hearing. Cherokee, North Carolina: October 2, 
1990. 

Indian Nations at Risk (INAR). Great Lakes 
Regional Hearing. St. Paul, Minnesota: Sep- 
tember 20, 1990. 

Indian Nations at Risk (INAR). High Plains 
Regional Hearing. Billings, Montana: August 
20, 1990. 

Indian Nations at Risk (INAR). Northwest 
Regional Hearing. Seattle, Washington: Sep- 
tember 5, 1990. 

Indian Nations at Risk (INAR). Plains Regional 
Hearing. Oklahoma City, Oklahoma: Septem- 
ber 17-18, 1990. 

Indian Nations at Risk (INAR). Alaska Regional 
Hearing. Juneau, Alaska: July 16-18, 1990. 

Indian Nations at Risk (INAR). Southwest 
Regional Hearing. Phoenix, Arizona: Septem- 
ber 12, 1990. 

Krasnow, Jean. Building New Parent-Teacher 
Partnerships; Teacher Research Teams Stimu- 
late Reflection. Equity and Choice. 199C, 6. 

Linney, J. A., & Vemberg, E. Changing Patterns 
of Parental Employment and the Family-School 
Relationship. Children of Working Parents: 
Experiences and Outcomes. Hayes, C. D., & 
Kamerman, S. B. (Eds.). Washington, D. C: 
National Academy Press, 1983. (ERIC Docu- 
ment Reproduction Service No. ED 231 727). 



• ERIC 



73 

72 



Improving Parental Participation 

Lloyd, L. A Closing the Gap: Microcomputers and 
the Home-School Learning Link. TMiirational 

Technnlopv Update. 1984, 2 (4), 1-2. 

Locke, Patricia. An Ideal School System for 
American Indians - A Theoretical Construct. 
The Schooling of Native Amflrica . Washington, 
D.C.: American Association of College for 
Teacher Education with the Teacher Corps, 
United States Office of Education, 1978. 

McKinney, J. A. The Develo pment, and Implemen- 
tation of a Tutorial Program for Parents to 
Emprove the Reading and Mathematics 
Achievement cf Their Children . Fort Lauder- 
dale, Florida: Nova University, 1975. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 113 
703). Mize, G. K The Influence of Increased 
Parental Involvement in the Educational 
Process of their Children . Madison, Wisconsin: 
University of Wisconsin Research an \ Develop- 
ment Center for Cognitive Learning, Technical 
Report No. 418, 1977. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 151 661). 

Moles, 0., Wdlat, C, Carroll, T., & Collins, C. 
Research Area Plans for Families as Educators . 
Washington, D. C.: . National Institute of 
Education, 1980. 

Multine, Trudie. Child Development and the Na- 
tive American Perspective . Portland, Oregon: 
Unpublished paper, Northwest Indian Child 
Welfare Institute, 1990, p. 1. 

Nafziger, M. E. Involving P arents in Reading In- 
struction . South Bend, Indiana: Indiana 
University, 1982. (ERIC Document Reproduc- 
tion Service No. ED 219 727). 

Nardine, Frank E. Parent Involvement in the 
States: How Firm is Commitment. Phi Delta 
Kappan. January. 1991. 

Northern Plains Resource and Evaluation Center 
II. Developing IRA Projects for Stu dent. Self 
Esteem . Bismark, North Dakota: p. 29. 

Northwest Equals. What is Family Science? 
Portland, Oregon: Portland State University 
Continuing Education. 

Northwest Indian Child Welfare Institute. Posi- 
tive Indian Parenting . Portland, Oregon: 
1986, pp. 161-162. 

Oregon State Board of Education. Parent Involve- 
ment Fact Sheet #4 and 4A . B. C and D. Salem, 
Oregon: 

Oregon State Board of Education. Parent Involve- 
ment Sheet #2 . Salem, Oregon: 1990. 

Oregon State Board of Education. The Critical 
Link. Salem, Oregon: 1990, p. 8. 

Our Voices, Our Visio n- American Indians Speak 
Out for Education Excellence . American In- 



Robin Butterfleld, Floy Pepper 

dian Science and Engineering Society, College 
Entrance Examination Board, 1989. 
Parker, F. C, & McCoy, J. F. School-Based Inter- 
vention for the Modification of Excessive Ab- 
senteeism. Psychology in the Schools. 1977, 14, 
84-88. 

Paul, Alice S. Strategic Plans for Early Childhood 
Education in American Indian and Alaskan 
fTative Communities. Indian Nations At Risk r 
1990, pp. 3-6, 13. 

Pepper, Floy C. Effective Practices in Indian 
Education, A Teacher's Monograph . Portland, 
Oregon: Northwest Regional Educational 
Laboratory, 1985. 

Pepper, Floy C. Effective Practices in Indian 
Education: Administrator's Monograph. 
Portland, Oregon: Northwest Regional Educa- 
tional Laboratory, 1985, pp. 69-71, 77-78. 

Pepper, Floy C. Parent Study Handhook. 
Portland, Oregon: 1978, p. 6. 

Pepper, Floy C. Self Esteem and the Indian Child, 
The Talking Stick , An Indian Voice in the 
Pacific Northwest . Seattle, Washington: 
January, 1991, p. 2. 

Pepper, Floy C, & Henry, Steven L. Cognitive, 
Social and Cultural Effects on Indian Learning 
Style: Classroom Implication. Canadian Jour- 
nal of Native Education. 1986, 13, (1). 

Pepper, Floy C, & Henry, Steven L. Using 
Developmental and Democratic Practices to 
Teach Self Discipline. Theory int o Practice. 
1985, XXIY, 264-269. 

Piopho, Chris. A Deal for the Nineties: Cut Taxes, 
Improve Schools. Phi Delta Kannan. January. 
1991. 

Reeves, Faye, Peniska, Gretchen, & Heemstra, 
Jean. Indian Head Start Programs -- The Child 
in the Process of Becoming. The Schooling of 
Native America . Washington, D.C.: American 
Association of Colleges for Teacher Education 
with the Teacher Corps, United States Office of 
Education, 1978. 

Reynolds, Eleanor. Guiding Vnung Children: A 
Child Centered Approach . Mountain View, 
California: Mayfield Publishing Company, 
1990. 

Samuels, S. Jay. Why Children Fail to Learn and 

What to Do About It. Exceptional Children. 

CEC. Reston, Virginia: 1986, 53 (1), 7-16. 
Sattes, Beth D. Parent Invo lvement: A Review of 

the Literature. 1985, p.6. 
Schaefer, E. S. Toward a Revolution in Education. 

Nation nl Elementary Principal. 1971, 51 (1), 

18-25. 

Sheats, D., & Du.ikleberger, G. E. A Determina- 
tion of the Principal's Effect in School-Initiated 



73 74 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



Home Contacts Concerning Attendance of 
Elementary School Students. The Journal nf 
Educational Research, 1979, 72, 310-312. 
Shedlin, Allan Jr., Klopf, Gordon J., & Zaret, Es- 
ther S. The School as Locus of Advocacy for All 
Children. New York City, New York: Elemen- 
tary School Center, 1988. 

SheltOn, J., & Dobson, R. L. An Analysis nf a 
Family Involvement-Communication System 
in a Title I Elementary School Stillwater, Ok- 
lahoma: Oklahoma State University, 1973. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 
082 091). 

Shuck, A., Ulsh, P., & Piatt, J. S. Parents En- 
courage Pupils (PEP): An Innercity Parent In- 
volvement Reading Project. Reading Teacher. 
1983, 3fi, 524-528. 

Simmons-Ailes, Sandra. The Growing Path: 
Traditional Infant Activities for Tndian 
Children. Bernalillo, New Mexico: The Pueblo 
Infant Parent Education Project, Southwest 
Communications Resources, Inc., 1983. 

Smith, M. B., & Brahce, C. I. When School and 
Home Focus on Achievement. Educational 
Leadership. 1963, 20, 314-318. 

Solomon, Zelma P. California Policy on Parent 
Involvement. Phi Delta Kannan. January, 
1991. 

Stough, M. F. Lowering Barriers to Home-School 
Communications: In search nf a Re-definition 
of Parent Involvement. San Diego, California: 
College of Education, San Diego State Univer- 
sity, 1982. (ERIC Document Reproduction Ser- 
vice No. ED 220 989). 

Sweeney, Jim. Tins for Improving Srh onl Climate . 
Arlington, Virginia: American Association of 
School Administrators, 1988, p. 10. 

Thompson, Thomas. The Schooling of Native 
America . (Ed.). Washington, D.C.: American 
Association of Colleges for Teacher Education 
with the Teacher Corps, 1978.U.S. Dept. of 
HEW. Low Income Teaching Ki t on Child 
Development: A Guide for Parents. 
Washington, D.C.: Superintendent of Govern- 



ment Documents, U.S. Government Printing 
Office, 1975. 

Wagonseller, Bill R., & McDowell, Richard L. Iqu 
and Your Child: A Common Sense Approach to 
Successful Parenting . Research Press, 1979. 

Wells, Robert N., Jr. Indian Education from the 
Trihal Perspective: A Survey nf American In. 
dian Tribal T^adera. Canton, New York: St. 
Lawrence University, 1991 (Revised). 

Wolf, J. S. Parents as Partners in Exceptional 

Education. Theory Into Practice, 1982, 21 (2), 
77-81. 

What Works - Schools that Work: Education for 
Disadvantaged Children. Washington, D.C.: 
United States Department of Education. 

Zeldin, Shepherd. Implementation of Home- 
School-Community Policies. Equity and 
Choice . 1990,6. 

About the Author 

Robin A. Butterfield (Winnebago/Chippewa) 
has almost twenty years of educational experience, 
including being a classroom teacher both in reser- 
vation and urban communities, at a variety of 
grade levels, K-12. Ms. Butterfield has developed 
a variety of cultural materials for Native and 
multi-cultural programs. She has provided 
hundi eds of workshops nationwide which focus on 
effective strategies for Native and multi-cultural 
education. Ms. Butterfield is currently the Indian 
Education/Civil Rights Specialist for the Oregon 
Department of Education. 

Floy C. Pepper, (Creek) has been an educator 
for 51 years - as a teacher in Bureau of Indian 
Affairs Schools, public schools, as a counselor, ad- 
ministrator of Special Education, college professor, 
speaker, workshop presenter, and writer. She co- 
authored Maintaining Sanity in the Classroom, 
with Dr. Rudolf Dreikurs and Bronia Grunwald. 
Floy is presently co-chairman of the Multicul- 
tural/Multiethnic Education Task Force and the 
Indian Curriculum Committee for Portland Public 
Schools, Portland, Oregon. 



9 

ERIC 



/ .) 



END 



U.S. Dept. of Education 

Office of Educational 
Research and Improvement (OERI) 



ERIC 

Date Filmed 
August 8, 1992 

ERIC 



