Proceedings of 

The Rural Early Childhood Forum 
On American Indian and Alaska 
Native Early Learning 

July 28-29, 2005 

William J. Clinton Presidential Center 
Little Rock, Arkansas 




The National Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initiatives 
Mississippi State University Early Childhood Institute 

The American Indian Leadership Program 
The Center on Rural Education and Communities 
Pennsylvania State University 



Proceedings 
Of the 

The Rural Early Childhood Forum 
On American Indian and Alaska Native Early Learning 
July 28-29, 2005 

William J. Clinton Presidential Center 
Little Rock, Arkansas 



Sponsors 

The National Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initiatives 
Mississippi State University Early Childhood Institute 

The American Indian Leadership Program 
The Center on Rural Education and Communities 
Pennsylvania State University 

Co-Sponsor 

Southwestern Electric Power Company 




* National Center 

• Rural Early Childhood 

Learning Initiatives 

Mississippi State University 

Early Childhood Institute 



Citation: National Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initiatives. 
(2006). Proceedings of the Rural Early Childhood Forum on American Indian and 
Alaska Native Early Eearning, July 28-29, 2005, Eittle Rock, AK (Rural Early 
Childhood Report No. 2). Mississippi State, MS: Mississippi State University 
Early Childhood Institute. 

Forum Chair 

Cathy Grace, Ed.D. 

Professor and Director 

National Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initiatives 
Mississippi State University Early Childhood Institute 

Editor 

Eli z abeth F. Shores, M.A.P.H. 

Senior Research Associate 

National Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initiatives 
Mississippi State University Early Childhood Institute 

Design and Production 

Lynn Bell 

Multimedia Producer 

National Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initiatives 
Mississippi State University Early Childhood Institute 

(c) 2006 Mississippi State University 

On the cover: Kipnuk (c) Barry Lindley 1999. 



Mississippi State University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, 
religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation or group affiliation, age, dis- 
ability, or veteran status. 

The contents of this report were developed under Grant # P116Z05-0056 by the U.S. 
Department of Education. However, the contents do not necessarily represent the policy 
of the Department of Education, and the reader should not assume endorsement by the 
Federal Government. 





CONTENTS 



INTRODUCTION 

Assessing the State of the Knowledge; 

American Indian and Alaska Native Rural Early Childhood 
Education 

Kai A. Schafft, Susan C. Faircloth, and Nicole L. Thompson 1 

FORUM PROGRAM COMMITTEE 12 

AGENDA 13 

PAPERS 

Early Childhood Educational Opportunities for American Indian 
and Alaska Native Children and Families 

Tarajean Yaypie-Mintc^ 16 

The Flealth and Development of American Indian and Alaska 
Native Children in relationship to Reservation and Rural/Urban 
Residence 

Taurel S . Endfield 38 

Effective Early Education Programs that Promote the Learning 
of the English Language and Tribal Languages and Cultures 

NilaM. Rinehart 55 

Transitions of American Indian and Alaska Native Children from 
Pre-school to Kindergarten 

Cheryl Clay 79 

American Indian and Alaska Native School Readiness 

Nicole L. Thompson, Margaret A. Tope, and Jeanne Holland 100 

Young American Indian / Alaskan Native Children with 
Disabilities: Implications for Policy, Research, and Practice 

Susan C. Fair cloth 114 

American Indian and Alaska Native Early Childhood Family 
Involvement: A Review of the Literature 

SusanRae Banks-Joseph and Eaurie D. McCubbin 132 

School Leaders 

Roger Bordeaux 155 



PARTICIPANTS 



173 




INTRODUCTION 



Introduction 

Assessing the State of the Knowledge: 

American Indian and Alaska Native Rural Early Childhood 

Education 

Kai A. Schafft, Susan C. Faircloth, and Nicole L. Thompson 

Over the course of the history of the United States, American 
Indians and Alaska Natives have consistently remained among the 
most socio-economically disadvantaged groups along an array of 
indicators from income and employment, health care and life ex- 
pectancy, to educational attainment (Gonzales, 2003). Despite these 
challenges, American Indians and Alaska Natives have demonstrated 
remarkable resiliency (see Endfield’s contribution and Banks-Joseph 
& McCubbin’s contribution, these proceedings). Despite the threats 
posed by disease, poverty and concerted efforts to eradicate native 
culture and language, Native communities, along with their languages 
and traditional cultures, continue to persist. According to census 
figures, at the beginning of the 20 th century, American Indians num- 
bered about 237,000. By the end of the 20 th century, however, that 
figure had increased to just under 2.5 million (Gonzales, 2003). Na- 
tive communities have been able to maintain traditional beliefs and 
cultural practices in the face of an often brutal history of European 
colonization and government assimilationist policies (Banks-Joseph 
& McCubbin, 2005; Gallegos, Villenas, & Brayboy, 2003; Johnson, 
2003). Although social and economic conditions for American In- 
dians and Alaska Natives have generally improved over the last 100 
years, in comparison to other groups. Native people still lag behind 
on many social, economic and educational indicators (Snipp, 1995). 

Arguably, improving educational opportunities must be a main 
thrust in the effort to improve the life chances of American Indian 
and Alaska Native children, increase community vitality, and preserve 
native languages and cultural traditions and practices. Early childhood 
education is a crucial first step in increasing the chances of educa- 
tional success, both in the short-term and the long-run. Research 




KAI A. SCHAFFT, SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH, AND NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



since the 1960s has documented short-term benefits including in- 
creased cognitive and social skills as well as increases in later academic 
achievement. Similarly, early childhood education has been tied to 
decreased referrals to special education, and decreased grade reten- 
tion (Barnett, 1998; Bryant & Maxwell, 1997; Illinois State Board of 
Education, 1985; Nieman & Gastright, 1981; Yoshikawa, 1995). 

These findings are important to consider in light of the relation- 
ship between educational attainment and economic security in later 
life. Census data show that the average annual earnings for college 
graduates is $45,400, as compared with $25,900 for high school 
graduates and only $18,900 for adults who never completed high 
school. Additionally, these earning inequalities have increased over 
the past 25 years, indicating the growing significance of education 
for socioeconomic well-being (Day & Newburger, 2002). The gap 
in academic achievement between Native and non-Native peoples 
thankfully has narrowed in the last 30 years. However, as Ward 
(2005) noted, as recently as 1980, over 8.4 % of Native children did 
not complete fifth grade as opposed to 2.6 % of Whites. American 
Indian and Alaska Native youth remain at the highest risk for high 
school dropout of any racial or ethnic group, and are much less 
likely to complete a four-year degree or higher than White or African 
American college students (Ward & Snipp, 1996). 

The papers in this volume join other commentators in noting 
the marked gaps in research on Indian Education (see, for example, 
Deyhle & Swisher, 1997). Regardless of the logistic, cultural, and 
other challenges that may be to some degree responsible for this gap, 
the lack of research-based knowledge in this area is to the detriment 
of Indian educators and the Indian communities within which they 
work. The absence of research, however, is not due to a lack of 
important unanswered questions. 

Research on American Indian Education: 

Addressing the Gaps 

The National Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initia- 



2 




INTRODUCTION 



tives, known as Rural Early Childhood; Penn State’s American Indian 
Leadership Program (AILP); and Penn State’s Center for Rural Educa- 
tion and Communities (CREC) in 2004 began discussing what might 
be done to address these research needs and gaps, particularly with 
regards to early childhood education and educational leadership. Our 
discussions resulted in the convening of an “experts” conference, 
the Rural Early Childhood Forum on Native American and Alaska Native 
Early Eearning, of which this proceeding is one result. The forum 
was comprised of academic researchers and faculty. Native educa- 
tors, Native early childhood education specialists, and community 
leaders with a strong interest in and concern for rural Indian early 
childhood education. 

Participants in this forum were invited to revisit the American 
Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda (Strang, Von 
Glatz, & Hammer, 2002; Strang & Von Glatz, 2001) that was pre- 
pared in response to President Clinton’s 1998 White House Executive 
Order 13096 on Indian Education. Our aim was twofold: first, to 
assess the current state of rural Indian early childhood education, 
with an emphasis on the years prior to formal school entry, as well as 
educational leadership as it pertains to rural Indian early childhood 
education; and second, to discuss how research might be initiated 
that would help to fulfill the goals of the research agenda. 

The forum took place July 28-29, 2005 at the William J. Clinton 
Center in Little Rock, Arkansas. This was the first academic meeting 
ever held at the Clinton Center. More than 30 people, recognized as 
experts in their research/issue areas, participated in the forum. Par- 
ticipants presented papers synthesizing research gaps in key areas of 
Indian Education, and participated in roundtable discussions to de- 
termine a best course of research, partnership and action, identifying 
the most needed areas of research as well as strategies for partnering 
with communities and leveraging resources to carry out this work. 

Why Rural? 

A strong focus of the forum was the discussion of how key 



3 




KAI A. SCHAFFT, SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH, AND NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



issues related to early childhood education might play out differ- 
ently across rural and urban contexts, with a specific focus on rural 
settings. Although there are concentrations of Native populations in 
large urban areas such as New York City and Los Angeles (Ogunwole, 
2002), almost one million American Indians or Alaska Natives reside 
in nonmetropolitan and/ or reservation settings (U.S. Census Bureau, 
2004), where much of Indian education occurs. However, research has 
also shown that the nonmetropolitan location is associated with de- 
creased educational attainment. Snipp (1989), for example, has shown 
that the percentage of American Indian and Alaska Native students 
falling behind by grade level differs significantly by location. Evidence 
shows dropout rates are also increased in nonmetropolitan areas 
(Ward, 1995, 2005). Challenges in education include shortages of 
highly qualified teachers, higher costs for transporting students (as 
well as the time spent by students on school buses), and the challenges 
of meeting the requirements of the No Child Left Behind legislation 
in the face of often limited fiscal and human resources. There also is 
less access to programming and social services in rural areas, as well 
as decreased economic opportunities, increased concentrations of 
poverty and limited political power relative to urban areas. 

On the other hand, rural and reservation settings and the tribal 
communities located there may represent valuable opportunities 
for preserving traditional cultures and knowledge that have been 
demonstrated as vital for increasing academic achievement among 
Native children and for decreasing dropout rates (Kushman & Barn- 
hardt, 2001; Ward, 2005). Recognizing the strong interrelationships 
between school and community and building these interrelationships 
into educational practice can yield powerful results in educational 
improvement, community vitality, and preservation of traditional 
cultural beliefs and practices (Kushman & Barnhardt, 2001). Under- 
standing the specific contexts in which Indian education takes place, 
including both the challenges and assets posed by the rural context, 
is a crucial part of developing a better understanding of promising 
models and practices to improve the life chances of Native children, 



4 




INTRODUCTION 



and of ensuring the continued social, cultural and economic vitality 
of the communities of which they are a part. 

Assessing the State of the Knowledge: 

Rural Early Childhood Indian Education 

The papers that follow in this volume represent an important sum- 
mation of the state of the knowledge on rural early childhood educa- 
tion as it concerns American Indian and Alaska Native children. 

Yazzie-Mintz addresses two central questions. First, to what ex- 
tent do Native children and families in reservation, rural, urban and 
other settings have early childhood education opportunities available 
to them? Second, how might an appropriate and effective network 
of tribal early childhood programs be organized, especially in rural 
settings? To address the first question, Yazzie-Mintz uses census data. 
Head Start Statistics and Children’s Defense Fund reports. In aggre- 
gate, Native children appear to have slightly decreased access to early 
childhood education opportunities in comparison to other children. 
However, she observes that too often aggregated data hide differences 
across tribal contexts. “Scientific” data collection procedures tend 
to obscure inter-tribal and community-level differences; while more 
targeted studies might have greater potential to yield meaningful data 
for American Indian and Alaska Native communities. 

Endfield discusses the heightened risk of a variety of health prob- 
lems for Native children, noting that these problems are embedded 
within a history of social, political and economic marginalization 
associated with western expansion and European conquest. Im- 
proved access to health care and government programs has helped 
American Indian populations to grow and enjoy improved health, 
yet serious problems still remain that affect Native children including 
diabetes and fetal alcohol syndrome, compounded by broader social 
inequalities. Effectively addressing these problems will remain a chal- 
lenge in rural areas where access to health services remains limited. 

Rinehart examines promising practices in early childhood educa- 



5 




KAI A. SCHAFFT, SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH, AND NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



tion programs, particularly with regard to both instruction in English 
(as a first or second language), and effective methods of preserving 
and/ or revitalizing native language and culture. Her discussion results 
from both her review of research literature as well as her firsthand 
experience developing and implementing a language revitalization 
program for the Central Council of the Tlingit and Haida Indian 
Tribes’ Head Start in Juneau, Alaska. Her paper emphasizes the 
importance of culturally appropriate early childhood education for 
American Indian and Alaska Native children for developing a strong 
sense of cultural identity as well as for providing the foundations 
for later academic achievement. At the same time she notes that 
little research exists as to the effectiveness of different approaches 
for Native children, and much of what does exist does not address 
inter-tribal differences that might affect the appropriateness and/ or 
effectiveness of different programs. 

Clay explores the cultural and language discontinuities associated 
with Native children entering into kindergarten. She discusses the 
programs preschools and elementary schools use to support Native 
families as their children transition between preschool and elementary 
school, emphasizing the parental role of “cultural mediator” and the 
importance of involving multiple stakeholders including educators, 
parents and community members in the transition process. Ultimately 
however, she concludes that there is a disconcerting lack of com- 
prehensive research investigating transition models, particularly for 
Native children. 

Thompson, Pope, and Holland investigate the issue of whether 
promoting school readiness among American Indian and Alaska Na- 
tive children through current mainstream developmentally appropriate 
practices may conflict with Native traditions and culture. To this end 
they address two central questions. First, how must early childhood 
programs be structured so that they foster the fundamental skills 
that children are expected to have when they enter school, and sec- 
ond, how effective are these early childhood programs and activities 
for promoting school readiness for Native children? Compounding 
the debate over what exactly constitutes school readiness and how 



6 




INTRODUCTION 



this concept should be defined, Thompson et al., like Yazzie-Mintz, 
point to the problems of generalizing across groups, and argue that 
“programs and assessments which address the school readiness of 
Native children must also address the cultural differences of these 
children” [pp. 100-113, these proceedings] . 

Faircloth addresses two main questions. First, how is the incidence 
of disabilities among infant and pre-school aged American Indian 
and Alaska Native children related to differing residential contexts in- 
cluding rural (reservation and non-reservation), peri-urban and urban 
residence? Second, how can early childhood programs accommodate 
Native children with disabilities? While the disproportionate repre- 
sentation of Native students in special education programs within 
public and BIA-operated or funded schools is well-documented, little 
is known about the status of these children prior to their enrollment 
into the educational system. 

Banks-Joseph and McCubbin discuss American Indian and Alaska 
Native community involvement in their children’s schools and pro- 
grams and the community and school-level factors that appear to 
be associated with involvement and best practices specific to Native 
children promoting family and community involvement in early child- 
hood education programs. The authors find that the research literature 
in this area is extremely limited, especially when narrowed only to 
Native children. Following Johnson (2003), they argue that the lack 
of research on family involvement in American Indian and Alaska 
Native early childhood education may be due in part to research ap- 
proaches that fail to take into account indigenous perspectives leading 
to an appropriate understanding of family involvement. 

Finally, Bordeaux discusses appropriate educational leadership 
practices in rural and reservation-based schools and communities 
serving American Indian and Alaska Native children. He argues that 
effective leaders must have an intimate understanding of local com- 
munity culture, including local politics, family structure and traditional 
practices of communication. 



7 




KAI A. SCHAFFT, SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH, AND NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



Conclusions: 

Summarizing the State of the Knowledge 

The most overwhelming result of the forum was the consistent 
identification of the lack of research in all areas of American In- 
dian and Alaska Native early care and education. All of the authors 
experienced difficulty when attempting to identify data-sets that 
contained information about Native children. Most quantitative data 
available related to early childhood education is not disaggregated to 
tribal and community levels. Although case studies and ethnographic 
research exits at more disaggregated levels, the generalizability of 
these findings remains limited as does the capacity for generating 
appropriate programmatic responses to American Indian and Alaska 
Native early childhood education needs. Quite simply, more research 
is needed — most of the questions were only partially answerable due 
to the lack of quantitative and qualitative data. 

Further, the need for culturally sensitive research abounds. Cur- 
rent research practices must respect Native traditions and policies. 
Gone are the days when a lone researcher could enter an American 
Indian or Alaska Native community to document what the Native 
people do. Research today must actively involve the people being 
researched — American Indian and Alaska Native people must be in- 
volved in the research process — research can no longer be conducted 
on Native people, but must now be conducted with Native people. 
The extensive amount of research needed in Native communities is 
going to require cooperation and participation from a variety of enti- 
ties. Multiethnic research teams, researcher-community collaboration, 
and community partners must actively engage in research processes 
to eliminate the existing gaps in knowledge about the early care, 
development, and education of American Indian and Alaska Native 
people. We hope that this forum, as well as these proceedings, helps 
to move these efforts forward. 




INTRODUCTION 



References 

Banks-Joseph, S., & McCubbin, L. D. (2005). American Indian and 
Alaska Native early childhood family involvement: A review of 
the literature. In National Center for Early Childhood Learning 
Initiatives, Proceedings of the Rural Early Childhood Forum on Ameri- 
can Indian and Alaska Native Early Eearning, July 28-29, 2005, Tittle 
Rock, AR, (pp. 132-154). (Rural Early Childhood Report No. 2). 
Mississippi State, MS: Mississippi State University Early Child- 
hood Institute. 

Barnett, W S. (1998). Long-term effects of early childhood programs 
on cognitive and school outcomes. In WS. Barnett & S. S. Boocock 
(Eds.), Early care and education for children in poverty: Promises, programs 
and long-term results (pp. 11-44). Albany, NY: State University of 
New York Press. 

Bryant, D. & Maxwell, K. (1997). The effectiveness of early inter- 
vention for disadvantaged children. In: M.J. Guralnick, (Ed.), The 
effectiveness of early intervention (pp. 23-46). Baltimore, MD: Paul H. 
Brookes Publishing. 

Day, J. C., & Newburger, E. C. (2002). The big payoff: Educational at- 
tainment and synthetic estimates of work-life earnings. Current Popula- 
tion Reports P23-210. Washington, DC: United States Census 
Bureau. 

Deyhle, D., & Swisher, K. (1997). Research in American Indian and 
Alaska Native education: From assimilation to self-determina- 
tion. In M. W Apple, (Ed.), Review of Research in Education , 22 
(pp. 113-194). Washington, DC: American Educational Research 
Association. 

Executive Order No. 13096, 63 FR 42681 (1998). 

Gonzales, A. A. (2003). American Indians: Their contemporary 
reality and future trajectory. In D. L. Brown & L. E. Swanson 
(Eds.), Challenges for Rural America in the twenty-First century (pp. 43- 
56). University Park: Penn State. 



9 




KAI A. SCHAFFT, SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH, AND NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



Gallegos, B., Villenas, S., & Brayboy, B. (2003). Indigenous educa- 
tion in the Americas: Diasporic identities, epistemologies, and 
postcolonial spaces. 'Educational Studies , 34(2), 143-146. 

Illinois State Board of Education. (1985). Effectiveness of early childhood 
education programs: A review of research. Springfield, IL: Department 
of Planning, Research and Evaluation. ERIC Document No. ED 
260 825. 

Johnson, G. G. (2003). Resilience, a story: A postcolonial position 
from which to (re)view Indian education framed in ‘at risk’ ideol- 
ogy. Educational Studies, 34(2), 182-197. 

Kushman, J. W., & Barnhardt, R. (2001). Reforming education from 
the inside-out: A study of community engagement and educa- 
tional reform in rural Alaska. Journal of Research in Rural Education, 
17(1), 12-26. 

Nieman, R. H., & Gastright, J. F. (1981). The long term effects of 
Title I preschool and all-day kindergarten. Phi Delta Kappan, 63, 
184-185. 

Ogunwole, S. U. (2002). The American Indian and Alaska Native popula- 
tion: 2000. Census 2000 Brief: C2KBR/01-15. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Census Bureau. 

Snipp, C. M. (1989). American Indians: The first of this land. New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation. 

Snipp, C. M. (1995). American Indian economic development. In E. 
N. Castle (Ed.), The changingAmerican countryside (pp. 303-3 17). Law- 
rence: University of Kansas Press. 

Strang, W., & Von Glatz, A. (2001). American Indian and Alaska 
Native education research agenda. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart- 
ments of Education. 

Strang, W., Von Glatz, A., & Hammer, P. C. (2002). Setting the 
agenda: American Indian and Alaska Native education research 
priorities. (EDO-RC-02-14.) Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearing- 
house on Rural Education and Small Schools. 



10 




INTRODUCTION 



U.S. Census Bureau. (2004, December). American Indian and Alaska 
Native Summary File 2000 Census of Population and Housing. 
AIANSF-01. 

Ward, C. (1995). American Indian high school completion in rural 
southeastern Montana. Rural Sociology , 60(3), 416-434. 

Ward, C. (2005). Native Americans in the school system. Lanham, MD: 
Altamira Press. 

Ward, C., & Snipp, C. M. (1 996) . An introduction to American Indian 
human capital and development. In W C. Ward & C. M. Snipp 
(Eds.), American Indian human capital and economic development (pp. 
1-6). Greenwich, CT: JAI. 

Yoshikawa, H. (1995). Long-term effects of early childhood pro- 
grams on social outcomes and delinquency. Future of Children 
5(3), 51-75. 



11 




FORUM PROGRAM COMMITTEE 



Nicole L. Thompson, Ph.D. (Menominee/Mohican) 

Assistant Professor and Coordinator 
American Indian and Alaska Native Initiative 
National Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initiatives 
Mississippi State University Early Childhood Institute 

Susan C. Faircloth, Ph.D. (Coharie) 

Assistant Professor 

Departments of Education Policy Studies and Special Education 
The Pennsylvania State University 

Kai A. Schafft, Ph.D. 

Department of Education Policy Studies 
The Pennsylvania State University 



12 




AGENDA 



Thursday, July 28, 2005 

9:00 a.m. Convene 

Welcome 

Elizabeth F. Shores 

Greeting 

David Alsobrook 
Director 

William J. Clinton Presidential Library 
Prayer 

Winona Sample (Red Lake Chippewa) 

Opening Remarks 

Cathy Grace, Co-chair 

John Tippeconic, (Comanche), Co-chair 

9:30- 10:00 a.m. Opening Discussion 

Julie Quaid, Pigeon Big Crow, 

Roger Bordeaux 

10:00-10:20 a.m. Presentation: Resources 

Tarajean Yazzie-Mintz 

10:20-10:35 a.m. Response 

Linda Kills Crow, Linda Smith 

10:35-10:55 a.m. Presentation: Health 

Laurel Endfield 



13 




10:55-11:10 a.m. 



Responses 

Cheryl Wilson, Julie Quaid 



11:10-11:30 a.m. Presentation: Language 

Nila Rinehart 

11:30-11 :45 a.m. Responses 

Gloria Sly, Tarajean Yazzie-Mintz 

1 1 :45 a.m. - 1 2: 1 5 p.m. Break 

1 2: 1 5 - 1 : 1 5 p.m. Luncheon 

“No Child Left Rebind” 

Nicole Bowman 

‘"The Indian Health Service” 

Cheryl Wilson 

1:15-1:30 p.m. Break 

1:30-1:50 p.m. Presentation: Transitions 

Cheryl Clay 

1:50-2:10 p.m. Responses 

Rick St. Germaine, Dwight Hare 

2:10-2:30 p.m. Presentation: School Readiness 

Nicole Thompson, Margaret Pope, and 
Jeanne Holland 

2:30-2:50 p.m. Responses 

Cheryl Clay, Pigeon Big Crow 



14 




2:50-3:10 p.m. 

3:10-3:25 p.m. 

3:25-4:00 p.m. 

4:00 p.m. 

Friday, July 29, 2005 
9:00 a.m. 

9:15-9:35 a.m. 

9:35-9:50 a.m. 

9:50-10:10 a.m. 

10:10-10:25 a.m. 

10:25-10:45 a.m. 
10:45 a.m.-Noon 
Noon 



Presentation: Special Education 

Susan Faircloth 

Response 
Susan Banks 

Discussion 

Recess 



Reconvene 

Presentation: Family and Community Involvement 

Susan Banks 

Responses 

Debbie Lente-Jojola, Pigeon Big Crow 

Presentation: School Leaders 
Roger Bordeaux 

Responses 

Grayson Noley, David Beaulieu 

Break 

Discussion 

Adjourn 



15 




TARAJEAN YAZZIE-MINTZ 



Early Childhood Educational Opportunities 
For American Indian and Alaska Native Children and Families 

Tarajean Yazzie-Mintz 
Indiana University 

There exist economic, social, and cultural costs to acquiring access 
to quality early childhood education for American Indian and Alaska 
Native (AI/AN) families. Even if individual families have the financial 
background to “invest” in early education, the challenge remains for 
an increased portion of American Indian and Alaska Native families 
to acquire the benefits of an early childhood education. To help par- 
ents make informed choices among available program possibilities, 
research needs to be conducted to investigate whether children from 
different economic, language, and cultural backgrounds respond dif- 
ferently to early childhood education in general or to specific program 
models (Cotton & Conklin, 1998). 

Access to early education is an issue that intimately involves both 
child and parent. Access to early education requires parents, educators, 
and researchers to carefully critique existing educational structures 
and philosophies in order to focus attention on accessing quality early 
education. Ultimately, economic, social, and cultural investments need 
to be made in order to bring forth new energy and possibilities for 
American Indian and Alaska Native families residing in diverse social 
and cultural contexts. 

In this paper, I present and discuss issues of access to early child- 
hood education and educational opportunities in terms of American 
Indian/Alaska Native economic, social, and cultural investments. 
I will examine research on access to early childhood education in 
general and discuss descriptive demographic data, extracted from the 
Decennial Census 2000 and other available sources that may include 
American Indian and Alaska Native early childhood education data. 
The following questions guide my inquiry: 



16 




EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 



1 . To what extent do American Indian and Alaska N ative children 
and their families in reservation, rural, urban, and other set- 
tings have early childhood education opportunities available 
to them? 

2. How can a network of tribal early childhood programs be 
organized for action, particularly in rural settings? 

Saluja, Early, and Clifford (2002) report that overall the number 
of children attending early childhood programs has been increasing. 
What the increase means in terms of AI/AN children and families 
can be explored by examining descriptive data and existing research 
literature focused on various tribal nations and early childhood 
education programs. Currently, there is little research that examines 
in-depth the current state of early childhood education for AI/AN 
children (Cahape & Demmert, 2003). Cahape and Demmert found, 
in their review of American Indian early childhood education, that 
research studies tend to focus generously on educational evaluations 
of programs for accountability purposes and on health domains , 
and very little on examining access to programs. 

Moreover, the existing research lacks reliable statistics about 
how many AI/AN children and families are served by the different 
types of programs. The lack of information and studies may be due 
to the fact that until the 2000 Census, data specifically focused on 
AI/AN populations were not available, not collected, collected by 
some tribes and not others, or were not easily accessible for analysis. 
However, with increased technological advances, opportunities to 
access meaningful national data are improving. Moreover, early child- 
hood programs and centers are able to communicate information in 
ways that are readily available in published reports (i.e., Head Start) 
on the Internet. On the other hand many of these published reports 
include only those groups with significant numbers or percentages 
of the U.S. population, such as White, African American, and, more 
recently, the drastically increasing, Hispanic/Latino population. 



17 




TARAJEAN YAZZIE-MINTZ 



Access to Early Childhood Education: 

Review of Research 

To understand access in terms of early childhood education, it 
is important to examine the general early education literature on ac- 
cess and benefits of early education, and from this work hone in on 
questions related to AI/AN populations. Researchers have reported 
that pre-kindergarten education and experiences are important for 
school readiness for both child and parent (Nissani, 1993). Specifi- 
cally, a national research sample indicated that “attending Elead Start, 
prekindergarten, or other center-based preschool programs was 
linked to higher emerging literacy scores in 4-year-olds. This corre- 
lation remained statistically significant when other child and family 
characteristics were taken into account. This benefit of preschool at- 
tendance accrued to children from both high-risk and low-risk family 
backgrounds” (Zill et al., 1995). In a review of research, Cotton and 
Conklin (1998) reported that parents whose children were preschool 
graduates were more likely to be involved in their child’s education 
(Lazar & Darlington, 1982), had high expectations for their child 
(Consortium for Longitudinal Studies, 1983; Featherstone, 1986), 
and felt comfortable contacting teachers more often (Featherstone, 
1986). Access to such early childhood educational programs has 
been linked to income level of parents (Svestka, 1995). Interestingly, 
Schumacher and Greenberg (1999) and the Children’s Aid Society 
(1999) found that access to quality child care was very limited for 
families leaving welfare. 

Research focused on early education for language minority stu- 
dents suggests that education should be inclusive of family. For ex- 
ample, Nissani (1993) suggests that in order to “promote the healthy 
self-esteem of each and every young child, early childhood education 
programs must be thoughtfully designed to serve both parents and 
children - all the more so for those who speak a language other than 
English at home”. 

The 1990 decennial U.S. Census revealed, “participation rates in 
preschool, including both public and private programs, are 81% of 



18 




EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 



5-year-olds, 50% of 4-year-olds, and 30% of 3-year-olds” (Svestka, 
1995). Interestingly, when Svestka examined available data on fi- 
nancing preschool for all children, she found that the U.S. provides 
free education targeted “exclusively for the poorest children and for 
disabled children, while in other countries all children are included 
in the regular preschool classes, and children with various special 
needs receive additional benefits.” Moreover, the U.S. is believed to 
be far more financially capable of investing in the education of young 
children than other countries such as France and Italy. However, 
France and Italy reported 1 00% and 92% participation in preschool 
respectively. This information highlights our greatest challenge of 
persuading the general U.S. public and government to invest in high 
quality^ early education for young children residing in the U.S. If in 
the U.S. we are unable to create opportunities for the general U.S. 
population at large to achieve 1 00% participation in early childhood 
education, the question becomes: Which populations within the U.S. 
are not receiving quality early education? 

Access to early childhood education can be defined in terms of 
ability or motivation to acquire programmatic and structured school- 
ing opportunities or informal learning opportunities provided through 
socialization with family and interactions with a cultural or social com- 
munity. The majority of the existing research discusses educational 
opportunities in terms of formal structured programs, such as early 
childhood learning centers, and programs offered by non-profit and 
for-profit organizations (independent for-profit, religious affiliate, 
Head Start, public school, independent non-profit or other public 
agency). In this paper I treat informal non-school learning and so- 
cialization provided by parents, family, and community as important 
considerations in examining the question of access to early learning 
opportunities. For example, a specific tribal nation may set priority on 
early Native language learning opportunities with village elders - and 
having access to this type of education may be just as important as 
having access to opportunities in structured school settings. 



19 




TARAJEAN YAZZIE-MINTZ 



Descriptive Data 

There are very limited sources of descriptive data specifically 
focused on AI/AN early childhood education. There are numerous 
reports in the form of program evaluations which may provide local 
and tribal specific information - certainly tribes and early childhood 
educational programs serving Native children would benefit from an 
in-depth examination of these reports or a quantitative study which 
provides an overview of tribal access to various types of early educa- 
tion opportunities. In an effort to provide an overview of the existing 
knowledge, I chose to focus on three main sources of data: Census 
2000, Head Start Statistics, and reports generated by the Children’s 
Defense Fund. These three sources are widely used in research and 
advocacy work related to early education and populations served by 
such programs. Finally, by examining reports and descriptive data 
provided by these three organizations, I could share the strengths 
and weaknesses of the existing knowledge in terms of generating 
researchable questions for future work. 

Census 2000. The U.S. Census American Indian and Alaska Na- 
tive Summary File (AIANSF) (U.S. Census Bureau, 2000) provides 
both an overview and tribally specific information about enrollment 
in school by age and by school type: nursery school and preschool. 
Using the AIANSF data tool, I extracted sample data focused on two 
particular populations: 1) American Indian and Alaska Native 3- and 
4- year olds enrolled in school, and 2) children enrolled in public and 
private nursery/ preschool. These two samples of data were treated 
as different inquiries because children enrolled in public and private 
nursery and preschool include children who may be older than 3- and 
4- years old. The two sets of information were extracted to highlight 
different aspects of early education access; general enrollment by 
specific age grouping and nursery/ preschool by public and private 
school status. Both sets of data are important to building a fuller 
understanding of access to early education program type. 

The AIANSF data sample showed that of the total number of 



20 




EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 



AI/AN children who were 3 and 4 years old in 2000, there were ap- 
proximately 37,492 3- and 4-year-olds enrolled in school, compared to 
44,675 3- and 4-year-olds not enrolled in school (see Figure 1). When 
this same population was compared with the total U.S. non-Native 
population of 3- and 4-year-olds (see Figure 2), 46% of AI/AN 

3- and 4-year-olds were enrolled compared to 49% of the children 
in the total U.S. population. By contrast, 54% of the AI/AN 3-and 

4- year-olds were not enrolled in preschool, compared to 51% of the 
3-and 4-year-olds in the total U.S. population. In the U.S. population 
about half were enrolled and half were not enrolled. In the AI/AN 

46000 
44000 
42000 
40000 
38000 
36000 
34000 
32000 

Figure 1. School enrollment status for all American Indians and Alaska 
Natives, 3-4 years yld. (Source: U.S. Census 2000 - American Indian and 
Alaska Native Summary File (AIANSF) - Sample Data.) 





Figure 2. Enrollment in nursery school, preschool by race as a percent of 
total age group, 3- years old. (Source: U.S. Census 2000 - American Indian 
and Alaska Native Summary File (AIANSF) - Sample Data.) 



21 





TARAJEAN YAZZIE-MINTZ 



the picture is much different; a greater percent were not enrolled 
than were enrolled. 

I include Table 1 to show data broken down by selected tribes 
with populations greater than 1 0,000 members; data is available to do 
more careful analyses of enrollments in early childhood programs by 
tribe. Note that for some tribes, such as Pine Ridge, the enrollment 
picture differs from the overall picture of AI/AN children — more 
children are enrolled than are not enrolled. Other tribes more closely 
mirror the overall picture in which a greater number of children are 
not enrolled. This chart also provides a breakdown by gender allow- 
ing the possibility to analyze differences and trends between male 
and female 3- and 4- year olds. Additionally it is possible to look at 
breakdowns of programs by type of program: public and private. 

Table 2 breaks down enrollments by both gender and public 
and private nursery/ preschool (note that this table includes children 



Tribe 


Total 

Population 


Population 3 
years and over: 
Male; Enrolled 
in school; 3 
and 4 years 


Population 3 
years and over: 
Male; Not 
enrolled in 
school; 3 and 
4 years 


Population 3 
years and over: 
Female; 
Enrolled in 
school; 3 and 
4 years 


Population 3 
years and over: 
Female; Not 
enrolled in 
school; 3 and 
4 years 


Gila River 
Reservation, AZ 


10317 


55 


145 


62 


147 


Fort Apache 
Reservation, AZ 


11597 


114 


103 


83 


107 


Pine Ridge 
Reservation and 
Off-Reservation 
Trust Land, SD — 
NE 


14255 


186 


143 


141 


147 


Chickasaw OTSA, 
OK 


22378 


128 


229 


274 


233 


Choctaw OTSA, 
OK 


29357 


231 


273 


231 


332 


Creek OTSA, OK 


49564 


331 


531 


385 


542 


Cherokee OTSA, 
OK 


74739 


594 


931 


561 


800 


Navajo Nation 
Reservation and 
Off-Reservation 
Trust Land, AZ — 
NM — UT 


174847 


1468 


1792 


1656 


1610 


Total 


387054 


3107 


4145 


3393 


3918 



Table 1. Selected tribes (total population > 10,000) by 3- and 4- year olds enrolled and not 
enrolled in nursery school or preschool. (Source: U.S. Census 2000 - American Indian and 
Alaska Native Summary File (AIANSF) - Sample Data.) 



22 



EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 



older than 4 years old). It is clear that the great majority of AI/AN 
children enrolled in school are enrolled in public nursery/ preschool 
programs. This points to a greater responsibility for tribal and U.S. 
governments to provide high quality programs, as most of the chil- 
dren are enrolled in public programs. 



Head Start. A recent report released by the National Head Start 
Association in the form of a fact sheet brief indicates that of the 
1,072,014 children and pregnant mothers reported as receiving ser- 
vices in 2003, 11% were AI/AN, Asian, Native Hawaiian or other 
Pacific Islander, Bi- or Multiracial, and other (see Table 3). Statistics 
provided in the brief did not disaggregate and distinguish data by 





Male 


Female 


Total 


Enrolled In 
nursery school; 
preschool 


25,610 


23,672 


49,282 


Enrolled In 
nursery school; 
preschool; public 


20,594 


18,979 


39,573 


Enrolled in 
nursery school; 
preschool; private 


5,016 


4,693 


9,709 



Table 2. AI/AN enrollment status: Male and female by public and private 
nursery/preschool enrollment. (Source: U.S. Census 2000 - American Indian 
and Alaska Native Summary File (AIANSF) - Sample Data.) 



Ethnicity 


Children % 


Staff % 


White 


35% 


42% 


Black 


27% 


27% 


Latino 


25% 


21% 


American Indian 
or Alaska Native 


4% 


3% 


Biracial or 
Multiracial 


4% 


1% 


Asian 


1% 


2% 


Hawaiian/Pacific 

Islander 


1% 


1% 



Table 3. Early Head Start population, 2002, by ethnicity. (Source: Irish, K., 
Schumacher, R., & Lombardi, J. (2003). Serving America’s youngest: A snapshot 
of Early Head Start children, families, teachers, and programs in 2002. (Head 
Start Series Brief No. 3). Washington, DC: Center for Law and Social Policy. 



23 






TARAJEAN YAZZIE-MINTZ 

AI/AN only (for more information see the National Head Start As- 
sociation web site: http: / / www.nhsa.org.). The lack of disaggregated 
data for AI/AN children and families is overshadowed by attention 
paid to larger ethnic groups: White, Hispanic and African American, 
and by the need to generate “generalizable” research findings through 
national “scientific” studies. Targeted statistics revealing AI/AN 
access to early childhood programs and services provided by Head 
Start would be informative to a national research and program agenda 
focused on AI/AN early education. 

The national study indicates that the findings of this “probability 
national sample” of Head Start programs are generalizable to “all 
newly entering 3- and 4-year-olds in all Head Start Centers operating 
in 2002-03, except those serving only special populations (i.e., programs serv- 
ingprimarily only migrant, Native American, or Early Head Start children)” 
(Westat & others, 2005, p. 50, italics added for emphasis). When 
national studies exclude AI/AN children and families, it is nearly 
impossible to examine national Head Start data in terms of AI/AN 
early education provided by Head Start Centers and programs. The 
access to data on AI/AN students may become much more cumber- 
some as educational researchers will be forced to extract data by tribe 
through other venues. 

Children’s Defense Fund, 2005. In 2002-2003, 44.4% of the children 
enrolled in Head Start in Alaska were identified as American Indian or 
Alaska Native (2005a). In general, early childhood education centers in 
Alaska do not require teachers to participate in ECE pre-service, nor 
does the state require family child care homes to have similar pre-ser- 
vice in caring for young children. The child care provided to AI/AN 
children and other children in Alaska are provided by programs with 
teachers who, for the most part, are not exposed to pre-service in early 
childhood care and education and by programs that have low salaries, 
which the Children’s Defense Fund links to high teacher turnover. 
What this information signals is to carefully consider the quality of 
those programs to which AI/AN families have access, particularly 
if there exists high turnover in staff and little to no pre-service for 



24 




EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 



teachers providing care to young Native children. 

An interesting comparison provided by the Children’s Defense 
Fund: In the year 2000, the cost of child care was reportedly $6,019 
per child per year as compared to the annual cost of public college 
tuition, which was $2,855. Early child care costs more than one year 
of a college education! In another report, the Children’s Defense 
Fund (2005b) describes similar differences in annual costs for child 
care ($4,627) and college ($2,990) in North Dakota. This is relevant 
and important data because in the state of North Dakota, AI/AN 
as a group are reported as the second largest ethnic population, 
and comprised 11% of the total number of Head Start enrollees in 
North Dakota in 2003-2004. The reasons for the disparity in costs 
for early child care and college in Alaska and North Dakota were not 
discussed, only highlighted. 

If family income is correlated with access to high quality child care, 
we have reason to be concerned about the ability of Native families 
to sustain access to costly early childhood education. Researchers 
and early childhood education advocates must consider the economic 
challenges of providing every AI/AN child with a continuous and 
quality early learning experience. The North Dakota and Alaska 
examples are only two of many states in which tribal nations reside. 
The information provided by the Children’s Defense Fund provides 
evidence which motivates educational leaders and researchers to seek 
viable possibilities to create better educational investments in quality 
early education for AI/AN children. 

Factors Affecting Access to Early Childhood Education 

In this section, I attempt to speak about access in complex ways. 
Access is more than simply delivering a child to a physical location 
called preschool or day care. Access for parents and children must 
include knowing about the ways in which to interact, read (text and 
context), and critically engage in the structural and political aspects 
of the educational system. As I searched the Navajo Head Start 
Department’s web site (see http:/ / www.nnheadstart.org), I realized 



25 




TARAJEAN YAZZIE-MINTZ 



that in order to benefit from the great amount of knowledge and 
information posted on this site, parents must first have a computer 
with access to the Internet. Second, parents must be both computer 
literate and be literate in the English language in order to access this 
knowledge. And third, both of these characteristics - having a com- 
puter with Internet access and literacy in English - are connected with 
having sufficient income to sustain Internet access and educational 
attainment or background. 

I noticed that in order to enroll a child in the programs, parents 
must fill out what is called a “Head Start Recruitment Worksheet,” 
two pages of questions with notations that inform parents that filling 
out the form is not a guarantee that their child will be enrolled. This 
process requires the parent to know the entire process for enroll- 
ment, including the qualifications needed to be considered a viable 
participant. And in order to fill out the worksheet, parents must be 
able to read and write. 

I wondered about the effectiveness of the ways in which early 
education programs make themselves accessible to parents. This 
line of thought also led to questions about the current levels of 
literacy among American Indians and Alaska Natives, and whether 
or not there is a link to issues of access to quality early education. 
How many of the Native grandparents who care for grandchildren 
have sufficient opportunities to access early education institutions in 
meaningful ways? How does the fact that many grandparents do not 
speak English have an impact on access to early education? More than 
75% of the total number of parents who benefit from Early Head 
Start programs have little or no schooling past high school (Irish, 
Schumacher, & Lombardi, 2003). While this data was not disag- 
gregated by race, the percentage provides a snapshot of the overall 
challenges that may exist in terms of need for child care, and ability 
to access and interact with programs in effective ways. Early educa- 
tion centers and programs can be innovative in their approaches to 
outreach, considering creative approaches to reaching parents that 
they may not already be reaching with their current methods. 



26 




EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 



Access to Information about Quality Early Childhood Education 
Opportunities 

The challenge of access to early education opportunities contin- 
ues to point to the limited knowledge that parents and families have 
about early childhood programs and options. A study conducted by 
Schumacher and Greenberg (1999) suggests that families leaving 
welfare do not use subsidies because they do not know that they are 
available, or as Fuller and Kagan (2000) found, single mothers after 
leaving welfare did not have the time to investigate all their options 
for child care (Fuller, et al., 2002). Lack of information addressing 
the following questions may exist: Which education program is best 
for my child, a public or a private program? What are the benefits to 
enrolling my child in a racially integrated early childhood program 
versus a program that is racially and geographically isolated? Flow 
much time should young children spend in early education programs? 
What is the influence of speaking a language other than English in 
accessing quality child care programs? Flow do families choose an 
educational program that is responsive to learning and physical dis- 
abilities? Is educational research available to parents and families in 
a format that is both accessible and informative? To what extent do 
parents and families consider the importance of research in their 
decisions? To what extent do parents and families consider future 
educational outcomes linked to early educational opportunities in 
their decision to enroll a child in early education programs? Responses 
to these questions may prove significant in parental decisions about 
their child’s early education. These are questions that can also inform 
a research agenda focused on early childhood education for AI/AN 
families. Lastly, parents who are knowledgeable about early education 
opportunities are in a better position to envision their child’s early 
learning experiences as a social, cultural, and economic investment 
in their child’s future. 

In addition to parents, tribal communities and educational agencies 
can serve as valuable partners in gathering information and knowledge 
about early education. Community members may require knowledge 



27 




TARAJEAN YAZZIE-MINTZ 



about the process for accessing appropriate and sufficient funding 
to create programs that meet the needs of local communities and 
families. Availability of programs is a massive challenge, particularly 
for rural communities which may not have the local resources to seek 
funding opportunities. Organizing rural communities in multiple ways 
is an action that can increase the local knowledge base and may spur 
local education projects. Rural Voices, a community capacity project in 
Manitoba, Canada, seeks to increase rural participant involvement in 
developing social programs, which include thinking about early child- 
hood education opportunities. Questions about rural early education 
are apparent in the global context as well. Rural Voices has learned the 
following from their pilot and research projects with rural, northern 
child care in Canada during the past 15-20 years (2005): 

• “Few provinces have not experimented with rural service delivery 
options and seasonal supports.” 

• “Lessons learned and progress made rarely receive necessary atten- 
tion to move forward with responsive public policy changes.” 

• “Although the realities and subsequent changes in rural life con- 
tinue to lessen the gap between urban and rural child care needs, 
the challenges of population base, geography, and irregular em- 
ployment patterns mean rural input into public policy develop- 
ment is critical if future public policy development is to respond 
to rural families.” 

• “In Canada approximately 30% of the population lives in non- 
urban areas, 80% of the land mass is non-urban - the people who 
live in these areas are guaranteed access to social programs under 
Social Union Framework Agreement.” 

• “Provincial and territorial governments all acknowledge there are 
needs for child care in rural, remote and northern communities. 
The issue centers around the fact that the new service models 
need to be developed and put in place to meet the diverse needs 
of individual communities. 

What can we learn from Rural Voices? We learn that our neighbor 



28 




EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 



country to the north guarantees access for rural population people 
- of which First Nations people make up a percentage - to social 
programs such as early childhood education. Rural Voices also ac- 
knowledges what we know, which is that “new service models need 
to be created to serve diverse populations.” Work with rural AI/AN 
communities will benefit from examining other progress made 
in rural communities, such as work conducted by Rural Voices in 
Canada. There exist cautionary tales particularly focused on the way 
in which lessons learned and progress made “rarely receive necessary 
attention to move forward with responsive public policy changes.” 
Without serious attention to creating both programs and responsive 
public policy, change in access to quality programs may be limited 
to parents and families with young children. It is clear that AI/AN 
parents, families and communities need to become active and knowl- 
edgeable in the educational and political agendas at the local, regional 
and national levels. Active educational and political participation can 
lead to increased opportunities for local communities to embark on 
developing quality early education programs close to home. 

Access to Quality Programs and Facilities 

Access to quality programs and facilities are dependent upon the 
type of program desired, costs, location, and flexibility in hours of 
business. There are many different types of early childhood learning 
programs and centers available from which families can choose. The 
question remains: Do the choices meet the expectations that AI/AN 
families have for those programs and centers? The mere existence 
of choice highlights both the need to consider issues of economic, 
physical, and political access, and the need to question whether the 
choices provide the kind of early education that may socialize values 
and beliefs in young Native children that are in connection with fam- 
ily expectations. Families in urban and suburban settings may have 
more choices in terms of number of programs and centers; do they 
also have the kind of education that incorporates tribal knowledge, 
values, language, and culture? Surely, family and parental expecta- 



29 




TARAJEAN YAZZIE-MINTZ 



tions are important in deciding among available early child care and 
education options. 

Snipp (1988), a prominent Native sociologist, conducts empirical 
demographic studies particularly focused on AI/AN peoples. Snipp 
and other sociologists have conducted relevant research about 
American Indian families in urban settings. Snipp reports that many 
of these Native individuals resist assimilation into the White culture 
and retain and maintain their own cultural and ethnic backgrounds. 
This phenomenon of social and cultural resistance is important, as 
it allows us to question whether the early education programs avail- 
able to American Indian families actually reflect cultural and social 
values of their family and tribe. And in terms of cultural and relevant 
educational programming, are these programs based on authentic 
knowledge and practices? Are these considerations important to 
AI/AN parents? 

I would venture to guess that in rural areas the number of pro- 
grams and centers available to families are less in number, but the 
need for parents to make informed choices about their child’s early 
education remains. The choices can range from placing their child in 
the care of their relatives or in daycare offered by the tribe (through 
Head Start) or religious organizations. Again, we know little about 
what motivates parents to choose one option over other options. 
The research literature, in general, speaks to parental choice having 
much to do with flexible schedules and hours of operation and avail- 
ability. 

A ccess to Tribal Knowledge and Processes of Teaming 

Soto and Swadener (2002) discuss the need for groups perceived 
as “the minority” to construct educational paradigms which reflect 
the cultures and values associated with unique linguistic and cultural 
groups and reflect the experiences and values of social classes other 
than the White, European middle-class. With this significant perspec- 
tive in mind, the research discussed to this point becomes marginal 
and even questionable in our efforts to define and describe access 



30 




EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 



to quality early education programs that attempt to educate young 
children in terms of indigenous knowledge, language, and ways. 
Soto and Swadener call educators to action by asking educators “to 
examine and critique how issues of power are affecting our lives and 
children’s lives...” and opening our eyes to “see the need to rethink 
our overreliance on a strictly scientific world-view” (2002, p. 52). 
Methodology used to create debate and consider theory, research, 
and praxis certainly should include generating questions about access 
to local tribal knowledge and history as early learning opportunities 
for young Native children. What opportunities are there for young 
children in programs to access tribal language and culture and interact 
with Native teachers and elders? Do Head Start programs serving 
reservation communities infuse local social and institutional culture- 
learning experiences, so that young children and families are exposed 
to both “mainstream” values and tribal values? What role does culture 
and language play in religious-based early childhood education? Is this 
aspect of early learning important to parents? These are questions 
which need further investigation. 

A ccess to Culturally Responsive Teachers and Instruction 

In a time of increased cultural and linguistic diversity in popula- 
tions in both urban and rural settings, the teaching force providing 
education to these contexts needs to reflect preparation for teaching 
children representing diverse cultural backgrounds (Horm, 2003). 
Irish, Schumacher, and Lombardi (2003) reported the following 
breakdown of children and staff by race in Early Head Start programs 
(see Table 3). Irish, et al. (2003) suggest that what these statistics 
demonstrate is that, overall, the Early Head Start program staff 
tends to reflect the racial and ethnic backgrounds of the children 
they serve. While this may be true when we examine the aggregate 
data, the data does not necessarily indicate that students and staff 
of the same race are matched together at the same sites. It would be 
important to see what the data looks like for individual races, such 
as American Indian and Alaska Native. Overall, AI/AN parents may 



31 




TARAJEAN YAZZIE-MINTZ 



have access to Head Start programs but we don’t know if they have 
access to culturally responsive teachers. 

Organising Tribal Networks for Access in Rural Educational Contexts 

American Indian and Alaska Native nations have available to them 
a variety of tribal and intertribal resources, research institutions, and 
universities interested in improving early educational access for young 
children. Below I share some initial ideas for the development of 
tribal networks, partnerships and nationally funded research-based 
projects that may contribute to rural tribal needs and contexts. In 
order to build inter-tribal capacity quickly, tribal nations can begin 
work by building upon existing educational agendas, and devise 
research questions targeted at local tribal issues. Some of the ideas 
shared here are meant to target what early childhood educators can 
do, and other ideas are intended for consideration by tribal organiza- 
tions and educational networks at large. 

Tribal Netivorks — Beyond Single Nationhood (Inter-tribal Consortium j 

Tribal nations already demonstrate innovation in intertribal col- 
laborations to meet their needs. In conceptualizing tribal networks 
among small rural tribes, we can learn from successful tribal consortia 
which currently exist — for example, the Northwest Intertribal Court 
System. The Northwest Intertribal Court System is an advance- 
ment of tribal sovereignty comprised of the following Northwest 
tribes: Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation, Jamestown 
S’Klallam Tribe, Muckleshoot Tribe, Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe, 
Sauk-Suiattle Tribe, Shoalwater Bay Tribe, Skokomish Tribe, Stillagua- 
mish Tribe, and Tulalip Tribes. This intertribal system was created 
to respond to individual tribal needs and maintain legal autonomy 
from the state legal system (Harvard Project on American Indian 
Economic Development, 2003): 

The reality was that many western Washington tribes simply 



32 




EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 



did not have the resources to maintain their own court sys- 
tems. Some of these tribes are extremely small, consisting of a 
couple hundred citizens. Many of them could not provide the 
necessary funding or professional staff to operate independent 
tribal courts. And, yet, because the tribes lacked robust dispute 
resolution mechanisms, tribal citizens were regularly forced 
into state courts for the resolution of critical tribal disputes. 

Early childhood education for small, rural tribes share similar 
characteristics as the tribes of the Northwest Intertribal group; 
programs lack economic resources, have small populations within 
tribes, and have limited staff to support educational opportunities 
which must respond to both geographic distance and quality in terms 
of trained educators and opportunities for continued professional 
development. 

Use of technology. Early childhood teachers serving AI/AN children 
in rural areas can use electronic networking to communicate with 
other teachers serving similar populations. Honey and Henriquez 
(1993) suggest that this type of professional interaction supports a 
sense of autonomy for teachers. In addition, access to email, Internet, 
and electronic discussion groups serve as other resources for teachers 
in their search for quality research and information on teacher practice 
(Rothenberg, 1995). Use of technology by early childhood teachers 
in conjunction with other modes of conferencing, pre-service, and 
in-service may provide continued networking with other early child 
educators. Access to technology may prove to be a problem for pro- 
grams with little funding to support this type of interface. 

Tribal research inquiry. Tribal research inquiry - research initiated 
and conducted by the tribes themselves - is imperative to the process 
of increasing access to early education, particularly for rural tribal 
nations. When research is conducted about programs serving AI/AN 
children by non-Native researchers or researchers from outside of 
the local community, findings may not bloom into implementation 



33 




TARAJEAN YAZZIE-MINTZ 



of quality programs or policies which target improving educational 
opportunities for AI/AN children and families. It is important that 
tribal and intertribal initiatives be developed to carry out and docu- 
ment promising practices in terms of policy, program implementa- 
tion, and funding at the local, regional, and national levels. There 
exist multiple venues for sharing research conducted by tribes, such 
as the National Indian Education Association annual meeting, and 
early childhood education conferences, such as the Head Start an- 
nual conference, or via a Nadonal AI/AN early childhood education 
research center. 

Tribal, tribal college and university partnerships. Partnerships among 
these three political entities - tribes, tribal colleges, and universities 
- are crucial. Tribes, as sovereign nations, have much power to control 
the development of early childhood education initiatives. Tribal col- 
leges and universities have the capacity to help guide tribes to fund 
and develop research projects which respond directly to tribal and 
inter-tribal early education needs. Strong partnerships create sustained 
opportunities to create longitudinal studies of early education and 
provide the means to include research-based recommendations in 
local, regional, and national policy. Endless possibilities exist both 
for individual tribes and inter-tribal networks. 

Early Childhood Education 
As a Cultural, Social, and Economic Investment 

AI/AN children and families need to be empowered to access 
quality early childhood education in ways that extend beyond physi- 
cally entering centers or programs. Educators and researchers must be 
challenged to think about access in complex ways, including question- 
ing current research informed mainly by “generalizable studies” with 
“representative samples,” which ultimately do not include or apply 
to AI/AN populations. Alternative research methodologies may lead 
researchers to discover new and important findings. 

The investment in early education makes sense when all Native 



34 




EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 



children - regardless of family income - are provided the opportu- 
nity to be exposed to quality learning opportunities - both in and 
out of formal programs. In turn, researchers and educators must 
remember that our low participation rates are low because there are 
minimum qualifications to participate in most government- funded or 
non-profit programs. Not all children and families qualify to enroll, 
and many of these families that never qualify may be on the cusp 
of economic need and at the same time fall just below the ability to 
afford to enroll in private or other early education programs - not 
funded by government subsidies. The reality is that we will not reach 
100% participation until multiple organizations, tribes, and the U.S. 
government at large sees that early education is a social, cultural, and 
economic investment in every child’s future. 

Access is about both entrance/ participation and quality. Entrance 
or participation in low quality programs is not really access at all. 
Critically examining access to early education is much like “looking 
a gift horse in the mouth.” We are receiving “free” education, and 
yet I am asking that we look carefully at what it is that we are getting 
that is “free.” What is the quality of this free education? Finally, we 
need to ask ourselves, “Do we want access to an educational system 
built on weighted political agendas and mediocrity?” 

References 

Cahape, P., & Demmert, W. G. (2003). American Indian and Alaska 
Native early childhood health, development, and education re- 
search. (EDO-RC-03-012). Washington, DC: U.S. Department 
of Education. 

Children’s Aid Society. (1999). The human cost of waiting for child care. 

The Children’s Aid Society. New York, NY. 

Children’s Defense Fund. (2005a). Alaska early childhood development 
facts. Retrieved Jan. 5, 2006, from http:/ /www.childrensdefense. 
org / earlychildhood/ statefacts/AK.pdf 
Children’s Defense Fund. (2005b). North Dakota early childhood develop- 
ment facts. Retrieved Jan. 5, 2006, from http:/ /www. childrens de- 



35 




TARAJEAN YAZZIE-MINTZ 

fense.org/ earlychildhood/ statefacts/ND.pdf 

Consortium for Longitudinal Studies. (1983). As the twig is bent; Last- 
ing effects of preschool programs. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates 

Cotton, K., & Conklin, N. F. (1998). Research on early childhood 
education (School Improvement Research Series). Portland, OR: 
Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 

Featherstone, H. (1986). Preschool: It does make a difference. Prin- 
cipal, 65, 16-17. 

Fuller, B., & Kagan, S. L. (2000). Remembering the children: Mothers bal- 
ance work and child care under welfare reform. New York: Columbia 
University. 

Fuller, B., Kagan, S. L., Loeb, S., Carroll, J., McCarthy, J., Kreicher, 
G., et al. (2002). New lives for poor families? Mothers and young children 
move through welfare reform. New York: Columbia University. 

Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development. (2003). 
Retrieved Jan. 5, 2006, at http:/ /www.ksg.harvard.edu/hpaied 

Horm, D. M. (2003). Preparing early childhood educators to work in 
diverse urban settings. Teachers College Record, 105(2), 226-244. 

Honey, M., & Henriquez, A. (1993). Telecommunications and K-12 
educators: Findings from a national survey. (ED 359 923). New 
York: Center for Technology in Education. 

Irish, K., Schumacher, R., & Lombardi, J. (2003). Serving America’s 
youngest: A snapshot of Earf Head Start children, families, teachers, and 
programs in 2002. (Head Start Series Brief No. 3). Washington, 
DC: Center for Law and Social Policy. 

Lazar, I., & Darlington, R. (1982). Lasting effects of early education: 
A report from the Consortium for Longitudinal Studies (Society 
for Research in Child Development Monograph No. 47). 

Nissani, H. (1993). Early childhood programs for language minority 
students. (ED 355836). Washington, DC: ERIC Clearinghouse 
on Languages and Linguistics. 

Rothenberg, D. (1995). The Internet and early childhood educators. 
(ED 382409.) Urbana, IL: ERIC Clearinghouse on Elementary 
and Early Childhood Education. 



36 




EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 



Rural Voices. (2005). Rural Voices objectives. Retrieved Jan. 5, 2006, 
from http:/ /ruralvoices.cimnet.ca/cim/86C179_268T14762. 
dhtm 

Saluja, G., Early, D. M., & Clifford, R. M. (2002). Demographic 
characteristics of early childhood teachers and structural elements 
of early care and education in the United States. Early Childhood 
Research & Practice, 4( 1). Retrieved Jan. 6, 2006, from http:/ / ecrp. 
uiuc.edu/v4nl / saluja.html 

Schumacher, R., & Greenberg, M. (1999). Child care after leavingwelfare: 
Early evidence from state studies. Washington, DC: Center for Law 
and Social Policy. 

Snipp, C. M. (1998, June). The costs of being American Indian: Eth- 
nic identity and economic opportunity. Paper presented at annual 
conference of Institute for Social Science Research. Retrieved Jan. 
5, 2005, from http:/ /repositories.cdlib.org/issr/volume4/25/ 

Soto, L. D., & Swadner, B. B. (2002). Toward a liberatory early child- 
hood theory, research and praxis: Decolonizing a field. Contem- 
porary Issues in Early Childhood, 3(2), 38-66. 

Svestka, D. (1995). Financing preschool for all children. ERIC 
Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early Childhood Education. 
(ED389471.) Retrieved Jan. 5, 2006, from http:/ /www.ericdigests. 
org/ 1996-3/ children.htm. 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2000). Decennial Census - American Fact Find- 
er- American Indian and Alaska Native Summary File (AIANSF). 
[http:/ / factfinder.census.gov] 

Westat, and others (2005). Head Start Impact Study firstyear findings, June 
2005. Rockville, MD: Westat. 

Zill, N., Collins, M., West, J., & Hausken, E. G. (1995). Approaching 
kindergarten: A look at preschoolers in the United States. Young 
Children, 5/(1), 35-38. 



37 




LAUREL S. ENDFIELD 



The Health and Development of American Indian and Alaska 
Native Children In Relationship 
To Reservation and Rural/Urban Residence 

Laurel S. Endfield (White Mountain Apache) 

Europeans moving into North America and then expanding ever 
westward was the cause of drastic declines in the American Indian 
population (Cooper, 1999). Cooper estimated that the American In- 
dian population declined from more than one million people at the 
beginning of the nineteenth century to fewer than 300,000 in 1879. 
The causes of this decline were not solely from the battles between 
the newcomers and the American Indians but more so from the 
contagious diseases brought to their homelands. Improved health 
care, increased access to government programs and education, among 
other developments, have helped American Indian and Alaska Native 
populations to grow. 

According to Snipp (2002), overall, 1.4 million children were 
identified as Native American or Alaskan Native. However, inter- 
pretation of data is difficult because of the census’s self-identifying 
procedures. Respondents were asked to report all races that applied 
to their ancestry. Comparisons of the 2000 census material was made 
more difficult than previous censuses because there now requires 
comparison of two sets of numbers. Out of the 1.4 million reported 
America Indian/ Alaska Native children only 840,000 reported only 
one racial group. Using the single race definition, American Indian/ 
Alaska Native children (AI/AN) increased by 21%, or by the multiple 
race definition, by 99%. Approximately 29% of all AI/AN children 
lived on reservations or in Alaska Native villages. The majority of 
children living on reservations or villages, 87%, did not report more 
than one racial ancestry. 

According to the U.S. Indian Health Service (2005), “the American 
Indian and Alaska Native population has grown more rapidly than 
the nation’s population as a whole during the last decade, 17.9% ver- 
sus 10.7%.” However, there are serious threats to American Indian 



38 




HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT 



and Alaska Native health and development that still exist. Diseases 
and conditions that have a high prevalence rate in AI/AN children 
include, but are not limited to: diabetes, Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and 
fetal alcohol effects, nutritional inadequacies, inadequate education, 
high rates of unemployment, discrimination and cultural differences. 
Also important to note is that according to Indian Health Service 
statistics (2005), a safe and adequate water supply and waste disposal 
facilities are lacking in 12% of AI/AN homes compared to only 
1% of homes for the general United States population. On some 
reservations, for instance the Navajo Nation, some children live in 
homes that completely lack electricity, water, and indoor plumbing 
due to the remoteness of their home’s location. 

Diabetes is a growing disease worldwide; however in AI/AN 
populations, the disease has reached epidemic proportions (Daychild, 
n.d.). According to Daychild, “minorities have higher rates than the 
general population. American Indians and Alaskan Natives (AI/AN) 
in particular experience type 2 diabetes and its complications 4-6 times 
more often than the general population.” In fact, according to the 
Indian Health Service (2005), “American Indians and Alaska Natives 
have the highest prevalence of type 2 diabetes in the world. Diabetes 
is traditionally a disease of older people but, alarmingly, diabetes is 
being diagnosed at young ages in Indian communities. Prevention 
of diabetes has become an urgent priority.” Childhood obesity is a 
leading factor to the development of diabetes and heart disease in 
children. Over the past 30 years the prevalence of overweight and 
obese children in American Indian and Alaska Native communi- 
ties has increased dramatically. Rates of AI/AN children suffering 
from obesity are three times more likely than national patterns, and 
overweight children are two times more likely than national patterns 
(Hammer & Demmert, 2003). 

Prenatal exposure to alcohol can result in Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
or fetal alcohol effects. According to the American Academy of 
Pediatrics (2000): 

The term fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) refers to a constellation of 



39 




LAUREL S. ENDFIELD 



physical, behavioral, and cognitive abnormalities. In addition 
to the classic dysmorphic facial features, prenatal and postnatal 
growth abnormalities, and mental retardation that define the 
condition, approximately 80% of children with FAS have mi- 
crocephaly and behavioral abnormalities. As many as 50% of 
affected children also exhibit poor coordination, hypotonia, at- 
tention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, decreased adipose tissue, 
and identifiable facial anomalies, such as maxillary hypoplasia, 
cleft palate, and micrognathia. Cardiac defects, hemagiomas, 
and eye to ear abnormalities are also common. 

The term fetal alcohol effects was developed originally to describe 
abnormalities observed in animal studies, but it was adopted 
quickly by clinicians to describe children with a variety of 
problems, including growth deficiency, behavioral mannerisms, 
and delays in motor and speech performance, who lacked the 
full complement of FAS diagnostic criteria. 

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome in AI/AN populations is much higher 
than the rest of the national population. According to the Centers for 
Disease Control (About, n.d.), “Incidence of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
per 10,000 total births for different ethnic groups were as follows: 
Asians 0.3, Hispanics 0.8, white 0.9, blacks 6.0, and Native Ameri- 
cans 29.9.” Occurrences of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome among AI/AN 
tribes vary between tribes. Health facilities serving primarily Navajo 
and Pueblo tribes report prevalence similar to the national statistic, 
while Southwest Plains Indians reported a much higher prevalence, 
1 in every 102 live births (About, n.d.). 

In any community, and for any race, there is little that is more 
important than the health and welfare of its children. The health and 
development of American Indian and Alaska Native children, includ- 
ing schooling practices, has changed within the last century. Tactics of 
assimilation are still definitely present in different forms, but can be 
considered not as severe as in times past. Boarding school practices 
have made some positive changes that allow children more freedom 
of expression and reduced the abuse associated with previous board- 



40 




HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT 



ing school practices. However, school programs that provide cultural 
awareness and language preservation are small in number, even within 
reservation boundaries. Strides are being made, but there is still a long 
way to go. Federal laws have been enacted that allow tribes some 
self-determination, including the right to protection of its children. 
However, true self-determination is yet to come. 

Before 1978, responsibility for American Indian child welfare lay 
mainly with the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) (Snipp, 2002). Young 
children were removed from their families and homes and moved 
to boarding schools where schooling attempts for American Indian 
children focused on assimilation. The end of the boarding school 
system began in the early 1930s and more children were allowed 
to stay at home with their families. The BIA established the Indian 
Adoption Project in 1958 to oversee the welfare of AI/AN children 
in possibly abusive homes. The numbers of America Indian children 
living in off reservation foster or adoptive homes increased swiftly. 
The majority of placements were in non-Indian households, far from 
reservations. In 1978 the Indian Child Welfare Act was passed. The 
law was intended to keep Indian children in environments similar to 
which they were born. However, time, economic development, ac- 
ceptance, and technology have changed the parameters of AI/AN 
children’s environments. 

Many AI/AN children do not live on Indian reservations or in 
Alaska Native villages but rather off reservations in both rural and 
urban settings. The Indian Health Service population trends (2005) 
shows that in 1990, 56.2% of the Indian population resided in urban 
areas, with the remaining 43.8% residing in rural areas. Programs for 
American Indian and Alaska Native children, both on and off the 
reservation, in both rural and urban areas, are essential to improv- 
ing their health and development. Accessibility to these programs is 
dependent upon many factors, including economic status, geographic 
locations, tribal membership, and transportation, among others. 

The major contributor to the improvements in American Indian 
and Alaska Native health and development, and the primary provider 
of federal health care, is the Indian Health Service (IHS). IHS is an 



41 




LAUREL S. ENDFIELD 



agency within the Department of Health and Human Services, and 
is responsible for providing health services to American Indians 
and Alaska Natives. The Indian Health Service provides the fol- 
lowing information: The provision of health services to federally 
recognized tribes is a direct result of a special government-to-gov- 
ernment relationship between the federal government and Indian 
tribes. This relationship was established in 1787 and is based upon 
Article I, Section 8 of the United States Constitution. Numerous 
treaties, laws. Supreme Court decisions, and Executive orders give 
this relationship form and substance. Currently, IHS provides health 
services to approximately 1.5 million American Indians and Alaska 
Natives who belong to more than 557 federally recognized tribes in 
35 states (Indian Health Service, n.d.). According to the Indian Health 
Service (2005), approximately 56% of American Indians and Alaska 
Natives living in the United States rely on the Indian Health Service 
to provide their primary access to health care services. 

In 2003, the AI/AN user population in urban areas was ap- 
proximately 605,000 (Indian Health Service, 2005). According to 
IHS (2005), American Indians and Alaska Natives in urban locations 
experience aggravated health problems because of the lack of family 
and traditional cultural environments. This same report also identi- 
fies American Indian and Alaska Native youth as being at greater 
risk for serious mental health and substance abuse problems, suicide, 
increased gang activity, teen pregnancy, abuse, and neglect. 

According to IHS (1999) statistics, the service population is 
increasing at a rate of about “1.8% each year, excluding the impact 
of new tribes” (p. 35). This yearly increase continues to strain an 
“already challenged [system] to meet even 60% of the health needs 
of Indian country”. The “user population in FY 1997 was consider- 
ably younger than the U.S. All Races population” (p. 28). The total 
IHS population under age 5 was 10.2%, compared to the U.S. All 
Races percentage of 7.7. The largest IHS area, Phoenix, which had 
the highest percentage of population under age 5, had a percentage 
that was nearly 4% higher than the U.S. All Races percentage. The 
smallest IHS area, Nashville, which had the lowest percentage of 



42 




HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT 



population under age 5 still had a percentage that was more than 1 . 1 
times the U.S. All Races percentage. The median age of the AI/AN 
population is 27.8 years, which is considerably younger than the U.S. 
All Races age of 36 years (Indian Health Service, 2005). 

The mission of IHS is “to raise the physical, mental, social, and 
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the high- 
est level” (Indian Health Service). They strive to reach their goal in 
assuring that “comprehensive, culturally acceptable personal and 
public health services are available and accessible”. Reports show that 
solid gains have been made in IHS reaching their goal and improv- 
ing American Indian and Alaska Native people’s health. When IHS 
was transferred from the Department of the Interior to the Public 
Health Service in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, 
“the general health of Indian people substantially lagged behind the 
rest of the U.S. population” (IHS, 1987). This was reflected in the 
AI/AN mortality rates compared to those of the general population 
(Rhoades, D’Angelo, & Hurlburt, 1987). 

Mortality rates were several times higher for American Indians 
and Alaska Natives than for other races. As a result of preventative 
healthcare programs, sanitation improvements, and medical advances, 
American Indian and Alaska N ative health has substantially improved, 
however, the health of American Indians and Alaska Natives still lags 
behind the general U.S. population. Life expectancy has increased 
by 20 years from 1940 to 1980 (Rhoades, D’Angelo, & Hurlburt, 
1987). This still leaves American Indian and Alaska Native popula- 
tions lagging behind the U.S. All Races population by almost 4 years 
(Indian Health Service, 2005). Significant gains have also been made 
in reducing infant mortality rates as well as drastic improvements 
in neonatal mortality rates. Mortality rates in infants dropped from 
62.7 deaths per 1,000 in 1955 (Hammer, & Demmert, 2003) to 8.8 
in 2001 (Indian Health Service, 2005). The U.S. All Races population 
infant death rate is 6.9 per 1000 live births. Neonatal mortality rates 
have reduced by approximately two thirds between the early 1970s 
and the mid-1990s (Hammer, & Demmert, 2003). It is important to 
note that these rates are inclusive only for geographical areas serviced 



43 




LAUREL S. ENDFIELD 



by the Indian Health Service. According to Indian Health Service 
(2005b), “American Indians and Alaska Natives die at higher rates 
than other Americans from alcoholism (517%), tuberculosis (533%), 
motor vehicle crashes (203%), diabetes (210%), unintentional injuries 
(150%), homicide (87%) and suicide (60%).” 

Baldwin et al. (2002) provided more information specific to this 
study. According to their research, both rural and urban AI/AN 
mothers were 2 to 3 times more likely than white mothers to receive 
inadequate prenatal care. Urban AI/AN mothers and infants would 
more often receive better care than rural AI/AN mothers and in- 
fants. Low birth weight rates for AI/ AN infants were higher than for 
Whites, with urban AI/AN rates worse than rural American Indian 
and Alaska Native rates. Rates for postnatal deaths were very high 
for both rural and urban AI/AN infants, with rates more than twice 
the rate for white infants. 

Another program that has been successful in improving the 
overall health and development of AI/AN women, infant and 
children is WIC, the Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, 
Infants, and Children, a federal program operated through state and 
local agencies. The 33 tribal WIC programs currendy on American 
Indian reservations are administered by Native American organiza- 
tions and represent nearly 100 of the 557 federally recognized tribes 
(Cole, 2002). WIC has helped to improve the health and nutrition of 
AI/ AN women, infants, and children by providing nutritious supple- 
mental foods and nutrition education, while also working together 
with other organizations to improve access to health care (Henchy, 
Cheung, & Weill, 2000). AI/AN participants make up about 1.7% of 
the national WIC caseload and have grown from an average of 2,433 
clients each month in 1976 (Henchy, Cheung, & Weill, 2000) to serv- 
ing an average of 121,140 clients each month in 1998 (Cole, 2002). 
Tribal WIC programs offer culturally appropriate services specific to 
AI/AN health and nutrition concerns and help to provide continu- 
ity of care in geographically isolated tribal lands (Henchy, Cheung, 
& Weill, 2000). According to Henchy, Cheung, and Weill (pg. 7-8), 
documented benefits of the WIC program include: 



44 




HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT 



• WIC is successful in improving participants’ health and nutritional 
status, bringing them into the health care setting, and preventing 
health problems. 

• WIC improves the dietary intake of pregnant and postpartum 
women and improves weight gain in pregnant women. 

• Pregnant women participating in WIC receive prenatal care ear- 
lier. 

• WIC increases the duration of pregnancy and reduces low birth 
weight rates. 

• WIC reduces fetal deaths and infant mortality. 

• WIC decreases the incidence of iron deficiency anemia in chil- 
dren. 

• WIC significantly improves children’s diets. 

• WIC improves the growth of at-risk infants and children. 

• Children enrolled in WIC are more likely to have a regular source 
of medical care and are more likely to be immunized. 

• WIC helps prepare children for school; children who receive WIC 
benefits demonstrate superior cognitive development. 

• WIC saves money by preventing costly health problems. 

According to the United States Department of Agriculture: Food 
and Nutrition Service (as cited in Cole, 2002), the 63% of AI/AN 
WIC enrollees located on or near reservations differ considerably 
from WIC enrollees living off reservations: 

WIC enrollees located on or near reservations are concentrated 
in the West (61%) and Mountain Plains (20%), while those off the 
reservation are most concentrated in the Southwest (44%). Those 
located off the reservation are more likely to reside in metropolitan 
areas (45.7% versus 33.4%). Compared to Native American WIC 
enrollees off reservations, those on or near reservations have larger 
average family size (4.4 versus 4.0) and are more likely to be in 
families of six or more persons (23.8% versus 14.0%). Those on or 
near reservations also have greater participation in public assistance 
programs (24.6% versus 15.2% receive TANF; 39.4% versus 29.5% 



45 




LAUREL S. ENDFIELD 



receive food assistance) and more severe poverty (41.4% versus 34.9% 
are below 50% of the federal poverty level) (Cole, N. 2002). 

The Bureau of Indian Affairs (1997) reported that 30% of the 
employed American Indians in Indian country still live below the 
poverty line. The United States unemployment rate is approximately 
4%, while many American Indian tribes suffer unemployment rates 
of 50%, with some even higher (Fryer, 1999). The consequence of 
such poor economic circumstances is that 43.1% of A 1/ AN children 
under the age of 5 are living in poverty compared to 20.1% of the 
U.S. All Races (Indian Health Service, 1998). 

According to Cole (2002), AI/AN infants have greater recorded 
prevalence, compared with all WIC infants, in the major risk cat- 
egories. Infants living on reservations or in Alaska Native villages, 
compared to those off reservations, have higher clinical risks (22.2% 
versus 12.5%) and dietary risks (19.2% versus 12.3%), while infants 
off reservations are slightly higher in anthropometric rates of risk 
(28.9% versus 27.5%). AI/AN children also show greater preva- 
lence to risk categories except in biological risks. Their patterns of 
risk replicate those of infants on and off reservations. Additionally, 
AI/AN children have higher rates of obesity as compared to all WIC 
children: prevalence is 20% for children on or near reservations, 1 6% 
for children off reservations, and 13% for all WIC children. 

Traditional AI/AN education was conducted at home amongst 
the people within family units and villages. Children were educated 
for tribal life by their elders, family members, and peers. Storytelling, 
working with adults, participation in ceremonies and puberty rites 
were essential to cultural education. Education also came from the 
customs of the different clans (Spring, 2001). With the introduction 
of European cultures into North America, AI/AN children were 
introduced to cultures very different from their own. Fortunately, A 1/ 
AN cultures and languages have experienced some revitalization, as 
well as renewed acceptance and respect so that children are receiving 
some culturally and developmentally appropriate educational services 
from different federally, grant, and tribally supported programs. 



46 




HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT 



Although there has been a revitalization of Native languages, 
indigenous languages continue to be lost at an alarming rate. There 
is an ongoing struggle to promote language and preserve it in written 
form. Many linguists predict that half of the world’s 6000 languages 
will be dead or dying by the year 2050. Languages are becoming extinct 
at twice the rate of endangered mammals and four times the rate 
of endangered birds. Linguists predict that if this trend continues, a 
dozen or fewer languages could dominate the world (Ostler, 2000). 

The leading federal program that provides AI/AN children with 
developmental and educational services is Head Start. Head Start 
programs, including Early Head Start, are comprehensive child de- 
velopment programs, which serve pregnant women, children from 
birth to age 5, and their families. These child-focused programs strive 
to reach an overall goal of increasing school readiness of young 
children from low-income families (U.S. Administration for Children 
& Families, 2003). 

Head Start began in 1965 as an 8-week summer program by the 
Office of Economic Opportunity, and was designed to help break 
the cycle of poverty (Administration for Children & Families, 2003). 
The preschool program, serving children from ages 3 to 5, was a 
comprehensive program designed to meet the emotional, social, 
health, nutritional, and psychological needs of the low-income chil- 
dren served. Head Start provides a range of individualized services 
in the areas of education and early development including: medical, 
dental, and mental health services; nutrition; and parent involvement. 
Head Start also ensures that all services provided are responsive and 
appropriate to individual child and family development, ethnicity, 
culture, and linguistic heritage and experiences (Administration for 
Children & Families, 2002). Head Start has had a strong impact on 
children, families, communities, and early childhood programs across 
the country. Head Start serves both rural and urban children and their 
families in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the 
U.S. territories, including many American Indian and Alaska Native 
children (U.S. Administration for Children & Families, 2002). 

According to the Head Start Bureau’s fiscal year 2004 Head Start 



47 




LAUREL S. ENDFIELD 



program fact sheet, the actual 2004 fiscal year budget for Native 
American and migrant programs was $451,325,000.00 (U.S. Admin- 
istration for Children & Families, 2005). The fiscal year 2005 ap- 
propriation is $456,003,000.00. There are 2,729 Head Start grantees 
and delegate agencies. Excluding family childcare homes, there are 
20,049 Head Start and Early Head Start centers. Of these grantees and 
delegate agencies, 6% are through tribal governments or consortium 
agreements. The Head Start enrollment for 2004 was 905,851. Of 
these children, 3.1% were AI/AN (U.S. Administration for Children & 
Families, 2005). These numbers represent about 50% of the pregnant 
women, infants, and preschool- age children eligible to receive Head 
Start services (National Head Start Association, n. d.). 

The National Head Start Association (n. d.) provides that: 

• Substantial research finds that Head Start and Early Head Start 
programs provide positive educational benefits. 

• Head Start children performed better on cognitive, language, and 
health measures than their comparison group counterparts did. 

• Head Start programs improve the well-being of the children and 
families they serve, providing health and dental services to children 
and families who might otherwise not have them. 

• Parents who participate in Head Start are found to have greater 
quality of life satisfaction; increased confidence in coping skills; 
and decreased feelings of anxiety, depression, and sickness. 

• Head Start children are at least eight percentage points more likely 
to have had their immunizations than those children who did not 
attend preschool. 

According to Taylor (1996), during the 1994 Reauthorization of 
Head Start, Early Head Start was established as an outreaching arm 
of the Head Start program. Early Head Start is a federally funded, 
comprehensive early childhood program serving low-income prenatal 
to age three children, pregnant women, and their families. Research 
has shown that the years from conception to age 3 are critical in hu- 
man development. This called for the Head Start program to embark 



48 




HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT 



on an extensive planning process that would ensure that children 
and families would receive high quality services that would enhance 
growth and development, making a difference in outcomes for young 
children (Taylor, 1996). The National Head Start Association (2005) 
provides documentation of the following benefits of the Early Head 
Start program: 

• Early Head Start children on average had a higher cognitive de- 
velopment score than their control group had. 

• Early Head Start children demonstrated a higher level of social- 
emotional development than their control group in a number 
of areas. Compared with their control group, they showed less 
aggressive behavior and were more attuned as they played. 

• When their children were 3 years old. Early Head Start parents 
reported significantly less depression than parents in the control 
group did. 

• Early Head Start children had a higher immunization rate than 
children in a control group. 

• Early Head Start children at age 3 had larger vocabularies than 
the control children had. 

Head Start has made huge impacts in the health and development 
of AI/AN children. Children are receiving services both on and off 
American Indian reservations. As a parent who has had children in 
both settings, I recognized that a major benefit of reservation, or tribal 
programs, is the promotion of culture in the classroom. American 
Indian programs are respectful, knowledgeable, and appreciative 
of the culture of the children they serve. According to Strand and 
Peacock (2002), feeling good about one’s tribal culture; participation 
in tribal and cultural activities; positive feelings of belonging within 
a community and a family; appreciation of the influences of elders, 
parents, and grandparents; and participation in a school setting where 
the curriculum included culture provided for three positive charac- 
teristics in AI/AN children: good self-concept, a strong sense of 
direction, and tenacity. All three of these are very important attributes 



49 




LAUREL S. ENDFIELD 



for children to have to succeed in the world. 

Head Start is only one of the early childhood programs available 
for American Indian and Alaska Native children both on and off 
the reservation and in both rural and urban settings. Many individual 
tribes provide grant-funded childcare, such as those funded by the 
Child Care and Development Fund, for parents of young children 
that ensure that the children are receiving care that is monitored by the 
tribe. Children off the reservation, in both rural and urban settings, 
may qualify for state and/or grant-funded programs that monitor 
childcare to ensure the health and safety of the children. 

Although programs are offered both on and off the reservation 
and in both rural and urban settings, a disparity that exists between 
rural and urban settings, as well as on or off the reservation, is the 
availability of programs. Children in urban areas are going to have 
greater access to programs that will contribute to their health and 
development than those living in rural areas. Similarly, children living 
off the reservation are going to have access to more and different 
programs, including state-funded programs. It is important to note 
that continuing budget cuts in not only Head Start, but also in child 
care and educational programs in general, are making it more dif- 
ficult for AI/AN children and families to receive quality child care. 
Unless education and childcare become a priority to the government, 
cutbacks and decreases will continue to have negative impacts on 
AI/AN children nationwide. 

Historically, AI/AN populations represent the most economically 
disadvantaged and underserved groups in America. They have the 
lowest income and educational levels as well as the lowest standard 
of living (O’Connell, 1985). Fortunately, for American Indians and 
Alaska Natives, the best of both worlds have combined after cen- 
turies of frustration, confusion, misunderstanding, repression, and 
perseverance. American Indians and Alaskan Natives have remained 
determined throughout years of attempted assimilation to keep their 
native traditions and tongues alive. Formal Native American educa- 
tion spans from reservation preschools to universities far from the 
reservation lands of the native peoples. It can and should encompass 



50 




HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT 



tribal traditions, cultural beliefs, academics, and technology in a middle 
ground between two distinct cultures with each providing the other 
with the opportunities to teach, learn, and grow. However, too often 
educational endeavors remain unable to break completely away from 
assimilation tactics and embrace cultural values. Regardless, Native 
American and Alaska Native populations have emerged victorious 
as students, educators, and leaders determined to leave their mark on 
American history and to carve their place in the future. 

References 

About, (n. d.) Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: Alcohol has been found to be acutely 
toxic to the fetus. Retrieved July 1 1, 2005, from http:/ / alcoholism. 
about.com/ cs/ alerts/l/blnaal 3.htm 
American Academy of Pediatrics. (2000). Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and 
alcohol-related neurodevelopmental disorders. Retrieved July 11, 2005 
from http:/ / aappolicy.aapublications.org/ cgi/ content/ full/ pe- 
diatrics;106/2/358 

Baldwin, L., Grossman, D. C., Casey, S., Hollow, W., Sugarman, J. R., 
Freeman, W L. et al. (2002). Perinatal and infant health among 
rural and urban American Indians / Alaska Native families. Ameri- 
can Journal of Public Health, 92(9), 1491-1497. 

Bureau of Indian Affairs. (1997). 1997 Labor market information on 
the Indian labor force. Washington, DC: Author. 

Cole, N. (2002). The characteristics of Native America WTC participants, 
on and off reservations. (Report No. WIC-02-NAM). Washington, 
DC: United States Department of Agriculture. Retrieved June 9, 
2005 from http:/ /www.fns.usda.gov/oane 
Cooper, M. L. (1999). Indian school: Teaching the white man’s way. New 
York: Clarion Books. 

Daychild, W (n.d.). Diabetes prevention initiative at Phoenix Indian Medical 
Center. Retrieved July 11, 2005 from http://ihs.gov/medicalpro- 
grams/behavioral/ aayrtc/breastfeed/ docs/brstfdgdm.htm 
Fryer, B. (1999). The neglected workforce. First Nations Development 
Institute: Business Alert, 14(6), 8. 



51 




LAUREL S. ENDFIELD 



Hammer, P. C., & Demmert, Jr., W. G. (2003). American Indian and 
Alaska Hative early childhood health, development, and education assessment 
research. Charleston, West Virginia: ERIC Digest. (ERIC Docu- 
ment Reproduction Service No. ED482326). 

Henchy, G., Cheung, M., & Weill, J. (2000). W1C in native American 
communities: Building a healthier America; Report summary. (Report No. 
RC 023 270). Washington, DC: Food Research and Action Center. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED459050) 

National Head Start Association. (2005). Early Head Start research: 
Early Head Start children. Retrieved June 7, 2005 from 
http:/ /www.nhsa.org/ research%5Fbites%2Dehsc.htm 

National Head Start Association (n.d.). Head Start works. (Issue Brief). 
Alexandria, VA: Author. 

National Head Start Association, (n. d.). Head Start basics. (Issue Brief). 
Alexandria, VA: Author. 

O’Connell, J. C. (1985). A family systems approach for serving rural, 
reservation Native American communities. Journal of American 
Indian Education , 24(2), [Online] retrieved June 9, 2005 from 
http: / / jaie.asu.edu/ v24/V24S2fam.html 

Ostler, R. (2000, Spring). Disappearing Languages [Electronic Ver- 
sion]. Whole Earth, 100, 1-8. 

Rhoades, E. R., D’Angelo, A. J., & Hurlburt, W. B. (1987). The Indian 
Health Service record of achievement. [Abstract], national Library 
of Medicine, 102(4). 

Snipp, C. M. (2002). American Indian and Alaska native children in the 
2000 census. A kids count / PRB report on the census, 2000. (Report No. 
RC 023952). Washington, DC: Annie E. Casey Foundation and 
The Population Reference Bureau. (ERIC Document Reproduc- 
tion Service No. ED474249) 

Spring, J. (2001). The American school: 1642-2000. New York:McGraaw- 

Hill. 

Strand, J. A., & Peacock, T. D. (2002). nurturing resilience and school 
success in American Indian and Alaska native students. Charleston, 
West Virginia: ERIC Digests. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED471488) 



52 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



Taylor, H. H. (1996). Early Head Start: A new commitment to children 
and families. National Head Start Bulletin, 1(57), 1-3. 

U.S. Administration for Children & Families. (2003). Head Start Bureau 
General Information. Retrieved June 7, 2005 from http:/ /www2.acf. 
dhhs.gov/ programs/hsb/ about/ generaliformation/ index.htm 
U.S. Administration for Children & Families. (2002). Head StartBureau 
Head Start history. Retrieved June 7, 2005 from http:/ /www.acf. 
hhs.gov/ programs/hsb/ about/history.htm 
U.S. Administration for Children & Families. (2005). Head Start Pro- 
gram Fact S beet. Retrieved June 7, 2005 from http:/ /www.acf.hhs. 
gov/ programs/hsb/research/ 2005.htm 
U.S. Indian Health Service, (n.d.a). Breastfeeding as a diabetes prevention 
initiative at Phoenix Indian Medical Center. Retrieved July 11, 2005, 
from http:/ /www.ihs.gov/ medicalprograms/behavioral/ aayrtc / 
breastfeed/ docs/brstfdgdm.htm 

U.S. Indian Health Service, (n.d.b). Indian Health Service introduction. 
Retrieved June 9, 2005 from http://www.ihs.gov/Publidnfo/ 
PublicAffairs/Welcome_Info/IHSintro.asp 
U.S. Indian Health Service. (1987). The Indian Health Service record of 
achievement. Retrieved June 9, 2005 from http://ncbi.nlm.nih. 
gov 

U.S. Indian Health Service. (1999). Regional differences in Indian health, 
1998-99. Retrieved June 9, 2005, from http:/ / www.ihs.gov/Pub- 
licInfo/Publications/trends98/RD-98b.pdf 
U.S. Indian Health Service. (2005a). Diabetes. Retrieved July 11, 2005, 
from http:/ /info.ihs.gov/Health/4_Diabetes-Jan2005.doc 
U.S. Indian Health Service. (2005b). Facts on Indian health disparities. 
Retrieved July 11, 2005 from http://info.ihs.gov/Health/ 1 l_Dis- 
paritiesFacts-Jan2005.doc 

U.S. Indian Health Service. (2005c). Heritage and health. Retrieved July 
11, 2005 from http://info.ihs.gov/HERITAGE_&_HEALTH_ 
2005.pdf 

U.S. Indian Health Service. (2005d). Indians in urban areas. Retrieved 
July 11, 2005 from http://info.ihs.gov/People/4_indiansInUr- 
ban-Jan2005.doc 



53 




LAUREL S. ENDFIELD 



U.S. Indian Health Service. (2005e). Indian population. Retrieved July 
11, 2005, from http://info.ihs.gov/People/l_IdiaPopTrends- 
Jan2005.doc 

U.S. Indian Health Service. (1998). Population statistics. Retrieved June 
9, 2005 from http://www.ihs.gov/Publidnfo/Publications/ 
trends98/ part.pdf 



54 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



Effective Early Education Programs that Promote Learning 
the English Language and Tribal Languages and Cultures 



Nila M. Rinehart 

Throughout its history, Head Start has been the nation’s corner- 
stone of services for low-income young children and their families. 
With the addition of the Child Care Bureau, created in 1995, the 
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services provides much of 
the funding and concentrated support for American Indian and 
Alaska Native (AI/AN) children in early care and education pro- 
grams. Approximately 28,000 AI/AN children were served in Head 
Start in 2004 (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2005). 
Approximately 35,000 children were served by the Child Care and 
Development Fund of the U.S. Child Care Bureau in 2003 (Rinehart, 
2005). An additional unknown number of AI/AN children receive 
care from family members and friends, non-tribal child care, public 
and tribal schools, and other state, local and private funded early care 
and education providers. The Kids Count data on AI/AN children 
measures of child well being from the 2000 census reports that there 
are 432,994 American Indian children under the age of 6 in the United 
States (Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2003). One has to wonder where 
the estimated 85.5% of the AI/AN children are, what is the level of 
care they are experiencing, what developmental opportunities are they 
being provided, what is the level of family and community support, 
and is the tribal culture and language accessible and supported? 

Throughout the late 1990s, funding for early care and education 
programs grew with opportunities for enhancing services. Some of 
these projects included Early Learning Opportunities Grants, Even 
Start, and Early Head Start. Although tribal communities were re- 
cipients of these funds, along with Head Start and Child Care and 
Development Funds, the largest service providers for young AI/AN 
children in tribal communities, little is known about child outcomes 
and best practices relative to this special population. There is not a 
central clearinghouse or place for AI/AN early care and education 

55 




NILA M. RINEHART 



providers to learn about and share ideas, promising practices, and 
current research in order to improve services and child outcomes. 
Lastly, there have been few studies with a focus on young AI/AN 
children. In summary, there is little known about the status of early 
care and education for AI/AN children. 

This paper examines promising practices in early childhood educa- 
tion programs and activities that promote effective use of English as a 
primary and/ or second language and the programs and activities that 
are effective in developing, preserving, and/or revitalizing AI/AN 
language and culture. Additionally, innovative systems, public policy, 
and unmet research needs are identified. 

Promising Practices in English Language Learning 
And Retaining Tribal Languages 

To grow to their fullest potential, AI/AN children need strong 
and loving families and communities that care for their needs. Equally 
important, tribal children need an understanding of teachings about 
community traditions, tribal values, and language. The center of 
strength and identity for tribal children comes from belonging to 
an extended tribal community-family, their participation in cultural 
activities and in understanding the sacred meanings behind their 
tribal practices (Strand, 2003). While learning to understand their 
tribal heritage, AI/AN children are also gifted learners of other skills. 
Tribal children need a learning environment that nurtures their natural 
curiosity and their path to knowing. This balanced preparation of 
tribal children fully enables them to participate in their place in tribal 
communities as well as in the larger world community. Practice and 
preparation in their cultural traditions interwoven with math, science 
and the full range of experiences reflecting all early education learning 
domains helps them to understand and participate in their rightful 
place in our universe. 

The National Association for the Education of Young Children 
(NAEYC) position statement, “Responding to Linguistic and Cultural 
Diversity: Recommendations for Effective Early Childhood Educa- 



56 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



tion,” emphasizes that children learn and grow to their fullest potential 
when the home language and culture is valued and integrated within 
the curriculum and learning environment (NAEYC, 1995). The posi- 
tion statement recognizes that the language and culture of the home 
is what children know and it is the basis for their unique perspective 
on life and on learning. This important foundation and framework 
supports children as they begin to make sense of experiences and con- 
struct knowledge. From a very early age, and some would say before 
birth, many tribal children are taught about their connection to the 
world. They are taught to honor the reverence of tribal practices and 
they are taught to think of themselves as connected to one another 
and to the greater universe. This interconnectedness is essential for 
tribal children’s development of the self. Language, culture, and the 
home environment allow children to know who they are and from this, 
children form the basis for constructing knowledge. It is from these 
incredible eyes that tribal children see and interpret their world. 

The following practices and reflections come from an examina- 
tion of early care and education and AI/AN education literature, 
and from my experience in implementing a language revitalization 
program in the Central Council Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes of 
Alaska (CCTHITA) - Head Start program, in Juneau, Alaska. 

Addressing language in Program Design 

Given what we know about AI/AN children and the values 
placed on culture and language, how do educators build learning en- 
vironments to help children use these strengths to succeed? Tabors 
(2000) provided a definition that is important to AI/AN children, 
“A bilingual child is a child who is exposed to two languages, no 
matter what her level of proficiency is in the two languages.” Given 
this premise, AI/AN children are bilingual if they have any contact 
with family members, caregivers, or a community that is rooted in a 
tribal language or culture. With this understanding, the approach to 
answering the question of what programs and activities appear to 
promote effective use of English as a primary and/ or second language 



57 




NILA M. RINEHART 



and/ or are effective in developing, preserving, and/ or revitalizing the 
tribal language and culture must be set in research on best practices 
for children learning a second language (whether that language is 
English or a tribal language). 

Tabors (2000) provides an overview of bilingualism relative to 
how much English and the home language is spoken in the home 
and in the community. These distinctions are necessary to consider 
when planning for curriculum design and developing effective early 
care and education programs for second-language learning. Based on 
a home and community language inventory, professionals can make 
program design decisions to implement a variety of options: 

• AI/AN language immersion classrooms 

• Bilingual classrooms in the AI/AN language and English 

• English-only classrooms 

• Cultural and language enrichment programs for children and their 

families 

Tabors (1997) suggests that children learn language in two ways: 
simultaneously and sequentially. Simultaneous learning happens when 
children are learning more than one language at once. In her review of 
the literature and research on this subject, Tabors reports that teach- 
ers and parents often express concern that children will mix up the 
two languages, or that second language learning might hold children 
back. However, second language learning yields cognitive benefits. 
Tabors also contends that children learn languages in relationship to 
their experiences with them, and they are able to hold each language 
separate from the other, determining when to use which language. 

Sequential acquisition occurs when children begin learning their 
first language and then begin learning another. Tabors (1997) states 
that there are benefits associated with this language learning: “sec- 
ond-language learners, even very young ones, already have prior 
knowledge about language and its uses. In the process of learning a 
first language, they have determined what communication is all about, 
and, furthermore. . . plow communication works]. For these children, 



58 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



then, second-language acquisition is not a process of discovering what 
language is, but rather discovering what this language is.” Learning 
a second language can occur at any age, however, young children 
are better positioned to take on this task, more so than an adult or 
teenager who is faced with many more cognitive demands and tasks 
(Tabors, 1997, p.12). This outlook is supported by Peacock (1999), 
reflecting on work by Greymorning (1997; 1999), who maintained 
that “tribal groups that begin AI/AN language instruction at an early 
age will be more successful than tribes that concentrate on teaching 
older students.” 

Tabors (1997, p. 39) describes that researchers have observed 
a definite developmental sequence for young children learning a 
second language: 

1. There may be a period of time when children continue to use 
their home languages in second-language situations. 

2. When they discover that their home language does not work in 
this situation, children enter a nonverbal period as they collect 
information about the new language and perhaps spend some 
time in sound experimentation (and children use nonverbal com- 
munication). 

3. Children begin to go public, using individual words and phrases 
in the new language. 

4. Children begin to develop productive use of the second lan- 
guage. 

In making choices about program planning, AI/AN educators 
are wise in knowing about how children learn a second language 
(whether the objective is for children to learn the English or the 
tribal language). It is through understanding what has been learned 
about language acquisition that appropriate choices can be made for 
effective planning. 



59 




NILA M. RINEHART 



Curriculum Planning and Development 

In addition to selection of the appropriate language-learning 
environment, choices must be made about curriculum planning and 
development. The curriculum in early childhood classrooms serving 
AI/AN children must be grounded in community values, set in the 
societal context, rooted in the ebb and flow of community life, and 
is an emergent and reflective process. This curriculum belongs to 
the community and comes from the inside out (Rinehart, Tagaban, 
Focht, & Squibb, 2000). The outcomes are clear and include science, 
math, language, literacy, creative, physical, social and emotional out- 
comes. The process for developing these outcomes is inclusive of 
the children’s family and community. 

The Central Council Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska 
Head Start program developed a curriculum framework that is im- 
bedded in tribal values and learning outcomes. It is a collection of 
what we know as the best in relationship to tribal culture, community 
practices, subsistence life practices, and sciences that relate to our 
area of the world. The framework responds to the entire realm of 
child learning domains and outcomes as required by the Head Start 
Bureau, Alaska State School Standards, and state learning outcomes 
for young children. 

The At Yatx’I Satu Kei Nas.a’x Curriculum is rooted in the ebb 
and flow of the seasons and is relevant to the events happening in the 
communities and in the subsistence life style. The Tlingit economic 
year of hunting, salmon fishing, seaweed gathering and berry picking 
are central elements. The curriculum mirrors the values and beliefs of 
the community and of the families, and it also recognizes contempo- 
rary practices and knowledge. The learning domains include natural 
sciences, language and literacy, physical/motor, problem solving, 
and creative arts. Because the curriculum is centered on the seasons, 
there are “Gathering Places” for the fall, winter, spring, and summer. 
Within each Gathering Place, there are thematic units. For example, a 
Gathering Place for fall is Salmon Ecology. Within the unit on Salmon 
Ecology, there are several choices for lessons and activity plans asso- 



60 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



dated with each of the relevant learning domains. All of the lessons 
reinforce important community values of taking care of our natural 
resources because nature provides our food and subsistence. The 
lessons also include Tlingit language words and phrases for teachers 
to highlight with the children. The activities promote learning about 
the natural sciences and the ecological life of a salmon. There is a 
family-based curriculum tied to what the children are learning in the 
classroom “Family Feathers,” so that parents and grandparents can 
further the children’s learning. The family curriculum includes video 
tapes designed to help parents learn about child development and it 
is tied to a “Family Time Workbook” (CCTHITA Flead Start 2002). 
Furthermore, the lessons have as an outcome the ability for children 
to meet state early education learning standards. Curricula building 
on community strengths, values and practices enhance the lives and 
learning of young children by telling them a rich story about who 
they are and this story strengthens the children’s success in school. 

The need for AI/AN children to understand their own culture, 
language, and connection to the tribal community is no different 
than the need all children have to acquire a sense of belonging. For 
AI/AN children this means that it is important that they have op- 
portunities to learn about their culture, language, and history. This 
process must be in the earliest years, beginning first with the family 
and community. Continuity is established when this learning is rein- 
forced and continued through early education programs and later in 
elementary and secondary schools. 

Strategies identified by the English Language Learners Focus 
Group (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2002) and 
strategies that were identified and implemented in the CCTHITA 
language program include: 

• Learning environments are enhanced with the spoken and, when 
possible, the written language of the children. There is a conscious 
effort to extend and add to the children’s language. 

• Community elders and language masters are included among the 
staff either through paid or volunteer positions. They are trained 



61 




NILA M. RINEHART 



in language acquisition skills and have a defined role in language 
teaching 

• Family and community stories are documented and shared and 
appropriately used as learning tools in the classroom. 

• Staff members establish meaningful relationships with the com- 
munity and thereby have firsthand experience in the lives of the 
people they serve. 

• Resources are provided to provide a rich learning environment 
that has culturally relevant and authentic literature, art, music, 
and studies that are congruent with the community activities and 
embedded in community values. 

• Early literacy skills, alphabet knowledge, and phonemic aware- 
ness are a focus in classroom activities and are provided using 
developmentally and culturally appropriate methods. 

• Since many tribal languages may not be written, opportunities are 
created for community dialog to occur to work out agreements on 
appropriate spellings and language usage to begin documenting 
the language. 

• Publish curriculum frameworks, lesson plans, books, and materials 
in order to promote sharing. Distribute the resources widely to 
promote community progress. 

• Investigate and learn about language-teaching methods (i.e., im- 
mersion classrooms, total physical response methods); use simple 
language for new language learners, use facial gestures and point 
to objects to help children in understanding; repeat words and 
phrases; when children speak in the target language repeat and 
extend their language, always adding. 

• Help children link what they are learning to real life experiences 
and concrete objects. 

• Plan predictable routines so new language learners can anticipate 
and learn to expect what is coming. 

• Write books; develop picture dictionaries in both the home and 
target language. Distribute these resources widely. 

• Involve parents by inviting them to the classroom and special 
sessions so that they know what is occurring and help them to 



62 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



extend the learning in the home by providing resources. 

• Make available on loan early literacy and family literacy kits/bags. 
Include writing materials, books, tapes, master cards and readers, 
and other audiotapes of the target language. Encourage adults to 
read aloud to children and to tell stories. 

• Complete language inventories (surveys, not assessments) of 
parents and family members in order to inform planning and 
encourage their involvement in program activities. 

• Identify family, program and community resources to help with 
oral and written translations and new word translations. Also 
identify resources to assist in developing materials (artists and 
crafts people). 

• Provide summer curriculum development institutes, a place where 
teachers and community members (including parents) can develop 
curriculum materials (i.e., books, audiotapes, games, lesson plans, 
felt board stories, computer program software, family take-home 
kits). Reproduce these kits so that the resources reach beyond one 
classroom. 

• Use commercial materials to support lesson plans (such as plastic 
whale and sea mammal figurines for the water table to extend 
Tlingit stories and songs). (Commercial “Native American” cur- 
ricula and materials must be carefully reviewed for stereotypical 
or inauthentic presentation of culture.) 

Politics of Language and Culture 

Teaching or integrating AI/ AN culture and languages in schools 
is a politically and emotionally sensitive issue in most AI/AN com- 
munities. There is loss and trauma associated with this issue and 
many are skeptical and cautious about new initiatives. Many AI/AN 
communities may resist letting the schools become a place where 
language and culture are taught because culture and language are 
the responsibility of the family and community (Batchelder, 2000). 
These attitudes especially exist toward schools because schools often 
are controlled by outsiders. 



63 




NILA M. RINEHART 



AI/AN parents and families care about their children’s success 
and work at providing the best for them. Because of this inherent 
need to protect and to ensure their children can fully participate in 
the outside world, some parents may want English language learn- 
ing first as the best goal for their children, even when it risks the 
loss of home language. Overt and covert discrimination is very real 
and very much alive. When an Indian child learns to be grounded in 
tribal traditions and languages, their speech patterns are different and 
they think, interact and perceive their experiences in different ways. 
“Cultural differences can lead teachers to misunderstand children, to 
mis-assess their developmental competence, and to plan incorrectly 
for their educational achievement” (Bowman, 1994). 

Also, because of past efforts to assimilate AI/AN people, many 
parents in the parenting generation have lost proficiency in the tribal 
language and this will create challenges in revitalizing languages that 
are risk. With many demands on family life, second language learning 
may not be a priority. 

Lastly, there are many dialects, alphabet systems, proper spelling, 
and language usage to consider. There may be disagreement among 
key members of the community in the “right way.” Sometimes these 
disagreements can cause great divisions in the community. 

There are many solid reasons why educators should not integrate 
the language and culture of AI/AN children into the school setting. 
However, there are many more reasons why responsible educators 
should. Strategies include: 

• Create community conversations about how best to support AI/ 
AN children to succeed and to learn about how best to integrate 
their language and culture in the schools. 

• Create a language consortium, with broad representation and 
support. The consortium can assist in making critical decisions 
about language usage. 

• Expect there will be those who disagree and professionals will 
need to find people who can support and encourage them to keep 
moving forward. 



64 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



How AI/AN Children Learn 

There have been some debates over how AI/AN children learn. 
Some assert that AI/AN children have particular learning styles. 
Learning styles often reported in AI/AN children include a greater 
capacity for artistic expression and symbolism, visual cognitive learn- 
ing, and conceptualizing from a holistic framework. As with any 
theory, we should be cautioned that by concentrating on these learning 
styles we must not stereotype children and diminish the individuality 
of AI/AN children because they are all very unique. Research has 
found learning style differences between cultural groups and within 
groups, and learning style studies are often contradictory. There is a 
need for more research in this area, as well as an identification of ef- 
fective interventions for differences in learning styles (Soleste, 2002). 
This information is another piece among many to consider when 
planning an appropriate learning environment for AI/AN children. 
Planning deliberate classroom environments that are developmentally 
appropriate, individualized, and rich with a carefully planned cur- 
riculum combined with effective teaching methodology is essential 
for young AI/ AN children. 

Staff Development 

Teachers and administrators must possess a level of cultural un- 
derstanding, be reflective in their practice, and create an environment 
respectful of diversity (Pewewardy & Hammer, 2003). It is important 
for children to experience schools that employ caring adults who can 
relate in a culturally competent manner to the children’s culture and 
traditions. These attributes are important whether or not teachers are 
representative of the child’s community. Just because staff may be 
from the community does not mean they are able to create a caring 
environment for children to experiment and grow. In order to teach 
children, especially children from different and linguistic backgrounds, 
teachers must know themselves. We all come from different places 
in life. Our experiences are different, and these experiences have an 



65 




NILA M. RINEHART 



enormous impact on our belief systems and in the way we process 
information. According to U.S. Department of Health & Human 
Services (2002), Strategies for staff development include: 

• Provide staff with ongoing training and development on issues 
related to culture including learning about the historical context 
of the people. 

• Provide staff with training on first and second language acquisi- 
tion and learning. 

• Create opportunities for staff to be involved with the commu- 
nity. 

• Provide opportunities for staff to examine their own beliefs and 
attitudes toward second language learning and cultural issues. 
Create provocative conversations to allow staff to wrestle with 
their ideas, biases, truths, and allow for rediscovery. 

• Use the help of early childhood experts, theorists, researchers and 
scholars to share knowledge and skills with practitioners. 

• Establish partnerships with colleges and universities to obtain 
college credit for professional training in these areas; also request 
the creation of classes to assist in the community’s efforts. 

• Establish partnerships with other language-learning communities, 
consortiums, and institutes to share knowledge and adopt models; 
join and/or establish language consortiums to work in support 
of one another to further language goals. 

• For language revitalization communities, provide opportunities 
for teachers to learn the target second language (i.e., summer 
institutes, language coach/mentors, immersion programs for 
teachers). 

Family and Community Partnerships 

AI/AN parents and community leaders must be involved in 
decision making in early education programs, especially in decisions 
concerning second language learning and curriculum. Empowering 
families means working in partnership with them to jointly make 



66 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



the best and most informed decisions possible for the well-being of 
AI/ AN children. According to U.S. Department of Health & Human 
Services (2002), strategies include: 

• Identify family and community interests, dreams for the future, 
strengths and needs. Use this as a basis for planning. 

• Share information with parents and the community about the 
developmental process of learning a second language; investigate 
with parents the political and social-emotional side of language. 

• Provide opportunities for parents to learn about early childhood 
development, and culturally related child rearing practices. 

• Provide opportunities to involve parents in their own second 
language development by providing classes and by providing at- 
home projects focused on language and literacy. 

• Encourage parents and the community to talk, sing, tell stories, 
hold conversations with children that extend and enrich their 
vocabulary in their home language and in English. 

• Use the family’s home language in verbal and written communica- 
tion as much as possible. 

• Invite elders, extended family, and community members to be 
involved in the program either as paid staff or as volunteers. 

Outcomes for All AN Children 

Before a teacher can facilitate learning, the teacher must know 
what learning objectives and outcomes are expected. For many years 
schools and teachers developed their own outcomes. These outcomes 
were based on the teacher and school’s culture and values. In order 
to facilitate learning for AI/AN children, teachers and schools need 
to know what a successful AI/AN child will be like once that child 
has gone through the educational system. What skills will he or she 
possess, what things will he or she be able to do in life, what things 
will he or she have experienced? Only the parents, extended family, 
communities, and nations into which AI/AN children are born can 
answer these questions. In early education programs. Head Start has 



67 




NILA M. RINEHART 



taken the lead in determining educational outcomes by instituting 
locally developed plans and outcomes that also respond to national 
outcomes. These plans are used as a tool to document, for the com- 
munity and program, the kinds of skills, abilities, hopes, and dreams 
parents and families have for their children, and what kind of com- 
mitment the Head Start program will have to fulfill the need. Teachers 
and schools can only expect participation and support from families 
and communities if the family and community’s priorities become 
the teacher and school’s priorities. 

Many AI/AN communities are documenting their tribal values so 
that families, schools, and communities can facilitate learning in a way 
that respects and activates important practices that help children suc- 
ceed. In this way, the community begins to voice the things that make 
AI/AN children unique. When these outcomes are further focused 
by integrating other local, state and national learning outcomes, the 
combination offers children possibilities to excel in all developmental 
domains. Strategies include: 

• Invite parents and the community to identify what they want their 
children to be like in the future, what they want them to know, and 
what they want their children to be. Ask parents to envision their 
children in the future and build outcomes on these visions. 

• Use child outcomes, the culture, natural environment, community 
happenings, and values as the framework to build a curriculum. 

• Integrate local, state, and national child outcomes with locally 
developed child outcomes. 

• Partner with colleges, universities, language institutes, and other 
professionals to assist. 

• Learn from other communities, adopting methods and 
processes. 

Assessment 

Now more than ever, early childhood education programs and 
educational systems must prove their effectiveness. Accountability 



68 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



is often measured by standardized achievement tests that are not de- 
signed to measure true child outcomes. These tests can be harmful to 
children if they are interpreted and used in the wrong way. Poor test 
scores among AI/ AN children seriously undermine the dignity of 
AI/AN children, their families, communities, and nations. Educators 
must be careful about how standardized tests and assessments are 
delivered and used. Strategies for assessment include: 

• “Identify measures and processes that assess first and second 
language levels of proficiency; use observation, recording strate- 
gies, and documentation procedures that are aligned with child 
outcomes and are meaningful for parents to interpret and under- 
stand” (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2002). 

• Consider the use of observational, narrative-rich descriptions of 
children during a regular classroom day, or when children are in 
their home environment during a family visit (Tabors, 2000). 

• Use principles and guidelines to inform practice, including position 
statements such as the joint position statement of the National As- 
sociation for the Education of Young Children and the National 
Association of Early Childhood Specialists in State Departments 
of Education, “Early Childhood Curriculum, Assessment, and 
program Evaluation” (NAEYC, 2003). 

In summary, young AI/AN children can attend well-provisioned 
and safe, aesthetically beautiful early care and education programs 
that are specifically designed for their tribal community. The curricu- 
lum incorporates everyday life in a way young children understand. 
The curriculum is individualized for the community and child, it is 
experiential, and it develops children’s physical, cognitive, social, 
emotional, spiritual, and creative skills. The learning environment 
and significant adults nourish the child’s individual and communal 
spirit. The children speak and are read to in their tribal language as 
well as in English. The community is supportive and contributes to 
their learning. Innovative practices, including research, are shared with 
practitioners to continually renew and improve outcomes. 



69 




NILA M. RINEHART 



Innovations in Early Care and Education Systems 
And Public Policy 

Several research projects have been undertaken to provide in- 
formation to guide public policy, enhance services, and practice in 
early care and education. The following are a few representative 
examples: 

• The Family and Child Experiences Study (FACES) is a national 
longitudinal study that describes the characteristics, experiences, 
and outcomes for children and families in Head Start. The study 
is providing information about quality and outcomes for young 
children. The study was initiated in 1997 and continues to provide 
valuable data (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 
August 2003). 

• The Early Head Start Research and Evaluation Project measured 
outcomes and collected information about programs and family 
experiences within Head Start programs. The analysis will link 
program interventions with child and family outcomes (U.S. De- 
partment of Health & Human Services, retrieved July 2005). 

• Head Start Impact Study was launched in 1998 as a congressional 
mandate as a part of Head Start’s authorization. The purpose of 
the study is to determine the impact of Head Start on the children 
it serves (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, retrieved 
July 20, 2005). 

Although these studies and many others contribute to the early 
care and education knowledge base, AI/AN children have not directly 
benefited from these projects. The body of knowledge that has been 
gained through these large-scale efforts has not included this special 
population and there is strong consensus that the unique characteris- 
tics of tribal children require specialized approaches to research design 
and approaches. Additionally, legislative mandates have excluded tribal 
programs from certain national Head Start research and evaluation 
activities (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2004). 



70 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



In 2001, the Head Start bureau initiated a 2-year AI/AN Head 
Start Research and Outcomes Assessment (U.S. Department of 
Health & Human Services, 2004). The project was launched to ad- 
dress the following questions: 

• What are the research priorities and needs of AI/AN pro- 
grams? 

• What issues should be considered in conducting research in 
American Indian and Alaska Native Head Start programs? 

• How can ACF support partnerships between researchers and 
American Indian- Alaska Native Head Start programs? 

• To what extent are culturally appropriate instruments, measures, 
and procedures available to assess outcomes? 

• What technical assistance would be helpful for program staff in 
terms of conducting developmental screenings and assessing child 
outcomes? 

A synthesis of relevant studies, articles, reports, theses and dis- 
sertations, unpublished documents, and other materials was gathered 
and the following references are gathered from this synthesis (U.S. 
Department of Health & Human Services, 2003). It should be noted 
that relatively few recent studies or resources were found that further 
contribute to early care and education English or tribal language 
learning. However, the studies, articles, and other documents found 
in the synthesis continue to support the use of culturally appropriate 
practices to help provide contextual links for children’s learning. 

In 2004 the Head Start Bureau launched an Innovation and Im- 
provement Grant program with one of the priorities being English 
Language Learners. Several projects were awarded in the planning 
phase of the project in 2004. In 2005, projects will be selected for 
a full 3-year implementation phase. Because AI/AN children are 
considered a special population, they have not been included in this 
initiative. The rationale for not including AI/AN children is because 
they are thought to be trying to retain and revitalize their AI/AN 
language and not necessarily learn the English language. However, if 



71 




NILA M. RINEHART 



Tabors’ definition of a bilingual child is accepted, then many AI/AN 
children are indeed bilingual and in need of this kind of support. 

In 2002, the Head Start Bureau sponsored an English Language 
Learners Focus Group and issued a report on findings. The purpose 
of the session was to solicit specific recommendations regarding ef- 
fective approaches for addressing the opportunities and challenges 
presented by working with young children who are English language 
learners (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2002). 

In 2005, the Head Start bureau initiated a bulletin on English 
Language Learners that highlights promising practices and resources 
for programs to use in serving English Language Learners. Among 
the many articles in this bulletin is an article entitled “Head Start: An 
Avenue to Revitalize a Language.” This article provides insight into 
the efforts of the Cherokee Nation Head Start program in continuing 
the tribal culture and language (Drew, 2005). 

The Administration for Native Americans (ANA) funded 23 
(116 received) applications from tribal entities in 2003 and 33 (117 
received) in 2004 in the area of Language Preservation. ANA grants 
are awarded from one competitive area at any time. Therefore, while 
eligible applicants may compete for a grant in each of the three 
competitive areas (Social and Economic Development Strategies, 
Environmental Regulatory Enhancement and American Indian and 
Alaska Native Language Preservation), an applicant may only submit 
one application per competitive area and no applicant may receive 
more than one grant in each competitive area, including any exist- 
ing ANA grants (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 
retrieved July 15, 2005). Tribes must choose their priorities between 
critical areas. 

Released in 2000, the Head Start Child Outcomes Framework 
is intended to guide HS programs in their curriculum planning and 
ongoing assessment of the progress and accomplishments of children 
(U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2003). Relative to this 
initiative is the Head Start Bureau’s National Reporting System (NRS), 
which AI/AN programs completed nearly 16,000 NRS assessments 
in 2003-2004. Although the bureau cautions reading too much into 



72 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



the data, the following findings are relative to AI/AN Children in 
Head Start. American Indian children in Head Start show growth in 
understanding spoken English, vocabulary, in letter recognition, in 
early math skills. The greatest gains were made in letter recognition 
and early math skills (Shultz, 2004). 

Unmet Research Needs and Recommendations 
For Additional Research 

Many studies have contributed to the early care and education 
and family development knowledge base (i.e., studies in brain de- 
velopment, the effects of poverty on the educational outcomes of 
children, the effects of domestic violence and child maltreatment on 
young children) (Hixon, S., personal communication of the National 
Indian Head Start Directors Association, 2004). These studies have 
been used to guide practice and program development and are valu- 
able resources to the early care and education profession. However, 
research specific to the AI/AN population needed and highlighted 
by many of the authors cited in this paper. 

When working with AI/AN children and families, it is critically 
important to use research as a tool to help better practice. How- 
ever, there have been few studies that focus specifically on AI/AN 
children. Being such a small percentage of the overall population, 
the AI/AN population is often left out. When studies are brought 
about, AI/AN communities are forced to make comparisons across 
tribal groups, which can be very problematic. Although there are 
many similarities among AI/AN tribal groups, we are also very dif- 
ferent. AI/AN people speak different languages, some of them are 
written, but most are not. Our tribal histories are different. We live 
in small rural communities and large urban ones. Some live in close- 
knit tribal communities, and many do not. Our social systems are 
structured differently as are our governments. Lastly, there are always 
differences, even among families that are affected by demographics, 
socioeconomic status, and many other variables. All of these issues 
make research and the interpretation of research challenging. 



73 




NILA M. RINEHART 



The following is a summary of research needs as identified by my 
own practice, by many of the authors cited in this paper, the AI/AN 
research agenda for Head Start programs, the National Indian Head 
Start Director’s Association, and the English Language Learners 
Focus Group. 

Tribal Identity and Culture 

Differences in educational outcomes for AI/AN bilingual children 
and English-only children; effective ways to promote AI/AN lan- 
guage instruction in a multi-language environment; developmentally 
appropriate teaching practices that support second language learning 
(English or tribal language); effective practices in teaching/ revitaliz- 
ing the AI/AN language; case studies of community tribal language 
revitalization projects; links of culturally relevant/ tribal language 
enhanced programs to academic child learning outcomes. 

Early childhood education. Data on long-term educational outcomes 
for AI/AN children who attend Head Start as compared to AI/AN 
children who do not; more information about learning styles in AI/ 
AN children; the content and structure of Head Start instruction 
(effectiveness of mixed age groups, benefits or drawbacks of full day 
versus part day); classroom strategies and interventions that accom- 
modate differences in learning styles; how and if learning strategies 
(styles) change over time; socialization of learning styles; appropriate 
screening, assessment and outcomes measurement (birth to 5). 

Health and development. Ties of tribal identity, language and cul- 
ture to social and emotional well-being and links to educational 
outcomes. 

Staff and staff development. Effects of teachers’ attitudes and meth- 
ods of interacting with children and links to educational outcomes; 
strategies and best practices in teaching methods for teaching second 
languages. 



74 




EFFECTIVE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAMS 



Family and community involvement. Parents’ disciplinary practices and 
their effects on children’s mental health and educational outcomes; 
family involvement in programs that are embedded in the family’s cul- 
ture and language; family participation in tribal language revitalization 
programs; effects of family involvement on student achievement. 

Accessibility of research findings. In the review of literature concern- 
ing the topic of this paper, there are many important research proj- 
ects, papers, and information that can contribute to daily practice 
in teaching young children. The problem that exists is making the 
outcomes of research projects and recommendations accessible to 
teachers and administrators who are in the process of working with 
and designing programs for young AI/AN children. There is not a 
clearinghouse of materials, resources, and research available to the 
AI/AN early care and education community in the topic areas ad- 
dressed by this paper. 



Summary 

The strategies addressed in this paper are possible goals. Our na- 
tions must realize the essential gift that children bring to our futures. 
We must learn to nourish every child by providing every essential that 
children need to grow and thrive in our world. The broader com- 
munity must understand that there is not one right and true way and 
that many perspectives are desirable and are necessary for survival 
and growth. We must all recognize that the only thing stopping us 
from providing young AI/ AN children with the essential things they 
need to grow and learn so they can assume their rightful place in our 
world is us. 



References 

Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2003). Kids count pocket guide: American 
Indian children. Baltimore, MD: Author. 



75 




NILA M. RINEHART 



Batchelder, A. (2000). Teaching Dine’ language and culture in Navajo 
schools: Voices from the community. InJ. Rehyner, J. Martin, L. 
Lockard & W. Sakiestewa Gilbert (Eds.) Learn in beauty: Indigenous 
education for a new century. Flagstaff: Northern Arizona University. 

Bowman, B. & Stott, F. (1994). Understanding development in a 
cultural context: The challenge for teachers. In B. Mallory & R. 
New (Eds.), Diversity and developmental 'ly appropriate practices: challenges 
for early childhood education. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Central Council Tlingit & Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska Head Start. 
(2002). Family time workbook: Family feathers, Video Extension Activi- 
ties. Juneau, AK: Author. 

Central Council Tlingit & Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska Head 
Start. (2002). Family Feathers: Understanding and guiding your 
preschool child: Tips and tools from parents, professionals, and 
elders. (Video series). Juneau, AK: Author. 

Drew, R. & Grass, R. (2005). Head Start: An avenue to revitalize a 
language. Head Start bulletin, 78. Retrieved Jan. 31, 2006, from 
http:/ /www.headstartinfo.org/ publications/hsbulletin78/ 
hsb78_19.htm 

Greymorning, S. (1997). Going beyond words: The Arapaho immer- 
sion program. In Reyhner, J. (Ed.), Teaching indigenous languages. 
Flagstaff: Northern Arizona University. 

Greymorning, S. (1999). Running the gauntlet of an indigenous lan- 
guage program. In Reyhner, J. (et al.) (Eds.), Fevitaliying indigenous 
languages. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University. 

National Association for the Education of Young Children. (1995). A 
position statement: Responding to linguistic and cultural diversity recommenda- 
tions for effective early childhood education. Washington, DC: Author. 

National Association for the Education of Young Children. (2003). 
A position statement: Early childhood curriculum, assessment, 
and program evaluation: building an effective, accountable system 
in programs for children birth through age 8. Washington, DC: 
Author. 

Peacock, T. D., & Day, D. R. (1999). Teaching American Indian and Alaska 
Native languages in the schools: What has been learned. Charleston, WV: 



76 




TRANSITIONS 



ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. 

Pewewardy, C., & Hammer, RC. (2003). Culturally responsive teachingfor 
American Indian students. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on 
Rural Education and Small Schools. 

Rinehart, N. (2005). [Interview with Linda Killscrow regarding Ameri- 
can Indian and Alaska Native children participating in Child Care 
and Development Fund program] . 

Rinehart, N., Tagaban, J., Focht, D., & Squibb, L. (2002). Including 
AI/AN culture in the curriculum. Proceedings of the Head Start bu- 
reau Child Development Institute, Albuquerque, NM: U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services, Head Start Bureau. 

Shultz, T. (2004, September). Head start national reporting system update. 
Proceedings of the 2 nd Annual ALANPB National Conference. Washing- 
ton. DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

Soleste, H. R., & Tharp, R. G. (2002). Theoretical perspectives, research 
implications of the learning styles of American Indian and Alaska Native 
students. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Educa- 
tion and Small Schools. 

Strand, J.A., & Peacock, T.D. (2003). Nurturing resilience and school 
success in American Indian and Alaska Native students. ERIC Digest. 
ED471488. 

Tabors, P. (1997). One child, two languages. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. 
Brookes. 

Tabors, P. (2000). Bilingualism in early childhood education. Proceedings 
of the National Head Start Child Development Institute. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Head Start 
Bureau. 

U.S. Head Start Bureau. (2005). Head Start program fact sheet: fiscal year 
2004. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. 

U.S. Head Start Bureau. (2003). The Head Start leaders guide to positive 
child outcomes: strategies to support positive child outcomes. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 



77 




NILA M. RINEHART 



U.S. Head Start Bureau. (2004). Establishing a research agenda for American 
Indian and Alaska Native Head Start programs. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. 

U.S. Head Start Bureau. (2003). A summary of research and publications on 
early childhood for American Indian and Alaska Native children. Wash- 
ington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

U.S. Head Start Bureau. (2003). Head Start Family and Child Experience 
Survey (FACES). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services. 

U.S. Head Start Bureau, (n.d.). Head Start Impact Study. Retrieved July 
20, 2005, from http:/ / www.acf.hhs.gov/ programs/ opre/hs/im- 
pact_study 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2002). The American Indian and Alaska Native 
Population: 2000. Retrieved July 15, 2005, from http:/ /www.census. 
gov/ prod / 2002pubs / c2kbr0 1 - 1 5.pdf 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, (n.d.). Frequently 
asked questions. Retrieved July 15, 2005 from http:/ /www.acf.dhhs. 
gov/ programs/ ana 

U.S. Head Start Bureau. (2002). English language learners focus group 
report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. 

U.S. Head Start Bureau, (n.d.). Early Head Start Research and Evalu- 
ation Project. Retrieved July 15, 2005, from http://www.acf.hhs. 
gov/ programs/ opr e/ ehs/ ehs_resrch/ index.html. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 



78 




TRANSITIONS 



Transitions of American Indian and Alaskan Native Children 
From Pre-school to Kindergarten 

Cheryl D. Clay 

When young children anticipate entering kindergarten, they may have 
feelings of excitement, uncertainty, or even fear of the unknown. 
Likewise, families, including American Indian and Alaska Native 
(AI/ AN) families may look forward to their children entering kinder- 
garten with both anticipation and apprehension. Will their children 
find success in school? Some families of AI/AN children, due to 
their own challenges with schooling, may be apprehensive about how 
their children will cope with the new teacher and his/her academic 
and behavioral expectations. Is my child prepared to succeed with the 
academic goals of kindergarten? Will my child behave and learn what 
this kindergarten teacher expects? Will my child be accepted by other 
youngsters and find friends in school? What can I do to help my son 
or daughter succeed in kindergarten? Although AI/ AN families may 
experience similar hopes and fears as other families, their children 
may also face challenges of coping with curriculum, language and 
cultural discontinuities between the educational contexts of preschool 
and kindergarten. AI/AN parents and preschool and kindergarten 
personnel seek transition strategies, programs, and models to facilitate 
AI/AN children in learning academic skills and social competencies 
needed for school success while maintaining language and cultural 
participation with their families and tribal communities. 

The purpose of this paper is to explore the transition of AI/AN 
children as part of the change process of entering kindergarten along 
with maintaining connections with their unique home languages and 
cultures. First, a brief history of transition programs is reviewed in- 
cluding definitions of transition and continuity. Second, attention is 
given to how preschools and elementary schools support the involve- 
ment of AI/ AN families as they and their children transition between 
preschool and kindergarten. Third, promising transition strategies 
for AI/AN children from the literature are reviewed. Fourth, pro- 



79 




CHERYL CLAY 



gram models in the literature are described including features that 
address ways to build successful relationships among families and 
school personnel from diverse language and cultural backgrounds. 
Fifth, research needs and recommendations are discussed. Finally, 
policy recommendations for improving the transition of AI/AN to 
kindergarten are proposed. 

Flistory of Transition 

For the past 20 years positive adjustment during transition to 
kindergarten has been broadly recognized as the first step to school 
success. In 1992 transition was defined in the U.S. Department of 
Education’s National Transition Study as “those activities initiated 
by schools or preschools to bridge the gap between the preschool 
and kindergarten experiences” (RMS Research Corporation, 1992). 
The transition of AI/AN children from preschool to kindergarten 
encompasses the changes that occur as AI/AN children complete 
the last few months in their preschool, often reservation-based Head 
Start, classrooms and their first few months in kindergarten class- 
rooms. Within an ecological view of transition to kindergarten (Pianta 
& Cox, 1999), children and family members experience letting go of 
relationships with the familiar people and setting of preschool and 
forming new relationships with unfamiliar kindergarten personnel and 
procedures. They also encounter different curricula in preschool and 
kindergarten. Preschools, including Head Start, have been designed 
as developmentally appropriate while kindergartens were academi- 
cally oriented. Developmentally appropriate meant that the curricu- 
lum and methods were designed to match the cognitive/language, 
social/ emotional, and physical/ motor developmental levels of the 
children in the class. In contrast, kindergarten curricula focused on 
the academic goals of the school district curriculum for all children 
regardless of individual developmental levels. 

Not all children adjust to the academic and behavioral expecta- 
tions of kindergarten programs in ways that are both effective and 
appropriate (socially competent). According to Lombardi (1992), 



80 




TRANSITIONS 



“many children have problems adjusting to elementary school pro- 
grams that have a different philosophy, teaching style, and structure 
than those programs in which they participated during their earlier 
years.” As many as half of entering kindergarten students experienced 
adjustment difficulties that interfered with their learning progress 
according to kindergarten teachers (Pianta & Cox, 1999). Children 
who experience greater discontinuities, such as language, culture, and 
socioeconomic background, between preschool and kindergarten 
programs may need more supports in order to adapt to the new 
schooling and benefit from learning activities. 

In the 1980s and 1990s, preschool teachers and parents endeav- 
ored to “prepare” children for kindergarten with school and home 
“readiness” activities. These efforts were intended to bridge the gap 
between developmentally appropriate preschool curricula and aca- 
demic kindergarten curricula (Lombardi, 1992) by preparing children 
to perform specific academic skills and to behave in ways effective 
and appropriate to kindergarten. For children deemed “not ready” 
according to readiness screening procedures of academic and behav- 
ioral skills, parents were often advised to provide the “gift of time” 
through academic red shirting (extra year of preschool), transition 
kindergarten classes, transition first grade classes and kindergarten 
retention. There is some evidence that Native American children were 
referred to these extra year programs at a disproportionately higher 
rate compared with non-Native American children (Clay, 1998). 

The popularity of “extra year” programs diminished after the Na- 
tional Association for the Education of Young Children ([NAEYC], 
1995a) issued a position statement on school readiness. This docu- 
ment reviewed longitudinal research that showed short-term academic 
benefits of an extra year washed out by second or third grade and 
the risk of damage to self-esteem was more likely to negatively affect 
academic performance in the long term. Many policy makers and 
practitioners shifted their concern from preparing “ready” children to 
changing schools to be ready for all students. According to NAEYC, 
schools were called upon to promote universal school readiness 
through schools that are ready for all age-eligible students, by: 



81 




CHERYL CLAY 



• Addressing the inequities in early life experiences so that all 
children have access to the opportunities that promote school 
success; 

• Recognizing and supporting individual differences among children 
including linguistic and cultural differences; and 

• Establishing reasonable and appropriate expectations of children’s 
capabilities upon school entry. 

The burden of “readiness” shifted from “ready” children to 
“ready” schools. According to Shore (1998) the responsibility for 
a successful transition was a specific responsibility of elementary 
schools: 

• Ready schools strive for continuity between early care and educa- 
tion programs and elementary schools. 

• Ready schools smooth the transition from home to school. 

Continuity is the concept of similarities or differences between 
preschool and kindergarten. Continuity is the degree to which behav- 
iors learned in the first environment are seen as appropriate in the 
next. Will adults in kindergarten respond to children in ways that are 
consistent with expectations established in preschool? If children sud- 
denly find that their usual ways of responding are no longer effective 
and appropriate, they will experience discontinuity. American Indian 
children experience cultural discontinuity through disrupted recip- 
rocal use of oral language in kindergarten consistent with academic 
disorientation, lower oral language skills and slower development of 
literacy skills (Clay, 1998). It is possible to reduce academic, language, 
and cultural discontinuities through family involvement and building 
relationships that sustain communication and coordination among 
stakeholders (Smrekar, Guthrie, Owens, & Sims, 2001). 

Preschool and Kindergarten Transition Efforts 

Preschools and schools may address the need for greater continu- 



82 




TRANSITIONS 



ity during transitions of AI/ AN children to kindergarten with three 
changes: 1) coordination of the curricula of preschools and kinder- 
gartens; 2) school procedures to build relationships and maintain 
communication and coordination of stakeholders; and, 3) specific 
strategies to address the languages and cultures of AI/AN families. 
The following discussion reviews research related to each of these 
ways to change preschools and schools, increase continuity across 
settings, and improve adjustments and school success of AI/AN 
children. 

Early childhood care and education programs must be high 
quality in order to effectively prepare young children for school suc- 
cess (Helburn et al., 1995). In this study, children from low-income, 
single-parent families who attended low-quality early childhood 
education programs were most vulnerable to lower academic skills 
in kindergarten, first and second grades. On a wider scale, in 2003 
federal legislation required Head Start grantees to assess and plan 
curriculum around more academic content focused on specific child 
outcomes in literacy: 

• Understands an increasingly complex and varied vocabulary. 

• For non-English-speaking children, progresses in listening to and 
understanding English. 

• Develops increasing abilities to understand and use language to 
communicate information, experiences, ideas, feelings, opinions, 
needs, questions; and for other varied purposes. 

• Uses an increasingly complex and varied spoken vocabulary. 

• For non-English-speaking children, progresses in speaking Eng- 
lish. 

• Associates sounds with written words, such as awareness that 
different words begin with the same sound. 

• Recognizes a word as a unit of print, or awareness that letters 
are grouped to form words, and that words are separated by 
spaces. 

• Identifies at least 10 letters of the alphabet, especially those in 
their own name. 



83 




CHERYL CLAY 



• Knows that letters of the alphabet are a special category of visual 

graphics that can be individually named. 

In this way Head Start Program curricula became a closer match 
to the more expectations for academic skills of entering kindergar- 
teners. More recently, some elementary schools have reached out to 
coordinate curricula further by housing Head Start or preschools on 
site. This facilitated adopting preschool and kindergarten literacy and 
mathematics curricula from the same company. 

On the kindergarten side of transition efforts, the National As- 
sociation of Elementary School Principals urged elementary princi- 
pals to lead initiatives among stakeholders that advocate for quality 
early childhood programs associated with their schools (2005). This 
report specifically recommended that principals “create transition 
programs that ensure close contact among Head Start programs, pre- 
school programs and public schools” (p. 9). In contrast to common 
assumptions, families from all cultural backgrounds, education, and 
income levels are known to have a positive influence on their children’s 
school success (Ho Sui-Chu & Willms, 1996; Shaver & Walls, 1998). 
In research synthesized by Henderson and Mapp and published by 
Southwest Educational Development Laboratory (2003), programs 
that strengthened connections among school, family and community 
had a positive impact on school achievement. When schools wel- 
comed parents to be involved and addressed specific needs of families 
and the community, their transition programs were more successful 
in generating engagement and supporting the positive adjustment of 
children (Pena, 2000; Sanders & Harvey, 2000). 

As AI/AN children enter kindergarten they encounter cultural 
discontinuities related to differences between home languages and 
cultures and mainstream schools. It may be the first time they are in a 
position to relate to non-Native American authority figures and peers 
without older AI/ AN family or community members to mediate the 
experience (Vygotsky, 1978). Children who attend reservation-based 
Head Start classrooms often have AI/AN teachers, aids, or support 
staff who act as their language and cultural mediators (Moore, Beatty, 



84 




TRANSITIONS 



& Perez-Mendez, 1995). For example, the events of daily life such 
as birth, tragedies, stresses, job changes or accomplishments of a 
family are more readily known, understood and accommodated in 
a relatively small, homogeneous AI/AN community. The language 
and way language is used are more readily understood by an AI/AN 
child in their reservation (Clay, 1 998) or village classroom. When chil- 
dren enter kindergarten, it may be their first experience interpreting 
and responding to languages of non-American Indians or Alaskan 
Natives on their own. To the extent that families are involved in the 
transition of their children to kindergarten, they serve as mediators 
to interpret and support the daily learning activities. 

Although much was known about the value of a positive adjust- 
ment to kindergarten in the 1990s, the National Education Goals 
Panel declared that “transition activities . . . are the exception rather 
than the rule in our public schools” (as cited in Bohan-Baker & Little, 
2002). The most common way kindergarten teachers (95%) helped 
children make the transition to kindergarten was to talk with the 
child’s parent after school started. What, specifically, is known about 
how schools may support families as they transition to kindergarten? 
How do school personnel facilitate stakeholders to form positive 
relationships during transition? Currently, many schools have transi- 
tion programs designed to ameliorate apprehensions of all families; 
promising features of these transition programs are now considered 
for AI/AN children and families. 

A review of current transition practices shows many ways stake- 
holders seek to communicate, coordinate, and increase the quality and 
quantity of family involvement. They share information about school, 
early education, individual children, and ways to respect language and 
culture along with other promising transition practices. 

Sharing Information about School 

• Principal, teacher, teacher assistant and other support staff who 

warmly welcome families, but do not intimidate 

• Clear, jargon-free description of the kindergarten program 



85 




CHERYL CLAY 



• Tour of the classrooms to see teachers and children “in action” 

• Tour of the school including gym, cafeteria, playground, nurse’s 
station 

• Clear answers to questions in their native language 

• Expectations of the school of entering kindergarteners and their 
families 

• Opportunity to meet and interact with other parents 

• User-friendly printed information and a phone number for future 
questions 

• Parents may help children become familiar with kindergarten 
teachers by reviewing their names, showing their pictures and 
talking about the kindergarten classroom (Kraft-Sayre & Pianta, 
1999 ). 

Sharing Information about Preschool Children 

• Preschool curriculum and methods 

• Preschool personnel prepare information about individual chil- 
dren: health, special needs, test results and progress reports 

• Kindergarten teachers adapt curriculum with above informa- 
tion 

• Transition staffing for children with identified disabilities in pre- 
school 

• Invite parents of preschoolers to PTO/PTA meetings 

• Joint inservice professional training with preschool and kinder- 
garten teachers 

• Resource/ parent center and libraries in preschools and elementary 
schools open to all staff and parents 

• Aggregate data on assessments of individual children, classrooms 
and programs shared with preschool and kindergarten person- 
nel 

• Respect for the language and culture of each family 

• Classroom environment shows AI/AN culture with pictures, 
children’s literature, cultural displays 

• Curriculum materials (counting objects, stories, vocabulary of 



86 




TRANSITIONS 



common concepts in native language — colors, numbers, animals, 
direction words, family relationships) 

• Classroom procedures reflect AI/AN cultural values (daily greet- 
ings, display of knowledge, individual vs. group work, use of time 
and space) 

• Classroom presenters from AI/ AN communities such as dancers, 
musicians, cultural events, storytellers, pottery makers, weavers, 
tribal leaders 

• ECE and kindergarten staffed with bilingual teacher aides, as 
needed, to serve as cultural mediators 

• Preschool and kindergarten personnel trained in cross-cultural 
competence (Moore, Beatty & Perez-Mendez, 1995). 

Other promising practices to involve families in transition to 

kindergarten include: 

• Spring kindergarten visits by preschool children and parents 

• Home learning activities such as reading to children and discus- 
sions 

• Elementary school informational meetings about kindergarten in 
the spring 

• Preschools partner with local PTAs 

• Home visits by preschool and kindergarten teachers 

• Family support groups during transition to kindergarten 

• Preschool teachers maintain informal contact with preschool 
“graduates” 

• Early registration and assignment of children to kindergarten 
classes 

• Class assignments with kindergarten teachers who taught older 
siblings to facilitate relationships between the teacher and family 
members (Kraft-Sayre & Pianta, 1999). 

While these features of transition programs offer promise for 

communication and coordination among stakeholders, specific bar- 
riers have also been identified; class lists generated too late to make 



87 




CHERYL CLAY 



contacts with children and families before school starts, summer work 
by kindergarten teachers is not supported, and a plan for transition 
to kindergarten is not available in the school district. Furthermore, 
a national survey by the National Center for Early Development 
and Learning showed that kindergarten teachers perceived that 
family characteristics are greater barriers to family involvement in 
schools that are urban, have a higher minority population, or are 
located in higher concentrations of poverty. The following models 
are included as examples of promising features likely to overcome 
these barriers. 



Models for Transition Programs 

Although preschools. Head Start programs, and elementary 
schools have adopted practices believed to improve the adjustments 
and school performance of children during their transition to kin- 
dergarten, few research-based models of transition programs are 
currently in use. This section describes Head Start transition require- 
ments and the Ecological and Dynamic Model of Transition. 

The reauthorized Head Start Act (2003) provides guidelines for 
local programs to implement transition practices. “Each Head Start 
agency shall take steps to coordinate with the local educational agency 
serving the community involved and with schools in which children 
participating in a Head Start program operated by such agency will 
enroll following such program, including: 

1. Developing and implementing a systematic procedure for 
transferring, with parental consent, Head Start program re- 
cords for each participating child to the school in which such 
child will enroll. 

2. Establishing channels of communication between Head Start 
staff and their counterparts in the schools (including teachers, 
social workers, and health staff) to facilitate coordination of 
programs. 

3. Conducting meetings involving parents, kindergarten or el- 



88 




TRANSITIONS 



ementary school teachers, and Head Start program teachers 
to discuss the educational, developmental and other needs of 
individual children. 

4. Organizing and participating in joint transition-related training 
of school staff and Head Start staff. 

5. Developing and implementing a family outreach and support 
program in cooperation with entities carrying out parental 
involvement efforts under title I of the Elementary and Sec- 
ondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6301 et seq.). 

6. Assisting families, administrators, and teachers in enhancing 
educational and developmental continuity between Head Start 
services and elementary school classes. 

7. Linking the services provided in such Head Start program 
with the education services provided by such local educational 
agency. 

Each local Head Start grantee uses the above guidelines to design 
a specific transition plan that fits their local community. Local plans 
and transition efforts vary widely across Head Start programs. A key 
factor in the effectiveness of transition interventions is the extent to 
which transition plans are actually implemented (Boethel, 2004). 

The most promising comprehensive theoretical model for the 
transition of AI/ AN children from preschool to kindergarten is the 
Ecological and Dynamic Model of Transition (Kraft-Sayre & Pianta, 
2000) (see Fig. 1), which is included in Bohan-Baker’s and Little’s 
(2002) review of family involvement literature. This model shows 
how relationships change over time for transition stakeholders of 
preschool and kindergarten. As children move from preschool to 
kindergarten, their continuing relationships are with parents and 
peers if they are assigned to the same kindergarten classroom. The 
move to kindergarten necessitates that both children and their families 
disengage from the familiar relationships of preschool and establish 
new relationships with the teacher, peers and community members 
in kindergarten. If families are actively involved, they more actively 
support their children to form new relationships during their transi- 



89 




CHERYL CLAY 



tion to kindergarten. 

Through active involvement, family members are also in a position 
to mediate the adjustment of their children as they are forming new 
relationships in kindergarten. They may assist their children to cope 
with discontinuities specifically associated with language and culture. 
For example, mainstream kindergarten teachers use space, time and 
their voices in culturally determined ways that are different from prac- 
tices in AI/AN families. Space and time are more flexible in AI/AN 
communities, responsive to the needs of children and teachers at the 
moment. AI/AN family members and teachers communicate with 
children using low voices and culturally specific gestures; mainstream 
teachers more typically use high pitched, louder voices to communi- 
cate and control behaviors of students (Clay, 1998). Families may be 
able to help their children interpret behavioral expectations at school 
and ways to meet their teacher’s academic expectations. 

For research purposes, this ecological model of transition pro- 
vides a promising framework for evaluating which transition strate- 
gies most effectively impact the adjustment and school success of 
AI/AN children during their transition to kindergarten. For example, 
what intervention strategies are associated with increased family in- 
The Ecological and Dynamic Model of Transition 



Preschool Kindergarten 



Teacher ^ ► Peer 




Teacher ^ Peer 


■ 1 

◄-> 




t M t 


Community ^ ^ Family 




Community ^ ^ Family 



Figure 1. From Kraft-Sayre, M.E., & Pianta, R.C. (2000). Enhancing the transition to 
kindergarten: Linking children, families and school. Charlottesville, VA: University of 
Virginia, National Center for Early Development and Learning. 

Diagram from Bohan-Baker, M., & Little, P.M.D. (2000). The transition to kindergaten: A 
review of current research and promising practices to involve families. Cambridge, MA: 
Flarvard Family Research Project. Retrieved March 19, 2006, from www.gse. harvard, 
edu/hfrp/projects/fine/resources/research/bohan.html. 



90 









TRANSITIONS 



volvement and school success for AI/AN children? What strategies 
increase the involvement of tribal officials and other tribal leaders in 
the transition of young AI/AN children to kindergarten? 

Although much has been written about the process of transition 
from preschool to kindergarten and promising strategies for effective 
transition programs, little is known about the relative effectiveness 
of specific strategies and no evaluations have been conducted of 
comprehensive models of transition. Even less is known about how 
the languages and cultures of AI/AN children may be associated with 
involvement of family members, new relationships in kindergarten, 
adjustments to kindergarten, and subsequent school success. For 
example, the Family and Child Education Program sponsored by 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs (Schultz, Lopez, & Hochberg, 1995) 
could be studied using the ecological model discussed above. What 
specific family involvement strategies of the reservation-based Parents 
as Teachers program and center-based Even Start Family Literacy 
Program were associated with positive adjustment to kindergarten? 

In light of the dearth of comprehensive research addressing re- 
search-based theoretical models of transition of children, particularly 
AI/AN children, to kindergarten, more research is needed to better 
understand effective transition practices. 

Research Needs and Recommendations 

According to McWayne (2004), transition research projects should 
be planned and implemented using these recommendations: 

• Multidimensional measures 

• Culturally relevant constructs and operationalizations 

• Family involvement across different developmental periods 

• Longitudinal designs 

• Regression models that incorporate other known correlates of 
child outcomes 

• School variables and effects on family involvement 

• Empirical investigations of programs that work 



91 




CHERYL CLAY 



The following research topics drawn from multiple sources are 

timely and critical to improving the transition of AI/AN children 

to kindergarten. 

Parent Involvement 

• Factors motivating parents’ decisions to become involved in their 
children’s education, how involvement influences outcomes, and 
how to help teachers and schools encourage involvement 

• How to build relationships between home and school before 
concerns and tensions lead to mistrust between home and school 
(Pianta & Cox, 1998) 

• Community organizing as a means of involving low-income and 
ethnically diverse parents and community members to improve 
low-performing schools and children’s learning and development 
(Weiss, Henderson, Epstein, Hoover-Dempsey, & Jeynes, 2005) 

• Workable alternatives for involving working parents, parents of 
infants, or parents experiencing high stress 

• Home-based family involvement interventions 

• Male involvement/ outreach 

Communication / coordination among stakeholders 

• Home-school reciprocal dialog, parental expectations for children’s 
academic success, notions of parents’ and schools’ responsibili- 
ties 

• School-based programs of school, family, and community (tribal) 
partnership and the roles of districts and states in guiding these 
programs 

• Cultural discontinuities in current classroom practice 

• Professional development to increase cultural awareness and 
sensitivity 

• Exchange of quality information on children’s development in 
home and school contexts 

• Expert/unilateral dictations versus reciprocal dialogue and col- 



92 




TRANSITIONS 



laborative action 

• Bilingual staff and community paraprofessionals 

• Efficacy of “culture-language mediators” to increase the quan- 
tity and quality of family involvement during transition (Barrera, 
1996) 

• Indirect (brochures, packets, media messages) vs. direct contact 
(phone calls, home visits, conversations at school) in generating 
family involvement 

Policy Recommendations 

The following policy recommendations are based upon the transi- 
tion practices likely to facilitate a more positive transition of AI/AN 
children to kindergarten. They are divided into policies to improve the 
quality of preschools and elementary schools, structure of transition 
programs and professional development. 

Preschools 

1 . Tribal Head Start Program personnel encouraged to participate 

in language preservation and cultural activities in preschool 
classrooms and to communicate these practices to stakeholders 
during the transition process (Drew & Glass, 2005). 

2. Universal enrollment of all 3- and 4-year-old children in poverty 

in high quality early childhood care and education programs 
(Magnuson & Waldfogel, 2005). 

Pilementary Schools 

1. Family Involvement programs employ paraprofessionals 
within the AI/AN community as language/ cultural mediators 
(O’Connell, 1998). 

2. School Principals provide leadership to establish transition 
teams made up of stakeholders (parents, preschool and kin- 
dergarten personnel, and tribal community members) to plan, 



93 




CHERYL CLAY 



implement, and evaluate transition programs (Ferrandino, 
2005). 



Structure of Transition Programs 

1 . Frequent direct stakeholder contact, especially children, family 

members and kindergarten teachers 

2. Alignment of curriculum and program features of preschool 

and kindergarten 

3. Timely communication/coordination between preschool and 

kindergarten programs; provide families with kindergarten 
information in the spring in order to better prepare their child 
to participate in kindergarten (Pacheco, Tullis, Everest, Baker, 
& Sutherland, 2004). 

4. Recruit and support educators in preschool and kindergarten 

who are trained in languages other than English — multilingual 
and multicultural backgrounds (NAEYC, 1995b). 

Professional Development 

Elementary principals and preschool administrators should re- 
quire joint professional development training for kindergarten and 
preschool classroom personnel (NAEYC, 1995b; Pacheco, Tullis, 
Baker, & Sutherland, 2004) that includes the following topics: 

• Cultural awareness and sensitivity in areas of culture, language, 
and diversity to achieve cross-cultural communication and compe- 
tence, including how to use self-reflection tools to assess cultural 
competence (Moore, Beatty, & Perez -Mendez, 1995). 

• Communication patterns differ among families and teachers from 
different language and cultural backgrounds (Phillips, 1992). 

• Communication patterns of American Indian kindergarteners are 
disrupted in kindergarten compared with preschool with peers 
and adults, evidence of cultural discontinuity (Clay, 1998). 



94 




TRANSITIONS 



• Inherent cultural conflicts between AI/AN tribal communities 
and mainstream schooling (Peshkin, 1997). 

Summary 

AI/AN children experience cultural and language discontinuities 
as they transition from preschool to kindergarten. Family members 
who are involved in the transition process may serve as cultural media- 
tors as their children move from preschool to kindergarten. Using the 
Ecological and Dynamic Model of Transition, the promising transi- 
tion strategies may be the subject of research to better understand 
and improve the transition of AI/AN, the beginning of a positive 
adjustment to kindergarten and school success. 

References 

Barrera, I. (1996). Thoughts on the assessment of young children 
whose socioicultural background is unfamiliar to the assessor. In 
S. J. Meisels & E. Fenichel (Eds.), New visions for the developmental 
assessment of infants and young children (pp. 69-83). Washington, DC.: 
Zero to Three. 

Bohan-Baker, M., & Little, P. M. D. (2002). The transition to kindergarten: 
A review of current research and promising practices to involve families. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Family Research Project. 

Clay, C. (1998). Schooling at-risk Native American children. New York: 
Garland Publishing, Inc. 

Ferrandino, V. L. (2005, April 15). Ready, set, go to preschool. 
NAESP Principal’s Perspective, 1-3. Retrieved on June 22, 2005 
http:/ /www.naesp.org 

Helburn, S., Culkin, M., Morris, J., Mocan, N., Howes, C., Phillipsen, 
L., Bryant, D., Clifford, R., et al. (1995). Cost, quality, and child 
outcomes in child care centers-. Public report. Denver: Economics 
Department, University of Colorado at Denver. 

Drew, R., & Glass, R. (2005). An environment of acceptance helps 
preserve the Cherokee culture. Head Start Bulletin, (78). 



95 




CHERYL CLAY 



Head Start Act of 2003, 42 U.S.C., 9801 et seq. 

Henderson, A. T., & Mapp, K. L. (2003). A new wave of evidence: 
The impact of school, family and community connections on 
student achievement. Retrieved June 22, 2005, from http:/ /www. 
sedl.org/ connections 

Ho Sui-Chu, E., & Willms, J. D. (1996). Effects of parental involve- 
ment on eighth-grade achievement. Sociology of Education, 69(2), 

126-141. 

Hubbell, R., Plantz, M., Condelli, L., & Barrett, B. (1987). Final 
report: The transition of Head Start children into public school, Vol I. 
(Final Report) (DHHS BOA No. 105-86-8123). Washington, 
DC: CSR, Inc. 

Kraft-Sayre, M., & Pianta, R. C. (1999, December). An approach to 
enhance kindergarten transition. National Center Early Develop- 
ment and Learning, Spotlights, (17). 

Kraft-Sayre, M. E., & Pianta, R. C. (2000). Enhancing the transition to 
kindergarten: Einking children, families, and schools. Charlottesville, VA: 
National Center for Early Development and Learning, University 
of Virginia. 

Lombardi, J. (1992) . Beyond transition: Ensuring continuity in early childhood 
services. ( EDO-PS-92-3). Urbana-Champaign, IL: Clearinghouse 
on Early Education and Parenting, Early Childhood and Parenting 
Collaborative, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 

Lopez, G. R. (2001, October). On whose terms ? Understanding involvement 
through the eyes of migrant parents. Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, 
Seattle, WA. 

Magnuson, K. A., & Waldfogel, J. (2005). Early childhood care and 
education: Effects on ethnic and racial gaps in school readiness. Retrieved 
June 22, 2005 from http://www.futureofchildren.org/informa- 
tion2826/ information 

Magnuson, P. (2004, September). The preschool connection. Com- 
municator, 27(1). Retrieved June 22, 2005, from http:/ /www.naesp. 
org 



96 




TRANSITIONS 



McWayne, C. (2004, December). Readiness: The role of family-school 
connections in supporting student success in early childhood. 
Paper presented at the Family, School, and Community Connec- 
tions Symposium: New Directions for Research, Practice, and 
Evaluation at Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, 
MA. 

Million, J. (2005, April 15). Landmark report by elementary school 
principals advocating early childhood education — preschool — for 
nation’s children, NAESP Principal’s Perspective , 1-3. Retrieved on 
June 22, 2005 from http:/ /www.naesp.org 

Moore, S. M., Beatty, J., & Perez -Mendez, C. (1995). Developing cultural 
competence in early childhood assessment. . Boulder, CO: University of 
Colorado at Boulder. 

National Association for the Education of Young Children. (1995a). 
NAEYC Position Statement: School readiness. Young Children , 
46(1). 

National Association for the Education of Young Children. (1995b). 
Responding to linguistic and cultural diversity; Recommendations 
for effective early childhood education. Washington, DC: Author. 
National Association of Elementary School Principals. (2005). 

Leading early childhood learning communities; What principals should know 
and be able to do. Alexandria, VA: Author. 

O’Connell, J. C. (1998). Project Apache: A reservation, community-based 
early intervention program for Apache infants and toddlers with special needs 
and their families . (Final report). Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona 
University. 

Pacheco, R, Tullis, E., Everest, M., Baker, H. & Sutherland, C. (2004, 
May). Kindergarten Transition Study. Retrieved June 22, 2005 
from http:/ /www.TheCfE.org 

Pena, D. C. (2000). Parent involvement: Influencing factors and im- 
plications. Journal of Educational Research, 94(1), 42-54. 

Peshkin, A. (1997). Places of memory: Whiteman’s schools and Native 
American communities. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 



97 




CHERYL CLAY 



Phillips, S. U. (1992). The invisible culture: Communication in class- 
room and community on the Warm Springs Indian Reservation. 
Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press. 

Pianta, R. & Cox, M. (1998, July). Kindergarten transitions. National 
Center for Early Development <& Learning Spotlights, No. 1 . Retrieved 
on June 22, 2005 from http://www.fgp.unc.edu/ncedl/pages/ 
spotlt.efm 

Pianta, R. C., & Cox, M. J. (1999). The transition to kindergarten: Research, 
policy, training and practice. Baltimore: Paul Brookes Publishing 
Co. 

RMS Research Corporation. (1 992) . Transitions to kindergarten in Ameri- 
can schools. (Contract No. LC 88089001). Washington, DC: Office 
of Policy and Planning, U.S. Department of Education. 

Sanders, M. G., & Harvey, A. (2000, April). Developing comprehensive 
programs of school, family, and community partnerships: The community 
perspective. Paper presented at the Meeting of the American Edu- 
cational Research Association, New Orleans, LA. 

Shaver, A. V., & Walls, R. T. (1998). Effect of Title I parent involve- 
ment on student reading and mathematics achievement .Journal of 
Research and Development in Education , 31(2), 90-97. EJ561992. 

Shore, R. (1998). Ready schools: A report of the Goal 1 Ready Schools Re- 
source Group. Washington, DC: National Goals Panel. 

Schultz, T., Lopez, E., & Hochberg, M. (1995). Early childhood reform 
in seven communities: Front-line practice, agency management, and public 
policy. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. 

Smrekar, C., Guthrie, J. W, Owens, D. E., & Sims, P. G. (2001). 
March towards excellence: School success and minority student 
achievement in Department of Defense schools. (ED 459218). 
Nashville, TN: Peabody Center for Education Policy, Peabody 
College Vanderbilt University. 

Stormshak, E. A., Kaminski, R. A., & Goodman, M. R. (2002). 
Enhancing the parenting skills of Head Start families during the 
transition to kindergarten. Prevention Science , 3(3), 223-234. 



98 




TRANSITIONS 



Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Weiss, H. B., Henderson, A. T., Epstein, J. L., Hoover-Dempsey, 
K., & Jeynes, W. (2005, April 14). Research and evaluation of family 
involvement in education: What lies ahead? Paper presented at the an- 
nual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 



99 




NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



American Indian and Alaska Native School Readiness 

Nicole L. Thompson, Margaret A. Pope, and Jeanne Holland 
Mississippi State University 

The debate over the concept of school readiness has been ongoing 
for over a century (Kagan, 1990). However, in the past decade, the 
debate has become even more intense due to the passage of Goals 
2000: Educate America Act of 1994. The National Education Goals 
panel identified a framework to improve American education and 
better support students’ learning. The first goal focused on school 
readiness: “By the year 2000, all children in America will start school 
ready to learn” (Section 102). By including school readiness as a 
part of Goals 2000, lawmakers acknowledged that many American 
children did not enter school ready and that educators needed to do 
something to rectify this situation. But, what to do and how to do it 
are questions still begging to be answered. Other questions arise as 
well. Does the child have to come to school ready to learn? Should 
the school be ready for the child? Is there a difference in being ready 
to learn and being ready for school? What role should the family and 
community play? Whose responsibility is it to make a child ready for 
school? 

In American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) communities, 
the situation becomes even more complicated — should families and 
communities work together to promote school readiness? In this case, 
it will be important to remember the history of AI/AN educational 
experiences with mainstream (i.e., White European) education, where 
the goal was to civilize and Christianize the Indian, and to remove young 
Native children from their communities in order to educate them (Ad- 
ams, 1995). Does promoting school readiness then mean moving away 
from traditional tribal child rearing practices? What happens when 
current mainstream developmentally appropriate practices conflict 
with AI/AN traditions and culture? 

Unfortunately, the majority of the aforementioned questions do 
not have an answer. They simply have yet to be explored. President 



100 




SCHOOL READINESS 



Clinton signed Executive Order 13096 on AI/AN education in 1998. 
This action placed greater emphasis on the need for research about 
AI/AN education as a whole, but specifically identified AI/AN 
early childhood education as an area needing further exploration. 
The purpose of the research agenda resulting from Executive Order 
13096, completed in 2001, was to “summarize the current state of 
research and describe the research topics that should be given the 
highest priority” (Strang & von Glatz, 2001, p. 1). The purpose of 
this paper then, is to attempt to answer the following questions in 
the AI/AN Education Research Agenda: 

1. How must early childhood programs be structured so that 
they foster the fundamental skills that children are expected 
to have when they enter school? 

2. How effective are early childhood programs and activities for 
AI/AN children in promoting readiness for school? 

First, a brief overview of school readiness will be presented. In- 
cluded in this section will be a general discussion of the effectiveness 
of early childhood programs in preparing young children for school. 
Second, a possible way to structure early childhood programs so that 
they foster skill development in young AI/ AN children is presented. 
Third, the effectiveness of early childhood programs in promoting 
school readiness among AI/AN young children is examined. Finally, 
the paper ends with implications for future research and suggestions 
for investigation. 



School Readiness 

Researchers, educators, and policymakers continually attempt to 
define school readiness (see, for example: Bruner & Copeman, 2003; 
Crnic & Lamberty, 1994; Gredler, 1992; Kagan, 1990, 1994; Katz, 
1991; Lewit & Baker, 1995; Maeroff, 2003; National Association for 
the Education of Young Children, 1995; National Association of 
State Boards of Education, 1991; Pianta & LaParo, 2003; Shore, 1998). 



101 



NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



However, the search for one universally accepted definition continues 
because an acceptable definition in one community does not work in 
another. In the first 5 years of the new century, early childhood educa- 
tors focused on incorporating language, literacy, and numeracy skills 
into their instructional practices so that children will be academically 
ready to enter school. Early childhood programs are to teach children 
the foundational skills that would promote success in school and 
prepare children to enter kindergarten. However, preparing children 
for school is not a sole responsibility of early childhood educators or 
programs (National Association of State Boards of Education, 1991). 
Teachers in elementary schools, families, and communities also play 
an important role in preparing children for school. 

The concept of school readiness is difficult to define within the 
current educational context; nationally recognized standards explicitly 
stating the concepts and skills that young children must acquire within 
their first 4 years to prepare for school do not exist. Additionally, 
there is not a nationally recognized assessment to determine whether 
children are ready for school. Being ready for school in one school 
district, state, or tribe may be extremely different from another school 
district, state, or tribe. Simply stated, expectations differ across the 
nation. 

Although a universal definition for school readiness has not been 
established, several entities have used specific guidelines to assess 
the school readiness of the students in their programs. Ten years 
ago, the National Association for the Education of Young Children 
([NAEYC], 1995) released a position statement regarding school 
readiness. NAEYC recognized children’s developmental differences; 
specifically social, emotional, physical, and cognitive development as 
important indicators of school readiness. Therefore, school readiness 
is a compilation of all of the areas in which educators and parents 
feel are necessary to promote positive learning experiences that trans- 
late to successful academic achievement within the school context. 
School readiness consists of multiple components that are affected 
by numerous factors: age, health and maturity of the child, family 
involvement, and social competence, just to name a few. Children who 



102 




SCHOOL READINESS 



are involved in stimulating learning experiences related to language, 
literacy, and numeracy prior to entering kindergarten ought to have 
a knowledge base on which to build. 

NAEYC (1995) posited that several factors influence the child 
and family’s readiness for school: life experiences or limited life ex- 
perience, variations in children’s developmental processes, and the 
level of school expectations for children as they enter school. The 
variability of children’s learning experiences as well as cognitive, so- 
cial, emotional, and physical development all play a role in children’s 
success in school. Parents and early childhood educators therefore, 
are to provide children with experiences that will help them succeed 
within their own learning capacity. 

In addition, NAEYC (1995) contended that excuses related to the 
lack of school readiness (single parent families, lack of materials in 
the home, minimal health care, education levels of parents, etc.) are 
no longer acceptable. If the child is not ready for school, then it is the 
school’s responsibility to ready the child. Therefore, early childhood 
education programs do have a strong role to play in the preparation 
of young children for school, but family and community members 
have an equally important role to play as well. 

Pianta and LaParo (2003) described the relationships and interac- 
tions that a child engages in as significant to their academic achieve- 
ment. For example, children should be cared for by devoted adults as 
well as live in a safe environment that follows routines and contains a 
vast array of stimulating materials. Maeroff (2003) provided examples 
of how parents or caregivers can offer experiences that encourage 
learning. For example, literacy materials, such as books, should be 
displayed conveniently for children’s use and read frequently. Com- 
puters and field trips, which include trips to the library or museum, 
can provide children with experiences that promote academic success 
and broaden their life experiences. 

Currently, reform efforts exist to provide young children with the 
experiences necessary to increase academic achievement and prevent 
learning difficulties. One of these efforts is the federal Good Start, 
Grow Smart Initiative (GSGS), begun in 2002. The GSGS Initiative 



103 




NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



is to ensure that young children possess the skills needed to be suc- 
cessful when they enter school. GSGS asked states to create content 
standards related to school readiness that align with state kindergar- 
ten through 12 th grade standards. These content standards, known 
as Early Learning Guidelines (ELGs), in development at this time 
writing, will provide concrete, measurable support for early childhood 
programs to teach children what they need to know in an effort to 
foster a seamless transition to kindergarten. ELGs will address early 
literacy, language, prereading, and mathematics. 

More recently, the Department of Health and Human Services 
(2004) published a booklet, The Tribal Guide to the Good Start, 
Grow Smart Early Learning Initiative. This booklet provided an 
explanation of GSGS and described the implications of GSGS for 
AI/AN communities. Due to sovereignty, AI/AN communities are 
encouraged to follow their state ELGs but are not required to do 
so. AI/AN communities are also encouraged to design high-quality 
learning experiences for their young children so that they are better 
prepared for school. One important factor to consider in the devel- 
opment of ELGs is that only three states have tribal representation 
on the committees that draft the ELGs. 

Many states are attempting to create consistency within early child- 
hood programs as well as between these programs and kindergarten. 
Maeroff (2003) described a study in which data were collected in the 
state of Maryland that used an assessment tool to evaluate children’s 
readiness to enter kindergarten. In 2002, just over half of all children 
were “ready for what awaited them” (p. 3). Most children who were 
not prepared to learn the concepts and skills required in kindergarten 
were from low socioeconomic homes in which few books or learn- 
ing experiences were available. In fact, the children who entered 
kindergarten lacking the skills and experiences needed to succeed 
academically were found to have reading scores that were 60% lower 
than children from higher socioeconomic status. 

Additional problems have been identified in early childhood set- 
tings, such as the quality of the learning experiences and instruction 
that children receive. According to Maeroff (2003), the Committee 



104 




SCHOOL READINESS 



for Economic Development criticized early childhood programs’ 
lack of appropriate learning experiences provided to children. Pianta 
(as cited in Maeroff, 2003) believed that early childhood teachers do 
not build academic relationships with young children through discus- 
sions and inquiry-based activities. Instead, children learn basic skills 
in isolation within a passive learning context. 

Young children entering early childhood programs are greatly 
affected by the type of learning experiences, family support, and 
teacher they encounter. Additionally, children’s home environments 
tend to be predictive of their performance in school. The implica- 
tions surrounding young children and school readiness are clear. The 
question now becomes, can young children be expected to perform 
successfully upon entering school when standards are continuously 
becoming more rigorous; when instruction is inconsistent; and when 
their learning experiences, developmental levels, cultures, and home 
environments differs greatly. 

Early Childhood Programs’ Structure 
To Foster Skill Development 

The State Early Childhood Policy Technical Assistance Network 
(SECPTAN), developed to assist policy makers in 17 states access 
information about effective policies and practices in the area of 
early childhood education, identified 6 domains of school readiness. 
These six domains correlate to the NAEYC standards and to the 
categories associated with the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, 
Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) and Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, 
Kindergarten Cohort (ECLS-K) baseline data sets. The identified 6 
domains include health and physical development; emotional well- 
being and social competence; approaches to learning, language de- 
velopment/ communication skills, cognition and general knowledge; 
and other miscellaneous mathematics and scientific thinking (Bruner 
& Copeman, 2003). 

These domains can be used to examine the parameters for the 
development of early childhood education programs that will foster 



105 




NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



the fundamental skills AI/AN children are expected to have when 
they enter school. Regardless of the populations being served, the 
5 general domains for school readiness and the following indicators 
can be used to effectively structure early childhood programs that will 
ensure that children are ready to learn when they begin school. 

Although these indicators offer a strong foundation for developing 
an effective early childhood program and are intended to cultivate 
school readiness, the position statement of the NAEYC (1995) 
regarding the critical factors associated with establishing a universal 
design for school readiness must be acknowledged. NAEYC posited 
that universal school readiness programs recognize and support 
children as individuals who have various linguistic and cultural dif- 
ferences and needs. The U.S. Administration for Children & Families 
(n. d.) reported that much of the research that has been associated 
with the AI/AN children has not always provided benefits for them. 
The report indicates that AI/AN children have unique learning styles, 
develop language skills, and are affected by health matters that are 
different from other races or ethnicities. AI/AN children not only 
differ from other races or ethnicities, but they also differ from other 
tribes across the United States. Therefore, as with the NAEYC (1995) 
position statement, programs and assessments which address the 
school readiness of AI/AN children must also address the cultural 
differences of these children. Children who are English language 
learners, minorities, or come from low-income families, tend to have 
a culture gap to bridge when entering school (Shore, 1998). When a 
difference exists between the culture of the school — regardless of 
grade level — and the culture of the home, teachers need to be cau- 
tious so that they do not misinterpret children’s abilities or actions 
(Delpit, 1995). 

Early Childhood Programs’ Effectiveness 
In Promoting School Readiness 

Knowing what research has shown about the many ways that 
school readiness can be defined and the lack of national standards 



106 




SCHOOL READINESS 



to assess the readiness of all prekindergarten children, regardless 
of race or ethnicity, the question then becomes how can the effec- 
tiveness of early childhood education programs and activities for 
AI/AN children be measured in order to promote school readiness, 
especially in the rural context. Assessment of program effectiveness 
is even more difficult in rural communities, because early childhood 
practitioners in rural America tend to have less opportunity for con- 
tinuing professional development and children are more likely to be 
in informal care arrangements that are not licensed or regulated. Cur- 
rently, there is no published research to answer the question of how 
to measure the effectiveness of early childhood programs in the rural 
setting. However, in an attempt to begin to answer this question, an 
examination of ECLS-K and ECLS-B baseline data by the National 
Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initiatives ([Rural Early 
Childhood], 2005) can be used to look for variations in the selected 
indicators related to child and family health, socioeconomic status of 
children, and children’s readiness for school across all ethnic groups 
in the cohorts. This data can then be used to understand the specific 
needs of AI/AN children in relation to their school readiness. 

According to the National Center for Rural Early Childhood 
Learning Initiatives (2005) analysis of the ECLS-B and ECLS-K 
regarding previously identified indicators of health, socioeconomic 
status, and school readiness, AI/AN children tend to be significantly 
different from their Caucasian, African American, and Hispanic 
counterparts. This analysis does not differentiate between rurality, 
family poverty, or parental education as key factors in the disparities 
between ethnic groups. 

Upon examination of this data, it is evident that extreme varia- 
tions exist among people of all ethnicities. Nonetheless, rural AI/AN 
indicators are significantly different. For example, most indicators 
are almost double or less than half of the level of non-rural AI/AN 
children. Strang, von Glatz, and Hammer (2002) reported that AI/AN 
children do not seem to be as prepared to begin school as compared to 
children of other racial or ethnic groups. The ECLS-B and ECLS-K 
data sets provide further evidence to support their conclusion. Based 



107 




NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



on this data, it would seem that early childhood education programs 
and activities are not that effective in preparing rural AI/AN young 
children for school. At this point, it will be important to remember the 
difference between being ready for school and ready to learn. AI/AN 
children may engage in learning activities that are not measurable or 
valued in a mainstream educational setting. 

The ECLS-B and ECLS-K baseline data also highlight an interest- 
ing child care phenomena in AI/ AN settings, which is the percentage 
of rural AI/AN children not participating in a center-based child 
care program. Almost half of rural AI/AN babies were in no care 
outside the home (44.2%). A higher percentage of rural AI/AN ba- 
bies (42.5%) received care by a relative (not a parent) than did rural 
White babies (26.9%) or rural Hispanic babies (13.9%). Additionally, 
only 5.1% of rural AI/AN babies were cared for by a non-relative. 
Further, rural AI/ AN children (10.6%) in the ECLS-K were far less 
likely than rural White children (35.3%) to have attended a center- 
based prekindergarten program. 

Approximately 560 federally recognized Indian tribes and Alaska 
Native villages exist in the United States today. Of these, approxi- 
mately 500 receive Child Care Development Funds (CCDF) directly 
or through a consortium to support their early childhood educa- 
tion endeavors (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Administration for Children and Families, 2004). As of December 
2001, the AI/AN Program Branch of Head Start reported fund- 
ing 145 Head Start and 40 Early Head Start programs and serving 
over 23,000 AI/AN children. Of these children, 3,400 speak an AI 
language or language other than English or Spanish in their homes 
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration 
for Children and Families, 2003). Both CCDF and Head Start funds 
can be used to provide child care through centers or homes. In the 
reports that tribes and villages must submit to CCDF and Head Start 
for funding, they must identify how the monies are being spent, both 
in centers or homes and on the activities being provided. The reports 
are approved, the funds are distributed to tribes and villages, and 
then the services are provided. However, plans can change, reports 



108 




SCHOOL READINESS 



can change, and services can change, thus, providing a very limited 
understanding of what actually happens in tribal child care settings 
(L. Kills Crow, personal communication, Jan. 12, 2005). The early 
child care practices used by the tribes who do not access federal funds 
have not been publicly identified. 

Given the three factors of (a) the inexistence of a universal defini- 
tion of school readiness, (b) a limited reporting system on informa- 
tion related to early child care practices from tribes receiving federal 
funding, and (c) the lack of information on early child care practices 
by other tribes, it is not possible to present an accurate assessment on 
the state of school readiness or the effectiveness of early childhood 
education programs for AI/AN children at this time. Research in 
these areas is needed to provide the data needed for effective deci- 
sions to be made. 

Implications for Future Research 

After attempting to answer questions regarding how early child- 
hood programs are to be structured so that they foster the fundamen- 
tal skills that children are expected to have when they enter school 
and how effective are early childhood programs and activities for 
AI/AN children in promoting readiness for school, it would seem 
that there is more unknown about the structure and effectiveness 
of early childhood programs regarding school readiness for AI/AN 
young children than is known. This dearth of accurate data presents 
a variety of options for future research. Possible topics for investiga- 
tion are presented below. 

1 . How is school readiness defined within AI/ AN communities? 
Does school readiness mean the same thing for all tribes and 
villages? How can that definition be incorporated into main- 
stream educational settings to show that AI / AN children enter 
school ready to learn? 

2. Longitudinal data focusing on all AI/AN children (not just 
on the 10-12% in Bureau of Indian Affairs contract and/or 



109 




NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



grant schools or Tribally-controlled schools) needs to be col- 
lected to determine the type and effectiveness of their early 
care experience and subsequent success in school. 

3. Surveys of AI/AN early childhood programs and providers 
could be administered to determine what educational activities 
are being undertaken to prepare young AI/ AN children for 
school. In addition, information regarding teacher attrition, 
teacher education levels, family involvement, health care and 
other services available to AI/AN children could be included 
to help policy-makers, educators, and researchers understand 
what happens in tribal child care settings. 

4. In what ways do mainstream developmentally appropriate 
practices (DAP) and traditional child rearing practices conflict? 
Is it possible to bridge these two concepts so that AI/AN chil- 
dren benefit from DAP and traditional child rearing practices? 
How? 

5. Are the early childhood education services available to AI/ / 
AN children different depending on where they live (i.e., on 
or off a reservation)? What services are available to AI/AN 
children who live on a reservation? What services are available 
to AI/AN children who live off of a reservation in a town 
or city? Are the unique characteristics of AI/AN children 
considered when services are provided to them? 

6. In what ways are AI/AN families involved in the early educa- 
tion of their young children? In what ways can AI/ AN families 
be supported so that they play an active role in the education 
of their children? 

This list of possible research topics is only a beginning; there are 
many topics in need of exploration in regard to AI/AN early educa- 
tion, care, and development. The scarcity of research surrounding 
AI/AN early childhood education has been already been well-docu- 
mented. Regardless of the research project undertaken, the research 
must be conducted with tribes and villages, not on them. Additionally, 
the research must focus on success and respect tribal practices and 



110 




SCHOOL READINESS 



culture (Marks, Moyer, Roche, & Graham, 2003; Strang & von Glatz, 

2001; Strang, von Glatz, & Hammer, 2002). 

References 

Adams, D. W. (1995). Education for extinction: American Indians and the 
boarding school experience, 1875-1928. Lawrence, KS: University of 
Kansas Press. 

Bruner, C. & Copeman, A. (2003). Measuring children’s school readiness: 
Options for developing state baselines and benchmarks. State Early Child- 
hood Policy Technical Assistance Network: Retrieved June 7, 2005, 
from http:/ /www.finebynine.org/pub.html 

Bruner, C. & Copeman, A. (2003). Measuring children’s school readiness: 
Options for developing state baselines and benchmarks. State Early Child- 
hood Policy Technical Assistance Network: Retrieved Feb. 1 , 2006, 
from http:/ /www.finebynine.org/pdf/Baselines.pdf 

Crnic, K., & Lamberty G. (1994). Reconsidering school readiness: 
Conceptual and applied perspectives. Early Education and Develop- 
ment, 5(2), 99-105. 

Delpit, L. (1995). Other people’s children: Cultural conflict in the classroom. 
New York: New Press. 

Executive Order No. 13096, 63 FR 42681 (1998). 

Goals 2000: Educate America Act. H.R. 1804 (1994). 

Gredler, G. R. (1 992). School readiness: Assessment and educational 
issues. Brandon, VT: Clinical Psychology Publishing. 

Kagan, S. L. (1990). Readiness 2000: Rethinking rhetoric and respon- 
sibility. Phi Delta Kappan, 72, 272-279. 

Katz, L. (1991). Readiness: Children and schools. (ERIC Digest EDO 
PS-9 1-4). Urbana, IL: ERIC Clearininghouse on Early Education 
and Parenting. Retrieved Jan. 5, 2006, from http:// ceep.crc.uiuc. 
edu/ eecearchive/ digests/1991/katz91.html 

Lewit, E. M. & Baker, L. S. (1995). School Readiness. Critical Issues for 
Children and Youth, 5(2), 128-139. 

Maeroff, GI. (2003). Universal pre-kindergarten: State of play. (ERIC ED 
482856). New York, NY: Foundation for Child Development. 



Ill 



NICOLE L. THOMPSON 



Marks, E., Moyer, M., Roche, M., & Graham, E. (2003). A summary 
of research and publications on early childhood for American Indian and 
Alaska Native children. Calverton, MS: ORC Marco. 

National Association for the Education of Young Children. (1995). 
NAEYC position statement on school readiness. Washington, DC: 
Author. 

National Association of State Boards of Education. (1991). Caring 
communities Supportingyoung children and families: The report of the Na- 
tional Task Force on School Keadiness. Alexandria, VA: Author. 

National Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initiatives. 
(2005). American Indian and Alaska Native young children: Findings 
from the ECFS-K and ECES-B baseline data. (Rural Early Childhood 
Brief No. 4). Mississippi State, MS: Mississippi State University 
Early Childhood Institute. 

Pianta, R. C., & LaParo, K. (2003). Improving early school success. 
Educational leadership, 60(7), 24-29. 

Shore, R. (1998). Ready schools. Washington, DC: National Education 
Goals Panel. 

Strang, W., & von Glatz, A. (2001). American Indian and Alaska Native 
Education research agenda: In response to Executive Order 13096. Wash- 
ington, DC: United States Department of Education. 

Strang, W, von Glatz, A., & Hammer, P. C. (2002). Setting the agenda: 
American Indian and Alaska Native education research priorities. (ERIC 
EDO-RC-02-14). 

Child Care Bureau. (2004). A tribal guide to the Good Start, Groiv Smart 
Early Teaming Initiative. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Health & Human Services, Administration for Children & Fami- 
lies. 

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Administration for 
Children & Families, (n.d.). American Indian-Alaska Native Head 
Start. Retrieved March 15, 2006, from http:/ / www.acf.hhs.gov/ 
programs/opre/hs/ aian/ 



112 




SCHOOL READINESS 



U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for 
Children & Families. (2003). Head Start Bureau: Region XI, American 
Indian-Alaska Native program branch (AI-ANPB). Retrieved Feb. 1, 
2006, from http:/ /www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/hsb/programs/ 
aianpbs.htm 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for 
Children & Families. (2004). Tribal child care training and technical 
assistance (TriTAC): Tribal child care grantees. Retrieved Jan. 6, 2006, 
from www.nccic.org/ tribal/grantees.html 



113 




SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH 



Young American Indian/ Alaskan Native Children with 
Disabilities: Implications for Policy, Research, and Practice 

Susan C. Faircloth, Ph.D. 

Introduction 

After much dialogue and debate regarding early childhood educa- 
tion among American Indians and Alaskan Natives, I was charged by 
the National Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initiatives 
and the Pennsylvania State University’s Center for Rural Education 
and Communities and the American Indian Leadership Program to 
answer two questions: 

1. How is the incidence of disabilities among infant and pre- 
school-age American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) 
children related to rural (reservation and non-reservation), 
suburban, small town, large city, etc. residence? 

2. How can early childhood programs accommodate AI/AN 
children with disabilities? 

Given my own research and interests in the education of AI/AN 
children with or at-risk of developing a disability, I was eager to 
undertake this charge. However, after many hours of research and 
reading, I find myself facing a lack of published data to allow me to 
effectively answer these questions. 

Although AI/AN students are disproportionately represented in 
special education programs in public and Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(BIA) funded or operated schools (see e.g., Faircloth & Tippeconnic, 
2000), little is known about the status of these children prior to their 
entry into the educational system as well as their early years within 
this system. Given this lack of published data, I will use this venue 
as an opportunity to review what we do know about the status of 
AI/AN children with disabilities and to facilitate a dialogue around 
what we need to know about these children, particularly those from 



114 




CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES 



birth to age 5. In doing so, I will provide a demographic profile of 
young American Indians and Alaskan Natives with disabilities, define 
Early Intervention services, identify and explore factors that place 
American Indian/ Alaskan Native children at risk for developing or 
acquiring disabling conditions, explore ways in which early childhood 
programs may accommodate AI/AN children with disabilities, and 
briefly address the impact of disability across the lifespan. I will end 
with implications for policy, research, and practice and suggestions 
for next steps to address the issues and concerns identified, not only 
in this paper, but also as a result of the collective body of papers and 
discussion presented at this forum. 

Demographic Profile of Americans I Alaskan Na fives with Disabilities 

Two thousand six hundred and thirty four AI/AN children ages 
birth to 2 were served under Part C of the Individuals with Disabilities 
Education Act (IDEA) during the 2003-2004 school year. In total, 
2.46% of AI/AN children ages birth to 2 received early interven- 
tion services, compared to 2.26% of Asian/Pacific Islanders, 2.16% 
of Blacks, 1.99% of Hispanics, and 2.34% of Whites. In addition, 
9 states or territories, including California, Hawaii, Indiana, Mas- 
sachusetts, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Carolina, West 
Virginia, and Guam, reported the number of AI/AN infants and 
toddlers, ages birth to 2, identified as at risk of developing a disability. 
This number totaled 176. Examples of early intervention services 
provided include: assistive technology; audiology; family training; 
health, medical, nursing, and nutrition services; occupational and 
physical therapy; psychological services; respite care; social work 
services; special instruction; speech and language; transportation; vi- 
sion services; and other services not specified. During the 2002-2003 
school year, AI/AN infants and toddlers with disabilities and their 
families were served in the following settings: developmental delay 
programs, typically developing programs, home, hospitals (inpatient 
services), residential facilities, service provider locations, and other 
settings (U.S. Office of Special Education Programs, n.d.). 



115 




SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH 



Eight thousand eight hundred and forty eight AI/AN children 
ages 3-5 were served under Part B of IDEA during the 2003-2004 
school year (U.S. Office of Special Education Programs, n.d.). In 
total, 8% of AI/AN children ages 3-5 received early intervention 
services, compared with 3.6% of Asian/Pacific Islanders, 5.94% of 
Blacks, 4.26% of Hispanics, and 6.37% of Whites. Of these, the larg- 
est number were served under the category of developmental delay 
(4,1 13) followed by speech or language impairments (3,897), mental 
retardation (123), autism (122), other health impairments (114), 
specific learning disabilities (113), multiple disabilities (93), hearing 
impairments (84), orthopedic impairments (84), visual impairments 
(45), emotional disturbance (44), traumatic brain injury (12), and 
deaf-blindness (4). 

In both cases described above, ages birth to 2 and ages 3 to 5, a 
higher percentage of AI/ AN children received early intervention ser- 
vices compared to Asian/Pacific Islanders, Blacks, and Hispanics. 

Early Intervention Services Defined 

Early intervention is defined in IDEA (20 USC§632) as develop- 
mental services that are: 

• provided under public supervision 

• provided at no cost except where federal or state law provides for 
a system of payments by families 

• designed to meet the developmental needs of an infant or toddler 
with a disability in any one or more of the following areas: 

■ physical development 

■ cognitive development 

■ communication development 

■ social or emotional development 

■ adaptive development 

• to the maximum extent appropriate, [early intervention services] 
116 




CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES 



are provided in natural environments, including the home, and 
community settings in which children without disabilities partici- 
pate 

• are provided in conformity with an individualized family service 
plan 

Early intervention services include (20USC§631(4)(E)(i-xiv): 

• Family training, counseling, and home visits 

• Special instruction 

• Speech-language pathology and audiology services 

• Occupational therapy 

• Physical therapy 

• Psychological services 

• Service coordination services 

• Medical services (diagnostic/evaluation purposes) 

• Early identification, screening, and assessment services 

• Elealth services necessary to enable the infant or toddler to benefit 
from the other early intervention services 

• Social work services 

• Vision services 

• Assistive technology devices/ services 

• Necessary transportation and related costs 

In legislating early intervention services. Congress identified the 
following needs (20 USC§ 631): 

■ To enhance the development of infants and toddlers with 
disabilities and to minimize the risk of developmental delay 

■ To reduce educational costs by reducing need for special edu- 
cation and related services 

■ To minimize the likelihood of institutionalization and to 
maximize potential for independent living 

■ To enhance the capacity of families to meet the special educa- 
tion needs of their infants and toddlers 



117 




SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH 



■ To enhance the capacity of state and local agencies and ser- 
vice providers to meet the needs of historically underserved 
populations 

Children with disabilities who qualify for special education pro- 
grams and services transition from early intervention to school age 
services at age 3 and are eligible for such services, unless deemed 
otherwise, until the age of 21. During the 2000-2001 school year, 
approximately 47.2 million students were enrolled in elementary and 
secondary schools in the United States (National Center for Education 
Statistics, 2002). Of these, approximately 5.8 million students, ages 6- 
21 , were served by special education programs and services. Although 
American Indians and Alaskan Natives accounted for slightly more 
than 1% of the total school age population, they accounted for nearly 
1.5% of all students in special education. Nearly 15% of the approxi- 
mately 600,000 AI/AN students attending U.S. public schools were 
served by special education programs and services (U.S. Department 
of Education, 2002). They were more likely to be placed in special 
education than students from all other racial or ethnic minority groups 
except African Americans. In comparison, the Bureau of Indian Af- 
fairs (BIA) and tribal schools served approximately 48,000 AI/AN 
students during the 2000-2001 school year. Of these, approximately 
17% or slightly more than 8,000 AI/AN students were in special 
education programs (Bureau of Indian Affairs, 2002). 

Identifying Factors that Place American Indian I Alaskan Native Students at 
Risk for Developing or Acquiring Disabling Conditions 

Regardless of the location (e.g., rural, urban, suburban, etc.) in 
which American Indian and Alaskan Native children live, they tend to 
be disproportionately affected by health problems including speech 
and language impairments, respiratory tract infections, fetal alcohol 
syndrome due to maternal use/ abuse of alcohol, diabetes, and obesity 
(Marks, Moyer, Roche, & Graham, 2003). Each of these factors may 
increase children’s risk of developing or acquiring a disability which 



118 




CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES 



may result in eligibility for special education programs and services. 
These conditions may be related to socioeconomic and environmental 
factors such as poverty, smoking, poor nutrition, lack of adequate 
healthcare, stress, drug and alcohol use and abuse, recurrent otitis 
media 1 or middle ear infection, poor diet and nutrition, etc. 

In addition to physical health, mental health has been cited as 
“. . . the largest unmet health need for Indian people today” (Neligh, 
1990, as cited in Marks et al., 2003). Although there is conflicting 
data regarding the incidence of mental illnesses and other related 
disorders among American Indian/ Alaskan Native children, there is 
some evidence to suggest that these children are more susceptible, 
than their peers, to depression, abuse, and neglect, factors that are 
thought to be correlated to behavioral problems, psychiatric symp- 
toms, and risk-taking behavior (Marks et al.). 

Although no studies were identified that specifically addressed 
similarities or differences in the incidence of disability among 
American Indian/Alaskan Native young children based on location 
of residence, one study did examine differences in perinatal and infant 
health among rural and urban American Indians and Alaskan Natives 
(Baldwin et al., 2002). The authors found that rural mothers received 
less adequate prenatal healthcare than did those in urban areas. They 
suggest that this may be related to factors such as distance to and 
from health services, limited transportation, and greater distances 
from health services than those located in or near urban areas, etc. 
that interfere with women’s receipt of prenatal care. The authors also 
found that “. . .urban mothers were more likely to be unmarried, to 
be having their first child, and to be smokers . . . [ while] rural mothers 
were more likely to have preexisting medical conditions, complica- 
tions of pregnancy, and a prior preterm or small-for gestational- age 
infant” (Baldwin et al., 2002) and that the incidence of low-birth 
weight was approximately 10% higher among urban AI/AN mothers 
than those in rural areas. 



1 Shriberg, Flipsen, Thielke, Kwiatkowski, Kertoy, Katcher, et al. (2000) (cited in Hammer & Dem- 
mert, 2003) found a connection between recurrent bouts of otitis media and increased risk for speech 
disorders among American Indian children. 



119 




SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH 



Other factors that contribute to poor health care and outcomes 
among American Indians and Alaskan Natives include: lack of finan- 
cial resources, cultural barriers, suspicion of health care providers, and 
poor sanitary conditions (The Health Care Challenge, 1999, as cited in 
Office of Minority Health, n.d.). These findings are important given 
that health-related factors may place children at risk of developing 
or acquiring disabilities or other impairments later in life. 

How Can Early Childhood Programs 
Accommodate AI/AN Children with Disabilities? 

A synthesis of research (Marks et al, 2003) in the area of early 
childhood education and American Indians/Alaskan Natives identi- 
fied the following issues or concerns: 

1 . Lack of culturally appropriate curricula and practices 

2. The need to emphasize the development and use of language 
and literacy 

3. The need for improved teacher training and professional de- 
velopment 

4. The need for increased parent involvement 

5. Improvement of assessment tools and practices 

6. The need to address the physical health and well being, as well 
as the mental health, of young AI/AN children 

Although this is not an exhaustive list, it underscores the need to 
develop and implement a comprehensive set of services for young 
AI/AN children regardless of their disability status that is cognizant, 
foremost, of the linguistic and cultural diversity of these children and 
the communities in which they live. According to Paul (1992), “As 
society moves forward in its efforts to improve conditions for early 
childhood care and education, deeper issues must be considered by 
Native Americans. Programs for young Native children need to be de- 
signed within the context of each child’s culture, home language, and 
family. This cannot be done without community input and support” 



120 




CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES 



(p. 39). Further, Paul (pp. 40-41) suggests the following strategies for 
the provision of successful early childhood care and education: 

• Train more N ative teachers and administrators through incentives 
to enter the field of education and to use alternative certification 
procedures. 

• Include cultural awareness courses in teacher training. 

• Hire Native aides trained in child development principles a lan- 
guage and culture models. 

• Increase Head Start availability for all who wish to participate. 

• Establish a culturally based curriculum relevant to the local com- 
munity. 

• Promote, maintain, and encourage Native language use. 

As illustrated, effective early childhood programs are essential, 
not only for AI/AN children with or at risk of disabilities, but for 
all AI/AN children. This is underscored by findings (e.g. Beiser & 
Attneave, 1982, as cited in Fisher, Bacon, & Storck, 1998) that sug- 
gest that AI/AN children tend to do well in school during their early 
childhood years. However, marked differences become evident during 
the adolescent years. The question, then, is what happens to the child 
and/ or the educational system during the adolescent years and how 
can we use this knowledge to retool educational programs so that 
AI/AN continue to fare well in the educational system? 

Impact of Disability Across the Ufespan 

Although the focus of this paper is on early childhood education 
for AI/AN children with disabilities, it is important to acknowledge 
that the existence of a disability has implications throughout one’s en- 
tire life span. Current reports indicate that 22%, or 550,000, American 
Indians and Alaskan Natives report having one or more disabilities, 
compared with 20% of all racial groups, 20% of Whites, 20% of 
Blacks, 15% of Hispanics, and 10% of Asians (National Council on 
Disability, 2003). The most frequently occurring disabilities among 



121 




SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH 



AI/ANs include (National Council on Disability, 2003): 

• Spinal cord injuries 

• Complications of diabetes 

• Blindness 

• Mobility impairments 

• Traumatic brain injuries 

• Deafness or hardness of hearing 

• Orthopedic impairments 

• Anthralgia (joint pain) 

• Emotional or mental heath conditions 

• Learning disabilities 

• Alcoholism or drug related dependencies 

Some of the barriers and challenges faced by AI/ANs with dis- 
abilities include (National Council on Disability, 2003): 

• Attitudes and perceptions 

• Lack of awareness 

• Lack of uniformity/ coordination of services among federal, state, 
and tribal governments and other service providers 

• Lack of public transportation in rural and remote areas which 
also has implications for independent living and mobility 

• Limited infrastructure among rural communities (e.g. lack of 
wheelchair accessible buildings, sidewalks, ramps, etc.) 

• Limited access to tribal and federal offices, as well as housing and 
other physical structures 

• Difficulty navigating the educational system 

• Need for personal care assistance 

Implications for Policy, Research, and Practice 

As illustrated, the education of AI/AN children with disabilities 
impacts and is impacted by policy, research, and practice at the tribal/ 
local, state, and federal levels. To effectively serve this population, we 



122 




CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES 



must examine what the current landscape looks like in terms of the 
incidence and prevalence of disability among American Indian and 
Alaskan Native communities. This will provide data that will allow us 
to better understand which categories of disability are most preva- 
lent and then to create, or in some cases, finetune existing services 
that target these particular disabilities. For example, we know that 
nationally, a problem exists with the high incidence of fetal alcohol 
syndrome that is related to maternal use and abuse of alcohol during 
pregnancy. However, we do not know the extent to which this condi- 
tion is found among all AI/ AN communities, or if the incidence rate 
is higher among certain tribes, and/ or those tribal people residing in 
rural versus urban areas. 

Nationally, we must advocate for the inclusion of American 
Indians and Alaskan Natives in sufficient numbers in large-scale 
research studies to enable valid and reliable analysis of data. It is 
also recommended that the Indian Health Service (IHS) collect and 
analyze national data comparing maternal and infant health status 
among all Native groups served by IHS facilities as well as tribal 
health care providers (Baldwin et al, 2002). At present, no such data 
were available. 

As demonstrated by the lack of a comprehensive body of research 
and publications regarding the education of young American Indian 
and Alaskan N ative children with disabilities, it is no longer acceptable 
to argue that American Indians and Alaskan Natives are an insufficient 
percentage of the overall population, who do not warrant statistical 
analysis. As we know, the current administration, and in large part 
the education community, heralds the use of evidence-based, em- 
pirical research. Without such research, we can not adequately argue 
for the development and implementation of appropriate services, 
nor can we accurately portray the current status of this population. 
This argument is bolstered by the Administration for Children and 
Families (Marks et al, 2003): 

AI/AN children have not always been the direct beneficiaries of 
knowledge that has been gained through research. Very little evidence 
has been systematically gathered from Head Start programs that serve 



123 




SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH 



these children. To date, understanding the differences across and 
within AI-AN populations has remained largely outside the body of 
knowledge derived from systematic, large-scale research on early child- 
hood development. To the extent that studies have been conducted, 
they often are ethnographic or case studies, which, although rich with 
detail and understanding, may be limited in their generalizability and 
are not necessarily the best method for producing knowledge that 
can be turned into strategies to better serve American Indian and 
Alaska Native children. 

There is a strong consensus that American Indian and Alaska Na- 
tive children bring unique aspects of their culture and background 
into Head Start. Based on studies and practitioners’ observations, 
it is likely that many American Indian and Alaska Native children 
have learning approaches, develop language skills, exhibit behavioral 
characteristics, and are affected by health matters in ways that are 
different from those of other racial and ethnic groups. Moreover, 
American Indian and Alaska Native children differ from each other 
across tribal and ancestral affiliations and across the cultural norms 
that affect their families and the types of environments in which they 
live. Any research efforts must take into account the unique cultural 
characteristics of the children and families served as well as the goals 
and directions of the local communities in which they live. 

Although AI/AN children are often absent from data analysis 
and reporting, it is important to note that they are included in exist- 
ing large scale data sets compiled at the national level, such as the 
Early Childhood Longitudinal Studies (ECLS-B and K). We need to 
ask what can we learn from such data sets and how can we facilitate 
the systematic analysis and publication of these data? What we do 
know is that preliminary analyses of these data indicate differences 
in early childhood disability status based on location. For example, 
in one study, researchers found that rural students were 60% more 
likely to be placed in special education in kindergarten than their 
peers in other settings (National Center for Rural Early Childhood 
Learning Initiatives, 2005). Additional informal analysis shows that 
young American Indian students are disproportionately represented in 



124 




CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES 



special education programs and services in public schools . 2 Although 
this is a starting point, this database again does not include a large 
sample of American Indians thereby limiting the generalizability, reli- 
ability, and validity of these data. However, one of the exciting things 
about this database is the potential to recommend to the National 
Center for Education Statistics or other research groups skilled in 
large-scale quantitative data collection and analysis, that this study 
be replicated solely with American Indians and Alaskan Natives in 
order to provide more useful data. 

In addition to quantitative analysis using large-scale data sets, 
there are a number of other questions that can be addressed using 
more qualitatively based methods of research. Questions to consider 
include: 

• What is the current status of early childhood education among 
rural American Indian/ Alaskan Native children with or at risk of 
developing disabilities? (e.g., How many eligible children? What 
are the most prevalent conditions? Are these children located in 
rural or urban areas?) 

• What types of services are provided? What types of training and 
professional development are available for early intervention 
service providers? To what extent do available services meet the 
unique cultural and linguistic characteristics of American Indian 
and Alaskan Native children, their families, communities, etc.? 

• Is there a correlation between residence (e.g., rural, urban, subur- 
ban, etc.) and the incidence of disability? If so, why? How does 
location of residence impact access to and provision of early 
intervention, as well as preventive services for young AI/AN 
children who have or are at-risk of developing a disability? 

• What are the current best practices in the field of early child- 
hood education as it relates to the education and care of young 



2 

The author has received a small grant from The Pennsylvania State University’s Children 
Youth and Family’s Consortium to analyze the data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal 
Study to factors that place American Indian children at risk for receiving special education 
programs and services. 



125 




SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH 



American Indian and Alaskan Native children with disabilities? 

• Does the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement 
Act recognize the role of language and culture in the develop- 
ment and implementation of Individualized Family Services 
Plans and Individualized Education Plans? If so, how? If not, 
what can we do to ensure that such provisions are mandated and 
implemented? 

• Are there differences in the provision of early intervention ser- 
vices in rural versus urban areas? If so, what? Why? 

• What is the role of tribal governments in providing early interven- 
tion services? 

• What is the role of the Indian Health Service as well as tribal 
health care programs in providing services to AI/AN children 
with disabilities? 

• What is the role of Head Start, Early Head Start, Family and Child 
Education programs (FACE) and BABY FACE programs in the 
provision of early intervention services? 

• What is being done to ensure the seamless transition of AI/AN 
children from early intervention services to school age special 
education services? What needs to be done to improve this transi- 
tion? 

• What happens to the provision of services among transitory 
children who migrate between rural and urban areas? How can 
we facilitate the seamless provision of services? 

• How can early intervention programs interpret and operationalize 
the definition of parents to facilitate extended family and com- 
munity involvement in the special education process? 

• What can school leaders do to facilitate the seamless provision 
of early intervention services? Are school leaders adequately pre- 
pared to assume responsibility of school-based early intervention 
services? 

• Are definitions of disability culturally bound ? 3 Do Native commu- 
nities view disability in the same way educators and other service 
providers do? What implications do these differences or similari- 
ties have for the provision of early intervention services? 



126 




CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES 



• How can we make the assessment and identification process more 
culturally appropriate and relevant for use among young American 
Indian and Alaskan Native children? 

Regardless of what questions are asked or how the data are col- 
lected and analyzed, we must be careful to avoid the frequently oc- 
curring disconnect between research and practice. 

In addition to the lack of research, an ongoing area of concern is 
the use of standardized tests in the assessment of AI/AN students. 
This practice has been linked to the disproportionate representation 
of culturally and linguistically diverse children, including AI/ANs, 
in special education programs and services (Hammer & Demmert, 
2003). Dynamic assessment, which is a comprehensive approach to 
assessment that takes into account linguistic and cultural diversity, 
has been suggested as an alternative or compliment to standardized 
testing (Ukrainetz, Harpell, Walsh & Coyle, 2000, as cited in Hammer 
& Demmert, 2003). Banks (1997) has also studied the perceptions 
of caregivers and professionals regarding assessment of American 
Indian/ Alaskan Native families. Her research found a disconnection 
between current “best practices” in assessment and actual practices 
in the field. 

Another ongoing concern is the need to develop and implement 
effective means of preparing, recruiting, and retaining highly qualified 
cadres of Native special educators (e.g., early intervention specialists, 
speech and language therapists, etc.) as well as early childhood educa- 
tors and care providers. Current models such as the one at Northern 
Arizona University Reaching American Indian Special/Elementary 
Educators (RAISE) (see http://coe.nau.edu) are instructive as to 
how we can grow our own and provide incentives for them to work 
in their own communities upon earning their degrees. Just as training 

3 

For example, Beiser, Dion & Gotowiec (2000, p. 435) (as cited in Demmert & Hammer, 
2003) found that “ ‘there is nothing culture-bound about the symptoms of either hyperac- 
tivity or attention-deficit.’ ” However they recommended that researchers examine ways in 
which “ cultural context may affect the response of parents and teachers to these potentially 
long-lasting problems of childhood.” 



127 




SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH 



of staff is important, parents also need to be made aware of and 
encouraged to access all available early intervention/ early childhood 
services for AI/AN children with disabilities. One way to facilitate 
this is the development and implementation of parent training and 
information centers such as the Native American Families Together 
Parent Center in Moscow, Idaho, which is specifically designed to 
serve American Indian and Alaskan Native parents and families (see 
http:/ /coe.nau.edu). This can serve as a valuable resource to all in- 
volved in the education of young AI/AN children with disabilities. 

Next Steps: Where Do We Go From Here? 

Although the questions we posed in the introduction are not fully 
answered, the most important lesson, I believe, gained from this dis- 
cussion is the need to not only study and examine the current state 
of the education of young AI/AN children with disabilities, but to 
emerge from this forum, with a renewed commitment and plan of 
action to identify, develop, and/ or implement effective practices that 
will ensure that our children, regardless of disability status, receive 
the most effective educational and supportive services, including the 
appropriate use of tribal languages and cultures. Such work requires 
that we, as a community of Native practitioners and researchers, and 
local, tribal, state and federal governments, collaborate specifically, as 
this is our focus, with rural A 1/ AN communities to address the issues 
outlined not only in this paper, but as a collective result of this forum. 
This type of approach recognizes the fact that the education of young 
AI/AN children, particularly those with or at-risk of developing a 
disability, cannot be adequately provided in isolation. Their education 
is, in fact, impacted by the cultural, social, economic, political, legal 
and historical conditions within which this population exists. The lack 
of a systemic approach to early childhood education, including early 
intervention, will result in the failure to provide appropriate services. 
In turn, we will continue to see the disproportionate representation 
of AI/AN children in special education programs and services not 
only from birth to age 5 but also throughout the school-age years. 



128 




CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES 



In the end, it is not sufficient to pose research questions and 
identify areas in need of improvement. We must take this work a step 
further so that this forum will positively impact the education and 
care of young American Indian and Alaskan Native children with 
disabilities residing in rural or reservation-based communities, using 
the information gained from this forum, as well as the work that has 
been done and continues to be done in our own communities. In 
order to accomplish these goals, we will require adequate funding, 
commitment and ongoing collaboration. My charge is to leave this 
forum with a formulated plan of next steps that is not limited to 
discussion, but is actionable. 



References 

Baldwin, L., Grossman, D. C., Casey, S., Hollow, W, et al. (2002). 
American Journal of Public Health, 92(9), 1491. 

Banks, S. R. (1997). Caregiver and professional perceptions of assess- 
ment practices and validity for American Indian/ Alaska Native 
families. Journal of American Indian Education, 37(f), 16-44. 

Bureau of Indian Affairs. (2002). Office of Indian education programs, 
Bureau of Indian Affairs: 2002 fingertip facts. Retrieved January 6, 
2004, from http:/ /www.oiep. bia.edu 

Faircloth, S., & Tippeconnic, J. W, III. (2000). Issues in the education 
of American Indian and Alaskan Native students with disabilities. 
ERIC Digest (ED 448009). Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse 
on Rural Education and Small Schools. 

Fisher, R A., Bacon, J.G., & Storck, M. (1998). Teacher, parent, and 
youth report of problem behaviors among rural American Indian 
and Caucasian adolescents. American Indian and Alaskan Native 
Mental Health Research, 8(2), 1-27. 

Hammer, P.C., & Demmert, W. G, Jr. (2003). American Indian 
and Alaska Native early childhood health, development, and 
education assessment research. (ERIC Digest No. ED482326). 
Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and 
Small Schools. 



129 




SUSAN C. FAIRCLOTH 



Individuals with Disabilities Education Act Amendments of 1997 
(IDEA), Pub. L. No. 105-17, 20 U.S.C. §1400 et seq. 

Marks, E.L., Moyer, M. K., Roche, M., & Graham, E. T. (2003). A 
summary of research and publications on early childhood for American 
Indian and Alaska Native children. Washington, DC: Child Out- 
comes Research and Evaluation, Office of Planning, Research 
and Evaluation, Administration for Children and Families, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. 

National Center for Education Statistics. (2002). Public school student, 
staff and graduate counts by state: S chool year 2000-2001 . Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Education. 

National Center for Rural Early Childhood Learning Initiatives. 
(2005). Preliminary rural analysis of the Early Childhood Longitudinal 
Study - Kindergarten Cohort (Rural Early Childhood Brief No. 2). 
Mississippi State, MS: Mississippi State University Early Child- 
hood Institute. 

National Council on Disability. (2003). People with disabilities on 
tribal lands: Education, health care, vocational rehabilitation, 
and independent living. Retrieved Jan. 5, 2006, from http:// 
www.ncd.gov/newsroom/publications/2003/tribal_lands.htm 

Office of Minority Health, (n.d.). American Indian & Alaska Na- 
tive populations. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. 

Paul, A. S. (1992). Early childhood education in American Indian and 
Alaska Native communities. Summary of Paper 7. In P. Cahape & 
C. B. Howley (Eds.), Indian nations at risk: Listening to the people: Sum- 
maries of papers commissioned by the Indian Nations at Risk Task Force 
of the U.S. Department of Education (pp. 39-41). Charleston, WV: 
ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. 

U.S. Department of Education. (2002). Twenty-fourth annual report to 
Congress on the implementation of the Individuals with Disabilities Educa- 
tion Act. Washington, DC: Author. 



130 




CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES 



U.S. Department of Education. U.S. Office of Special Education 
Programs (n.d.). Data tables for OSEP state reported data. Table 
AA14 2003. Retrieved Jan. 5, 2006, from http:/ /www.ideadata. 
org/ arc_toc5.asp#partbCC 



131 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 

American Indian and Alaska Native Early Childhood Family 
Involvement: A Review of the Literature 

SusanRae Banks-Joseph, Ph.D. (Arapaho) 

Laurie D. McCubbin, Ph.D. 

Introduction 

American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) communities (families, 
clans, tribes, etc.) have family systems, worldviews, and ways of teach- 
ing and learning that differ from those of White Europeans (Medi- 
cine, 1981; Red Horse, Lewis, Feit, & Decker, 1978; Tafoya, 1989). 
Understanding the cultural context of historical and contemporary 
AI/AN communities is critical as one seeks to examine families’ and 
communities’ involvement in early childhood programs and to under- 
stand the role that White European education has played. Through 
the educational system in the United States, the federal government 
worked to destroy tribal languages and cultures by removing children 
and young adults from their communities (i.e., The Boarding School 
Era). Families continue to face the realities of an educational system 
in which their children (a) are overrepresented in special education 
and underrepresented in programs for the gifted and talented (Banks, 
1997; Council for Exceptional Children and the National Alliance of 
Black School Educators, 2002; Faircloth & Tippeconnic, 2000; Garcia 
& Pearson, 1994; Reshley, 1988; Samuda, Kong, Cummins, Lewis, & 
Pascual-Leone, 1989); (b) are either underserved or not served at all 
upon being appropriately identified as having special needs (National 
Council on Disability, 2003); and (c) are exposed to experiences in 
schools that are often void of cultural and language curriculum and 
culturally responsive methodologies, further confounding the pursuit 
of equity in education (National Council on Disability, 2000; Deyhle 
& Swisher, 1997; Harry, Kalyanpur, & Day, 1999). 

In spite of the fact that, of all Americans, as a group, Native stu- 
dents have the highest dropout rate from public schools, the lowest 
academic achievement levels, the lowest rate of school attendance, 



132 




FAMILY INVOLVEMENT 



and the lowest rate of participation in post-secondary education 
(Deyhle & Swisher, 1997; National Council on Disability, 2003; U.S. 
Commission on Civil Rights, 2003), the resilience of AI/AN chil- 
dren, youth, families, elders, and communities cannot be overlooked. 
Despite AI/AN communities being nearly destroyed by disease, war, 
and genocide and the overt attempt by the government to eradicate 
traditional Native cultures and languages (Strand & Peacock, 2003), 
Native people have been able to maintain their tribal identities (John- 
son, 2003), including religions, beliefs, values, and cultural practices. 
The survival of AI/ AN communities and their culture has been and 
continues to be dependent upon communities’ support, circling all 
aspects of life. 

Early childhood, elementary, secondary, and post-secondary edu- 
cation is but one thread of life’s education; yet, that part of one’s life 
is interconnected within all other aspects of life including emotional, 
spiritual, physical, and mental. The resilience to withstand, overcome, 
or recover from serious threat (Masten, 2001) of AI/AN communi- 
ties speaks to the strengths within family systems, worldviews, and 
ways of teaching and learning. Red Horse et al. (1978) provided what 
Running Wolf et al. called “remarkable insight into the extended 
family system, identifying three primary differences between AI/ AN 
families and White European or Caucasian families”: 

The first difference they note is in the definition of extended 
family. The White European or Caucasian definition identifies 
the extended family as three generations living in the same 
household, whereas in AI/AN cultures it is defined as a vil- 
lage-type network construct which has a significant impact 
on behavior and socialization processes. Secondly, in AI/AN 
communities this extended family structure transmits culture 
and conserves family patterns, which in turn contributes to 
identity development. Finally, according to Red Horse et al. 
(1978), the family promotes accountability in that it sets stan- 
dards and expectations which then maintain the wholeness of 
the group through the enforcement of values (Running Wolf 



133 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 
et al., 2002, p. 34). 

Resilience among AI/AN communities and families also has 
been referred to as cultural resilience. Cultural resilience (Ambler, 
2003; Heavy Runner & Morris, 1997) is a concept that has included 
being proud of one’s heritage; having connections with traditional 
Native culture and the family, school, community; and the tribe’s 
responsibility to nurture, protect and guide children. Heavy Runner 
(2002) defines cultural resilience as the strength that lies in the heal- 
ing process within the Native culture. This cultural resilience is also 
embedded within the family systems, patterns, structures, and values 
that are upheld within the Native community. 

Research on resilience among AI/AN people has yielded some 
promising findings. Waller and Patterson (2002) found that an infor- 
mal network of family can serve as a protective buffer against sources 
of stress and can be a key factor in resilience. This informal network 
can consist of friends, relatives and neighbors and is not limited to 
solely blood or clan/tribe relations. Research has also found that 
strong connections and ties with parents, families, communities, and 
traditional Native culture positively predicted school performance, 
school retention rates, and emotional well-being (Cummins, Ireland, 
Resnick, & Blum, 1999; Hobfoll, Jackson, Hobfoll, Pierce, & Young, 
2002; Whitbeck, Hoyt, Stubben & LaFromboise, 2001). However 
there remains a paucity of research on cultural resilience among 
AI/AN families and early childhood involvement. Therefore, as one 
examines current literature regarding AI/ AN families’/ communities’ 
involvement in early childhood service provision, it is important to 
reflect upon the cultural context of parent/ family involvement; that 
is, what constitutes family/ community involvement in early childhood 
among AI/AN populations. 

Since President Clinton’s Executive Order on American Indian/ 
Alaska Native Education (Executive Order No. 13096, 1998) placed 
a significant emphasis on early childhood education and the impor- 
tance of related research, it is indeed timely to examine the current 
efforts, barriers, and best practices that are beginning to emerge from 



134 




FAMILY INVOLVEMENT 



programs charged with meeting the needs of young AI/ AN children 
and families. AI/AN infants and young children are served through 
a variety of programs including Even Start, Early Elead Start, Head 
Start, FACE, Baby FACE, local non-profit tribal and non-tribal agen- 
cies, and tribal and public schools that have elected to serve 3- to 5- 
year-olds within their educational systems. When children are between 
the ages of 5 and 8 (early elementary) they are served in either tribally 
controlled. Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), or public schools. Given 
the diversity of service programs, this comprehensive review of the 
literature regarding AI/ AN family/ community involvement in early 
childhood education was guided by the following questions: 

1. To what extent are rural and reservation American Indian 
and Alaska Native communities (families, tribes, and others) 
involved in their children’s schools and programs? 

2. How do grade level, percentage of N ative enrollment, teacher, 
administrator, curriculum, school governance, location of 
school, community characteristics and tribal differences affect 
involvement? 

3. What are some of the best practices specific to American 
Indian and Alaska Native children for promoting family and 
community involvement in early childhood programs? 

The results of this review will be followed by a discussion of the 
implications for practice, research, and policy development. 

Extent of American Indian and Alaska Native Community In- 
volvement In Early Childhood Education 

The extent of AI/AN communities’ involvement in their 
children’s early childhood schools and programs must be framed 
within current, often White European definitions of parent/ family 
involvement. Herein lies one of the challenges for researchers and 
practitioners; that is, to go beyond such views and definitions to collect 
data on all facets of communities’ involvement from AI/ AN cultural 



135 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 

perspectives. It is within this context that a review of the literature 
for empirical studies, program reports, and related nonempirical 
articles were examined. The review included an exhaustive search 
of the ERIC data-base including government documents. Office of 
Indian Education publications, Psychlnfo data-base, Head Start and 
Early Head Start reports, the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, 
FACE and Baby FACE reports, as well as Symposiums related to early 
childhood education and testimony before the U.S. Congress related 
to AI/AN education inclusive of early childhood education. The 
results indicated that since the Executive Order 13096 on American 
Indian and Alaska Native Education signed by President Clinton on 
August 6, 1998, (and before) research (empirical) in AI/AN early 
childhood education is scarce especially when one contrasts this with 
the ever increasing body of knowledge within non-Native early child- 
hood educational arenas (Demmert, 2001). There were no empirical 
studies found in this review (1998-present) on the extent of AI/AN 
famikesY communities’ involvement in early childhood education; 
however, there were data from several reports, symposiums, and 
congressional testimonies that warrant discussion. There were also 
several studies on related service provision; wherein, AI/AN families’ 
expressed their perceptions regarding involvement in their child’s 
early education. These studies will be presented within the “best 
practices” section below. 

It is also important to note that some studies and reports were 
conducted in which AI/AN families and children were purported to 
be included, yet data were reported in aggregate so that one cannot 
evaluate the extent to which the findings do or do not hold true for 
AI/AN communities. For example, in the results presented in Cel- 
ebrating Cultural and Linguistic Diversity in Head Start (Joseph & Cohen, 
2000), data collected included African Americans, Asians, Hispanic, 
and AI/AN, but results were not provided according to ethnic groups. 
Therefore, any data from AI/AN populations are hidden and non- 
accessible to the AI/AN families/communities, researchers and/or 
practitioners. The resulting data represents generalizations about cul- 
turally/linguistically diverse populations. Generalizations are subject 



136 




FAMILY INVOLVEMENT 



to extreme caution especially when applied indiscriminately across 
diverse populations. 

Reports Specific to All AN Populations 

A national evaluation of the Even Start Family Literacy Program 
was conducted and a descriptive analysis of the Tribal Even Start 
Program and families served in 1995-96 were reported (Tao, Khan, & 
Arriola, 1998). Eight of nine projects were described and compared 
to 563 projects reporting nationwide; approximately, 326 parents and 
507 children were represented in the tribal data set and 32,814 parents 
in all Even Start programs. The ethnic background of participants 
in the tribal projects were 83% American Indian, 11% Caucasian, 
<1% Asian, 4% Hispanic, and 0% African American. In terms of 
family/ community involvement, the report addressed parents’ par- 
ticipation in adult education, parenting education, and the extent 
to which their children participated in early childhood educational 
services. The report also described the extent to which parents were 
engaged across all three services, the types of services received, the 
prevalence of children with special needs and the extent of retention 
and goal completion by participants. 

The results indicated that parents’/ families’ participation in home 
visits varied across tribal projects ranging from none to 52 over the 
course of a year; the average across projects was 1 1 in contrast to 9 
reported in the national Even Start. The model of Even Start stipu- 
lates that at least one parent and child participate in all three of the 
services that the program offers. The reported data indicated that 
more than 90% of parents in the tribal Even Start project participated 
in the parenting opportunities (i.e., parenting classes on parent-child 
literacy, child development, child’s language and thinking skills, etc. 
and parent-child activities that included social development, arts and 
crafts, gross motor activities, reading, storytelling, pre-reading etc.) in 
contrast to 88% of all Even Start projects. The rate of participation 
was 20 hours for tribal parents and 27 hours for non- tribal. Nearly 
half of the parents, 44%, participated in adult secondary education 



137 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 

or GED programs that were available, in contrast to 40% across all 
Even Start projects. However, the number of hours that parents 
spent in adult education was significantly lower than that of parents 
in non-tribal projects, 25 and 93 hours, respectively. 

The type of participation of tribal parents’ children indicated that 
the majority were served via individualized home-based programs 
(78%); while, 32% participated in center-based, 18% compulsory 
schooling (K-3) coordinating with Even Start, 16% in services for 
school-age children outside of school hours, 2% daycare with edu- 
cational component, and 6% in no services for their children. The 
extent to which tribal parents participated in all three services was 
71% in contrast to 75% of all Even Start projects (Among the parents 
not participating in all three services, most (93%) participated in the 
parenting opportunities or early childhood services (96%). Early child- 
hood education had the most scheduled contact hours; for children 
over 2 years old the scheduled hours were 27-32 hours per month, 
children younger than 3 received approximately 3 hours per week in 
educational services. Parent-child joint activities participation rate was 
reported as 3 hours per month with respect to home visits, 4 hours 
per month in-center/ classroom, and 5 hours per month in field trips, 
meals, or social functions. The numbers of children with special needs 
were 6%, in contrast to 12% of all Even Start projects. The reten- 
tion and successful goal completion reflected that tribal families were 
continuing their participation similarly to that of non-tribal, 62% and 
60%, respectively. However, of all families for whom year-end data 
were received, less than 1% of tribal families compared to 6% of all 
Even Start had completed their goals and left the program. 

This data provided some general information on the types of 
parent/ family involvement in early childhood education (i.e., parent- 
child activities and parenting education activities). However, the data 
does not reflect traditional educational activities of families or types 
of activities that families engaged in within the home and community 
that were done outside of the program contact activities. 

In a more recent report on AI/AN Head Start programs (Marks 
& Graham, 2004), subjects voiced their perspectives on goals for 



138 




FAMILY INVOLVEMENT 



their children, including the strengthening and continuation of tribal 
identity via language and cultural skills, basic academic skills including 
literacy and math, as well as respect for diversity by integrating other 
ethnic group traditions into the curriculum, health and wellness, social 
and personal growth, self-esteem, respect, moral sensibility and per- 
sonal responsibility, contributing to society, and confronting prejudice 
and racism. The subjects indicated that parent/ family involvement 
and safety and stability were critical for family/ community well-be- 
ing. Tribal leaders, parents and family members, and Head Start staff 
shared the impact that many programs had on language acquisition 
and cultural activities that children were benefiting from as well as 
family engagement in education. They also identified the need to 
increase family engagement in the education of Native children and 
the need to encourage more men to participate in AI/AN education 
of young children and youth. 

Subjects in the study by Marks and Graham also identified some 
of the challenges to strengthening and continuing tribal identity and 
culture. Factors that were highlighted included disagreement regard- 
ing the proper place for such learning to occur, which languages to 
integrate into programs that serve multiple tribes, the declining num- 
ber of fluent language speakers within some tribes, and competing 
with electronic media. Although this report lacked specific data on 
family/ community participation, strengths and challenges were sum- 
marized which emphasized parent/ family involvement/ engagement 
as a strength of the tribal Head Start programs; while also emphasiz- 
ing the need to build upon that strength by increasing and sustaining 
involvement throughout their children’s educational pathways. 

Some AI/AN families have the opportunity to participate in Fam- 
ily and Child Education (FACE) and Baby FACE programs, which are 
sponsored by the Office of Indian Education Programs and the BIA. 
The programs focus on family literacy and the “integration of tribal 
languages and cultures is fundamental” (Tippeconnic & Jones, 1995, 
p. 7). These programs also focus on “school readiness, high school 
completion, adult literacy, lifelong learning, and parental participa- 
tion in education” (p. 6) through center-based and/or home-based 



139 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 

programs. Within this review of the literature, no current data on the 
extent of family/ community involvement in FACE and Baby Face 
programs were found. There was a description of the FACE program 
and lessons learned (Momentum, 1999; Tippeconnic & Jones, 1995) 
as well as testimony provided by Potvin (2000) in the hearing before 
the Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Youth and Families of the 
Committee on Education and the Workforce Flouse of Representa- 
tives, One Flundred and Sixth Congress, 1999. Potvin described the 
FACE model as a strength model: 

It builds on family strengths, rather than pointing out deficits. 
This is a factor in family involvement and helps develop a 
partnership with the school that continues when the children 
enter the Kindergarten- 12 system. Many of the parents in our 
program did not have a positive experience when they were 
in school. When they voluntarily enroll in FACE, they are in- 
viting us into their homes. The parents are the first teachers. 
Our role is to strengthen and support them as their child’s 
teacher. . .there are currently 22 FACE programs in over 180 
Indian schools. FACE is unique in providing services from 
prenatal through third grade. Waiting until a child is in kin- 
dergarten to start working on parental involvement may be 
too late (pp. 6-7). 

Comprehensive ongoing research on early childhood education 
programs and models is critical to understanding the unique strengths 
and needs of AI/AN families and communities. 

Reports that Included All AN Populations in Aggregate Results 

Joseph & Cohen (2000) included data conducted on children 
enrolled in Plead Start, 1992-1993 and 1998-1999, in which 3.8% 
and 3.4% of the populations, respectively, were AI/AN. The results 
included home languages status, recruitment strategies, staff-to-chil- 
dren ethnic ratios (AI/AN approximately equivalent), multicultural 



140 




FAMILY INVOLVEMENT 



materials and activities and parents’ perceptions of these efforts, 
the importance of parent involvement and parent activities (i.e., 
“search for employment through classes on self-esteem building, 
goal setting, career options, self-marketing, job skills training” (p. xi), 
health services, and suggestions for improving the ability of Head 
Start programs to serve families from culturally/linguistically diverse 
populations. 

Data on parent participation and perspectives were gathered uti- 
lizing focus group and interview methodology through site visits to 
30 programs that served culturally/linguistically diverse children and 
families. The findings indicated that there were differing perceptions 
among program directors and other staff regarding parental involve- 
ment. The directors indicated very high involvement; while the other 
staff members indicated low involvement. Some of the difficulties 
that were reported to be barriers to involvement by staff were echoed 
by parents, including the need for translators, transportation, child 
care, developing and maintaining relationships between staff and 
families, and communication. Parents indicated that they were pleased 
with many of the services that they participated in. In addition, there 
were differences in how home visits were done (i.e., a continuum 
ranging from service providers who were aware of and responsive to 
cultural values and traditions of families while conducting home visits 
to those who conducted home visits that were not individualized and 
in some cases ignored the family’s cultural values and traditions). The 
data were reported in aggregate which poses challenges for deter- 
mining the extent to which the key findings on parent participation 
and perspectives (successes and challenges) relate to specific ethnic 
populations for determining aspects that are critical to obtaining as 
well as maintaining high levels of family involvement. 

Recent Early Head Start and Head Start evaluation reports as 
well as the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study were conducted 
with diverse programs. Some of the data results were compared 
utilizing a control group, while other analyses were examined within 
the program group only (Flanagan, & West, 2004). Upon examining 
those reports and related papers, data on various results including 



141 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 

those on parent/ family participation in early childhood home visit- 
ing, and mixed-model programs effects (Administration for Children 
and Families, 2003), American Indian populations were either not 
reported on, mixed in within the demographic category of “other” 
or mixed in with all populations. Thus, the degree to which any of 
the results hold “true,” in terms of effective models, parent/ family 
participation, and challenges unique for AI/ AN families/ communi- 
ties remains an unknown. 

The extent to which grade level, percentage of Native enroll- 
ment, teacher, administrator, curriculum, school governance, location 
of school, community characteristics and tribal differences affect 
involvement in AI/AN early childhood education is unknown at 
this time. Studies have been conducted within Indian education that 
indicate that youth who develop strong cultural identities experience 
higher levels of success in education (Huffman, Still, & Brokenleg, 
1986; Vadas, 1995; Whitbeck, Hoyt, Stubben, & LaFromboise, 2001). 
The importance of the role that caring families and teachers have 
on building resiliency as well as providing high expectations and op- 
portunities to participate (Demmert, 2001) adds further support for 
the need to understand the factors that support family/ community 
involvement in early childhood education and beyond. Students with 
involved parents, regardless of income or background, are more likely 
to experience success in academics and social skills, as well as persist 
through graduation and post-secondary education (Henderson & 
Berla, 1994; Henderson & Mapp, 2002). 

Best Practices for Family and Community Involvement 

Promoting family/community involvement in AI/AN early 
childhood education is fundamental to ensuring physical, emotional, 
spiritual, mental health of tomorrow’s leaders. Cummins et al. in- 
vestigated the correlates of physical and emotional health among 
AI/AN adolescents and stressed that “the connection to family 
remains a consistently powerful factor in the lives of these youth” 
(p. 38). Further, Congress designed several specific procedural safe- 



142 




FAMILY INVOLVEMENT 



guards to allow parents/ caregivers input into school decisions and to 
maximize the likelihood of providing an appropriate education for 
children and youth with disabilities (Yell, 1998). Therefore, identifying 
best practices for promoting family/ community involvement is war- 
ranted. The best practices highlighted here are based upon a review 
of related literature (descriptive narratives of various programs and 
models, opinion papers, related research studies, etc.). The need for 
research (qualitative and quantitative) regarding the validity of these 
components/practices, as well as models utilizing various combina- 
tions of these practices, cannot be overstated. 

1 . Integrate language and culture (curriculum, methods) through- 
out service provision programs (Aakhus & Hoover, 1998; 
Banks, 2004; Cleary & Peacock, 1998; Pavel, Banks, & Pavel, 
2002 ). 

2. Acknowledge and build on families’ strengths (Banks-Joseph, 
2005; Potvin, 1999; Tippeconnic & Jones, 1995). 

3. Build trust through respectful, reciprocal relationships between 
families/ communities and service providers (Joseph & Cohen, 
2000; Cross, Earle, Echo-Hawk Solie, & Manness, 2000; Harry, 
Kalyanpur, & Day, 1999). 

4. Implement and/or develop programs in tribal-specific man- 
ners matching their unique family-based cultural values, beliefs, 
and kinship systems (Medicine, 1981; National Council on 
Disabilities, 2003; Swisher & Tippeconnic, 1999). 

5. Involve families/ communities (i.e., children, parents, aunties, 
uncles, grandparents, elders) in the decision-making processes 
(Demmert, 2001; Howard, Williams, & Lepper, 2001; National 
Council on Disability, 2003; Olson, Olson, Pingayak, Sterling, 
& Pierzchanowski, 2002). 

6. Utilize mixed methods of service delivery (i.e., home-based 
and center-based) as opposed to a single method (Joseph & 
Cohen, 2000). 

7. Recruit and retain AI/AN service providers (administrators 
and direct service providers) (Pavel, Banks, & Pavel, 2002; 



143 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 

Faircloth & Tippeconnic, 2000). 

8. Provide interpreters consistently when needed (Joseph & 
Cohen, 2000). 

9. Provide transportation and child care consistently when needed 
(Tao, Khan, & Arriola, 1998). 

10. Utilize family liaisons/community friends/advocates when 
needed (Banks-Joseph, 2005). 

11. Provide ongoing professional training (cross-cultural commu- 
nication, learning styles, curriculum development, disabilities, 
etc.) (Demmert, 2001; Deyhle & Swisher, 1997; Faircloth & 
Tippeconnic, 2000; Swisher & Tippeconnic, 1999). 

12. Provide ways for families/ community members to provide on- 
going feedback (Banks, 2004; Flarry, Kalyanpur, & Day, 1999; 
Flernandez, 2001; National Council on Disability, 2003). 

13. Provide collaborative teaming networks with all agencies 
providing services to young children and families (Howard, 
Williams, Port, & Lepper, 2001). 

14. Invite families whose children have moved on to elementary 
and/or secondary school to serve as support families (i.e., 
ongoing community involvement) (Bergstrom, Cleary, & 
Peacock, 2003; Barnhardt, 1999). 

15. Set up family/ community involvement transition plans. 

AI/AN parents, families, elders, children and young adults, com- 
munities, teachers, and researchers have shared their concerns and 
suggestions for improving schools (i.e., BIA, tribal, public, etc.) and 
related educational services (i.e., general education, early childhood 
education, special education, etc.) for decades (Banks, 2004; Charles- 
ton, 1994; Cross Earle, Echo-Hawk, Solie, & Manness, 2000; Cum- 
mins et al., 1999; Cross, 1986; Medicine, 1981; Robinson-Zanartu & 
Majel-Dixon, 1996; St. Germaine, 2000; Running Wolf et al., 2002; 
Swisher & Tippeconnic, 1999). It is imperative that as programs are 
implemented, developed, and modified, that data are gathered across 
multiple dimensions in a culturally appropriate manner. The need 
for such research is urgent given the ongoing failure of schools and 



144 




FAMILY INVOLVEMENT 



educational systems to facilitate the expression and growth of AI/AN 
children’s gifts and talents. 

Implications for Future Research 

The results of this review of the literature on AI/AN fam- 
ily/ community involvement in early childhood education, including 
special education, indicates the scarcity of studies, not only in this 
topic area, but also within AI/AN early childhood education more 
broadly. The extent of AI/AN family/community involvement in 
early childhood education is unclear. So, too, is how that involvement 
may differ according to grade level, percentage of Native enrollment, 
teacher, administrator, curriculum, school governance, location of 
school, community characteristics and tribal differences; and what 
constitutes “best practices” in promoting AI/AN family/ community 
involvement. This is particularly disconcerting given the amount of 
research conducted in early childhood within the non-Native popula- 
tions. Additionally, according to Banks 92004): 

In a report to Congress (2003) by the National Council on 
Disabilities, family/ tribal involvement in general and special 
education, culturally responsive service delivery, reading and 
standard English performance, family/ professional commu- 
nication (cross-cultural communication) and collaboration, 
parent/ caregiver information and resource dissemination, 
among other issues, were identified as needing improvement 
(National Council on Disabilities, 2003). Recommendations 
for improvement include establishing effective research-based 
interventions, developing and implementing culturally respon- 
sive curriculum, implementing language and cultural programs, 
developing Tribal policies regarding special education and 
disability services, developing inter/ intra-agency collabora- 
tion/partnerships to effectively build seamless responsive 
services (driven by child, family, and tribal needs and priori- 
ties), cross-tribal advocacy for disability issues at the state and 



145 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 



national levels (use sovereignty to effect educational change 
for all indigenous people), and incorporate Tribal consensus 
regarding accountability of any and all service delivery systems 

(P-7). 



Research that is funded and collected at national and state levels 
would be more beneficial to participants and programs if data were 
reported both in aggregate form and disaggregate form. Specific 
information is needed for making recommendations for funding, 
policy development, and refining future research questions as we seek 
to improve early childhood educational service access, delivery, and 
implementation for AI/AN children, families, and communities. 

Family/community involvement research that clearly defines 
“involvement” from an AI/AN traditional contextual context is 
needed to insure that the research and subsequent implications are 
comprehensive and relevant. In addition to clear and culturally ap- 
propriate definitions of “involvement” in education, Johnson (2003) 
points out the need for research to be conducted in a postcolonial 
framework using an indigenous set of experiences, traditions and 
epistemologies. Rather than approaching educational research from 
an “at-risk” mindset with the sole focus on family and the children, it 
is important to also consider systems of power and colonialist educa- 
tional practices that may be negating the resilience of AI/AN families 
in education and the traditional and cultural models of childhood 
development. The paucity of research on AI/AN family involvement 
could be due to the “at-risk” ideology which has led practitioners 
and educators to provide interventions and support systems outside 
or away from the family and culture (Johnson, 2003) and therefore 
making it difficult to understand, conceptualize, and research family 
involvement through an indigenous framework. Research needs to 
examine policies of social systems that support and enhance family 
and cultural resilience that in turn can positively affect early childhood 
development and education. The concept of cultural resilience can 
be strengthened by further refinement of the underlying constructs 
including ethnic identity and ethnic family schema which appear to 



146 




FAMILY INVOLVEMENT 



have protective value in promoting resilience in other indigenous 
groups (McCubbin & McCubbin, 2005). Such research could serve 
to empower communities as they seek to ensure that their children 
and youth are prepared to meet the successes and challenges that life 
long learning will surely present. 

Conclusions 

AI/AN families have been described as the most marginalized 
groups with respect to educational equity (U.S. Commission on Civil 
Rights, 2003). Family involvement in early childhood education that 
extends to community, tribal, and intertribal relations are essential 
to effect systemic change for future generations. To accomplish 
this, outreach efforts (i.e., identifying, informing, training, soliciting 
input on services needed and the efficacy of those services, etc.) 
to address AI/AN families’ needs in schools and related wellness 
areas on and off reservation are truly needed. How long will the 
children and families have to wait? All AI/AN children and families 
have precious gifts to share within their communities and beyond. 
Traditional, holistic, community-centered educational practices 
implemented within AI/AN early childhood education may facilitate 
growth, healing, and wellness for future generations - a goal in need 
of immediate pursuit. 



References 

Administration for Children and Families. (2003). Early Head Start 
Reports. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services-. Washington, 
DC. Retrieved June 15, 2005, fromwww.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ 
opr e/ ehs_resrch/ index.html 

Aakhus, B. P., & Hoover, J. H. (1998). Rural Ojibwe mother’s experi- 
ences with early childhood special education services. Proceedings 
of the American Council on Rural Special Education, Coming Together: 
Treparingfor Ratral Special Education in the 21st Century. (ERIC Docu- 
ment Reproduction Service: Clearinghouse on Rural Education 



147 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 

and Small Schools No. RC 021 434). 

Ambler, M. (2003). Cultural resilience. Tribal College Journal, 14(4), 8. 

Bergstrom, A., Cleary, L. M., & Peacock, T. (2003). The seventh 
generation: Native students speak about finding the good path. 
Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and 
Small Schools. 

Banks-Joseph, S. R. (2005). Empowering Indigenous families who 
have children with disabilities: An innovative outreach model. 
Disability Studies Quarterly, 25(2). 

Banks, S. R. (2004). Voices of tribal parents/caregivers who have 
children with special needs. Multiple Voices: Ethnically Diverse Ex- 
ceptional Learners, 7(1), 33-47. 

Banks, S. R. (1997). Caregiver and professional perceptions of assess- 
ment practices and validity for American Indian/Alaska Native 
families. Journal of American Indian Education, 37(1), 16-44. 

Barnhardt, R. (1999). Indigenous education around the world. Work- 
shop papers from the World Indigenous Peoples Conference: 
Education. Albuquerque, New Mexico, June 15-22, 1996. (ED 
467 395). Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural and 
Small Schools. 

Bergstrom, A., Cleary, L. M., & Peacock, T. (2003). The seventh 
generation: Native students speak about finding the good path. 
Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and 
Small Schools. 

Charleston, M. G. (1994). Toward true Native education: A treaty of 
1992 final report of the Indian nations at risk task force draft 3. 
Journal of American Indian Education, 33(2), 1-56. 

Cleary, L. M., & Peacock, T. D. (1998). Collected wisdom: American Indian 
education. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 

Council for Exceptional Children and the National Alliance of Black 
School Educators. (2002). Addressing over-representation of 
African American students in special education: The pre-referral 
intervention process; An administrator’s guide. Retrieved July, 23, 
2004, from http:/ /wwwideapractices.org 

Cross, T. (1986). Gathering and sharing: An exploratory study of 



148 




FAMILY INVOLVEMENT 



service delivery to emotionally handicapped Indian children. Port- 
land OR: Research and Training Center to Improve Services for 
Seriously Emotionally Handicapped Children and Their Families. 
Regional Research Institute for Human Services, Portland State 
University and the Northwest Indian Child Welfare Institute. 

Cross, T., Earle, K., Echo-Hawk Solie, H., & Manness, K. (2000). 
Cultural strengths and challenges in implementing a system of care 
model in American Indian communities. Systems of care: Promising 
practices in children ’s mental health, 2000 Series, Volume I. Washington, 
DC: Center for Effective Collaboration and Practice, American 
Institutes for Research. 

Cummins, J. R., Ireland, M., Resnick, M., & Blum, W. (1999). Cor- 
relates of physical and emotional health among Native American 
adolescents .Journal of Adolescent Health, 24, 38-44. 

Deyhle, D. & Swisher, K. (1997). Research in American Indian and 
Alaska Native education: From assimilation to self-determination. 
In M.W Apple (Ed.), Review of research in education (pp. 113-194). 
Washington DC: American Educational Research Association. 

Demmert, G., Jr. (2001). Improving academic performance among 
Native American students: A review of the research literature. 
Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and 
Small Schools, Retrieved June 23, 2005, from http://www.ael. 
org/ERIC/page.cfm?&scope=ai&id=241&pub=x 

Deyhle, D. & Swisher, K. (1997). Research in American Indian and 
Alaska Native education: From assimilation to self-determination. 
In Apple, M. W. (Ed.) Review of research in education (pp. 1 13-194). 
Washington DC: American Educational Research Association. 

Executive Order No. 13096, 63 FR 42681 (1998). 

Faircloth, S., & Tippeconnic, J. W , III. (2000). Issues in the education of 
American Indian and Alaska Native Students with disabilities. Charles- 
ton, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small 
Schools. Retrieved June, 23, 2005, from www.ael.org/ERIC/page. 
cfm?&scope+ai&id=241&pub=x 

Flanagan, K. D. & West, J. (2004). Children born in 2001 : First results 
from the base 



149 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 

year of theEarly Childhoodljongitudinal Study, Birth Cohort (ECU* -B). E.D. 
TAB. NCES 2005-036. (ED483068). Washington, DC: National 
Center for Education Statistics. 

Garcia, G. E., & Pearson, P. D. (1994). Assessment and diversity. In 
L. D. Hammond (Ed.), Review of research in education. Washington 
DC: American Educational Research Association. 

Harry, B., Kalyanpur, M., & Day, M. (1999). Building cultural reciprocity 
with families: Case studies in special education. Baltimore MD: P. H. 
Brookes. 

Heavy Runner, I., & Morris, J. S. (1997). Resiliency: A paradigm shift 
for schools; Traditional Native culture and resilience. Center for Applied 
Research and Educational Improvement, 5(1), retrieved August 
31, 2005, from http:/ / education.umn.edu/ carei/Reports/Rprac- 
tice/Spring97 / traditional.htm 

Henderson, A. T., & Berla, N. (1994). A new generation of evidence: The 
family is critical to student achievement. Washington, DC: Center for 
Law and Education. 

Henderson, A. T., & Mapp, K. L. (2002). A new wave of evidence: The 
impact of school, family and community connections on student achievement. 
Austin TX: Southwest Educational Development Laboratory. 

Hernandez, H. (2001). Multicultural education: A teacher’s guide to linking 
context, process, and content (2 nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Mer- 
rill. 

Hobfoll, S. E., Jackson, A., Hobfoll, I., Pierce, C. A., & Young, S. 
(2002). The impact of communal mastery versus self-mastery on 
emotional outcomes during stressful conditions: A prospective 
study of Native American women. American Journal of Community 
Psychology, 30(6), 853-873. 

Howard, V. E, Williams, B. F., Port, P. D., & Lepper, C. (2001). Very 
young children with special needs: A formative approach for the 21 st century 
(2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill/Prentice Hall. 

Huffman, T., Still, M. L., & Brokenleg, M. (1986). College achieve- 
ment among Sioux and white South Dakota students. Journal of 
American Indian Education , 25(2), 32-38. 

Johnson, G. G. (2003). Resilience, a story: A postcolonial position 



150 




FAMILY INVOLVEMENT 



from which to [rejview Indian education framed in “at-risk” ide- 
ology. Educational Studies, 34(2), 182-197. 

Joseph, G. E. & Cohen, R. C. (2000). Celebrating cultural and lin- 
guistic diversity in Head Start. Washington, DC: Commissioner’s 
Office of Research and Evaluation in the Administration on 
Children, Youth, and Families, U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. 

Marks, E. L., & Graham, E. T. (2004). Establishing a research agenda 
for American Indian and Alaska Native Head Start programs. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser- 
vices. Retrieved June 26, 2005, from http://www.acf.hhs.gov/ 
programs/opre/hs/ aian/ reports/ aian/ aian_rep.pdf 

Masten, A. S. (2001). Ordinary magic: Resilience processes in devel- 
opment. American Psychologist, 56(3), 227-238. 

McCubbin, L.D., & McCubbin, H. I. (2005). Culture and ethnic iden- 
tity in family resilience: Dynamic processes in trauma and trans- 
formation of indigenous people. In M. Unger (Ed.), Handbook 
for working with children and youth: Pathways to resilience across cultures 
and contexts (pp. 27-44). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Medicine, B. (1981). American Indian family: Cultural change and 
adaptive strategies. Journal of Ethnic Studies, 8(4), 13-23. 

National Council on Disability. (2000). Back to school on civil rights: 
advancing the federal commitment to leave no child behind. Government 
Documents Service: Online Publications (Y3.D63/3:2 C 49). 
Retrieved March 9, 2004, from http:/ /www.asu.edu/lib/hayden/ 
govdocs/ onlinepubs/ ncd.html 

National Council on Disability. (2000). Back to school on civil rights: 
advancing the federal commitment to leave no child behind. Government 
Documents Service: Online Publications (Y3.D63/3:2 C 49). 
Retrieved March 9, 2004, from http:/ /www.asu.edu/lib/hayden/ 
govdocs/ onlinepubs/ ncd.html 

National Council on Disability. (2003). People with disabilities on tribal 
lands. Government Documents Service: Online Publications. (Y3. 
D 63/3:2 P 39). Retrieved March 10, 2004, from http:/ /www.asu. 
edu/lib/hayden/govdocs/ onlinepubs/ ncd.html 



151 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 

Momentum. (1999). NCFE’s Quarterly Newsletter. Retrieved June 15, 
2005 from 

http:/ / www.famlit.org/Publications/Momentum/June2000/ 
face.cfm 

Olson, J., Olson, P.D., Pingayak, T., Sterling, K.W, & Pierzchanowski, 
L. K. M. (2002). Eearningfrom and working with Yup’ik professionals. 
Symposium on Research and Evaluation Methodology: Lifespan 
issues related to American Indians/Alaska Natives with Disabili- 
ties. Washington DC: Work Group on American Indian Research 
and Program Evaluation Methodology. 

Pavel, D. M., Banks, S. R., & Pavel, S. (2002). The Oksale story: Train- 
ing teachers for schools serving American Indians and Alaska 
Natives. Journal of American Indian Education, 41(2), 38-47. 

Potvin, R. (1999, July). Examining education programs benefiting Native 
American children. Testimony before the Subcommittee on Early 
Childhood, Youth and Families, Committee on Education and 
the Workforce, United States House of Representatives, One 
Hundred and Sixth United States Congress. Washington, DC. 

Red Horse, J.C., Lewis, R., Feit, M., & Decker, J. (1978). Family be- 
havior of urban American Indian. Social Casework, 59(2), 67-72. 

Reshley, D. J. (1988). Minority MMR overrepresentation: Legal is- 
sues, research findings, and reform trends. In M. C. Wang, M. 
C. Reynolds, & H. J. Walberg (Eds.). Handbook of special education, 
research, and practice (Vol. 2). New York: Pergamon. 

Robinson-Zanartu, C., & Majel-Dixon, J. (1996). Parent voices: 
American Indian relationships with schools. Journal of American 
Indian Education, 56(1), 33-54. 

Running Wolf, P, Soler, R., Manteuffel, B., Sondheimer, D., Santiago, 
R. L., & Erickson, J. S. (2002). Cultural competence approaches 
to evaluation in tribal communities. In Work Group on American 
Indian Research and Program Methodology ( AIKPEM ). Symposium on 
research and evaluation methodology: Eifespan issues related to American 
Indians I Alaska Natives with disabilities. (RC 023926). Retrieved 
June 23, 2005, from http://www.nau.edu/ihd/airrtc/catalog. 
html#indians 



152 




SCHOOL LEADERS 



Samuda, R. J., Kong, S. L., Cummins, J., Lewis, J., & Pascual-Leone, 
J. (1989). Assessment and placement of minority students. Kinston/To- 
ronto: Intercultural Social Sciences. 

St. Germaine, R. (2000. May-June). A chance to go full circle: Build- 
ing on reforms to create effective learning. Paper presented at the 
American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 
Conference, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Albuquerque, NM. 

Strand, J. A. & Peacock, T. D. (2003). Nurturing resilience and school 
success in American Indian and Alaska Native students. The Inter- 
national Child andYouth Care Network, 58, retrieved August 31, 2005, 
from www.cyc-net.org/ cyc-online/ cycol-1203-resilience.html 

Swisher, K. G., & Deyhle, D. (1989). The styles of learning are dif- 
ferent, but the teaching is just the same: Suggestions for teachers 
of American Indian Youth. Journal of American Indian Education 
/Aug.), 1-14. 

Swisher, K. G, & Tippeconnic, J. W., III. (1999). Next steps: Research 
and practice to advance Indian education. (ED 427 902). Charleston, 
WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural and Small Schools. 

Tafoya, T. (1989, August). American Indian/ Alaska Native families: 
Through Coyote’s eyes .Journal of American Indian Education (Aug.), 
28-42. 

Tao, F., Khan, S., & Arriola, C. (1998). Special analysis of tribal Even 
Start projects (1995-96). NationalEvaluation of Even Start Family Eit- 
eracy Program. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. 

Tippeconnic, J. W, III, & Jones, P. (1995). A description of Family and 
Child Education (FACE): A comprehensive approach to family 
literacy. Journal of American Indian Education, 35(1), 6-9. 

United States Commission on Civil Rights, (2003). A quiet crisis: 
Federal funding and unmet needs in Indian Country. Retrieved 
November 3, 2003, from www.usccr.gov/pubs/na0704.pdf 

Vadas, R. E. (1995). Assessing the relationship between academic 
performance and attachment to Navajo culture. Journal of Navajo 
Education , 12(2), 16-25. 

Waller, M. A., & Patterson, S. (2002). Natural helping and resilience 
in a Dine (Navajo) community. Families in Society, 83(1), 73-84. 



153 




SUSANRAE BANKS-JOSEPH AND LAURIE D. MCCUBBIN 

Whitbeck, L. B., Hoyt, D. R., Stubben, J. D., & LaFromboise, T. 
(2001). Traditional culture and academic success among American 
Indian children in the upper Midwest. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 40(2), 48-60. 

Yell, M. L. (1998). The law and special education. Upper Saddle River, 
N.J.: Merrill. 



154 




SCHOOL LEADERS 



School Leaders 
Roger Bordeaux, Ph.D. 

Introduction 

Effective educational leadership in rural and reservation schools 
and communities serving American Indian and Alaskan Native 
(AI/AN) children requires that leaders be sensitive to the needs and 
desires of the culture of the people served. Regardless of where the 
leader is - at home, in early childhood programs, at K-12 schools or 
in colleges and universities - the effective leader exhibits behaviors 
that influence the learning environment. The leader blends modern 
leadership theory and practice with American Indian and Alaskan 
Native (AI/AN) traditional leader practice. 

This paper will discuss traditional AI/AN leadership and modern 
leadership theory and practice. It will also discuss the contextual 
factors necessary for consideration in AI/AN communities. The 
contextual factors include humans (learners, parents, teachers, etc.) 
and organizational structure including school improvement efforts. 
The paper will propose the characteristics necessary for effective 
leadership in rural and reservation schools and communities that 
serve American Indians and Alaskan Natives. Effective leaders in rural 
and reservation schools and communities serving AI/ AN children, 
including early childhood and K-12 programs, must seek visions, practice 
the oral tradition, gather goods, and put family first. 

Tribal Leaders: Past, Present and Future 

Deloria (1969) declared “the Indian struggle for freedom was 
symbolized by the great war chiefs Crazy Horse, Sitting Bull, Chief 
Joseph and Geronimo” (p. 196). These leaders of the past were able 
to convince many Lakota, Nez Perce and Apache tribal members 
that freedom was worth fighting and dying for. These leaders had 
specific characteristics including oral expression, use of traditional 



155 




ROGER BORDEAUX 



ceremonies, tribal loyalty, and sensitivity to their peoples’ needs and 
desires. He also contended that the only difference in tribal leader- 
ship in two centuries is that the Bureau of Indian Affairs defines 
the ground rules. If tribal leadership has not changed, then current 
tribal leaders need to research previous AI/AN leaders’ leadership 
knowledge, attributes, and skills. Current tribal education leaders must 
also investigate outside influences, such as bilingualism, biculturalism 
and the influence of acculturation. 

While looking at her own tribe, Deloria (1969) identified the 
following skills necessary to be a quality member of the tribal com- 
munity: 

• One had to be a good relative. 

• All had a job to teach children. 

• Formal education was transmitted through ceremonies, precept 
and example. 

• Giving was glorified (p. 17). 

These skills or contextual factors are necessary to internalize and 
live if a leader hopes to be effective in similar AI/AN communities 
including leaders in modern business and education serving American 
Indian and Alaskan Natives. 

Tippeconnic (1984) reported that leaders in AI/AN communities 
need the following knowledge and skills: 

• Effective communication and meaningful contact with commu- 
nity 

• Tribal education policy and practice 

• Ability to integrate local tribal language and culture 

• Parent and community involvement 

• Ability to recruit and retain quality staff, preferably bilingual or 
bicultural 

Effective leaders need to completely understand the modern and 
traditional culture of the local community, including the political 



156 




SCHOOL LEADERS 



environment, the economic conditions, the family relationships, and 
the traditional communication practices. 

In American Indian Education, Reyhner (2004) contends that the 
purpose of formal education for many years for AI/AN children 
was to “Christianize and civilize.” The federal government and 
various religious orders were given the task of teaching the Ameri- 
can Indian and Alaskan Natives the knowledge and skills that they 
thought were necessary for survival. Not until the mid-1960s were 
American Indians and Alaskan Natives allowed to be active leaders 
in their own education programs. The progress in AI/AN education 
has happened in the last 40 years. Tippeconnic (1999) concluded that 
the tribal control of education could benefit students attending those 
tribal schools, students in public schools, and colleges and universities 
primarily in the integration of Indian cultures and languages. Tribal 
control would also improve current and future AI/AN leadership 
in order to achieve greater tribal self-sufficiency and ensure cultural 
and language survival. 

A case study (Fuentes, 1995) of the Maryetta School in Stillwater, 
Oklahoma, identified leadership strategies used by the superintendent 
so that the school would be successful. The school population was 
about 500 K-8 low-income students who were primarily American 
Indians. The strategies included gathering input from the community, 
implementing ideas from the community, grantsmanship, organizing 
special events, managing money wisely, and long term planning. 

Allen (1993) contends that the use of AI/AN values, combined 
with modern leadership practice, provides a framework for effective 
management of educational institutions on reservations. The Lakota 
values mentioned are wisdom, fortitude, respect for others, timeli- 
ness, generosity, respect for Mother Earth, and bravery. Values-based 
leadership has always been at the heart of AI/AN culture. When 
going to war, praying for the ill, getting ready for a ceremony, or 
even waking up in the morning, many effective leaders used values 
to guide their everyday life. There was a time when all in the tribal 
community were leaders in their own roles whether hunter, child 
bearer, orator, or spiritual leader. 



157 




ROGER BORDEAUX 



Young AI/AN learners appreciate the presence of native people 
in leadership roles in schools because it brings positive role models 
(Pavel, 1999). Educational institutions on reservations must always 
seek qualified AI/AN leaders who exhibit and model behaviors that 
will positively influence the learners. The success of AI/AN learn- 
ers in schools include attitude, motivation, and parent involvement 
(Johnson, 2003). The following resiliency factors specific to Ameri- 
can Indian and Alaskan Natives should also have an influence on 
school leaders in AI/AN schools; extended family system, positive 
tribal identity, and biculturalism, insight/ understanding, self-reliance, 
relationships, and resilient perspective (Klassen, 1996) . The school 
factors influencing resiliency included having a culturally relevant 
teaching method, a culturally relevant curriculum, and having long 
term mentoring relationships. 

A report of research (Bergeson, Griffin, & Hutado 2000) suggests 
the relatively low level of academic success among American Indian 
elementary and secondary school students, as a group, is largely the 
result of discontinuities between the cultures and languages of these 
students’ homes and communities and the language and culture of 
mainstream classrooms. American Indian students also tend to per- 
ceive academic success as offering few extrinsic rewards, and they 
are likely to view learning much of what is necessary to succeed aca- 
demically (such as the standard language and the standard behavior 
practices of the school) as detrimental to their own language, culture, 
and identity. The report suggests many strategies that teachers of 
AI/AN students can use to improve the success of those learners. 

An instructional leadership research project by Eastman (2005) 
concluded that “first, teachers, in general, have a need to feel sup- 
ported and backed. Teachers in Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) 
contract and grant schools that are contracted from year to year with 
no tenure policy applicable have an even greater need for support, 
especially teachers that are non-Native and non-tribal members. 
Secondly, it is critical for instructional leaders to have a thorough 
understanding of the culture or culture(s) of the students for which 
they serve. Additionally, they must utilize culturally appropriate and 



158 




SCHOOL LEADERS 



accepted practices when interacting with students, staff, parents, 
and community members. Finally, principals must work closely with 
superintendents to properly train locally-controlled school boards to 
maximize their empowerment to improve education for their tribal 
children.” 

Ball and Pence (2001) report positive results of an innovative 
Generative Curriculum Model. The Meadow Lake Tribal Council and 
the University of Victoria collaborated to develop a Cree and Dene 
early childhood care curriculum and implemented the curriculum 
for 2 years. The program was primarily a professional development 
program. The key results included high rates of student retention and 
program completion, parenting and grandparenting skills improve- 
ment, increased cultural integration, and increased partnerships. 

John (2001) discussed the importance of family involvement 
in early childhood programs. The family involvement included the 
recognition of American Indian history and culture. The “Hintil 
Kuu Ca,” which means “house of children,” is a preschool, summer 
school, and after-school program attended by 125 children age 3- 
12. The program has had positive influences including having more 
American Indian children graduating from high school and some 
attending college. 

Lipka (2002) reported evidence supports inclusion of Native 
language and culture in educational programs as a strategy for im- 
proving outcomes. 

Apthorp, D’Amato, and Richardson (2003) reviewed research 
and related literature to summarize evidence on the effectiveness 
of instructional practices for helping American Indian students 
meet standards. The promising practices identified included teach- 
ing indigenous language first followed by instruction in learning to 
read and write in English, emphasizing reading comprehension, peer 
interaction, frequent monitoring of student progress, using culturally 
congruent materials and instruction in math, and collaboration with 
the community to create culturally congruent classrooms. 

Demmert and Towner (2003) conducted a review of research 
literature on the influence of culturally based education on academic 



159 




ROGER BORDEAUX 



success of Native American learners. They reported that culturally 
based education programs developed cooperatively with parents and 
community members strengthen relationships between home and 
school and that excellent language and culturally based education pro- 
grams hold promise for improving academic success of learners. 

Modern Educational Leadership 

Leadership, second to classroom instruction, is the most influen- 
tial characteristic in schools on student learning (Leithwood, Louis, 
Anderson, & Wahlstrom, 2004). The influence of educational leaders 
on student learning has been also reported in many other papers, 
research and books. The bibliography in this paper clearly shows the 
importance that effective leadership has on student learning. Lead- 
ers must always remember that what they do, every day and every 
minute, while in the presence of fellow leaders, parents, teachers and 
students, will determine the success of the school. 

Covey (1990) includes the following principle-centered behaviors 
necessary for leader effectiveness: continually learn, be service-ori- 
ented, radiate positive energy, believe in other people, lead a balanced 
life, see life as an adventure, be synergistic, and exercise for self re- 
newal (physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual). These behaviors 
are identified as necessary for effective educational leadership and 
school effectiveness. Leaders need to model learning by reading 
current educational journals and books and actively participate in 
school-sponsored professional development activities. They need to 
balance their personal and professional life so that there will be time 
to have fun and time to work. The effective leader should always be 
positive in all environments so that modeling will radiate energy. 

Sergiovanni (2002) stated that the following principles facilitate 
teaching and learning; cooperation, empowerment, responsibility, ac- 
countability, meaningfulness, and ability- authority. Since educational 
leaders should always be teaching and learning, they need to follow 
principles that facilitate teaching and learning. Educational leaders 
must always be in the continuous learning mode so they can serve 



160 




SCHOOL LEADERS 



as models in their educational institution. Leaders need to empower 
parents, staff and students and give them the responsibility while 
making them accountable for their actions. 

Senge et al. (2002) provides an excellent field book for all who 
work in educational settings. The field book helps educational lead- 
ers apply the five disciplines and also sets out four competencies for 
educational leaders. The disciplines are: 

• Personal mastery 

• Shared vision 

• Mental models 

• Team learning 

• Systems thinking 

The competencies necessary for educational leaders are engage- 
ment = mobilize to tackle tough problems, systems thinking = recog- 
nize systems and find leverage, leading learning = all learn and lead, 
and self awareness = know impact on people and systems. When 
applied on a daily basis, the competencies will increase teaching and 
learning at educational institutions. The field book provides contextual 
factors that the educational leaders must keep in mind when leading. 
The community characteristics in which the school resides need to be 
studied and analyzed in order to understand the many communities 
within the community. 

Murphy (2001) contended that preparation of school leaders 
was not driven by education or leadership. He provided the follow- 
ing qualities for education leaders: an understanding of caring and 
humanistic concerns as a key to effective leadership, knowledge of 
the transformational and change dynamics of the superintendency, 
an appreciation of the collegial and collaborative foundations of 
school administration, and an emphasis on the ethical and reflective 
dimensions of leadership. These new qualities were developed into 
standards for school leaders by the Interstate School Leaders Licen- 
sure Consortium (1996). The specific standards are: 



161 




ROGER BORDEAUX 



1. A school administrator is an educational leader who promotes the 

success of all students by facilitating the development, articulation, 
implementation, and stewardship of a vision of learning that is 
shared and supported by the school community. 

2. A school administrator is an educational leader who promotes the 

success of all students by advocating, nurturing, and sustaining 
a school culture. 

3. A school administrator is an educational leader who promotes the 

success of all students by ensuring management of the organiza- 
tion, operations, and resources for a safe, efficient, and effective 
learning environment. 

4. A school administrator is an educational leader who promotes the 

success of all students by collaborating with families and com- 
munity members, responding to diverse community interests and 
needs, and mobilizing community resources. 

5. A school administrator is an educational leader who promotes 
the success of all students by acting with integrity, fairness, and 
in an ethical manner. 

6. A school administrator is an educational leader who promotes 

the success of all students by understanding, responding to, and 
influencing the larger political, social, economic, legal, and cultural 
context. 

Educational leaders have to be ethical. Strike, Haller, and Soltis 
(2005) reviewed numerous ethical questions and behaviors for edu- 
cational leaders. Zubay & Soltis (2005) used case studies to raise 
various ethical questions facing educational leaders. They were able 
to raise issues that educational administrators confront every day. 
Issues such as cheating, racial and sexual orientation discrimination, 
and rumors were some of the ethical problems discussed in the case 
studies. The four ethical necessities for human beings proposed by 
the Dali Lama (1999) also relate to educational leadership. They are 
empathy, restraint, fortitude, and compassion. School leaders need to 
be well grounded in personal and community ethics. The four ethical 
necessities are: empathy = the supreme emotion, restraint = habit of 



162 




SCHOOL LEADERS 



inner discipline, fortitude, and compassion. 

Hunter (1998) states that the true essence of leadership includes 
listening and accomplishing tasks while building relationships. 
Monroe (1997) provides educational leadership lessons. The lessons 
provide additional skills and competencies that should be reviewed 
in order to formulate effective educational leadership. Some of the 
lessons include working from the heart, having a positive attitude, 
persevering, being an idealist in a less than ideal world, teaching and 
learning, and working toward making things new. 

Kouzes & Posner ((2002) report on five practices necessary for 
effective educational leadership. The practices are model the way = 
model behaviors they expect of others, inspire a shared vision = what 
could be, challenge the process = innovate grow and improve, enable 
others to act = foster collaboration and build trust, and encourage 
the heart = carry on dramatic gestures or simple actions. 

Deal & Peterson (1999) suggest there are symbolic roles that 
educational leaders must perform in order to be effective. The sym- 
bolic roles are: 

• Historian: probe the past to give meaning to present 

• Anthropological sleuth: look for present rituals and values 

• Visionary: picture of positive future 

• Potter: shape school culture 

• Poet: communicate with language 

• Healer: healing wounds during transitions 

These symbolic roles would create an educational environment 
that would focus on teaching and learning. The leader would jump 
from role to role dependent on the specific situation. When trans- 
forming school cultures, Stolp & Smith (1995) report that a leader is 
a cultural leader. The effective educational leader must be a designer, 
teacher, and steward. The leader must design from within using avail- 
able resources, modelling effective teaching strategies, and being a 
protector of the sacred children. 

The Jossey-Bass Reader on Education Leadership (2000) is an excel- 



163 




ROGER BORDEAUX 



lent resource for educational leaders. The book is a collection of 30 
authors including Deming, Evans, Gardner, Glasser, and Lieberman. 
Each chapter provides a framework for educational leaderships. Some 
topics include leadership, management and organizational behavior, 
moral leadership, and shared leadership. 

Connors (2000) contends, “successful schools only survive when 
there are successful administrators leading the way” (p. 12). The 
book provides specific characteristics of a well-adjusted leader. The 
characteristics are: 

• Ability to care and be concerned for others 

• Desire to be successful 

• Ability to handle stress 

• General feeling of good health 

• Ability to think logically 

• Ability to have fun 

Connors (2000) also stated that great educational leaders use 
teachers as resources to serve as solution finders to provide feed- 
back, to spread the good word, to share their talents, and to provide 
support. 

McEwan (2003) identified seven effective steps for educational 
leaders: 

• Establish, implement and achieve academic standards 

• Be an instructional resource for your staff 

• Create a school culture and climate conducive to learning 

• Communicate the vision and mission of your school 

• Set high expectations for your staff and yourself 

• Develop teacher leaders 

• Establish and maintain positive relationships with students, staff 
and parents 

Keeping these seven steps in the forefront of an educational lead- 
er’s every day life would insure a focus on teaching and learning. 



164 




SCHOOL LEADERS 



Contextual Factors to Consider 

Effective educational leaders must create a school environment 
that insures a safe and orderly environment. Effective leadership 
includes insuring that educational institutions are conducive to learn- 
ing and teaching. Lezotte and McKee (2002) contend that effective 
schools research included instructional leadership as a key correlate 
within the context of continuous school improvement. Other cor- 
relates included a clear mission, focus on teaching and learning, 
availability of resources, frequent monitoring of staff and student 
success, and having a safe and secure environment. The Southwest 
Educational Development Laboratory (1992) stated the following 
characteristics as necessary for school change: be visionary, remem- 
ber schools are for learning, value human resources, communicate 
and listen, be proactive, and take risks. The Council for Exceptional 
Children (1994) identified specific leadership characteristics necessary 
in order for a school to be inclusive for children with handicapping 
conditions. Effective educational leaders should create an environ- 
ment so that children with handicapping conditions are safe and 
secure. The school characteristics necessary for inclusion included 
having a common vision and a sense of community, site based author- 
ity, shared leadership, scheduling planning time, staff development, 
and redeploying resources. 

A review of literature by Hoachlander, Alt, and Beltranena (2001) 
provides leaders with guidance on school improvement strategies 
that work. The strategies included raising the bar: higher achieve- 
ment standards for all students, increased student engagement and 
motivation, and focused sustained professional development. The 
review also reported that if school leaders also build linkages with 
parents and staff, there will be positive school success. 

Barth (1990) stated students, parents, teachers, principals are/ 
could be the community of leaders. The human resources involved in 
education can be the leaders. Lie (2003) later identified his own cruis- 
ing and working rules, as well as his norms of personal behavior for 



165 




ROGER BORDEAUX 



effective educational leaders. One of his norms of personal behavior 
is when a party is talking, do not interrupt, and pay attention. 

Fullan (2001) states that when change happens, leaders can be the 
positive change agents and influence the change process. He reports 
that there are key roles that effective leaders need to use during the 
change process. The roles are to have a moral purpose, understand 
change, develop relationships, be a knowledge builder, and facilitate 
coherence making. When leaders change, an effective educational 
leader should define the desired results, and then grow people and 
processes to ensure those results (Martin and Mutchler, 2003). 

Conclusions and Recommendations 

This paper discusses the research framework of these two ques- 
tions: 

1 . What are the characteristics of effective leaders in rural and 
reservation schools and communities serving AI/ AN children, 
including early childhood and K-12 programs? 

2. What are the key contextual factors leaders should consider and 
how do tribal languages and cultures influence leadership? 

It is well documented that effective educational leadership has 
a monumental influence on teaching and learning regardless of 
environment. Whether at home or in a formal educational setting, 
the leaders set the tone and direction of the family or educational 
institution. It does not matter if the institution is a Head Start pro- 
gram, an elementary or secondary school, or a college or university, 
the educational leaders need to prepare learners (sacred children) to 
be good family and community leaders. 

The characteristics of effective leaders have been researched for 
many years and there appears to be accepted standards for school 
leaders. There are specific knowledge, skills, and attributes that edu- 
cational leaders must have in order to be successful. The current 
focus on accountability requires school leaders to always remember 



166 




SCHOOL LEADERS 



the primary purpose of schooling is teaching and learning. The ef- 
fective leaders must also be aware of the environment in which they 
practice. These contextual factors should be in the forefront, every 
minute, in order to survive and thrive in AI/ AN communities. 

The leaders now and in the future, in communities that serve 
AI/AN learners, must be well- versed in oral tradition (speaking and 
listening), seek visions (be a strategic visionary), gather the goods 
(use all available resources), and always think family first (be a com- 
munity builder). These essential skills are based on my own review 
of the literature and over 25 years of leadership life with American 
Indians and Alaska Natives. Each of these essential skills necessary 
for leadership success is discussed in more detail: 

1 . To seek visions (be a strategic visionary), educational leaders in 
AI/AN communities need to have a clear and focused personal 
vision of leading, teaching and learning. The formulation of a 
vision takes years of seeking what is near and dear to a leader’s 
heart. The vision should be values based and the values must 
be congruent with AI/AN values. The leader must also be 
able to help educational institutions and communities seek 
their collective vision and mission. Guiding all communities 
to a collective vision and mission will increase the likelihood 
of school success. Once the collective vision and mission are 
formulated then the task of developing and guiding a continu- 
ous strategic plan are essential. The basic part of a quality plan 
includes collecting and analyzing data, formulating specific 
objectives, designing actions or activities, evaluating the suc- 
cess of the plan, and then beginning the process again. 

2. To use oral tradition (speaking and listening combined with 
reading and writing), leaders must be able to communicate 
their vision of teaching and learning as well as the mission 
and vision of the institution they are leading. Oral tradition in 
a modern bilingual/bicultural society means having the ability 
to speak, listen, write, and read. The necessity to speak well is 
an important presentation skill not only before parents, teach- 



167 




ROGER BORDEAUX 



ers, and students but also on the phone, before tribal, federal 
and state legislators, and community organizations. The leader 
must also be a good listener. Gathering information by listen- 
ing is an excellent data solicitation skill. The analysis of oral 
information is necessary so that leaders can access information 
from others who may not be able to communicate by using the 
written word. The skill of writing is changing so that it is now 
more important to able to write and edit text on computers and 
other text storage devices than it is to have good penmanship. 
It may even be necessary to learn voice recognition software 
so that leaders will be able to use oral tradition and technology 
at the same time. The ability to read and keep up with current 
education research is necessary so that leaders will know the 
latest leading, teaching and learning strategies. Leaders must 
have quality speaking, listening, writing and reading skills. 

3. To gather the goods (use all available resources), educational 
leaders and AI/AN communities must always gather the best 
human and material resources necessary to guide schools and 
communities toward a collective vision and mission. Lead- 
ers must always seek the best available human resources. In 
AI/AN communities it is beneficial to seek AI/AN human 
resources. An educational leader must support a learning 
community within the AI/AN communities. The adults of a 
learning community are always learning, which provides young 
learners with models. 

4. To place family first (be community builders), educational 
leaders must develop a sense of family within AI/AN com- 
munities. All in the community must believe that the sacred 
young learners are children to all the adults of the community. 
When the whole community believes in the sacredness of 
children then all will want to work toward the collective vision 
and mission. 

The key contextual factors effective leaders in AI/ AN communi- 
ties need to consider are bilingualism, biculturalism, extended family 



168 




SCHOOL LEADERS 



involvement, community partnership, and positive tribal identity. 
Communities on AI/AN lands are diverse in language and culture. 
There are many families that practice traditional culture, others that 
practice a mix of traditional and modern traditional culture and others 
that practice modern culture. The effective leader must be aware of 
the individual and collective cultures of the people they serve. The 
success of leadership includes the ability to rally the community to 
a common vision and mission. The leaders of today need to rally all 
cultures of the families to a common culture of the school. Lead- 
ers must get all extended families involved in the sacred learners’ 
educational community. The sacred learners need to feel that they 
are an important part of the educational community and the tribal 
community. 

The common leadership threads between past and present, and 
both AI/AN cultures and other cultures of the world, need to be fur- 
ther analyzed. The combined skills of leading, teaching, and learning 
are essential so that educational leaders in AI/AN educational com- 
munities can be the best that they can be in this bilingual/bicultural 
world. Leaders in AI/AN communities must have specific knowledge, 
skills and attributes and be able to know when to use which skills 
within the context of leading, teaching and learning. 

References 

Allen, T. (1993). Manager as warrior. Mission, SD: Sinte Gleska 
Press. 

Apthorp, H., D’Amato E., & Richardson, A. (2003). Effective stan- 
dards-based practices for Native American students: A review of 
research literature. Aurora, CO: McREL. 

Ball, J., & Pence, A. (2001). Constructing knowledge and training cur- 
ricula about early childhood care and development in Canadian 
Aboriginal communities. (ERIC ED 451 995). Paper presented 
at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association. 

Barth, R. (1990). Improving schools from within; Teachers, parents and prin- 



169 




ROGER BORDEAUX 



cipals can make the difference. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Barth, R. (2003). Lessons learned; Shaping relationships and the culture of 
the workplace. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. 

Bergeson, T, Griffin, A., & Hutado, D. (2000). Reading and Native 
American learner research report. Seattle, WA: Washington State 
Department of Public Instruction. 

Covey, S. (1990). Principle-centered leadership. New York: Simon and 
Schuster. 

Connors, N. (2000) . If you don ’t feed the teachers they will eat the students!; 
A guide to success for administrators and teachers. N ashville, TN : Incen- 
tive Publications. 

Council for Exceptional Children. (1994). Creating schools for all our 
children: What 12 schools have to say. Reston, VA: Council for Ex- 
ceptional Children. 

Deal, T., & Peterson, K. (1999). 'Shaping school culture; The heart of leader- 
ship. San Francisco: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 

Deloria, V. (1969). Custer died for your sins; An Indian manifesto. New 
York: Avon Books. 

Demmert, W & Towner, J. (2003). A revieiv of the research literature on 
the influences of culturally based education on the academic peformance of 
Native American students. Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Edu- 
cational Laboratory. 

Eastman, N. (2005). A mixed methods research to investigate the 
perceptions of the principals’ leadership practices at two Bureau 
of Indian Affairs (BIA) high schools located in South Dakota. Lin- 
coln, NE. (Doctoral dissertation, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
2005). Retrieved march 10, 2006, from http://digitalcommons. 
unl.edu/ dissertations/AA13176725 

Fullan, M. (2001). Leading in a culture of change. San Francisco: Jossey- 
Bass. 

Fuentes, N. (1995). Maryetta School: The school of a rural community. 
(ERIC ED 393 624). Austin, TX: Southwest Educational De- 
velopment. 

Hoachlander, G., Alt, M., & Beltranena. R. (2001). Leading school 
improvement: What the research says. Atlanta: Southern Regional 



170 




SCHOOL LEADERS 



Education Board. 

Hunter, J. (1998). The servant: A- simple story about the true essence of leader- 
ship. Rocklin, CA: Prima Publishing. 

Interstate School Leaders Licensure Consortium. (1996). Standards 
for school leaders. In Jossey-Bass Reader on Educational leadership 
(pp. 97-113). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

John, L. (2001). School feels like family: Early education programs for 
American Indian children emphasise culture and connection. Oakland, 
CA: Childrens’s Advocate. 

Johnson, C. (2003). Perceptions of factors that contribute to the 
successes of American Indian children. Dissertation. Vermillion, 
SD: University of South Dakota. 

Jossey-Bass. (2000). The Jossey-Bass Reader on Education leadership. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Klassen, H. (1996). The development of resiliency in American Indian 
adolescents. (Dissertation, Harvard University, 1996). Ann Arbor, 
MI. UMI Dissertation Services. 

Kouzes, J., & Posner, B. (2002). The leadership challenge. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 

Lama, D. (1999). Ethics for the new millennium. New York: The Berkley 
Publishing Group. 

Leithwood, K., Louis, K., Anderson, S., & Wahlstrom, K. (2004). 
Executive summary: How leadership influences student learning. N ew York: 
The Wallace Foundation. 

Lezotte, L., & McKee, K. (2002). Assembly required; A continuous school 
improvement system. Okemos, MI: Effective Schools Products. 

Lipka, J. (2002). Schooling for self determination: Research on the effects 
of including Native Eanguage and culture in school. (ED 459 989). 
Charleston, WV. ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and 
Small Schools. 

Martin, L., & Mutchler, D. (2003). Tail-safe leadership. Orlando, FL: 
Delta Books. 

McEwan, E. (2003). Seven steps to effective instructional leadership. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. 

Monroe, L. (1997). Nothing’s impossible: leadership lessons from inside and 



171 




ROGER BORDEAUX 



outside the classroom. New York: Perseus Books Group. 

Murphy, J. (2001). The changing face of leadership preparation. The 
School Administrator (Nov). Retrieved March 10, 2006 from 
http:/ /www.aasa.org 

Pavel, D. M. (1999). Schools, principals, and teachers serving Ameri- 
can Indian and Alaska Native students. (ED425895). Charleston, 
WV: ERIC/CRESS. 

Reyhner, J. (2004). American Indian education. Norman, OK: University 
of Oklahoma Press. 

Senge, R, Cambron, N., Lucas, T., Smith, B., Dutton, J., & Kliener, A. 
(2000). Schools that learn; A fifth discipline field book for educators, parents, 
and everyone who cares about education. New York: Doubleday. 

Sergiovanni, T. (2002). The principalship: A reflective practice perspective. 
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 

Southwest Educational Development Laboratory. (1992). leadership 
characteristics that facilitate school change. Austin, TX: Author. 

Stolp, S. & Smith, S. (1995). Transforming school culture: Stories, symbols, 
values and the leader’s role. Eugene, OR: University of Oregon. 

Strike K., Haller E., & Soltis J. (2005). The ethics of school administration. 
New York: Teachers College Press. 

Tippeconnic, J. W., III. (1984). Public school administration on Indian 
reservations. (ED260869). Las Cruces, NM: ERIC Clearing House 
on Rural Education and Small Schools. 

Tippeconnic, J. W., 111.(1999). Tribal control of American Indian 
education: Observations since the 1960s with implications for 
the future. In K. G. Swisher & J.W Tippeconnic III (Eds.), Next 
steps: Research and practice to advance Indian education. See RC 021 798 
ERIC document ED 427 904. 

Zubay, B., & Soltis, J. (2005). Creating the ethical school. New York: 
Teachers College Press. 



172 




PARTICIPANTS 



David E. Alsobrook, Ph.D. 

Director 

William J. Clinton Presidential 
Library 

Little Rock, Arkansas 

SusanRae Banks-Joseph, 
Ph.D. 

Associate Professor 
Department of Teaching and 
Learning 

College of Education 
Washington State University 
Pullman, Washington 

Roger Bordeaux, Ed.D. 
(Sicangu Lakota) 

Superintendent 

Tiospa Zina Tribal School 

Agency Village, South Dakota 

Nicole Bowman (Mohican) 

Doctoral Candidate 
Department of Education 
Leadership and Policy Analysis 
College of Education 
University of Wisconsin 
Shawano, Wisconsin 

William Boyd, Ph.D. 

Batschelet Chair Professor of 
Educational Administration 
College of Education 



Pennsylvania State University 
University Park, Pennsylvania 

Cheryl D. Clay, Ph.D. 

Associate Professor 
Department of Teacher Educa- 
tion 

Fort Lewis College 
Bayfield, Colorado 

Ann Clements 

Education Coordinator 
Office of the Secretary of State 
Little Rock, Arkansas 

Ann Copland 

Senior Executive and Legislative 
Assistant 

Office of U.S. Senator Thad 
Cochran 

United States Senate 
Washington, DC 

Pigeon Big Crow (Oglala 
Sioux) 

Director - Child Care and De- 
velopment 

Pine Ridge, South Dakota 

The Honorable Charlie 
Daniels 

Secretary of State 
Little Rock, Arkansas 



173 




Laurel Endfield (White 
Mountain Apache) 

Doctoral Candidate 
Fielding Graduate Institute 
Pinetop, Arizona 

Susan C. Faircloth, Ph.D. 
(Coharie) 

Assistant Professor 
Departments of Education 
Policy Studies and Special Edu- 
cation 

Pennsylvania State University 
University Park, Pennsylvania 

Cathy Grace, Ed.D. 

Professor and Director 
Early Childhood Institute 
National Center for Rural Early 
Childhood Learning Initiatives 
Mississippi State University 
Starkville, Mississippi 

Sybil Jordan Hampton, Ph.D. 

President 

Winthrop Rockefeller Founda- 
tion 

Little Rock, Arkansas 

R. Dwight Hare, Ph.D. 

Professor 

Department of Curriculum and 

Instruction 

College of Education 



Mississippi State University 
Starkville, Mississippi 

Jeanne Holland, M.Ed. 

Doctoral Candidate 
Research Associate II 
National Center for Rural Early 
Childhood Learning Initiatives 
Mississippi State University 
Starkville, Mississippi 

Linda Kills Crow (Delaware) 

Director 

Tribal Child Care Technical As- 
sistance Center 

Native American Management 
Services, Incorporated 
1455 Harvest Road 
Ponca City, Oklahoma 

Debbie Lente-Jojola 

National Coordinator 
Family and Child Education 
(FACE) 

Baby FACE 

Bureau of Indian Affairs 
U.S. Office of Indian Education 
500 Gold Avenue SW, Rm. 7222 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 

Gail Lindsey, Ed.D. 

Associate Director 
The Early Childhood Institute 
Mississippi State University 
Starkville, Mississippi 



174 




Grayson Noley, Ph.D. 
(Choctaw) 

Chair and Associate Professor 
Department of Educational 
Leadership and Policy Studies 
College of Education 
University of Oklahoma 
Norman, Oklahoma 

Steve Patterson 

Chief of Staff 

Office of U.S. Sen. Blanche 

Lincoln 

Little Rock, Arkansas 

Dexter Pearson 

District Aide for Education 
Office of U.S. Rep. Vic Snyder 
Little Rock, Arkansas 

Margaret Pope, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professor 
College of Education 
Mississippi State University 
Starkville, Mississippi 

Julie Quaid (Confederated 
Tribes of the Warm Springs) 

Education Director 

The Confederated Tribes of the 

Warm Springs 

Warm Springs, Oregon 



Nila Rinehart, M.Ed. 

(Taos Pueblo) 

Project Director 
Community Development 
Institute 

Denver, Colorado 

Winona Sample (Red Lake 
Chippewa) 

Consultant for Early Education, 
American Indian Programs 
Folsom, California 

Kai A. Schafft, Ph.D. 

Department of Education 
Policy Studies 
College of Education 
Pennsylvania State University 
University Park, Pennsylvania 

Kymara Seals 

Deputy State Director 
Office of U.S. Senator Mark 
Pryor 

Little Rock, Arkansas 

Elizabeth F. Shores, 

M.A.P.H. 

Senior Research Associate 
National Center for Rural Early 
Childhood Learning Initiatives 
Mississippi State University 
Starkville, Mississippi 




Gloria Sly, Ph.D. (Cherokee Na- 
tion) 

Director 

Cherokee Nation Cultural Re- 
source Center 
Tahlequah, Oklahoma 

Rick St. Germaine, Ph.D. (Lac 

Courte Oreilles 

Ojibway) 

Professor 

History Department 
University of Wisconsin-Eau 
Claire 

Eau Claire, Wisconsin 

Nicole L. Thompson, Ph.D. 
(Menominee /Mohican) 

Assistant Professor 
Department of Curriculum and 
Instruction 
College of Education 
Mississippi State University. 
Starkville, Missisippi 



Cheryl Wilson (Osage/Kaw) 

Head Start Program Director 
Indian Health Service 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 

Tarajean Yazzie-Mintz, Ed.D. 
(Navajo) 

Department of Education 
Indiana University 
Bloomington, Indiana 




National Center 

Riiral Early Childhood 
Learning Initiatives 

Mississippi State University 

Early Childhood Institute 




pennState 




