DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 401 086 



RC 020 832 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Hankes, Judith Elaine 

Investigating the Correspondence between Native 
American Pedagogy and Constructivist Based 
Instruction. 

Apr 96 

16p. ; Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the 
American Educational Research Association (New York, 
NY, April 1996). 

Information Analyses (070) — Speeches/Conference 
Papers (150) 

MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

Alaska Natives ; American Indian Culture ; ’'American 
Indian Education; American Indians; Child Rearing; 
’'Constructivism (Learning) ; Cooperative Learning; 
’'Culturally Relevant Education; ’'Educational 
Principles; Elementary Secondary Education; Nonformal 
Education; ’'Teacher Student Relationship; Teaching 
Methods ; Teaching Styles 



ABSTRACT 

This paper r evi ews studies detailing formal and 
nonformal instruction of Native American children by Native American 
teachers and compares attributes common to traditional Native 
education with principles of the constructivist approach to 
instruction. Five pedagogic principles are considered: (1) teacher as 
facilitator, guiding rather than telling; (2) focus on 
learner-developed understanding; (3) problem-based instruction, with 
the problems situated in the learner's culture and lived experiences; 
(4) cooperative rather than competitive instruction; and (5) 
time-generous rather than time-driven instruction. Culturally 
responsive pedagogy can only be practiced in culturally sensitive 
environments where ways of perceiving, believing, acting, and 
evaluating are shared. The literature review suggests that Native 
American pedagogy and constructivism share common beliefs and 
perceptions about teaching and learning. Therefore, constructivist 
ways of teaching . promi se to be culturally responsive to cultures 
valuing Native American pedagogy. Ways in which constructivism and 
Native American pedagogy conflict with traditional pedagogic 
assumptions of the dominant culture are outlined, and possible 
reasons are offered as to why constructivism was developed among 
dominant-culture educators. Contains 32 references. (SV) 



Vc Vc Vc Vc Vf it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 

’' Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made ’' 

’' from the original document. 

ititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititititit 



VO 

00 

o 



1 



o 



s 



INVESTIGATING THE CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN NATIVE AMERICAN 
PEDAGOGY AND CONSTRUCTIVIST BASED INSTRUCTION 

A Paper Presented at the 

American Education Research Association Convention 



April, 1996 
New York, New York 



by 

Judith Elaine Hankes, Ph.D. 



University of Wisconsin Oshkosh 
Oshkosh, WI 
(414)424-8974 

hankes@vaxa.cis.uwosh.edu 



fM I 
(<0 



• O 

• (T^ 

o 

ERIC 

hfiiiffliiffnffaaaa 



“PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 






U.8. OCPARTMENT Of EDUCATION 

Otltcti oi EducatK>n«l Research ar>d improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

^ihis document has been reproduced aa 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction Quality. 



TO THE educational RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)/' 



e Potntsofvieworopmionastatedinthisdocu- 

ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy. 



2 



INVESTIGATING THE CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN 
NATIVE AMERICAN PEDAGOGY AND 
CONSTRUCTIVIST BASED INSTRUCTION 



2 






The Need for Culturally Responsive Instruction 

Surprisingly little attention has been given to the teaching methods used in 
teaching ethnic minority students in this country, particularly when the 
notion of culturally relevant cmriculum materials has been around as long as 
it has. It is as if we have been able to recognize that there are cultmal 
differences in what people learn, but not in how they learn. (PhiUips, 1982) 

The preceding quote serves as a lens through which this review of literatme is 
focused. Here, Phillips succinctly identifies a critical issue - the importance of culturally 
compatible teaching methods. It is this issue that grounds my investigation of the 
pedagogical compatibihty between Native American ways of teaching and constructivist 
based instruction. Within this paper both Native American and constructivist pedagogy 
will be described and the commonalities between the two will be discussed. 

Having proposed that there is a generalized Native way of teaching, it is important 
to recognize that Native Americans represent more than 280 different tribal groups 
(Butterfield, 1983; Stuck in the Horizon, 1989) and that each tribal group possesses 
var 5 dng hnguistic, cultural, social, pohtical, and economic dimensions. Consideration of 
such diversity forces one to be cautious when overgenerahzing across tribes (Brasswood & 
Szaraniec, 1983). However, many studies point out that there are notable consistencies 
among Native peoples (Tharp & Yamauchi, 1994; Cahape & Howley, 1992; Indian Nations 
at Risk Task Force, 1992). This paper, like those referenced above, identifies 
commonalities, specifically informal and formal teaching practices, shared by Native 
American teachers across tribes. These practices comprise what is referred to within this 
paper as Native American pedagogy. 

Perspectives on the Learner's Role 

Before one is able to gain an understanding of traditional Indian teaching, it is 
important to discuss the Native American perspective of the learner's role. Tafoya (1982) 
helps illmninate this perspective by relating the incident of a Navajo elder responding to a 
yoimg boy's query as to why it snows in Montezuma Canyon. The elder responded by telhng 
him a story about a boy who discovered a strange flaming object; 

They (the Holy People) would not allow him to keep even a part of it, but 
instead put him to a series of tests. When he was successful at these tests, 
they promised they would throw all of the ashes fi*om their fireplace into 




Montezuma Canyon each year. "Sometimes they fail to keep their word, and 
sometimes, they throw down too much; but in all, they turn their attention 
toward us regularly, here in Montezmna Canyon" (p. 27). 

When the boy heard the story, he accepted the explanation of why it snowed in 
Montezuma Canyon but then wanted to know why it snowed in Blanding, another 
Navajo area. The old man quickly rephed, "I don't know. You'll have to make 
up your own story for that." To the anthropologist (Toelken) who had 
witnessed this exchange, the old man later commented that, "It was too bad 
the boy did not understand stories," and he explained that this was not really 
about the historical origin of snow in Montezuma Canyon or any other place, 
but a story about the proper reciprocal relationship between man and other 
beings. He attributed the boy's failure to grasp the meaning of the story to 
the influence of white schoohng (p. 28). 

Tafoya's explanation of this interchange situates the learner as an active 
participant, not merely a passive recipient of knowledge: 

This is very much a part of Native American teaching: that one's knowledge 
must be obtained by the individual . . . gaining of that knowledge does not 
come from only hstening to elders, or seeing what others have done. . . . The 
seeker must open up himself to himself .... The insights and comprehensions 
must be achieved internally (p. 28). 

Others (Leavitt, 1983; Scollon & Scollon, 1981) have investigated both the social 
and cognitive aspects of stor 3 d«lhng as well as other traditional Native American teaching 
practices, and, like Tafoya, have concluded that abstracting basic rules and principles is 
left to participants according to their experience levels and perspectives. 

This conclusion situates the learner not as a dependent student but as an 
autonomous learner. Understanding this perspective becomes vitally important when 
analyzing principles of Native American pedagogy; learner autonomy is covertly embedded 
in indirect, cooperative, sense-making, culturally situated, and time-generous instruction. 

The constructivist perceptions of the learner and le£U"ner behaviors parallel those 
described above and conflict with dominant culture perspectives. Historically, in American 
classrooms, the learner has been viewed as "an empty vessel" or "blank slate" and learning 
has been thought to be a repetitious "mimetic" activity (Jackson, 1986). In contrast, 
constructivism emphasizes the learner as an active maker or constructor of meaning 
(Glatthorn, 1994). Brooks and Brooks (1993), in their book, A Case for Constructivist 
Classrooms, a source frequently referenced in this paper,explain that: 

The constructivist vista is far more panoramic and elusive. Deep understanding, 

3 




4 



not imitative behavior is the goal .... In the constructivist approach, we do not look 
for what students can repeat, but for what they can generate, demonstrate, and 
exhibit (p.l6). 

Comparing Pedagogies 

In the following section, foim research studies detaihng instruction of Indian children 
by Indian teachers will be reviewed. Though the studies share attributes common to 
traditional Native American instruction, such as the autonomous role of the learner, each 
study was selected to exemplify a particular component or principle of such pedagogy, and 
each study is identified by the principle it exemplifies. Constructivist correspondence with 
each principle will also be discussed. The pedagogic principles to be considered are: 1) 
teacher as facilitator: guiding rather than telling; 2) sense-making instruction; (3) 
problem-based instruction with problems situated in the culture and lived experiences of 
the learner; 4) cooperative rather than competitive instruction; and 5) time -generous rather 
than time-driven instruction. 

Principle 1 Teacher as Facilitator: Guiding Rather than Telling 

Ericks-Brophy and Crago (1993) analyzed classroom discourse in six Inuit-taught 
kindergarten and first-grade classrooms in northern Quebec. The findings of this study 
suggest that unlike mainstream classrooms based on behaviorist learning theory where 
discourse is typically organized around elicitation sequences initiated and controlled by 
the teacher (Cazden, 1988; Silliman & Wilkinson, 1991), Inuit teachers facilitated group 
responses and peer modelling to decentralize teacher intervention and de-emphasize the 
authoritarian role of the teacher. The emphasis in the Inuit classrooms was on listening to 
others as opposed to individual responses and performance. This allowed teachers to 
capitalize on using peer models to explore emerging concepts as well as rethink 
misconceptions. In their interviews, the teachers described their role in terms of the 
facilitation of peer exchanges: 

-to encourage my students to get along and help each other 

-that my students learn to cooperate 

-that my students respect each other 

-to keep all the children equal 

-to be a good example to my students 

The researchers suggested that this interactional pattern is culturally congruent 
with the larger Inuit society where conversational topics are not controlled by individual 
speakers and verbal interactions are typically focused on the general audience and do not 
tend to spotlight individual participants. They concluded: 




4 



Teachers avoided singling students out for evaluation, praise or correction in 
front of their peers and were careful not to emphasize or spotlight individual 
performance in the public arena, 8illowing students to participate equally in 
classroom exchanges without pressure or loss of face. In this way, students 
were able to take greater responsibility for their own learning and the 
progress of the group. At the same time, they learned centrsil Inuit V8ilues 
concerning the importance of group cooperation, the equahty of all group 
members, and respect for others. 

The findings of this study are consistent with those previously outlined in other 
Native American education studies (Erickson & Mohatt, 1982; Foster, 1989; Phillips, 

1983; Lipka, 1991; ScoUon & ScoUon, 1981). The facilitating teacher role promotes both 
autonomous and cooperative learning: students take greater responsibility for their own 
learning . 

Collins, Brown, and Newman (1989) note that in constructivist classrooms the 
teacher coaches and scaffolds, observes the learner and offers hints and feedback to guide 
her/his thinking. This guidance includes encouraging the student to reflect on and talk 
about that thinking as well as compare it with the thinking of others. Constructivist 
classrooms are not dominated by textbook oriented "teacher talk", rather, they are 
environments of collaborative problem solving. Brooks and Brooks (1993) caution against 
teacher and text domination: 

Conscientious students who are acculturated to receiving information passively 
and awaiting directions before acting will study and memorize what their teachers 
tell them is important. Robbing students of the opportunity to discern for 
themselves importance from trivia can evoke the conditions of a well-managed 
classroom at the expense of a transformation-seeking classroom (p. 103). 

Principle 2 Sense-meiking Instruction and Principle 3 Problem-based 
Instruction with the Problems Situated in the Culture and Lived 
Ex periences of the Learner 

In a case study of a Yup'ik teacher, Lipka (1991) proposes that Eskimo teachers 
should teach Eskimo students. He states that ethnicity is not merely a classroom variable 
but that it determines the actual interactional style and relationship between students 
and teachers. He argues that for teachers to effectively instruct, they must possess not 
only an in-depth understanding of content in the culture, but that they must also share 
culturally compatible communication styles and values. Lipka grounds his proposal on 
cognitive learning theory: 

Research on minority and indigenous school-aged students reveals a 
"relational" cognitive style. . . . (This) style recognizes the importance of the 




5 



whole and the context, as opposed to an "analytical" cognitive style, which is 
abstract and decontextualized (Cohen, 1969). . . . The non-Yup'ik teacher 
states in a linear manner, first this, and then this (Good & Brophy, 1987), 
prior to doing anything. The verbal messages are decontextualized from the 
content. . . . Differences in ordering of introductory statements between Anglo 
and Yup'ik teachers are not mere happenstance; they are culturally groimded 
in Yup'ik and mainstream American culture. Activities (in indigenous 
classrooms) begin without the customary lengthy verbal introduction Anglos 
expect. This suggests differences in cognitive ordering and structuring. 

Lipka illmninates the intentionality of Native American instruction by explaining 
specific practices. For example. Native American teachers will ignore requests for 
procedural or locational assistance so as not to reinforce dependence on verbal instruction 
during lessons that call for observation. Students are also allowed to move from their 
seats to get a closer look at what other students might be doing. In these ways, the teacher 
shares the instructional load with the students and builds group solidarity. 

Another Native American teaching practice is the avoidance of correcting someone or 
directly telling them that they are wrong. In Yup'ik pedagogy, corrections are based on 
affirmations of what the student knows. Underlying this practice is the belief that each 
student is capable of learning when allowed to perform in his/her comfort zone. 

In the Yup'ik classroom of this case study, Lipka described instruction as relaxed, 
almost informal, and reminiscent of lessons taught by elders. The teacher involved the 
students with content exploration by situating it pedagogicaUy within the lived experiences 
of the students. Among the examples of situated pedagogy described by Lipka is an 
incident when the teacher invited the students to sit on the floor with him, some chose to 
and some chose not to do so. There was no coaxing or statements of persuasion. From a 
Yup'ik cultural perspective, what was done respected the individual and reinforced group 
harmony. 

Likewise, the lesson content, an art lesson in which the problem to be solved was 
that of simulating the stretching of a beaver skin, was situated within the Yup'ik culture 
and required special imderstanding by the teacher, understanding that perceived the 
lesson as an art activity as weU as a lesson about siuwival, patience, care, and doing things 
properly. To summarize, for instruction to be culturally sensitive, content and pedagogy 
cannot be separated. Other researchers reporting similar findings include GiUiland (1992), 
Macias (1989), Ross (1989), and Swisher and Dehyle (1989). 

Constructivism also emphasizes situated and contextualized learning. In 
constructivist classrooms, students carry out tasks and solve problems that resemble the 
nature of those tasks in the real world (Glatthorn, 1994). Rather than doing excercises out 
of context, the student becomes engaged with contextualized problems, problems that 




6 



allow the learner to connect prior knowledge and transfer new knowledge and 
understanding to real situations. 



Pritif^inle 4 Cooperative Rather than Competitive Instruction: Cooperative Self- 
determination 



P hilli ps (1983) in her book, The Invisible Culture, provides a detailed description 
of how classroom communication patterns of Indian children parallel adult communication 
patterns on the Warm Springs Indian Reservation in Oregon. Thought provoking findings 
of this study include: 

Indian students generally make less efibrt than Anglo students to get the 
floor in classroom interaction. They compete with one another less for the 
teacher's attention, and make less use of the classroom interactional 
framework to demonstrate academic achievement (p. 108). 

It is generally the case that timns at talk are more evenly distributed in 
Indian classrooms (p. 113). 

In the Indian classroom it is common for children who had demonstrated the 
ability to answer correctly a particular question in one instance to refrain 
from even trying to answer the same question the next time it was raised (p. 

113). 

The children are reared in an environment that discourages drawing attention 
to oneself by acting as though one is better than another (p. 118). 

Indian student verbal peuticipation in group projects was not only much 
greater than in whole class or small-group (teacher directed) encounters, but 
also quahtatively different. As a rule, one could not determine who had been 
appointed as leaders of the Indian groups on the basis of the organization of 
interaction, and when the students were asked to pick a leader, they usu£iUy 
ignored the instructions and got on to the task at hand (p. 120). 

Indian children demonstrate a strong preference for team games and races . . . 
but they show a reluctance to fimction as leaders in games that require one 
person to control the activities of others (p. 122). 

In group projects and playgroimd activities, Indian students were able to 
sustain infrastructure interactions involving more students for a longer time 
(compared to white students in the same study) without the interaction 
breaking down because of conflict or too many people trjnng to control the talk 
(p. 124). 




7 



,8 



In her study, Phillips proposes that the non-competitive, cooperative nature of 
Indian children is behavior which mirrors adult communication patterns. She 
li 3 T)othesizes that Indian organization of interaction can be characterized as maximizing 
the control that an individual has over his or her own talk, and as minimizing the control 
that a given individual has over others. Furthermore, she explains that Indians are not 
accustomed to having to appeal to a single individual for permission to speak but rather 
determining for themselves whether they will speak. Behavior which might be judged by 
Anglos to be reticent and insecure would be considered by Indians as self-determining. 

Many studies of North American Indians have noted that overt authority which 
would interfere with the autonomy of the individual is rarely or never exercised (Basso, 
1970; Hallowell, 1955; Erickson & Mohatt, 1982; Spindler & Spindler, 1971). It is not that 
Indians are by nature self-effacing, rather, Phillips suggests that this behavior is 
consequential to the caretaking patterns of extended families. A child cared for by siblings 
and cousins is less likely to compete for the attention of a dominant adult and is more 
likely to attend to the rhythms of group interaction while maintaining a healthy degree of 
independence. "The notion of a single individual being structurally set apart from all 
others, in anything other than an observer role, and yet still a part of the group 
organization, is one that Indian children probably encounter for the first time in school 
(Philhps, 1982)." 

Like the social interactional patterns described by Phillips above, the foundational 
principles on which constructivism is grounded emphasize social and cultural mediation of 
learning. Brooks and Brooks (1993) succinctly express this: 

Constructivism is not a theory about teaching. It's a theory about knowledge and 
learning. Drawing on a S 5 mthesis of current work in cognitive psychology, philosophy, 
and anthropology, the theory defines knowledge as temporary, developmental, 
socially and culturally mediated, and thus, non-objective. Learning fi"om this 
perspective is understood to be a self-regulated process of resolving inner cognitive 
conflicts that often become apparent through concrete experiences, collaborative 
discomse, and reflection (p.vii). 

The cooperative learning behaviors described above by Phillips provide rich 
exeimples of social mediation and must be regarded with awesome respect. Such behaviors 
exemplify not only human ways of learning but humane ways of surviving. 

Principle 5 Time-Generous Rather than Time-Driven Instruction 

Erickson and Mohatt (1982) investigated the interaction patterns of two experienced 
first grade teachers, one Indian and one Anglo, in Odawa and Ojibwa classrooms in 
northern Ontario. A significant contribution of this study was the comparison of time 




8 



allocation for instructional activities between the classrooms. The study documented that 
the Indian teacher spent more time waiting for students to finish their work - students 
were given 15 minutes to finish work in the Indian classroom and an average of 5 minutes 
in the Anglo classroom, that the Indian teacher appeared to accommodate more sensitively 
to the children's rates of beginning, doing and finishing work, and that she maintained 
control of the students not with overt directives but by paying close attention to the 
rhyt. hms of activity and judging when the students were ready for things to change. 

The researchers explained this behavior as reflecting sensitivity to ciilturally valued 
collaborative behavior, rather than to authoritarianism. The Indian teacher's strategies 
involved proceeding fairly slowly and deliberately, sharing the social control: leadership 
shared by teacher and by students rather than divided into separate compartments - 
teacher time and student time. The teacher had control of the students but achieved this 
by paying close attention to each student's progress. In this way, the students clearly had 
control of the teacher. A predetermined schediile or curriciilmn agenda directed by the 
teacher did not set the pace for instruction. 

Lipka (1991) reported similar findings in the study described above. He explained 
that Indian students have a different set of "rights and responsibilities" than we would 
find in a mainstream classroom. They begin and finish a task at their own pace, within the 
confines of school. The teacher does not say, "Okay, it's three o'clock and it's time to leave, 
everybody hand in your work." The task and the involvement of the children with the task 
determined time. Gilliland (1992), in his book Teaching the Native American, explains: 
The Native American characteristic which is probably most misunderstood is 
their concept of time. To European-Americans, time is very important. It 
must be used to the fullest. Hmry is the by-word. Get things done. They feel 
guilty if they are idle. They say, "Time flies." To the Mexican, "time walks." 
However, the Indian tells me, "Time is with us." Life should be easy going, 
with little pressure. There is no need to watch clocks. In fact, many Indian 
languages have no word for time. Things shoiild be done when they need to be 
done. Exactness of time is of little importance. When an activity shoiild be 
done is better determined by when the thing that precedes it is completed or 
when circumstances are right than by what the clock says (pp. 32-33). 

The constructivist process, like the Native American instruction described above, 
must not be constrained by rigid time-driven and grade specific mastery of 
objectives. Constructivism views time as a way of coming to know one's world (Brooks & 
Brooks, 1993), and coming to know one's world is a lifelong process; one's individual 
experiences generate understanding and the development of new knowledge; rich 
experiencing takes time. 




9 



Reflections on the Dominant Culture and Constructivism 

Culture is a system of standards for perceiving, believing, evaluating, and acting 

(Goodenough, 1971). 

People in interaction are environments for each other (McDermott, 1976). 

Integration of these two quotes help summarize the premise of this paper: culturally 
responsive pedagogy can only be practiced in culturally sensitive environments where ways 
of perceiving, believing, acting, and evaluating are shared. After considering this premise 
and having reflected on the studies reported in this paper, one is inclined to conclude that 
Native American pedagogy and constructivism share common beliefs and perceptions 
about teaching and learning. Therefore, it is possible to propose that constructivist ways of 
teaching promise to be culturally reponsive to cultures valuing Native American pedagogy 
as described in this paper. Fiuthermore, it is possible to conclude that both conflict with 
traditional dominant culture pedagogic beliefs. The following table serves to validate this 
statement by comparing and contrasting these three perspectives: 

A Comparison of Principles Across Instructional Approaches 



Dominant Cultxire Pedagogy 


Constructivist Pedagogy 


Native American Pedagogy 


i'eachers generally behave 
n a didactic manner, dissem- 
nating information to 
students. 


Feachers gener8dly behave in 
an interactive manner, 
mediating 

the environment for the student. 


Teachers engage students with 
content through group 
involvement, decentra- lizing 
teacher intervention and 
authoritarianism. 


Jtudents primarily work alone. 


Students primarily work in 
^oups. 


Caretaking patterns of extended 
Families and bonded community 
interactions are replicated in 
3[roup learning experiences. 


i;!xirriculum activities rely 
lieavily on textbooks and 
workbooks. 


Curricular activities rely 
leavily on primary sources 
Df data and manipulative 
materials. 


Lessons relate to real problems 
that will likely confront the 
student. 


The day is partitioned into 
)locks 

>{ time and content coverage. 
Time on task” drives 
nstruction. 


Class time is spent solving 
complex problems. Students are 
encouraged to reflect on and 
iiscuss their own and other's 
thinking. 


[nstruction is time-generous 
rather than time-driven. 
Exactness of time is of little 
importance; when an activity 
should be done is determined by 
when the activity that proceeds 
it is completed. 


Curriculum is presented part to 
vhole with emphasis on basic 
ikills. 


Curriculum is presented whole 
to parts with emphasis on big 
concepts. 


All knowledge is relational, 
presented whole-to-part not part 
to-whole. Just as the circle 
produces harmony, holistic 
:hinking promotes sense-making| 




10 



Jtudents are viewed as blank 
;lates onto which information is 
itched by the teacher. 


Students are viewed as thinkers 
with emerging theories about 
:he world. 

. 


Each student possess 
Creator-given strengths and is 
3orn a thinker with a life 
mission. 


5tudent assessment is viewed as 
separate from teaching and 
occurs almost entirely through 
esting, testing that stratifies 
iitudents and promotes 
: ompetition. 


^sessment is interwoven with 
teaching and occurs through 
teacher observation of student 
work. Each student is 
instructed at her/his appropriate 
earning level. There is little, if 
my, use for competition. 


Age and ability determine task 
appropriateness. Task and 
[earning mastery is 
iemonstrated through 
performance. Creator ordained 
mission determines one's role in 
ife, and no one mission is beter 
than another. Competition, 
situating one as better than 
another is discouraged. 



The proposition that culturedly reponsive pedagogy can only be practiced in 
culturally sensitive environments leads one to consider the ciilture that generated 
constructivist principles. As stated earlier, constructivism is founded on theories of 
cognitive psychology, philosophy, and anthropology. However, theories do not generate 
cultural environments; rather, ciiltures generate and support theories. The question that 
must be posed is. Why were constructivist ideas developed by educators within the 
dominant ciilture, and why is constructivism generating dominant ciilture interest? A 
quote from the National Council for Teachers of Mathematics Teaching Standards 
(1991) attibutes this instructional reform to concern over projected societal needs of the 
twenty-first centmy. Reflection on this excerpt also illiuninates why the American society 
is economic8illy stratified as well as why Indian children have experienced and continue to 
experience failure in traditional dominant ciilture schools. 

Schools, as now organized, are a product of the industrial age. In most 
democratic countries, common schools were created to provide most youth the 
training needed to become workers in fields, factories, and shops. As a resiilt 
of such schooling, students also were expected to become literate enough to be 
informed voters. Thus, minimum competencies in reading and writing, and 
arithmetic were expected of 8ill students, and more advanced academic 
training was reserved for the select few. These more advanced students 
attended the schools that were expected to educate the future ciiltural, 
academic, business, and government leaders. 

The educational system of the industrial age does not meet the economic 
needs of today. New social goals for education include (1) mathematicedly 
literate workers, (2) lifelong learning, (3) opportunity for 8ill, and (4) an 
informed electorate. Implicit in these goals is a school system organized to 
serve as an important resource for all citizens throughout their lives (NCTM 
Standards, 1989, p. 3). 




11 



Caution is imperative when considering these statements. Emphasis must be 
placed on the words "economic needs", not "opportunity for all". Global market economy 
drives this reform, not humanitarian concerns; however, whether driven by economy or 
humanity, the shift from didactic classrooms to constructivist classrooms is real. 

Educators have recognized and are recognizing that industrial age factory model schoohng 
no longer serves a nation at risk of losing marketing capabihties and societal harmony. A 
most thought provoking consideration is that what produced for Indian people a 
community building educational process based on situated problem solving is now forcing 
the dominant culture to return to human and humane ways of learning, ways identified as 
constructivism. The traditional dominant culture educational system evolved out of 
industrial demands, whereas, constructivism reponds to the human condition. 

Conclusion 

At the beginning of this paper, it was proposed that attention be given not only to 
what people learn but also how people learn (Phillips, 1983). In response to this concern, I 
have attempted to describe a Native American way of learning and discuss its 
compatibUity with constructivism. The following comments, though motivated by very 
different lived experiences, reflect this compatibihty: 

Brooks and Brooks (1993) describe the characteristics of 
constructivist classrooms as environments in which teachers recognize and honor the 
human impulse to construct understanding. They explain that teachers in these 
environments: 

* free students from the dreariness of fact-driven curriculums and allow them to 
focus on large ideas; 

*place in students' hands the exhilarating power to follow trails of interest, to make 
connections, to reformulate ideas, and to reach unique conclusions; 

*Share with students the important message that the world is a complex place in 
which multiple perspectives exist and truth is often a matter of interpretation; 
*acknowledge that learning and the process of assessing learning, are, at best, 
elusive and messy endeavors that are not easily managed (p. 22). 

An Oneida kindergarten teacher, one identified as a practitioner of Native American 
pedagogy, expressed similar behefs when describing her role: 

One of the things that is passed along through culture is the behef that what we do 
today is going to benefit or harm the next seven generations, and that is the Great 
Law. So we must be mindful of how we are treating the children. Every creation is 
special. Every child has strengths, and I think as a teacher you need to bring out 
those strengths. I don't know ever 3 dhing. We are a body of learners together, and 
they teach me things. I want them to feel that they are equal to me, that they can 




12 



ask me an 5 rthing, that they can be psirticipants in their own learning, that they can 
help decide what's going on in our clasroom. You find out their strengths by getting 
to know what they want to learn about and facilitating what needs to be learned 
that way. In a way, that's a real good bedance (Hankes, 1994). 




13 



REFERENCES 



Basso, K. (1970). To give up words: Silence in Western Apache culture. Southwestern 
Journal of Anthropology, 26, 213-130. 

Brassard, M. R., & Szaraniec, L. (1983). Promoting early school achievement in American 
Indian children. School Psychology International, 4, 91-100. 

Brooks, J. G., & Brooks, M. G. (1993). In search of understanding: The case for 
constructivist classrooms. Alexandria:VA. Association for Supervision and 
Curriculum Development. 

Butterfield, A. (1983). The development and use of cultmally appropriate curriculum 
for American Indian students. Peabody Journal of Education, 61, 50-66. 

Cahape, P., & Howley, C. B. (Eds.). (1992). Indian nations at risk: Listening to the 
people. Charleston, WV: Appalachia Educational Laboratiry, ERIC Clearing 
House on Riu*al Education and Small Schools. 

Cazden, C. (1988). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning. 
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann Educational Books. 

CoUins, A.,Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. (1989). Cognitive appenticeships: Teaching the 
craft of reading, writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing 
learning and instruction; Essays in honor of Robert Glaser. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 

Erickson, F., & Mohatt, G. (1982). Cultural organization of the participation structures 
in two classrooms of Indian students. In G. Spindler (Ed.), Doing the ethnography 
of schooling (pp. 131-174). NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 

Eriks-Brophy, A, & Crago, M. B. (1993). Transforming classroom discourse: Forms of 
evaluation in Inuit IR and IRe routines. Paper presented at the American 
Educational Research Convention, Atlanta, GA. 

Foster, S. (1989). Out of school mathematics teaching: Content and instruction as 

reported by Bad River Anishinabeg. Unpubhshed Master's Thesis, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, WI. 

Gililand, H. (1992). Teaching the Native American (2nd ed.). Dubuque: Kendal Hunt. 
Glattom, A. A. (1994). Constructivism: Imphctations for curriculum. 

International Journal of Educational Reform, 3 (4), 449-455. 

Good, T. L., & Brophy, J. (1987). Looking in classrooms. London: Harper & Row 
Publishers. 

Goodenough, W. (1971). Culture, language, and society. Addison- Wesley module. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. 

Hallo well, A. I. (1955). Culture and experience. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press. 

Hankes, J. E. (1994).Native American pedagogy and cognitive-based mathematics 
instruction. Unpubhshed Dissertation, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI. 

Indian Nations at Risk Task Force. (1992). Indian nations at risk: An educational 
strategy for action. Washington, DC: Department of Education. 

Jacksn, P. W. (1986). The practice of teaching. New York: Teachers CoUege Press. 




14 



Leavitt, R. M. (1983). Stor 5 rtelling as language curriculum. In W. Carsen (Ed.), Actes du 
quartorzieme Congres de Algonquistes (pp. 27-33). 

Lipka, J. (1991). Toward a culturally based pedagogy: A case study of one Yup'ik Eskimo 
teacher. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 22, 203-223. 

McDermott, R. P. (1976). Kids make sense: An ethnographic account of the 
interactional management of success and failure in one first-grade 
classroom. Unpublished dissertation. Stanford University, Anthropology 
Department. 

Macias, C. J. (1989). American Indian academic success: The role of indigenous learning 
strategies. Journal of American Indian Education, 28, 43-51. 

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1989). Curriculum and evaluation 
standards for school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author. 

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1991). Teaching standards for school 
mathematics. Reston, VA: Author. 

Phillips, S. (1983). The invisible culture: Communication classroom and 

community on the Warm Springs Indian Reservation. New York, NY: Longman 

Inc. 

Ross, . C. (1989). Brain hemispheric functions and the NativeAmerican. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 28, 72-75. 

Stuck in the horizon: A special report on the education of Native Americans. (1989, April 
2). Education Week, 1-16. 

Scollon, R., & Scollon S. K. (1981). Narrative, literacy, and face in interethnic 
communication. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

SiUiman, E., & Wilkinson, L. C. (1991). Communicating for learning: Classroom 
observation and collaboration. Gaithersberg, MD: Aspen. 

Spindler, G., & Spindler, L. (1971). Dreamers without power: The Menomini. New 
York: Holt, Rineholt and Winston. 

Swisher, K., & Deyhle, D. (1989). The styles of learning are different but the teaching is 
just the same: Suggestions for teachers of American Indian youth. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 28, 1-13. 

Tafoya, T. (1982). Coyote's eyes: Native cognition styles. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 21, 21-33. 

Tharp, R. G. , & Yamauchi, L. A. (1994). Effective instructional conversation in native 
American classrooms. A report prepared for the Nationsd Center for Research on 
Cultural Diversity and Second Language Learning, University of California-Santa 
Cruz. 




15 



Detach and complete this form and submit with your document. 
This form may be copied ae needed. 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION CENTER 

(ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION^ 

Title: )^AUvi e KrVU.gVi.CfliA 

OnA ^liri i , f ^ "1-V\ ^ Vr»AckD 

Author(s): WtxWV^e^ 

Date: \ V-(/^ 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and 
significant materials of interest to the educational community, 
documents announced in the monthly abstract journal of the 
ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually 
made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper 
copy, or electronic/optical media, and are sold through the 
ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) or other ERIC 
vendors. Credit is given to the source of each document. If 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices 
is affixed to the document. 



“PERMISSION TO 
REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN 
GRANTED BY 

*\1.. . VU V (Vua. 




"PERMISSION TO 
REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL IN OTHER 
THAN PAPER COPY 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 








TO THE EDUCATIONAL 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL 


RESOURCES INFOR- 




RESOURCES INFOR- 


MATION CENTER 




MATION CENTER 


(ERIC)" 




(ERIC)" 



ERIC 



If permission is granted to reproduce the identified document, 
please CHECK ONE of the options below and sign the release 
on the other side. 

OR 



Permitting 

microfiche 



□ Permitting 
reproduction in 
other than paper 
copy (Level 2) 



(4" X 6" film) 
paper copy, 
electronic, and 
optical media 
reproduction (Level 1) 

Documents will be processed as indicated, provided quality 
permits. If permission to reproduce is granted, but neither box 
is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



0 83 



OVER 



Signature Required 

"I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center 
(ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce this document as 
indicated on the other side. Reproduction from the ERIC micro- 
fiche or electronic/optical media by persons other than ERIC 
employees and its system contractors requires permission from 
the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit repro- 
duction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy infor- 
mation needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries." 

Sianaturfi: O i I ^ 



Printed Name x V c.i V (4-nuKfJ^ 

Organization: 



Position: 



Q 












Address: (,->'7^.'^ 



Tel. N Zip Onrip- ^ C j 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION 
(Non-ERIC Source) 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you 
wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another 
source, please provide the following information regarding the 
availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a docu- 
ment unless it is publicly available, and a dependable source 
can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that 
ERIC selection criteria are significantly more stringent for doc- 
uments which cannot be made available through EDRS). 



Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price Per Copy: 

Quantity Price: 



IV. REFERRAL TO COPYRIGHT/ REPRODUCTION 
RIGHTS HOLDER 

If the right to grant reproduction release is held by some- 
one other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate 
name and address: 



