Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


When Social Support Fits into your 
Luggage: Online Support Seeking and its 
Effects on the Traditional Study Abroad 
Experience 

Jude P. Mikal 

University of California, Santa Barbara 


Introduction 

The theories of intercultural adjustment that have dominated research 
on acculturative stress and culture shock are based on notions of transition 
that have failed to keep pace with changing media technology. Intercultural 
adjustment theorists like Oberg, Lysgaard and Adler were operating in a time 
when lengthy, cost prohibitive modes of communication were the norm, and 
logistical considerations meant the severing of all but the most intimate of ties 
while overseas. Forty years post hence, the information age has demolished 
the communication barriers that were the cornerstone of early theories of 
initial target culture contact. For modern students communication is free and 
frequent as university students continuously maintain dual existences on-, 
and off-line. Where physical whereabouts play an integral role in the first, the 
second is maintained irrespective of physical boundaries. Thus where study 
abroad represents a similar displacement for students today as it did forty 
years ago; modern students maintain an online persona that likely changes 
the degree to which physical displacement is appraised as a potential stressor. 

Dubbed the Net Generation (Leung, 2007), modern university students 
have grown up not only with advanced communication technologies at their 
disposal, but using such technologies to both maintain and create social 
networks of support. In a study abroad context, the maintenance of dual 
on- and offline personas provides students with the opportunity to demolish 
communication barriers with the home culture created by geographic distance. 
Conversely, online communication may help bring down communication 
barriers created by linguistic and cultural differences, providing students 
with exciting opportunities for face-to-face social interaction with host 
nationals. Yet, very little is known about how students are using the Internet 
in the development or maintenance of social support networks during study 
abroad. The goal of the present research project is to understand how Internet 


17 



Jude Mikal 


mediated support complements, supplements or supplants traditional support 
seeking and how online support seeking leads to changes in the traditional 
study abroad experience. In the next section of this study I will present relevant 
literature on the subjects of acculturative stress, social coping, and Internet 
mediated social support in order to ground the research question and study 
findings. 

Relevant Literature 

Normative models of acculturative stress generally rely on two common 
assumptions: (1) that international migration is characterized by heightened 
stress levels; and (2) that the key to coping with such stress is social interaction. 
U-curve models, conceived in the mid-1950s suggested a painful initial 
adjustment to a new culture that occurred in 3-5 steps, roughly introduction, 
followed by crisis, and later, recovery. The catalyst for movement between the 
stages was increased engagement with the target culture (Lysgaard, 1955; Oberg, 
I960; Adler, 1975). While such prescriptive models have been debunked both 
empirically and theoretically (e.g. Church, 1982; McKinlay, et al., 1996). still, 
more modern intercultural adjustment theories like acculturation attitudes / 
acculturation strategies conceived by Berry (1991), and developed by Ward 
and Kennedy (1994) rely on similar assumptions. The model attempts to 
predict differential stress levels abroad, by looking at attitudes towards home 
culture maintenance vs. desire for integration - measured, at least in part, by 
peer network composition. 

Taking these two assumptions for granted, literature on social coping 
offers insight into the mechanisms through social support can act to alleviate 
stress. Literature on social coping suggests that support may take one of three 
forms: (1) instrumental support refers to the provision of goods or services 
used to cope with a stressor; (2) informational support refers to the transfer of 
relevant information for dealing with a stressor; and finally (3) socio-emotional 
support refers to the feelings of acceptance and togetherness that come from 
social interaction (Cohen, S., & Wills, T.A., 1985). Other theorists have 
noted that individuals may find support simply through their participation 
in a broader social network - and research has shown that this degree of 
“embedded support” also shows a positive correlation with psychological 
wellbeing (Cohen, S., & Wills, T.A., 1985; Thoits, P.A., 1986). 

Studies on computer-mediated communication (CMC) have shown the 
Internet to be an effective tool in the communication of both socio-emotional 
and informational support. Evidence in such studies has failed to demonstrate 
a link between Internet communication and the transmission of instrumental 
support, and to date, no study has examined the Internet as a possible social 


18 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


context through which to derive embedded support. Conversely, research on 
CMC and Internet mediated social support demonstrates that the Internet 
is not only a useful tool in facilitating communication over large distances 
(Dimmick, et ah, 2000), but that there are a number of relative advantages 
to social support received online. For example, research has shown the 
Internet to be an effective tool for support seeking among individuals with 
difficulties with face-to-face communication, or for those who find face-to-face 
communication less rewarding. Thus far, such studies have been concerned 
primarily with mental handicaps, such as Asberger’s Syndrome and Autism 
(e.g. Burke, Kraut & Williams, 2010), and stigmatized conditions, such as 
infertility (e.g. Malik & Coulsin, 2008); however, the present study extends 
empirical analysis to include study abroad participants given their status as 
marginalized linguistic and cultural minorities who experience language and 
cultural barriers to communication. 

Early studies on Internet communication have suggested that while the 
Internet increases the quantity of social interactions, it does so at the expense 
of quality (Kraut, et al., 1998; Baym, N.K., 2004), but notions of such quality 
/ quantity tradeoffs are becoming increasingly antiquated. No longer is the 
assumption that friendships are formed or maintained exclusively on- or off¬ 
line (Subrahmanyam, K., 2008). Research on social networking sites like 
Facebook which has exploded to over 550 million members worldwide (www. 
facebook.com), has demonstrated that such sites facilitate the maintenance 
of and reconnection with socially supportive peer networks, and recent work 
(Raacke & Bonds-Raacke (2008)) has demonstrated that the site is a useful 
tool in the construction of new friendships. Researchers are further suggesting 
that relationships developed online may be more meaningful given that they 
are generally based on common interests, and a common life-situation, rather 
than simple geographic proximity. 

Despite growing recognition of the advantages of Internet mediated social 
support, concerns remain. While there is little agreement among researchers 
as to the relationship between online and offline social interaction, early 
empirical studies indicated that increased social interaction online is correlated 
with decreased face-to-face interactions (Papacharissi, 2000; Putnam, 2000; 
Kraut, et al., 1998), though more recent studies are finding the converse 
to be true (Hampton, 2003; Robinson, et al., 2000, McKenna, 2002). 
Researchers have found that increased convenience in online transactions 
means that individuals are no longer required to leave their homes for minor 
errands (such as shopping) leading to decreased daily social interaction, and 
higher risk of depression (Kraut, et al., 1998). Further, while the Internet 
allows for the construction of support communities across communication 


19 



Jude Mikal 


boundaries, studies have found that in the absence of emotional or tonal cues, 
misunderstandings are more likely to occur. In a comparative study of group 
work conducted on and offline, researchers found that groups who conducted 
their work primarily online were less cohesive and less satisfied with group 
work outcomes (McKenna, 2002). Finally, studies have demonstrated that 
increased online activity is associated with decreased academic performance, 
less social involvement, and increased loneliness and depression (Shaw, L.H., 
& Grant, L.M., 2002). 

This present paper contributes to a more complete understanding of 
the role of the Internet in the formation and maintenance of social support 
networks during study abroad. Specifically this research represents a first look 
at how the Internet serves to overcome communication barriers arising from 
linguistic and cultural differences encountered abroad. During study abroad, 
students may look to the Internet to help break down communication barriers 
and form friendships with members of the target culture, or conversely, to 
help them feel closer to socially supportive relationships back in the home 
culture. The paper also examines how increased access to both types of social 
support online changes the traditional study abroad experience, both in terms 
of students’ intercultural adjustment, as well as in the proportion of students’ 
social support networks made up of host nationals, co-nationals living abroad, 
and co-nationals living in the home country. Finally, the paper represents the 
beginning of a discussion of theoretical models of intercultural adjustment, 
and how such models ought to be adjusted to account for dramatic increases 
in communication technologies. 

Methodology 

Data was gathered in four two-hour focus groups held in Northern 
Germany in 2009. Focus groups consisted of four topics: (1) the transition 
abroad, (2) peer network composition, (3) advantages of maintianed Internet 
use during study abroad, and (4) disadvantages of maintained Internet use. 
The protocol was semi-structured, and students were allowed and encouraged 
to deviate from prescribed topics, but a routine of approximately 30 minutes 
per discussion topic was adhered to. Focus groups were scheduled every two 
weeks, allowing time to transcribe each session by hand, code each session and 
modify focus group protocol for the subsequent session. Once all four focus 
groups were complete, a thorough coding was conducted using a combination 
of bottom-up and top-down techniques. 

Focus group participants were graduate and undergraduate students 
studying abroad in Germany. Due to theoretical considerations, respondents 
were required to be American, to be affiliated with a university and to be 


20 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


abroad for more than 3 weeks. In all, 21 students participated in the two-hour 
focus groups. Programs represented ranged from traditional, full-immersion, 
year long programs - to independent research in an English-speaking institute 
under the guidance of a German professor. Participants ranged in age from 
20 to 32. 18 participants were Euro-Caucasian, while 3 were East Asian. Of 
the 21 participants, 10 were graduate students, 11 were undergraduates; 14 
were social science majors, 5 were in physical sciences, 1 student was studying 
architecture and 1 was studying Humanities. All 21 students had regular 
Internet access through a laptop, university housing or place of employment. 

Results 

Results indicate that students are accessing socio-emotional, informational 
and embedded support online, and will be organized into the following 
three themes: (1) Internet as Transitional Device: Early normative models 
of acculturative stress suggest an initial decline in psychological wellbeing, 
due to disorientation. Students are smoothing the transition abroad by using 
online technology to supplement socio-emotional support through home 
support networks. (2) Internet as Cultural Inlet: Data suggests that students 
are supplanting face-to-face Informational support with Internet mediated 
support in order to create opportunities for interaction in the target culture, 
and to facilitate rapid establishment of daily routines in the host culture. (3) 
Internet as Placeholder in the Home Culture: Students abroad look at their 
social support networks back home as “paused”. Students use the Internet 
to provide socio-emotional support, thus reminding friends and family of 
students’ secured place within those networks. Finally, results indicate that 
despite increased access to support, students are still evidencing heightened 
stress levels. These findings are discussed below. 

Transitional device 

A recurrent theme that emerged among focus group participants was the 
use of Internet technology to provide continuity during the transition abroad. 
Two respondents in two different focus groups reported that the Internet served 
as a “lifeline” to social support networks in the home country. Evidence suggests 
that the Internet serves two specific transitional functions: (1) it smoothes the 
transition abroad by providing continuous access to social support networks 
back in the country of origin, and (2) provides identity affirming embedded 
support through participation in a broader social network. 

Students of the Net Generation are accustomed to the spillover of personal 
relationships into cyberspace, and conversely, of cyber relationships into real 
space. According to one respondent, relationships can no longer be conceived 


21 



Jude Mikal 


of as either maintained on or offline, since most relationships are maintained 
through multiple media. 

We’ve had technology growing up. Through high school and now 
college, I’ve had a cell phone, a computer and the Internet, so most of 
my friendships are still established around those forms of technology 
(H4: Holly, graduate student, research assistant in an international 
research institute, abroad for five months). 

The Internet does not represent an abstracted, impersonal medium of 
communication, or even an extension of personal relationships. Rather 
friendships are formed and maintained through multiple media to the extent 
that the online persona is symbiotic with the offline persona. 

With friendships that straddle both real- and cyber-space, it is logical that 
when face-to-face contact is no longer possible given large geographic distance, 
students comfortably rely on computer-mediated communication in order to 
maintain socially supportive relationships. According to one respondent, he is 
used to maintaining relationships over the Internet, since he formed the habit 
when he moved to New York from Colorado to attend university. 

For me going abroad just so closely parallels university life. I live in 
Colorado and go to school in New York, so I switch [between locations] 
so often and for months at a time. This is just like being in New York 
for a few months. The only difference is that I’m not with the people I 
would normally interact with in New York (A3: Adam, undergraduate, 
taking courses in a non-immersion program, abroad for one semester). 

Study abroad simply represents a third place - neither home nor university. 
Rather than maintaining a single group of friends exclusively online, students 
must maintain two groups of friends online, while negotiating a bilateral (on 
and offline) entry into a third culture. 

All students reported maintaining regular contact with members of the 
home culture with the primarily goal of obtaining socio-emotional support. 
Two respondents from focus group four reported talking to their mothers daily, 
I talked to my mom when I was in college almost every day, and I still 
do it here. Even if it’s just for like two or three minutes so say, “Have a 
great day.” It makes me feel better when I hear from her, and she feels 
better when she hears from me. We’re just so close (H4: Holly). 

Others were likely to maintain daily contact with the home culture, when 
they were involved in significant romantic relationships. According to another 
respondent the Internet smoothed the transition from daily contact with her 
romantic partner, to intermittent contact complicated by a nine-hour time 
difference. 


22 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


At the beginning, I was up until five o’clock in the morning every night 
[talking online to my boyfriend]. If I didn’t talk to him everyday, I was 
like, “Oh my God, what is he doing? He doesn’t love me anymore!” I 
mean he felt the same way, but it was especially hard - especially while 
I was transitioning here (K4: Karen, undergraduate, taking courses in a 
non-immersion environment, abroad for one semester). 

The respondent further reported staying online for several hours at a time, 
hoping to be online when her partner logged on to the Internet in the United 
States, so that the two could make contact. 

Students were also likely to maintain contact with members of their peer 
groups through multiple interfaces. All 21 respondents had accounts on social 
networking sites through which they maintained regular contact with friends 
and family, providing pictures and daily updates on everything from outings, 
to mood, to dinner. According to a respondent in focus group one, her parents 
continue to keep track of her through her daily “tweeting” of her meals. 

I went out on Friday night and I did not [record my dinner on] Twitter. 
So my dad checks my Twitter [account], and when he didn’t see my 
dinner, he was very concerned. So my mom emails me, and then my 
sister posts on my wall on Facebook saying, “Why haven’t you Tweeted 
your dinner?” (Sal: Samantha, graduate student, taking courses in an 
international research institute, abroad for one month) 

Through social networking sites, students remain a virtual presence among 
social support networks and are able to maintain a certain base-level support 
while abroad. Before leaving for a 10-day trip another respondent reported 
emailing friends, and updating her Facebook status to reflect that she would be 
incommunicado in the days to come. Thus, the respondent indicates the need 
to deactivate base-level support during her absence, for fear that her silence 
might be interpreted as a need for support - as in the Samantha quote, above. 

The concerns expressed by Samantha’s father, in the absence of a Twitter 
“status update” reflect another continuity provided by the Internet through 
the transition abroad. Students reported generally stable Internet use habits 
from which they derived support. Most students reported that they had an 
Internet routine for their day. While some students simply checked email in 
the morning and at night, others had more detailed routines, 

I eat my yogurt and muesli, and while I do it I look on the Internet, 
check my Gmail, and check my university email. Then I check 
Facebook and Twitter. I’ll potentially check two blogs of these girls I 
sort of know, and maybe the New York Times. If there’s still something 
to do, maybe I’ll follow some links on Twitter, but that’s sort of the 


23 



Jude Mikal 


morning [portion of the routine]. When I get home [from work] I do 
the Facebook / Twitter check again, and I’ll continue that throughout 
the night because people are updating. At some point in the evening I’ll 
talk to my boyfriend on Skype, and I’ll watch television online, like the 
Daily Show, or listen to a podcast. Yeah - that’s my typical Internet day 
(Sal: Samantha). 

It was not uncommon for students to report such ritualized Internet use 
patterns. Even several students without such detailed routines reported that 
they were likely to keep their computers logged onto the Internet, with tabs 
open to gaming sites, email and social networking sites depending on their 
interests. 

Cultural inlets and cultural consumerism 

Along with Internet use providing continued access to online networks 
of support, as discussed in the section on Transitional Objects above, the data 
suggest that students are interested in a quick and efficient establishment 
of daily routines once abroad - and are using the Internet as the means to 
achieve this goal. From the moment students enter the new culture they are 
demonstrating agency in their cultural and physical orientations. No longer 
must students wander lost through a city armed with a map and a rudimentary 
understanding of the target language. Students are locating products and 
areas of interest from the safety of their residence as of the first day. “My 
first morning I Googled where to find coffee. I Googled something like, 
“coffee in [my city]” and found a place that was close to my apartment (Sal: 
Samantha).” Once students locate the item or area of interest they are using 
mapping programs such as Google Maps to plan their route. In fact, virtually 
all students reported using a mapping program to orient themselves with 
relation to their surroundings, with several reporting having used a mapping 
program to obtain directions to the focus group location. 

From orienting themselves during the initial transition abroad, to the 
establishment of daily routine within the host culture, focus group data shows 
that students are creating their lives abroad independently and without much 
help from (or contact with) the target culture. Focus group three consisted of 
four students participating in a study abroad program that required no prior 
knowledge of German. For these students the prospect of setting up a bank 
account without access to bank information online in English seemed nearly 
impossible. 

The idea [of setting up a bank account] terrifies me. If I wanted to set 
up an account with a German bank I wouldn’t know what they were 
saying to me. I would definitely take someone with me who knows 


24 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


better German (Me3: Melissa, undergraduate, taking courses in a non¬ 
immersion program, abroad for one semester). 

Melissa, like others of the Net Generation, believes that, “it’s better to have 
more information than less.” As a result, Melissa and other Net Generation 
students are opting out of cross-cultural encounters where access to information 
may be slowed or limited due to communication difficulties. Results indicate 
that students are using the Internet to bypass many potential cross-cultural 
interactions in favor of a more rapid establishment of daily routine. No longer 
are students forced to browse classified listings, phone for availability, and set 
up viewings in order to find an apartment. Rather, students are able to browse 
apartment listings with photos on the Internet, and initiate contact through 
low risk media such as email. Public transit fares, tickets and special offers can 
all be located online, often in English, or translated with the help of online 
translation programs. Further, no longer are students sitting with travel agents 
to book train and airline tickets, but rather booking, and often even checking 
in, online. 

To students, integration without exercising linguistic and cultural 
competencies comes down to a question of efficiency. Students no longer 
view themselves as cultural anthropologists exploring new and undiscovered 
cultures, but simply following the path set by those before them. In the industry 
of study abroad, the students have become cultural consumers. Melissa offers 
the following illustrative anecdote, 

We decided the other way to go to Victoria Park, but we’d never been 
there before, so we just Google Mapped how we would ride our bikes 
there. Now technically you could make the argument that if we hadn’t 
done that, we may have discovered some undiscovered place along the 
way and had this wonderful adventure but you know, we got there and 
managed to find an amazing place to have lunch. Because we’re using 
our time more efficiently in getting to places, we can know those places 
and those areas better (Me3: Melissa). 

Traveling with a destination in mind, students are no longer venturing off the 
beaten path. “Knowing” a culture is less an exploration than the compilation 
and completion of a checklist of cultural artifacts. For students spending a 
limited time abroad, agency and determination are essential components of 
effective and efficient consumption of German culture. 

Cultural consumption should not imply that students are not learning, or 
that the Internet is not an effective tool for the establishment of daily routines 
and creation of cultural inlets. For while integration through exploration, 
virtually by definition, involves a certain number of missteps; integration 


25 



Jude Mikal 


through Internet allows students to circumvent those missteps which can 
be not only embarrassing, but financially costly. One respondent gives the 
following example, 

The thing about the Internet is that it saves you a lot of embarrassment. 

I wanted to go fishing while I was here, and I was looking up tackle 
shops, and I found out in trying to do that that it takes forty or fifty 
hours of fishing training to get a license here in Berlin. If I had gone 
fishing and gotten caught by police they would have fined me for 
poaching, for trespassing, for fishing without a license and it would 
have cost me close to a thousand Euro. I mean I could have learned that 
on my own, but I prefer to learn that from the Internet (G3: Grant). 

It is important to note that while cultural misunderstandings are endemic in 
cultural exploration, they are the “means” which have long been justified by 
the “ends” of cultural and language learning. In many ways, the Internet allows 
students to acquire and apply cultural lessons through less abrasive means. 

Not only may the Internet prevent cultural missteps, but using the 
Internet in the establishment of daily routines may reflect an understanding 
of a worldwide “Internet culture.” While only a few years ago Americans 
comprised 70% of all Internet users, that number plummeted to 30% in 2007 
(Lievrouw, L.A., 2000 cited in Raacke and Bonds-Raacke, 2008). As a result, 
avoiding face-to-face interactions in favor of online information seeking may 
not be reflecting students’ ethnocentricity, so much as reflecting a global trend 
toward modernity. A respondent from focus group four offers the following 
justification of purchasing tickets online: 

These exercises in talking with a ticket agent are antiquated. There are 
machines now - like fast pass tolls in the U.S. - and those personal 
interactions go away over time. They may be good practice and 
exposure to the culture in a sense, but if it goes away and won’t be a part 
of the culture anymore, what’s the point? (T4: Tom, graduate student, 
research assistant at an international research institute, abroad for one 
year) 

Students recognize that like America, German society is moving toward 
automation of certain services. Purchasing tickets online does not constitute 
cultural avoidance - as young Germans are also prone to purchasing tickets 
online. If anything, synthetic encounters with German culture of the past are 
no longer sufficient exercises in language and cultural learning. 

Rather than seeking out cultural and language learning opportunities 
through everyday interactions such as ticket purchases and apartment searches, 
students are seeking out more substantive interactions with the target culture 


26 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


based on more than simple casual contact. Data demonstrate that students are 
using the Internet to make connections through cultural activities. All students 
reported using the Internet to locate cultural events such as art exhibitions and 
political speeches. Tom, quoted above, recommended using the Internet to 
look for special theme nights at local dance clubs, while another respondent 
from focus group one reported that, although she speaks no German, she was 
likely to purchase symphony orchestra or ballet tickets from the local theatre 
online. Nicholas, a former professional athlete reported that he was able to use 
the Internet to connect with the target culture by finding a sports league in 
which to participate. He reports, 

Finding this soccer team was probably the best thing for my German, 
probably the best thing for seeing other parts of the state, for meeting 
other German people and for getting a little bit more entrenched in 
the culture (Nl: Nicholas, graduate student, research assistant at an 
international research institute, abroad for one year). 

Finding a soccer league allowed Nicholas to create a network of friends who, 
at the time of the interview, constituted a significant portion of his face-to- 
face social support network. A few students also reported using the Internet 
to extend party invitations to host nationals. Though these interactions often 
did not result in the creation of new friendships, they generally resulted 
in exposure to an element of the German culture - and the possibility for 
interaction created by the Internet. Furthermore, the Internet allows for access 
to logistical information such as clubs, events, and exhibitions that may be 
prohibitively complicated in the target language, such that students can spend 
more time creating possible engagements with the culture, and less time in 
fruitless searches for ways to engage. 

Focus group data also showed that social connections online can translate 
into increased face-to-face interaction. Social networking sites, particularly 
country-specific sites, provide opportunities to connect with others within the 
community. Kimberly used Facebook to strengthen a friendship with another 
American she had met several times at a party: 

I was friends with this guy on Facebook because we just kept randomly 
meeting at parties, but I didn’t really spent that much time talking to 
him. Anyway, so he wrote something on his wall — I think it was his 
‘top five favorite bands’ or whatever, and they happened to be exactly 
what I like, so I was all, “Oh my God that’s so awesome!” Then he 
ended up signing on right there and we just kept talking and talking 
and now we’re going to meet somewhere next week - we were just like, 
“Wow! We should hang out! We have so much in common!” (K2: 
Kimberly, undergraduate student, taking courses in a full-immersion 


27 



Jude Mikal 


program, abroad for one year) 

Others reported feeling as though friendships had been strengthened over 
the Internet. Adam reports meeting people at a party, and feeling as though 
requesting a subsequent meeting might be overly forward. Facebook allows 
him to take the first step, “I think it’s because they’re kind of afraid to initiate 
another physical [face-to-face] contact or communication at first.” (A2: 
Adam) And Kimberly continues,“And it’s easier to invite twenty people to 
a barbecue and include someone you just met, than to call them up and be 
like, “Hi! Remember me from last night?” (K2: Kimberly) The Internet 
provides an effective method of communication for those for whom face-to- 
face interaction might seem too forward. Students do not risk rejection, and 
are able to expand social circles more easily. 

Internet use and maintenance of ties back home 

The idea of a life “on pause” back in the home culture became a theme in 
each of the four focus groups. Data suggest that the Internet enables students 
to continue attending to responsibilities within the home culture while living 
abroad. This continued attention to social and professional obligations back in 
the United States serves two functions. First, the ability to attend to obligations 
makes study abroad available to many students whose impacted schedules may 
have prevented them from studying abroad in the past. Second, continued 
attention to social and professional obligations softens the transition back into 
the United States by securing positions in important personal and professional 
networks. 

Data indicated that students are aware of the short-term nature of their 
study abroad experiences and as a result were unlikely at the start of their 
sojourn to give up coveted positions in university sports or clubs. Grant, from 
focus group three, continued running a university club in the United States 
during his semester abroad, and talked about how the Internet has allowed 
him to maintain his role as an active member, 

I run a club at NYU and it hasn’t been hard at all. I’ve actually 
participated in meetings and stuff through the Internet and I’ve kept in 
contact - at least with the active members - on a day-to-day basis to see 
what they’re doing (G3: Grant). 


Students, like Grant are likely to spend their time abroad living in two cultures 
- simultaneously participating in clubs, maintaining friendships and fulfilling 
professional obligations within the home country, while physically living 
abroad. 


28 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


Professional obligations were central concerns for three focus group 
respondents. Two respondents reported that fulfillment of their degree 
requirements required the completion of a summer internship. Students were 
required to submit the applications for these positions in late April, but they 
wouldn’t be returning to the United States until late May. While some businesses 
were reluctant, or refused to accept internship applications submitted online, 
the two students were using the Internet to submit applications to other 
technologically well-equipped firms. Similarly, Nicholas from focus group 
one was applying to graduate school, while completing an internship with 
a research institute in Germany. Applications were due in December, for the 
coming fall semester. 

Students also reported using the Internet to secure their position in social 
support networks back home by both seeking and providing support online. 
One respondent who had lived abroad in several countries reported that no 
longer does moving necessitate the abandoning of one social support network 
and the formation of another. Rather, social support network formation 
becomes an additive process as friendship networks become more global. 
Nevertheless, according to one respondent, maintenance of home culture ties 
involves a certain effort. For Robyn increasing her “presence” on Facebook was 
a way of asserting her position in social support networks, and not being left 
behind. “I would say my Facebook use is more productive in the way that I’m 
making myself a little more known. Like, ‘Fley, nice picture.’” It’s like saying, 
‘Fley, I’m still here!”’ (Rl: Robyn, graduate student, taking courses in an 
international research institute, abroad for two months) According to Robyn, 
this represents a change from her past Facebook behavior due to her physical 
absence. Erin clarified the need for this online presence, saying, 

I couldn’t imagine being abroad without the Internet. If you think 
about it even when I get back there’s going to be this ten-month gap 
where I don’t connect with my friends because they’ve moved on. 

They’re ten months ahead, and I’m coming back to a life that I’ve put 
on hold. If I didn’t have the Internet I would be totally behind. It 
would make reintegrating back into American culture so much harder 
(El: Erin, undergraduate student, taking courses in a full immersion 
program, abroad for one year). 

Kimberly, from focus group two, also echoed the sentiment, saying that without 
the Internet she would be required to abandon social support networks for a 
full ten months causing her to be left behind. 

Due to the temporary nature of study abroad programs, students are likely 
to be stressed about obligations they have in their home country once their 


29 



Jude Mikal 


time abroad is complete. As universities grapple with how to reconcile study 
abroad, with demanding obligations in students’ home universities, students 
appear to be taking matters into their own hands by attempting to fulfill 
obligations with both countries at the same time. Students are maintaining 
their presence in university clubs, fulfilling professional obligations, and 
maintaining friendships to facilitate their reintegration into the home culture. 
While critics may argue that this distracts from a total immersion experience, 
changes in the nature of programs suggest that “total immersion” may no 
longer the goal of study abroad. 

Acculturative stress 

With regard to changes to the overall study abroad experience, evidence 
suggests that despite the introduction of Internet technology students still suffer 
from acculturative stress. Despite the fact that many students report low stress, 
feelings of hostility, and negative stereotyping of the target culture indicate 
otherwise. For example, when asked directly about his transition into German 
culture, Mark, a respondent from focus group three, reported, “it’s been a 
really easy adjustment. I don’t think I’ve had any problems.” Nevertheless, 
when conversations turned to issues with German culture, Mark contributed, 
For me, the bureaucracy is baffling here, and incredibly frustrating - 
especially at the beginning, when you have to register in several different 
offices. You wait in line to get a number, then you finally get a number 
after 45 minutes, and then you wait for another two hours, to speak 
with someone who is usually quite rude (M3: Mark, undergraduate, 
taking courses in a full immersion program, abroad for one year). 


Mark’s quote regarding his heightened level of frustration in dealing with 
German protocol for university registration belies a heightened stress, and a 
rocky transition that he failed to report when asked directly about his level of 
stress. Mark later continues that a month into his stay in Berlin, he returned 
from shopping to find that the front wheel of his bike had been stolen. His 
story continues, “I had just gotten here. This was maybe a month after I had 
arrived and that just really sent me over the edge so I was on the U-bahn crying 
with a one-wheeled bike “(M3: Mark). When another student comforts Mark, 
saying that she, too, would have been likely to cry, Mark says in reference to his 
uncharacteristically strong response to the theft, “Yeah, I had just gotten here 
and I was kind of fragile.” Mark’s comments, that he had just arrived and was 
feeling “fragile” and “on edge,” imply that he was dealing with his problems 
under added stress of the transition abroad. 

Discussions of difficulties encountered abroad covered a range of 


30 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


topics from adjustment or transition, to everyday cultural and linguistic 
misunderstanding, to feelings of isolation. In complaining about German 
culture, however, a pattern emerged in which students were able to attribute 
minor cultural and linguistic misunderstandings to cultural differences, or to 
their own misstep, while more egregious culture clashes were attributed to 
Germans and German culture. Students told stories of the former with a mix 
of good humor, and mild embarrassment at their own cultural ignorance. For 
example, at the start of her sojourn abroad, Rebecca was surprised to find that 
stores were generally closed on Sunday. She says, 

I didn’t know everything was going to be closed on Sunday. I arrived 
on a Friday, and we had been traveling for 24 hours, so all we did was 
come [to the institute] pick up the key and go home. On Saturday, we 
walked around and didn’t think to buy tons of food. I guess that if I 
had made a better effort [to meet people at the institute] on Friday, we 
could have eaten something other than crackers and pretzels on Sunday 
(R3: Rebecca, graduate student, taking courses at an English-speaking 
institute, abroad for 2 months). 


In this instance, the threat from Rebecca’s misstep was relatively minor, and 
the consequence was simply that Rebecca and her partner were not able to 
eat anything other than snacks on Sunday. The result is that Rebecca does not 
express frustration at store closures, but assigns responsibility to herself, saying, 
“if I had made more of an effort,” the problem would likely not have arisen. 
From discussions of traffic, bicycle and pedestrian laws, to discussions of grocery 
store etiquette, in the event of minor, short-lived misunderstandings, students 
were likely to assign responsibility either to themselves, or to the intersecting 
of two different cultures. The result of assuming the role of “learner” was that 
students did not stereotype the culture and demonstrated an ability to reflect 
on the situation. 

Yet small misunderstandings may begin to grate over time, particularly 
in the event that students find themselves explicitly corrected by members of 
the target culture. While host nationals are allowed, and encouraged, to be 
brokers of linguistic knowledge, students find it threatening when members of 
the host culture attempt to broker cultural knowledge in the form of behavior 
correction. One respondent reports, 

I’ve noticed that people will try to teach me German words. If I say 
something wrong, they teach me the correct German way of saying it, 
so it’s been a really easy adjustment. I don’t think I’ve had any problems 
(Me3: Melissa). 


31 



Jude Mikal 


Conversely, when the knowledge being brokered through correction is cultural, 
students’ reactions ranged from cold and indifferent, to harsh and accusatory. 
According to one respondent, 

The other day, we were on the train, and a woman was calling us out for 
putting our bikes in a compartment that was allowed to have two bikes 
in it. Well there were exactly two bikes in the compartment so she was 
just talking at us and we just ignored her, and sat there not moving (G3: 
Grant). 

Although it is unclear whether Grant was, in fact, breaking a rule - it should 
be noted that there are often stipulations to rules for bike travel on public 
transportation that Grant may not have been aware of. The cold reaction by 
Grant and his companion do not offer the woman a chance to explain, and 
demonstrate more frustration with the encounter than a willingness to learn 
from it. 

Other encounters brought about much harsher reactions and reflections 
during complaint sessions. One respondent told the following story, 

One of my friends came and she didn’t bring my guest mother a present 
and [as a result, my host mother] was sort of like icy towards us all 
week. I was just like whatever. I don’t really care. I’m like going home 
and I’m probably not going to talk to these guys again. My host mother 
confronted me after my friend left and was like, you know, ‘next time 
you have a friend come they have to bring me a present. I expect it 
because I make you all this food’ - she like toasts us bread - ‘I made all 
this food, this is the least you could do.’ She even still mentions it to 
me over and over and over again and I just find it to be so childish and 
so stupid (T4: Tom). 


Rather than Tom looking upon this as a learning experience, it is clear from 
his reflections that he is externalizing the situation, assigning fault not to his 
misunderstanding of cultural expectations or even personal expectations, but 
to his host mother’s “childish” and “stupid” demands, for appreciation for 
toasting bread. 

The result is that student attitudes toward the larger culture can begin to 
reflect these stereotypical notions of rigidity and aloofness allowing students to 
save face by writing off the culture at large. Says one respondent, 

I think it’s true people do not have a problem to call you out if you’re in 
any way violating a rule. However, if you are within the law but being a 


32 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


complete asshole - breaking things, throwing up, just generally being a 
problem, that’s fine. You’re not doing anything illegal. But if you want 
to cross the street, or if you walk on the grass when you’re not allowed 
to, that is actually against the rules and they will call you out on it (H3: 
Haley, graduate student, research assistant at an international research 
institute, abroad for two years). 

When another student tells a story of being reprimanded for holding a 
door open, while she waited for her friend to add sugar to her coffee, Tom 
responds jokingly, “They were mad because in Germany you’re supposed to be 
insensitive. I think you mixed up cultural sensitivity with cultural insensitivity 
(T4: Tom).” 

The harsh language and insults used above, demonstrate hostility towards 
behavior correction and the brokering of cultural knowledge. Students assign 
cultural stereotypes circumventing not only the learning of the particular 
situation, but the openness to cultural difference required for future learning. 
This assignment of cultural stereotypes may also result in part from students’ 
feelings of isolation from the both home and host cultures. Despite the 
advantage of cultural inlets through the Internet, students often reported 
feeling isolated from the target culture. Many students reported difficulties in 
adjustment, and making friends with Germans. Mark suggests that this may 
be a result of getting older, 

I think the older you get, the harder it becomes to be the foreigner. I 
always compare this experience to the one I had in Argentina when 
I was 17. There I went clubbing three times a week, and within the 
first few months I had 80 numbers in my cell phone. Here at the 
university level everyone is kind of slowed down. They have girlfriends, 
even wives and husbands. So the older you get the more difficult it 
gets to penetrate the society and feel like you actually have good solid 
friendships (M3: Mark). 


In fact, of the 21 students interviewed, only four reported significant 
friendships with members of the target culture: three students were placed 
with German roommates, and one student had a German girlfriend. Similarly, 
though the Internet has brought students into more regular contact with the 
home culture, Erin reports that the Internet does not make up for lack of a 
physical presence, 

It’s hard. I used to know my friends’ schedules just because we lived 
together or because we were always so close. Now my best friend just 


33 



Jude Mikal 


got a job so she’s never home before 11pm and by then it’s the middle 
of the morning here and I’m not awake. Occasionally I try to call her 
cell phone with Skype but she’s always in class so it’s always really 
frustrating. I never know when we can actually talk (E3: Erin). 


Many students expressed similar frustrations about leaving home during times 
of transition in their families. 

Each stressor mentioned above creates a need for each of the hypothesized 
Internet uses. Transition difficulties lay the foundation for use of the Internet 
as a transition device. In response to feelings of isolation from the host culture, 
and feelings of cultural ineptitude students may find themselves searching for 
informational support, as well as resources for gaining access to the target culture 
through cultural events. Finally, fears of isolation from the home culture - and 
of being left behind - may be calmed by access to online resources which help 
students maintain personal and professional obligations in the home country, 
though they are physically located abroad. 


Discussion 

The purpose of the present study was to examine changes to the traditional 
study abroad experience given changing notions of transition brought about 
by widespread use of advanced communication technologies. Using data 
collected from in-depth focus group interviews with 21 American students 
studying abroad in Germany over 200 pages of text were generated from which 
three themes emerged. Data suggests that students are using the Internet to: 
1) access emotional and embedded support to facilitate the transition into the 
new culture; 2) quickly and efficiently establish daily routines in the target 
culture; and 3) fulfill professional and social obligations back in the United 
States while abroad. Nevertheless, the results indicate that students are still 
suffering from acculturative stress, and suggest the possibility that the Internet 
may risk transforming the traditional notion of cultural exploration, into one 
of cultural consumerism. 

Implications for students and short-term migrants in general are largely 
positive. Focus group interview data demonstrated that the Internet is an 
effective way of seeking out emotional support from the home country that can 
help migrants to navigate a difficult transition abroad. The Internet provided 
a medium through which to maintain important relationships in the home 
culture, while also providing a continuity in behavior expectations, language 
and identity through embedded social support networks which students 
were able to carry abroad with them. Furthermore, students reported using 


34 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


the Internet to connect with co-nationals, providing a network of support 
comprised of other foreigners likely to understand the difficulties of living 
abroad. Often students were able to find important information online in their 
native language, and where such information was not available in English, 
students were able to find resources to help them interpret the target language 
either completely such as with programs like Google Translate, or in part 
through online dictionaries. 

Support seeking online was not limited to providing a link to the home 
culture and language, however. Through the Internet, students were able to 
find inlets into the target culture, and form relationships with host nationals, 
as well. Students reported using the Internet to find cultural activities based 
on their interests, thereby expanding possibilities for social interaction and 
the formation of cross-cultural friendships. Students are no longer required to 
make do with everyday encounters in order to develop superficial linguistic and 
cultural proficiency. Seeking out cultural events has the potential to provide a 
solid foundation for stronger friendships based on a common interest and puts 
students in touch with the realia which constitutes the experiential learning in 
study abroad. Students are exhibiting this same agency in the establishment of 
their daily lives abroad. Internet search and mapping programs are allowing 
students to exercise independence in everything from locating apartments, to 
locating corner grocery stores, fitness centers and shopping malls. Study abroad 
is responsible for providing students a means to study at a foreign institution 
through a pre-established network of support. Today, the Internet similarly 
reduces the risks of living abroad by providing the same pre-established 
network of support for everything outside of the university. 

Nevertheless, the verdict on Internet use is complicated given the dual 
goal of alleviating stress, while also creating an environment conducive to 
learning. The result is a tale that is far more cautionary. The lengthening of 
the initial transition period suggests less time actively engaged with the target 
culture, while attending to responsibilities back in the home culture during 
study abroad prevents full immersion and lengthens the transition out of the 
host culture. Linda Stone, a blogger for the Huffington Post, comments on the 
constant straddling of cyber and real space saying that students are engaging 
in a “continuous partial attention.” According to Stone, continuous partial 
attention refers to the desire to remain a constant active node. As a result, 
engagement in any one activity is limited due to constant attending to several 
other, potentially more interesting activities. Several programs have exacerbated 
this problem by shortening the amount of time students are spending abroad 
making for very superficial cultural engagement, and leaving students and 
administrators equally dissatisfied with the results. 


35 



Jude Mikal 


The Internet also risks changing the nature of study abroad from process 
to product. When transactions could be conducted online, students were 
likely to see the face-to-face counterpart transactions as pointless. In other 
words, students asked why they would visit a ticket agent in a train station, 
when the same transaction could be accomplished in a fraction of the time 
online. The problem with such logic is that the goal is not the train ticket. 
Rather, the goal is the cultural and language skill set exercised in the purchase 
of the ticket. Data show that students’ interest in speed and efficiency have 
changed the focus from long-term goals like cultural learning, to short-term 
goals like ticket purchases. It is the shift toward more cultural than functional 
goals that distinguishes study abroad from tourism. This switch in focus has 
enabled students to rapidly and efficiently integrate into the target culture. 
Unfortunately, where it may now take only several days to learn how to 
physically navigate a city, students lack sufficient cultural knowledge to set up 
a life that reflects the values of the culture in which they are living. Students 
therefore set up the life abroad that they had envisioned back in the United 
States and that reflect American values. 

The establishment of a daily routine that fails to account for the values 
of the host culture may be a symptom of a larger problem. It is possible that 
the continuous engagement with the home culture through the Internet is 
“normalizing” American behavior such that students’ frame of reference never 
changes. Part of the study abroad experience is students’ shedding of their 
ethnocentric worldview, in order to adopt a more international perspective. 
If students continue to create an insular world in which America is the norm 
and all other countries constitute a deviation, then students’ worldview is 
unlikely to change. Evidence of this ethnocentrism can be seen in the results 
section on acculturative stress where some students demonstrated an attitude 
of entitlement and some exaggerated notions of cultural difference, both of 
which stand in direct opposition to the goals of study abroad. 

Where normative theories of intercultural adjustment are concerned, 
the present study offers some new and exciting insights. Evidence suggests 
that the Internet is smoothing out previous abrupt transitions into and out 
of the target culture, indicating that it may no longer be relevant to refer to a 
culture “shock.” Students are no longer affronted by the host culture, but able 
to choose their degree of involvement, etreating to a more familiar identity 
affirming embedded or socio-emotional support when cultural encounters 
become too difficult. Berry’s model of acculturation strategies / acculturation 
attitudes may also have to be reanalyzed given such ready access to members 
of the home culture via the Internet. It may no longer be relevant to discuss 
an “abandonment” of the home culture in any but the most exceptional of 


36 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


cases - as immigrants and sojourners have unrestricted access to co-nationals 
online. Finally, acculturative stress in general may undergo a shift from entirely 
undesirable, to occasionally desirable. If students are failing to encounter 
stress, or are fleeing to the safety of online interaction when faced with stress, 
it may indicate that students are seeking justification for culturally insensitive 
behaviors. American behavior becomes the standard, and students fail to adapt 
to behavioral expectations within the target culture, leading to a decrease in 
cultural learning. Rather than buffering students from stressful encounters, the 
next step for administrators may be to encourage students to confront stresses, 
in order to adapt and learn. 


Conclusion 

Internet communication has changed the traditional study abroad 
experience by providing students with additional options: students choose 
where, when and through whom to seek support; but also where and when 
to engage in the target culture. Further research on the topic of Internet 
mediated social support during study abroad should aim to quantify the 
trade-off between hours spent online and hours spent actively engaging with 
members of the target culture. Future research should also consider the use of 
quantitative data to examine the link between hours spent online and stress 
level during study abroad by considering whether the Internet represents active 
or avoidance coping (Roth, S., & Cohen, L.J., 1986). Finally, longitudinal 
data would help uncover an Internet use trajectory to determine the extent to 
which Internet use follows a regular pattern, and help administrators to spot 
deviations that may indicate abnormal Internet dependence. 


References 

Adler, P. (1975). The Transitional Experience: An alternative view of Culture 
Shock. Journal of Ffumanistic Psychology, 15(4), 13-23. 

Baym, N.K., Zhang, Y.B., & Lin, M. (2004). Social interactions across media. 

New Media & Society, 6, 299-318. 

Berry, J. (1997). Immigration, Acculturation, and Adaptation. Applied 
Psychology: An International Review, 46(1), 5-68. 

Bolger, N., Zuckerman, A., & Kessier, R. (2000). Invisible support and 
adjustment to stress. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 
953-961. 


37 



Jude Mikal 


Burke, M., Kraut, R., and Williams, D. (2010). Social use of computer-mediated 
communication by adults on the autism spectrum. ACM CSCW 2010: 
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, 425-434. 

Church, A. (1982). Sojourner Adjustment. Psychological Bulletin, 91, 540-572. 

Cobb, S. (1976). Social support as a moderator of life stress. Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 38(5), 300-314. 

Cohen, S. & Wills, T. (1985). Stress, Social Support, and the Buffering 
Hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 98(2), 310-357. 

Dimmick, J., Ramirez, J., Wang, T., & Lin, S. (2007). ‘Extending society’: 
the role of personal networks and gratification-utilities in the use of 
interactive communication media. New Media Society, 9, 795-810. 

Gorka, B. & Niesenbaum, R. (2001). Beyond the Language Requrirement: 
Interdisciplinary Short-Term Study-Abroad Programs in Spanish. 
Hispania, 84 (1), 100-109. 

Gullahorn, J. T„ & Gullahorn, J. E. (1963). An Extension of the U-Curve 
Hypothesis. Journal of Social Issues, 19(3), 33-47. 

Hammer, M. (1981). Social Supports, Social Networks, and Schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 7(1), 45-57. 

Hampton, K., & Wellman, B. (2003). Neighboring in Netville: How the 
Internet Supports Community and Social Capital in a Wired Suburb. 
City & Community, 2(4), 277-311. 

Kraut, R., M. Patterson, V. Lundmark, S. Kiesler, T. Mukhopadhyay 
and W. Scherlis (1998) ‘Internet Paradox: a Social Technology that 
Reduces Social Involvement and Psychological Well-being?’, American 
Psychologist 53(9): 1017-31. 

Leung, L. (2007). Stressful Life Events, Motives for Internet Use, and Social 

Support Among Digital Kids. Cyberpsychology and Behavior, 10, 204-214. 

Lysgaard, S. (1955). Adjustment in a Foreign Society: Norwegian Fulbright 
Grantees Visiting the United States. International Social Science 
Bulletin, 7, 45-51. 

Malik, S. & Coulson, N. (2008). Computer mediated infertility support- 
groups: An exploratory study of online experiences. Patient Education 
and Counseling, 105-113. 

McKenna, K. Y., & Green, A. S. (2002). Virtual Group Dynamics. Group 
Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice. Special Issue: Groups and 
Internet, 6(1), 116-127. 

McKenna, K. Y., Green, A. S., & Gleason, M. E. (2002). Relationship 
formation on the Internet: What’s the big attraction? Journal of Social 
Issues. Special Issue: Consequences of the Internet for self and society: 

Is social life being transformed? 58(1), 9-31. 


38 



Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad 


McKinlay, N. J., Pattison, M., & Gross, H. (1996). An Exploratory 

Investigation of the Effects of a Cultural Orientation Programme on the 
Psychological Well-Being of International University Students. Eligher 
Education, 31(3), 379-395. 

Oberg, K. (I960). Culture shock: adjustment to new cultural environments. 
Practical Anthropology, 7, 177-182. 

Papacharissi, Z., & Rubin, A. (2000). Predictors of Internet Use. Journal of 
Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 44 (2), 175-196. 

Putnam, D. E. (2000). Initiation and maintenance of online sexual 
compulsivity: Implications for assessment and treatment. 
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 3(4), 553-563. 

Raake, J., & Bonds-Raake, J. (2008). MySpace and Facebook: Applying 
the Uses and Gratifications Theory to Exploring Friend-Networking Sites. 
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 11 (2), 169-174. 

Robinson, J. P, Kestnbaum, M., Neustadtl, A., & Alvarez, A. (2000). Mass 
media use and social life among Internet users. Social Science Computer 
Review. Special Issue: Survey and statistical computing in new 
millennium, 18(4), 490-501. 

Roth, S., & Cohen, L.J. (1986). Approach, Avoidance, and Coping with Stress. 
American Psychologist, 813-819. 

Shaw, L.H., & Grant, L.M. (2002). In Defense of the Internet: The 
relationship between Internet Communication and Depression, 
Loneliness, Self-esteem and Perceived Social Support. Cyberpsychology, 
5(2), 157-171. 

Stone, L. (2009J. Continuous Partial Attention. Retrieved on February 21, 
2010 from http://lindastone.net/qa/continuous-partial-attention/. 

Subrahmanyam, K., Reich, S., Waechter, N. & Espinoza, G. (2008). Online 
and offline social networks: use of social networking sites by emerging 
adults. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 29, 420-433. 

Thoits, P.A. (1985). Social Support and Psychological Well-Being: Theoretical 
Possibilities. In Sarason, I.G. & Sarason, B.R. (Eds.), Social Support: 
Theory, Research, and Applications. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
Martinus Nijhof. 

Turner, R. J., Frankel, B.G., & Levin, D.M. (1983). Social support. 

Conceptualization, measurement, and implications for mental health. 
Research in Community and Mental Health, 3, 67-111. 

Ward, C., & Kennedy, A. (1994). Acculturation strategies, psychological 
adjustment, and sociocultural competence during cross-cultural 
transitions. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 18 (3), 
329-343. 


39 



Jude Mikal 


Wethington, E. & Kessler, R. (1986). Perceived Support, Received Support 
and Adjustment to Stressful Life Events. Journal of Health and Social 
Behavior, 27(1), 78-89. 


40 



