DOCUMENT RESUK£ 



ED 306 860 HE 022 584 

TITLE Minorities Access to Research Careers. 

INSTITUTION American Association of State Colleges and 

Universities, Washington, D.C.; City Univ. of New 
Yorlc, N.y. Hunter Coll. 
SPONS AGENCY National Inst, of Mental Health (DHEW) , Rockville, 
m. 

Aug 89 
442457 

lOp.j This report is one of a group gathered by the 
AASCU/ERIC Hodel Programs Inventory Project, funded 
by the Fund for the Improvement of Postsecondary 
Education to the American Association of State 
Colleges and Universities, in collaboration with the 
ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education. For related 
documents, see HE 022 565-617, HE 022 619-643 and HE 
022 645-659. 

Reports - Descriptive (141) 
MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

* Access to Education; Alcohol Abuse; American 
Indians; Asian Americans; Blacks; *Car^er Awareness; 
College Students; Drug Abuse; Females; Graduate 
Study; Higher Education; Hispanic Americans; Mental 
Health; *Minority Groups; Models; Program 
Descriptions; Research Methodology; *Research Skills; 
State Colleges 

*AASCU ERIC Model Programs Inventory Project; «City 
University of New York Hunter College; Minorities 
Access to Research Careers Program 



The Minorities Access to Researc>\ Careers (MARC) 
program at Hunter College, New York is designed to provide an 
in-depth 2-year research training experience for minority students in 
order to prepare them fo»- graduate school and eventual research 
careers in alcohol, drug abuse, and mental health fields. The target 
groups include Blacks, Hispanics, Asian Americans, and Native 
Americans, and most participants are women. Specific goals associated 
with this program include: to offer a curriculum familiarizing MARC 
students with the basic assumptions, principles, and research 
methodology of their major disciplines; to provide the necessary 
skills to evaluate critically a body of literature in a particular 
research area; and to enable them to design, conduct, and 
statistically evaluate experiments that test specific hypotheses in a 
particular research area. A full 2-year commitment to the program is 
required, and during these 2 years, students receive mentoring from a 
researcher in anthropology, psychology, and/or sociology. Ten schools 
in the United States offer MARC programs, five of them historically 
black colD'^^es. A copy of the spring colloquium schedule and an 
announcement for a discussion group on career psychology of minority 
scholars are appended. (SM) 



PUB DATE 

GRANT 

NOTE 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



ABSTRACT 



sO 

o 



Title of Project: 

Minorities Access to Research Career 

Name of Institution: 
Hunter Col 1 ege 

Depar t ment s of Ant hr opol ogy , Psychol oyy , So>- i ol ogy 

Pr o jec t C on tact I n for ma 1 1 on : 
Michel e A- Paludi, Ph.D. 
Depar t ment of Psychol ogy 
Hunter Col 1 ege 
695 Par^ Avenue 
New Yor^ , NY 10021 

212-772-5681 



Go^ don E^ar r , Ph . D . 

Department of Psy»:hol ogy 

Hunter Col 1 ege 

695 Par^ Avenue 

New Yor ^ , NY 10021 

212-772-5610 



Funding Agency: 

National Institute of Mental Health 

Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Menbal Health Administration 

Grant Number: 
442457 



Date: 



1981~cur r ent 



N 



CUNY, Huater_Coll_ 



us DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

OHtce of Educational Reseafch and improvemenf 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 



This document has been reproduced as 
received from ihe person or organi2afton 
originating it 

r Mmof changes have oeer made to improve 
reproduction quaiit> 

• Points of view or jomtons stated in this docu 
ment do not n-^'cessanly represent official 
OFRl positior^ or policy 



ERIC 



2 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



AASCU/ERIC Model Programs Inventory Project 



The AASCU/ERIC Model Programs Inventory is a two-year project seeking 
to establish and test a model system for collecting and disseminating 
information on model programs at AASCU-member institutions — 375 of the 
public four-year colleges and universities in the United States. 

The four objectives of the project are: 

0 To increase the information on model programs available to 
all institutions through the ERIC system 

0 To encourage the use of the ERIC system by AASCU 
institutions 

0 To improve AASCU's ability to know about, and share 
information on, activities at member institutions, and 

0 To test a model for collaboration with ERIC that other national 
organizations might adopt. 



The AASCU/ERIC Model Programs Inventory Project is funded with a grant 
from the Fund for the Improvement of Postsecondary Education to the 
American Association of State Colleges and Universities, in collaboration 
with the ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education at The George 
Washington University. 



Abstract 



The objectives of the MAPC program is to provide an in-d'^pth two 
year research training experience for students in order to 
prepare them for graduate school and eventual research careers in 
alcohol, drug abuse, and mental health fields. Recruitment of 
applicants for MAPC scholars is from a population that includes 
Hunter College sophomores and City University of New York 
community college sophomores. Students majoring in Anthropology, 
Psychology, and Sociology participate in this p>"ogram. The 
specific goals associated with this program include: 

1. to provide a curriculum to familiarize MAPC student*5 
with the basic assumptions, principles, and research methodology 
of their major di'cxplines; 

2. to provide an optional interdisciplinary minor to 
familiarize more students with differences and similarities of 
the various research strategies in the participating disciplines 
and to providG them with a broader perspective than that a».:quired 
with any one of the disciplines alone; 

3- to provide the MAPC students with the si- ills necessary 
to evaluate critically a body of literature in a partir^lar 
research area; 

4- to enable MAPC student tci design, conduct, and 
statistically evaluate experiments that t(-?st specific hypti^thosi <3 
in a particular research area; 

5. to train MAPC students to communicate their exper i mt^-nta] 
findings both in an appropriatci written format and by oral 
pr eserit at i on in Honors seminar s, at pr o f essi onal niee^t x ngb, and in 
professional journal s; 

6. to provide MAPC studeTitr^ vnth specialized seminars and 
colloquia conducted by leading minority researchi^rs »:in topics 
relating to alcoholism, drug abuse, and mental health; 

7. to provide MAF-'C students wibh "hands on" resc?ar«:h 
experience by having them directly participate in research under 
the sponsorship of a mentor during the two years in the program. 
In addition, ten weeks during the summer is spent in a different 
laboratory outside the home campus; 

8. to provide an intersessiun "mini cour<::>e" of ir.fc'^veral 
weel-s' duration taught by a leading minority scholar. Chosen 
topics are uf broad interest to the students and inv»-«lve a 
critique tuf research m(?thodology in a particul^^^r arr?a. 



ERLC 



4 



Int r odui-i i en 



The Minorities Access to Research Careers F'rogramy supported 
by the Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental Health Administration 
provides undergraduate minority studpnti> who are interested in 
pursuing research careers with tkn,^ research experience, 
mentoring, and training that will allow them to pursue these 
careers. This program began in 1979 and is funded by the 

National Institute of Mental Health. The target groups of the 
MARC program include Blai:^<■s, Hispanics, Asian American, and 
Native Americans. Most of the participants in this program are 
women . 

MARC scholars are selected at participating colleges thmugh 
a competitive process. Selection is based on avaluation of each 
applicant's grade point average, recommendations from faculty 
members, demonstrated interest in a research career at the Ph.D. 
level, and a personal interview. Students apply to the MARC 
program during the spring semester prior to their junior year in 
college. A full two year commitment to the MARC program is 

required. During these two years MARC students receive mentoring 
from a researcher in anthropology, psychcJ ogy , and/or sociol'jgy 
who provides research and training. 

Ten schools in the United States off^-r MARC programs. Five 
of these colleges are historically E{lac^ c colleges. All of thr^ 
ten schools serve populations of Blac^, Hispanic, Asian, and/or 
Native American students. Each program i<3 interdisciplinary. 
Schools participating in this program are listed below. 

Atlanta University Center 

Cal 1 f or ni a St at e Uni v er S3 t y- Domi nquez Hi 1 1 5. 

Grambling State University 

Howard Uni ver si t y 

Hunter Ci:«l 1 ege 

Jac^ son State Uni vers j. ty 

New Me.Aico Highlands University 

SUNY/College at Old West bury 

Tuskegee University 

Wayne State University ^ 

Er|c 

^ mmmm^mi Hupter Col 1 BQE begaH its program in 1981 and it currently 



funds nine MARC scholars. Currt^ntly Michele Paludi i^s its 
Project Coordinator and Gordon B/Arr the Project Director. In 
addition, four individuals also comprise the Ster-aring Committee? 
of the Program: Pamela Stone Cain (Department of Sociology), 
Darlen.3 C. DeFour (.Depar tme?nt «jf Psychology), Charles Green 
(Department of Sociology), and Louise Lennihan 'Department of 
Ant hr opol ogy ') . 

MARC students at Hunter College have par ti'^ipated in several 
national and regional conventions, including: Annual MARC 
symposium, Annual Hunter College Psychology Convention. Annual 
Eastern Psychological Association Convention. Students have also 
published with their mentors in journals such as Amer ican_ Jour nal^ 

Another objective of the MARC program is to promote-' 
involvement of as many students as possible with the program. Jo 
additional categories of me.'nbership have thus been established: 
MAPC Associates and MARC Affiliates. MARC Ass<:'Ciates are 
students (1) who are academically qualified to be Scholars but 
for whom there are no stipends available or (2*) are still in 
their first year or are sophomores but show promise of being 
mainstreamed into the program when they reach their junior year, 
or (3) are academically qualified but do not meet c 1 1 1 izc-^nshi p 
requirements. MARC Affiliates are students not defter ibed by the 
above information who wish to attend program events, receive 
guidance from program personnel, but do not receive laboratory 
placement or follow the MARC curriculum. 

Graduates of Hunter's MARC Program have are pursuing 
graduate careers at Syracuse University, the City University of 
New York Graduate Center, University •:• f Maryland, Yale 
University, and University of Michigan. Fields of specialization 
incl ude cul tur al an t hr opol ogy, m(?di c i ne, demogr aphy , mo I ecul ar 
genet i cs, bi opsychol ogy , ant hr opol ogy. 



o 



ERIC 



0^§'i.!llt2.t.l*2Q_'2l-E!L!:iSlL<2!l] 

Target Population: Minority Undergraduate Students 

Focus of F'rogram: To provide extensive research e^Nperience tri 

prepare students for a career at the Ph. D. 
1 evel . 

Staffing of Program: Project Director, Project Coordinator, 

Steer i ng Commi tt ee f-^oco Departments of 
Ant hr opol og> , Psychol ogy , and Soc i ol ogy 



Funding Information: National Institute of Ment'31 Health 



ERIC 



Appendi ces 



ERJC 



^ ' MARC 



TO: MARC Conrxinity 

FROM: Michele Paludi 

Sprinq Colloquium Schedule 
1989 

All meetings will take place in Room 626 Hunter Nortii from 2-4* 
February 

- 15 ~" Organizational Meeting and Discussion of MARC Convention 
>iar£h 

' 1 Minority Wcren'r Mental Health Issues 

Participants Include: 

Rosa Gil, Associaticxi of Hispanic Mental Health 
Professionals 

Doris Koo, Asian Arrericans for Equal \ty 



2^5 Presentation for MARC Convention 

2^ Dean Harrison, OM{ Graduate Center Office of Equal Enplcyment 

Opportunity, " How to apply to graduate school 

^ril 

' " 5 Workshop on Graduate School Applicaticns 



Participants : 

Lcu:se Lennihan 
Charles Green 
Gordcai Barr 
Myr.iCA Fader 

2S Career Psvdhology Issues 

Participants include faculty and MARC graduates 

t'lay 

10 Recepticxi and End of Year Celebration 



ERLC 



M 1 NMP ] T 1 ES Al C E< T n PE f^FApr ! I L Apr £h""] PF'-PuP -M^l 



i iUNTEP C QL LE CP 



.<nr'Oun»:»e - 



IN OUP Om '^'GICFS: r APEEr' Prr/rimLDGV DP hilMDF'ITY r^CHOLAf'-n 



A I" 'iinvoi- -i'.^l 1 on H»"»ur w l I i 



) } e^m Del gaclLi 
F''ubv T i.ann 



Place,: f.J'f. Hunbev r^cr i h 



Fhf'? Hunter P'j11<ge i"« imnn iru I: y i^^ Lc« ai l;^eri J 



For mor e in for ma t i un , c on L f^c t : 
Michele Paludi 
77:' 

Mar 1 e Br i qnijl 



ERIC • ^ 



