DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 463 907 

AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 
ABSTRACT 

Indigenous science knowledge and its integration into school curricula and 
describes current efforts to bridge Western and Native science. "A Yupiaq 
World View: Implications for Cultural, Educational and Technological 
Adaptation in a Contemporary World" (Angayuqaq Oscar Kawagley) documents 
Yupiaq practices in a fish camp and how they relate to science education in 
Yupiaq schools. "Look to the Mountain: An Ecology of Indigenous Education" 
(Greg Cajete) presents a science curriculum development model reflecting 
Native philosophy and culture. "The Foundational Values of Cultural Learning" 
(Kallen M. Martin) describes the Ahkwesahsne Science and Math Project, which 
bases curricula in Iroquoian traditional oral literature and Aboriginal 
number systems. In "Lighting the Seventh Fire," F. David Peat, a Western 
physicist, chronicles his awakening to Indigenous science knowledge and its 
spiritual aspects. Peat sees advanced mathematics as a common language that 
crosses cultures. "Red Earth, White Lies: Native Americans and the Myth of 
Scientific Fact" (Vine Deloria, Jr.) critiques Western science's narrow 
worldview, which disregards alternate explanations of reality and promotes 
racism. "Redefining Science Education for Aboriginal Students" (Madeleine 
Maclvor) , "Bridging Native and Western Science" (Pam Colorado), "Indian 
Givers" (Jack Weatherford) , and "Whose Science Whose Knowledge" (Sandra 
Harding) address curriculum development, the relevance of Indigenous science 
to environmental concerns, and Indigenous contributions in medicine and 
agriculture. Super Saturday, a summer project of the Saskatoon Tribal Council 
and the University of Saskatchewan, is based on a Hawaiian model. Na Pua 
No'eau included teacher, student, and parent activities that integrated 
Native Hawaiian culture, language, handicrafts, history, and knowledge of the 
sea and sailing. The Saskatchewan project incorporates western science, 
Indigenous knowledge, and Native building design. (SV) 



RC 023 381 

Settee, Priscilla 

Indigenous Knowledge in the Sciences and a Practical 
Application in the Super Saturday Project. 

2000-05-00 

21p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Canadian 
Indigenous and Native Studies Association (CINSA) (Edmonton, 
Alberta, Canada, May 28-31, 2000) . 

For full text: 

http : //www . ualberta . ca/~nativest/ CINSA/ CDf iles /papers /Settee 
.pdf. 

Information Analyses (070) -- Reports - Descriptive (141) -- 

Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; * American Indian Education; 

Cultural Exchange; *Culturally Relevant Education; 
*Curriculum Development; Elementary Secondary Education; 
Foreign Countries; Mathematics Education; *Science Education 
Hawaii; * Indigenous Knowledge Systems; Saskatchewan 



This paper reviews books and research papers concerned with 




Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



Indigenous Knowledge in the Sciences and a Practical 
Application in the Super Saturday Project 

For the Canadian Indigenous and Native Studies Association 

May 28-31,2000 

by Priscilla Settee 



been granted By LHAS 




y 



) s. department of education 

of Educational Research and Improvement 

"■‘VS'SS'"'""" 

rssw 

ginatmg it. 

nor changes have been made to .mprove 
production quality. - 

ffSrM» , 5SSSSS 

£Rl position or policy. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



i 



/ *' 



Indigenous Knowledge in the Sciences and a Practical Application in the 
Super Saturday Project , for the Canadian Indigenous and Native 
Studies Association, May 28 - 31, 2000 by Priscilla Settee (copyright) 

Several articles, research papers and books, have been written by 
Indigenous scholars about the Indigenous science knowledge base of 
Indigenous peoples. While the knowledge base is growing, more research 
is urgently required, especially to help future students and youth get a sense 
of the wealth of knowledge which exists within their communities. This 
paper reviews some of those books and then describes current projects that 
attempt to overcome the problems identified. 

Indigenous Knowledge 

A Yupiaq World View: Implications for Cultural, Educational and 
Technological Adaptation in a Contemporary World by Angayuqaq Oscar 
Kawagley examines some of the cultural and educational implications when 
two cultures meet. This study takes place in a remote Yupiaq village in 
southwestern Alaska. More specifically the study is of the Yupiit Nation and 
its school system. Kawagley, a Yupiaq, documents Yupiaq practices in a 
traditional fish camp and how those practices relate to science education in 
Yupiaq schools. Kawagley utilizes participant-observer research methods, a 
common method for data gathering. Kawagley describes the Yupiaq World 
view as a cognitive map for making sense of our world where care is given 
for maintaining balance between the human, natural, and spiritual realms, 
thereby creating a sense of harmony. 

Kawagley uses a tetrahedral metaphor to represent the 
interrelationship among humans, nature, and the supernatural in the Yupiaq 

oq world view. A delicate balance is maintained through constant 

co • 

0*0 • 

CN) » 

C3 *. 

<erJc 



3 



2 



communication between the three realms. Kawagley chose as his research 
setting the Yupiaq fish camp, community and school. He calls the fish camp 
a cornucopia of traditional and modem technologies. Kawagley feels that it 
is a mistake to exclude ordinary people whose experience comes from 
common sense, casual empiricism, or thoughtful speculation. Through his 
study Kawagley shows the process his people used in order to make a good 
life for themselves and their community. 

Kawagley examines all aspects of production within the research 
setting. How weather is predicted how fish is obtained, prepared, and stored 
are considered. The Native diet and plants which are used for medicine and 
healing are also considered. Kawagley examines old and modem 
technology such as transportation and aids for food production. All are 
considered applications of Indigenous science and technology. He 
concludes that Yupiaq people survived by asking questions, observing, 
experimenting, memorizing, applying data, and using available resources to 
develop their technology. 

Look to the Mountain: An Ecology of Indigenous Education by Greg 
Cajete is a book about Indigenous perspectives in education. In the chapter 
"Indigenous Science: Seven Orientations of Environmental Knowledge," 
Cajete explains that ethnoscience is a Western terminology useful for 
describing some of the key elements of Indigenous science. The separation 
between science and ethnoscience represents a dilemma that has been 
associated with the orienting, teaching, and learning of science by primarily 
non-Westem learners. In most Western cultures, ethnoscience is seen as 
cultural while science is seen as acultural, an idea which has alienated many 
Indigenous learners from science. Because many Indigenous students have 
been alienated from learning Western science and because Indigenous 




3 



science is neither acknowledged or validated, students have been excluded 
from science type professions. Cajete presents a remarkable model for 
curriculum development which is reflective of Aboriginal philosophy and 
which is based on seven orientations (organized around: a Center, the four 
directions, Below and Above. Students begin with the Center place of 
creation and learning through self. Students learn the nature of creativity by 
learning to be creative through journal writing, making art, creative 
encounters with Nature and researching creative expression in Indigenous 
cultures. Through this process students find their own Center and form the 
foundation for the process of learning and creation. The four directions 
provide a framework for researching other forms of knowledge. The East 
orients the student to the natural philosophy which guides them to 
Indigenous knowledge. The East is where students prepare for their 
personal journey of learning. The West represents sustenance, social well- 
being, and community. Through the West students understand the human 
community and its reflection in themselves. The South is the world of 
plants, fertility, healing, and wholeness. Here students understand their 
relationship and dependence on the plants and the natural world. The North 
is associated with animals and human relationships. Here students are 
introduced to concepts from wildlife biology, ecology, mythology, and 
theology. Students establish a direct personal relationship with the animal 
world through the form of making animal masks, drawing animals, and 
working with animals. Myth and art bring to life the relationship between 
people and animals. The Below is the domain of the Earth Mother and the 
elements of earth, wind, fire, water, and air. Students are introduced to 
natural phenomena such as the winds, mountains, seas, forests, lakes, rivers, 
plains, and deserts. The seventh orientation is the Above and the domain of 



ERIC 



5 



4 



the Celestial Father, the Great Mystery, the Sun, Moon, and Stars. The 
Cosmos is the grand expression of the creative centre that is within each of 
us. Students see themselves as part of a greater story of creation. 

"The Foundational Values of Cultural Learning" by Kallen M. Martin 
describes the Ahkwesahsne Science and Math Pilot Project which is under 
the auspices of the Mohawk Board of Education. The reserve of 
Ahkwesahsne is split among the provinces of Ontario and Quebec and the 
state of New York. Ahkwesahsne has developed a curriculum which relies 
on the principles of three foundational aspects of Iroquoian culture, the 
Great Law of Peace, the Iroquoian Creation Story, and the Thanksgiving 
Address. The curriculum was created as a response to the high failure rate 
of Iroquoian students and is based on values which honour Mohawk culture 
and science. It teaches students who they are as a people. The co-ordinator 
of the project, Brenda LaFrance defines science as a way of coming to 
knowing. LaFrance says that it was important to look at dreams, visions, 
and the prophecies and information that they have come to know as being 
Mohawk. The information is then compared to Western science. Creation 
stories were incorporated into the math, science, and language arts 
components of the curriculum. The curriculum begins at the ground level 
and then goes up to the sky world. Circles and lines, earth, water, trees, 
animals and birds, agriculture and food, medicine, the cosmos, and energy, 
constitute the unit theme. 

The Tree of Peace is discussed in the unit on trees. The symbolism of 
the great white pine in Iroquoian stories is discussed. Principles of peace, 
honor, and a good mind, are instilled in students. The project ensures use of 
Elders and spiritual leaders in the classroom. Camping trips enable students 
to track animals and to identify them by their droppings. Students also find 




6 



5 



out about Indian medicines, herbs, and edible plants. The water unit enables 
students to look at history, geography, and language arts, as well as the 
impact of industrial pollutions and its impact on the seventh generation. 
Bird studies include local birds habitat, coloring, breeding, wingspan, and 
plumage. No other textbook provides the information on the alteration of the 
environment along the St. Lawrence River. 

The mathematics curriculum includes Aboriginal number systems, 
origin of number words, limits of counting, mathematics thought of the 
Iroquoian agricultural and hunting society, Mesoamerican geometry, the 
Mayan concept of zero, Incan and Mayan calendrics, computational 
techniques, and notation devices. The use of Indigenous cultural values and 
concepts has shown an amazing increase in student self-esteem and it makes 
students better prepared for higher education. 

In Lighting the Seventh Fire , F. David Peat (a brilliant physicist) 
writes about the spiritual ways, healing, and science of the Native American. 
Peat has written thirteen other books about science. This book was written 
after Peat's illustrious career in science, and after he had spent much time 
with Aboriginal philosophers, teachers, and elders. After many years as a 
scientist engaged in theoretical research, Peat began thinking about new 
ways and new ideas when he was struck by the way society had become 
separated from nature. Peat recalls looking at Touch the Earth by T.C. 
McLuhan and being struck by the images of Indigenous faces which spoke 
to him in a hauntingly beckoning manner. Shortly after, he was called by a 
man who was to become a lifelong friend and teacher, Leroy Littlebear, 
inviting him to an Aboriginal ceremony. That began Peat's journey to the 
richness, power, and subtlety of the Indigenous approach to knowing and 
being. 




7 



6 



Lighting the Seventh Fire chronicles Peat's journey to the world of 
Indigenous science and knowledge. Peat claims that it is not so much an 
attempt to explain traditional knowledge in the light of Western science so 
much as it is an acknowledgment of another way of knowing and his attempt 
to dialogue with another world view. Peat relates his experience at a Sun 
Dance, acknowledging first and foremost the womens' important role in 
bringing together the conditions and energy for the Sun Dance to begin. For 
Peat, the Sundance experience is an example of two cultures clashing — the 
Western and the Aboriginal. Western scientists do not accept Aboriginal 
science world views as authentic and valid, but measure them through a 
Western world view. Western paradigms, through their positions of power, 
deny any authenticity to Indigenous knowledge. Aboriginal knowledge 
becomes labelled as myths, legends, superstitions, and fairy stories. In 
Western science almost all knowledge is learned out of books however in 
the Indigenous coming to knowing, everything is learned thought listening 
and experiencing as well as relating and respecting other living entities, 
including natural resources such as rocks, water, trees, and the land. Peat 
talks about the quality of silence and role of Elders, dreams, visions, and 
clowns. 

Stories of creation are central to all Indigenous peoples and are at the 
centre of their being. This fact presents a clash of values when compared to 
the stories of conquest, that Western falsification and projection history 
teaches. Peat finds error in many of the historical projections such as the 
Bering Strait theory, wherein Indigenous people supposedly crossed into the 
new world through the Bering Strait. Western science/history does not teach 
about the Indigenous holocaust wherein millions have died since contact 
with Europeans. Peat states that 90 to 95 percent of the people perished. 




8 



7 



Nor does Western Science teach about Indigenous knowledge of plants and 
their contributions to Western medicines. Western knowledge fails to teach 
about the sacredness of all life forms. It fails to teach the facts that plants 
are important not only because of their medicinal qualities, but because of 
their important relationship to Indigenous peoples. Peat believes that much 
of Western illness is a product of the philosophy of disrespect for the natural 
world, something that Indigenous people neither experienced nor practised. 
Peat uses the metaphor of bacteria and viruses as not only causing sickness 
but also permeating ideas, values and ways of thinking. 

Aboriginal knowledge in the sciences includes mathematics. Peat 
explains the importance of mathematics concepts, including geometry, 
surveying, computation and number representation. Early application of 
these principles by Indigenous people, helped them in the building of their 
early temples and earth works. As an example, Peat explains that the 
buildings of the Anasazi people of the Chaco Canyon were aligned 
astronomically. Balls of string kept by women of the northwest were 
knotted at periodic intervals. This method was used to keep accurate 
monthly times. To enter the world of numbers is a sacred act. For 
Indigenous people the number four represents the four directions, the four 
seasons, and the four cycles of human life (birth, childhood, adulthood, and 
old age). The number four also represents balance and harmony as seen in 
the Medicine Wheel. 

Mayan people wrote vast numbers of books about religion, 
mathematics, and daily life. These books were destroyed by the early 
Spaniards on the grounds that the writings were pagan. Mayan astronomy, 
science, history, literature, ceremonies, cosmology and philosophy will 
never be known except for that knowledge which has been passed down 




9 



8 



orally from generation to generation. Peat feels that the highest mathematics 
is identical for Europeans, Mayans, Arabs, Chinese and Indians. Therefore 
mathematics should translate across cultures, as it is the study of basic 
logical relationships of the world. For Peat, mathematics begins with the 
structure of the cosmos and of sacred sites. Peat states that the Mayan 
number system is superior to all others because the Mayans invented the 
number zero. The concept of zero made it possible to represent 
astronomically large numbers which was necessary when the Mayans 
figured out the great cycles of the solar system and the universe. 

Within Indigenous science, language has a power all its own, it is not 
simply a matter of translating Western concepts into Indigenous languages. 
Speaking can evoke powers and energies. Thus people must be careful 
when choosing their words. 

Peat states that Indigenous science conforms to the definition of 
Western science. But it is not possible to separate Indigenous science from 
ethics, spirituality, metaphysics, ceremony, and social order. 

On the other hand, it is not possible to 
separate Indigenous science from other areas 
of life such as ethics, spirituality, 
metaphysics, social order, ceremony, and a 
variety of other aspects of daily existence. 

(p. 242) 

Indigenous science is a way of being. In comparing Western and Aboriginal 
science, Peat examines how true Western science is to its principles and 
what makes Aboriginal science sound. He feels that Westerners need to 
drop their obsession with ideals and accept Indigenous science as a valid 
understanding of nature. Both Western and Indigenous cultures have much 
to gain by listening and dialoguing. They need to envision new and 
harmonious relationships for all of life. Particularly because physics has had 




9 



a profound effect upon the world population, it is important that a bridge be 
established between Western physics and Indigenous science and 
metaphysics. 

Red Earth White Lies, Native Americans and the Myth of Scientific 
Fact by Vine Deloria, Jr., is another critical look at the field of Western 
science. Deloria begins by giving some history to the American Indian 
situation and how this history sets the stage for the public to view Indians as 
child-like with no history and no sense of nationhood. Deloria goes on to 
say how this frame of mind sets the stage to acknowledge only one form of 
scientific knowledge, the Western form. Deloria (1995) presents his 
information in such a way as to belittle Western knowledge and by stating 
that science is fueled by racism which acknowledges only its own 
knowledge. 



Unfortunately, the discussion of the 
age of the Earth and the nature of past 
events was conducted wholly within 
the confines of Western civilization. 

Consequently, the traditions of all 
other peoples were shunted aside, (p. 

38) 

Deloria states that scientists spend time proving they are right, rather than 
bothering to consider any other world views. 

Deloria criticizes the Bering Strait theory as a way of denying 
Indigenous peoples' claim to the Americas. He also calls into question 
Western scientists information on human origins and states that many 
inconsistencies and inaccuracies exist in contemporary interpretations. 

Like any other group of priests and 
politicians, however, scientists lie and 
fudge their conclusions as much as 
the most distrusted professions in our 




10 



society-lawyers and car dealers (p. 

41). 

Deloria refers to science as a very powerful religion. Deloria states that 
many of Western scientists' theories and postulations go unchallenged 
because it is an old boys network of gentlemanly agreements. 

Scientists and scholars are notoriously 
obedient to the consensus opinions of 
their profession, which usually means 
they pay homage to the opinions of 
scholars and scientists who occupy 
the prestige chairs on Ivy League and 
large research universities or even 
dead personalities of the past ( p. 43). 

Scholars who question commonly held beliefs are often pay personally. If 
they question issues such as the often touted overkill of the mammoth, 
mastodon, and other prehistoric animals by Paleo-Indians, scholars are 
squeezed out of the scholarly world. 

Racism plays a large part in Western science thereby disregarding any 

non-Westem contributions. 

In methodological terms there is a 
major problem in bringing non- 
Westem traditions within the scope of 
serious scientific perspective, and that 
is the inherent racism in academia and 
in scientific circles. Some of the 
racism is doctrinaire and unforgiving- 
for instance, the belief that, for a 
person or community possessing any 
knowledge that is not white/Westem 
in original, verification and 
articulation are unreliable ( p. 49). 

This attribute of Western science is echoed by Gill and Levidow 
(1987) and by Harding (1993). 

In "Redefining science Education for Aboriginal students" Madeleine 
Maclvor (1995) gives statistics to show that much needs to be accomplished 




12 



11 



in the teaching and learning of science by Aboriginals. It is essential that 
Indigenous people take their place in the development of their own 
community, and science is an important component of that development. 
But Western science needs to be reconstructed to meet the needs of the 
Aboriginal community. Maclvor uses Eber Hampton's twelve standards of 
education as a framework for science curriculum development for 
Aboriginal people. Those twelve standards are: spirituality, service, 
diversity, culture, tradition, respect, history, relentlessness, vitality, conflict, 
place, and transformation. Maclvor makes a case for the inclusion of 
Aboriginal knowledge, culture, ways of knowing and material and social 
reality when developing science curriculum. She states that Indigenous 
people must be fully engaged when learning science. An example would be 
the involvement of Aboriginal students in mapping out traditional territories 
in documenting resource use and traditional sustainable methods. Maclvor 
cites several examples of environmental disasters on Indigenous lands. They 
illustrate science gone bad and they give one more reason for the redrafting 
of a new scientific paradigm. According to Maclvor, the use of the twelve 
standards will ensure that science curriculum requires Indigenous peoples 
not to assimilate but will instead honour and respect them. 

In "Bridging Native and Western Science", Pam Colorado describes 
Native science through the metaphor of a tree. The tree is the precursor to 
human existence and is likened to a respected elder. According to Colorado, 
Native science has a sacred basis, its teachings are grounded in the natural 
world. All of life can be understood from the tree. A law of Native science 
requires that we look ahead seven generations when we make decisions. 
Laws and standards govern Native science. The goal of Native science is 
the search for balance, harmony, and peace with all living relations. 




13 



12 



Colorado writes about four dynamics that drive Native science: 
feelings, the historical now, a quiet still place, and relations. Because elders 
are the purveyors of Native science, a potential barrier exists: today many 
youths do not know how to ask for knowledge. Qualities which allow a 
person to become a Native scientist include self-discipline, patience, sharing, 
faith experience, information, and prayer. Native language is the key to all. 

Colorado states that it is necessary to strengthen Native science to 
block penetration by Western science. The annihilation of 25 million 
Indigenous peoples was a direct result of the birth and evolution of Western 
science. We Indigenous people have become dependent on a foreign system 
of knowledge to understand our own destruction. We try to find solutions 
through someone else's eyes rather than through our own means, our own 
knowledge. How we came to that destructive point has historical roots. 
Events such as the burning of the Mayan libraries and the murder of elders 
were two ways that the destruction of the Indigenous knowledge base came 
about. More recently Colorado states that Indigenous Elders, Shamans, and 
ceremonial events are trivialized and undermined by outsiders. All of these 
symptoms Colorado claims reflect a European colonial structure or 
intellectual imperialism. Our survival relies on the ability of our youth to 
develop a critical consciousness about their world and an understanding of 
Indigenous science. Native science will protect and nurture the natural 
environment which is in dire need of protection . 

Colorado states that the survival of the planet is dependent on Western 
science's ability to acknowledge and utilize the principles of Indigenous 
science. One way to ensure this bridging is to take advantage of cross- 
cultural scientific exchange and collaboration. Participatory research can 
serve as a tool towards change. In order to avoid pitfalls in the relationship, 




14 



13 



Indigenous science must be recognized as standing on its own right as a 
knowledge base. 

Indigenous people acquire much knowledge through listening. I recall 
a story told by Danny Musqua, Saulteaux elder at the University of 
Saskatchewan, in which he relayed an incident with his 86 year old 
grandmother. One day Danny greeted her only to be told to be quiet. Every 
time he would try to greet her she would tell him to be quiet. Finally she 
said, "I'm listening for the sounds that these tiny bugs make and if you talk I 
will not be able to hear their voices." It was after they both heard the sharp 
highpitched tiny screech, did the old woman tell Danny the significance of 
the bug's voice. Her knowledge goes something like this: In the spring the 
tiny insects lay their eggs on the shaft of a special plant which at this time of 
the year is underground. If we hear the bugs before they actually lay their 
eggs we will be able to identify the spot where the plant will grow. I 
gathered from this that the plant may be dug up accidently or damaged if we 
don't walk carefully- hence the bug listening ritual. The plant leaves will be 
used as a medicine, and later in the season the flowers and the roots will all 
be used for medicinal purposes. All because of the sound of a bug. 

Jack Weatherford is a non-Indigenous scholar who has spent a lot of 

time learning and writing about Indigenous contributions to science. Prior to 

writing his book Indian Givers, Weatherford spent considerable time in 

South America and other parts of the world learning about Indigenous 

knowledge, particularly in reference to food contributions. He claims that 

without the experimental and trial and error methods of early Indian farmer, 
modem science would have lacked 
the resources with which to start. The 
limited agricultural background of the 
Old World would have been far too 
meager and would have required 




15 



centuries more of research before 
science reached its present level, (p. 
82) 



14 



According to Weatherford, Indigenous peoples in South America were the 
first to develop the "planting" method (as opposed to the Old World 
"broadcasting" method) of planting seeds. Com was adapted to grow with 
an protective husk which saved the com seeds from both drought and 
insects. Prior to their adaptation away from wheat-based foods to potato 
diets, many Old World people died from famine when wheat was wiped out 
with more ease than underground potato crops. Weatherford states that 
without potato crops many populations (including the Irish and Russians) 
would not have survived. Indigenous peoples of South America were the 
first to freeze-dry potatoes for storage, and to use after the growing season 
had come and gone. 

In the tiny jungle community of Genaro Herrera, the South American 
Indians are teaching scientists how to cultivate a wide variety of yams, 
potatoes, and tubers. These Western trained scientists have no 
understanding, knowledge, or language for many of these plants. 
Weatherford (1988) stated: 

The American crops required new 
ways of farming that appeared bizarre 
to Old World farmers and violated all 
past agricultural principles of good 
farming. The scientist working at 
Ganaro Herrera strive to unravel the 
complex technology of native 
agriculture and food processing as 
much as they strive to understand 
more about the biology 
of the plants themselves, (p. 82) 




18 



15 



Weatherford talks about the general superiority of Indian medical 
knowledge and pharmacology. It is common knowledge that Indigenous 
peoples saved the live of many men who came with Jacques Cartier during 
the early voyages. Today the Incas still prevent goiter with seaweed (high 
iodine content) and kelp is harvested by large commercial ships from 
California to Peru for a variety of pharmaceuticals, foods, and toiletries 
(Weatherford, 1988). Other Indigenous medicines are petroleum jelly, oil 
of wintergreen, aspirin, quinine, and muscle relaxants from curare. Brain 
surgery was practised by Andean Indians to relieve concussions suffered 
from severe blows to the head during combat. The Aztec precision surgery 
surpassed the European centralization of medicine at that time. 

Even today no steel scalpel has ever 
been made that cuts sharper than the 
obsidian implements of the Aztec 
surgeons. Only the laser beam can 
cut a finer incision with less bleeding 
and less scarification than the Aztec 
surgeons. The fine Aztec scalpels 
allowed the doctors to cut with 
minimum blood loss, and the wound 
healed with fewer scars, (p. 188) 

Similarly Sandra Harding in Whose Science Whose Knowledge, 
credits the knowledge of Indigenous African cultures. According to her 
sources, agricultural sciences developed in Africa at least seven millennia 
before appearing on any other continent. 

Barley and wheat were cultivated and 
harvested near the Nile and farther 
south in Nubia more that 10,000 years 
before the Egyptian dynasties. Cattle 
were domesticated in the Kenya 
highlands more than 15,999 years 
ago. It now appears that the Euphrates 
River Valley, familiar to North 
Atlantic schoolchildren as the cradle 




17 



16 



of civilization was developed through 
the diffusion from Africa of 
information, ideas, and technologies. 

(p. 225) 

In the field of medicine, Africans used many of the components of 
some modem drugs, including, antibacterial agents, Kaopectate, aspirin, and 
reserpine. African societies had treatments for malaria fever, snakebite, 
neurotoxic venoms, intestinal parasites, catarrh, tumors, skin ulcers, 
venereal disease, conjunctivitis, bronchitis, urethral stricture, and others. 
Mathematics was highly developed in ancient Africa as evidenced by 
records of an 8,000 year old numerization system which was found in Zaire. 

While it is indisputable that Indigenous knowledge in the sciences 
predates much of Western science, and forms the basis for many 
contemporary scientific wonders, recognition for these contributions is not 
evident. Recently the Saskatoon Tribal Council and the University of 
Saskatchewan have embarked on a project which is addressing this problem, 
through the development of a project called Super Saturday. This program 
will incorporate Indigenous knowledge with Western science in the context 
of teaching children. The Project is based after a Hawaiian model from the 
Na Pua No'eau Center for Gifted and Talented Native Hawaiian Children in 
Hilo, Hawaii. 

The Center for Gifted and Talented Native Hawaiian Children was 
established for the purpose of increasing educational enrichment 
opportunities for Native Hawaiian children from grades k to 12 at the 
University of Hawaii. There are four elements incorporated into the Na Pua 
No'eau program development. These elements are, talent enhancement, self- 
esteem development, integration of Hawaiian culture and values, and student 
and parent support services. The Na Pua No'eau centre serves as a resource 




18 



17 



for educational institutions and teachers. It provides state of the art research, 
materials and knowledgeable personnel. Workshops are offered to classroom 
teachers to enable them to understand the needs of Native Hawaiian gifted 
and talented youth. 

The Student and Parent Support Services is an integral part of the 
centre. The support services provide students and their families with 
information and activities that will help the students to succeed. Students and 
parents receive staff support, information, and enrichment activities to use at 
home. These activities permit parents to be positive advocates in the students 
success. 

Within the Na Pua No'eau program, the Keala Lapa'au program 
develops an interest in medical careers. The program facilitates activities 
which enhance the number of students in medicine. It provides hands-on 
practice with day to day contact and other activities with medical doctors. It 
also includes career shadowing and internships, as well as an undergraduate 
pre-medicine program at the university. 

An important part of the programming is the integration of Western 
knowledge with Native Hawaiian values and culture, as an effort to meet the 
needs of parents. Language, culture, handicrafts, and history is an integral 
part of the programming. The Hokule'a utilizes the outdoors and the wa'a 
kaulua (double hulled canoe) to gain knowledge in celestial navigation, 
astronomy, meteorology, and physics of wave action. 

Students use their creativity and 
thinking skills as they re-live the 
survival of their Kupuna(ancestors) 
who crossed the Pacific Ocean on the 
double-hulled canoe, Hokule'a. A 
thorough process of solving a series 
of everyday problems encountered 
while at sea is an every day challenge 



0 



1 

A 



9 




18 



for student sailors. Psychomotor skills 
also come into play as students learn 
to construct tools for gathering food 
and water and learn to construct 
protective shelters while at sail. More 
psychomotor skills become important 
to master as students learn to paddle, 
navigate, sail, maintain and repair a 
Hawaiian sailing vessel (Na Pua 
No'eau Booklet) 



Like the Hawaiian model, the Super Saturday program reflects 
Indigenous culture and incorporates Western science knowledge. The 
organizing team, which is made up of faculty members from the University 
of Saskatchewan, employees from the Saskatoon Tribal Council, and First 
Nations Elders and community people, met over the past year, identifying 
topics, resource people, curriculum ideas, and funding proposals. The pilot 
year, which began in July 1 998, sponsored two groups of children in Grades 
4-6 to study at the University of Saskatchewan campus, and to take part in 
some field work in their home communities during the months of July and 
August The second intake of 1998 took place in August. 

An essential component of the Super 
Saturday program includes themes 
that will incorporate 

cultural/traditional teachings. This 
particular aspect prevents the loss of 
knowledge of ancestral 

accomplishments. Therefore, serving 
as an anchor for students maintaining 
cultural identity in the mix of learning 
other world view perspectives. 

(SuperSaturday brochure) 

In preparation for their studies, science faculty members (from 
engineering, mathematics, chemistry and biology) met with community 
people knowledgeable in their Aboriginal traditions. Together they 





19 



developed curriculum which appeal to young Aboriginal students and draw 
comparisons between Indigenous knowledge and Western science. The 
Engineering faculty along with teepee and sweatlodge builders, have 
incorporated the Aboriginal and Western design forms as examples of 
structurally sound building practices. The program expanded to include 
Grades 7-9 in the fall of 1998 and will expand to include grades 10 - 12 in the 
summer of 2000. 




21 



Sent ‘APR. 1 2. 2002 u 2: 33PIVf L>INC U OF S-EXTENSION DIV0467; 



Apr *12* 02 1 0: 52^0. OOO r 




U,S. Department of Educatlw 

Office of Educational Research end Improver lent (0 ERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE ) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 



REPRODUCTION REU 

(Specific Document) 

I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Tide. X r\t>l i ~H\e- £c- 

/Vt ■/"/«- S*i't*' r 2sPc*- 


ff 


Authors): ft' i^r(.v S, e j* (-c« 




Corporate Source: 




Publication Date: 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In otder to dbeeminnte ns widely ns posslbto timely and significant materials of lntofos|to 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, ReaoumM In Education (RIE), are usually m ids 
and etooronle madia, and sold through lha ERIC Documant RopredUctlon Service (Epr S; 
reproduction mlaasa Is granted, one of the following notices Is affixed to the document. 



If permission la granted to reproduce and disceminate the identified document, pleas* ( 
of the page. 



CH sCK ONE of I he following three options end sty at the bottom 



Tb» ■Mlfto (ttCMr Man brfw «• ba 

«■»■**» at U^naearorM 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 






4* 



& 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 

INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



YN* wvto tfkfctr itiwm betomf wfi bi ; 

Ltttel 2A docwn 



PERMISSION TO RFPRODUCF AN S 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN^ 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC M -OlA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERsfoNLY, 
NAS BEEN GRANTED BV 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



2A 



the educations) comm tin tty, documents announced in the 
i available to wen in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
;). Credit !• given to the source of each document, end, if 



Levoil 



Q 



L«vftJ 2A 
□ 



CrmA horn tew U+ct 1 hInm, pafftoTOg reew4lrel»gii 
■nd dtuemiiufion In mkndaw or oarer ERIC orowrai 
wadte (•,fl u docrorfc) anrfpepycapy. 



Chick horn las 2A fllsBS, partial in ty rap# teiiycKswi 

4M dreamUM** fcn /r*oo«* end In 

far ERIC ftthM cotecAort Maacribar t 



OoaiivrefllB wiB bo preotatad ft* Mere* prDwte»d__ f 

If (ifiiiiitui to raproditot fl granted, but ire box la chacbtd, duonwni i 



Sign 

here,-* 

please 



1 humpy gm* fo Che Educator# Rosourcos Information Canter (ER/c; noneictes 
oj ^Seated aPovt, Reprtrfuefto Own rbo ERtC mtorottotw or electronic moc 
ujftfiQi 4 ws rvqufa ptmtfsstan from 0 ^ ccpyrW hWtibr. Bto*p 0 m 1 $ m*d* tor n 
to satisfy Information mods of eduoators in response to discrete inquiries, 


m pomlsslon to mpmduca and dteoe/ntoate Wte documenf 
by parsons other man £*/C ompfoyoa* and /te syatem 
pn^mWmjomducdpn by 


S’<lccLi_ 


« 


W*d N*mftPMN*YTW* ™ 

iff t SCI 1 1 n. f e C. Dl/il.cf •hr/ 


U/l • 0 e / 5 / /ct /) / *%; ( ( / ,v 


T( 


FF , "^ 0 ; V ^ 

L_ f-i. - 5 ^ 5 1 . 


fA * <?u. <,5:4. 7 


& 


Cte AdMtar 


^ /Jm 11 , 



Tire Mirpto adorer ahos-n below am tie 
gmaog to m |awj 7 B dccumana 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



26 



IsvsIJi 



□ 



»*re teifygi it retort*, ptrmjre ny 
reirobKaten are] (fltaarrWirefari In mfcrotore on* 



qutHry ptqNtt. 

*HI b* pruanaad ttlcvte 1. 



o 

ERIC 



(over) 



ih&Q;Cci&VC*d P' 



