DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 410 765 



FL 024 719 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

JOURNAL CIT 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Rodriguez Pino, Cecilia, Ed. 

Teaching Spanish to Native Speakers of Spanish Newsletter, 
Volume 1 Number 1. 

New Mexico State Univ., Las Cruces. 

1994-00-00 

8p . ; This is the only issue published. 

Collected Works - Serials (022) -- Reports - Descriptive 

(141) 

Teaching Spanish to Native Speakers of Spanish Newsletter; 
vl nl 1994 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

Class Activities; Classroom Techniques; Code Switching 
(Language) ; Communication Apprehension; Conferences; 
Cooperative Learning; Federal Aid; Group Activities; 

Heritage Education; Hispanic Americans; *Inservice Teacher 
Education; * Language Maintenance; Latin American Literature; 
Literature Appreciation; ^Native Language Instruction; 
Notional Functional Syllabi; Reading Instruction; Secondary 
Education; ^Spanish; Student Needs; Student Placement 
Hispanic American Students; National Endowment for the 
Humanities; United States (Southwest) 



ABSTRACT 



The newsletter is devoted to description of a 5-day 
conference on "Teaching Spanish to Southwest Hispanic Students" funded by the 
National Endowment for the Humanities and held at New Mexico State University 
on July 14-19, 1993. It lists the middle and high school teachers from 
Arizona, California, New Mexico, Nevada, and Texas who participated, briefly 
describes the participant selection process, notes the kinds of programs from 
which the participants came, and summarizes the conference program. The 
central feature was presentations by eight experienced master 
teacher/consultants on theoretical and practical issues in teaching Spanish 
as a first language. Each gave a talk on current research and application in 
a particular area of specialization. These included: student placement; 
meeting individual students’ affective and instructional needs; techniques 
for language maintenance and retrieval; pre-reading, reading, and 
post-reading activities to use with Spanish literary texts students can 
relate to easily; activities using the functional-notional approach to 
developing language skills; creative group activities to explore 
opportunities to use Spanish outside the classroom; cooperative learning 
activities; and popular language use, language use apprehension, and 
codeswitching. Incorporating ethnographic studies into the curriculum is also 
discussed. Additional past and upcoming conference information is included. 



(MSE) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document . 



'O 

r- 

o 



8 



Teaching Spanish to 




Native Speakers of Spanish 



Newsletter 




13 



Volume I. Number 1 



Spring 1994 



Las Cruces. N.M. 




NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES 
1993 SUMMER CONFERENCE 

TEACHING SPANISH TO SOUTHWEST HISPANIC STUDENTS 




MATFPuf'u^'® ' *™° DUC * THIS I 
w ■"■•S BEEN GRANTED BY J 






vj 



oje 






Si 



.O 






or taxational flesea7rh t ION 

originating it on °r organization 

° Sr ssx^sr » 

cfocumenUtoiiot necessa S |' a,ed in this 
official OERI position or poifc y rePreSenl 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



2 






Teaching Spanish to Native Speakers of Spanish 




Newsletter 




Volume 1, Number 1 



Spring 1994 



Las Cruces, N.M. 




NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES 
1993 SUMMER CONFERENCE 

TEACHING SPANISH TO SOUTHWEST HISPANIC STUDENTS 








Consultants and participants take a break between sessions 



A live day conference, “Teaching Spanish 
to Southwest Hispanic Students,” funded by 
the National Endowment for the Humanities, 
was sponsored by New Mexico State Univer- 
sity on July 14- 19, 1993. The conference was 
designed by Cecilia Rodriguez Pino of the 
Department of Languages and Linguistics at 
NMSU for thirty high school and middle 
school teachers from the eight -state region of 
the southwest. 

The high school teachers who participated 
in the eight-hour-per-day conference were se- 
lected on the basis of the following criteria: 
minimum of three years’ teaching experience 
in a foreign language classroom, commitment 
to develop materials at the conference, and 
willingness to classroom-test the materials 
during the academic year; and also be mentor 
teacher in their school district for inservice 
workshops and/or language conference pre- 
sentations. The selection committee also gave 
preference to teachers whose questionnaire 
responses showed their district’s pressing 
needs for native speaker instruction, and a let- 
ter of support from an administrator in their 
school or district office. The conference par- 
ticipants must also be assigned to teach in a 
middle school or high school foreign language 
or native speaker classroom during the 1993- 
94 academic year. The conference fellows re- 
ceived a $250 stipend in addition to five days 
per diem, books, materials and conference 
supplies. 

The summer conference participants are 
listed below by state: 

ARIZONA: Julia Hernandez, South Mountain 
High School, Phoenix; Colleen Kane, Arcadia 
High School, Phoenix; Judith Kent, Amphi- 
theater High School, Tucson; Lucy Linder, 
North High School, Phoenix; Pat Stewart, 
Miami High School, Miami. 

CALIFORNIA: Peggy Blanton, Clovis West 
High School, Clovis; Esperanza Cobian, 



Silver Creek High School, San Jose; Laura 
Nunez, Ray Kroc Middle School, San Diego; 
Rodolfo Orihuela, C.K. McClatchy High 
School, Sacramento; Irene Silvas, W.C. 
Overfelt High School, San Jose; Sonia 
Stroessner, Gunn High School, Palo Alto; Ali- 
cia Wilson, Buena High School, Ventura. 

NEW MEXICO: Felipe Avila, Gadsden 
Middle School, Anthony; Angela Ortiz 
Buckley, Sunland Park High School, Sunland 
Park; Barbara Perea Casey, Goddard High 
School, Roswell; Barbara Cottle, Hot Springs 
High School, Truth or Consequences; Eva 
Gallegos, Valley High School, Albuquerque; 
Martin Lueras, La Cueva High School, Albu- 
querque; Marta Moran, Ofiate High School, 
Las Cruces; Alicia Fletcher, St. Pius High 
School, Albuquerque; Myrtelina Rael, Mora 
High School, Mora; Gail Lamendola, Pecos 
High School, Pecos. 

NBjVADA: Gordon Hale, Green Valley High 
Scljfl feL Henderson; Catherine B. Hammelrath, 
LasVegas/ragh School, Las Vegas. 

TEXAS. Annette Guerra, Clark High School, 
Plano; Viola Milan, San Jacinto Junior High 
School, Midland; Stella Reyna, Holmes High 
School, San Antonio; Lupe Rosas, Riverside 
High School, El Paso; Marfa Zambrano, John 
Marshall High School, San Antonio. 



Pre-Conference Background Knowledge 

A few participants who attended the sum- 
mer conference were from school districts 
where there are no language programs avail- 
able for native speakers or who have never 
taught an SNS course and are very eager to 
develop a two-track system at their school. 
Several of the participants have taught in the 
native track sequence but some admitted that 
they did not receive formal theoretical and 
pedagogical instruction, have limited knowl- 
edge of dialect variation, and find that there is 
a lack of published materials to use with their 
diverse Spanish-speaking student population. 
All the participants were eager to learn new 
methods and approaches on how to design 
materials and units in the following areas: self- 
esteem, cultural identity, maintainance of the 
heritage language, literature that students can 
relate to, and integration of culturally relevant 
activities which have been passed on through 
generations. Some teachers expressed an in- 
terest in developing interdisciplinary materi- 
als appropriate for native speakers other than 
the available “canned” curriculum. 

All the participants came to the conference 
with a strong desire and interest to work with 
other colleagues and develop materials to use 
in their school district and share with other 
teachers who are also in dire need of materi- 
als, methods and theories on the teaching of 
Spanish to native speakers. 




3 



The Five Day Conference Program: 

During the conference, eight experienced 
master teachers/consultants presented ses- 
sions on the theoretical and practical applica- 
tions for teaching Spanish as a first language, 
not a foreign language. Each consultant gave 
a talk on current research and application in a 
particular area of specialization related to na- 
tive speakers in the language classroom. A 
brief summary of each consultant’s presenta- 
tion, which is also available on videocassette, 
is given below. 

Dr. Richard Teschner, Director of the Span- 
ish for Native Speakers Program and co-au- 
thor of two textbooks for native speakers, in 
his keynote address "After the PlacementTest, 
What do We Do?,” discussed the importance 
of language placement and assessment in the 
appropriate level of the sequence for the di- 
verse population of Hispanics. The Univer- 
sity of Texas at El Paso’s Department of Mod- 
ern and Classical Languages has developed a 
Language Placement and Assessment Test for 
students who enter the foreign and native lan- 
guage sequence. The computerized testing in- 
strument has native speaker indicator items 
which will place students whose first language 
is Spanish in the appropriate course. 

Patricia Morales Cano, professor of Span- 
ish at Western New Mexico University at Sil- 
ver City, discussed how important it is to meet 
both the affective and instructional needs of 
native speakers. Professor Cano emphasized 
that special attention be given to receptive 
bilinguals who wish to reclaim their heritage 
and lost language. Her session focused on the 
needs and priorities of each participant in their 
school district and offered professional sug- 
gestions to deal with the school administra- 
tion to bring about changes in the SNS cur- 
riculum. 

Dr. Nasario Garcia from New Mexico 
Highlands University at Las Vegas mentioned 
strategies and techniques for language main- 
tenance and retrieval. He discussed Joshua 
Fishman’s theories which emphasize the need 
to set language goals that are oriented toward 
the smaller societal units such as families, 
neighborhoods, and towns. Dr. Garcia’s ad- 
vice is to design speaking activities that cre- 
ate a friendship network and an ethnic bond 
to maintain the language, culture and litera- 
ture. 

Dr. Ricardo Aguilar Melantzon, professor 
at New Mexico Slate University and literary 
prize winning novelist, in collaboration with 
the project director, designed pre-reading, 
reading and post-reading activities to use 



with Chicano literature, or other Spanish lit- 
erary texts that Hispanic students can relate 
to. During his session. Dr. Aguilar emphasized 
the importance of students "being involved in 
the text” through a variety of speaking, writ- 
ing and listening activities as well as reading 
in which they will not only reflect on the ma- 
terial, but how it affects their own personal 
lives, the lives of others and the human condi- 
tion in general. For his session on literature, 
Dr. Aguilar compiled a bibliography of 
Chicano short stories and other literary texts 
appropriate for middle school and high school 
students. Each participant received a copy of 
his novel Madreselvas en Flor and participated 
in listening, speaking, reading and writing ac- 
tivities designed for the session to show how 
the activities can be used in a student-centered 
classroom so teachers.can receive feedback on 
various aspects of the activities. The partici- 
pants’ feedback as students in the listening and 
writing activities demonstrated that the diverse 
functional levels of students in the classroom 
can be more addressed with activities that al- 
low them to voice their opinions about the lit- 
erature. The teachers who participated as stu- 
dents were put in the position to reflect on their 
personal experience with the segment from 
Madreselvas en Flor , but also on prior literacy 
and personal experiences. Professor Aguilar 
also encouraged the participants to write their 
own short stories. 

Dr. Aguilar has recently edited a collection 
of Chicano short stories Cuento Chicano del 
Siglo XX Breve Antologfa which includes 
one of Rodolfo Anaya’s short stories "El 
Velorio” among other internationally known 
Chicano authors. Copies of this valuable col- 
lection are on sale. Contact Di: Ricardo Aguilar 
at the Department of Languages and Linguis- 
tics at New Mexico State University. 



Dr. George Blanco, professor at the Uni- 
versity of Texas at Austin offered examples of 
activities using the functional/notional ap- 
proach to develop students' languages profi- 
ciency in the four skills. His expertise in the 
area of methodology for teaching Spanish to 
native speakers as opposed to teaching it as a 
foreign language involves designing thematic 
units incorporating functions such as analyz- 
ing, imparling information, describing, narrat- 
ing, etc. His program emphasizes that Hispanic 
students can already function at a higher level 
than their non-native counterparts and a well- 
structured curriculum must be designed to pro- 
mote and further develop their existing func- 
tional proficiency in the language. To moti- 
vate students, one must emphasize meaning 
first, and form must have a secondary role. 
De-emphasize formal grammar study since it 
does not really utilize the students' functional 
ability in Spanish. A copy of his publication 
Espaiiol para el hispanohablantes: Funcion v 
nocion was given to each participant to help 
them design units according to the needs of 
their programs. 

Dr. Barbara Merino, professor at the Uni- 
versity of California at Davis, described nu- 
merous creative ways a teacher can design 
group activities to explore how students in this 
generation can use their Spanish outside of the 
classroom. Dr. Merino formed groups and dis- 
tributed southwestern regional dictionaries to 
the participants for "el juego de los 
diccionarios” to awaken in each student the 
notion that we live in a very active language 
community and should value all our Hispanic 
dialects. We must avoid telling native speak- 
ers that their dialect variants are incorrect. She 
offered many other language activities such 
as the use of ethnographic and sociolinguistic 
studies students can conduct both in and out 



r\ 

bh 




James Halligan, President of New Mexico State University welcomes consultants and participants. 



o 

ERLC 



4 




A visit to historic Mesilla. Consultants: Aguilar, Garcia, de Leon, 
Merino, Cano (back), Pino, de Barling andAngela Lovino, NEH evaluator 



of class, and oral history projects with their 
family members. Dr. Merino gave invaluable 
guidelines on how to develop a sample lesson 
with a statement of philosophy, the theoreti- 
cal framework, criteria for the module and 
evaluation of the material unit. Each partici- 
pant also received several chapters of her 
manuscript which she co-edited with Henry 
Trueba and Fabian Samaniego. Language and 
Culture in Learning: Teaching Spanish to Na- 
tive Speakers of Spanish . The book is 1994 
Falmer Press publication and offers both 
theory and practice with articles that include 
linguistic, anthropological, sociological, for- 
eign language and pedagogical studies. 

Ana Marta de Barling, Spanish teacher at 
Lynn brook and Cupertino High schools in 
Santa Clara, California, presented many strat- 
egies and suggestions for using cooperative 
learning activities in the native speakers class- 
room to develop a sense of membership and 
ownership in the group’s activity and its re- 
sults. The cooperative activities promote the 
sense of positive interdependence but yet with- 
out the personal participation of each mem- 
ber of the group the task cannot be accom- 
plished. She discussed that cooperative activi- 
ties allow students with diverse backgrounds 
to contribute to the completion of a group 
project through interaction, cooperation, and 
collaboration. 

Dr. Laura Gutierrez Spencer, professor at 
the University of Nevada at Las Vegas, also 
presented many language activities and hand- 
outs in which students can actively use 
“popularismos” in class. Dr. Spencer, along 
with the rest of the consultants, emphasized 



the importance of building each student’s self 
esteem in class in order to have a successful 
classroom environment. The activities de- 
signed by Professor Spencer allow the students 
to codeswitch and use their own. language 
variations in class. She stated that “it is more 
important that students use their home lan- 
guage in class rather than to be quiet all se- 
mester and never improve their language for 
fear of making errors.” Her opinion echoed 
the sentiments of many participants at the con- 
ference who had felt that their language vari- 
ants were “incorrect” and were relieved to hear 
other professors identified with their fears. 

Time was allowed for discussions and work 
in groups to prepare thematic unit outlines that 
the participants would develop throughout the 
academic year and classroom test. In the short 
time they had, the participants developed six 
thematic unit outlines which they felt would 
make students aware of their cultural pride and 
heritage, self worth, and preparation for their 
future profession. Each group proceeded to de- 
velop a five-day unit on the following themes: 
(1) Investigacion de Raices Familiares; (2) La 
Narrativa Personal; (3) De Cajas de Carton a 
Maletas; (4) Prejuicios a traves de la Moda; 
(5) Las Carreras; and (6) El Inmigrante. In the 
thematic outlines it is evident that grammar is 
not the main focus. A high degree of interac- 
tion through pair, group and class work as well 
as out-of-class activities which apply the in- 
terview process are incorporated into the unit. 
Throughout the academic year, the participants 
have been fine-tuning the activities, imple- 
menting them in class and asking for student 
feedback, their reactions to the materials and 



the evaluation process. Several of the units will 
be highlighted and distributed at two confer- 
ences in the Spring. At the Southwest Confer- 
ence on Language Teaching at Salt Lake City, 
Utah on April 22, the project director and a 
participant, Gordon Hale from Las Vegas, 
Nevada, will present a session. The project 
director will also present a session at the Uni- 
versity of California at Davis on May 20. 

It is hoped that this brief description of the 
NEH Summer Conference will give teachers 
and administrators an idea of the great need 
and importance to develop curricula that truly 
addresses the native speakers of Spanish. It 
was deemed important by all participants and 
consultants at this conference that we must all 
play a major role in continuing to design theo- 
retically and pedagogical ly sound materials 
and document our experiences through teacher 
research. Many of the strategies designed for 
this conference have not been explored sulfi- 
ciently enough to document the degree of suc- 
cess in class. The preparation of many instruc- 
tional materials that have not published need 
much attention by other enthusiastic teachers 
like the participants and consultants who 
worked together at the five-day conference 
with the valuable support of the National En- 
dowment for the Humanities to focus on the 
Spanish for Native Speakers profession. 




Cecilia Rodriguez Pino accepts conference logo 
designed by Rodolfo Orihuela, participant 




The logo design for the NEH Conference 
Summer 1993 



o 

ERIC 



